A NEW and EASY METHOD To Understand the Roman History. With an Exact
Chronology of the Reign of the Emperors; An Account of the most Eminent
Authors, when they flourished; And an Abridgment of the Roman Antiquities and
Customs. By Way of DIALOGUE, For the Use of the Duke of Burgundy.

Done out of French, with very Large Additions and Amendments, by Mr. Tho.
Brown.

Ita late per orbem terrarum arma circumtulit, ut qui res ejus legunt, non
unius populi, sed generis humani fact a discant.

Luc. Flor. London: Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Oxford-Arms in Warwick
Lane: And W. Lindsey, at the Angel in Chancery Lane. MDCXCV.

Advertisement.
MIscellanea: Or a Choice Collection of Wise and Ingenious Sayings, etc. of
Princes, Philosophers, Statesmen, Courtiers, and others; Out of several Ancient
and Modern Authors: For the pleasurable Entertainment of the Nobility and
Gentry of both Sexes. By G. M.

Printed for William Lindsey at the Angel near Lincoln's Inn in Chancery Lane,
1694.

THE Translator's Preface.
THere are Two Popular Objections commonly made against Abridgments, which I
shall endeavor to answer one after the other: The first is, That they have
occasioned the Loss of the greater Volumes from whence they were extracted.
Thus, for instance, the Loss of Trogus Pompeius is imputed to Justin; that of
Livy to Florus or his Epitomator; and Xiphilinus, a Monk of Constantinople, who
flourished about the middle of the Eleventh Century, is charged with depriving
the world of Dion Cassius. Nay, the Loss of all the Texts and Decisions of the
Learned Lawyers before him, is attributed to Trebonian, who compiled his
Pandects out of them. This Notion was started by some Learned Men of the last
Age, as Bodin, Casaubon, and my Lord Bacon; and since their time, merely, I
suppose, upon their Credit and Authority, it has been almost universally
received, without any manner of Examination. However, with a due submission be
it spoken to Persons of their deserved Esteem and Reputation in the world, I
cannot persuade my self, that this Accusation is well supported; for besides
that we have the Misfortune to regret the want of several useful Books, which
as far as we know were never abbreviated, such as Diodorus Siculus, and
Dionysius Halicarnasseus; and on the other hand enjoy several others that were
Epitomized, as we find the History of Herodotus is still extant, although one
Theopompus, whom Suidas mentions, had made an Abridgment of it; both which
Instances are sufficient to overthrow this precarious Hypothesis; yet in my
opinion there are so many better Reasons to be assigned for the Loss of th^se
precious Monuments of Antiquity, that I am apt to flatter my self it will be no
disagreeable Entertainment to the Reader to give him a short View of them.
Before the Art of Printing was discovered, it may easily be imagined, That as
Volumes of any considerable Bulk were infinitely more Expensive than now they
are, so they could only be purchased by men of Plentiful Fortunes; that
consequently they were nothing near so well diffused; and when they happened to
be lost or impaired by ti^e, the Loss was neither so soon, nor so easily
rec^uited. If to this we add, That in that part of the world which had formerly
been the Seat of all Arts and Sciences, Learning began to be neglected, if not
despised; and that from another part of it vast Inundations of Barbarous People
were continually pouring down, who swept away every thing before them; no
considering man I believe will find it strange, That amidst the vast Treasures
of the Ancient Ages, so few should escape so general a Shipwreck, and arrive
safe to our hands. That this was the case of the Roman Empire in its declining
Period, no body that is not utterly unacquainted with their History, will
presume to question. As soon as that Vigorous Spirit which animated thrir
Republic, had wholly abandoned them, Learning and Learned Men made but a very
inconsiderable Figure among them. Hence we see, that from the time of the
Antonines till Diocletian, they did not produce one single Historian above the
rank of our Modern Grubstreet Annalists. I could not prevail with my self to
allow the Scriptores Augustae Historiae, who lived in this Interval, a better
station; for tho it is certain that sorry Guides are better than none at all,
yet the Style of the abovementioned Writers is so extremely vicious, their
Conduct so injudicious and their Relations of all Transactions so jejune and
insipid, that any one that will submit to the Penance of turning over their
W^rks, will s^on be convinced to his cost, that what I have told him, is true.
While Learning was thus daily decaying in its Vitals, all this while Epitomes
were given it to keep it alive: not that they contributed to the loss of the
Greater Volumes, which would have been destroyed without them; but they were
the only Books that then pleased, and were in vogue; whether it was that the
sickly Genius of those Ages could not endure Volumes of a larger size, which it
required a more healthful Constitution to digest; or whether the continual
Alarms of their Enemies just allowed them time enough to peruse short Manuals;
as we see men seldom sit down to a Regular Dinner, when they are every moment
in danger of having their Quarters beaten ^p. For now the Goths, under which
name I comprehend all the Northern Mob made up of the Scum of several Nations,
invaded the Empire in good earnest, and pierced into the very Bowels of it,
which before they were contented to attack only in its Out-skirts and remotest
Provinces. This insolent Rabble of Tramontani passing the Alps, out of a
natural aversion to all Literature and Politeness, burnt and plundered all the
Libraries that stood in their way; and as no care was taken to repair the
damages which these outrageous Levellers every where committed, we ought not to
wonder, that when the Building was consumed, so much of the rich Furniture
happened to share the same Calamity, and be destroyed along with it. The
Saracens indeed, who some Ages after subdued the better part of Asia and
Greece, were a fairer Enemy; As if their design had been to make an entire
Conquest of Sciences and Arts, rather than of Territories and People, they
encouraged the Muses; which perhaps may be one reason why more of the Greek
Historians are preserved, than of the Latin, and translated Ptolomy, Euclid,
and Aristotle, with most of the valuable Greek Books they could get, into the
Arabic Langua^e; by the same token that the last of these about the end of the
Twelfth Century, was out of Arabic turned into Latin, upon which barbarous
Version the Schoolmen afterward built all their petifogging, litigious,
Cobweb-Divinity. But the Goths were not so merciful in their anger; they
destroyed Learning root and branch, and by their good will would not have left
us the least remainders or footsteps of it. To this may be added as no small
cause of the l^ss of so many Latin Originals, the indiscreet Zeal of some
over-pious Christians, who never thought their Religion secure, or out of
danger, so long as any of the Monuments of Paganism were suffered to stare it
in the face; for this reason they sacrificed all those Books which gave the
least account of the Heathen Theology to the flames; and as it is impossible for
an Historian to give us a full Hist^ry of any Country without acquainting us
with several of their Religious Rites and Ceremonies, because Livy makes
frequent mention of the Roman Sacrifices, Lustrations, Processions, etc.
Gregory the Great destroyed as many of his Books as had the misfortune to fall
into his hands, and by doing so, imagined he did his Maker good service. I
could sooner forgive him, had he taken upon him the Title of Universal Bishop
which his Ambitious Brother Prelate of Constantinople th^n usurped; nay, had he
done all the sinful unrighteous things which the worst of his Succ^ssors ever
committed, than pardon him this Immoral Action of destroying the Works of Livy.
In short, for I am afraid I have dwelt too long upon this Chapter; it is
evident, that first a neglect or discouragement of Learning, then the
everlasting Invasions of Barbarous Nations, really contributed to the loss of
those Ancient Authors, whom now we want, especially considering that the
Transcribers of those Ages could not soon enough repair the Damages which these
cruel Ravagers committed in the Empire of Learning, it being truly observed of
the Roman Monarchy, and the Roman Authors, that their Greatness in part
occasioned the destruction of both.

So much for the first Objection, which I confess does not affect our Attempt,
as being compiled not out of one single Historian, but collected out of many.
The other, as it appears to be better grounded, so it is more general, and
strikes at all Abbreviations whatever. It is therefore pretended, that these
sorts of Performances don't so much diffuse Learning, as they prostitute it;
that as they were the Inventions of an unpolished Age, when people grew lazy,
so they continue those habits still in the minds of men; that the generality of
Mankind contenting themselves with a superficial knowledge of things, sit down
satisfied with these amusements, which furnish them with matter enough for
common Conversation, and by this means are hindered from making a thorough
progress in Learning. To this terrible Charge it may be answered, That the ill
use these empty Pretenders make of Abridgments, as of every thing else, does
not destroy the real advantage of them, and ought by no means to stand in
competition with the visible benefit that the far greater number of Readers
daily reap from them. As there is no disputing against matter of Fact, it is
certain there were never so many Abstracts or Epitomes of all sorts printed as
at present; witness the great variety of Iournals in all parts of Europe; and
yet the Commonwealth of Learning has been so far from receiving any prejudice
or detriment from them, that it may without the least imputation of vanity be
affirmed, that all Sciences have been more universally cultivated in our Age,
than in any of the preceding ones; and that these Abbreviations have not a
little contributed to the farther increase and propagation of them. History is
a Province of a vast extent, where an unacquainted Traveller may easily lose
his way, or else be bewildred in the great variety of matter; and therefore
it is but a charitable Office to give him a general Scheme of the Country
before he actually visits it. It Is likewise plain that Abridgments have been
succesfully attempted in Mathematics. How intelligible are Tacquet, Barrow, and
De Wit, in respect of Clavius's tedious Comments upon Euclid's Demonstrations?
nay they have not only saved abundance of unnecessary labor, but they have
made this knowledge pleasant to those who in the last Age were frighted with
the difficulty of th^se Studies. Before I dismiss this Paragraph, I will only
add, That Abridgments have been so far from mutilating any of the branches of
Learning, that were it not for the assistances we derive from them, there would
be so many Interruptions and Chasma's, particularly in the Historical part of
it, that it would prove but an uncomfortable study. How many Ecclesiastical
Monuments* for instance, had been lost, if Photius the Learned Patriarch of
Constantinople had not preserved them for Posterity, by throwing them into a
l^sser room.

I will not so far abuse my Reader's patience as to enlarge upon the several
Advantages deduced from History, and particularly the Roman, which of all
others is the most instructive and entertaining. As it comprizes a prodigious
variety of surprising Events, the Affairs of other Nations are all along so
interwoven with theirs, that what one of their own Writers said of them, is
literally true, viz. That whoever reads the Actions they performed, does not so
much learn the History of one single People, as that of all Mankind. And
certainly it is a prodigious thing to consider, that a small pitiful Town,
composed at first of Outlaws and Vagabonds, of different Interests, Tempers,
and perhaps Principles; of so little Credit and Reputation, that their
Neighbors refused to marry their Daughters to them, should surmount so many
Difficulties which threatened their Constitution in its very infancy; and
afterward upon a new moulding of their Government, which private Malcontents
at home, and powerful Enemies abroad labored to destroy, should by the
regularity of their Military Discipline, the bravery of their Forces, and the
virtue of their Inhabitants, be in a capacity make such astonishing Conquests.
And though the perpetual Struggles between the People and the Senate threw the
State into so many terrible Convulsions, that by all appearing Symptoms, their
Commonwealth often seemed to be in an expiring Condition; yet we find they made
the haughtiest Powers in the Universe truckle to them, and reduced all the then
inhabited World to their obedience. After this, to reflect, how by the creeping
in of Avarice and Luxury, and the several Inferior Vices dependant on these,
the Republic was dissolved, and forced to give way to the Emperors, under whose
hands it flourished for some time, till by the frequent Revolutions made by an
Insolent Army, but especially by the perpetual Irruptions of the Northern
People, it was by degrees broken to pieces, all these remarkable shiftings of
the Scene, and the fresh appearance of so many new persons still upon the
Theater, must needs give a considering man not only a very agreeable, but
useful entertainment.

I am now arrived to the last stage of my Preface, so that I have no more work
left upon my hands, but only to give the Reader a short Account of the
following Performance. It was compiled by a Judicious Hand in France for the
use of the Duke of Burgundy, and recommended to me by a Learned Gentlemen here
in Town, who was so taken with the newness of the Method, and the exactness of
the Chronology, that he was impatient till he saw it put into an English dress.
The whole is managed by way of Question and Answer, in an easy, familiar,
intellegible Method, suited to persons of the meanest Capacity, but with that
good order and accuracy, that the greatest Proficients in this sort of Learning
may not be ashamed to refresh their Memories by perusing it. I was the more
easily persuaded to undertake it, because I could never as yet meet any
Abbreviation of the Roman History, which was not in one respect or other lame
and deficient. Either the Style was uncorrect, the Narration too tedious, or
obscure, or the true order of time miserably neglected.

As for Lucius Florus, tho I confess there are abundance of things very
prettily said in him, yet he so frequently interrupts the Series of the
History, and is so everlasting an Affecter of pointed Sentences, to which he
sacrifices the Truth without any remorse, that he is not to be depended upon.
Eutropius and Aurelius Victor lived in an unpo^ite Age, and not only pass over
several Important Occurrences, but commonly give a faulty account of matters of
fact.

I cannot answer for this, that it wholly comes up to the dignity of the
Subject; and indeed as it is the first undertaking of this nature that ever
appeared in public, it cannot reasonably be expected that it should be carried
to its highest perfection at once; however, I may without vanity affirm, That
it has been considerably improved in the Version, as any one that will be at
the pains to compare the Translation with the Original will soon discover.

If it meets the favorable Reception which so useful and serviceable a
Performance seems to deserve, the Translator may, perhaps, find leisure time
enough hereafter for the advantage of our English Youth to put it into the
Universal Language.

A Clear Method for the more easy understanding the Roman History, etc.
The Origin of the Romans. The Year of the World 2800. Before Jesus Christ
1184.
Quest. I Desire to know the O^igine of the Romans?

Answ. They came from Aeneas, the Son of Anchises, who after the taking of
Troy, fled into Italy, and settled there.

Q. When did this happen?

A. In the Year 2800 of the Creation of the World.

Q. When Aeneas was in Italy, what did he there?

A. He married Lavinia, Daughter to Latinus, King of the Latins, after he had
in a single Combat killed Turnus, King of the Rutuli, who pretended to the same
Lady.

Q. Did he do nothing else?

A. He built a City there which he called Lavinium.

Q. Who governed the Latins after the Death of Latinus?

A. Aeneas.

Q. How long did he Reign?

A. No more than three Years.

Q. Who succeeded Aeneas?

A. His Son Ascanius, whom he had by Creusa.

Before we take in hand the Succession of the Kings of Rome, it is in some
manner necessary to give that of the Latin Kings after the Destruction of Troy,
and to remember that Aeneas, Anchises's Son, and Son-in-Law to Latinus, from
whom the Latins derive their Name, was slain in a Battle Four hundred twenty
six years before the Building of Rome, and that Latinus reigned Thirty five
Years of it.

A Chronological Table of the Latin Kings.
Kings. Year of the World. Reign Picus Son of Saturn 2757 37 Faunus 2794 44
Latinus I. 2838 35 Aeneas 2872 6 Ascanius Son of Aeneas 2877 38 Silvius Son of
Ascanius 2915 29 Aeneas Silvius 2944 31 Latinus II. 2975 51 Alba Silvius 3035
39 Capetus I. 3064 26 Capys 3090 28 Capetus II. 3118 13 Tiberinus 3131 8
Agrippa Silvius 3139 41 Alladius, or Aremulius Silvius 3180 19 Aventinus
Silvius 3199 37 Procas, or Palatinus Silvius 3236 23 Anulius Silvius 3259 41
Numitor. 3299 2

The Building of Rome. Year of the World 3301. Before Christ 753.
Q. WHen was the City of Rome built?

A. In the 3961 Year of the Julian Period. 753 before the Christian Era. 431
after the burning of Troy, and of the World 3301.

Q. Which was the Capital City of the Latins then?

A. Alha, because Julius that built it, made it the Seat of his Empire.

Q. What King possessed the Throne at that time.

A. Amulius after he had ejected his Brother Numitor.

Q. From whence was Rome so called?

A. From Romulus, who gave it his own Name.

Q Why?

A. Because his Brother Rhemus and he having agreed, That he who saw the best
Augury should Name it; Romulus had the most favorable Augury, as having seen
twelve Vultures, and the other only six.

The means Romulus made use of to People his New City of Rome.
Q. WHat Method did Romulus take to People his City?

A. He bethought himself of two expedients.

Q. What were they?

A. In the first place he opened a Public Sanctuary in a little Wood, which
was not far from the City, where all Fugitive Slaves, Criminals, Bankrupts, and
others of the same Quality found Protection.

Q. Did this Expedient take effect?

A. Ay.

Q. What did he do after this?

A. Since the Romans had no Women among them, and their Neighbors would not
marry with them, they were obliged to have recourse to a Stratagem.

Q. How was that?

A. They published in all the Neighboring Provinces, that at such a time they
designed to celebrate some Sports. The Sabins came to see the Divertisement,
and brought their Wives and Daughters hither. Now when they were most intent
upon beholding the Sights, Romulus gave the Signal, and the Romans immediately
carried off the Sabine Women, and married them.

Q. Romulus having thus peopled his City, what did he afterward?

A. He divided it into Thirty Curiae or Wards, which he called Sabin.

Q. Did he do nothing besides?

A. He also divided his Subjects into three Orders?

Q. As how?

A. The First was that of the Senators, whom he created to the Number of a
hundred, and called them Patres or Fathers, and their Children Patricians. The
Second was that of the Knights. And the Third, that of the People.

The several Sorts of Government in the City of Rome.
Q. HOw was Rome governed at first?

A. By Kings.

Q. How do ye call this sort of Government?

A. Monarchy.

Q. Was Rome always governed by Kings?

A. No: It became a Republic after the Expulsion of Tarquin the Proud, who was
the Seventh King there.

Q. What do you mean by Republic?

A. That is to say, a State where several Persons command.

Q. What difference do you make between a Monarchy and a Republic?

A. A Monarchy is a State where only one governs in Chief. A Republic, where
the Administration is lodged in many Hands.

Q. How long did this Republic continue?

A. It lasted in the first place, from the Consulat of Brutus to the Consulat
of Claudius, which makes 245 Years; and afterward from the Consulat of
Claudius to the Empire of Caesar, which makes about as many Years more.

Q. Did Rome always continue a Republic?

A. No; it was afterward governed by Emperors.

Q. What difference is there between a King, and an Emperor?

A. It Is another Name, but the Au^hority is almost the same.

Q. How many sorts of Government have there been in Rome?

A. Three: That of Kings, which lasted 250 Years. That of the Consuls 450. And
that of the Emperors 360.

Q. How long did the Roman Empire continue from the first year of Caesar, to
the tenth of Constantine Palaeologus, which makes up its beginning and end?

A. It continued a Thousand five hundred and one Year.

Q. How many Kings had they at Rome?

A. Seven, whose Names you will see in a Table below.

Q. How many Emperors have there been in the two Empires of the East, and the
West?

A. The Forty eight first possessed it entirely. The Twelve succeeding had the
Empire of the West, and the other Sixty three the Empire of the East.

The Seven Kings of Rome.
The Year of the World 3301.

In the Fourth Year of the Sixth Olympiad.

3961 of the Julian Period.

431 after the Taking of Troy.

753 before the First Year of the Christian Era.

Kings. Year of the World. Reign. 1. Romulus. 3301 38 Inter-Regnum. 3339 2.
Numa Pompilius. 3340 43 3. Tullus H^stilius. 3383 32 4. Ancus Martius. 3414 34
5. Tarquinius Priscus. 3439 39 6. Servius Tullius. 3477 44 7. Tarquinius
Superbus. 3521 44

The two first Consuls, Brutus and Collatinus, governed in the 245th Year of
Rome, after the Expulsion of their Kings, on the 24th of February. A day
observed in their Calendar.

Romulus the First King of Rome. Year of the World 3301. Before Christ 753.
Q. I Desire to know something of the Birth of Romulus?

A. He was the Son of Rhea Silvia, and supposed to be begotten by Mars.

Q. Who was this Rhea Silvia?

A. Daughter to Numitor, and Neice of Amulius.

Q. What happened to this Lady?

A. Her Uncle Amulius shut her up among the Vestal Virgins, that so by this
means he might make her incapable of having Children, who might one day dispute
the Throne he usurped with him.

Q. Did this Policy of his succeed?

A. No: For this young Vestal going one day to fetch some Water in a little
Wood, which the Albans had consecrated to Mars, to be employed in the
Sacrifices of the Goddess Vesta, she was ravished by an armed Man, who
pretended to be the God Mars.

Q. But what did Amulius when he saw her big with Child?

A. He condemned her to Dye; but at the Intercession of Antho, only Daughter to
this Inhuman Tyrant, this Sentence was changed into perpetual Imprisonment.

Q. What befell her in this Prison?

A. She was brought to bed of two Children?

Q. And what happened to the poor Infants?

A. Amulius immediately commanded 'em to be thrown into the Tiber, in a little
Wooden Basket without a cover.

Q. How were they preserved?

A. The Stream carried the two Infants to the Side of the River, and a certain
Woman, called Lupa, directed thither by their Cries, took them up, and gave
them Suck for some time, which occasioned the Report that they were suckled by
a She-wolf.

Q. Who took the care to bring them up?

A. One Faustulus by Name, the King's Shepherd, who knowing their Birth, took
them from the Woman, carried them home, and gave them to his Wife Acca
Laurentia to nurse them.

Q. When they came to age, what did they then?

A. Faustulus having told them who they were, they killed their Uncle Amulius.

Q. For what reason?

A. To Re-establish their Uncle Numitor in his Throne; and lastly, in the
second Year of his Reign, they built Rome.

Q. What happened to Rhemus?

A. As he was jesting and ridiculing the smallness of the Ditch, which Romulus
had caused to be made, and leaping over it, he was killed by one of the
Workmen, who gave him a great Blow on the Head with a Rake.

Q. How came Romulus to be King?

A. After the Death of his Brother Rhomus, he was owned as King by all his
Followers.

Q. What did he do when he was King?

A. He was a great Warrier, and gained a considerable Battle against the
Ceninians, the Antemnates, and the Crustumenians, with whom he made War.

Q. What remarkable Performances did he do in this War?

A. He killed their General with his own Hand, and defeated the rest of the
Army.

Q. After this Victory, what did he?

A. He entered Rome in a Chariot drawn by four Horses, covered with a Purple
Robe, all the Prisoners of War marching in order before him.

Q. Did not he give them their Liberty again?

A. Yes; at the instance of the Roman Women, who for the most part had
Relations among them.

Q. He received them afterward into the number of his Citizens?

A. Right, and gave them the same Privileges with the rest of the Romans.

Q. Had Romulus no other War but this?

A. He maintained a long and cruel War against the Sabins, who were mightily
enraged at the taking away of their Wives and Daughters.

Q. During this War, what Remarkable Action happened?

A. The Sabins possessed themselves of the Capitol by the means of Tarpeia, who
had the keeping of one of the Gates, and delivered it to them.

Q. Upon what Condition?

A. That they should give her the Golden Bracelets they wore on their Arms.

Q* And what ensued upon this?

A. Instead of performing this Article, they pressed her to Death with the weight
of their Bucklers, and cut the Garrison in pieces.

Q. Were there not several other Combats between the Romans and the Sabins.

A. There was another, which had been exceeding bloody, if the Roman Wives,
that had been carried off by force, had not thrown themselves between the two
Armies, and obtained a Peace with their Tears.

Q. The Sabins then were touched with Compassion at this sight.

A. True; both one and the other side threw down their Arms, and swore they would
never War against each other any more.

Q. What Agreement then did they make?

A. That Rome should be the Capital City of their Empire, and that Romulus and
Tatius, King of the Sabins, should Reign together.

Q. Where did they live?

A. Tatius continued in the Capitol which he had Conquered; and Romulus chose
Mount-Palatine.

Q Was not the Body of the Senate augmented by Tatius?

A. He made 'em just as many more as they were before the late Articles.

Q. What was that Number?

A. Three hundred.

Q. Was any thing done in Honor of the Women?

A. They instituted the Matronalia, or Feast of the Matrons, which was to be
celebrated Yearly.

Q. How do they say Romulus died?

A. We don't positively know. Some pretend that as he was haranguing his
Soldiers, a Tempest arose, and he disappeared all on the sudden; and this gave
an occasion to the common belief, That he was translated among the gods.

Q. But which is the most probable Opinion?

A. That the Senators, whom he treated too imperiously, killed him in the midst
of the Senate, so that each of them carried under his Robe some Piece of his
Body, and afterward made the People believe that he was mounted up to Heaven.

Q. After the Death of Romulus, was not the Form of Government changed?

A. Yes: For the Senate being composed of Romans and Sabines, 'twas resolved to
choose by Lots Five Persons of both Nations, who should reign five days
alternatively, till such time as they could find out one that was worthy to
fill the Throne.

Q. How long did this Interregnum last?

A. A Twelvemonth.

Q. Was nothing done to the Honor of Romulus?

A. A Temple was built to him upon the Quirinal Mount, where he was adored
under the name of Quirinus.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Thirty eight Years, and was succeeded by Numa Pompilius.

Numa Pompilius the Second King of Rome. Year of the World 3340. Of Rome 40.
Q. FRom whence came Numa Pompilius?

A. From Cures, the Metropolis of the Sabines.

Q. How was he declared King?

A. Some Ambassadors went to offer him the Crown at Cures, where he then
resided, and all in consideration of his great Piety.

Q. What things did he do, being arrived at Rome?

A. The first thing he did was to disband the Guards which Romulus had
instituted for the security of his Person.

Q. What made him do so?

A. Because he said 'twas better for a Prince to make himself be loved than
feared by his Subjects.

Q. What did he do afterward?

A. He established a certain Form of Sacrifices and Ceremonies that were to be
observed in the Worship of their gods.

Q. Did he do any thing besides?

A. He likewise instituted the Pontiffs, the Augurs, and the Salian Priests. In
fine, he testified by his Laws and Actions, That nothing was more necessary in
a State than Religion and Justice.

Q. Did not he build some Temples?

A. He built one to the Honor of Ianus, which was to be shut in the time of
Peace, and opened in War.

Q. Did he build any more?

A. Yes: That which he consecrated to the Goddess Vesta, where he established
the Vestal Virgins.

Q. Who were these Vestals?

A. Certain Virgins that were chosen about the Age of Four or Five Years, out
of the Noblest Families in Rome, to be Priestesses of the Goddess Vesta.

Q. What was their Employment?

A. To look after the Holy Fire which burned incessantly upon an Altar, and was
a Symbol or Character of the Divinity they adored.

Q. What Punishment was assigned for those Vestals that let the Holy Fire go
out?

A. They were interred alive and treated after the very same manner with those
which violated their Chastity, to which they were obliged.

Q. Did Numa Pompilius do any thing remarkable besides this?

A. He divided the Year into Twelve Months, whereas Romulus had only instituted
Ten. In short, he established several other Laws, which he said he received
from the Goddess Aegeria.

Q. What manner of death died he?

A. He died of an Indisposition, being Fourscore years old, after a Reign of 43
Years, which he passed in a profound Peace.

Q. Had he any Children?

A. He had four Sons, none of which succeeded him in the Crown, but made four
Illustrious Families in Rome.

Q. Had he no Daughters?

A. He had one called Pompilia, who was married to a Sabine Nobleman, whose
name was Martius.

Q. Who was Successor to Numa Pompilius?

A. Tullus H^stilius.

Tullus Hostilius, Third King of Rome. Year of the World 3383. Of Rome 83.
Q I Would be informed of what Family was Tullus H^stilius?

A. He was Grandson to Tullus H^stilius, who was killed in endeavoring to
retake the Capitol; and was elected by the Romans for his Heroic Actions.

Q. What remarkable thing did he in the beginning of his Reign?

A. 'Twas he who first taught the Romans Military Discipline, and the Art of
fighting regularly.

Q. Did he do nothing else?

A. He distributed among the ordinary sort of people all the Demcan which the
Kings before him kept in their own hands, and reserved no more for himself than
what he had when he was but a private Person.

Q. What considerable things happened in his Reign?

A. The famous Combat between the Horatii and Curiatii.

Q. Pray recount to me how that was managed.

A. The Romans and Albans being willing to put a speedy Conclusion to the War,
which had lasted a long while, 'twas resolved on both sides to choose out Three
men to fight for their Country.

Q. And what were the Conditions?

A. If the Three Albans were vanquished, Alba was to submit it self to the
Government of the Romans: On the other hand, if the Roman Champions were
beaten, then Rome must do the like to Alba.

Q. Who were pitched upon for this Exploit?

A. The Romans chose the Three Horatii, Brothers; and the Albans the Three
Curiatii, who were Three Brothers likewise.

Q. What was the Success of the Combat?

A. The Three Curiatii were at first wounded, and Two of the Horatii slain.

Q. The Third Horatius being left to fight the other Three, what became of him?

A. He pretended to fly for it; and as the Curiatii eagerly pursued him, he
faced about, and killed 'em one after another.

Q. Did he not soon tarnish the Glory of this Illustrious Action?

A. Yes.

Q. As how?

A. By murdering his own Sister.

Q. What instigated him to do that?

A. Returning Victorious, and meeting his Sister in Tears for one of the
Curiatii, who was promised her in Marriage, he run her through with his Sword.

Q. Was he punished for this Crime?

A. No; his late Victory excused him.

Q. The Romans being thus Conquerors, what did Tullus after this?

A. He ordered the City of Alba to be razed to the ground, and commanded the
Albans to come and live at Rome with their King Metius Suffetius.

Q. What became of that King?

A. He was sometime after tied to the Tails of four Horses and torn in pieces.

Q. For what Misdemeanor was so severe a Punishment inflicted on him?

A. For forming a Conspiracy to make himself Master of Rome; and betraying the
Romans, in not sending them the Assistance he was obliged to give them.

Q. After what manner died Tullus Hostilius?

A. He and his whole Family were burnt by Lightning which set his Palace on
fire.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Thirty two Years.

Q. Who succeeded him?

A. Ancus Martius, who resembled Numa Pompilius as well for his Justice as his
Piety.

Ancus Martius, Fourth King of Rome. Year of the World 3414. Of Rome 114.
Q. OF whom was Ancus Martius descended?

A. He was the Son of Pompilia, and Grandson to Numa Pompilius.

Q What particular things did Ancus Martius do?

A. Nothing, if we except his enclosing Mount Aventine, and the Ianiculum
within the City, and building New Walls about it, and laying the Foundation of
the City Ostia at the mouth of the Tiber.

Q. Had he no Wars at all?

A. He had one with the Latins, whom he defeated in several Battles.

Q. How died he?

A. O^^ a Sickness in the Twenty fourth Year of his Reign.

Q. How many Children had he?

A. He had Two, whom he left under the Care of Tarquinius Priscus, who took
away the Kingdom from them, and got himself to be declared King of Rome.

Q. It was then this Tarquinius Priscus that succeeded him?

A. Yes.

Tarquinius Priscus, Fifth King of Rome. Year of the World 3439. Of Rome 139.
Q. FRom whence came Tarquinius Priscus?

A. He was originally of Corinth, and Son to a Rich Merchant whose name was
Demaratus.

Q. How came he to be raised to this Dignity?

A. Under the Reign of Ancus Martius he quitted the City of the Tarquins to
seek his Fortune at Rome, which it seems answered his Ambition.

Q. What happened to him in his Journey thither?

A. As he came near the City an Eagle lighted and took off his Bonnet, and soon
after placed it on his Head again. Tanaquil told him, That this lucky Omen
promised him the Regal Authority.

Q. Why quitted he his former name Lucumon to take that of Tarquinius?

A. In remembrance of the City of the Tarquins, where he was born?

Q. How got he himself declared King?

A. After the Death of Ancus Martius he assembled the S^nators and People, and
being supported by his Friends, and those whom he had gained to his Party by
Money, he put in for the Crown, and managed his Affairs so dexterously, that he
obtained it without any difficulty.

Q. What did he do to secure himself in his new Kingdom?

A. He augmented the Senate with a hundred Senators, and enlarged the Authority
of that August Body. He likewise added Three hundred new Members to the Order
of the Knights, which was their number before.

Q. What other things were done by him in particular?

A. He ordered a Bundle of Rods bound up together, with an Axe in the midst, to
be carried before the Magistrates. He regulated the Stuff and Fashion of the
Robes that were to be worn by the Kings and Augurs; and commanded the Chairs of
the Senators to be made of Ivory.

Q. What did he do besides all this?

A. He regulated the Habits which were to distinguish the Knights from others
that served in the Wars, and enjoined them to wear Golden Rings on their
Fingers. Then to distinguish the Children of Illustrious Families, he ordered
them to wear long Robes bordered with Purple.

Q. Did he undertake any considerable Building?

A. He built the Circus, between Mount Palatine and Mount Aventine, to have
there represented the Combats of Gladiators, and of Beasts, or any other
Diversions of the like nature, that derived their name from thence.

Q. What was remarkable in his Reign?

A. That he was the first that wore a Crown and a Scepter, with the other Marks
of the Regal Dignity.

Q. What other remarkable Passages have you?

A. Being one day minded to try Actius Navius, President of the Augurs, he
asked him, Whether what he thought of in his mind was possible to be done, or
no?

Q. What Answer did Actius return him?

A After having consulted the Birds, he positively told him it was. Why, says
the King, I was thinking whether I was able to cut this Whetstone with a Razor.
That you are, replied the Augur; and at the same time the King accordingly cut
it.

Q. Did not this give a mighty Reputation to the Augurs?

A Yes; for from that time the Romans never began any Enterprise without
consulting them.

Q. What did Tarquin do besides, to make himself recommendable?

A. He extinguished the Name of the Latins through all Italy, having possessed
himself of most of their Cities.

Q. What Misfortunes befell him?

A. He was slain by Two Peasants that were bribed to do it by the Children of
Ancus Martius.

Q. Why did they get him to be assassinated?

A. Because they were angry to see him elevated to the Throne to their
prejudice.

Q. How old was he when they slew him?

A. Eighty four years old, and reigned Thirty eight of them.

Q. How many Children did he leave behind him?

A. He left Two, whom he placed under the Care of Servius Tullius.

Q. Who succeeded Tarquin?

A. The abovementioned Servius Tullius.

Servius Tullius, Sixth King of Rome. The Year of the World 3477. Of Rome 177.
Q. FRom what sort of Parents was Servius Tullius descended?

A. He was Son to the Prince of Cornicula, a small City which Tarquin had taken
in the Province of the Latins.

Q. What Adventures happened to them?

A. His Father was killed at Corinth; and his Mother, who was then big of him,
was carried Prisoner to Rome, where Tanaquil the Wife of Tarquin took an
affection to her, and lodged her in the Palace, where she was delivered of
Servius Tullius.

Q. What happened at his Birth?

A. 'Twas remarkable, that lying in his Cradle a Lambent Flame played about his
head for above the space of an hour, and did him not the least Injury.

Q What did Tanaquil, who was particularly well skilled in Divination, believe
of this Prodigy?

A. She was of Opinion that it promised the Kingdom to this Infant, and after
that time took great care of his Education, and gave him her Daughter in
Marriage.

Q. How came he to be proclaimed King?

A. Servius being Son-in-Law to Tarquin, and having the Management of all
Affairs in his own hands at the time of his death, he behaved himself, by the
Queen's Assistance, so well in this place, that he was elected and proclaimed
King by the People, some time after the Death of that Prince.

Q. What remarkable things does History tell of him?

A. Having vanquished the Tuscans and the Vejentes, he exceedingly augmented
the City of Rome, added the Quirinal, Viminal, and the Exquiline Hill to it,
and encompassed it with Walls and Dit^hes.

Q What other Actions are related of him?

A. He was the first that took a Survey of the Roman Citizens, and valued every
man's Estate to tax him proportionably to his Income, that so his Troops might
be better accommodated.

Q. How often was this done?

A. Once in Five Years.

Q. How was this space of time called?

A. A Lustrum.

Q. How many Children had he?

A. Two, whose Names were Tullia.

Q. What sort of Inclinations had they?

A. The Eldest was of a sweet agreeable Temper: The Youngest, Fiery and
Ambitious.

Q. Whom did they marry?

A. The two Tarquins, Brothers-in-Law or Nephews to Servius.

Q. How came they to marry them?

A. Tullius apprehending that these Tarquins the Sons or Grandsons of
Tarquinius Priscus would shock him in his Throne, thought the best way to
secure them in his Interests, would be to bestow his Eldest Daughter upon the
Elder Tarquin, who was naturally Ambitious and Violent; and his Youngest upon
the other, whose name was Aruns, who had as much Moderation as his Brother had
Heat and Passion.

Q. What was the Consequence of these Marriages?

A. As these things were wholly managed by a Principle of Policy, and Servius
had no regard to the different Characters and Dispositions of the married
Couple, he was the occasion that Tarquin, who liked not the too gentle humor
of his Wife, entered into a strict Correspondence with his Sister-in-Law, and
debauched her.

Q. I desire to know the Result of this Correspondence.

A. Tarquin murdered his own Wife, and the Youngest Sister poisoned her Husband.

Q. Why did she do so?

A. To put her in a capacity to marry her Brother-in-Law, and take away the
Crown from her Father.

Q. How came Tarquin to be declared King?

A. Suffering himself to be over-persuaded by Tullia, who told him he must turn
the old Gentleman out of his Kingdom without waiting for his Death, he summons
the Senators to tell them he was minded to reign?

Q. What happened upon this?

A. He placed himself on the Seat where the Kings were accustomed to sit, and
began to call his Father-in-Law Servius an Usurper.

Q. And what became of Servius?

A. This making a great noise in the Senate, the King came to know the reason
of it: Tarquin immediately raising himself from his Seat, he laid hold of him,
and throwing him down stairs, ordered the Soldiers to assassinate him.

Q. After this Murder, how did Tullia manage her self?

A. Being informed that Tarquin was owned for King, she imm^diately got her
Chariot ready to go and congratulate him; and as she came to the street where
the Body of her Father lay across the way, the Coachman going to turn back and
pass some other way, this Unnatural Fury would not suffer such a delay, but bid
him drive on, and pass over the Body of her Father, that was all bloody.

Q. How long did Servius Tullius reign?

A. Forty four years.

Q. Who succeeded him?

A. Tarquin the Proud.

Tarquinius Superbus, Seventh King of Rome. Year of the World 3521. Of Rome 221.
Q. I desire to be informed particularly of the Birth of Tarquin.

A. Some Historians tell us he was the Son of Tarquinius Priscus, but others
are of opinion he was only his Grandson.

Q. How did he govern his Kingdom?

A. 'Twas after the Death of Servius, whom he caused to be assassinated, that
he seized upon the Kingdom, and behaved himself with all imaginable Arrogance
and Cruelty.

Q. Why was he sirnam'd Superbus?

A. From the Insolence of his Temper.

Q. What did he do when he was made King?

A. He despised the Authority of the Senate, and frequently put to death, or
banished, or imprisoned the Senators and chief men of the City, upon false
Reports and Accusations.

Q. What remarkable things did he do?

A. He defeated the Volscians by Force of Arms, but made himself Master of
Gabii by Treachery.

Q. How was that managed?

A. He pretended to fall out with his Son Sextus, in the presence of most of
his Captains; nay, his Passion was carried on so far, that he was going to
strike him.

Q. What does Sextus upon this?

A. Away he flies, and sends to the Gabians to beg the Protection of their City
against the barbarous Treatment of an Unnatural Father.

Q. And did the Inhabitants receive him?

A. Yes: And he knew so well how to establish himself in their good Opinion by
fighting for them, that they made him their General, and Governor of the Town.

Q. When Sextus found himself in a condition to do what he pleased, what did he
then?

A. He dispatches one Messenger only to his Father, as they had agreed before.

Q. What Message was the fellow entrusted with?

A. With nothing but Compliments.

Q. What does Tarquin?

A. He carries him into his Garden, and in his presence knocks off the Heads of
all the highest Poppies.

Q. Without doubt Sextus understood well enough his Father's meaning.

A. Right: He struck off the Heads of the principal men among the Gabians; some
he imprisoned, others he accused of Treason, to find a pretext to condemn, and
so make them incapable of doing him any Injury.

Q. What Disgrace happened afterward to Tarquin?

A. His Reign daily becoming more and more odious to the Romans, they took his
Crown from him, and turned him with his whole Family out of the City, for a
certain Crime committed by his Son.

Q. What was that?

A. Sextus, who imagined that his High Birth would carry him out in every
thing, having beheld Lucretia the Wife of Collatinus, he was struck with her
Beauty; but as he could not hope to satisfy his Passion easily, (for besides
that she was a Lady of the severest Virtue imaginable, she was married to a
Prince of the Royal Family), he was resolved to ravish her.

Q. How was that effected?

A. In the night time he enters her Chamber, claps his Dagger to her Breast,
and threatened to kill her, if she did not comply with his Desires.

Q. These Menaces, did they affright her?

A. No.

Q. What did Sextus then to accomplish his Intentions?

A. Seeing nothing was able to move this Illustrious Lady, he tells her, That
after he had killed her, he would kill her Slave likewise, and leave him in her
Bed, and then publish abroad, that he killed them both in the Act of Adultery.

Q. Then this Consideration prevailed with her.

A. Yes: For she rather chose to surrender her Body to the Passion of Sextus,
than suffer her Memory to be dishonored by so black a Calumny.

Q. What did she after this?

A. After she had shown this weakness, she hides a Dagger under her Gown, and
sends to find out her Husband Collatinus, her Brother Lucretius, and her Cousin
Brutus, who were encamped before Ardea: She complained to them of the Brutal
Action of this libidinous Prince, begged them to revenge the Injury done to
her; and immediately drawing out the Dagger from under her Gown, she struck it
into her Belly, being resolved not to survive the Loss of her Honor.

Q. What did Brutus do after she was d^ad?

A. He draws the bloody Dagger out of Lucretia's Wound, and swore by her Chaste
Blood* That he would chase Tarquin and all his guilty Family out of Rome.

Q. How long did Tarquin reign?

A. Twenty four Years.

Q. Where died he?

A. In Tuscany, after having made several Efforts in vain to re-possess himself
of Rome.

Of the Alteration in the State of Rome. Year of the World 3545. Of Rome 245.
Q. AFter Tarquin was turned out of Rome by Brutus, by whom was the City
governed?

A. By Consuls.

Q. When began this Government?

A. 245 Years after the Foundation of Rome, and 510 before the Birth of Jesus
Christ.

Q. What were these Consuls?

A. Certain Magistrates, in whose hands the Sovereign Authority was lodged for
a Year only.

Q. What was their Office?

A. To command the Armies.

Q. Who were the two first Consuls?

A. Brutus and Collatinus.

Q. Was not the Consulate taken away from Collatinus?

A. Yes.

Q. Wherefore?

A. Because he carried the Name of Tarquin, which was odious to the People.

Q. Whom did they put in his place?

A. Valerius Publicola.

Q. What is remarkable of B^utus?

A. That he for a long time counterfeited the Madman, to avoid Tarquin's
Cruelty, who had put to death Marcius Iunius his Father, and his Brother, with
several more of the Senators.

Q. What did he do besides this, worthy of remembrance?

A He loved his Country so entirely, that he beheaded two of his Sons for
conspiring against the Republic.

Q. By whom was that Conspiracy carried on?

A. By the Deputies whom Tarquin had dispatched to Rome, to negotiate the
Affair of his Restoration.

Q. Where did Brutus dye?

A. He lost his life soon after, fighting with Aruns the Son of Tarquin, in a
Battle against those of Tarquin's Party, and the Vejentes who espoused his
Quarrel.

Q. What happened to 'em in this Duel?

A. They ran one another through with their Lances.

The Wars which the Romans were obliged to maintain.
THE Hetruscan War. The War of the Latins. The War of the Volscians. The War of
the Vejentes. The War of the Gauls. The Second War of the Latins. The War of
the Samnites. The War of the Tarentines. The first Punic War. The second Punic
War. The War of Antiochus. The War of Macedonia. The third Punic War. The War
of Corinth. The War of Portugal. The War of Numantia. The War of the Slaves.
The War of Iugurtha. The War of Mithridates.
Q. Besides these, had they no Civil Wars?

A. Yes; they had two; the first between Marius and Sylla; and the second
between Caesar and Pompey. It Is true, there were several Seditions, which shall
be recounted in their proper place.

Q. For what reason did the Romans undertake all these Wars?

A. To defend their Liberty, preserve their Limits, protect their Allies, and
enlarge their Empire.

The War of Etruria. The Year of the World 3547. Of Rome 247.
Q. WHich was the first War that the Romans were engaged in, after the
Expulsion of their Kings?

A. That of Etruria.

Q. How did it begin?

A. Porsenna, King of that Country, being resolved to support Tarquin's Party,
came to besiege Rome with a powerful Army.

Q. How was it ended?

A. By the Valor of Horatius Cocles, and Mutius Scaevola's Bravery, which so
effectually daunted him, that he sent Deputies to the Romans to offer them
Peace.

Q. How many Hostages did they give him?

A. Twenty young Ladies of the greatest Beauty and Quality in the City.

Q. What remarkable Action was it that Horatius Cocles performed?

A. He alone sustained for some time the Fury of the Enemies, who would have
passed the Bridge to enter the City; and at last when it was broken down, he
threw himself into the Tiber, and swam cross it, without abandoning his Arms
all this while.

Q. And Mutius Scaevola's Action, how was that?

A. He privately stole into the Enemies Camp, with a design to kill the King,
but failed in his Attempt, for he mistook the King's Secretary for the King
himself.

Q. What did they do to Scaevola after this unfortunate Disappointment?

A. He was taken and brought before Porsenna.

Q And after what manner did he behave himself there?

A. He puts his criminal Right hand which committed the mistake, into a Fire
which happened to be there: And know, says he to the King, that Three hundred
of us young Roman Gentlemen have conspired your Death.

Q. What effects did so resolute an Action produce?

A. Porsenna, affrighted at the Hardiness and Resolution of the Romans, offered
them a Peace, and accepted of the abovementioned Ladies by way of Hostages.

Q. What happened upon that?

A. Clelia, who was one of the Twenty that were given in Hostage to Porsenna,
having sl^pt from her Guards, swims over the Tiber on Horseback, and came back
to Rome.

Q What did they do to her when she was arrived there?

A. The Consul fearing lest the world would accuse him of Infidelity, was for
surrendering her into Porsenna's hands, who sent her honorably back again to
Rome, with some other young Romans, and made a Peace.

The War of the Latins. The Year of the World 3555. Of Rome 255.
Q. WHich was the Second War that the Romans were obliged to sustain?

A. That of the Latins, who took up Arms at the Instigation of Manlius,
Son-in-Law to Tarquin.

Q. And after what manner did it end?

A. A bloody Battle that was fought near the Lake of Regilus, soon put an end
to it.

Q. Who were the Generals of the two Armies?

A. Manlius was at the Head of the Latins, and Aulus Posthumous commanded the
Romans?

Q. Which side gained the Victory?

A. 'Twas in suspense for some time, but at last it declared it self in favor
of the Romans.

Q. How many Men were killed upon the spot?

A. There were Forty thousand Men slain in the Action: Thirty four thousand of
the Latins, in which number was Manlius: And Six thousand of the Romans. After
the Death of Manlius, the Tarquins lost all hopes of being ever restored.

The War of the Volscians. The Year of the World 3559. Of Rome 259.
Q. WHich was the Third War the Romans had?

A. That of the Volscians, and the Aequi.

Q. Why did they declare War against those People?

A. Because they continually disturbed, and annoyed the Romans.

Q. When did this War begin?

A. In the Year of Rome 259, and it lasted for several Years

Q. By whom were the Volscians defeated?

A. By Quinius Cincinnatus, who after he had performed many Glorious Exploits
formerly, retired to his Country house, where he lived quietly, Tilling his
Ground, and now was taken from the Plough to be made Dictator.

Q. What memorable things did he do?

A. By his Valor he saved the Army commanded by the Consul Marcus Minutius,
which was surrounded by the Enemy.

Q. After this Expedition, what became of Cincinnatus?

A. He peaceably returned to his old Employments at his Country House.

Q. What other remarkable Things happened during this War?

A. The Adventures of Coriolanus.

Q. Who was this Coriolanus?

A. He was a Roman Gentleman, whose Name was Martiu^.

Q. Who gave him then the Surname of Coriolanus?

A. The Consul Martius, for having performed wonders at the taking of Corioli.

Q. What befell him?

A. He was condemned to Banishment in the Year of Rome 263.

Q. Upon what account?

A. For having spoken contemptibly of the Tribunes.

Q. Whether fled he?

A. To the Volscians, as being the most inveterate Enemies to the Romans, and
consequ^ntly the fittest to execute his Revenge.

Q. What did he among the Volscians?

A. He engaged them to renew the War with the Romans in the Year 263.

Q. Did he command their Troops?

A. The Volscians chose him for their General with Tullius Accius, who at that
time Commanded them.

Q. And what famous Exploits did he perform?

A. He signalized himself in several Encounters, wherein he always defeated the
Romans.

Q. Did he always take the same advantage over the Romans?

A. No; for being encamped near the Gates of the City with a design to besiege
it, vanquished by the Prayers and Tears of his Mother Veturia, and his Wife
Volumnia, whom the Senate deputed to go and intercede with him, he abandoned
his Enterprise, and drew the Army off in the Year 266.

Q. And what was done by way of Recompense to so fortunate a Mediation?

A. They built a Temple, which was consecrated to the Fortune of the Women.

Q. What was the end of Coriolanus?

A. Accius becoming Jealous of him, ordered him to be assassinated by ten or a
dozen Villains, who accused him of Treason.

Q. Had the Volscians any other Wars but what are already mentioned?

A. Yes; but the Death of Coriolanus occasioned their Ruin, for they were
entirely defeated in a famous Battle by Spurius Cassius.

Q. After all these Conquests, did this Spurius Cassius enjoy himself long?

A. No; for three Years after he was thrown headlong from the Tarpeian Rock.

Q. How came this misfortune to befall him?

A. Because he was accused of a design to get himself declared King. 'Twas he,
who was Author of the A Law that respected the Division of Fields.
Lex Agraria, in the Year 268.

The War of the Vejentes. The Year of the World 3571. Of Rome 271.
Q. WHen began the War of the Vejentes?

A In the year of Rome 271.

Q. Who declared it against them?

A. The Fabians.

Q. How came that about?

A. The Family of the Fabians begged of the People of Rome to leave the
Management of the War to their care, and they would undertake it at their own
Expense.

Q. How many were there of this Illustrious Name?

A. Three hundred.

Q. And how came they off?

A. After having frequently defeated their Enemies, they unluckily fell at last
into an Ambuscade, which the Vejentes had prepared for them, and by this means
the Fabians were wholly cut off in the Year of Rome 277.

Q. Near what place did this defeat befall them.

A. Near the River Cremera, and the Gate through which this Honorable Family
sallied out of Rome, was called the Scelerata, or wicked.

Q. Had the Vejentes always such Success?

A. No, for the Year following the Consul Servilius put an end to this War by
an over^hrow he gave them.

Q. Did not he put an end to other Wars besides this?

A. He had frequent Rencounters with the Volscians, who were often beaten, and
particularly by Quintus Capitolinus.

Q. What other considerable Actions did Capitolinus perform?

A. In the Year 286, he took Antium, the Capital City of the Volscians.

Q. Did he do nothing else?

A. Ten years after the Taking of this City, being called from his
Country-seat, where he employed himself in cultivating his own Grounds, he was
created Dictator, and in that Quality overcame the Aequi, and made them first
pass A Ceremony the Romans had of using their Enemies after they had conquered
them.
under the Yoke.

Q. By whom was the City of the Vejentes taken?

A. By Camillus, the Dictator, after a Siege of Ten years continuance, in the
Year of Rome 358.

Q. By what means did he take it?

A. By undermining it.

Q. What particular Passages happened at this Siege?

A. The Soldiers were resolved not to return home till they made themselves
Masters of the Place, and bound themselves by a solemn Oath to observe it. And
this was the first time that they begun to pass the Winter under Tents.

Q. This same Camillus, did not he Signalize his Valor upon other occasions?

A. He brought the Fidenates into Subjection, and the City of Falisci, but by a
very gen^rous Action.

Q. How was that, I pray?

A. A Schoolmaster put the most considerable Children for their Birth in the
Town, into his Hands, expecting to get a mighty Reward for his pains; but
Camillus ordered him to be stripped stark naked, and so to be soundly whipped from
his Camp to the City, whither he sent him with all his Boys.

The War of the Gauls. The Year of the World 3663. Of Rome 363.
Q WHen began the War of the Gauls?

A. In the Year of Rome 363.

Q. Where did it first break out?

A. Having entered Italy, to the number of above a Hundred thousand Men, out of
an Expectation of finding a mighty booty there, they first besieged Clusium.

Q. Did not the Romans take the part of the Clusians their Allies?

A. Yes, they sent Ambassadors to the Gauls, who instead of harkening to them,
raised the Siege of Clusium, and marched directly to Rome.

Q. What did the Romans do when they heard of their March?

A. They sent Fabius the Consul to oppose their coming with a powerful Army.

Q. And did a Fight hereupon ensue?

A. A most bloody Battle was fought near the River Allia, where the Roman Army
was entirely defeated.

Q. And what did the Gauls after this terrible Conquest?

A. They immediately entered the City of Rome, finding the Gates open, and the
Place abandoned.

Q. And how did the Gauls behave themselves, being now Masters of the Town?

A. They effectually plundered it, and coming into the Senate House, massacred
all the Senators, and afterward burnt the whole City down to the ground.

Q. What did they besides?

A. After all this Ravaging and Desolation, Brennus who commanded the Gauls,
besieged the Capitol, whither the Roman Youth retired with Manlius.

Q. How long did this Siege continue?

A. Six whole months, after which Brennus ordered a great number of Ladders to
be made, designing to attempt the Scalade of it in the Night.

Q. And did his design take effect?

A. It had certainly succeeded, if Manlius and the rest of the besieged had not
been awakened by the noise of some Geese in the Garrison, and beaten back the
Gauls that were already got upon the Ramperts, and thrown down headlong those
that were upon the Ladders

Q. Did the Gauls abandon the ^lace upon this?

A. No; they hop^d to carry it at last by Famine, but Manlius perceiving their
Design, threw abundance of Loaves into their Camp, to let him see they were not
straightened for Provisions.

Q. Were they not weary of so long a Siege?

A. Right, and sent to tell the Besieged, they would draw off and leave their
City, provided they would give them a thousand pounds of Gold.

Q. Did any remarkable Accident happen during this Capitulation?

A. Camillus, who had been banished some time ago, and recalled with all speed
to come to the Relief of the City, arrived thither at the Head of Forty
thousand men, whom he had picked up in his March, beats the Gauls out of Rome,
and afterward pursuing them for two or three Leagues, gives them an entire
defeat.

Q. What does he after this Victory?

A. He returns to Rome in Triumph, and stops the People who would have fain
gone to live at Veii, because Rome was all burnt down, with such powerful
Arguments, that he persuades them to remove the Rubbish, clear the Ruins, and
build a new City.

Q. How long was it Re-building?

A. Not above an Year.

Q. And how was this War ended at last?

A. After, the Gauls were wholly defeated by Manlius and Dolabella.

Q. How happened the Death of Manlius, whom they Sir-nam'd Capitolinus?

A. 'Twas after his having defended the Capitol, and intrieguing to make
himself King, that he was thrown headlong from the top of that very Capitol,
which he had defended with so much Gallantry.

Q. What memorable Passage fell out in the Year 393 of the Building of the City.

A. A Gulf a peared in the midst of the public Place, which they could fill up
by no manner of means.

Q. Were not the Augurs consulted upon this?

A. Yes.

Q. And what an Answer did they return?

A. That it would never close again till the most precious thing in Rome was
thrown into it.

Q. And what Method did they take?

A. At the very time, when they were most perplexed to find out this precious
thing, Marcus Curtius mounts his Horse, leaps into it all armed as he was, and
the Gulf immediately closed up.

The War of the Latins. The Year of the World 3714. Of Rome 414.
Q. WHo declared War against the Latins?

A. The Romans did in the Year of Rome 414.

Q. Wherefore did the Romans declare War against them?

A. Because they pretended to have a Right to the Privileges of Roman Citizens,
a share in the Government, and bearing of all Offices.

Q. What remarkable things happened in the Course of this War?

A. The first is, That a Young Gentleman of the Latins singling himself out of
the Army, to Challenge any Roman to Fight him; young Manlius, Son to Manlius
Torquatus the Consul, rides up to him, fights him, and kills him.

Q. And what Reward had Manlius for so brave an Action?

A. But a sorry one; for his Father ordered his Head to be struck off before
the whole Army, for having violated the Military Discipline.

Q. What were these Orders?

A. The Consuls had issued out an express Prohibition for any one to quit his
Post, till the Signal for the Battle was given.

Q. What was the second Remarkable Thing?

A. It Is this; Decius, the Consul, devoted himself for his Country, by running
into the midst of the Enemies.

The War against the Samnites. The Year of the World 3711. Of Rome 411.
Q WHen did the war against the Samnites begin?

A. In the Year of Rome 411.

Q. Why did the Romans declare War against them?

A. 'Twas at the Request of the Campanians, who had put themselves under the
protection of the Romans.

Q. How long did this War continue?

A. It lasted Fifty years.

Q. What Accidents of Note happened in this Interval.

A. Two things that deserve to be remarked. The first is, that the Samnites
finding themselves not strong enough to Engage the Romans by force of Arms,
were obliged to have recourse to an Artifice.

Q. Tell me how it was managed?

A. They chose Ten of the Craftiest Soldiers out of the Army, and apparelled
them like Shepherds, then they gave each of them a small Flock of Sheep, and
having instructed them in all they were to do, posted them on the Road where
the Roman Army was to pass.

Q. Well, and what did these Shepherds do so merrily burlesqu'd?

A. Being in their respective places, they were met by the Van-Couriers of the
Army.

Q. And what Questions did they ask them?

A. Whether they knew where the Army of the Samnites was gone.

Q. What answers did these counterfeit Shepherds return?

A. That they had actually besieged Luceria.

Q. Upon this Advice what did the Romans do?

A. 'Twas resolved to march to the Relief of this City, because it was a place
of great Importance to them.

Q. And what followed upon that Resolution?

A. The Army of the Romans being shut up in the Defiles through which they must
of necessity pass before they could reach this place, the Samnites fell
vigorously upon them, plundered them of all their Arms, and made them pass
under the Yoke.

Q. Did not the Romans soon after revenge this Affront?

A. Yes; for some time after, Fabius and Papyrius defeated the Samnites
entirely.

Q. Which is the second thing that is to be remarked?

A. That young Decius in a Battle against the Samnites, and the Gauls who had
joined them, performed the same that his Father had done upon a like occasion,
that is to say, he devoted himself to Death, and flung himself into the midst
of his Enemies.

The War against the Tarentines. The Year of the World 3772. Of Rome 472.
Q. WHy did the Romans make War upon the Tarentines?

A. Because they pillaged a Fleet belonging to the People of Rome, and ill
treated the Ambassadors that were sent to complain of this Injury.

Q. When was the War declared against them?

A. In the Year 472, and with that Success, that L Aemilius Barbula defeated
them, together with the Samnites and Salentines that came to their Assistance.

Q. And what Shifts did this overthrow put them upon?

A. It obliged them to beg Relief of Pyrrhus in the Year 474, who Transported a
vast Army into Italy, wherein he had abundance of Elephants, Animals till that
time utterly unknown to the Romans.

Q. How many Battles were fought during this War?

A. Two that were considerable ones. The first was fought in Campania near
Heraclea: And the second in Lucania.

Q. What was the Success of this first Battle?

A. The Romans under the Conduct of Levinus had the worst on it; but they were
vanquished rather by the disorder the strange sight of those huge Elephants put
them into, than by the Forces of Pyrrhus.

Q. Were store of Prisoners taken here?

A. Yes; but upon Fabricius his redemanding them, Pyrrhus sent them all back
without taking Ransom for them.

Q. What did Pyrrhus after he had gained this Battle?

A. He visited the Field where this Scene was trans^cted, and observing that
the Romans still grasped those that had given them their Death's wound; that
Dead as they were, a certain Fierceness appeared in their Looks, and that all
their Wounds were honorably received before; he cried out in a great
Amazement, Oh! how easy a matter were it for me to Conquer the whole World if I
had the Romans for Soldiers, or the Romans had me for their King!

Q. What did Pyrrhus after this?

A. He dispatched Ambassadors to Rome with considerable Presents to endeavor
to accommodate the matter between the Tarentines and them.

Q. The Ambassadors being sent back, what did Pyrrhus ask them at their return?

A. He demanded of them what they thought of Rome? and they immediately
answered him, That their City seemed to be a Temple, and their Senate an
Assembly of Gods.

Q. Did not the Romans bring a Second Army into the Field?

A. Yes: Nay, they were so incredibly diligent, that Pyrrhus in mighty
admiration said of them, Without question, I am born under the Constellation of
Hercules. I have a fine time on it here to cut off the Heads of my Enemies,
since new ones perpetually arise from their Blood, like those of Hidra, to
persecute me.

Q. Well, and what was the Success of this Second Battle that was fought in
Lucania?

A. Those very Elephants that gained Pyrrhus his first Battle, lost him the
second.

Q. How happened that?

A. It so fell out, That one Caius Minutius cut off the Trunk of one of the
Elephants, which made the Creature cry out so furiously, that he afrighted his
fellows; so away they ran back upon their own Forces, broke their Ranks, and
put the Army into so strange a Confusion, that it was no difficult matter for
the Romans to defeat them.

Q. What followed after this Battle?

A. Pyrrhus's Physician came to Fabricius, offering to Poison his own Master;
but the Generous Consul sent him back to Pyrrhus, who commanded him to be
immediately hanged.

Q. After this overthrow, where did Pyrrhus turn himself?

A. He goes into Sicily to assist the Syracusans against the Carthaginians; but
this Expedition not succeeding to his Expectation, he goes back into Italy in
the Year 479, where he was beaten, and his Camp forced by the Romans.

Q. After this last Defeat, whither did he go?

A. After he had quitted Italy, he returned into Epirus, having been employed
Six Years in the Tarentine and Sicilian War.

Q. And what happened after the Retreat of Pyrrhus?

A. The Romans having defeated the Tarentines and Samnites, the Conquered were
obliged to submit to the Conquerors, so they entr'd into an Alliance with those
of Rome, in the Year 482.

Q. What farther progress did the Romans make?

A. They attacked the Salentines, and at last the Punic War started up, which
proved to be the longest and most dangerous War that the Romans had hitherto
experienced.

The First Punic War. The Year of the World 3790. Of Rome 490.
Q. WHen began the first Punic War?

A. In the Year of Rome 490, two Years after the return of Pyrrhus into Epirus.

Q. What occasioned it?

A. The Ambition and Jealousy of Carthage.

Q. Who were the Authors of this War?

A. The People of Messina on one side, and Hiero King of Syracuse, an Ally of
Carthage, on the other.

Q. How came this about?

A. This King, in Conjunction with the Carthaginians, declared War against the
City of Messina; and the Romans resolving to Succor the Messineses, because
they had been always their good Friends, sent over an Army into Sicily, under
the Conduct of Appius Claudius.

Q. What was the Success of it?

A. It was a long time uncertain, although the Carthaginians were Masters at Sea,
and the Romans at Land.

Q. But which side obtained the Victory in the mean time?

A. Appius Claudius, the Roman General, defeated Hiero, and having obliged him
to demand a Peace, he obtained it upon easy terms.

Q. What happened sometime after?

A. Duilius put out to Sea.

Q. Was not he the first of the Romans that gained a Naval Victory?

A. Yes.

Q. About what time did this happen?

A. In the Fifth Year of the War.

Q. After what manner?

A. The Galleys of the Carthaginians which were light and nimble, were
overpowered by those of the Romans that were short and heavy; and by this
means, their dexterity in managing their Oars was of no service to them, and
their whole Fleet was either Taken or Sunk.

Q. What other remarkable Passages happened?

A. The Romans gained some other Advantages over the Enemy; but their Consul
Catilinus was surrounded on every side in the Streights of Camarina, into which
he was imprudently got, and was as happily delivered.

Q. By what means, and by whom was this effected?

A. By the Valor of Calpurnius Flamma, a Tribune, who with a Detachment of
Three hundred chosen men, fell upon the Enemies main Body, which kept that
Defile.

Q. What did the Carthaginians do in this Juncture?

A. They turned all their Forces immediately upon Calpurnius, and so the Romans
had an opportunity to make their Escape out of this narrow place.

Q. But how did Calpu^nius's Three hundred men come off?

A. They were all cut in pieces.

Q. But did their Leader make a shift to save himself.

A. Yes; but he was wounded in six or seven places.

Q. How did this War conclude?

A. A Second Engagement at Sea put an end to it.

Q. Who gained the Victory?

A. Caius Lutatius in the Twenty third year, near the Isle of Aegates, and this
Victory put a period to the War.

Q. Who commanded the Carthaginian Fleet?

A. Hanno was their Admiral.

Q. What were the Conditions of the Treaty of Peace?

A. That the Carthaginians should Surrender Sicily, Sardinia, and all the other
Isles that are between Afric and Italy, to the Romans; and that for Twenty
years, they should pay them Twelve hundred Talents.

Q. Who signalized himself in this War?

A. Attilius Regulus, who took Tunis, and several other Cities belonging to the
Carthaginians, and at last went to lay close Siege to Carthage it self.

Q. Without doubt this obliged the Carthaginians to sue for a Peace?

A. Right.

Q. And was Regulus willing to grant it?

A. Not unless it were upon very hard Conditions.

Q. When the Carthaginians saw that, what Course did they take?

A. They were necessitated to give the Command of their Army to Xantippus,
Captain of the Lacedaemonians.

Q. What remarkable Actions did this General perform?

A. He gave the Romans a great overthrow, killed Thirty thousand upon the
place, and took Fifteen thousand Prisoners, among whom was Attilius Regulus.

Q. In what place was this Battle fought?

A. Near Clupea.

Q. What did they do with Regulus?

A. They sent him to Rome to Treat with the Senate about the Exchange of
Prisoners.

Q. And did he persuade the Romans to treat of a Peace?

A. No: far from that, he endeavored as much as in him lay to hinder them from
making one; telling them the Affairs of Carthage were in a very Bad condition,
and that they ought never to leave off till they had utterly ruined them.

Q. What became of him then at his return to Carthage?

A. Having told them the Romans would by no means hearken to a Peace, unless
they would submit to their Authority, the Carthaginians put him to Death.

Q. What Torments did they make him endure?

A. They shut him up in a Barrel, stuck full of Nails, with the Points toward
him.

Q. And thus the first Punic War was ended?

A. Right, after Twenty three years losses on both sides.

Q. Was not the Temple of Ianus shut soon after?

A. Yes; the first time since Numa's Reign.

Q. Was it long before it was opened again.

A. No; for the Romans were soon after obliged to fight against the Ligurians,
the Liburnians, and the Insubrian Gauls, who were often beaten.

Q. By whom?

A. The Ligurians and Liburnians by Fulvius; and the Insubrian Gauls, who had
Britomarus to head them, by Aemilius.

Q Were not the Gauls likewise defeated by others?

A. Flaminius vanquished them when Ariovistus was their General; and they
received another overthrow from Marcellus, who slew their King Viridomarus with
his own hand.

The Second Punic War. The Year of the World 3814. Of Rome 514.
Q. WHen did this Second War begin?

A. Twenty four years after the first?

Q. What was the occasion of the Second War?

A. The Ambition of Annibal, the Son of Amilcar. Besides, the Carthaginians
grew now impatient of their Twenty four years of Servitude, and of having paid
a Tribute to the Romans for so long a time.

Q. But how came Annibal to forward it so mightily?

A. Because his Father, who carried him, when he was but Nine years old, into
Spain, made him solemnly Swear at the foot of an Altar, never to be reconciled
to the Romans.

Q. What happened during this War?

A. At the end of Nine years War, Amilcar was slain, and his Son-in-Law,
Asdrubal, set up in his room.

Q. What befell Asdrubal after this?

A. He was slain Eight years after in Battle, and Annibal succeeded him.

Q. What did Annibal do when he saw himself General of the Carthaginians?

A. Fearing lest the same misfortune that happened to his Father Amilcar and
Asdrubal, should attend him, if he did not go upon some Generous Expedition, he
made himself Master of all the Provinces of Spai^ that reach as far as the Ebre.

Q. And what did he next attempt?

A. He made his Army march into the Territories of the Oscades, whom he reduced
under his obedience, and soon after possessed himself of all the Cities
thereabout, but especially those belonging to the Capertans and the Vacceans.

Q. Whither did he shape his course after this?

A. He marched to attack Saguntus, a City of Spain, and an Ally of the Romans.

Q. What did the Romans do upon this occasion?

A. They sent Ambassadors to Carthage to complain of the Injury that was done
to the Saguntines, and of the Infraction of the Treaty of Peace by this means.

Q. What sort of an Answer was returned them?

A. They were forced to return home, very ill satisfied with the Answer of the
Carthaginians.

Q. What did the Saguntines do upon this refusal?

A. Harassed with the continual Fatigues of a Nine Months Siege, and pressed by
Famine and want of Provisions, they demanded to capitulate; but Annibal
persisting to treat them with too much indignity, they chose rather to perish
than to trust themselves in the hands of so cruel a man.

Q. And what did these people do, being thus reduced to despair?

A. After they had buried their Gold and Silver in the ground, they made a
great Bonfire in the midst of the Town, into which the greatest part of the
Garrison leaped, and the rest were inhumanely killed.

Q. After the taking of this City, what did they do with it?

A. They laid it level with the ground.

Q. When the Romans heard of these Outrages, how were they affected?

A. They dispatched Ambassadors to Carthage, to know of them whether they
approved of the procedure of Annibal.

Q. And how were they received?

A. Fabius, one of the Ambassadors, seeing them demur upon the Point, told them
they had nothing to do but to choose either Peace or War; and all of them
immediately crying out War, War, the Ambassadors immediately departed.

Q. Whither did the Ambassadors go before they returned to Rome?

A. They visited Spain and Gaul, to desire the people of those Nations not to
give Passage to the Carthaginians.

Q. Did they accomplish their designs?

A. No; for those of Spain being affrighted by the sad example of Saguntus, and
the Gauls by the great Success of Annibal's Arms, they refused this Embassy as
a ridiculous Proposition.

Q. Where resided Annibal?

A. He past the Winter at New Carthage, then returned to Cales, where after he
had performed his Vows to Hercules, he renewed his Ancient Oath.

Q. What was it that instigated him to do it again?

A. An extraordinary Dream, which filled him with joy, and put him upon the
Resolution to march into Italy with his Army.

Q. And how did Annibal employ himself before his arrival into Italy?

A. At first he made himself Master of the Ilergetes, the Bargusians, the
Ausetans, and all Aquitain.

Q. Whither went he afterward?

A. He passed the Pyrenaean Mountains, then he marched through Gaul,
notwithstanding the opposition of the people, who were obliged to give way. At
last he came to the foot of the Alps.

Q. Did not Annibal's Army find it a difficult matter to climb these Mountains?

A. 'Twas troublesome enough, as well for the height of the Rocks, which seemed
to touch the Skies, as for the Snows which made the ways almost impracticable.
Besides, that the Inhabitants of the Hills were no small impediment to them in
their March.

Q. Did Annibal then accomplish this vast Design?

A. Yes: For having with an undaunted Courage undertaken to climb the Hills, on
the ninth day he found himself on the top of them.

Q. When he was there, what did he make his Soldiers remark?

A. He shows 'em all Italy, lying at a great distance, bidding them look upon
that vast Country as the certain Recompense of their Toil and Labor.

Q. Was not Annibal more perplexed to get down the Hills, than he was in
climbing up?

A. Right: For the Frost rendered the ways every where so slippery, that there
was no steady walking; besides the Mountain was so steep in some places, that
there was scarce any other way of getting down, but by catching hold of the
Twigs and Branches of Trees that grew between the Rocks.

Q. How then did he make a shift to reach the Valleys?

A. He made use of Fire, Iron, and Vinegar, to open a way through the Rocks;
and thus having passed the Alps in the space of Fifteen days, he came into
Italy with a Hundred thousand Foot, and Twenty thousand Horse.

Q. Where was it that Annibal first gave Battle to the Romans?

A. Between the Po and the Ticinus.

Q. What was the Success of it?

A. The Roman Army was overcome.

Q. Who had the Command of it?

A. Scipio the Consul.

Q. Was he not wounded?

A. Yes; and had certainly been taken by the Enemy, if the Valor of his Son,
who was afterward sirnam'd Africanus, had not forced him out of their hands.

Q. When did Annibal give the second Battle?

A. A short time after the first.

Q. Where was it fought?

A. At the River Trebia.

Q. How was the Event of it?

A. No happier for the Romans than the last: Sempronius and his whole Army was
there defeated, and Annibal triumphantly passed the Appennines.

Q. What did Annibal do the year following?

A. He came into Etruria after a March of four days and three nights in the
midst of Bogs and Morasses, without reposing himself, which so fatigued him,
that he lost an eye.

Q. What happened to him after this?

A. 'Twas in this place that Flaminius the Consul, a man of great rashness and
precipitation, fell into the Snares which Annibal had laid for him, he was
slain, and his Army put to the Rout near the Lake of Trasimene.

Q. How many Romans lost their lives in this Battle?

A. Near Fifteen thousand slain, and some Ten thousand put to flight, and
dispersed all over Etruria.

Q. Did not some remarkable Accident happen after this Battle?

A. It Is reported that two women lamenting their Children at one of the Gates
of the City, whom they supposed to be dead, seeing them unexpectedly return,
were so filled with joy, that the excess of it killed them.

Q. After this great Overthrow, what was done at Rome?

A. The people being assembled, consulted the Books of the Sybils, where they
found, That all these Misfortunes were only owing to the Indignation of the God
Mars.

Q. What Resolutions did they form upon this Discovery?

A. They vowed to celebrate a Holy Spring; and after that, in the absence of
the Consuls, the people created Fabius Maximus Dictator, and M. Minucius Rufus
Master of the Horse.

Q. Where was Annibal at that time?

A. He was advanced as far as Spoletum, which obliged the two Consuls Aemilius
Paulus, and Terentius Varro, to hasten with their Army.

Q. Where did the two Armies meet?

A. Near Cannae, a small Town situated in Apulia: Here did Varro put his men
in a posture to receive the Enemies.

Q. Was this a bloody Fight?

A. Yes; for there was near Forty five thousand Romans slain, with Fourscore
Senators, and Paulus the Consul himself was killed.

Q. What remarkable Passages happened in this Battle?

A. The Consul Paulus having been wounded, was in the midst of the hurry and
confusion found covered with blood and dust, by a Colonel of the Army.

Q. What said this Officer to Paulus, seeing he was still alive?

A. Take my Horse, and fly for your self.

Q. And what answer did Paulus make him?

A. No, no; use him your self, cries he, with a dying voice, and go to Rome,
and bid the Senators from me fortify the Town before Annibal comes to attack it.

Q. Did he say any thing else to him?

A. Above all, tell Fabius Maximus, that I have lived, and that I now dye
remembering his Orders and Counsels; so leave me here to expire amidst this
horrible Slaughter of the Romans.

Q. Did the Slaughter continue a long time?

A. So long, that Annibal commanded his Soldiers to desist; and so great, that
he sent to Carthage Three Bushels of Golden Rings, taken from the Fingers of
the Roman Knights that were killed.

Q What happened after the Battle of Cannae?

A. Some young Romans were debating amongst themselves to abandon Italy.

Q. And had their design like to have passed in this Assembly?

A. Publius Cornelius Scipio, a Colonel in the Army, who was after surnamed
Africanus, drew out his Sword, and swore he would kill the man who would not
take an Oath never to go out of Rome.

Q. Did not the Romans desire a Peace?

A. No; they were so far from demanding a Peace of the Carthaginia^s, that
receiving advice that the Consul Varro, whose rashness was in part the cause of
that cruel Loss, was on his way home, all the City went out to meet him, to
thank him because he had not despaired of the Safety of the Commonwealth.

Q. What do they say of Annibal?

A. That if he had known how to make use of a Victory, as well as he did how to
get one, Rome had been utterly ruined.

Q. Where was Annibal then?

A. Near Capua, which he reduced under his Obedience, as well as a great part
of Italy.

Q. Had he always the better on it?

A. No; for Capua proved as fatal to him, as Cannae had been to the Romans.

Q. How came that about?

A. Because he and his Army abandoned themselves to the Effeminacies and
Pleasures of that place, and staid a long time there, so that he never thought
of pursuing his Conquests, which gave the Romans time to take breath again.

Q. What did the Romans do in this Exigence?

A. All the Roman Youth, the Magistrates, nay, even the Slaves, took up Arms.

Q. What did Fabius Maximus do in the mean time?

A. He endeavored by delays and amusements to weaken Annibal.

Q. What did the Romans attempt with their Army?

A. They laid Siege to Capua.

Q. And was Annibal idle?

A. No; thinking to make them raise the Siege, he marched directly toward Rome?

Q. And what happened to him?

A. A sudden Tempest arising just as he was going to fight Fulvius, he was
obliged to return back without fighting.

Q. Was it long before Capua surrendered?

A. No.

Q. How did the Romans use them?

A. They took away all their Privileges.

Q. What followed after the taking of Capua?

A. Asdrubal going to join his Brother Annibal, who lay then in Apulia with a
powerful Army, was defeated by the Consuls Claudius Nero, and Livius Salinator.

Q. After this Battle, what did Nero do?

A. He caused Asdrubal's Head to be thrown into the Carthaginian Camp; which
Annibal seeing, he immediately cried out, I perceive my self now to be
unfortunate.

Q. What was Scipio doing in Afric in the mean time?

A. He cut in pieces Hanno's Army, the General of the Carthaginians, and took
Prisoner Siphax King of Numidia, who had quitted the Romans, and taken the side
of the Carthaginians.

Q. Wherefore did Scipio pass into Afric?

A. 'Twas done with a design to remove Annibal out of Italy.

Q. And did it succeed?

A. Yes.

Q. What did Annibal do before he left Italy?

A. He exercised a thousand Cruelties in the Towns that continued still under
his Power; nay, he ordered all the Italians that were in his Army to be
massacred.

Q. What happened upon Annibal's arrival into Afric?

A. A bloody Battle was fought near Zama.

Q. On which side did the Victory fall?

A. Annibal being defeated by Scipio, despaired of retrieving his Fortune
there, and so fled into Asia.

Q. The Carthaginians being thus vanquished, what became of them?

A. They were obliged to submit to the Peace allowed them by the Romans.

Q. What name was it that Scipio obtained by this Expedition?

A. That of Africanus.

The War of Macedonia. The Year of the World 3850. Of Rome 550.
Q. WHen did the Macedonian War begin?

A. A little after the Peace of Carthage, in the year of Rome 550.

Q. For what Reasons did the Romans undertake this War?

A. As well for the ancient quarrel they had to Philip King of Macedonia for
joining with Annibal when he was Master of Italy, as for the several Complaints
their Allies, and especially the Athenians made of them.

Q. Who first opened the War?

A. King Philip.

Q. How did he begin it?

A. By the Siege of Abydos.

Q. What became of the Inhabitants of that place?

A. Philip reduced them to such an extremity, that after the example of the
Saguntines they chose to kill themselves.

Q. Was Philip always thus successful?

A. No; for four years after he was defeated by Flaminius at the So called from
resembling a Dog's head.
Cynocephalae in Thessaly.

Q. Did Philip lose abundance of men there?

A. He lost Thirteen thousand, reckoning the Dead and the Prisoners.

Q. Was a Peace granted him at last?

A. Yes, on that condition he would lay no more pretensions to any of the
Cities of Greece.

Q. The Liberty of Greece then was the Price of this Victory?

A. Right; for all the Cities of Greece, except Sparta, were free.

Q. Was that City always in a servile condition?

A. No; for in the year 561, Philopaemen having killed the Tyrant Nabis, made
them associate with the Achaeans.

The War of Antiochus. The Year of the World 3862. Of Rome 562.
Q. WHen began the War of Antiochus against the Romans?

A. In the Year of Rome 562.

Q. What made him declare War against them?

A. He was instigated to it by Annibal, who was then a Refugee in his Court.

Q. And how came he off?

A. Having been beaten both by Land and Sea, as well by the Consul Lucius
Scipio, Brother to him surnamed Africanus, as by the Courage and good Conduct
of his Brother, he was forced to beg a Peace.

Q. On what Terms was it given him?

A. That he would quit all the Places on this side Mount Taurus.

Q. Did not Lucius Scipio for this Exploit merit the name of Asiaticus?

A. You are in the right.

The second Macedonian War. The Year of the World 3883. Of Rome 583.
Q. WHat did Philip King of Macedonia do all this while?

A. He wholly employed himself in making Preparations for a new War.

Q. Had this Philip any Children?

A. He had two, whose names were Perses and Demetrius. This last was given in
Hostage to the Romans, who entertained him very respectfully.

Q. Were there no Divisions between the Brothers?

A. Yes; and so managed, that their Father Philip put Demetrius to death, whom
the Jealousy of Perses, and the kind Treatment he received at Rome had rendered
suspicious to him.

Q. What was the Consequence of all this?

A. The year following, Perses, who inherited the hatred and designs of his
Father against the Romans, declared War against them.

Q. What was the Success of this War?

A. Aemilius the Roman General entirely defeated Perses in the Year 586.

Q How many Macedonians lost their lives upon this occasion?

A. There were Thirty thousand of them slain.

Q. How did this War conclude?

A. With the final destruction of the Kingdom of Macedonia.

Q. Did Perses continue there?

A. No; he engaged himself in the Interests of Gentius King of Illyrium, who
met with the same d^stiny.

Q. How did that happen?

A. He was overcome by Anicius the Praetor; and the same year both Anicius and
Aemilius triumphed at Rome, one over Gentius, and the other over Perses, and
each King marched before the Chariot of his Conqueror.

Q. In what year did this fall out?

A. In the year 587 of Rome. Thus Macedonia and Illyrium were reduced into the
form of Provinces.

Q. After these mighty Victories, no body I suppose thought it dishonorable to
submit to the Romans?

A. No; for after the Defeat of Antiochus, and the Reduction of Macedonia,
several Kings and Nations strove, and were ambitious to be under their
Protection.

Q. Among these Kings, were there not some that showed themselves more forward
than the rest?

A. There were two, Eumenes King of Asia, and Prusias King of Bithynia,
surnamed the Hunter; but Eumenes was suspected of some underhand dealing.

Q. What was that?

A. To have secretly favored the Party of Perses.

Q. What method did he take to clear himself of this Suspicion?

A. He sent his Brother Attalus to Rome, who had b^gg'd his Brother's Kingdom
for himself, if a Physician appointed to bear him company in this Journey, had
not hindered his design.

Q. And what did Prusias on his side, to engage the Romans to support him?

A. He scandalously flattered them, having caused some Medals to be coined in
Honor of the Senate, which he treated as a Divinity, and the Senators, whom he
called his Tutelar gods.

The Third Punic War. The Year of the World 3905. Of Rome 605.
Q WHen did this Third Punic War begin?

A. In the year of Rome 605.

Q. What gave occasion to it?

A. 'Twas because the Carthaginians violated the Articles of Peace, and
declared War against Massinissa, who was an Ally of the Romans.

Q. And what Resolutions did the Senate make hereupon?

A. 'Twas unanimously decreed to follow the advice of Cato the Censor, which
was to destroy the City of Carthage entirely.

Q. And to effect it, what Measures were taken?

A. Censorinus and Manilius the Consuls marched directly to the City.

Q. What did the Carthaginians to avert the Storm?

A. They sent Deputies to them to know what Satisfaction it was they demanded.

Q. What answer was returned them?

A. That it was the Will and Pleasure of the Senate, that they should demolish
their City even to the Foundations, and remove themselves at least Ten Miles
from the Sea.

Q. So harsh a Proposition, how did it relish with the high spirits of the
Carthaginians?

A. It possessed them with so vigorous an Indignation, that they made a much
greater Resistance than could be expected from so feeble an Enemy.

Q. And what was the Result of all?

A. In the fourth year of this War Carthage was taken by Publius Cornelius
Scipio, who burnt and wholly destroyed it.

The War of Corinth. The Year of the World 3907. Of Rome 607.
Q FOR what reason did the Romans declare War against the People of Corinth?

A. Because of their ill treatment of the Roman Ambassadors, as also because
they brought over the Achaeans to their own Party.

Q. How did their Affairs succeed?

A. They were defeated by the Praetor Metellus in two Battles, near the
Thermopylae, and in Phocis, in the year of Rome 607.

Q. And what was the destiny of Corinth?

A. Mummius the Consul, after he had made himself Master of all Achaia, ordered
Corinth the Capital City of that Nation to be burnt down to the ground.

Q. What remarkable matter happened in the burning of it?

A. Different Metals being melted together, accidentally formed the famous
Corinthian Brass, on which the Romans set a higher value than Silver, and which
in succeeding times was imitated by a mixture of several Metals, on which they
bestowed the same name.

The War of Portugal. The Year of the World 3908. Of Rome
Q. WHO occasioned the War of Portugal?

A. A Prince whose name was Viriatus, who had usurped the Sovereignty of that
Country.

Q. By whom was that Country retaken?

A. By Quintus Fabius.

Q. What did they do to Viriatus?

A. They made a Peace with him.

Q. And after the Treaty was ratified, what became of him then?

A. The year following Cepio the Consul, without having any regard to the
Treaty, fell suddenly upon Viriatus, and treacherously put him to death.

The Destruction of Numantia. The Year of the World 3913. Of Rome 613.
Q. WHEN did the Ruin of Numantia begin?

A. Sixteen years after that of Carthage, the very same Scipio who had
destroyed that famous City, and thence acquired the name of Africanus, went to
besiege Numantia.

Q. What incited Scipio to be angry with them?

A. The Numantians had refused to surrender to the Romans some Rebels who had
taken shelter among them.

Q. And how did they behave themselves?

A. Tho they were inferior in number to the Enemy, yet for Nine years together
they resisted the whole Power of Rome; nay* they fatigued and harassed two or
three of their Armies.

Q. But at last how went their Affairs?

A. Scipio the Destroyer of Carthage having sat down before the Town, shut up
the besieged within their own Walls, where they all killed themselves out of
despair.

Q. And what became then of the City of Numantia?

A. It was razed to the ground; and thus all Spain became a Province of the
Romans.

Q. What other considerable Actions did the Romans about this time perform?

A. They made themselves Masters of Macedonia the Third time.

Q. What was he who had possessed that Kingdom for some years before?

A. His name Andriscus, a sorry, obscure, pitiful Fellow, who pretending to be
the Son of Perses had entered that Kingdom with very considerable Forces, in
the year 605.

Q. Did he continue long in the possession of this Kingdom?

A. No; for the year following he was defeated by Cecilius Metellus the
Praetor, who killed him Twenty five thousand men. This Victory made him take
the name of Macedonicus.

The War of the Slaves; and others about the same time. The Year of the World
3921. Of Rome 621.
Q. WHO was the chief of these Slaves that excited the War?

A. Ennus, a Syrian by birth, who counterfeiting a Divine Revelation,
encouraged his Brother Slaves to revolt.

Q. How many of these Slaves did he muster in a Body together?

A. About Seventy thousand.

Q. And what memorable Exploits did he perform.

A. He defeated four Roman Praetors; but in the Year 622. he was vanquished by
the Consul Rupilius.

Q. What remarkable thing happened in the year 621?

A. Attalus died, and by Testament left the People of Rome his Heirs.

Q. Did not this alienation make some Malcontents at home?

A. Yes; for it so happened that Aristonicus, Natural Son to Eumenes, being
discontented at this procedure, possessed himself of Asia, and cut in pieces
the Army of the Praetor Crassus.

Q. This Aristonicus, I suppose, was not always victorious in the Field?

A. No; for in the year 624 he was vanquished by the Consul Perpenna.

Q. Was not the abovementioned year remarkable for something else?

A. Right, for the Death of the second Africanus, who was found dead in his
bed; his Wife being suspected to have poisoned him.

Q. Did not the Romans signalize their Valor upon some new occasion?

A. In the year 629 they first attacked the Inhabitants of Gallia Transalpina,
and begun with the Salians and Allobroges.

Q. Who put a Period to that War?

A. Fabius the Consul, by defeating Bituitus King of the Arverni in a pitched
Battle.

Q. How many men did the King lose in this Action?

A. About Twenty six thousand. The Battle was fought near Isera; and 'twas at
this time that Gallia Narbonensis was reduced to the condition of a Roman
Province.

The War against Jugurtha. The Year of the World 3943. Of Rome 643.
Q. WHAT was the Original of this War?

A. 'Twas because Iugurtha King of Numidia, Bastard Son of Micipsa, had
ravished the Kingdom from the two Legitimate Children of the King his Father,
and unjustly dispossessed them of it.

Q. What did Micipsa's Children do in this Exigence?

A. They implored the Assistance of the Roman People, who immediately declared
War against Iugurtha.

Q. And who carried the Victory?

A. Iugurtha; but he defeated the Romans rather by his private Liberalities,
than by the force of his Arms.

Q. But did he still prevail?

A. No; Metellus the Consul, who was a man not to be bribed against the
Interest of his Country, was sent against him, and had the better of him in
several Engagements.

Q. What other ill successes attended Iugurtha?

A. Marius completed his Destruction, and at last he was delivered into the
hands of his Conqueror, through the Treachery of Bocchus King of Mauritania.

Q. And what became of Iugurtha then?

A. He was carried Prisoner to Rome, and after he had served to adorn the
Triumph of Marius, died in his Confinement.

Q. When did that happen?

A. In the year 647, about the time when Cicero was born.

Q. Did Marius perform any more considerable Exploits?

A. Some time after this, in his fourth Consulate, he exterminated the Teutones
and the Ambrons.

Q. Did he do any thing else to immortalize his Name?

A. He, together with Catulus, defeated the Cimbrians, who had designed to
force their way into Italy.

Q. How many of the Enemies we^e slain?

A. There were Twenty six thousand killed, and Sixty thousand taken Prisoners*

The War against Mithridates. The Year of the World 3960. Of Rome 660.
Q. WHEN began this War?

A. About the Year of Rome 660.

Q. Who was this Mithridates?

A. King of Pontus.

Q. Why did the Romans make War against him?

A. Because he had turned out Ariobarzanes King of Cappadocia, and Nicomedes
King of Bithynia, and possessed himself of their Dominions.

Q. What Method did these two Princes take to be reestablished in their
Kingdoms?

A. As they were Allies of the Romans, they demanded assistance of Sylla, who
at that time was Praetor.

Q. And did Sylla take their part?

A. He immediately took up arms, and having ejected the Usurper by Force, he
restored A^iobarzanes and Nicomedes to their own Country again.

Q. But how did Mithridates bear this Ejection?

A. He employed all his Efforts so successfully, that he turned them out the
second time one after the other; but they were again reestablish'd by the
Authority of the Senate.

Q. Was not Mithridates somewhat daunted, to see himself attacked by Nicomedes
and the Romans?

A. Far from that: He levied a mighty Army, and entered Cappadocia and Bithynia?

Q. What did he particularly do in the Kingdom of Bithynia?

A. He defeated the Roman Army, and on a day appointed ordered all the Italians
that were in Asia to be massacred.

Q. Did he make any farther Advances?

A. He made himself Master of Macedonia, Thrace, and Greece.

Q. Did not the Romans endeavor to stop the progress of his Conquests?

A. Sylla, who was then Proconsul, parted from Rome to hinder his Designs: He
immediately recovered Athens out of his hands, and afterward compelled him to
make a Peace; in pursuance of which he was to abandon Asia, Bithynia, and
Cappadocia.

Q. Did Mithridates stir no more?

A. Some years after he renewed the War in Asia; but Lucullus the Consul beat
him both by Land and by Sea.

Q. Whither did he retire after this Overthrow?

A. At first he resided in his Kingdom of Pontus, but finding himself still
pursued by Lucullus, he was obliged to take Sanctuary in Armenia, and beg the
Protection of Tigranes.

Q. And did Lucullus still march after him?

A. Having followed him into this Country, he there defeated the Two Kings,
whose Army consisted of Two hundred thousand Foot, and Sixty thousand Horse.

Q. What were the Effects of this Battle?

A. The Taking of Nisiba, and Tigranocetta the Capital City of Armenia.

Q. Was not Lucullus gloriously recompensed for all these Heroic Actions?

A. No; for his Soldiers refusing to stand by him, he was forced to give way to
Pompey, who had the Management of this War devolved upon him after Lucullus.

Q. What Remarkable Exploits did this new General perform?

A. He joined the Iberians and Albanians to the Roman Empire, as he pursued
Mithridates.

Q. What was the end of that Unfortunate Prince?

A. Seeing himself pressed hard on every side, he was thinking to make the best
of his way into Gaul, and shelter himself there, but the Revolt of his Son
Pharnaces, together with that of his Army fully completed his Ruin.

Q. After what manner died he?

A. He endeavored ineffectually to dispatch himself by Poison; and after
several vain Attempts to hasten Death that way, was forced to Stab himself.
Histori^ns frequently mention him for his great skill in Languages; and an
Antidote of his own Invention still bears his Name.

Q. When did this War fully terminate?

A. In the Year 691 under Cicero's Consulate, after it had lasted Forty years.

The Civil War between Marius and Sylla. The Year of the World 3966. Of Rome
666.
Q. WHat was the Cause of the Civil war between Marius and Sylla?

A. Ambition on both sides.

Q. What stands Marius charged with?

A. He procures the Command of the Army designed against Mithridates for
himself, by the means of Sulpitius, the Tribune, who by his own Authority had
taken it away from Sylla.

Q. And what did Sylla for his part?

A. Enraged at this Usage, he enters Rome with an Army, puts to death
Sulpitius, the Author of this whole Intrigue, and beats out Marius, who
thereupon fled into Afric.

Q. What became of Marius?

A. Having got Men enough together to make a small Army, he went to join Cinna,
who was ejected out of Rome by Octavius his Colleague.

Q. And what happened to him afterward?

A. Sertorius and Carbo, having likewise joined these two great Men with
abundance of their Friends, they resolved all four to march directly toward
Rome.

Q. When they had entered the City, what did they do?

A. They made a most terrible Slaughter there.

Q. After this cruel Revenge was over, what does Marius next?

A. He gets himself to be declared Consul now the Seventh time, and dies the
Year following.

Q. When Marius was dead, what Measures did Sylla take?

A. Having concluded a Peace with Mithridates, he came back into Italy in the
Year 672, and after he had vanquished Carbo Norbanus, and Marius the Younger,
enters Rome, and makes himself be created Dictator.

Q. Being elevated to this Dignity, how did he behave himself?

A. He in his turn banishes all those of the contrary Party, sends back the
greatest part of the Senators, but especially Sertorius; and proscribes so
great a number of them, that it is said, they amounted to Two thousand.

Q. After all this Havoc and Destruction, what became of Sylla?

A. He resigned the Dictatorship at the end of Three years.

Q. And was not that very acceptable to the People of Rome?

A. They were so well pleased at it, that when he died the Year following, they
ordered a most magnificent Funeral for him.

Q. Were no considerable Persons of Marius's Party remaining?

A. None but Sertorius, who had retired into Spain; but Metellus assisted by
Pompey, made War against him.

Q. And did the Event answer his Expectations?

A. He frequently fought him without any extraordinary Success to boast off;
till being at last assassinated by his own People, Pompey in a short time
reduced all Spain under the Obedience of the Romans.

The Taking of Jerusalem. The Year of the World 3691. Of Rome 691.
Q. AFter Pompey in Conjunction with Crassus, had defeated the Slaves that
rebelled, and had cleared the Seas of Pirates, what did he next?

A. He marched into Judea to determine some Difference which arose between the
Two Brothers, Aristobulus and Hircanus, concerning the Kingdom of Judea.

Q. What did he there?

A. Having been ill received by Aristobulus, he took Jerusalem by force, and
made them level the Walls of it.

Q. What was remarkable during the Siege?

A. He had so great a Respect for the Temple, that he prohibited his Soldiers
to touch the least thing belonging to that Sacred Place.

Q. And what did he do afterward?

A. He makes Judea a Tributary Province of the Empire; sets Hircanus on the
Throne, and carried the Proud Aristobulus chained and bound to set off the
Triumph, which he celebrated at Rome.

The War between Caesar and Pompey. The Year of the World 3993. Of Rome 693.
Q. WHat was the principal Cause of this War.

A. 'Twas Ambition occasioned all those Calamities which the Roman Empire
suffered during the Course of this War.

Q. How happened it?

A. Pompey, Caesar, and Crassus, seeing themselves to be the most powerful Men
of the Republic, made a League together, and so concerted Matters, that the
Administration of all Affairs wholly rested on them. This Government was
commonly called the Triumvirat.

Q. What did Caesar to confirm his Treaty?

A. He gave his Daughter in Marriage to Pompey.

Q. How did they share the Empire between them?

A. Caesar took the Government of Gaul. Pompey that of Spain. Crassus that of
Syria, which he therefore demanded, because he expected to make great
Advantages of that rich Province.

Q. After they had thus divided it, what did they do next?

A. Caesar and Crassus went each of them to their Government. Pompey staid at
Rome, and contented himself to send his Lieutenants into Spain.

Q. Which was Crassus's first Action in Syria?

A. He pillaged the Temple of Jerusalem, and carried away all its Riches.

Q. Was he not soon after punished for this Sacrilege?

A. Yes; for in an Expedition against the Parthians, he was entirely defeated
by Surena, General of their Army.

Q. What happened to him in this Battle?

A. He lost the greatest part of his men there, his own Son was slain, and
having the misfortune himself to fall into the Hands of the Enemy, they cut off
his Head, which being carried to Orodes, King of the Parthians, he caused his
Mouth to be opened, and pouring some melted Gold into it, said, Now satisfy thy
self with Gold, of which thou have always been so desirous?

Q. What did Orodes mean by so doing?

A. He only laughed at his Avarice, which influenced him to undertake that War.

Q. After Crassus was dead, how did Caesar and Pompey order Matters?

A. Pompey not enduring to bear an Equal, nor Caesar a Superior, they mutually
envied one another.

Q. What Measures did Pompey take?

A. He prevailed with the Senate to recall Caesar from his Government, as soon
as his time was expired, and to Disband his Army.

Q. And did Caesar comply with these Instructions?

A. As he rightly apprehended, that his Conquest of Gaul had created him
several Enemies, and very well saw whither this tended, he sent them word, That
he was resolved to put himself in a Condition to defend himself against his
Enemies, and that he would not dismiss his Army, unless they would oblige
Pompey to do the same.

Q. How did they receive his Proposal?

A. They would not hearken to it, which obliged him to assemble all his Forces
together, and march immediately toward Rome.

Q. Did not Pompey endeavor to hinder his March?

A. Caesar's sudden Expedition so afrighted him and his whole Party, that they
soon abandoned Rome and Italy, and passed into Greece.

Q. What did Caesar do in the mean time?

A. He entered Rome, plundered the Public Treasury; and after he had staid a
short time there to compose the Tumults of the City, he went into Spain, and
beat Afran^ius and Petrejus, Pompey's Two Lieutenants, out of the Country.

Q. As he returned, what did he do?

A. He made himself Master of Marseilles, and entering Rome the second time, he
took Possession of the Dictatorship, which the Praetor Lepidius had procured to
be conferred upon him in his Absence.

Q. What did he afterward?

A. He passed over into Greece to find out Pompey, and having besieged him near
Durazzo.
Dyrrachium in Albania, he was so rudely received, and his Army beaten after
such a manner, that if Pompey had known to make the best Use of his Victory,
Caesar, even in his own Confession, had been entirely defeated.

Q. Where did Caesar March after this small overthrow?

A. He got his Troops together, and marched toward Thessaly.

Q. Did any remarkable Action happen there?

A. Yes; for Pompey having pursued him thither, they fought in the Plains of
Pharsalia.

Q. On which side fell the Victory?

A. Pompey's Army was totally routed. As for himself, he fled toward Egypt to
Ptolomy, who was then very Young.

Q. What happened to Pompey?

A. As soon as 'twas known at Court, that he was ready to Land, Theodotius
persuaded the King to murder him, in order to engage Caesar to leave him in the
quiet Possession of his Kingdom.

Q. And did Ptolomy suffer himself to be so persuaded?

A. Yes; for he immediately sent Achillas and Septimius to Receive and
Compliment him on his part; and when they had him alone in a Cock-boat, they
immediately assassinated him in the very sight of the Vessel where his Wife and
Children were.

Of Seditions. The Year of Rome 261, 303, 377.
Q. WHat were the Causes of all those Seditions, that so often threatened the
Commonwealth?

A. The Ambition, Pride, and Insolence of the Tribunes.

Q. How many of them have you observed in History?

A. Five Principal Ones.

Q. When did the first begin?

A. In the Year 261.

Q. What occasioned it?

A. The Tyranny of the Usurers.

Q. How happened that?

A. The People being no longer able to endure their Cruelty, which proceeded so
far as to treat them like Slaves, retired in Arms to the Sacred Hill: But being
appeased by the Seasonable Discourse of Menenius Agrippa, who entertained them
with the Fable of the Belly, and the other Members, they returned to Rome.

Q. What Privilege did they then extort before they came back?

A. They obtained certain Magistrates to defend the People against the Violence
of the Senators.

Q. How were these Magistrates called?

A. Tribuni Plebis, or the Tribunes.

Q. When began the Second Sedition?

A. In the Year 303.

Q. What occasioned it?

A. The Arbitrary and Unlimitted Power of the Decemviri.

Q. How came it about?

A. When these Decemviri, or Ten Men, who were chosen by the People to reduce
the Laws they brought from Greece into one Body, had fully compriz^d them in
the Duodecim Tabulae; yet they still kept up and maintained that Authority,
which was only delegated to them for the Execution of this Design.

Q. What is remarked of Appius Claudius, one of these Decemviri?

A. That his Insolence proceeded so far, as to carry off Virginia, with a
design to Ravish her.

Q. What became then of Virginia?

A. Virginius, the Father of this Young Woman, killed her with his own Hand in
the Forum, as Claudius would have had her dragged off, after he had declared
her his Slave.

Q. What Effects did this produce?

A. It stirred up all the People against the Decemviri.

Q. What did they do to them?

A. They put them all in Prison.

Q. What occasioned the Third Sedition?

A. It happened upon the Subject of Marriages, the People being resolved it
should be lawful for them to Marry with the Patricians.

Q. Where did this Tumult break out?

A. In the Ianiculum, by the management of Canuseius, Tribune of the People.

Q. When did the Fourth Sedition begin?

A. In the Year of Rome 377.

Q. What was the Cause of it?

A. Ambition of Honors.

Q. Wherefore?

A. Because the People would be admitted to Public Employments, as well as the
Nobility.

Q. How did that happen?

A. Lucius Stolo, and Lucuis Sextius, Tribunes of the People, having preferred
a Law, which ordained that one of the Consuls should be always chosen out of
the Plebeians; the Senators opposed it with all their Authority.

Q. And the Tribunes on their side, what did they?

A. They hindered the making of any Curule Magistrate, so that there was a sort
of Anarchy in Rome for the space of Five years.

Q. Which of them carried the Point at last?

A. The People, and Lucius Sextius, was the first that was chosen out of their
Body.

Q. What was the Cause of the Fifth Sedition?

A. The Gracchi occasioned it by their endeavoring to re-establish the
Agrarian Law.

Q. How did that happen?

A. Tiberius Gracchus being desirous to obtain the good will of the People,
demanded to have the abovementioned Law put in Execution.

Q. What was the intent of that Law?

A. All the Citizens of Rome were by it forbidden to possess in Land, above
Five hundred Acres.

Q. And what was their design in getting it restored?

A. To enjoin all those that possessed any more to give their Lands up, and
distribute them among the People.

Q. Did not all the Nobility vigorously oppose it?

A. Yes; but't was to no purpose, for this Law was authorized by the Senate.

Q. And what did he do afterward?

A. He made his Colleague Octavius quit his Office, because he would have stopped
the Execution of this Law.

Q. What happened to him at last?

A. This good Success having rendered him insupportably Proud, Scipio Nasico
caused him to be Assassinated as he came out of the Capitol.

Q. Was not his Death revenged?

A. Caius Gracchus, his Brother, in order to effect it, promises the People to
get them all that Wealth which Attalus at his Death bequeathed to the Romans:
The Senate was so highly provoked at his Arrogance, that they offered the
weight of it in Gold, to any one that should bring his Head.

Q. What then became of Caius Gracchus?

A. He got one of his Slaves to kill him, finding himself pursued by the Consul
Opimius; and he that found his Body, cut off his Head, took out his Brains, and
filled it with melted Lead, to make it weigh the more.

Q. Besides these Five Seditions, do you observe no more?

A. Yes.

Q. Inform me concerning them?

A. Posthumous refusing his Soldiers the pillage of Volae, which he had
promised them, a Sedition arose in the Camp, where he was stoned to Death.

Q. What other Seditions can you recount to me?

A. Under Appius Claudius, the Roman Army would not vanquish that of the
Enemies, although it lay in their Power. There happened several little Mutinies,
that don't deserve to be particularly mentioned.

Q. Give me some instance of the Distrust or Jealousy of the Romans.

A. They were so jealous of having the least Invasion made upon their Liberty,
that they often sent the most Illustrious of the Nobility into Banishment,
whenever they suspected that they designed to arrogate too much Power to
themselves.

Q. Pray give me an Example of it?

A. There was in the first place, Coriolanus banished for having served them
too well; and Camillus was sent abroad for the same reason.

Q. Wherefore do they say Camillus was exiled?

A. Because the People were possessed with an imagination, that this Great Man
had not equitably divided the Booty taken from the Vejentes, between them and
the Army; so they believed he had a design to secure himself of the Hearts of
the Soldiers, in order to enslave the People.

Q. Give me one other Demonstration, I beseech you, that the Romans were so
jealous of their Liberty.

A. They put Spurius Cassius, and Sparius Melius to Death, because they
suspected them; the first for endeavoring to revive the Lex Agraria; the
second for his Largesses or Donatives to the People.

Q. Who killed Spurius Cassius?

A. 'Twas his own Father that executed Justice upon him; and as for the other,
Servilius Ahala, General of the Horse, killed him in the midst of the Forum, by
the order of Quintius Cincinnatus.

Q. And Manlius, how died he?

A. He was thrown headlong from the top of that very Capitol, which he had so
generously defended.

Q. For what reason?

A. Because he had delivered several poor Debtors from the Clutches of their
Creditors; 'twas observed he carried himself too high, and did not contain
himself within the Bounds of a private Citizen.

Q. How many Roman Generals do you observe there were, that killed the Generals
of the Enemies Army with their own hands?

A. Three; viz, Romulus, who killed Acron, King of the Cecinians; Cornelius
Cossus, who killed Tolumnius, King of the Vejentes; and Marcellus, who slew
Viridomarus, King of the Insubrian Gauls.

Q. Recount to me the Action of Curtius?

A. In the Year 395. a Gulf appeared in the middle of the Forum; and as 'twas
impossible to fill it up, although they threw in never so much Wood, and Stones,
and Earth, they had recourse to the Augars.

Q. And what Answer did they give them?

A. That it would never close again, till the most precious thing in Rome was
thrown into it. Now as they were strangely perplexed to find it out; Marcus
Curtius mounted on Horseback, and all in Armor rode into it, saying, That
nothing was more precious than Arms, and Military Virtue.

Q. What was the design of Catiline's Conspiracy?

A. To kill Cicero, who was Consul, to set the City on Fire at the four
Corners, to Plunder, and make themselves Masters of it; but this Plot was
happily discovered.

Q. Who were concerned in this Affair?

A. Lentulus, and Cethegus, and several other Senators.

Q. After this Conspiracy was discovered what became of Catiline?

A. He was cond^mn'd to depart out of Rome; so he withdrew toward his Army.

Q. What was done to the other Conspirators?

A. They were all put to Death.

Q. What became of Catiline at last?

A. He was defeated, and his Army cut in pieces by Petreius, Lieutenant to
Antonius the Consul, and himself killed upon the place.

A Chronological Table of the Emperors of Rome. From Julius Caesar to Augustus.
IN the Year 705 of Rome, 4005 of the World, Julius Caesar made himself
Emperor, and was Assassinated in the Senate on the Day of the Ides of March, in
the Year 710. He was perpetual Dictator but Three Years, Four Months, and Six
Days.

Augustus took the Empire in the Year 711 of Rome; and in 724. after the Death
of Marc Anthony, he was sole Emperor, and thus held the Empire Fifty seven
years, and the Monarchy Forty three years. He died in the Fourteenth year of
the Christian Era.

Anno Dom. Roman Emperors who Reigned. Years Months Days 14 Tiberius 22 6 37
Caligula 3 10 8 41 Claudius 13 8 20 54 Nero 13 7 28 68 Galba 6 7 69 Otho 3 5 69
Vitellius 8 5 69 Vespasian 10 79 Titus 2 2 2 81 Domitian. 15 6

These are commonly called the XII. Caesar's.

Here follows the Catalogue of the rest.
Anno Dom. Roman Emperors who Reigned. Years Months Days 96 Nerva 1 4 11 98
Trajan 19 6 15 117 Adrian 20 11 138 Antoninus Pius 22 6 161 Marcus Aurelius
Antoninus 19 10 161 L. Verus 9 180 Commodus 12 9 14 199 Pertinax 2 26 193
Iulianus 2 5 193 Severus 17 8 3 211 Caracalla and Geta 6 2 5 217 Macrinus and
his Son 1 2 218 Heliogabalus 3 9 4 222 Alexander 13 9 235 Maximin and his Son 2
238 Pupienus and Balbinus 10 238 The Gordiani 6 244 Philip and his Son 5 249
Decius and his Son 3 251 Gallus and Volusian his Son 2 4 254 Valerian 6 259
Galienus 8 268 Claudius II. 2 270 Aurelian 5 270 Quintillus 15 275 Tacitus 6 6
275 Florianus 3 276 Probus 6 4 282 Carus 1 282 Numerian, slain in the Year 284.
282 Carinus slain in 285 284 Diocletian 20 285 Maximian 18 304 Galerius and
Constantius 2 3 25 306 Constantine the Great 30 9 27 337 Constantine,
Constance, and Constantius, Brothers. 25 5 13 361 Julian the Apostate 1 7 27
363 Iovian 7 22 364 Valentinian the Great 8 22 375 Gratian 7 9 12 383
Valentinian II. 8 8 21 392 Theodosius the Great 8 22 395 Honorius. 28 7

Julius Caesar the first Roman Emperor. The Year of the World 4005. Of Rome 705.
Q. I Desire to be instructed in the Pedigree of Caesar?

A He was descended of one of the most Ancient Families of Rome by his Mother's
side; and of the Kings of that City by his Father's.

Q. What was his Mother's Name?

A. Aurelia.

Q. Under whom did he learn the Art-Military?

A. Under Marius.

Q. Where did he first carry Arms?

A. In Asia.

Q. What sort of a Reputation had he there?

A. A very bad one, occasioned by his Lewdness.

Q. To whom did he particularly apply himself?

A. To Pompey and Crassus, as being the most capable to advance his fortune, by
reason of the great Interest they had in the Commonwealth.

Q. What was the first Office he was called to?

A. To be Aedile with Bibulus.

Q. What was the next?

A. He was Censor and Pontifex Maximus under the Consulate of Cicero.

Q. When was he made Praetor?

A. The year following.

Q. At his going out of the Praetorship, what did he next?

A. He obtained the Government of Spain?

Q. And what did he do there?

A. He performed several glorious Exploits which deserved a Triumph, but he
preferred the Consulship to that Glory, and at last obtained it in the Year
695. by the Assistance of Pompey and Crassus, to whom he joined himself.

Q Being advanced to that high Dignity, what did he?

A. He distributed his Lands among the People of Rome.

Q And what happened to him afterward?

A. By his Artifices and excessive Liberalities, he so far established himself
in the good Graces of the People, that he procured the Government of Gaul to be
conferred upon him?

Q When did he go to take Possession of it?

A. In the Year 696.

Q. How long was he Governor there?

A. Nine years; during which time, he subdued all the Provinces that lie
between the Pyrenees, the Alps, the Rhine, and the Rhone, and made them
Tributary to Rome.

Q. Was not he the first Roman that adventured to pass the Rhine?

A. Right, and built a Bridge over it, to go and give Battle to the Germans who
were on the other side.

Q. What other remarkable Things did he perform?

A. He made a Descent likewise upon Britain, which before him was unknown to
the Romans.

Q. How often was Fortune contrary to him, during these Nine years.

A. Thrice: The first happened to him in Britain, where his Naval Forces had
like to have been lost by a Tempest. The second in Gaul, where one of his
Legions was entirely Defeated. And the third upon the Frontiers of Germany,
where his Lieutenants sell into an Ambuscade, and were cut in pieces.

Q. Having placed good Governors in Britain and Gaul, what did he next?

A. He repassed into Italy.

Q. And how was he received there?

A. Being at Luca, the Two Consuls, with above Two hundred Senators, and Four
hundred Knights went to Congratulate him upon his great Conquests.

Q. What did he afterward?

A. He demanded a Triumph, and the Consulship.

Q. Was it granted him?

A. No; for Pompey being jealous of Caesar's Glory, so managed his Cabals, that
they refused him both one and the other.

Q. How did Caesar bear this?

A. The Person whom he sent to Rome to make this demand, sets his Hand to his
Sword, and tells them, that what they refused him, That, meaning his Sword,
would give him?

Q. What followed upon this?

A. Caesar marches toward Rome, at the Head of his Army, which had Conquered
the Gauls, and passes the Rubicon, a small River, which parted that Government
from Italy.

Q. What was done at Rome in the mean time?

A. Pompey gets Caesar declared an Enemy to the Republic.

Q. And did this stop Caesar's Cariere?

A. He continues his March to Rome, which was abandoned by Pompey and his Party.

Q. Whither went Pompey?

A. To Brundusium, from whence he escapes by Night into Epirus, where he was
pursued by Caesar.

Q. Did not Caesar repass the Adriatic alone in a Fisherman's Boat?

A. Yes; and when the Master began to despond of safety, cheered him with Quid
times, Caesarem vehis.

Q. Was there a Battle between them?

A. At first Pompey had great Advantages over him, and had certainly ruined
him, if he had known how to have used his good fortune.

Q. How then did he miscarry?

A. Instead of protracting the War, and starving his Enemy, which he might
easily have done, he fights Caesar at Pharsalia, where he was totally defeated
in the Year 706. After this, he flies toward Egypt to King Ptolomy; but before
he reached the Shore, his Throat was cut in the Longboat by Achillas and
Septimius.

Q. Was it not in this Voyage that Caesar became passionately in love with
Cleopatra?

A. Yes; but her Brother Ptolomy, who thought to have obliged Caesar
everlastingly by dispatching of Pompey, finding himself not so well received as
he expected;

Q. Resolved to destroy him, did he not?

A. Right, and besieged him in the Palace, where with a handful of Men, Caesar
for a while kept off a Numerous Army; at last, by setting the Neighboring
Buildings on fire, where the finest Library in the World (which is supposed
among a thousand other Curiosities now lost, to have had Solomon's History of
Plants) was unluckily burnt to the ground, he makes his Escape to the Pharos,
and from thence with his Sword in one hand, and his Commentaries in the other,
Swims to his Fleet; and after he had entirely defeated Ptolomy's Forces, who
was drowned in endeavoring to save himself by flight, he puts the whole
Kingdom into the hands of Cleopatra.

Q. What Actions did Caesar perform afterward?

A. He beats Pharnaces, Son to Mithridates, who had assisted Pompey with his
Troops in Thessaly.

Q. What was remarable in this Victory?

A. 'Twas so easy and sudden, that Caesar writ no more than these three Words
to inform his Friends of it, Veni, Vidi, Vici. When this was done, he
vanquishes Iuba, King of Mauritania, who encouraged by L. Scipio and Cato,
renewed the Civil War in Afric. Here he causes Afranius, and Three hundred
Senators to be slain, who still continued to support that Party.

Q. After his return to Rome, what did Caesar apply himself to?

A. To reform the Calender, and accordingly added Ten days to the Year, which
Numa had made to consist of only Twelve Lunar Months, that is to say, of 355
Days; whereas by Caesar's new Alteration, it was made to consist of 365 Days,
and 6 complete Hours; reserving the six Hours to the end of every fourth year
to make a complete Day, which he placed before the 6th of the Calends of March.

Q. How was the Year named which consisted of 366 Days?

A. Bissextile; because the Sixth of the Calends was twice reckoned that Year.
This manner of Computation was called the Julian, from Julius Caesar the
Inventor of it.

Q. When was Caesar declared Perpetual Dictator by the Senate?

A. After he had vanquished Pompey's Sons in Spain.

Q. What Honors did they pay him?

A. A Temple was dedicated to him as to a God, which so far possessed him with
Pride, that he slighted them, and began to set up for a Sovereign.

Q. Was not this the Cause of the Conspiracy that was formed against him?

A. Yes.

Q. Who were the chief Contrivers of it?

A. Marcus Brutus, and L. Cassius, D. Brutus, and Trebonius.

Q. Was not his Death manifestly foretold by some strange Presages?

A. Yes; but he contemned and neglected them.

Q. What sort of Presages were they?

A. Some months before his Death, a certain Astrologer, whose name was Spurina,
told him, That the Ides of March would prove fatal to him. Calpurnia his Wife,
the night before he was killed, dreamt that the Cieling of the House fell down,
and that her Husband was murdered between her Arms. Nay, the very day he was
assassinated, having ordered some Beasts to be sacrificed, he found them all
defective.

Q. These Prognosties, and his own Indisposition, did they not make him
consider with himself for some time, whether he should go out or no?

A. They made that impression on him, that he was once minded to put off what
he had to propose to the Senate till another day; but at last, at the repeated
instances of Brutus, who represented to him that a^undance of the Senators were
come to the House, and that they had waited for him a long time, he was
prevailed upon to go out about ^leven in the morning.

Q. Being on his way thither, did not some Passages happen to him, which might
very well incline him to return home?

A. Spurina the Augur met him to whom says Caesar with a laughing Countenance,
Well, Spurina, behold the Ides of March are come. Right, said he, but they are
not yet past. After that an unknown person presented him with a Petition in the
streets, wherein he informed him of the Conspiracy; but Caesar mingled them
among some other Papers, telling him he would see immediately what it contained.

Q. What befell him after this?

A. Being arrived to the Senate House, he was accosted by one Cimber, under
pretense of supplicating him to recall home a Brother of his, who had been
banished some days before by a Decree of the Senate: But Caesar refusing then
to do it, and referring it to another time, Cimber seized upon the two sleeves
of his Robe; and Caesar crying out against this Violence, all the Conspirators,
who had given one another the Signal, surrounded him, and stabbed him.

Q. Who gave him the First Blow?

A. One whose name was Casea, who wounded him a little below the Throat.

Q. What happened aftewards?

A Caesar, who neither wanted Courage nor Vigor, seized upon his Poniard, and
made some effort to escape, but being at the same time run through in several
places, and perceiving among the other Assassines Marcus Brutus, for whom he
always expressed a mighty tenderness, he says to him in Greek, What, you too, my
Son! and then covering his Head with his Robe, he fell down at the feet of
Pompey's Statue, having received Twenty three Thrusts.

Q. What became of his Body?

A. The whole Assembly immediately breaking up, his Body was carried to his own
House by Three of his Slaves.

Q. Was he buried in any State?

A. Marc Anthony celebrated his Funeral after a most magnificent manner.

Q What did Anthony when he made his Funeral Oration?

A. He caused Caesar's Robe, which was still bloody, to be brought to him.

Q. And what said the people at this mournful sight?

A. It so sensibly affected them, that they ran through all parts of the City
with Torches in their hands, to burn the Conspirators Houses.

Q. What Remarkable Accident happened in this Confusion?

A. One Helvius Cinna, a Tribune of the People, having the Misfortune to meet
the Mob in the midst of their Fury, was cut in pieces, because they took him
for Cornelius Cinna, one of the Assassines.

Q. What became of the Conspirators?

A. The two Brutus's, Cassius, and the rest of them, seeing this terrible
Disorder in Rome, left the Town, and retired to their respective Governments.

Q. Was any thing done in Honor to Caesar's Memory?

A. The People erected a Pillar to him in the Forum, Twenty Foot high, with
this Inscription, Patriae Patri.

Q. Did they do nothing else?

A. They ordered the Gates of the Palace where he was murdered to be walled up;
that the Ides of March should for the future be called the Parricidal Ides; and
that the Senate should never meet on that day.

Q. What was observable of these Murderers?

A. That none of them died a Natural Death.

Q. How old was Caesar when he was killed?

A. Fifty six years, whereof he had reigned five.

Q. Was he not much mortified at his Baldness?

A. Yes; because they often rallied him upon this account: For which reason he
was always represented with a Crown of Laurel.

Q What sort of a Temper was he of?

A. So strangely abandoned to his Pleasure, that his open Familiarities with
Nicomedes King of Bithynia, exposed him to the Laughter and Invectives of the
whole world. He was called Queen of Bithynia by Bibulus, who was his unactive,
untalk'd-of Brother Consul.

Q. Was not he extremely given to Women?

A. He debauched several, and those of the highest Quality, among the rest,
Posthumia Wife to Servius Sulpitius; Tertulla Wife to M. Crassus; and Mutia
Wife to Pompey: But the Lady with whom he was principally in Love, was
Servilia, Mother of that Brutus who assassinated him.

Q. What Princess was it that he most passionately adored?

A. Cleopatra, with whom he frequently spent whole nights a feasting; nay, he
had bore her company as far as Aethiopia, but that his Soldiers positively
refused to follow him.

Q. Did not he carry her to Rome with him?

A. Yes; where he received her with all imaginable respect, and loaded her with
innumerable Presents.

Q. Had he any Children by her?

A. He had a Son, whose Name was Caesario.

Q. What said Curio of him?

A. That he was the Man of all the Women, and the Woman of all the Men.

Q. Was not he a man of Learning?

A. He was the most Eloquent man of his time. He has left behind him some
Orations, with a Commentary of his Actions: He could Write and Read at the same
time, and Hear what was said to him: He made nothing to dictate at once to Four
Secretaries, nay sometimes to Seven, upon different occasions. His History, tho
naked and unadorned, is writ in a most Pure and Elegant Style, and has been
valued by all Nations. Henry the Fourth of France, who resembled him in his
Unfortunate End, as well as his Heroic Actions, translated that part of it into
French, which related to the War of the Gauls. Quintilian says of him, That he
Spoke, Writ, and Fought, with the same Spirit.

Q. How many Wives had he?

A. Four; Cossutia, Cornelia, Pompeia, and Calpurnia.

Q. From whence was Cossutia descended?

A. She came of an Equestrian Family, and was extremely rich; but he repudiated
her, to marry Cornelia. Cornelia was Daughter to Cinna; by her he had Iulia,
who was afterward Pompey's Wife. Pompeia was Daughter to Claudius Pompey, and
Niece of Sylla; he married her after the Death of Cornelia, but got himself
soon divorced from her, upon a suspicion of her having committed Adultery with
Claudius, in the Temple of the Goddess Bona.

Q. What was Caesar used to say of Pompeia?

A. That it was not enough for a Woman to be chaste, but she must likewise take
care to avoid all Suspicion.

Q. Who was Calpurnia?

A. She was the Daughter of Piso.

Q. What Learned Writers were Contemporaries with Julius Caesar?

A. Lucretius the Epicurean Poet; Salust that admirable concise Historian;
Tully that excellent Orator; and, not to mention any more, Cornelius Nepos the
Biographer, or Writer of Lives; and Catul^us the Epigramatist.

Q. Give me the Portraicture of Julius Caesar?

A. The Turn of his Face was Oval; his Forehead smooth, a Roman Nose, Black
Lively Eyes, his Lips large, his Complexion White and Lovely, of High Stature,
the Forepart of his Head bald: His Constitution, which was naturally weak, he
improved by continual Exercise; his Humor was extremely pleasing, and his
Conversation agreeable; he had a strong Voice: There was something very
Majestic and Noble in the Air of his Face: He was Easy with his Friends, Exact
in his Military Discipline, Resolute in his Enterprises, Ind^f^tigable in time
of Danger. He often marched on foot, with his Head bare before his Soldiers,
without fearing either the Rain or the Sun.

Augustus the Second Emperor. The Year of the World 4011. Of Rome 711.
Q. FRom whom was Augustus descended?

A. He was Caesar's Kinsman, as being Son to Accia the Daughter of Iulia, who
was Caesar's Sister.

Q. Where resided he, when Caesar made him his Heir?

A. He followed his Studies at Apollonia, a City of Macedonia.

Q. Who was it that took Augustus's part against Anthony?

A. Cicero, because he refused to give him Caesar's Will, upon the score of his
being too young.

Q. What course did Anthony take?

A. He left Rome with an Army which he had got ready, and went to besiege D.
Brutus in Now Modena.
Mutina.

Q. What did the Romans do in this Juncture?

A. Hirtius and Pansa the two Consuls, with Octavius Caesar, on whom was
conferred the Title of Proconsul, marched immediately against him with an Army.

Q Upon this Advice how does Anthony manage his Affairs?

A. He raises the Siege to meet them, and so both Parties came to blows.

Q. Was it a bloody Battle?

A. The two Consuls indeed lost their Lives there: However, Anthony was
entirely routed, and Brutus set at liberty.

Q. After this defeat, whither went Anthony?

A. He was forced to fly to save his Life, and passed the Alps with a small
Retinue.

Q. Where did he retire for Protection?

A. He made his Applications to Lepidus Governor of Gallia Transalpina.

Q What methods did Octavius take, after he heard of the strict Alliance
between Anthony and Lepidus?

A. He was desirous of coming into the same Conf^deracy, being disgusted at the
Senate for refusing to make him Consul.

Q. How was this New League called?

A. The second Triumvirate.

Q. And what did Octavius after he was thus reconciled to Marc Anthony?

A. He prevails with him to come into Italy with Lepidus to confer together.

Q. Where was this Interview made?

A. In a small Island between Modena and Bolognia, where all three met.

Q. What Resolutions did they here fall upon?

A. Octavius promised Anthony to marry his Sister-in-Law.

Q. Was it not likewise concerted to revenge themselves to the utmost upon the
Murderers of Caesar?

A. Yes; and they divided all the Forces, and all the Provinces of the Empire
between themselves.

Q. How did they divide the Empire?

A. They resolved that Anthony should have all G^ul, except the Provin^e of
Narb^, the Government of which fell to Lepidus's share, as did that of Spain;
and that Caesar should command Afric, Sicily, and the other Isles.

Q. Who had the Charge of the War against Brutus and Cassius?

A. Caesar and Marc Anthony.

Q. What bargains did they m^ke in relation to their mutual Enemies?

A. Augustus basely abandoned Cicero to the Indignation of Anthony and he for
his part abandoned his own Uncle to the resentments of Octavius; Lepidus had a
Brother named Paulus, whom he left to the discretion of the other two.

Q. Why was Cicero proscribed by Anthony?

A. Because he had cruelly galled him with those bitter Invectives the
Philippies; which Orations were so called, in imitation of Demosthenes, who had
formerly handled King Philip after the same free manner.

Q. Relate to me the manner of Cicero's Death.

A. He was slain by an ungrateful Monster, whose name was Popilius, whom he had
formerly defended. This profligate wretch having pursued him as he was going to
make his escape into Greece, cut off his Head and his Hands; which Anthony
afterward nailed to the The Rostra.
Place where the Orators made their Harangues.

Q. What became of the other two?

A. Paulus made his Escape; and Lucius Caesar saved himself by the cunning of
his Sister, who having stopped those that were sent to murder him at the gate,
gave him an opportunity to slip cut at the back door.

Q. Do you know the number of the proscribed?

A. They were about Three hundred Senators, and Three thousand Roman Knights.

Q. When the Proscriptions were over, what did Caesar and Anthony do?

A. They marched against Brutus and Cassius, and left Lepidus in Rome.

Q. Where was the Battle fought?

A. In Thessaly, near the City of Philippi.

Q. Which way did the Success incline?

A. At first Cassius was beaten back by Anthony, and Caesar by Brutus; but a
false Alarm being given on one side, the equality soon vanished. Cassius, who
for his part had been forced to give way, imagining that Brutus was in the same
condition, killed himself.

Q. And what became of Brutus?

A. Having made a gallant opposition to Caesar and Anthony for some time, he
was at last defeated, and fearing to fall into his Enemies hands, made away
with himself.

Q. What did Anthony do with the Ashes of Brutus?

A. He sent them to his Mother in a small Vessel of Silver.

Q. And how did Porcia his Wife receive the News.

A* Being informed her Husband was dead, she was resolved no longer to survive
him, so she dispatched her self by swallowing burning Coals.

Q. But after this Victory, did not Caesar and Anthony fall out again?

A. They quarreled about some Domestic Concerns.

Q. Was not the difference afterward made up between them?

A. Yes, by Anthony's marrying Octavia the Sister of Caesar.

Q After this Accommodation what happened to Anthony?

A. He went into Asia to meet his beloved Cleopatra there.

Q. And where was Caesar?

A. He came back to Italy, where he fell out with Lucius Antonius, Brother to
the Triumvir, and made War against him.

Q. And how did it succeed on his side?

A. Having forced the other out of Rome, and shut him up in Perusium, he soon
obliged him to surrender himself.

Q. What does Lepidus in the mean time?

A. He endeavors in spite of Caesar to make himself Master of Sicily, after
they had taken it out of the hands of Sextus Pompeius.

Q. And how did Caesar requite him for his pains?

A. He turned him out of the Triumvirate, and banished him to a small City,
where he spent the remainder of his life in private.

Q. What did Anthony do to please Cleopatra?

A. He discarded Octavia, and married that Charming Queen of Egypt.

Q. And what followed upon this Marriage?

A. Being desirous to present her with the Empire of the whole World, he
declares War against Caesar, who was already but too much provoked against him
for this last Action.

Q. Where was this important Battle fought?

A. At Actium, a Promontory of Epirus; where the last Century the famous Battle
of Lepanto was fought between the Venetians and the Turks, wherein the Infidels
were beaten.

Q. How many Ships were there on both sides?

A. Caesar had Four hundred, but Anthony had no more than Two hundred.

Q. On which side fell the Victory?

A. In the midst of the Engagement, when as yet the Success on both sides was
equal enough, on the sudden Cleopatra possessed with fear, flies toward Egypt,
which Anthony perceiving, leaves the Battle to run after this Fugitive, tho no
less a stake than the Empire of the World depended upon it. But Caesar pursued
him, and laid Siege to Alexandria.

Q. What became of Anthony?

A. Finding himself irrecoverably lost, he killed himself.

Q. And Cleopatra how came she off?

A. Having resolved not to adorn the Triumphs of Caesar, she follows Anthony's
Example, and stings her self to Death with Serpents.

Q. At what time was Caesar the Master of the whole World?

A. In the year of Rome 725, and the 12 th. year after the Triumvirate.

Q. Did not our Blessed Savior come into the world under the Reign of Augustus?

A. Some Chronologers place his Birth 15 years before the death of Augustus,
the 3985 th. year after the Creation of the world, and the 753 d. from the
Foundation of Rome, in the Consulate of Cornelius Lentulus, and Calpurnius
Piso: But others that have examined the matter more exactly, place it under the
Consulate of Antistius Verus, and Laelius Balbus, in the year of Rome 747, and
the 38 th. year of Augustus.

Q. Had Augustus no Sons to bequeath his Empire to?

A. No.

Q. To whom did he leave it then?

A. He adopted Tiberius the Son of his Wife Livia, and at her importunity made
him Heir of the Empire, upon condition that he should adopt Germanicus the Son
of Drusus.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Fifty seven years he possessed the Empire, and held the Monarchy or single
Government by himself Forty three years. He died at Nola in Campania in Italy.

Q. How many Wives had Augustus?

A. Three; Claudia, Scribonia, and Livia Drusilla.

Q. Had he no Children by Scribonia?

A. He had Iulia, a Lady of no extraordinary Reputation.

Q. Who was Claudia?

A. Daughter-in-Law to Anthony, whom his Wife Fulvia had by her former Husband
Claudius.

Q Whom of the Three did he most passionately love?

A. Livia Drusilla.

Q. After what manner did he marry her?

A. He took her from her Husband Tiberius, and married her tho she was big with
child.

Q. What do Historians particularly remark of Augustus?

A. That he was of so sweet a Temper, that when a certain person came to
present a Petition to him, and as he offered it showed a great deal of Fear, he
pleasantly reproached him, saying, That he tendered him a Paper after the same
manner as people use to give meat to Elephants.

Q. And don't they observe, that he was a great Admirer of the Fair Sex?

A. As he particularly loved them, his Empress was so complaisant to him, as to
furnish him with them from all Quarters.

Q. Who were his most intimate Friends?

A. Agrippa and Maecenas.

Q. What was the latter remarkable for?

A. He was descended from the Kings of Etruria, and was a most Munificent
Patron to all the celebrated Wits of that Age, particularly to Virgil and
Horace.

Q. What is it that Historians remark farther concerning him?

A. 'Twas observed of him, that when the Affairs of State required Application
and Diligence, no one could be more industrious than he. At other times, when
he had no business upon his hands, he wholly abandoned himself to all sorts of
Pleasure and Effeminacy. From these two qualities so remarkable in him, his
Encouragement of Learning, and his Inclination to a Voluptuous Life, Maecenas
afterward came to signi^y both a Patron and an Effeminate Person.

Q. When did the Latin Tongue principally flourish?

A. All are agreed that it arrived to its greatest Purity in the time of Julius
Caesar, and Augustus. In the following Ages, what by adopting too many Greek
Words into their Language, and what by the continu^^ Irruptions of the Northern
Nations, it sensibly declined; and about the Sixth Century after our Savior,
was totally disused at Rome.

Q. What men of note lived in his time?

A. So many, that it is a difficult matter to recount them. To begin with those
that writ in Greek, at this time flourished Diodorus Siculus, who spent Thirty
years in the Capital City of the World to collect Memoirs for his Historical
Library; and that most excellent Historian and Critic Dionysius Halicarnass^u^;
Then Titus Livius, born at Padua, whose Wit, Seneca says, was equal to the
Greatness of the Roman Empire. Virgil the Prince of Epic, H^race of Lyric, Ovid
of Elegiac Poetry. Cornellus Gallus, Tibullus, and Propertius, with several
more of eminent Note, too numerous to be here inserted, all lived in his time.
In short, never did the Roman Arms and Eloquence, with all the Inferior
Sciences, as Music, Statuary, Painting, etc* so universally triumph, as they
did in the Augustean Age.

Q. Did Augustus make any progress in the reducing of Britain?

A. He wholly neglected it, either because he believed it would scarce answer
the Expense, or because he thought it not advisable to enlarge the Limits of
the Roman Empire, but content^d himself with those which Nature had prescribed
to it, viz. the Ocean, the Rhine, and the Euphrates.

Q. Was not the Temple of Ianus shut in his time?

A. All Authors agree, That it was now the third time shut by Augustus in the
year 730; after it had been the first time shut by Numa, and the second time a
little after the first Punic War.

Q. What was the greatest Loss he sustained?

A. Quintilius Varus had Three Legions cut in pieces by the Germans under their
General Arminius; which so disturbed him, that he was often heard to say,
Quintili Vare, read mihi Legiones.

Q. Had he any inclinations to be intemperate?

A. No; for in his greatest Debauches he never exceeded his Six Glasses; and as
for eating, he sat any where down to Dinner, let the place be never so homely,
if he had an appetite.

Q. Was he not superstitious?

A. Yes; and when it thundered, (of which he was strangely afraid) he generally
carried the Skin of a Sea-calf to preserve himself.

Q. How did he respect his Son-in-Law Agrippa, and the two Iulia's, the Mother
and the Daughter?

A. He used to wish, That he could have lived without Wives, and died without
Children, whom he frequently called his Three Imposthumes.

Q. What sort of a Man was he?

A. His Hair was white, and somewhat frizzled, his Complexion brown, but clear
and smooth, his Eyebrows arched, and almost joined, a Roman Nose, his Mouth
well made, small Teeth, but somewhat spoiled, and a short Chin, his Eyes black
and great, a little greenish and full of fire. His Body was marked with small
spots, his Stature below the common. There appeared in his Face something
agreeably Majestic and Charming, which deservedly gave him the Name of
Augustus, and hindered a certain Gaul of Quality, who had resolved to throw him
into a Precipice as he passed the Alps, from pursuing his design. He was of a
lively Imagination, a clear sprightly Wit, and a prodigious Memory.

Tiberius the Third Emperor. The Year of Rome 754. Of the Birth of I. C. 14.
Q. WHose Son was Tiberius?

A. The Son of Livia and Tiberius Nero. He was Fifty five years old when he
came to the Empire.

Q. What sort of a Prince was he?

A. His chief Talent lay in dissimulation, and he was universally hated for his
Cruelty, his Covetousness, his Debaucheries, and his Pride.

Q. But how did he behave himself in the beginning of his Reign?

A. He concealed all his Faults from the world with admirable address and
dexterity.

Q. What obliged him to stand so much upon his guard?

A. Because he was afraid of Germanicus, Son to his Brother Drusus, whom he had
adopted.

Q. And how did he serve him at last?

A. He dispatched him out of the way, because he was jealous of his growing
Merits.

Q. After what manner did he accomplish his design?

A. He sends this Prince, who had already by his Valor and Conduct ended the
Wars of Germany, into the East, to beat back the Parthians.

Q. And what way did he take there to destroy him?

A. He conferred the Government of Syri^ upon Piso, who being a mortal Enemy to
Germanicus, poisoned him in the year of Rome 772.

Q. Was it not discovered afterward that he was p^ison'd?

A. Y^s; and Agrippina, Wife to Germanicus, accused Piso of the Fact, who
knowing himself to be guilty, prevented his Condemnation by a voluntary death.

Q. When did Tiberius give the full stretch to his Cruelties?

A. After the death of his Mother Livia, which happened much about this time.

Q. With whom did he begin to exercise his barbar^us Temper?

A. By poisoning Drusus Caesar his Son; after this he starved to death Nero and
D^usus the Children of Germanicus, and all this by the advice of his great
Favorite Sejanus.

Q. How did this Sejanus behave himself aft^r he became so Absolute?

A. He committed a thousand Crimes; and his Insolence carried him so far as to
say, That he was Emperor of Rome, and that Tiberius was only Prince of Capreae,
a small Isle near Naples, where he used to retire. But his Pride did not last
long.

Q. What Accident befell him?

A. After he had suffered a thousand Indignities, he was strangled by the hand
of the Common Hangman, his Body dragged about the streets, and his whole Family
executed with him.

Q. What remarkable Passage was it that happened between Tiberius and the
Astrologer Thrasillus?

A. Tiberius had resolved one day to throw him headlong into the Sea, as he was
walking along with him; so he asked him if he knew what sort of death, and when
he should dye? Thrasillus answered him, That he knew nothing precisely of that
matter, but this he was sure of, That he was never in so great danger in his
life, as he was at that moment.

Q. Did not this Answer wholly alter Tiberius's Resolution?

A. Yes, he saved him, and after this reposed a mighty confidence in him.

Q. Did not the Crucifixion of our Blessed Savior happen under his Reign?

A. It fell out in the ^8 th. year of his Empire.

Q. Did not Tiberius propose it to the Senate to place him among the gods whom
the Romans worshipped?

A. Yes.

Q. And did the Senate give their consent to it?

A. No; because it was forbidden by the Laws of the Twelve Tables to receive
any Foreign gods.

Q.When did Tiberius dye?

A. He died in the 77th Year of his Age, after he had reigned Two and twenty
years, Six months.

Q. Was not Caligula supposed to hasten his Death?

A. Yes.

Q. How did he manage it?

A. By over-loading him with Blankets, under a pretense of making him warm.

Q. Where was Tiberius at that time?

A. He was in the Isle of Capreae, where he had no other Witnesses of his
Lewdness, than those who had their share in the same Crimes, wallowing in all
sorts of brutal Lusts, and in some manner forgetting he was Emperor.

Q. By what Nickname was he publicly called?

A. Caprinus, alluding to the Isle of Capreae, and his Lasciviousness.

Q. What remarkable Curiosities had he in that Island?

A. He had Chairs and Closets of his own Invention to exercise his Lewdness.

Q. What things were farther observable in his House?

A. He had several Chambers furnished with lascivious Pictures and Statues,
where were to be seen the Books of Elephantis, filled with immodest Postures.

Q. What Learned Men flourished in his Time?

A. Velleius Paterculus, who writ an Abridgment of the Roman History, and is so
universally admired for the peculiar Beauties of his Characters. Valerius
Maximus, who has given us an Excellent Collection of Memorable Stories digested
under proper Heads. Some place Quintus Curtius, the Writer of Alexander's Life
under his Reign, taking him to be the same Person whom Su^tonius mentions as a
Rhetorician, and Tacitus as Proconsul of Afric under that Emperor. But others
make him Contemporary to Vespasian; and some to have lived under the Reign of
Trajan.

Q. What remarkable Things happened in his time.

A. The first President of burning of Books began under him. For Cremutius
Cordus having in one of his Books, called Brutus the last of the Romans,
Tiberius orders the Author to be put to Death, and his Books to be burnt in the
Forum. Ovid too died in his Exile in Pontus, in this Emperors time.

Q. How many Wives had Tiberius?

A. Two: Agrippina, the Daughter of Agrippa; and Iulia, the Daughter of
Augustus.

Q. What sort of a Man was he?

A. The Features of his Face were regular and well, his Complexion white but
pimpled, a melancholy Air, a fierce Look, great Eyes, the forepart of his Head
bald, a stinking Breath, large Shoulders and Breast, a grave Gate, his Stature
of a prodigious Talness.

Caligula the Fourth Emperor. The Year of Rome 777. Of the Birth of I. C 37.
Q. FRom whom was Caligula descended?

A. He was the Son of Germanicus and Agrippina, and Nephew to Tiberius.

Q. Where was he Born?

A. In Germany, in the Camp, and was brought up among the Soldiers, who gave
him the Name of Caligula.

Q. For what reason?

A. Because he wore little Boots, after the Soldier's fashion; for Boots in
Latin, are called Caligae.

Q. How old was he when he came to the Empire?

A. Twenty five years old.

Q. Were not the People extremely pleased at his Elevation to this Dignity?

A. Yes; hoping he inherited all his Father's Virtues, as indeed he appeared to
be a Prince of very good Qualities.

Q. Did not he manage himself very well at the beginning.

A. He expressed so much Tenderness and Moderation, that he raised the
Expectations of all Italy. All those Persons, who for fear of Tiberius had
absconded, now* left their Holes and walked abroad. He recalled those that were
banished, and abolished the greatest part of the Imposts and Taxes.

Q. Did this continue long?

A. No; for soon after he wholly changed his manner of Life, and resigned
himself up to Cru^lty, Lewdness, and all sorts of Bestiality.

Q. What particular Acts of Cruelty are recorded of him?

A. He filled Rome with the Blood of the Principal Men of the Empire; nay, he
abused his own Sisters.

Q. What was his common saying?

A. He frequently wished the People of Rome had but one Head.

Q. Why so?

A. That he might have the pleasure of cutting it off, and destroying all the
Romans at one stroke.

Q. When his Sister Drusilla was dead, what respect did he pay to her Memory?

A. He caused a Temple to be erected to her, as if she had been a Goddess.

Q. How did he serve those that lamented her Death, and those that expressed no
Sorrow at all for it?

A. He indifferently commanded them both to be put to Death.

Q. For what pretense?

A. The first, because they envied Drusilla's happiness, whom he had so lately
enrolled in the number of the gods: And the latter, because they did not bewail
the loss of so amiable a Princess.

Q. How far did his Pride and Arrogance carry him?

A. He commanded himself to be adored as a God, and would needs have Temples
built to him in all places. He pretended that the Moon was mightily fallen in
love with his Person, and that she frequently came down to Caress him.

Q. How did Vitellius rally him upon that Subject?

A. Why, says he, when you gods are together, we poor men are not able to see
what you are a-doing.

Q. To what other monstrous Extravagances did his folly lead him?

A. He made his Horse be declared Consul in full Senate; he banished Livy's
Statue and Writings from all Libraries; he gave Virgil the same Treatment, and
would have suppressed the Verses of Homer, pretending his Power ought to be no
less than Plato's, who had prohibited the Reading of them in his Imaginary
Republic. Lastly, as he hated Seneca, and all men of Eminent Virtue, it came
into his head to abolish not only the Laws, but all the Living Oracles of them,
the most celebrated Lawyers.

Q. Had not he a mighty Ambition to ride a Horseback over the Sea?

A. To accomplish this unaccountable Frolic, he built a Bridge of Galleys from
Napales to Baiae, which is reckoned to be more than four Miles.

Q. And what noble Pranks did he play upon this Bridge?

A. He magnificently feasted all such whom their Curiosity had brought thither,
and afterward caused them to be thrown into the Sea.

Q. Having quitted Rome to go and fight the Britains, what fine Employment did
he set his Army upon?

A. He only made them gather Cocklesh^lls, and with these Spoils he came back
to Rome.

Q. After what manner did he receive those that came to see him?

A. He only gave them his Foot to kiss.

Q. In his Buildings, what did he chiefly affect?

A. To force Nature, and attempt Impossibilities.

Q How spent he those prodigious Sums which Tiberius had gathered?

A. In levelling Mountains and Valleys.

Q. How was his Death?

A. He was killed by Cassius and Sabinus, a Captain of the Guards.

Q. How long did he Reign?

A. Three Years, Ten Months, and Eight Days.

Q. What became of Caesonia, his Wise, and his Daughter?

A His Wife was likewise Assassinated, and they dashed out the Brains of the
little Daughter he had by her, against a Wall.

Q. What found they in his Cabinet after his Death?

A. A Book wherein he had writ down the Names of all those whom he designed to
put to Death; and a Coffer, wherein there was so great a quantity of Poison,
that having thrown it into the Sea, they saw the Shore next Morning covered
with dead Fish.

Q. What Writers of Note flourished in his time?

A. Appion the Grammarian, for his insupportable Vanity, called the Cymbalum
Mundi, and that most Eloquent Platonist, Philo Iudaeus, a Jew.

Q. How many Wives had Caligula?

A. Four: Iunia Claudilla, Livia Orestilla, Lollia Pausina, and Caesonia.

Q. What sort of a Man was he?

A. Of tall Stature, bright Hair, the top of his Head bald, his Forehead high,
large, and wrinkled; his Looks fixed and stern; his Eyes sunk in his Head;
hollow Temples; a pale Complexion; a great Belly, Neck, and Legs; his Body all
over covered with Hair; he was a great Master of Music, and had an
extraordinary fine Voice; he was very adroit and dexterous at handling his
Arms, Dancing, and cleverly turning a Chariot.

Claudius the Fifth Emperor. The Year of Rome 781. Of the Birth of I. C. 41.
Q OF what Family was Claudius the Chief?

A. He was Son to Drusus, the Brother of Germanicus, Uncle of Caligula, and
Nephew of Tiberius.

Q. How came he to be Elected Emperor?

A. At that very time, when the Senators were deliberating whether they should
choose any more Emperors, or re-stablish the Commonwealth upon its Ancient
Bottom, some Soldiers broke into the Palace, with a design to Plunder it.

Q. And did they Rifle it accordingly?

A. No; for happening to find Tiberius Claudius Nero there, who hid himself for
fear of being killed, they carried him immediately to the Camp, and proclaimed
him Emperor.

Q. What was his true Character?

A. That he was a Prince without Vice, but had no manner of Spirit or Conduct.

Q. By whom did he suffer himself to be entirely governed?

A. By his Wife, and Freed men.

Q. What do Historians particularly tell us of his Wife M^ssalina?

A. She caused the greatest part of her Gallants to be put to Death, when they
were no longer able to satisfy her brutal Passion.

Q. Among the rest, did she not cause Silanus to be assassinated, who was one
of the handsomest Gentlemen of Rome?

A. Yes; and the reason was, because he refused to gratify her Lust.

Q. A strange Monster of an Empress this; but what is farther observable of her?

A. That she could not see a well-made beautiful Actor upon the Stage, but she
immediately became passionately in Love with him.

Q. What end came she to at last?

A. Claudius, who had tamely bore all these Injuries so long, at last wakens
out of his Lethargy, and causes her with her Adulterer C^ius Silius, to be
killed.

Q. What provoked him to it?

A. While he was but a days Journey distant from Rome, his Rampant Empress
publicly Marries this Roman Knight, and makes him Consul.

Q. How many Children had he by Messalina?

A. Britannicus and Octavia.

Q. After Messalina's Death, whom did he Marry?

A. His Niece Agrippina, Daughter to his Brother Germanicus, and the Mother of
Nero, whom she had by Domitius.

Q. What sort of a Woman was this Agrippina?

A. A Princess of a great Spirit.

Q. What remarkable Thing is recorded of her?

A. She established a Roman Colony in Germany upon the Rhine, from her called
Colonia Agrippina; it is now called Colen.

Q. When for the gratifying her Ambition, she consulted the Oracle to know what
her Son's fortune would be, what answer did she receive?

A. That he would be Emperor indeed, but then would certainly Murder her.

Q. And what said she to this Prediction?

A. It signifies nothing so long as he reigns. Occidat modo imperet.

Q. What did Claudius dye of?

A. He was poisoned by Agrippina, who gave him some Mushrooms to eat.

Q. Why did she serve him so?

A. Because he would not declare her Son his Successor in the Empire.

Q. Did this Poison carry him off?

A. No; but it made him extremely Sick.

Q. Who then hastened his Death?

A. His Physician thrust a poisoned Feather down his Throat, under a pretense
of making him vomit up his Mushrooms.

Q. How long did he Reign?

A. Thirteen years, Eight months, and Twenty days.

Q. When Claudius was dead, what did Agrippina do to Britannicus?

A. ^h^ shut him up, for fear the Romans should ^hu^e him to succeed.

Q. And what did Nero do in the mean while.

A. He was at the Camp, and got himself proclaimed Em^eror?

Q. Did Nero bu^y Claudius magnificently?

A Yes; and prevailed to have him Canonized by a D^cree of the Senate.

Q. How many Wives had Claudius?

A. Six: Lepida, Camilla, Vrgulanilla, Petina, M^ssalina, and Agrippina.

Q. How many Chil^ren had he?

A. He had by Vrgulanilla Drusus and Claudius; by Petina Anconia, and by
M^ssalina Octavia and Britannicus.

Q. Describe me the Person of Claudius?

A. The Corners of his Eyes were full of little red Veins, his Stature was
Tall, his Body well-proportion'd, a good Countenance, his Mien Majestic, his
Voice was harsh and disagreeable, his Mouth full of Spit^le, and his Nose
always dropping, he had a very bad Memory, and a phlegmatic heavy Soul.

Nero the Sixth Emperor. The Year of Rome 794. Of the Birth of I. C. 54.
Q I Desire to be informed of Nero's Genealogy?

A. He was the Son of Domitius Aenobarbus and Agrippina.

Q. How old was he when he came to the Empire?

A. Sixteen years old. Seneca was his Master, and Burrus his Governor.

Q. What remarkable Things do Historians tell of him?

A. Being one day obliged to Sign a Dead Warrant for a Criminal, he seemed to
be touched with so much Compassion, that he wished he could not write. O quam
vellem me nescire literas.

Q. Which was his principal Vice?

A. Cruelty.

Q. With whom did he begin to exercise that barbarous Quality?

A. He first poisons Britannicus.

Q. What farther barbarous Acts did he commit.

A. He put his Mother Agrippina to Death, after he had for a long time before
stripped her of all Authority, nay, and turned her out of Court.

Q. After he had caused her to dye, what did he more?

A. He had a mind to behold her all naked as she lay, and brutally said, That
he did not think his Mother had been so fine a Woman.

Q. Did he make any farther Progresses in his Barbarity?

A. He took away Otho's Wife, named Poppea Sabina; he repudiated Octavia, and
afterward put her to Death; and shortly after, he kicked the abovementioned
Poppea so that she died of it.

Q. Was no Conspiracy formed against him?

A. Piso contrived one against him, and had engaged several Gentlemen in it,
but Nero happening to discover the Author and his Accomplices, among whom were
the Poet Lucan and Seneca, he put them all to Death.

Q. Wherein did his Vanity chiefly lie?

A. He mightily valued himself for playing well upon the Harp in the Theater,
and Singing his part with the Comedians: Nay, he made a Voyage as far as
Greece, to let the Grecians see he was a good Musician, and a good Actor.

Q. Who was it he married instead of a Woman?

A. Pythagoras his Libertus, or Freedman.

Q. Had he not a Natural Inclination to mischief?

A. He was so strangely inclined that way, that he frequently said King Pream
was the happiest Prince in the world, for having the satisfaction to see his
Country all in Flames, before he lost his Kingdom.

Q. Had he not a great fancy to represent the burning of Troy by that of Rome?

A. One night he distributed his Guards through all parts of the City, and
commanded them to set the Houses on fire; which they so diligently executed,
that in a short time the whole Town was in a flame.

Q. Where was Nero all this while?

A. Upon Maecenas's Tower, from whence he beheld the Fire, and sung some of
Homer's Verses upon the Destruction of Troy.

Q. Whom did he charge with this Action?

A. As he had a mortal hatred to the Christians, he accused them with having
set the City on fire, and put several of 'em to death for it.

Q. Was it not he who began to persecute them first at Rome?

A. Right; and made them suffer Torments which till that time were unknown.

Q. Was not Armenia taken by one of his Generals?

A. Domitius Corbulo, sufficiently famous for conquering the Frisians, took and
burnt Artaxata the Metropolis of the Country, beat out the Parthians, and sent
Tiridates to Rome, where he received a Diadem from Nero: Yet after all these
considerable Services, being sent for into Greece by Nero, he was forced to lay
hands on himself, to prevent a more ignominious death.

Q. Was this Tyrant beloved by his Subjects?

A. No; for so many Crimes having drawn upon him the Contempt and Hatred of the
whole Empire, Vindex a Roman Senator, and Governor of Gaul revolted first
against him, and declared Galba the Governor of Spain, Emperor.

Q. In the mean while was Rufus the Governor of High-Germany unactive?

A. He entered Gaul with a powerful Army to join Vindex.

Q. And what happened upon this?

A. His Army, which knew nothing of his intention, fell upon that of Vindex,
and cut it to pieces.

Q. What did Vindex do when he saw this?

A. Imagining that Rufus had betrayed him, and enraged at the entire loss of
his Troops, he out of despair killed himself.

Q. What was the upshot of all?

A. The German Army joined the small remainder of the Gaulish, and then Rufus
declared Galba Emperor.

Q. Was not Nero terribly alarmed at this Revolt?

A. Instead of preparing himself for a Battle, he resolved to make his Escape
into Egypt, saying, he could get his Livelihood any where by his Acting and
Singing.

Q. How did his Guards behave themselves, seeing him so strangely pusillanimous?

A. They all forsook him.

Q. Whither then did Nero retire to save himself?

A. He stole privately out of Rome, and hid himself in a Cave.

Q. When the Senate perceived that, what Resolutions did they take?

A. They declared him at the same time an Enemy to the People of Rome,
condemned him to dye, and sent out Soldiers every where to go and apprehend him.

Q. Well, what befell him at last?

A. Finding there was no hopes to preserve his wretched life any longer, and
yet not having Courage enough to hasten Death with his own hands, he desired
Epaphroditus one of his Free'd-men to kill him, who broke his Poniard as he
endeavored to do him that kindness, but at last made a shift to dispatch him.

Q. Was not Nero the last Emperor of the Augustean Family?

A. Yes.

Q. How old was he when he died?

A. One and thirty, having reigned 13 Years, 7 Months, 28 Days, on the very
same day whereon he had formerly commanded his Wife Octavia to be assassinated.

Q. How many Wives had he?

A. Three; Octavia, Poppea, and Statilia.

Q. What remarkable Accident happened in his Reign?

A. Lions.
Lugdunum, a famous Colony in France, was in the space of one night burnt down
to the ground; and so as an Ancient Writer handsomely expressed himself, Inter
magnam urbem and nullam vix horarum aliquot spatium fuit.

Q. What Learned men flourished at that time?

A. Seneca, and Lucan, the Uncle and Nephew, whom Nero caused to be put to
death for being concerned in Piso's Conspiracy: The former an Excellent
Philosopher; and the latter, if he had been Master of a solid Judgment, as he
was of Flame and Spirit, a most Admirable Poet. Then Persius the obscure
Satyrist; and Silius Italicus, who composed a Poem about the Punic War;
Epicte^us the Moralist, slave to Epaphroditus, one of Nero's Freed men; and
Petronius Arbiter.

Q. Who was this Petronius Arbiter?

A. An Epicurean by profession, and Comptroller of Nero's Pleasures, who made
profession of a cultivated polite Luxury; for Purity of Style and Wit scarce to
be matched by any of the Roman Writers. Tho he was one of the Emperor's
greatest Confidents, yet falling at last into Disgrace with him, he bled
himself to death, and at his last moments caused some delightful Verses to be
repeated to him.

Q. What sort of a man was Nero?

A. His Visage was Full, and Red, but not agreeable; his Hair of a Chestnut
Color, falling down in Rings; he was short-sighted, his Eyes blue and sunk in
his head, his Neck and Belly large, his Skin very bad, and his Stature
indifferent.

Galba the Seventh Emperor. The Year of Rome 808. Of the Birth of I. C. 68.
Q. BY whom was Galba declared Emperor?

A. By his Army; but his overgreat Severity was the reason why he did not
continue long in the possession of the Empire.

Q. Did he find no manner of opposition?

A. He was scarce arrived at Rome, when he received advice, that Vitellius the
Governor of Germany was proclaimed Emperor by his Army.

Q. What measures did he take to maintain his Authority?

A. He adopted Piso a man of great Merit, because he was apprehensive he should
never have any Children by reason of his great Age.

Q. Was not Otho, this Emperor's intimate Friend, offended at this Adoption?

A. It so much disgusted him, that he raised the Praetorian Bands against the
Emperor, who had a great love for him, because every evening as he went out of
the Palace, he distributed some Money among them.

Q. Having gained the affection and good will of the Soldiery, what did he next?

A. He immediately went to the Camp, and got himself to be proclaimed Emperor.
After this he placed himself at the head of the Guards, who killed Galba, and
cut off his head.

Q. What did they do with his Head?

A. They carried it to Otho, who told them they did nothing in murdering of
Galba, unless they cleared their hands of Piso, which was almost as soon
executed as advised.

Q. How old was he when they killed him?

A. Seventy two years old; and he reigned six months, and seven days.

Q. How many Wives had he?

A. Only one, whose name was Lepida.

Q. What sort of a man was Galba?

A. He was neither big nor little, he had a Roman Nose, Black Eyes, a Bald
Head, a Long Visage, and full of Wrinkles.

Otho the Eighth Emperor. The Year of Rome 809. Of the Birth of I. C. 69.
Q. WHat was Otho's Character in the world?

A. He was a debauched man, who surrendered up his own Wife to Nero, in order
to make his Fortune at Court by it.

Q. How did Vitellius the Governor of Germany employ himself?

A. Having been proclaimed Emperor by his Soldiers, as we have already
mentioned, he marched toward Italy with a great Army, and there defeated Otho
at the Battle of Bebriacum.

Q. Where was this Battle fought?

A. Near Placentia.

Q. What course did Otho take when he heard of the defeat of his Army?

A. He despaired of repairing his Loss, and so resolved to kill himself. His
Friends dissuaded him from the design, and represented to him what fair
exp^ctations he had of meeting better success next time, since he was still
Master of Italy and Asia, from whence he might easily furnish himself with
considerable Forces.

Q. And what Answer did he make 'em?

A. He said, That for his part he thought it more advisable to quit the Empire
to Vitellius, than to be the occasion of shedding so much blood: So he advised
them to repair immediately to the Conqueror, that so they might the sooner
obtain pardon of him.

Q. And what did he do at last.

A. He slew himself, after he had burnt all the Letters which had been writ to
him, and might bring his Friends into danger.

Q. How old was he then?

A. He was Eight and thirty years old, and had reigned Three Months, and Five
Days.

Q. Describe me his Person?

A. He was of Low Stature, his Head bald, his Legs crooked, and the Features of
his Face much resembling Nero's.

Vitellius the Ninth Emperor. The Year of Rome 809. Of the Birth of I. C. 69.
Q. WHat sort of a man was Vitellius, as to his Temper?

A. He was one that made a god of his belly, and thought of nothing else but
eating and drinking.

Q. What remarkable Action happened under his Reign?

A. Valens and Cecinna defeated Otho's Army in Italy.

Q. Where was Vitellius at that time?

A. He attended the Success of the War at Lions, where he minded nothing but
feasting and revelling.

Q. Where did he steer his course after he was informed that his Generals had
got the Victory.

A. He marched directly to Rome, where he profusely squandered away all the
Money he found in the Treasury; and his continual. Drunkenness made such a
Beast of him, that sometimes he would forget he was Emperor.

Q. When he was arrived there, what did he do?

A. He banished all the Astrologers and Fortune Tellers out of Rome.

Q. Where was Vespasian at that juncture?

A. He was making War against the Jews, in quality of Lieutenant General to
Otho.

Q. What happened to him there?

A. He was extremely importuned by his Army to give his consent for them to
declare him Emperor.

Q. And did he hearken to this Proposal?

A. It was not without great difficulty he was prevailed upon to comply with
them, but at last he gave his consent.

Q. Who assisted him in this Undertaking?

A. Mucianus the Governor of Syria, and all the Princes of the East.

Q. Whom did he entrust with the management of the Jewish War?

A. His Son Titus.

Q. And whither did he himself march?

A. After he had dispatched his Lieutenants to Rome with a great Army, he went
for Egypt.

Q. Was not Vitellius strangely surprised, when he heard of the general
defection of the people from him?

A. He seemed not to be much concerned at the News, but contented himself with
only fending his Lieutenants against Vespasian, who defeated them.

Q. Did not this Overthrow oblige Vitellius to m^rch in person against the
Enemy?

A. Right; but he was so little accustomed to the Fatigues and Hardships of
War, that he returned back to Rome to his Pleasures.

Q. At his Arrival there, what measures did he take?

A. He made a Treaty of Peace with Sabinus the Governor of Rome.

Q. What were the Conditions of this Treaty?

A. That he should surrender the Empire into the hands of Vespasian.

Q. Were not his Guards extremely incensed at his making so tame a Resignation?

A. It very much displeased them* because they loved Vitellius upon the account
that he gave them liberty to do what they would.

Q. What happened in this Contest?

A. The Capitol was burnt down to the ground, as it had been once before in the
bloody Disputes between Sylla and Marius.

Q. What became of Vitellius at last?

A. He had the misfortune to be taken by the Captains of Vespasian's Army, and
d^agg'd naked through the City with a great deal of Ignominy.

Q. What did they do to him after this?

A. They cut his Throat, and afterward threw him into the Tiber.

Q. How old was he then?

A. He was 57 Years old, and had only reigned 8 Months and 5 Days.

Q. How many Wives had he?

A. Two; Petronia and Galeria.

Q. How was he made?

A. He was of an extraordinary Stature, his Belly prodigiously big, and a very
Red Face.

Vespasian the Tenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 809. Of the Birth of I. C. 69.
Q. WHen was Vespasian crowned Emperor?

A. 'Twas after the Death of Nero, who had sent him into Judea to chastise the
Insolence of certain Rebels, where he took several small Towns.

Q. By whom was he proclaimed Emperor?

A. By his Army; and after he had left his Son Titus in Judea, and put all the
Forces there into his hands, with the whole management of the War, he came back
to Rome.

Q. And how ordered he his Affairs there?

A. He put Vitellius to death, who as we told you before, had made himself
Master of the Empire.

Q. After what manner did he deport himself in his Government?

A. With infinite Justice and Sweetness.

Q. What Transactions fell out in the second year of his being Emperor?

A. The Jewish War, which some turbulent Seditious Spirits had kindled under
Nero's Reign, was ended.

Q. Who was the Ringleader of the Faction?

A. Eleazer the Son of Ananias. Religion furnished them with a pretense to
rebel, and the people were easily induced to it, because the Romans had made a
terrible slaughter of their Countrymen.

Q. Who was it that laid Siege to Jerusalem?

A. Caestius Gallus, the Lieutenant of Syria, but he was forced to raise it
ignominiously, with a considerable loss of his Forces.

Q. At what time did this happen?

A. In the 12 th. year of Nero's Empire, and the 65 th. of our Savior.

Q. Whither did the Jews march after this Victory?

A. They returned to Jerusalem, where they chose new Leaders, and among the
rest Ios^phus the Son of Mattathias, in the year 67 of Jesus Christ.

Q. What did Vespasian, who was afterward sent by Nero, do?

A. He took several Towns, and Josephus himself, who foretold that he should be
elected Emperor.

Q. Did Vespasian then besiege Jerusalem, the Capital City of the Jews?

A. Yes; but the Death of Nero, and the Murder of the following Emperors,
interrupted the Siege.

Q. What was the Conclusion at last?

A. In the year 70 of J. C. at the Feast of the Passover; and on the fifth of
April, after a Siege of four months continuance, this famous Temple was burnt,
and the City abandoned to plunder.

Q. What followed upon the loss of Jerusalem?

A. The name of the Jewish People was abolished, and their Miseries were so
excessively great, that it is certain God Almighty revenged upon this perfidious
Nation the Unjust Death of his Son.

Q. What Calamities did they sustain?

A. There was so terrible a Famine during this Siege, that the besieged were
forced to feed upon the vilest things imaginable, man's flesh not excepted;
nay, some Mothers were reduced to such streights as to eat their own Children.

Q. Without question they lost a world of men in this Siege?

A. About Eleven hundred thousand souls perished there; which is almost an
incredible thing.

Q. What became of the City?

A. It was razed to the ground by Titus's order; and according to our Blessed
Savior's Prediction, there was not one stone left upon another. The Jews that
remained were carried away Prisoners.

Q. What happened in the Third Year of Vespasian's Reign?

A. This Emperor and his Son triumphed over the Jews, and afterward he laid
the Foundation of the Temple of Peace.

Q. What particular things did he do to advance his Glory after this War was
over?

A. He begun a Noble Amphitheatre, which Augustus had a great desire once to
build.

Q. After what manner did he end his days?

A. Being at the point of death, he raised himself on the sudden, and cried
out, Oportet Imperatorem stantem mori, An Emperor ought to dye standing.

Q. How old was he when he died?

A. He was Sixty nine years old, he reigned Ten years within Ten days, and
hastened his Death by drinking too much cold water.

Q. Pray give me a Description of him.

A. He was of an indifferent Stature, but thick, his Visage red, his Shoulders
large, his Constitution vigorous, his Looks cheerful, his behavior courteous,
a Warlike Mien, his Temper civil, but covetous.

Q. Was it not he that gave occasion to the Proverb, To shoe a Mule?

A. Yes.

Q. How did it happen?

A. Being once in the Country, a man who desired to speak with him, gave some
Money to the Muleteer who conducted his Litter, to stop it, and make as if he
was going to shoe his Mule.

Q. Did not the Emperor smell out the trick?

A. He immediately gave Audience to the man that had a desire to talk with him,
but asked his Muleteer how much Money he got by shooing his Mule?

Q. Was he not constrained to lay several Taxes upon the people?

A. Yes; because his Predecessors had by their Luxury quite exhausted the
Public Treasury.

Q. Was it not he that laid an Excise upon Urine?

A. Yes by the same token that his Son taking occ^sion to remonstrate to him
that this Excise was dishonorable, V^spasian takes a P^ece of Gold out of his
Pocket, holds it to his Nose, and asks him whether it smelt ill or no.

Q. What answer did he make?

A. He told him, No. And yet for all that, says the Emperor, this very Piece
came from the Excise upon Urine.

Titus the Eleventh Emperor. The Year of Rome 819. Of the Birth of I. C. 79.
Q. WHO was Titus?

A. The Son of V^spasian.

Q. How did he behave himself in the beginning of his Reign?

A. He immediately quitted the Natural Propensity he had to Lewdness, and
treated every one with that sweetness, that he was called The Love and Delight
of all Mankind.

Q What were the first Instances he gave of his Clemency?

A. He pardoned two Persons of Quality who had conspired against him; he
likewise pardoned his Brother Domitian, who had formed a second Conspiracy
against him, and instead of punishing him, declared him his Successor in the
Empire.

Q. How died he?

A. His Brother Domitian, notwithstanding he had pardoned him before,
dispatched him by Poison, when he was aged Forty one years, and after he had
reigned Two Years, Two Months, and Twenty Days.

Q. What other demonstrations did Titus give of his Mercy?

A. It Is said he never refused any thing which was asked of him; and would
frequently say, That a Prince ought not to send back any of his Subjects sad or
discontented from his presence.

Q. What is besides reported of him?

A. One Night as he was at Supper, he remembered himself that he had done good
to no body that day, My Friends, says he to those that were about him, I have
lost a Day, Diem perdidi.

Q. What remarkable Passages happened during his Reign?

A. A prodigious quantity of Fire and Ashes broke forth from Vesuvius, which
were thrown as far as Afric, Syria, and Egypt.

Q. Did not this Irruption do a great deal of damage?

A. Pliny the Elder being desirous to behold this terrible Spectacle, was
suffocated by the Flames, and several Cities were ruined by it.

Q. What was it that Titus said as he was going to dye.

A. That he only repented himself of one thing, but did not express what it
was: It Is imagined that it was because he had not put his Brother Domitian to
death, and cleared the Empire of so wicked and cruel a Monster.

Q. Had he not a great value for the Senate and People of Rome?

A. Yes; for tho he was passionately in Love with Queen Berenice, yet he
refused to marry her, because he thought the Senate and People of Rome would
disapprove of the Match.

Q. What sort of a man was he?

A. He was of the common Stature, the Features of his Face very good, his Belly
somewhat of the largest; of a courteous Behavior, a sweet insinuating Mien, a
Noble Air, which inspired all those that beheld him both with Love and Respect.

Domitian the Twelfth Emperor. The Year of Rome 821. Of the Birth of I. C. 81.
Q. WHose Son was Domitian?

A. He was the Son of Vespasian, and younger Brother to Titus.

Q. Was he like his Father?

A. No; and much less did he resemble his Brother Titus, since he was one of
the most profligate Monsters that ever lived, and was not inferior to Nero in
Cruelty, Avarice, and Incontinence.

Q. In what did he chiefly excel?

A. He was so great a Master at his Bow, that he would frequently order a man
to be set with his hand stretched out, and his Fingers open, and then he would
shoot between his fingers, and never touch him.

Q. What was his constant Occupation?

A. He passed whole days in his Closet alone, where he diverted himself with
the Royal Sport of Fly-catching.

Q. Did not somebody rally him upon this occasion?

A. A certain Person of Quality having one day asked, Who was with the Emperor
in his Closet? answer was made him, That not so much as a Fly was with him.

Q. Did he perform any Warlike Expeditions?

A. He triumphed twice over the Daci and the Catti.

Q. Who was his chief Confident?

A. One Martial, whom he particularly affected; I don't mean the Poet of that
name, but another to whom that Poet addresses several of his Epigrams.

Q. To what extravagant Actions did his Folly lead him?

A. He must needs pass for a god, and so commands several Statues of Silver and
Gold to be erected to his own Honor.

Q. What other strange Frolicks did he play?

A. Being minded one day to put the Senators into a dismal Fright, he invited a
great number of them to come and sup with him.

Q. Well, and when they came there, how were they received?

A. He orders them to be locked up in a Hall hung with Black, and only lighted
by a few Lamps, by the light of which they could discern several Coffins, upon
each of which were written the names of those that were invited.

Q. Did not this terrible Scene possess them with strange apprehensions?

A. Yes; for after they had continued some time in these cruel imaginations,
some naked persons whose Bodies were blackened all over, entered the Hall with
Swords in one hand, and flaming Torches in the other.

Q. Did they not give themselves all for lost?

A. Yes; but after these black men had danced a pretty while about them, they
opened the doors, saying, The Emperor gave all the Company leave to withdraw.

Q. What was Domitian's usual way to make himself remember the Names of those
whom he designed to put to death?

A. He writ their Names down in a Table Book, but it cost him very dear; for
having among several others set down the Names of his Wife Domitia, Norbanus,
Petronius, and Stephanus;

Q. What happened upon it?

A. Domitia, who very well knew the Table Book, having accidentally lighted
upon it one day, she showed it to those persons whose Names were written down
there, as well as her own, in order to oblige them to concert matters with her,
and dispatch Domitian.

Q. How was Domitian's end?

A. Stephanus stabbed him with a Poniard in his Closet; but the Guards running
in immediately to his assistance, they soon killed Stephanus among them.

Q. What was Apollonius Tyanaeus a-doing at the moment when this happened?

A. He harangu'd the people of Ephesus, but stopped himself in the midst of his
Discourse; and after he had continued silent for some time, he cried aloud,
Courage, Stephanus, Strike the Tyrant; and a moment after, says he, The Tyrant
is dead, he is just now slain.

Q. What else do Historians remark of Domitian?

A. He persecuted the Christians throughout the whole Roman Empire. 'Twas he
that banished St. John into the Isle of Patmos; tho others lay it upon Nero,
which is the more probable of the two.

Q. What Learned Writers flourished in his time?

A. That Sonorous Enthusiastic Poet Statius; Martial the Witty Epigrammatist;
Iuvenal the declaiming Satyrist; that celebrated Institutor of Youth
Quintilian; Musonius the Philosopher; Apollonius Tyanaeus, a notorious Impostor
and Pretender to Miracles; that most excellent Historian Josephus, who has writ
the Antiquities of his own Countrymen: And for the Art Military, there was
Julius Agricola, who sailed round Great Britain, by him conquered, and was the
first Roman that discovered it to be an Island. He found and subdued the Orkney
Islands: But notwithstanding these great services, Domitian dispatched him by
Poison.

Q. How old was this Emperor when he was slain?

A. He was Forty four years old, having reigned Fifteen Years and six days.

Q. Pray give me a Description of him?

A. He was lusty and well-proportion'd, he had a handsome Nose, large Eyes, he
was weak-sighted, and had a Face as Red as Scarlet.

Nerva the Thirteenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 836. Of the Birth of I. C. 96.
Q. WHO was this Nerva?

A He was a Person of Quality who derived his Original from Narni, a City
situated in the Province of Vmbria.

Q. What Character had he in the World

A. He had the Reputation of a most Excellent Prince.

Q. What considerable things did he do in the beginning of his Reign?

A. He cancelled all the Edicts that had been made in Domitian's time.

Q. How old was he when they elected him to the Empire?

A. He was Sixty five years old.

Q. What other Proofs did he give the people of his Clemency and Generosity?

A. He restored all persons to their Possessions which they had been plundered
of by Domitian, and gave leave to all those whom he had banished, to return to
their Native Country. Among the rest, say some, St. John the Evangelist, who
suffered Exile in the Isle of Patmos, came back to Ephesus, of which City he
was Bishop.

Q. What remarkable Oath was that which Nerva swore?

A. He solemnly swore before the Senators, That he would put not one of them to
Death, tho they gave him never so just an occasion.

Q. And did he keep his Oath?

A. He so religiously observed it, that two of them having conspired to take
away his Life, he would not suffer them to dye?

Q. What did he do to them then?

A. He sent for them to let them see he was not ignorant of their Design
against him; he carried them with him to the Theater, placed them on each side
of him, and then gave both of them a Poniard, telling them before all the
world, That they might try upon him whether they were good or no.

Q. What is commonly said of him?

A. That he wanted Authority to suppress the Insolence of his Soldiers; and his
extreme Old Age rendered him contemptible.

Q. What method did he take to make himself more Absolute than he was?

A. He preferred Trajan, who at that time commanded the Army in Germany, before
all his Relations, and adopted him to the Empire.

Q. Did Nerva live a long while after this Adoption?

A. No; he died Three Months after, being completely Sixty six years old.

Q. Of what Distemper did he dye?

A. Of a Fever, which he got by straining his Voice too much, in talking to
one Regulus, who had put him into a Passion.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. One Year, Four Months, and Eleven Days.

Trajan the Fourteenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 838. Of the Birth of I. C 98.
Q. WHat Countryman was Trajan?

A. He came from Sevil in Spain.

Q Where was he when Nerva adopted him to the Empire?

A. At Colen in Germany, and was the first Foreigner that got possession of the
Roman Empire.

Q. Who was his Master?

A. Plutarch.

Q. What sort of a man was he?

A. He was one of the greatest Generals that ever sat upon a Throne: He was
Sweet-temper'd, Merciful, and Prudent: Nay, he was so charitable to his
Soldiers who were wounded in his Wars with the Dacians, that he tore off his
own Shirt from his Back to bind up their Wounds, when they had no Linen of
their own.

Q. What considerable Actions did he perform?

A. He defeated the Dacians, and their King Decebalus, over whom Domitian
Triumphed at Rome, tho he scandalously bought a Peace of him; he subdued
Armenia, Iberia, and Colchis; he overthrew the Sarmatians, Astrenians, and
Arabians, with the Inhabitants of the Bosphorus.

Q. What other Conquests did he make?

A. He attacked the Parthians, and took from them Armenia, Persia, Seleucia,
Babylon, and reduced a very considerable part of Asia, under the Roman Power.

Q. Was not he sirnam'd Germanicus?

A. Yes, for the glorious Exploits he performed in Germany.

Q. Did not several persons come to congratulate him upon his many Victories?

A. Ambassadors visited him from all parts of the world; nay, some came from as
far as the Indies to compliment him upon those occasions.

Q. What remarkable Presents were made him?

A. He was presented with a Horse from Armenia, which fell down upon his knees
as often as he went to mount him.

Q. By what other Actions did he increase his Reputation with the People?

A. He utterly exterminated those insufferable Vermin in a well-ordered
Commonwealth, the Delators and Informers, who had made so fine a Harvest on it
under the Reigns of Domitian, Nero, Caligula, and Tiberius.

Q. What remarkable Accidents happened in his time?

A. There was so prodigious an Earthquake at Antioch, while he and the whole
Court lay there, that the City was almost totally destroyed.

Q. And how did Trajan make a shift to save himself?

A. He escaped through the Windows of the Room where he lay.

Q. Where died he?

A. At Selinus, a City of Cilicia, whither he ordered himself to be carried.

Q What respect was paid him after his Death?

A. His Ashes were brought to Rome, and placed in a Golden Urn on the top of a
Pillar of a prodigious Height and curious Workmanship, which he had caused to
be erected in the public Place, and which is to this day called Trajan's
Pillar.

Q. How long did he Reign?

A. Ten years Six months and Fifteen days; he lived Sixty three years.

Q. What remarkable things do you find in his Reign?

A. Two: The first of them was the unparalleled Confidence he reposed in one
of his Friends, whose Name was Sura.

Q. How did he make it appear?

A. Some Persons, who envied him for the great share he possessed in the
Emperor's Friendship, strove by all imaginable means to blast his Reputation,
and render him suspected to his Master. They accused him with forming a Design
against his Life; but Trajan to let them see how far he relied upon the Honesty
of his Friend, having received an Invitation to Sup with him, went thither
freely.

Q. Well, and what did he do there?

A. After he had sent back his Guards, he orders Sura's Physician and Barber,
to be called to him; the former he commands to take off the Hair about his
Eyebrows, and the latter to shave his Beard. After this, he goes to a Bath,
and then sits down very unconcerned with the rest of the Company.

Q. What said he to his Friends next Morning?

A. He recounted to them every thing in order as it passed, and told them, That
if Sura had any Intentions to kill him, he gave him the fairest opportunity the
day before to do it, that a man could wish; and since he had neglected it, it
was an infallible indication that he had no such design in his head.

Q. What is the second remarkable thing?

A. Trajan in giving his Sword to the Colonel of the Guards, according to the
usual Custom, uttered these glorious Words, Take this Sword, and if I govern
like a Just Prince, employ it in my Service; but if I abuse my Authority, draw
it against me.

Q. What added he afterward?

A. That he who gave Laws to the rest of the World, lay under greater
Obligations to observe them, than any of his Subjects.

Q. What Title did the Romans bestow upon him?

A They gave him the Sir^name of Optimus.

Q. Was not his Memory exceeding dear to Posterity?

A. It was held in so great esteem, that in succeeding Times, when an Emperor
was promoted to this high Dignity, amidst the other Acclamations that were made
in the Senate House, they used to wish that he would prove as happy as
Augustus, and as good as Trajan.

Q. What answer did he make his Friends, who were Reproaching him one day with
his too great Condescension and Good nature?

A. That he lived with his Subjects, just as he would have wished them to live
with him, if they had been the Masters.

Q. What Faults or Vices do you observe in him?

A. Two very great ones. The first, that he was given to excessive Drinking.
The second, that he loved young Boys.

Q. What was his Wife's Name?

A. Plotina, who in some Ancient Medals is represented with a very tall
Head-dress, much resembling the Modern Commodes.

Q. What Learned Men flourished in his time?

A. Plutarch of Chaeronea, that admirable Philosopher and Biographer. Pliny the
Younger, who in his Panegyric upon Trajan, which he delivered in the
Senate House when he was Consul, gives us the true Exemplar of an Excellent
Orator, as well as he does of a good Prince. Su^tonius, who has writ the Lives
of the Twelve first Caesar's, with the same freedom as they lived them. Lucius
Florus, who has left us a pretty Compendium of the Roman History, tho justly
censured for too much affecting pointed Sentences. And lastly, Cornelius
Tacitus, a Sublime and Grave, tho sometimes Obscure Historian, famous for his
Reflections, and the good Sense of his Observations, which will always preserve
their Reputation in the World, especially with those Persons that intend to
study Politics.

Q. Was not he severe against the Christians?

A. He raised a Cruel Storm against the Professors of that Religion; and among
the rest, Ignatius, Bishop of Antioch, suffered, being torn in pieces by Wild
Beasts. At last, having received a favorable Account of the Simplicity of
their Worship, their Innocence, and Morals from Pliny Junior, in an Epistle,
which is still extant, the Persecution abated.

Adrian the Fifteenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 857. Of the Birth of I. C. 117.
Q. WHo was this Adrian?

A. Cousin of Trajan, and his Countryman, for he was a Native of an Italian
City in Spain.

Q. How came he to be made Emperor?

A. By the cunning Management of Plotina, the Wife of Trajan.

Q. But how did she carry on this Affair?

A. As soon as the Emperor was dead, she sent a forged Declaration immediately
to the Senate under his hand, whereby he adopts Adrian, and declares him his
Successor. In the mean time she dexterously conceals his Death, till Adrian's
Adoption was confirmed by the Authority of the Senate.

Q. Did Adrian make any Conquests?

A. So far from that, that he devoted himself wholly to Peace, and abandoned
Assyria, Armenia, and Mesopotamia, to the Parthians.

Q. What do Historians remark of him?

A. That he loved to be always Traveling abroad.

Q. What Reasons did he allege for so doing?

A. He used to say, That a Prince ought to imitate the Sun, who carries his
Light through all the Corners of the World, and illuminates all the Regions of
the Earth.

Q. How many Years did he spend in Surveying the Empire?

A. Thirteen.

Q. And what observable things are reported of him, during this long Progress?

A. He separated the Britains from the Picts, by a Wall Forty Leagues long,
which took up the whole breadth of the Island, and reached from the
German-Ocean to the Irish-Sea; it was likewise fortified by a Ditch of the same
length.

Q. Wherefore built he this prodigious Wall.

A. To secure the Britains from the Insults of the Picts, who were so called
from painting their naked Bodies, to make them look the more terrible to their
Enemies.

Q. What did he besides?

A. He gave a King to the Germans, who were upon the point of Revolting,
because he did not look upon himself to be in a Capacity to retain them in
their Duty by force.

Q. How did he treat the Armenians?

A. He remitted the Tribute they were obliged to pay to the Roman Emperors, and
gave them leave to Elect a King of their own.

Q. What respect was it he showed to the Memory of Pompey?

A. Having seen his Tomb in Egypt, which was below the Dignity of so great a
man, he caused a very Magnificent Sepulcher to be erected to him.

Q. Did not the Jurisconsults or Lawyers, principally flourish under his Reign?

A. They did, and Julian composed the Perpetual Edict by the Emperor's Command,
to serve as a Rule to all the Praetors that administered Justice in Rome. It was
called Edictum Perpetuum, because it was to continue in force for ever.

Q. After what manner died he?

A. Being weary of living longer, and having frequently endeavored to dispatch
himself, he died at last of bleeding immoderately at the nose, after he had
adopted Aelius Antoninus.

Q. How many Years did he possess the Empire?

A. Twenty years, and Eleven months, being Seventy three years old.

Q. Whom did he Marry?

A. Sabina, Trajan's Neice.

Q. How did he govern his Soldiers?

A. By living just as they did, and eating their Ammunition Bread, Bacon, and
Cheese, after the Example of Scipio, Aemilianus, and Metellus.

Q. Did not he much apply himself to the Study of Magic?

A. Yes.

Q. Was he a man of Learning?

A. There was never a man in his Empire, who knew so many several things in so
many several Professions. Besides, he had a prodigious Memory, and could repeat
by heart the Names of all Places, Passes of Rivers, and his Soldiers.

Q. Did he take a pleasure to converse with Learned Men?

A. Yes, and would always pretend to the Glory of having got the better of them
in all Disputes. One Favorinus, by Name, having owned himself outdone by the
Emperor, although he could easily have repelled the force of his Arguments, if he
had been so minded, and his Friends blaming him for it, Why, says he, would you
not have me give place to the Man that has Thirty Legions at his Command?

Q. What particularly recommended him to the People?

A. His Moderation and Clemency; for after his arrival to the Empire, he would
by no means revenge the Injuries that had been done him before. And having once
met a Person that had offended him, says he, You have escaped, since I am made
Emperor.

Q. What Learned Men flourished in his time?

A. Ptolomy of Alexandria, the famous Astronomer. Phlegon, Adrian's Libertus,
who deserves so well of History for his exact Calculation of the Olympiads.
Arrian who writ the Expedition of Alexander the Great. And Aulus Gellius, the
Learned Author of the Noctes Atticae. At the same time those Monstrous
Heretics, Basilides, Carpocras, Marcion, and the Gnostics, began to show
their Heads, and disturb the Tranquillity of the Church.

Antoninus Pius the Sixteenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 878. Of the Birth of I.
C. 138.
Q FRom whence came Antoninus?

A. He was a Gaul by Birth, and born at Nismes, a City of Languedoc. For his
Clemency, and other Virtues, he had the Surname of Pius bestowed upon him.

Q. What was his most usual Saying?

A. That he would rather choose to preserve the Life of one Roman-Citizen, than
to kill a thousand Enemies.

Q. Give me his Character.

A. He was the most just, and most moderate of all the P^^man Emperors; and had
left an unblemished Name behind him, if out of too warm a Zeal for his own
gods, he had not suffered the Christians to be persecuted, in which Tempest
Telesphorus and Hyginus, Bishops of Rome, suffered Martyrdom.

Q. What Reputation had he Abroad?

A. Tho he never stirred out of Italy, and but seldom out of Rome, yet he
effected more by the Authority of his Virtues, than any of his Predecessors had
done by their Arms. Pharasmanes, King of Iberia, having seen and conversed with
him, immediately made those Concessions which he had formerly refused.
Vologeses, the Parthian, no sooner read his Letter, but he quitted his
pretenses to Armenia; nay, the Indians and Hirc^nians chose him to be an
Arbitrator of their Differences.

Q. What Answer was it he gave his Wife Faustina, when she blamed him upon the
score of his being too liberal?

A. He laughed at her Avarice, And don't you know, says he to her, that now we
are in Possession of the Empire, we have nothing of our own, but that it
belongs all to the People.

Q. How did he serve Idle Persons.

A. He so far detested them, that he turned out of their places such as were
unserviceable to the Public, saying, Nothing was so scandalous, and indeed so
cruel* as to suffer the Commonwealth to maintain those lazy Mouths that did
nothing at all for it.

Q. Did he love to visit the Provinces of the Empire?

A. No: For, let a Prince, says he, take never so much care, yet his Retinue
will be a Charge and Burden to the People.

Q. Whom did he adopt for his Children?

A. Lucius Verus, and Marcus Aurelius; he gave his Daughter in Marriage to the
latter, and declared him his Successor.

Q. Pray give me an instance of his Moderation and Goodness?

A. Apollonius refused to go to Court to teach Marcus Aurelius, pretending that
a Master ought not to dance Attendance after his Schol^r. Why, replies
Antoninus, it is a wonderful thing that so great a Philosopher as you are,
should find it a greater way from your Lodgings to the Court, than from Chal^is
to Rome.

Q. How died he?

A. He died of an Indisposition at his Country House in the Seventy sixth year
of his Age, after he had reigned Twenty two years, and Six months.

Q. What Eminent Men flourished in his time?

A. G^len of Pergamus, the Celebrated Physician. Maximus Tyrius, a Platonic
Philosopher. Aelian, who has left a small Tract of Natural History. Justin, the
Abbreviator of Trogus Pompeius. And Diogenes Laertius, who writ the Lives of
the Philosophers.

Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, making together the Seventeenth Emperor. The
Year of Rome 901. Of the Birth of I. C. 161.
Q. WHo was this Marcus Aurelius?

A. Son-in-Law to Antoninus. He was called the Philosopher, because he applied
himself very much to the Study of Philosophy, and by Sect was a Stoic.

Q. Who shared the Empire with him?

A. Lucius Verus, his Brother, who had married his Daughter Lucilla.

Q. Was not this the first time that two Emperors held the Empire together?

A. Yes.

Q. What was the reason of making this Innovation?

A. Because Adrian would not adopt Antoninus, but upon this Condition, that
when he arrived to the Empire, he should adopt Marcus Aurelius, and that Marcus
Aurelius should adopt Lucius Verus.

Q. What sort of a Character had Verus in the World?

A. He was too Effeminate, and too great a lover of his Pleasures.

Q. What do Historians observe concerning him?

A. Marcus Aurelius having sent him to fight against the Parthians, he threw
the whole burden of the War upon his Lieutenants, who obtained great Advantages
over the Enemy.

Q. What did these two Emperors do afterward?

A. Having triumphed over the Parthians, they declared War against the
Marcomanni.

Q. What happened to Verus in this Expedition?

A. He died of an Apoplexy.

Q. And what did Marcus Aurelius do upon his Death?

A. He marched alone against these People, whom by this time the Goths, the
Vandals, the Sarmatians, the Suevi, and other Barbarous Nations had joined.

Q. What Success had Marcus Aurelius in this War?

A. After a Dispute of Three years continuance, he entirely defeated and
subdued them.

Q. What remarkable Accidents fell out in the Course of this War?

A. The Marcomanni being thus overthrown, the Emperor marching against the
Quadi, was got into a Pound, and surrounded on every side by the Enemies. Nor
was this all, for his Army was ready to perish for want of Water; but a Legion,
wholly consisting of Christians, by their earnest Prayers, obtained so
plentiful a Shower of Rain, that the whole Army was infinitely refreshed by it.

Q. Was there nothing more observable in it than this?

A. This Rain was accompanied with prodigious Thunder and Lightning, which only
fell upon the Barbarians, and cast them into so great a Confusion, that the
Romans immediately charging them, cut them all in pieces.

Q. How was this Legion named?

A. Fulminatrix Legio, or the Thundering Legion.

Q. What Concessions did the Emperor make to them in favor of this Miracle?

A. He stopped the Persecution against the Christians, whom till this time, at
the Instigation of the Philosophers, by whom he was solely managed, he had most
cruelly treated. In this Persecution, Pius, Ani^etus, and Soter, Bishops of
Rome; Justin Martyr, the Learned Apologist, and Polycarp, Bishop of Smyrna,
received the Crown of Martyrdom.

Q. What Men of Note lived in his time?

A. H^rmogenes the Rhetorician, Herodes Atticus, and Athenaeus whose Learned
Writings are so highly valued by the Critics. Philostratus, a Sophister, who
writ that impudent Legend of Apollonius's Life. Apuleius, an African, who
sufficiently discovers his Country by the harshness of his Style. And Lucian,
who from a Christian turning Atheist, employed his Satirical Talent so
liberally upon the Christian and Heathen Priesthood and Deities.

Q. What was his Wife's Name?

A. Faustina, who was one of the most barefaced lascivious Women that ever
lived.

Q. Did he not get himself Divorced from her?

A. He could never be induced to use her so; saying, That he could not cast her
off with Justice, unless he returned her back her Dowry, which was the Empire.

Q. Where died he?

A. In Pannonia (now Hungary) in the Sixty first year of his Age.

Q. How long did he Reign?

A. Nineteen years, and Ten days.

Q. To whom did he recommend his Son?

A. To the gods and the Roman people, if he were worthy of it.

Commodus the Eighteenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 920. Of the Birth of I. C.
180.
Q WHO was Commodus?

A. The Son of M. Aurelius, and the Lustful Faustina. But some say that he was
begotten by a Gladiator.

Q. What sort of a Prince did he make?

A. He was the Handsomest, but the Lewdest and most Vicious man of his Age. As
for the Administration of State Affairs, he wholly entrusted them with
Perennis, a Person of great Ambition and Cruelty, whom he had constituted his
Praefectus Praetorij, or Captain of his Guards.

Q. What do Historians particularly relate concerning him?

A. That he was so admirable an Archer, that one day having ordered a Hundred
Lions to be let loose one after another, he killed them all. At another time he
did the same by a Hundred Ostriches, and cut off their Heads with his Arrows,
which were headed in the fashion of an Half Moon.

Q. How did he behave himself toward his Sister Lucilla?

A. He caused her to be put to death for having conspired to advance her own
Husband to the Imperial Dignity, who was only a bare Senator of Rome. She was
first married to the Emperor Verus.

Q. Wherein did he show his Ambition?

A. In commanding himself to be called Hercules the Son of Jupiter: Nor was his
Cruelty less predominant than his Ambition; for he sacrificed all those to his
barbarous Resentments, of whom he had the least suspicion.

Q. After what manner died he at last?

A. He was poisoned by his Concubine Marcia, because she came to understand
that he had resolved to dispatch her out of the way.

Q. How happened she to receive that Information?

A. By the means of a Child who found the Emperor's Table Book, wherein she
found her own Death designed.

Q. What prompted him to serve her so?

A. Commodus (who spent his time at Court among Strumpets and Catamites, and
abroad with Fencing-Masters and Bullies) had it seems resolved to lie in the
Gladiators Amphitheatre, in order to go out with them the next morning, and
harangue the people in that blessed Company: Now she had taken the freedom to
remonstrate to him how mightily this would sink his Reputation, and how
contemptible it would render him to the whole world.

Q. How long did this true transcript of Nero and Caligula hold the Empire?

A. Twelve Years, Nine Months, and Fourteen Days, and died in the One and
thirtieth Year of his Age.

Pertinax the Nineteenth Emperor. The Year of Rome 933. Of the Birth of I. C.
193.
Q. HOW was Pertinax descended?

A. He came of very mean Parents; he was a Ligurian (a Genoese) by Nation,
first a Grammarian, and afterward turned Soldier.

Q. Did not he refuse the Empire?

A. Yes, but they compelled him to accept of it. He endeavored to avoid it by
recommending Glabrio a Senator to their Choice, who, as he said, was a man of
far greater Merit than himself.

Q. Pray acquaint me with his Character?

A. He was an exceeding Valiant, Discreet, Modest, and Sweet-temper'd Prince:
He would not suffer his Wife to be called Augusta or Empress, nor his Son to be
saluted by the Title of Caesar.

Q What happened to him?

A. He was assassinated by his Soldiers Three Months after he had been
proclaimed Emperor.

Q. For what reason?

A. Because he showed himself too severe toward them, and designed to keep
them under Military Discipline; so they cut off his Head, and carried it to the
Camp, where they fortified themselves. Seeing no body stir, they ordered one of
the Soldiers to make Proclamation, That the Empire was to be sold, and that he
who bid the most should be put into the Possession of it by the Army.

Q. The Empire being thus offered to sale, what Chapmen came in to buy so great
a Purchase?

A. Only Two Senators, Sulpician the Governor of Rome, and Julian; but the
latter carried it, because he offered the greater Sum.

Julian the Twentieth Emperor. The Year of Rome 933. Of the Birth of I. C. 193.
Q. WHO was Julian?

A. Grandson to the famous Lawyer of that name, who composed the perpetual
Edict in Adrian's time. Being proclaimed Emperor, and conducted to the
Senate House by his Guards, he made a very fine Speech to the Senators to this
effect; You want an Emperor, and I am the fittest person you can choose.

Q. Did not the People mutiny against him?

A. Yes, and refused to acknowledge him, saying he had stole the Empire.

Q. What befell him at last?

A. Severus, who was at that time Governor of Pannonia, being desired by the
Romans to take the Management of the Empire upon himself, revolted against him.

Q. What Measures did Julian take to avoid this Storm that threatened him so?

A. He offered to take him as Partner with him in the Empire.

Q. And did Severus accept the Condition?

A. He returned him no Answer, but still advanced toward Rome; which News so
dispirited Julian, that he sent him word he was ready to resign the Empire,
provided he would give him his Life and Liberty. At last he was murdered by his
own Soldiers, in the Fifty sixth Year of his Age; after he had reigned Two
Months and Five Days.

Severus the Twenty first Emperor. The Year of Rome 933. Of the Birth of I. C.
193.
Q. FRom whence came Severus?

A. He was originally an African, and seized on the Empire under a pretense of
revenging the Death of Pertinax, which he did by degrading the Praetorian
Soldiers that had killed him.

Q. Had he no Competitors in the Empire?

A. At first Albinus set up in Britain, and Niger in Syria; but he having with
great Celerity made himself Master of Rome, beat Albinus by Stratagem, and
Niger by open Force.

Q. How did he effect it?

A. Not thinking it advisable to have two Enemies upon his hands at once, he
takes off Albinus by proclaiming him Caesar, then pursues Niger, and after
several sharp Encounters takes and puts him to death. Having thus rid himself
of Niger, he immediately marches toward Albinus, whom he defeats and kills at
Lions.

Q. Whom did he take Partners with him in the Empire?

A. Caracalla and Geta, his Two Sons.

Q. How did he behave himself toward the Christians?

A. A Christian Soldier refusing to wear a Crown at a Donative, unhappily
proved the occasion of a sad Persecution, in which Irenaeus Bishop of Lions,
laid down his Life for the Truth. His great Favorite Plautianus incited him to
this Cruelty, laying hold of this occasion to seize the Fortunes and Estates of
several Persons of Quality that were Christians.

Q. What became of him at last?

A. After he had vanquished a world of people, he passed over into Britain,
whither being arrived, and not able to follow his Captains by reason of the
Gou^ which indisposed him, he received advice that his Son Bassianus was
declared Caesar by the Army.

Q. And did not this News extremely mortify him?

A. He got himself immediately to be carried in a Litter, and commanded the New
Emperor to be brought before him, with the Tribunes and Centurions, who were so
strangely affrighted at the Majesty which appeared in his Looks, that they
implored his Pardon upon their Knees.

Q. How did he receive them?

A. I would have you know, said he to them, that it is the Head which governs,
and not the Feet. After this he fell dangerously sick; but Caracalla fearing
that he would not dye, tried to corrupt his Father's Physicians to poison him.

Q. And did they comply with his desires?

A. No; for which he remembered them when he came to be Emperor, for he caused
them all to dye.

Q. Where did Severus end his days?

A. At York, being Sixty six years old, after he had reigned 17 Years, 8
Months, and 3 Days. Here perceiving his last hour approach, he cried out, I
have been all that a Man can be, but it serves me in no stead now. Then he
ordered his Urn to be brought to him, wherein his Ashes were to be enclosed;
and taking it between his hands, Little Vrn, says he, thou shall contain that
which the whole World was not able to contain.

Q. What was his True Character?

A. He was Cruel, and had no regard to his Word.

Q. To balance this, had he no other good Qualities?

A. He took delight to administer Justice; he was well skilled in the Laws, and
preserved a particular Esteem for Papinian, the most eminent Lawyer of that
time.

Q. What did the Senate say of him?

A. What had been formerly said of Augustus, they now said of him, That it had
been very advantageous for the Republic, if he had never been born, or had
never died; because, as on the one side he was serviceable to the Commonwealth,
so on the other he was somewhat too cruel.

Q. What may be farther said of him?

A. The same that was said of M. Aurelius, viz. That he had been happy if he
had had no Children. He was exceedingly regretted after his Death.

Q. What Learned men flourished under his Reign?

A. Clemens Alexandrinus a man of Universal Learning, who writ the Stromata;
Tertullian an Ecclesiastic Author likewise, in Humor, Wit, and Style, an
African; Minutius Foelix, who writ an Elegant Defense of the Christian
Religion, worthy of Augustus's Age: With several more of a lower rank.

Caracalla and Geta, making together the Twenty second Emperor. The Year of
Rome 951. Of the Birth of I. C. 211.
Q. TO whom fell the Empire after the Death of Severus, who died in Britain?

A. To his Two Sons, whom he carried along with him in that Expedition.

Q. For what reason did he carry them with him?

A. To remove them from Rome, where they lived in all manner of Excess.

Q. What was Geta's Character?

A. He was of a sweet easy Disposition, as his Brother Caracalla was naturally
brutish and outrageous.

Q. What barbarous Action did that Monster commit in the Second Year of his
Reign?

A. He killed his Brother Geta with his own hand, in the presence of his Mother
Iulia.

Q. What other Instances can you give me of his Cruelty?

A. He not only put above Two thousand persons to Death for adhering to his
Brother's Party, but he banished several more, and cut off Papinian's Head.

Q. For what reason?

A. Because he refused to flatter his Crime; for having desired him to write an
Apology to excuse his Brother's Death, this eminent Lawyer told him, That it
was much easier to Commit a Parricide, than to justify it.

Q. What is it that Historians report of his Mother Iulia?

A. That she had the Impudence to marry him, after Geta's Death.

Q. What Person did Caracalla imagine himself to be?

A. He fancied he was Alexander the Great, because his Head leaned a little
upon one Shoulder, as that Prince's did.

Q. What is particularly observable concerning his Reign?

A. That the Empire was never so harassed with Imposts and Taxes, as it was
under this Monster of Prodigality.

Q. What was the reason why he oppressed his Subjects so severely?

A. He would frequently maintain, That Money ought not to be lodged in private
hands, but that all should go to his Exchequer to be distributed among the
Soldiers.

Q. What became of him at last?

A. While he was making War against the Parthians, he writ to Materninus,
Governor of Rome, to consult the Astrologers, to know what fortune Macrinus the
Praefectus Praetorij would come to.

Q. To whom was the Governor's Answer carried?

A. It was delivered to Caracalla himself, while he was busied in managing a
very fine Horse in the presence of Macrinus.

Q. And did he read it?

A. No; he gave it to Macrinus to read, who spoke not one word of it to the
Emperor, but wholly employed himself to find out a person that would kill him.

Q. Did he find one ready to execute his design?

A. He met one Martial after a little search, whose Brother Caracalla had put
to death, who received this Commission with great eagerness, and run him
through the body while he was easing Nature.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Six Years, Two Months, and Five Days.

Q. Was he beloved by the People?

A. No; he was hated by all the world, except the Soldiers only, who regretted
his Loss by reason of the excessive Largesses he frequently bestowed upon them.

Macrinus and his Son, making together the Twenty third Emperor. The Year of
Rome 957. Of the Birth of I. C. 217.
Q. FRom whence came Macrinus?

A. He was a Moor by Birth, and of a very mean condition at first.

Q. What station was he in when they proclaimed him Emperor.

A. He was the Praefectus Praetorij.

Q. Whom did he associate with himself in the Empire?

A. His Son Diadumenus.

Q. What remarkable things do we read of Macrinus.

A. He made a Peace with the Parthians; and in his return to Rome divided his
Army into two Bodies, that they might march home two several ways, but this
division occasioned his ruin.

Q. Pray tell me how?

A. Maesa, Sister to the Empress Iulia, recommended to the Soldiers (who you
must know had no great affection for Macrinus) a young Gentleman about Nineteen
Years old, the Son of her daughter Semiamira, who as they commonly pretended
was Caracalla's Bastard, and they called him Heliogabalus.

Q. How did the Soldiers relish this Proposition?

A. They immediately proclaimed him Emperor, because they loved him for his
Father's sake; and he for his part marches directly toward Macrinus, and
defeats him.

Q. What became of Macrinus?

A. He was killed as he endeavored to save himself in the City of Antioch; and
shortly after his Son Diadumenus was slain by the order of the Emperor
Heliogabalus.

Q. How long did he and his Son reign?

A. One Year and Two Months.

Heliogabalus the Twenty fourth Emperor. The Year of Rome 959. Of the Birth of
I. C. 219.
Q. WHose Son was Heliogabalus?

A. The Son of Caracalla.

Q. What signifies this word Heliogabalus?

A. A Priest of the Sun.

Q. What remarkable thing is related of him?

A. He intended to destroy the Religion of the Romans, and commanded that only
the Sun should be adored.

Q. What sort of a Prince was he?

A. A Prodigy of a man, wholly abandoned to all Lewdness and Debauchery.

Q. To whom was he married in the quality of a Wife?

A. To Hierocles, his Slave.

Q. What orders did he give this Slave?

A. To beat him well-favour'dly when he found him guilty of any Excess.

Q. And did the Slave take him at his word?

A. Yes; and sometimes belabour'd his Imperial Sides so heartily, that he made
him black and blew all over, which the other bore very dutifully, comforting
himself, That a Wife was obliged in Conscience to suffer every thing from her
Husband.

Q. What did he do after this?

A. He establishes a Senate of Women, and makes his Mother the President of
them.

Q. What did this wise Assembly debate about?

A. The Habits and Ornaments of Women, together with their Amors and Intrigues.

Q. Whom did he adopt for his Successor.

A. Bassianus, his Cousin-German, whom he called Alexander.

Q. What kind of a Man was Alexander?

A. He had so many valuable Qualities to recommend him, that he soon gained the
Affection of all the Romans.

Q. Did not Heliogabalus become jealous of him?

A. Yes, and designed to put him to death.

Q. What happened upon this?

A. His Guards being acquainted with his wicked intention, assassinated
Heliogabalus, and threw his Body into the Tiber.

Q. How old was he then?

A. He was Twenty two years old, and had reigned Three Years, Nine Months, and
Four Days.

Q. What Eminent men flourished at this time?

A. Origin of Alexandria, who so learnedly defended the Christian Religion
against the Attacks of Celsus.

Alexander the Twenty fifth Emperor. The Year of Rome 962. Of the Birth of I.
C. 222.
Q. WHat Account do Historians give of this Alexander?

A. He was one of the greatest Princes that ever lived, and his Conduct was
equally conspicuous in Peace and War.

Q. What did he look after in the beginning of his Reign?

A. His first care was to administer Justice to all the world; next he turned
the Flatterers and Buffoons out of the Court.

Q. What other Regulations did he make?

A. He prohibited the Sale of any Offices, as being satisfied that none made a
scruple to sell what they had bought.

Q. What did he allow them in lieu of this?

A. He settled honorable Salaries upon all those whom he constituted Governors
of Provinces, lest they should squeeze and oppress the people.

Q What is reported of his Piety?

A. That he secretly honored Jesus Christ in his Closet.

Q. What other remarkable Passages occur in his History?

A. In Heliogabalus's time there was a set of Cheats, commonly called Sellers
of Smoke, because they took Money of people to solicit their business, and
help them to Preferment, but never did any thing for them.

Q Were there any of this Gang under the Emperor Alexander?

A. One of this hopeful Fraternity had it seems taken a Hundred Crowns of a
Soldier, and promised to obtain of the Emperor a certain Office which he was
desirous of.

Q. And when Alexander knew of it how did he serve him?

A. He fastens him to a Post, where he was choked by the smoke of a heap of
wood which was set on fire about him. Over the Post this Inscription was to be
seen, Fumo periit qui fumum vendidit. He that sold Smoke is stifled by Smoke.

Q. Did any considerable Revolution happen in Alexander's Reign?

A. Artaxerxes King of the Persians, after he had defeated the Parthians in
several Battles, and killed their King Artabanus, who was the last of the
Family of the Arsacidae, which had flourished Four hundred years,
re-establishes the Empire of the Persians. This exceedingly alarmed Alexander
Severus, by reason of the frequent Inroads the Persians made into the Roman
Territories.

Q. What great Exploits did Alexander perform after this?

A. Having revived the old Military Discipline, he defeated the Persians in the
East, and overcame the Africans in Mauritania. At last, wholly turning his
thoughts upon the German War, he with his Mother Mammea was slain by his
Soldiers at Mentz, in the 39th. year of his Age, having reigned Thirteen Years,
and Nineteen days. 'Twas his Mother's Penuriousness that ruined him with the
Army.

Q. What Eminent men flourished in his Reign?

A. Dion Cassius, twice honored with the Consular Dignity, who writ the Roman
History very acurately in Greek: The greatest part of this Excellent Work is
now lost; which is chiefly attributed to his Abbreviator Xiphilinus, a
Constantinopolitan Monk. Thus the loss of Trogus Pompeius is imputed to Justin,
as that of Livy to Lucius Florus.

Maximin and his Son, making together the Twenty sixth Emperor. The Year of
Rome 975. Of the Birth of I. C. 235.
Q. WHose Son was this Maximin?

A. A Shepherd's, in a small Village of Thrace.

Q. What Stature was he of?

A. An extraordinary one, being Eight Foot high; and besides he was so strong,
that he could draw a Chariot as heavy laden as two Horses could draw.

Q. How got he himself advanced to the Empire?

A. By a Faction of the Soldiers. He was the first Emperor that without any
Decree of the Senate obtained the Purple by the sole Authority of the Army.

Q. What method did he take to preserve himself in this Dignity?

A. After he had successfully ended the Wars of Germany, he exercised great
Cruelties in Rome; Some he fastened to Crosses, where they miserably perished;
others he baited in the Skins of Beasts, and exposed them to Tigers and Lions;
others were killed with Bastinadoes; in short, there was no sort of Barbarity
to be named, which he did not use.

Q. Did not these Brutalities draw the aversion of all the world upon him?

A. The Senate declared him an Enemy to the Republic.

Q. Who first made Head against him?

A. Gordianus the Governor of Afric, a man Eighty years old, was, together with
his Son, against his will elevated to the Empire; but Fortune crossing his
Attempts, and his Son being slain by the Moors, the old Gentleman out of
despair hanged himself.

Q. When the Senate heard of the death of these two great men, whom did they
elect for their Emperor?

A. Balbinus and Pupienus, two of their own Body.

Q. Was not Maximin highly incensed at the Proceedings of the Senate?

A. He immediately quitted the Sarmatian War, and marching into Italy at the
Head of his Army he besieged Aquileia, which was the first City he met in his
way, and was at that time the finest and most flourishing Town in all Italy.

Q. Who signalized themselves in this Siege?

A. The Women; for the Soldiers wanting Cordage to string their Bows, and serve
the Machines that were employed in throwing of stones, they cut off their own
Hair, and made Cords of it.

Q. What became of Maximin?

A. His Soldiers slew him and his Son in his Tent, because he had occasioned
the death of so many of them.

Q. How long did he and his Son reign?

A. Two Years and some Months.

Balbinus and Pupienus, making together the Twenty seventh Emperor. The Year of
Rome 978. Of the Birth of I. C. 238.
Q. BY whom were Balbinus and Pupienus owned to be Emperors?

A. By the Senate?

Q. Upon what condition?

A. That they should adopt young Gordianus for their Successor in the Empire,
the Grandson of him that hanged himself in Afric.

Q. How long did they reign together?

A. Nine or ten months.

Q. What happened at last?

A. Balbinus and Pupienus became jealous of young Gordianus, seeing him so
mightily beloved by every one, and therefore had agreed for their own security
to dispatch him; but the Soldiers prevented their Design, and killed them.

Gordianus the Younger, the Twenty eighth Emperor. The Year of Rome 978. Of the
Birth of I. C. 238.
Q. WHose Son was this Gordianus?

A. Grandson, as we observed before, to Gordianus the Governor of Afric.

Q. How old was he when he arrived to the Empire?

A. He was 17 Years old.

Q In whom did he repose the greatest confidence?

A. In his Father-in Law Misitheus, who was the Praefectus Praetorij, and was
so well satisfied of his Conduct and Valor, that tho he himself was present in
the Army, yet he would have it wholly commanded by him.

Q What actions did he perform?

A. By the advice of Misitheus he opens the Temple of Ianus, and marches
directly against the Persians who then threatened Italy.

Q. What Conquests did he make?

A. He retook Carrae, Nisibis, and some other Cities.

Q. What other remarkable things happened under his Reign?

A. In the Sixteenth Year of it Philip an Arabian, by the assistance of his
Physicians, poisoned Misitheus.

Q. What did this Philip do afterward?

A. He got himself declared Emperor in the presence of Gordianus, who fearing
further mischief from this perfidious Villain, desired him at least to give him
the place of Praefectus Praetorij.

Q. And did he give it him?

A. No, he refused him; but fearing the Soldiers would restore this young
Prince to his Throne again, he caused him to be murdered.

Q. Was the Army concerned for his Death?

A. It so far affected them, that they erected a Tomb to him with this
following Inscription: To the Divine Gordianus, Conqueror of the Persians, the
Goths, the Sarmatians, and the Germans, but not of the Philips.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Three Years and six days.

Q. Did nothing remarkable happen about this time?

A. The Goths, whose name before was unknown to the Romans, now daily began to
pour forth vast swarms of men upon the Outskirts of the Empire, which at last
terminated in the Ruin of it. These barbarous people carried every thing like a
vast Inundation before them, and erected Kingdoms not only in all the Southern
Provinces of Europe, but extended their Conquests as far as Afric. They first
introduced the Feudal Law into this part of the World, and settled fixed
Revenues in Land, and Temporal Jurisdictions upon the Church, which before
consisted of nothing but Voluntary Oblations.

Philip and his Son, making together the Twenty ninth Emperor.
Q FRom whenee came this Philip?

A. He was an Arabian by birth.

Q. What Measures did he take to secure himself of the Empire?

A. As he thought it advisable to conceal his Crime from the Senate, he sent
them word that Gordianus died a Natural Death; so that it was no difficult
matter for him to obtain of them to confirm the Choice which the Army had made
of him.

Q. Did he take any Partner in the Empire?

A. Yes, his Son.

Q. How long did they reign?

A. Five Years and some Months; after which they were both assassinated almost
at the same time; the Father in a Sedition which happened at Verona, and the
Son at Rome.

Q. What men of Note flourished now?

A. Plotinus a celebrated Platonist, and a Disciple of Origin, who taught with
great Applause at Rome; and St. Cyprian a most Eloquent Father, and Ornament of
the African Church.

Decius the Thirtieth Emperor. The Year of Rome 989. Of the Birth of I. C. 249.
Q. IN what station was Decius before he got Possession of the Empire?

A. He was nothing more than a Senator.

Q. How did he arrive to the Supreme Dignity?

A. Being sent by Philip to appease a Sedition which had arose in Pannonia, he
was there chosen Emperor by the very Authors of that Commotion, who discovered
all sorts of good qualities in him; and indeed he had only one fault, which was
his excessive Cruelty to the Christians.

Q. What did he enjoin them to do?

A. They were constrained by all manner of Tortures and Punishments to offer
Sacrifice to Idols.

Q. Was he engaged in any War?

A. He fought against the Goths, but was miserably overthrown by them, his Son
sl^in in his sight, and himself lost in a Marish, whither he fled by the Advice
of Gallus to save himself.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Near Three Years.

Q. What remarkable thing (...) out in his time?

A. It Is said he was the (...) of the Seventh Persecution, to (...) storm
several Christians fled into Woods and Caves; and particularly Paulus of Egypt,
the Patriarch of the Hermits, being taken with the Charms of a Solitary Life,
here laid down the first Scheme of Monkery. Among others, Pope Fabian lost his
Life; and Origin was taken into Custody and imprisoned, but to avoid Death he
was prevailed upon to offer Incense to Idols.

Q. What other Passages happened?

A. At the same time Novatus and Novatianus made a Schism in the Church, and
the abovementioned St. Cyprian Bishop of Carthage flourished; who in the Year
of our Lord 256, under the Pontificat of St. Stephen, having assembled a
Council at Carthage, declared the Baptism of Heretics to be null and void, and
that such Persons ought to be rebaptiz'd: However, he effaced this Error by his
Martyrdom, which happened in the time of Valerianus.

Gallus and Volusianus his Son, making together the Thirty first Emperor. The
Year of Rome 991. Of the Birth of I. C. 251.
Q. WHO was this Gallus?

A. He was Lieutenant of Decius's Army.

Q. How came he to be proclaimed Emperor?

A. By the Soldiers after the death of Decius.

Q. What means did he use to secure himself in the Empire?

A. He procured his Election to be ratified by the Senate.

Q. When he was at Rome, what did he do?

A. He associated his Son Volusianus with him in the Empire.

Q What did he do besides this?

A. He likewise adopted the Son of Decius.

Q. Why did he take this young Decius a Partner with him?

A. To quiet the minds of the Romans, but shortly after he caused him to be
poisoned.

Q. What became of Gallus at last?

A. He and his Son were murdered by their own Army for their Cowardice.

Q. How long did they reign?

A. Two Years and Four Months.

Aemilianus the Thirty second Emperor. The Year of Rome 994. Of the Birth of I.
C. 254.
Q. FRom whence came Aemilianus?

A. He was a Moor by Birth.

Q. What Office did he bear when he was made Emperor?

A. He was Governor of Pannonia.

Q. By whom was he proclaimed Emperor?

A. By the Soldiers, because he had beaten back the Scythians who had made an
Inroad into that Country.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. No longer than Three Months.

Q. What happened to him then?

A. He was killed by the very same Soldiers who Three Months before had
proclaimed him Emperor.

Q. What made them serve him so?

A. Because they despised him by reason of his mean Parentage.

Q. Whom did they elect in his place?

A. Valerianus, Governor of Germany and Gaul, an experienced Captain, and a man
of Quality.

Valerianus the Thirty third Emperor. The Year of Rome 994. Of the Birth of I.
C. 254.
Q. WHat sort of a man was Valerianus?

A. He possessed all the good qualities that make an Excellent Prince.

Q. Was he a Successful General?

A. No; for he lost every Battle he fought.

Q. Whom did he associate with him in the Empire?

A. His Son.

Q. How did he treat the Christians?

A. At the Instigation of a certain Magician, and of Macrinus the Prefect, he
raised a terrible Persecution against them, in which St. Lawrence was burnt
upon a Gridiron.

Q. What memorable things happened in his time?

A. The Barbarians committed great Ravages upon all the Provinces of the Empire.

Q. Did not Valerianus use his best endeavors to stop their Proceedings?

A. He did; and after he had attacked the Scythians, (who had taken Chalcedon,
burnt Nice, and the famous Temple of Diana at Ephesus) he turned his Forces
against Sapores King of the Persians, but was taken Prisoner in that War.

Q. How did they use him when they had him in their power?

A. He was treated by that cruel King with all the Indignity imaginable, for he
made a Footstool of him to mount his Horse, and at last ordered him to be
flayed and salted.

Q. When his Son Gallienus heard of his Father's Captivity, did not he employ
his utmost Power to deliver him from it.

A. No; and when a Messenger came to acquaint him with his Death, he replied
rather with the Stupidity of a Barbarian, than the Sedateness of a Philosopher,
That he knew very well his Father was born mortal, and subject to all the
accidents of Fortune.

Q. What extravagant actions did he ever commit?

A. He was vain enough to make a sort of a Triumph, wherein was to be seen a
man clad in Royal Vestments, resembling Sapores, loaded with Chains, and
followed by several others that represented the Persian Captives, as if he had
really vanquished the King of Persia.

Q. Did none of the Spectators laugh at this ridiculous Show?

A. Some Senators made very merry upon this occasion, and drawing near the
sight, they asked aloud, Where was their Emperor Valerianus?

Q. When Gallienus heard of it, how did he resent it?

A. He commanded all those that took this liberty, to be burnt.

Q. How long did Valerianus reign?

A. Six or seven years.

Gallienus the Thirty fourth Emperor. The Year of Rome 999. Of the Birth of I.
C. 259.
Q. WHose Son was Gallienus?

A. The Son of Valerianus.

Q. What remarkable Accidents happened in the world when he succeeded his
Father?

A. All the Provinces belonging to the Romans designed to throw off their Yoke,
and the respective Governors of them caused themselves to be proclaimed
Emperors; so that besides Gallienus, the Roman Empire might reckon Thirty
Caesar's or Tyrants.

Q. Who was it that stopped the progress of the Enemies of the Empire?

A. Odenatus King of Palmyra, a Generous Heroic Prince, not only retook Nisibis
and Carrae, and wrested Mesopotamia out of the hands of the Persians, but he
put their Monarch to flight, killed him abundance of his Soldiers, and sent
several of his Satrapae, or Peers, in Chains to Gallienus.

Q. What did Gallienus do with these Prisoners?

A. This scandalous Prince was not ashamed to Triumph over them, tho he had no
share in the Action.

Q. What Recompense did Gallienus make to Odenatus?

A. Some years after, in consideration of the Victories he had gained, and the
great Services he had done, he made him his Partner in the Empire; but one of
his own Relations becoming jealous of him, murdered him and his Son Herod.

Q. After Odenatus was dead, who took the Government in hand?

A. His Wife Zenobia, a Woman of an undaunted Spirit, and of a Chastity equal
to her Courage, who performed those Miracles against the Persians, the
Arabians, the Scythians, and the Armenians, that she will be always reckoned
among the greatest Heroines of her Sex.

Q. What memorable Action happened about this time?

A. The Franks, a Warlike and Powerful People, now began to make a Figure in
the world, and breaking out of Germany into Gaul, in process of time made
themselves Masters of all that large Country, from the Ocean and the Rhine, to
the Alps and Pyrenees.

Q. What did the Principal Officers of the Roman Army do?

A. Finding that Gallienus was not capable to defend the Empire, they resolved
to elect Claudius, a Man of Quality and Merit.

Q. What became of Gallienus at last?

A. He was assassinated near Milan, with his Brother Valerius, as he went to
give Battle to the Tyrant Aureolus.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Almost Eight Years.

Claudius II. the Thirty fifth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1008. Of the Birth of
I. C. 268.
Q WHat sort of a man was this Claudius the second?

A. One of the greatest as well as the most accomplished Princes of his time?

Q. How did he employ himself as soon as he was advanced to the Throne?

A. The first thing he did was to defeat Aureolus, who in Gallienus's time had
got himself to be proclaimed Emperor at Milan.

Q. What measures did Aureolus take?

A. He offered to own him as the Rightful Emperor, provided he would leave him
what he possessed in Italy.

Q. What Answer did Claudius return?

A. That he had done well to have made such a Proposition to Gallienus, but as
for himself he was resolved to make him know his duty, and surrender upon
discretion.

Q. What remarkable Action did Claudius afterward perform?

A. Having defeated Aureolus, he marched against an Army of Goths, consisting
of Three hundred thousand men, that ravaged and destroyed Asia Minor.

Q. Which side obtained the Victory?

A. Claudius gave the Goths a great Overthrow, and sunk Two thousand of their
Ships.

Q. What Surname was bestowed upon him for this gallant Exploit?

A. That of Gothicus.

Q. What died he of?

A. Of the Plague, after he had reigned about Two Years.

Quintillus the Thirty sixth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1010. Of the Birth of I.
C. 270.
Q. WHose Son was Quintillus?

A. The Son of Claudius.

Q. How was he proclaimed Emperor?

A. By the Soldiers, after the Death of his Father.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. No more than Fifteen Days.

Q. What Misfortune befell him then?

A. He was killed in a Mutiny by the very same Soldiers that had made him
Emperor.

Q. What Learned men flourished at this time?

A. Longinus, a great Favorite of Zenobia, and a most excellent Orator and
Critic, who in his Treatise de Sublimi makes honorable mention of Moses; and
Porphyry, a Jew by Nation, first a Christian and afterward an Apostate, but a
most Acute Philosopher.

Aurelianus the Thirty seventh Emperor.
Q. FRom whence came Aurelianus?

A. He was of a very mean Birth, and came from Pannonia.

Q. What sort of a man was he?

A. He was extremely Generous, but withal Cruel and Bloody, which occasioned
the famous Saying, That he was a good Physician, but took away too much blood.

Q. What did he do as soon as he was elected Emperor?

A. He wore a Diadem, which none of his Predecessors had ever done before him.

Q. Did he make any Warlike Expeditions?

A. He vanquished the Germans and Marcomanni in Vindelicia, which comprehended
the same Tract of Ground as Bavaria does now. Then marching toward the East,
he takes Zenobia Prisoner, recovers Egypt, and all Asia, and in short, enlarges
the Empire to its Ancient Bounds.

Q. When the Wars were over, how did he employ himself?

A. He triumphed at Rome, and his Illustrious Captive Zenobia made no small
part of the Spectacle; but he was enraged at some Seditions which had arose
there in his absence, the Authors of which he severely punished; nay, even some
Senators, for faults which a milder Prince would have passed by.

Q. How did the Romans relish this Severity?

A. They began to fear him, and say that he deserved to be assassinated.

Q. Where, and after what manner died he?

A. In Thrace, where he lay with a powerful Army to attack the Persians; and as
he was upon the March between Byzantium and Heraclea, he was slain by Mucaporus
at the Instigation of Mnestheus, his Freed-man and Secretary.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Five Years completely.

Q. Was his Death unrevenged?

A. No; for the Villainy of Mnestheus being immediately discovered, he was
condemned to be thrown to Wild Beasts, and the whole Army celebrated the
Funeral of Aurelianus after a most Magnificent manner.

Tacitus the Thirty eighth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1015. Of the Birth of I.
C. 275.
Q. AFter the Emperor Aurelianus was thus slain in Thrace, whom did they choose
to succeed him?

A. The Soldiers writ to the Senate to desire them to elect an Emperor.

Q. And what Answer did the Senate return?

A. They excused themselves, saying, they would leave it to the Army.

Q. What happened upon this?

A. An Inter-regnum of Eight Months; the Senate and Army complementing one
another about the Honor of creating an Emperor.

Q. Who was proclaimed Emperor at long run?

A. Tacitus, who was elected by the Senate.

Q. How old was he at that time?

A. He was Seventy Years old, and reigned Six Months.

Q. Where died he?

A. At Tarsus a City of Cilicia, of a Fever, occasioned by the Fatigues he was
obliged to endure in his War against the Scythians.

Q. Pray acquaint me with his Character?

A. He was grave, and of a sweet disposition, temperate, and capable to govern
very well; he was sober at his Meals, he loved Hunting and Building, which he
understood perfectly well: And what deserves particular mention, he valued
himself upon being a Namesake and a Relation of that Eminent Historian Tacitus.

Florianus the Thirty ninth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1015. Of the Birth of I.
C. 275.
Q. WHO succeeded Tacitus?

A. His Brother Florianus.

Q. Did his Reign last long?

A. No; for two or three Months after his Election, seeing Probus was elected
Emperor by the greatest part of the Army, he opened a Vein, and after that
manner died, in the Year of J. C. 276.

Probus the Fortieth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1016. Of the Birth of I. C. 276.
Q WHose Son was Probus?

A. He was according to some the Son of a Labourer in Dalmatia; or as others
would have it, the Son of one Maximilian a Colonel in the Army.

Q. What Station was he in when the Soldiers declared him Emperor?

A. He was Governor of Syria.

Q. As soon as the Senate had confirmed his Election, what Expedition did he go
upon?

A. He made War against the Germans, who after the death of Aurelianus had made
themselves Masters of one part of Gaul: These Germans were the true Franks,
whom he entirely defeated, and expelled the Country. Then he entered Germany,
the greatest part of which he subdued, and reduced to the form of a Roman
Province.

Q. Whither went he afterward?

A. Into Asia, where he beat the Persians several times, and constrained them
to demand a Peace; he likewise overthrew Saturninus the Governor of Syria, who
had revolted against him.

Q. What other memorable Actions did he perform?

A. He had the same Success against Proculus and Bonosus, who had usurped the
Imperial Authority in Gaul, of which place they were Governors, and having
there defeated and taken them Prisoners, he ordered them to be hanged.

Q. Who was this Bonosus?

A. A good Captain, but an excessive Drinker; which made the Emperor Aurelianus
say of him by way of Raillery, That he was born not to Live, but to Drink.

Q. How did they call him when he was hanged?

A. See, said they, it is not a Man, but a Bottle, that hangs there.

Q. Did Probus live many years after these Conquests?

A. No; for as he marched through Illyrium, he was slain at Sirmium by his
Soldiers.

Q. What was it that occasioned this heavy Misfortune upon him?

A. 'Twas because he treated them with too much severity, and employed them in
building or repairing the Public Works.

Q. How long did he reign?

A. Six Years, and Four Months.

Q. What Men of Note lived about this time?

A. Manes, the Father of the Manicheans, pretending himself to be the Paraclet,
propagated his Impious Doctrines in Persia, from whence they infected the
Neighboring Countries. At last he was flead alive there by the King's Command.

Carus the Forty first Emperor. The Year of Rome 1022. Of the Birth of I. C.
282.
Q. WHO succeeded next in the Empire?

A. Carus, who as soon as he found himself possessed of this Dignity, took his
two Sons, Carinus and Numerianus, Partners with him in the Empire, and procured
them to be declared Caes^rs.

Q. To what place did he send Carinus?

A. To Gaul, to fight against the Franks, a German People, who had made a new
Irruption into that Country.

Q. And where was Carus employed?

A. He marched himself against the Persians with Numerianus in his Company, and
took Mesopotamia from them. Nay, he was desirous to extend his Conquests beyond
Ctesiphon, but died in that Expedition.

Q. After what manner did he end his days?

A. He was found dead in his Tent after a terrible Tempest?

Q. To what did the Romans ascribe his Death?

A. To the Divine Vengeance, for endeavoring to carry his Victories beyond
Ctesiphon; because there was an Ancient Oracle which forbad the Romans to
extend their Empire beyond that Capital City of the Persians.

Numerianus the Forty second Emperor. The Year of Rome 1022. Of the Birth of I.
C. 282.
Q. WAS not Numerianus mightily concerned for his Father's Death?

A. He was so afflicted at it, that the Tears he shed incessantly upon this
occasion, so far injured his Eyesight, that he was forced to be carried in a
close Litter, because he could not endure the light.

Q. What became of him at last?

A. His Father-in-Law Aper, who was Captain of the Guards, and had an Ambition
to be Emperor, got him to be assassinated in this Litter.

Q. Did not Aper take care to conceal his death from the Army?

A. That the Soldiers might not have the least suspicion of the matter, he
accompanied the Litter, as if the Emperor had been still alive in it.

Q. What Answer did he give those persons that asked to see him?

A. That the Emperor had given Orders not to let the Litter be opened, because
the Daylight extremely incommoded his eyes.

Q. Who commanded the Army all this while in the Emperor's Name?

A. Aper, who by this means pretended to possess himself soon of the Empire;
but the noisome smell of the dead body discovered his Villainy, and gave occasion
to Diocletian, one of the Principal Officers of the Army, to kill him upon the
spot.

Q. And did this Action please the Army?

A. They liked it so well, that they immediately with one common consent
proclaimed him Emperor, without considering that they had another Lawful
Emperor still living.

Q. Who was he?

A. Car^nus, the Brother of Numerianus.

Carinus the Forty third Emperor. The Year of Rome 1022. Of the Birth of I. C.
282.
Q. WHere was Carinus when he heard that his Father was dead, and his Brother
Numerianus assassinated?

A. He was then in Gaul, where he minded nothing else but satisfying his Brutal
Appetite.

Q. Was he not surprised when he received advice that Diocletian was proclaimed
Emperor, and was marching toward him to dispute the Legality of his Title?

A. Yes, and immediately made a Truce with his Vices to go and fight him.

Q. Where was the Battle fought?

A. In Moesia, a Province of Asia Minor.

Q. Which side got the better on it?

A. Carinus had obtained the Victory, but as he pursued the Enemy in their
flight, he was assassinated by a Colonel of his own Army.

Q. For what Provocation?

A. Because he had formerly abused this Collonel's Wife.

Q. When did this happen?

A. In the Year of J. C. 285. after he had reigned Three Years.

Diocletian and Maximian, making together the Forty fourth Emperor. The Year of
Rome 1024. Of the Birth of I. C. 284.
Q. WHere was Diocletian born?

A. In Dalmatia, of very obscure Parentage, but he proved a man of great
Generosity.

Q. What was foretold concerning him?

A. That he should be made Emperor as soon as he had slain a Boar; upon which
account he killed several in hunting, but to no purpose* At last when he had
slain Aper the Captain of the Guards, he saw that was the Boar he was to kill;
for which reason he cried out aloud, I have killed the Boar; and the Army
proclaimed him Emperor.

Q. After the Imperial Purple was thus conferred upon him, how did he manage
Affairs?

A. Finding the Empire was invaded on every side, and that himself alone was
not able to oppose the Violence of the Barbarians, he took his old Friend
Maximian, an ill-bred clownish sort of a Brute, but a good Soldier, his Partner
in the Empire.

Q. What did these two do in conjunction?

A. They chose each of them Constantius Chlorus, and Galerius, to command their
Armies.

Q. What method did they take to engage them more strongly in their Interests?

A. They created them Caesar's, and afterward obliging them to be divorced from
their Wives, Diocletian gave his Daughter Valeria to Galerius, and Maximian his
Daughter Theodora to Constantius.

Q. These two Emperors and two Caesar's, were they successful in their Wars?

A. They were so fortunate in all their Attempts against the Enemies of the
Empire, that they obtained as many Victories as they fought Battles; and after
they had spent ten years thus in their Wars, crowned with Glory and Success,
they entered all four Triumphantly into Rome, where Diocletian caused himself to
be called Iovianus, and Maximian took the Title of Herculianus.

Q. After these two Great Men had made themselves absolute Masters of the
Empire, what is it that Historians tell us they did?

A. To the great amazement of all the world, both of them voluntarily quitted
the Empire, Diocletian at Nicomedia, and Maximian at Milan.

Q. Where did Diocletian pass his Retirement?

A. At Salonae, a small City of Dalmatia, the place of his Nativity, where he
spent the remainder of his life in cultivating his Gardens.

Q. And where did Maximian live privately?

A. In Lucania.

Q. How long did they reign?

A. Diocletian reigned almost Twenty Years, and Maximian Eighteen.

Q. Was not Diocletian a cruel Persecutor of the Christians?

A. Out of an implacable Malice to the Professors of that Religion, he designed
to extirpate them utterly out of the world; and what by the Cruelty of his
Edicts, the Bigotry of his Ministers, and the barbarous Variety of his
Torments, made a greater havoc of them than any of his Predecessors. In Egypt
only, a Hundred and fourteen thousand are said to be put to death, and Seven
hundred thousand sent into Banishment. The Thebaean Legion, together with their
Commander Mauritius, were cut off by Maximian; but this relation by some Modern
Critics is looked upon to be Fabulous.

Q Was not Maximian soon weary of this retired life?

A. Yes; and being desirous to leave it, in order to reassume the Imperial
Dignity, he earnestly importunes Diocletian to remedy those Evils which
Constantius and Galerius had occasioned by their ill conduct.

Q. What answer did Diocletian return him?

A. Showing him the Coleworts growing in his Garden, he told him he took a
greater pleasure to plant them, than to govern the Empire.

Q. What courses did Maximian take, finding himself despised and neglected by
all the world?

A. He withdrew to his Daughter, who was the Wife of Constantius, and
endeavoring to engage her to poison her own Husband, she discovered his
Perfidiousness to Constantius, who caused him to be slain.

Galerius and Constantius making together the Forty fifth Emperor. The Year of
Rome 1044. Of the Birth of I. C. 304.
Q. WHen were Galerius and Constantius proclaimed Emperors?

A. They did not take possession of the Empire till Diocletian and Maximian had
abdicated.

Q. What were they before they were advanced to that Honor?

A. They were only Caesar's.

Q. How did they divide the Empire between them?

A. Constantius contented himself with Britain and Gaul, and Galerius had the
rest of the Roman Empire for his share.

Q. What did Galerius do when he found himself unable to support so weighty a
Charge?

A. He associated Severus and Maximin with himself, whom he created Caesar's.

Q. What Governments did he bestow upon them?

A. He gave the Government of Italy to Severus, that of the East to Maximin,
and as for his own share, he contented himself with Illyrium.

Q. What was Constantius's Character?

A. He was of an agreeable, sweet, and merciful Disposition; but as for
Galerius he was of a quite contrary temper, he declared himself a mortal Enemy
of the Christians, and massacred a whole Town of them in Phrygia; nay, he would
have fain engaged Constantius to persecute them.

Q. What Judgments did these Cruelties draw down upon his head?

A. God permitted him to be seized by an infamous and nasty Disease, during
which he saw himself devoured alive by Worms, and so died.

Q. How did Constantius behave himself?

A. Making as if he really designed to persecute the Christians, he commanded
all the Officers of his Household, who were Christians, to change their
Religion, otherwise they should lose their Places.

Q. And were any of them so faint-hearted and wavering as to prefer the
renouncing of their Religion before the loss of their Employments?

A. Several of them were so; but the Emperor sent them away with disgrace,
saying, That those who were not true to their God, would never be faithful to
their Prince.

Q. How did he treat those that continued firm in their Religion?

A. He kept them still in his Service, and highly commended their Fidelity.

Q. How long did Constantius possess the Empire?

A. Two years, after which he died at York between the Arms of his Son,
Constantine the Great.

Q. Whom did Constantius leave his Successor behind him?

A. His Son Constantine the Great, who signalized himself exceedingly by his
Courage, and a thousand noble Actions.

Q. Wherein did he particularly distinguish himself from his Predecessors?

A. In that he was the first Emperor that embraced the Christian Faith.

Constantine the Great the Forty sixth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1046. Of the
Birth of I. C. 306.
Q. WHO was the Mother of Constantine the Great?

A. H^lena, whom some Historians make a British Woman, but with what
probability, let the Learned judge.

Q. Why was the Surname of Great conferred upon him?

A. For his great Exploits and Performances in War. He was the first Christian
Emperor.

Q. What happened to him in the course of his life?

A. The news of his being Emperor having arrived at Rome, Maxentius the Son of
that Herculius who had renounced the Empire, was elected and proclaimed Emperor.

Q. How did Maxentius behave himself in the beginning of his Reign?

A. At first he seemed to favor the Christians, in order to bring them over to
his Party by this means; but he did not treat them long after this manner, for
he persecuted them with a thousand cruelties, and rendered himself odious by
abundance of other Crimes.

Q. What was the consequence of these Barbarities?

A. He was defeated by Constantine the Great; and God, who was pleased by a
Miracle to draw this mighty Prince to the true Faith, showed him a Cross in the
Air, to convince this Victorious Emperor that it was the Crucified Jesus who
made him triumph over the Tyrant Maxentius.

Q. What did Constantine do after this?

A. He gave his Sister in marriage to Licinius, who requited him very ill for
this Honor; for without any provocation he declared war against him, nor was
so advantageous an Alliance able to make him live in good Terms with
Constantine.

Q. How came he off at last?

A. He was defeated, but his Wife by her continual intercession obtained of
Constatnine that he should not be put to death for his Crimes.

Q. And did Constantine yield to his Sister's Entreaties?

A. Yes, and was contented only with their banishing him to Thessalonica.

Q. Did Licinius continue long without attempting to make some disturbance?

A. No, for the next year he raised new Commotions, and in this second Sedition
was killed in the place of his Exile?

Q. What had Constantine to do after he had put an end to these Civil Wars?

A. He had enough to manage his own Family, where he had some Affairs that gave
him abundance of uneasy moments, and sensibly touched him.

Q. What happened to him there?

A. Fausta, the Wife of this great Prince, became passionately in love, even to
madness, with Crispus, who was Caesar, and Son to Constantine by his first
Wife, and attempted by her Caresses to induce him to answer her Brutal Passion.

Q. How did she succeed in her Amors?

A. She tried all efforts, but vainly, to debauch this young Prince, who
possessed as great a share of Virtue as he did of Beauty.

Q. What courses did this Woman take, finding her self so despised?

A. Her love being changed into hatred, carried her to those extremities
against this innocent Prince, that she accused him before the Emperor with a
design to force her?

Q. What credit did this Accusation find?

A. She had authority enough with the Emperor to be believed, and Crispus,
though wholly guiltless of the matter, was condemned to die, which was
accordingly executed.

Q. And did this Wickedness continue long unpunished?

A. No, for the young Prince's Innocence was discovered some time after, and
then Constantine, by way of Retaliation, justly put the Empress to death.

Q. What glorious things did Constantine do in his Reign?

A. He enriched and adorned, Ann. Dom. 336. the City of Constantinople (which
took its new Name from him, but before was called Byzantium) so magnificently
with the Spoils of his En^mies, that it went by the name of New Rome, as the
Country of Thrace, where it stands, still goes by the name of Romelia.

Q. What warlike Exploits did this Prince perform?

A. He defeated his Enemies, and particularly overthrew the Sarmatians in
several parts of the Roman Empire.

Q. Did he live any long time after his Conquests?

A. No; he died on Whitsunday, in the Year of our Lord 337. in the Suburbs of
Nicomedia, where he had received Baptism.

Q. From whose hands did he receive Baptism?

A. He was baptized by Pope Sylvester.

Q Was not the Nicene Council celebrated in his Reign?

A. Arius, a Presbyter of Alexandria, having denied the Divinity of our Blessed
Savior, Constantine to oppose the farther spreading of this Heresy, in the
Year 325. summons a Council of Bishops, which consisted in all of Three hundred
and eighteen, to meet at Nice, a City of Bithynia, where they made Arius recant
his impious Doctrine, and compiled the Nicene Cr^ed.

Q. What other remarkable things happened in his time?

A. His Mother Helena, a woman of much piety, but mixed with a great deal of
Superstition, which now began openly to infect the Church, is reported to have
found the very Cross on which J.C. suffered. In memory of which Invention the
Roman Church keeps a solemn Festival on the Third of May.

Q. What Learned Men flourished now?

A. Lactantius, the worthy Disciple of Arnobius, and Praeceptor to Crispus,
Constantine's Son, employed his Eloquence, of which he was a great Master, in
confuting the Errors of Paganism, and defending the Truth of the Christian
Religion.

Q. How many Wives had he?

A. Two. The latter was Fausta, the Daughter of Maximian.

Q. How many Children had he by Fausta?

A. Three Sons, Constantine, Constans, and Constantius, and two Daughters,
whose names were Flavia Iulia Constantina, and Helena.

Q. What did he leave to these Three Princes?

A. He was so overseen in his Politics as to commit that unpardonable Solecism
of leaving them all three Joint-heirs of his Empire, which they divided among
them.

Q. What had the Eldest for his Dividend?

A. He had for his share Gaul, and all beyond the Alps.

Q. What had Constans?

A. He possessed Rome, Italy, Afric, Sicily, and the other Isles, Sclavonia,
Thrace, Macedonia, and Greece.

Q. What fell to Constantius's share?

A. He was Master of Asia, of the East, and of Egypt.

Q. Give me a description of Constantine the Great?

A. He had a noble Air, a great Soul; he was sincere, valiant and modest, well
skilled in the Latin and Greek Languages, an excellent Horseman, bold, but
provident in all his Enterprises; full-faced, he had a thick Neck, his Nose
somewhat flat, his Eyes sparkling, his Hair thin, he shaved all his Beard,
which none of his Predecessors from Adrian used to do.

Q. How many Brothers do they say Constantine the Great had?

A. Two: viz. Constans the Father of Julian, and Dalmatius who left two Sons
behind him, one of whom named likewise Dalmatius was created Caesar in the Year
of our Lord 335.

Q. What was the name of Dalmatius's Second Son?

A. Annibalianus.

The Division of the Empire between the three Sons of Constantine the Great,
making together the Forty seventh Emperor. The Year of Rome 1077. Of the Birth
of I. C. 337.
Q. WHat were the Names of these three Sons?

A. The First was called Constantine, the Second Constantius, and the Third
Constans.

Q. After they had divided the Empire between themselves, how did they manage
Affairs?

A. They fell at Variance, which occasioned bloody Civil Wars; each of them
being desirous to Enlarge his Territories, but they were all destroyed at last,
one after another.

Q. Where was Constantine the Younger Born?

A. At Arles, and was Created Caesar in the Year 317, but he held the
Consulship almost Four Months.

Q. Upon whom did he make War?

A. Upon his Brother Constans, and thinking to take away those Provinces from
him, which he possessed by the Dividend which his Father made of the Empire; he
Marched with his Forces into Italy, where he was Slain, and thrown into the
River Aelna, near Aquileia, where Constans was at that time.

Q. How Old was he when this Accident befell him?

A. Twenty Five Years Old, and had Reigned Three of them.

Q. What did Constans Inherit by his Death?

A. He had Gaul, Spain, and Great Britain.

Q. When was Constans Third Son to Constantine the Great, according to
Historians, Created Caesar?

A. Upon Christmas Day in the Year 333.

Q. What were the First Exploits that Constans performed?

A. He Vanquished the Franks, and compelled them to make an Alliance with him;
his great Merits and the Sweetness of his Temper being Invincible Charms, that
drew the Affections of all Mankind after him.

Q. What do you particularly observe of him in History?

A. He always took the Part of the Orthodox, against the Arrians who Disturbed
the Tranquillity of the Church.

Q. Did any Unfortunate Accident befall this Prince?

A. Magnentius who had Usurped the Empire, put him to Death in Aelna, a City in
Rousillon, in the Year 350; he was then about Thir^y Years Old, and had Reigned
Thirteen of them.

Q. When was Constantius the Second Son of Constantine the Great, Created
Caesar.

A. In the year 324; but he dishonored this high Dignity, by murdering several
of his Relations, as also by espousing and professing the Arian Heresy; for
suffering himself to be seduced by the Flatteries of his Wife, and the
Insinuations of some Heretics, he persecuted the Church, and banished the
Orthodox Bishops.

Q. Upon whom did Constantius make War?

A. Upon Sapores King of Persia, a great Persecutor of the Christians; but
Constantius had the worst in all the Battles and all the Sieges he was engaged
in.

Q. Who was it that got himself declared Emperor by the Army in Hungary?

A. Vetranio, at the same time when Magnentius usurped the Sovereign Authority.

Q. What care did Constantius take to oppose his Designs?

A. He marched Westwards to fight Vetranio, and obliged Magnentius to retire to
Lions, where he laid violent hands upon himself.

Q. After Constantius had made himself sole Master of the Empire, how did he
behave himself?

A. He became so insolent, that he once more began to persecute the Catholic
Prelates, so that the Church was in a very miserable condition under this
detestable Prince.

Q. How stood the Affairs of the Church in his time?

A. Arianism almost universally prevailed; and only the Bishop of Rome, and S.
Athanasius, who compiled the Creed bearing his n^me, were left to stem the Tide.

Q. When was Julian, afterward sirnam'd the Apostate, made Caesar?

A. In the Year 355, and having beaten the Barbarians out of Gaul, he was
Saluted Emperor about the Year 360, and Marched with his Army toward the East.

Q. What Measures did Constantius take, when he heard he was in Illyrium, and
was Marching directly against him?

A. He changed his Design of an Expedition he had projected against the
Persians, and came back from Antioch to Tarsus, where he first felt his Fever,
and from thence to Mopsuestia in Cilicia, so called from the Fountains of
Mopsus, where he died.

Q. How old was he then?

A. Forty Years, and had reigned in all 25 Years 3 Months and 15 Days.

Julian the Apostate, the Forty eighth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1101. Of the
Birth of I. C. 361.
Q. WHO succeeded Constantius in the Empire?

A. Julian the Apostate.

Q. Where was he born?

A. In Byzantium, in the Year 331.

Q. Whose Son was he?

A. The Son of Constans, Brother to Constantine the Great, and of Basilina.

Q. Whom did he marry?

A. Helena.

Q. Why was he sirnam'd the Apostate?

A. Because he turned Pagan after he had been educated in the Christian
Religion, and had read the Holy Scriptures in the Church before the
Congregation.

Q. When was he sole Emperor?

A. In the Year 363, he was proclaimed Augustus by his Soldi^rs, but he had
been created Caesar before his Election to the Empire.

Q. Where was he proclaimed Emperor?

A. At Paris.

Q. What did he do in the beginning of his Reign?

A. He put all the Friends of Constantius to death, or sent them into
banishment; he only encouraged the Augurs, the Victimarii, and the
Philosophers; he ordered the Idolatrous Temples of the Heathens to be opened,
and having renounced the Faith* he assumed the Title of Pontifex Maximus. Nor
was this all; for the more to vex the Christians, he made scandalous
condescentions to the Jews, and began to erect a Temple for them at Jerusalem,
which he was obliged soon to leave off; for Globes of Fire breaking out from
under the Foundations, disturbed the Workmen; as Ammianus Marcellinus, a Pagan
Writer, witnesses.

Q. What befell him upon this?

A. He became the Laughter and Contempt of the People of Antioch.

Q. What course did he take to revenge the Affronts they put upon him?

A. He writ a Satyric Letter upon this occasion, called the Misopogan, or
Beard-hater.

Q. Upon whom did Julian make war?

A. Upon the Persians; but having after the second Battle insolently refused to
comply with the just Articles of Peace which they offered him, and burnt the
Ships that followed him, and carried Provisions for the Army, he was surrounded
on all sides by the Enemy.

Q. What became of him at last?

A. He had the mortification to find himself cut off from all hopes of
Assistance, and was wounded by an Arrow in the Fight, but 'twas never known
from what side it came.

Q. Did he say any thing as he was dying?

A. He desperately took out a handful of Blood which gushed from the Wound, and
throwing it up into the Air, cried out, Vieisti Galilaee, O Galilean thou have
at last overcome me.

Q. What did he mean by these words?

A. That our Blessed Savior, whom he had so often provoked by his Sacriledges,
and other indignities, and whom now he found to his cost to be the great Judge
of the Universe, would take a full vengeance for the Crimes and Blasphemies he
had uttered against his Sacred Person.

Q. What sort of a man was Julian the Apostate?

A. He had sparkling Eyes, a stern wandering Countenance, a straight Nose, his
Mouth somewhat of the biggest, a slit in his under Lip, a thick Beard which he
wore picked, his Shoulders large and moving, his Head hanging down, which he
always turned on one and the other side, he walked very fast although he was but
little, and made a great noise when he laughed. How great a Warrier he was, the
Alemans, Franks and Saxons, whom he overcame, do testify, and his remaining
Works are undeniable proofs of his Wit and Ingenuity.

Jovian the Forty Ninth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1103. Of the Birth of I. C.
363.
Q. WHO was proclaimed Emperor after the death of Julian the Apostate?

A. Iovian, the Son of Count Varronianus.

Q. Whom did he marry?

A. Charitas, the Daughter of Lucillianus, by whom he had a Son named Varro,
whom he made Consul.

Q. What do Historians tell us of this Prince?

A. That he was a handsome well-shaped man, illustrious for his Birth, but more
for his Piety.

Q. What did he principally apply himself to in the beginning of his Reign?

A. To draw the Soldiers from Superstition. He commanded Jesus Christ to be
adored by all those Soldiers who had abandoned his worship.

Q. Was he engaged in any Wars?

A. No, for in the condition he found the Army after the defeat and death of
Julian, he was obliged to make a Truce of Thirty years with Sapores, to whom he
yielded the greatest part of Mesopotamia.

Q. Did he live a long time after this?

A. No; he died of a sickness in the Thirty third year of his Age, after he had
reigned 7 months, 22 days.

Q. What particular things were done in his Reign?

A. He generally cancelled all the Edicts of the Apostate which were favorable
to the Pagans; he restored to the Faithful, and to the Churches all their
Goods, their Honors, their Revenues, and their Privileges.

Valentinian the Great, the Fiftieth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1104. Of the
Birth of I. C. 364.
Q. WHO was named Emperor after the death of Iovian?

A. The Army chose Valentinian Emperor at Nice, because in Iulian's time he had
preferred his Religion to his Preferment.

Q. What did he do as soon as he saw himself possessed of the Imperial Throne?

A. He made his Brother Valens his Partner in the Empire, and gave him the
Government of the East.

Q. What part did he reserve for himself?

A. The West?

Q. What sort of a man was Valentinian?

A. He was a very virtuous Prince, and a strict observer of Justice; very
ingenious, and a religious keeper of his word.

Q. With whom did he make war?

A. With the Saxons and Sarmatians, whom he defeated, and obliged them to
demand a Peace by their Ambassadors whom they sent to him.

Q. And what said Valentinian to them?

A. He fell into such a fit of anger, to which he was always very subject, that
he was seized with an Apoplexy.

Q. Did he dye of it?

A. Yes, in Hungary, being fifty five years old.

Q How many years did he reign?

A. Twelve years.

Q. Was he baptized before his death?

A. No; nevertheless he did not forbear to give sensible proofs of the Religion
he professed, and commanded the Pagan Temples to be shut.

Valens the Fifty first Emperor. The Year of Rome 1104. Of the Birth of I. C.
364.
Q. WHat Enemy had Valens to fight with in the beginning of his Empire?

A. Procopius who was related to Julian, and was his greatest Enemy.

Q. Did Valens make War against him?

A. The dispute between them was bloody, but at the upshot Valens defeated
Procopius, took him prisoner, and put him to death.

Q. What other Wars was he involved in?

A. He had a continual war with the Goths till their King Athanaricus having
begged a Peace of him, he granted it, and afterward kindly entertained him, at
such time as being persecuted by the Hunns, he came to desire this Emperor's
Protection, who settled him in Thrace.

Q. How did the Goths behave themselves at that time?

A. Not being able to bear the insufferable Avarice of Lupicinus their
Governor, they took up Arms against the Romans, ^ invaded Thrace.

Q. What memorable things happened in the course of this War?

A. Valens fell into the hands of his Enemies, who burnt him in a Cottage.

Q. How old was he when this Accident befell him?

A. He was fifty years old, and had reigned fourteen years and four months.

Q. What Qualities were observable in him?

A. He had both good and bad ones. He was choleric, cruel, and envious. The
Arian Heresy, with which he was infected, corrupted all his other good
Inclinations.

Q. What Learned men flourished in his time?

A. Gregory and Basil, who had contracted a friendship in their Youth at
Athens, where they followed their Studies. The former born at Nazianzum in
Cappadocia, from whence Surnamed Nazianzenus. The other born in Pontus, and
afterward made Bishop of Caesarea.

Q. What Acts of Cruelty did he ever commit?

A. He put all people to death who had the curiosity to know the name of his
Successor; and being informed that the first Letters of his Name were to begin
with Theod, he put to death old Theodosius the Father of Theodosius the Great,
who was afterward Valentinian's Successor.

Q. What considerable Actions had that Illustrious old man performed?

A. He had done the State great Service by his Counsels, beaten the Picts and
Scots out of Britain, and defeated Firmius the Tyrant, who ravaged Afric with
an Army of Moors.

Q. How many Children had Valentinian the Brother of Valens?

A. Two. The first named Gratianus, who was declared Augustus by his Father in
the City of Amiens.

Q. What was the Second Son's name?

A. He was called Valentinian the Younger, to distinguish him from his Father.

Q. What do Historians tell us of Valentinian the Younger?

A. That after the death of his Father he was declared Augustus at the Age of
Ten years by the Soldiers, as well as by his Brother Gratian.

Gratian the Fifty second Emperor. The Year of Rome 1115. Of the Birth of I. C.
375.
Q WHat Qualities was Gratian master of?

A. He had a Body well made, and a Soul of a vast extent, and great elevation.

Q. Don't Historians observe some defects in him?

A. He had some, but such as would not have appeared so conspicuous in an
indifferent Fortune; he had an incurable aversion to State Affairs, which ought
to have taken up his most serious moments.

Q. Did not this sink his Reputation mightily with his Subjects?

A. Yes, and what they could not suffer but with the utmost indignation, was to
see him freequently prefer a Barbarian Soldier to a Roman, although the Roman
was the elder of the two, and had more merits to plead.

Q. How did he manage matters after the death of Valens?

A. He took as Partner in the Empire with him Theodosius, the Grandson of that
Theodosius who was slain by the order of Valens.

Q. What forced him upon this Conduct?

A. Because he found himself not strong enough to support so furious a War as
he was then engaged in; and besides the Goths ravaged Thrace, and the other
Provinces of the Empire at pleasure.

Theodosius the Great, the Fifty Third Emperor. The Year of Rome 1132. Of the
Birth of I. C. 392.
Q. HOW old was Theodosius when he was taken Partner into the Empire?

A. He was thirty three Years old, and his first appearance on the Imperial
Seat gave sufficient proofs of his Courage and Prudence.

Q. Where was he born?

A. In Spain, at Lauca a Town of Gallicia. He imitated all the Virtues, but
none of the Vices of his Countryman Trajan. He summoned the Second Ecumenical
Council, that of Nice being the first, at Constantinople, Ann. Dom. 381.
wherein, besides the confirmation of the Nicene Council by an Hundred and fifty
Bishops, Macedonius the Heretic was condemned, and the Orthodox Belief
concerning the Holy Ghost, established.

Q. What memorable Exploits did he perform?

A. He vanquished all the Enemies of the Roman name, and gave peace to his
Subjects.

Q. Was not this Prince a sure Asylum to all Kings that were persecuted, and in
distress?

A. Yes, he supported them against all those who conspired their destruction,
and the subversion of their Governments.

Q. What instances can you give me of this his great Generosity?

A. Athanaricus King of the Goths, being turned out of his Kingdom by his own
Rebellious Subjects, fled to Constantinople, where he was very honorably
received by Theodosius.

Q. Did that Prince enjoy the Emperor's Favors any considerable time?

A. No; for tho he had escaped Death in so many Battles, yet he ended his days
when he expected to pass the remainder of his life in great tranquillity.

Q. Was not Theodosius concerned at the loss of him?

A. He would receive no manner of Consolation; nay, he was so profuse in the
Celebration of his Funeral, that it was no less Magnificent than what was used
to be kept for any of the deceased Emperors.

Q. Were not the Goths mightily astonished at this?

A. It made so deep an Impression upon them, that seeing themselves without a
Master, they were unanimously of an opinion, That they could not find a better
than Theodosius.

Q. Did the Goths then submit themselves to this great Prince?

A. Yes; and he distributed Lands among them for their maintenance with great
liberality.

Q. What remarkable matters happened after this?

A. The Tyrant Maximus made himself Master of Britain and Gaul, and chose
Triers for his Capital City.

Q. What Acts of Cruelty did that Usurpea commit?

A. He put the unfortunate Gratian to death at Lions, who was Twenty five Years
old.

Q. Did not Theodosius revenge h^^ death?

A. Yes; and placed young Valentinian (who had been forced out of Italy) upon
his Throne again.

Q. As to the business of Religion, how did he behave himself?

A. He reconciled himself to the Church, and to the great St. ^mbrose; and
notwithstanding all the efforts of the Arians to debauch him in his Principles,
and engage him in their Party, yet he still continued to adhere to the Ancient
Truth.

Q. What Character do Historians bestow upon him?

A. That he was inferior to none of his Predecessors either in Virtue or Merit;
that he never made War but out of mere necessity, and was successful in all his
Military Undertakings: In fine, that his Goodness charmed all the world; and
his engaging Behavior gained him the hearts of all that approached him.

Q. What was his chief Infirmity?

A. He was naturally Choleric, but he seldom suffered his Passion to get the
better of him, and then after some short intervals it was no difficult matter
to appease him. He had once designed utterly to destroy the City of Antioch,
for taking down the Statue of Augusta Placilla, but was at last persuaded by
their Bishop Flavianus to pardon them. At another time he massacred seven
thousand men in a Theater at Thessalonica, for killing their President.

Q. Which was the last Victory that Theodosius obtained?

A. 'Twas that which he gained over Eugenius, whose Troops had joined those of
Arbogastes, who had caused Valentinian to be strangled in his own Palace at
Vienna in Dauphine.

Q. Theodosius then vanquished these two Tyrants?

A. Yes; and 'twas rather by a particular Protection of Heaven, than any human
strength.

Q. What became of them?

A. Eugenius was taken Prisoner, and Arbogastes killed himself.

Q. Did Theodosius the Great live long after these Victories?

A. No; for shortly after this Generous Prince died at Milan, A. D. 395. being
Fifty Years old, according to the common Opinion.

Q. To whom did he bequeath his Empire?

A. He divided it between his two Sons Arcadius and Honorius.

Q. What had Arcadius for his share?

A. He had the Empire of the East, and Honorius that of the West.

Q. What Eminent Men flourished under his Reign?

A. St. Jerome, so profoundly skilled in the Hebrew Tongue, to whom the Learned
World is highly obliged for his great Performances upon the Scriptures. St.
Ambrose, Bishop of Milan, who employed his Eloquence against the Arians. St.
Austin, Bishop of Hippo in Afric, the most universally Learned Father of the
Latin Church. Ausonius, a famous Poet and Orator, and Master to the Emperor
Gratian, who rewarded him with the Consulate. Paulinus, Bishop of Nola in
Campania, who is first reported to have put Bells to a Sacred use; from whence
they are called Nolae and Campanae.

Arcadius the Fifty fourth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1135. Of the Birth of I.
C. 395.
Q. WHom did Arcadius marry?

A. Eudoxia, whom he suffered to govern absolutely as she thought fit; the
consequences of which had like to have proved as fatal to Religion as it did to
the Empire; for she banished St. Chrysostom, who had been translated from the Sea of Antioch Constantinople, only for inveighing against her Vices.

Q. Whom did he entrust at his death to be his Son's Guardian?

A. Isdigerdes, King of Persia, who acquitted himself very honorably in this
Trust; for he placed him under the Tuition of the Learned and Wise Antiochus;
nay, he openly declared, That whoever attempted any thing against the Interest
and Welfare of this young Prince, must expect to find him his Enemy.

Q. How old was he when he died?

A. He died in the One and thirtieth year of his Age, and in the Eleventh of
his, or rather his Wife's Reign, who died in Childbed.

Honorius the Fifty fifth Emperor. The Year of Rome 1135. Of the Birth of I. C.
395.
Q. GIve me the true Character of Honorius?

A. He was of a sweet agreeable Disposition, an enemy to Application and
Business; he even had an aversion to Public Affairs; however, he was very
zealous for the Christian Religion, in favor of which he made several Edicts.

Q What remarkable things fell out in his Reign?

A. After the Goths had spread themselves all over Italy, and were Masters of
the City of Rome, several Tyrants usurped the Sovereign Authority.

Q. Whom did these Tyrants nominate for their Emperor?

A. Attalus the Son of Alaricus. Honorius offered to make him his Partner in
the Empire, which he refused with a great deal of scorn and arrogance, and yet
accepted the Imperial Dignity after it was offered to him by the Senate.

Q. Did he long possess the Empire?

A. No, he was soon stripped of it; and being abandoned by the Gauls, to whom he
fled for Protection, he was taken Prisoner by Constantius, A. D. 415. and
delivered to the Justice of the Emperor Honorius.

Q. And how did he use him?

A. He gave him his Life, and contented himself only with cutting off one of
his hands.

Q. Why did he serve him so?

A. That this Rebel for the remainder of his life might carry the Punishment of
his Crime about him, and have everlastingly before his eyes the marks of his
Rebellion.

Q. What memorable Accidents happened after this?

A. One Constantine that commanded the Guards, and had nothing to recommend him
but only his Name, was declared Emperor; but being taken Prisoner, was
strangled at Ravenna. Then Iovian and Sebastian possessed themselves of Gaul, but
being seized at Narbo, were both put to death.

Q. Who was it that afterward usurped the Empire of the Gauls?

A. Heraclius, who passed into Italy with a Navy of Seven hundred Sail, but
being beaten there, he made his Escape to Carthage, where he was strangled.

Q. What other matters happened after the Death of these Tyrants?

A. The Goths entered France under the Conduct of their King Ataulphus.

Q. How old was the Emperor Honorius, when he died of his Dropsey?

A. Thirty five Years, A. D. 425.

Q. What sort of a Reign was his?

A. Nothing but a continued Scene of Troubles, Commotions, Tumults, and Wars,
occasioned by the Vandals, the Hunns, and other barbarous Nations, that daily
poured new Swarms of People into the Roman Provinces: Toward the end of his
Reign, A. D. 413, the Burgundians erected a new Kingdom toward the Rhone: The
Franks A. D. 420, erected another in Gaul, from them called France, under their
first King Pharamond: And the year following Vallia King of the Goths, after
the death of Ataulphus, constituted a Kingdom in Spain. The Vandals possessed
that part of it which was formerly called Boetica, and now from them Andalusia;
as the Goths in conjunction with the Alani, fix themselves in Provincia
Tarraconensis, which was afterward called Gothalania, and corruptly Catalonia.
The beginning of the Scottish Kingdom too is generally placed about the year of
our Lord 422; the Scots from Ireland settling themselves in the Northern parts
of Great Britain under their King Fergus.

Q. What Learned men lived about these times?

A. Pelagius a Britain, a warm Asserter of the Omnipotency of Free Will, and as
violent a Depressor of God's Grace; whom St. Austin encountered so vigorously.
Prudentius, Sedulius, and Paulinus, famous for Poetry, but infinitely exceeded
by Claudian, who raised his Reputation as much by the Elegance and Sweetness of
his Versification, as he lessened it by the Meanness of his Subject.

Of the Fall and Decay of the Roman Empire.
Q. WHat were the principal Causes of the Decay of the Roman Empire?

A. Pride, and Luxury, and Divisions at home; the frequent Mutinies of the
Army, who deposed their Emperors at pleasure; and the perpetual Invasions of
the Northern Nations.

Q. Who caused the greatest Desolations in the Empire?

A. The Goths, the Hunns, the Lombards, and Vandals, who in their turn ravaged
the several Provinces of it, erecting new Kingdoms, and establishing their Laws
and Customs where ever they came.

Q. By whom was Rome taken?

A. It was taken and retaken by Alarie King of the Goths, A. D. 410. and about
1163 years after the building of it. For the space of three days, this Imperial
City, which for Nine hundred years had defied the Attacks of all its Enemies,
even of Hannibal himself, was ravaged and plundered at the discretion of the
barbarous Conquerors. Not long after it was taken by Totila, and after him by
Theodoricus, who made so magnificent an Entry into it, that St. Austin, wholly
astonished at so prodigious a show, wished that he had seen three things upon
earth.

Q. What were they?

A. Jesus Christ in the flesh, St. Paul in the Pulpit, and Ancient Rome in its
splendour.

Q. Did not the Roman Empire for some time make a happy Progress?

A. It advanced rather than decreased from Julius Caesar down to Nero; but
afterward Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, so weakened it by their Civil Wars, that
it was scarce in a condition to preserve it self from the Insults of its
Enemies.

Q. Who restored this Empire to its Ancient Splendour?

A. In Trajan's time, as it possessed the greatest Extent of Ground, so it
visibly recovered its former Reputation. From that Period it by degrees
declined till the time of Constantine the Great, who by putting an end to all
intestine Broils, retrieved in some manner its ancient Credit; but through a
fatal ill management did it a greater Injury at last, than all his Predecessors
before him.

Q. How did that happen?

A. First he transplanted the Seat of the Empire from Rome, where it had so
long inhabited, to Constantinople; by which means he abandoned Italy and the
Provinces which lay nearest it, to the Invasion of the Barbarians, and what was
equally dangerous, to the Ambitious Attempts of the Bishops of Rome, who had
always a mighty hankering after Temporals. Next, he considerably enfeebled it
by dividing it between his Three Sons.

Q. How long did the Eastern Empire continue?

A. From the Sons of Constantine the Great, for the space of Twelve hundred
years, or thereabout, to Constantine Palaeologus the last Emperor of
Constantinople, who was pressed to death in the Crowd, when Mahomet the second
Emperor of the Turks took the City of Constantinople, in the Year of the
Creation of the World 5505, and of the Birth of J. C. 1453.

Q. How long was the Empire of the East in the possession of the French?

A. Fifty six years; viz. from the year 1204, to 1260.

Q. How came it to fall into the hands of the French?

A. By the Valor of Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, who made himself Emperor of
Constantinople, and it was retaken by another Baldwin, the fourth of that name.

Q. In whose hands did the Western Empire continue?

A. The Emperors of Constantinople endeavored all they could to keep it under
their obedience; and for that end sent their Deputies there, who had continual
Brigues and Quarrels with the Popes, so that at last they had no manner of
Authority or Credit in Italy about the time that Charlemagne was King of France.

Q. How did that happen?

A. Pope Leo the III d. finding himself now in a capacity to exercise that
power of disposing of Empires, which his Predecessors had so long thirsted
after; and besides having great obligations to the French Nation, who had
protected the Holy See from the Insults of the Lombards, promoted Charles the
Great to the Empire of the West.

Q. By whom was he proclaimed Emperor?

A. By the consent of all the Estates; viz. the Clergy, the Nobility, and the
People. The Pope himself placing the Imperial Crown upon his head.

Q. When did this happen?

A. On Christmas Day, in St. Peter's Church at Rome, in the Year of our Lord
801.

Q. And did this famous Conqueror acquit himself worthily in his place.

A. He lived Fourteen Years after his Elevation to this Dignity, and reigned
with that universal Esteem of the world, that they were used to say of him, He
was a Conqueror like Caesar, Peaceable like Augustus, and a Restorer of the
Church like Constantine. He summoned a Council at Frankfort, where the use of
Images in Churches, confirmed by the second Council of Nice, was condemned; and
he died at Aix la Chapelle in Germany, in the 72 d. Year of his Age.

Q. From whom did Conradus I. usurp the Imperial Crown?

A. From Charles the Simple King of France, who was Grandson to Charles the
Great, and the only person left alive of the Race of that great Emperor.

Q. For what reason do they say Leo III. excited the People to proclaim Charles
the Great, and bestow the Empire upon him, and his Descendents and Successors,
the Kings of France?

A. For their Piety and Zeal to Holy Church. Nay, Leo the Third solemnly
protested he would excommunicate all those that should presume to disturb them
in the possession of the Imperial Dignity.

Q. Did it always continue in that Line?

A. No; for about fourscore and five years after this, Pope Gregory V. a German
by Nation, and Cousin-German to the Emperor Otho III. of the House of Saxony,
to perpetuate the Empire in those of his own Country, made the Decree which is
commonly called the Golden Bull, because the Seal is made of that rich Metal.

Q. What did the Pope ordain in this Bull?

A. That only the Germans should have a right to elect the Emperor; for which
end he established Six Electors, Three Ecclesiastic, and Three Lay Princes.
Others pretend they were established long before, and that this Pope did only
confirm them.

Q. Who are the Ecclesiastic Electors?

A. The Archbishops of Ments, Colen and Triers, who are all Chancellors of the
Empire, the first for Germany, the second for Italy, and the third for France.

Q. Who are the Secular Electors?

A. 1. The Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Comptroller of the Household. 2. The
Duke of Saxony Master of the Horse. 3. The Duke of Brandenburg Great
Chamberlain.

Q Was not one more added to the Secular Electors?

A. The King of Bohemia was taken into the number at first, to be Arbitrator in
the Case, whenever the Votes fell equal on both sides.

Q. And has not a new Elector been added to them since?

A. Yes, for the Prince Palatine having forfeited his Electorate which was
given to the Duke of Bavaria, they constituted another for him at the Peace of
Munster. Since the late Revolution in England, the Emperor has been induced to
create a new Electorate in favor of the Duke of Hanover, in consideration of
the great Services he has done the Empire, particularly in this present
Confederacy against France; but as it is opposed by several Princes of the
Empire, who have entered their respective Protestations against it, we cannot
positively tell what will become of this Affair.

Q. Who was the first of the House of Austria that obtained the Empire?

A. Rodolphus Earl of Habspurgh, whom after a tedious Interregnum, which had
like to have proved fatal to the Empire, the Electors unanimously chose. He
overcame Ottocarus King of Bohemia, and in consequence of that Victory bestowed
Austria upon his Son Albert, and laid the foundation of that powerful House,
which has brought forth so many Emperors and Princes to Europe, and which ever
since the days of Charles the Fifth, who first projected the Election of a King
of the Romans, has enjoyed the Empire.

Of the Increase, Purity, and Decay of the Roman Eloquence and Learning.
Q. IN what Condition was the Roman Language at first?

A. For the first Five hundred years, that is, till they had made themselves
Masters of Italy, it continued very unpolite and barren; and produced no
Authors of Eminence and Note. Their Speech is a corruption of the Aeolic Greek,
which was spoken in the Southern Provinces of that Country, called Graecia
Magna, and now comprehends the Kingdom of Naples. Their Ecclesiastical Terms,
as well as the Rites and Ceremonies, and whole body of their Theology, were
borrowed from the Hetruscans.

Q. Who were the first Roman Authors?

A. Not to mention those whose Works are lost (for that would be an unnecessary
labor) Plautus and Terence, have an established Reputation; Plautus seems to
have proposed Aristophanes, the Author of the old Comedy, for his Pattern; as
Terence copies Menander, and entertains us with the New.

Q. What Alterations did it receive afterward?

A. From Terence's time, who flourished after the second Punic War, and is the
standard of the Latin Dialogue and Conversation, by reason of their frequent
Commerce with the Greeks, and other Politer Nations, their Language daily
improved in all other parts. Lucretius, Salust, and Catullus, who flourished a
little before the Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey, as they writ with a
purity equal or above any that preceded them, so they are excelled by few that
followed after; and Tully complains that much of the force, and spirit, and
majesty of their Language was lost even in his time. However, it is agreed on by
most hands, that in Augustus's time it arrived to its highest pitch of
perfection and purity, at which time Virgil, Horace, Ovid, Tibullus,
Propertius, Corn. Gallus, Manilius (though others place him in the Reign of
Theodosius the Younger); and not to mention any more, Corn. Celsus the
Physician, and Livy the Historian, flourished.

Q. When did it begin to decline?

A. As by a Fate peculiar to all sublunary things, nothing continues long in
the same state, but must either advance or go backward; the Roman Language
began to decline soon after Augustus. Now and then, it is true, stepped up an
extraordinary Genius, that in spite of the Age he lived in, preserved the
ancient Purity; as for instance, Minutius Faelix under the Emperor Severus; but
we have few Instances of this nature. For the first hundred years, and
something more, it escaped tolerably well, but soon after Trajan's time, we
find it was strangely corrupted.

Q What Reasons are commonly assigned for the decay of their Eloquence and
Language?

A. The former is generally ascribed to the loss of their Liberty, and the
subversion of the Old Government, which allowed a greater latitude and freedom
of speaking than they enjoyed under their Emperors. Several Reasons may be
given for the latter; as first, their affectation to incorporate so many Greek
Words and Phrases into their Tongue; a Vanity complained of by Iuvenal. In the
Age before they seldom used them but in case of necessity, and even then, as is
evident from Tully's Example, they writ them in Greek, and not in Latin
Characters.

Q. What other Causes are assigned for it?

A. The continual Irruptions of the Northern Nations, who like a mighty
Torrent, swept every thing before them. Such prodigious swarms of people still
breaking in upon them, could not but occasion a vast alteration in their
Language. To this may be added the introducing of a new Religion, viz. the
Christian, in the Empire; the Professors of which brought in with 'em a new set
of Phrases and Words, that were none of the politest, and wholly unknown
before, as seeming always to have a greater regard to the truth of what they
delivered, than to the purity of their Diction.

Q. How did it fare after this?

A. From the Tenth to the middle of the 15th Century little or no Learning was
stirring in these Western parts of the World: The Monks, who were the only
people that possessed any share of it, amusing themselves in the study of
School Divinity, as it is commonly called. Those that were the Historians in
those Ages leaving nothing but miserable jejune Relations of things behind
them, larded with frequent Miracles of their Saints, which seem to have been
written in defiance of Eloquence as well as of good sense.

Q. How came it to revive again?

A. 'Twas occasioned by two remarkable Accidents that happened within a short
space of one another. The first was the invention of Printing at Mentz in
Germany, in the Year 1440. by the help of which, to the incredible benefit of
the Learned World, we can print more Volumes in a day, and that more correctly,
than the Ancients could have written in an year. The second was the taking of
Constantinople by the Turks about twelve years after, which forced several of
the Learned Greeks to quit their Native Country, and come into Italy, where
they were forced to teach Greek for their own sustenance. Of this number were
Theodorus Gaza, Constantinus Lascharis, Chalcondilas, Chrysoloras,
Trapezuntius, who began to revive the study of that Language, which for the
space of Five hundred years had been perfectly buried.

Q. What Persons of Note encouraged Learning at that time?

A. Pope Nicholas the Fifth, that great Friend to the Muses, and Restorer of
Letters, employed the most Learned Men of that Age to compare and revise the
Old MSS. and print them; and we are particularly obliged to him for putting out
Polybius. After him Aeneas Sylvius, alias Pope Pius the Second, who was himself
a man of great Learning, promoted it by his Example and Encouragement. About
this time the Art of Painting, which had been totally lost for so many Ages,
began to flourish in Italy; and in the compass of an hundred years arrived to
its highest perfection.

Q. What were their principal Studies at this time?

A. To retrieve the purity of the Latin and Greek Tongues, and learn their
Antiquities; for which end they conversed with their Politest Authors, compared
various Readings, turned over Glossaries and Old Scholia upon Ancient
Historians, Orators and Poets; consulted old Inscriptions, examined old Statues
and Basso Relievos, in which as Italy abounded above all other Countries of
Europe, so it furnished them with a better opportunity to be skilled in the
Ancient Habits, Utensils, Sacrifices, etc. than the rest of their Neighbors.
The most eminent men for this sort of Learning, were Laurentius Valla,
Pomponius Laetus, Alexander ab Alexandro, Rodolphus Agricola.

Q How long was this Learning confined to Italy?

A. Not long; for although the Italians had the honor to revive it, and made a
very considerable progress in it, yet about the latter end of the 15th Century,
when Copies of Books were pretty well multiplied by Printing, Learning crossed
the Alps, and soon after Erasmus, Budaeus, Beatus Rhenanus, etc. dispersed
that sort of Knowledge through England, France, Germany, and the Low Countries.

Q. What Learned men had we then in England?

A. In King Henry the VIIIth's time, which was the soonest that we came
acquainted with the Belles lettres in England, we had an admirable Set of
Philologers in this Nation who were excellent Critics, and had a great command
of the Latin Tongue. Sir Thomas More, Cardinal Pool, Linacer, Collet, Cheek,
Ascham, and several more, often to be met with in Erasmus's Epistles. Indeed
about the beginning of the 16th Century a remarkable turn of Affairs happened
in this part of the World, which did not a little contribute to advance all
sorts of Learning.

Q. What was that?

A. In the Year 1519. Luther made a public defection from the Papal Authority,
which, till then, was generally received without any manner of examination.
This change of the Scene obliged both Parties, viz. those of the Reformation,
and the Champions for the Church of Rome, to prosecute their Studies in the
Learned Languages vigorously. The former to justify their Separation, and to
prove that Antiquity was of their side; and the latter, to keep their ground
still, and preserve the remainder of their Credit and Interest with the People.
When this Theological War was over, men applied themselves to all the other
parts of Learning; and in this last Age Mathematical and Physical Sciences seem
to have been the predominant Studies of the Learned men of Europe: not but that
a Critical Skill in Antiquity was at the same time pursued by several
Extraordinary men, as Bishop Usher, Mr. Seldom, Sir John Marsham, Mr. Gataker,
and after them by Dr. Spencer, Isaac Vossius, Nic. Heinsius, Frederic
Gronovius, Ezekiel Spanheym, and Graevius, Men even in this part of Learning
equal, if not superior to any that cultivated it before them. In short, all
manner of Learning seems at present to be better diffused in all parts of
Europe than ever it was; but whether the Genius's of this and the last Age are
comparable to those Immortal Heroes of Antiquity, truly so called, is a
Controversy that cannot be conveniently discussed in so narrow compass as this
Paper will allow.

An Abridgment of the Principal Customs of the Romans.
Concerning their Months.
Q. INto how many parts did the Romans divide their Months?

A. Into three, the Calends, the Nones, and the Ides.

Q. From whence comes the word Calends?

A. From the word Calo, to call, because on that day the Pontiff summoned the
People to tell them how many days it was to the Nones. The Calends were
peculiar to the Roman People; whence the Proverb, ad Calendas Graecas, i. e.
Never.

Q. From whence were the Nones so called?

A. Because they were the Ninth day before the Ides.

Q. And from whence are the Ides derived.

A. From the old Tuscan word iduare, which signifies to divide, because they
divide the Month into two almost equal parts.

Q. When began the Calends?

A. On the first day of the Month.

Q. When began the Nones?

A. On the seventh day of the following Months, viz. March, May, July, and
October, all which have one and twenty days.

Q. When did the Ides begin?

A. On the fifteenth of the abovementioned Months.

Q And in the other Months when came the Nones and the Ides?

A. The Nones on the fifth, and the Ides on the thirteenth.

Q. Thus the first day was reckoned the Calends, as Calendae Ianuariae is the
first of January?

A. Right; and the second day, if the Month had its Nones on the seventh day,
was called the sixth before the Nones; and if on the fifth, the fourth day
before the Nones: But the next day immediately following the Nones, is in every
Month alike called the eighth before the Ides.

Q. How many Nones have the Months of May, July, October, and March?

A. They have all six; the rest have only four; but all the Months in general
have eight Ides.

Q. And after the Ides are over, how do you reckon then?

A. By the Calends, which are told backward, and named from the following Month.

Q. Pray give me an Instance?

A. As the 18 th. of the Calends of May is the 14 th. of April.

Q. Cannot you give me some art^ficial Verses to fix these Rules in my memory?

A. Yes, they are as follows; Sex Maius Nonas, October, Julius, and Mars,
Quatuor at reliqui; tenet Idus quilibet Octo.
Inde dies reliquos omnes dic esse Calendas.


Of the Roman Year, and distinction of Days.
Q. INto how many Months did Romulus divide his Year?

A. Into Ten, and it consisted of 304 days: But after him Numa added two
Months, viz. January and February, and made his Year to contain Three hundred
fifty four days; but this Computation falling out too short for the space of a
regular Year by Ten Days and six hours yearly, it occasioned every eighth year
an interposition of three whole Months, which they called Leap year.

Q. What alterations did Julius Caesar make in the Roman Calendar?

A. He added the old Ten days to Numa Pompilius's Year; and lest the odd six
hours should breed any confusion, he ordered that every fourth year one whole
day should be inserted next after the 23 d. of February.

Q. When did the old Romans begin their Year?

A. At March; for which reason those two Months which in honor of Julius and
Augustus Caesar have been since called Julius and Augustus, were by them called
Quintilis and Sextilis, as being their fifth and sixth Months.

Q. What were their Dies Atri and Postriduani?

A. Unfortunate and unlucky days. They were called Atri, because they were
marked in their Kalendars with black, as on the contrary their Dies Albi, or
lucky days, were marked with white Characters. This Custom they borrowed from
the Scythians.

Q. Why had they the name of Postriduani?

A. Because the Romans were of opinion, that dies postridie Calendas, Nonas,
and Idus, i. e. the next day after the Calends, Nones, or Ides, of every Month
was unfortunate.

Q. What other distinction of days did they observe?

A. They had their dies festi, or feriae, Holidays, because they did on such
days ferire victimas, that is, offer up sacrifice; then their working-days,
called profesti, quafi procul a festis; and their half-holidays, which ab
intercidendo they called dies intereisi, days as it were cut asunder; one part
of them being allowed to all manner of Business, and the other wholly to
Religious Offices.

Q. Are these all?

A. No, we find another distinction of Days in the Roman Calendar; for some
were Fasti, whole Court-days, others ex part Fasti, half Court-days; and
lastly, Nefasti, nonleet days, tho indeed the word Nefastus does often signify
unlucky.

Q. From whence are these Names derived?

A. A Fando from speaking, because upon those days which were Fasti, the
Praetor might lawfully keep Court and administer Justice, which was not done
without speaking these three words, Do, Dico, Addico.

Q. What is the meaning of those three words?

A. A Judge is said, dare, when he grants out an Action or Writ against a man;
dicere, when he passes Judgment on him; and addicere, when in the Court he sees
and allows the delivery of the thing or person on which Judgment is passed.

Q. When did the Romans begin their day?

A. Their day begun at our Six in the morning; so that their Hora Prima was our
Seven, Hora Secunda our Eight, Hora Tertia our Nine a Clock, and so on.

Q. What were the Nundinae?

A. Every Month had Three great Markets, which because they were kept every
Ninth day, were called Nundinae.

Of the Republic.
Q. HOW many sorts of Slaves were there among the Romans?

A. Three.

Q. What were the first?

A. The first were the Children of Slaves, to whom they gave the name of Verna.

Q. What were the second?

A. Slaves by a Civil right, viz. such as were sold.

Q. And the third, what were they?

A. Slaves by the Law of Nations, those that were taken in Battle, or publicly
bought at an Auction.

Q. How many sorts of Freemen were there among the Romans?

A. Three sorts likewise: In the first place those that were born free, and of
Parents which had been always free, and these they called Ingenui: Secondly,
the Children of those that had been made free, who were called Libertini:
Thirdly, those who of Slaves were set at liberty by their Masters, and these
last were called Liberti.

Q How many ways were there of obtaining the Freedom of the City of Rome?

A. Three. 1. By Birth, both, or at le^st one of the Parents being free, and
these were called Cives Originarii. 2. By Gift, when the Freedom was bestowed
on any Stranger or Nation, and these were called Civitate Donati. 3. By
Manumission.

Q. After what manner was that performed?

A. The Servant was brought before the Consul or Praetor by his Master, who
laying his hand upon his head, cried, Hunc liberum esse volo, and with that
turned him round, gave him a Cuff* on the Ear, and was said, emittere servum^e
manis. Then the Praetor laid a certain Rod called Vindicta upon his head, and
answered, Dico eum esse liberum more Quiritum: At that time he received a Cap
as a token of Liberty; whence ad pileum voca^e aliqu^m, is to set one free.

Q. Into how many Orders did Romulus divide the City of Rome?

A. Into two; viz. the Patricians or Nobles, and the Plebeians or People.
Afterwa^ds a third Order, namely, that of the Knights or Equites, was added.

Q. What Privileges did the Patricians at that time enjoy?

A. They had a Right to aspire to all the Dignities and Offices of the State;
but in succeeding times the Plebeians were not excluded from them, ex^ept some
few, which were never executed but by Patricians.

Of their Army.
Q OF how many several parts was the Roman Army composed?

A. Of three parts: The first were the Roman Legions, wherein none but the
Roman Citizens served. The second consisted of the Allies, that is to say, the
People of Italy. And the third was made up of Auxiliary Troops sent by
Foreigners.

Q. How were the Allies paid?

A. They s^rved gratis, and had nothing but a certain quantity of Corn given
them: As for the Auxiliary Troops, they were daily paid, but they did not take
the Military Oath, as the Allies did.

Q. What did a Legion comprehend?

A. A certain number of Horse and Foot.

Q. Into how many Companies were the Infantry and Cavalry divided?

A. Into Ten; in every Company of Foot there were three Bands of Soldiers, and
in every Band two Centuries.

Q. Into how many Centuries were the Troops of Horse divided?

A. Each into three Centuries, and so there was consequently sixty Centuries,
and thirty Decuries in every Legion.

Q. Who commanded the Infantry?

A. Six Tribunes, with sixty Centurions, one to each Century.

Q. By whom were the Decuries commanded?

A. By thirty Decurions, and by one Officer to whom they gave the name of
Prefect, and this Prefect was at the head of a whole entire Wing.

Q. How many men had they in each Company of Foot?

A. Sometimes four hundred and twenty, and sometimes they amounted to six
hundred men.

Q. How many men were there in each Turma, or Troop of Horse?

A. No more than thirty, ten in each Decury, but in the Wing three or four
hundred.

Q From whence did the Roman Legions take their name?

A. From their Rank; thus, for instance, those that were of the first, called
themselves Soldiers of the first, and those that were of the second, called
themselves Soldiers of the second Legion.

Q. What Authority had the first more than the second Legion?

A. It was superior to all the rest as well for Quality as Number, because it
was commanded by the most experienced Officers.

Q. Had they not another very considerable Body besides this?

A. Right; and that was the Praetorian Regiment, which always followed the
Commander in chief, who as he raised this Company, so he often picked out the
best men he could find in the other Troops, or at least his best Friends, to
compose it. Augustus had Nine of these Troops of Guards; but they became
afterward so unruly, that instead of guarding the Emperors, they frequently
displaced and killed them.

Q. How many Legions had the Romans in the time of the Consuls?

A. At first there were only four, that were equally divided between the two
Consuls; afterward the Allies were obliged to furnish them with four more.

Q. Did not the number of them rise considerably higher in following Ages?

A. Yes, for in the second Punic War the Romans had in Italy, Sicily, and
Spain, Twenty five Legions; but in the Civil War between Caesar and Pompey,
they amounted to forty; and at the Siege of Mutina, the Army of Anthony, and
that of the Consuls, was composed of Fifty Legions

Q How were the Allies ranked?

A. They were disposed after such a manner, that they covered the two sides of
the Roman Legions, which made these Troops be called Alae, or Wings; their
Commanders not calling themselves Tribunes, but Praefects.

Q. What difference did they make between a Wing, and a Cornu?

A. They indifferently used the latter, when they spoke of the Roman Legions
and their Allies; whereas they seldom made use of the former when they spoke of
Legions, but almost always when they spoke of the Troops of Horse furnished by
the Allies.

Q. What was a Wing at that time when the Republic flourished?

A. Nothing but the Horse of the Allies; but under the Emperors they g^ve this
name to the Auxiliary Troops.

Of the Soldiers.
Q HOW many sorts of Soldiers had the Romans in their Infantry?

A. There were four sorts of them.

Q. What was the first?

A. Those that were light armed, and consequently fittest for all sorts of
nimble Service. These were generally young Fellows.

Q. Who were they that composed the second?

A. The Hastati or Pike-men, who were somewhat more advanced in age.

Q. What was the third?

A. Those that for their Age and Valor were called Principes; they carried a
Buckler, and used Hangers and were all in the strength and vigor of their Age.

Q. What was the fourth?

A. They were the Triarij, old experienced Soldiers, that fought in the third
rank. They used Bucklers, Hangers, and the Pilum.

Q. How many Bands were there in every Cohors?

A. Three, as I have already told you. The first consisting of Pikemen, the
second of the Principes, the third of the Triarij, who were always Six hundred;
but the others were sometimes more and sometimes less.

Q What particular Commander belonged to these light-armed Soldiers?

A. They had none, but were equally divided among the three other bodies.

Q. Had they not several names?

A. At first they were called Ferentarij, Lorarij, and Accensi, because they
filled up what was wanting in the Legions. Afterward the name of Velites was
given them; and lastly, that of Ant^signani, of Veloces, of Archers and
Slingers, all which names are derived either from their Arms or their rank; and
as they were not overcharged with Arms, they generally began the fight by
casting of Darts, Stones or Arrows.

Q. Who were the Evocati?

A. They were certain old Soldiers, who after they had served their time, were
desired by the Generals of the Army to make another Campaign. These had great
Privileges conferred upon them.

Of the Commanders.
Q. HOW many sorts of Commanders were there?

A. Three sorts. First, the Centurions and Tribunes commanded the Foot.
Secondly, the Decurions and the Praefects the Horse. Thirdly, the Lieutenants
and the General commanded both one and the other.

Q. What were the Privileges of the first Cohors?

A. That he who was Centurion of the Pikes called himself the first Pike; he of
the Principes the first Prince, and he of the Triarians the Primipilus. It
belonged to this last to keep the Roman Eagle, to fix it in the ground, or
carry it; which we understand by the ninth and tenth Primipilus.

Q. How many Cohorts were there in each Legion?

A. There were ten in each Legion, and in every Cohors six Centurions.

Q. From whence did these Centurions derive their names?

A. From the Cohors where they served. Those for instance that were of the
tenth, or the eighth, called themselves the tenth or eighth.

Q. But he that commanded the Triarians in the tenth Legion, how was he called?

A. He was called Decimus Pilus; he that commanded the Principes, Decimus
Princeps; and so of the rest.

Q. What reward was given to a Soldier after some glorious Exploit?

A. From the second Centurion of Pikes in the tenth Cohors they made him the
first, that is to say, the tenth Pike, afterward tenth Princeps, etc. and this
in the same Cohors.

Q. How did they recompense him afterward according to his merit?

A. He was made first Officer of the Ninth Cohors, then of the Eighth, and so
on till he came to the First, or perhaps to a Tribune's place, if Fortune
favored him.

Q. What did the Tribunes command?

A. They commanded the Legion, the Centurions, the Cohorts and Companies of
Foot.

Q. What did the Praefects command?

A. They commanded a Wing of Horse, and the Decuries the other Companies and
Decuries.

Q. How many men were there in a Wing?

A. There were thirty in these Companies, and ten in every Decury.

Q. Who chose the Legati, or Lieutenants to the Generals?

A The Senate nominated them, or else the Generals chose them themselves to the
number of three, or four, or more.

Q. What power had they?

A. They had power to judge private Causes, and commanded the Army in the
General's absence.

Q. Did not Augustus establish two sorts of them?

A. Yes, he made Consular ones, who were to look after the whole Army; and the
Praetorians, who took care of every Legion.

Q. To whom did they give the name of Imperator besides the Caesar's?

A. To those that by a Commission from the State had the managing of an Army,
being the same that a Praetor was in Ancient Times.

Q. Who had it besides?

A. Those that after they had gained some remarkable Victory, wherein at least
a thousand of the Enemy were slain, received this Title first from their
Soldiers, and afterward from the Senate, and then public Supplications were
granted them to thank the Gods, and sometimes a Triumph.

Q. What were their Colors?

A. An Eagle, a Wolf, a Minotaur, a Horse, and a Boar.

Q. What was this Eagle made of?

A. It was a golden Eagle fixed upon a Pike, and was only the Ensign of the
Roman Legions, so that they counted their Legions by Eagles. It was first of
all born by Marius.

Q. What did the Romans use for an Ensign in Romulus's time?

A. They took an handful of Hay, and percht it on the top of a Pole; but this
was afterward changed into a Pike, on the top of which they placed a small
piece of Wood.

Q. After what manner was it cut?

A. In the form of a Cross, and from it several small Circles and little
Bucklers hung down Cross wise, and above it was elevated a Hand.

Q. What was painted upon these Circles?

A. The Representations of their Gods and Emperors. Their Javelins likewise
served for Ensigns. To these the Emperors added an Elephant, a Sphinx, and a
Dragon.

Q. To whom did these Standards belong?

A. To the Horse; these Colors were foursquare, and fastened to a Pike
curiously adorned with embroidered Flames, in Gold, and in Purple; and
sometimes the Names of the Emperors were artificially wrought in them.

After what manner they disposed their Army for a Battle.
Q INto how many Battalions did the Romans divide their Army?

A. Into two or three Battalions; into two when they made two Wings, one upon
the Right, the other upon the Left.

Q. And when into three?

A. When between the two Wings they placed a third Battalion, and this happened
when they had no more than two Legions, or sometimes more.

Q. Where were the Romans placed?

A. They stood in the middle, and the Allies in the two Wings. I have here
given you a description of an Army drawn out after their manner, which I
borrowed out of Titus Livius.

Q. How many Legions were drawn out in this Army descrbed by Livy?

A. Four, two consisting of Romans, and two of their Allies.

Q. Where were the two Romans placed?

A. They were placed in the midst, the Elder of the two on the right, and the
other on the left, and the two Allies in the two Wings.

Q. When their Horse were drawn out into Squadrons, where did they stand?

A. They were placed in such a manner on the sides, that that of the Romans
covered the Right Wing, and that of the Allies the Left.

Q. How many Ranks had they in every Legion?

A. Three. The first was of Pikemen, the second of the Principes, the third of
the Triarians. In the front were to be seen all the ten Companies of Pikes
belonging to every Legion, and consequently the Van was composed of forty
Companies.

Q. Where did the Evocati stand?

A. They were either with the General, or in the middle of the Ranks to
encourage the rest.

Q. And where were the Centurions?

A. They were thus distributed: Two commanded the middle Battalion; and the
other two commanded one the Right Wing, and the other the Left Wing.

Q. Where was the General's place?

A. It was between the Triarii, and the Principes. He was surrounded by the
Praetorian Bands, and from thence commanded the whole Army.

Q. How were the Companies disposed?

A. They were so disposed in a Quadrangular form, that the Legion was likewise
foursquare. They fought just as they were ranked.

Of the Honors that were bestowed on the Conquerors.
Q. WHen a General had gained a considerable Victory, and the Soldiers had
saluted him by the name of Imperator, what did he next do?

A He immediately dispatched Letters crowned with Laurel to the Senate to
demand of them, that they would give him the name of Imperator, as likewise
that they would decernere Supplicationes, that is* appoint public
Supplications or Prayers.

Q. What did the Senate when they had agreed to this Proposal?

A. They all went in a Body to the Temples to thank the gods, and offered
Sacrifices to them.

Q. What did they afterward do?

A. They gave Public Entertainments; and the Public Rejoycings continued
more, or less, according to the Circumstances of the Victory, and the quality
of the Conqueror.

Q. Why was a lesser Triumph called Ovatio?

A. As well from the joyful Acclamations of the Soldiers, who often redoubled
this letter O, as because that in this lesser Triumph Sheep were offered, as
they offered Oxen in the greater.

Q. Who might pretend to this Triumph?

A. He that was neither Dictator nor Consul, and he that had not vanquished a
lawful Enemy.

Q. What honors did they pay him?

A. He was crowned with Myrtle, and so made his Entry into the City, preceded
by several men playing upon Flutes. Learned men are not agreed whether he rid
on Horseback or no.

Q. How was the solemnity of a Triumph ordered?

A. First marched the Flutes and Trumpets, next the Oxen that were designed for
Sacrifice adorned with Garlands and Ribbons; after them were to be seen the
Spoils taken from the Enemy, the several Titles and Representations of Nations
and Cities.

Q. Who followed after this?

A. The conquered Leaders, Princes and Kings bound and fettered.

Q. And where did the Imperator, or Lord General appear?

A. He was mounted upon a Chariot in a Triumphal Robe, crowned with Laurel, and
held a branch in his hand.

Q How was this Chariot drawn?

A. Sometimes by Stags, sometimes by Lions or Elephants, but for the general
part it was drawn by four white Horses.

Q. Who followed the Chariot?

A. The Children, the Relations, and Friends of the Conqueror. The victorious
Army marched afterward, the Cavalry and Infantry each in their proper rank.

Q. After what manner did they march?

A. They were all crowned with Laurel, and sung certain Verses suitable to the
Occasion, and carried about them the marks of their Valor, some Bracelets,
others Spears, or Chains about their Necks, the greatest part Crowns.

Q. Whither did the Conqueror go in this Procession?

A. He went to the Capitol where he offered Sacrifice, after which the Senate
made a magnificent Feast at the public Expense.

Q. What sort of a place was the Capitol?

A. It was a Temple dedicated to Jupiter upon the Tarpeian Hill. Domitian laid
out Three Millions to guild it.

Q. What was peculiar to this Temple?

A. There were three Altars in it; one dedicated to Juno, another to Minerva,
that in the middle, which was the most magnificent, to Jupiter.

Of the Southsayers or Augurs.
Q. WHat was the proper business of the Augurs?

A. Their Office was to explain Dreams, Extraordinary Events and Oracles, which
they did by the singing or flight of Birds, or by observing how they fed.

Q. Whence is their name derived?

A. They were called Augures ab avium garritu, from the chirping and singing of
Birds, and Auspices quasi Avispices ab aves aspiciendo, from beholding the
flight of Birds. These two kinds of Soothsaying have occasioned these and the
like Sayings, bonis avibus or auspiciis with good luck, malis avibus with ill
luck. And because they began nothing in auspicato, i. e. without the Counsel of
the Augurs, hence auspicari rem has signified to begin a matter.

Q From how many sorts of things did they draw their Auguries?

A. From five. First from Thunder and Lightning in the Heavens.

Q. What was the second?

A. By the singing of some Birds, as of a Raven, a Crow, an Owl, and these they
called Oscines; or by the flight of others, as Eagles, Vulturs, Buzzards, which
were called Praepetes.

Q. And how was the third?

A. By Chickens: Early in the morning they gave them something to eat, now if
they did not immediately pick it up with great greediness, so that some of the
Crumbs fell out of their mouths, if they walked from one side to the other, if
they crow'd, or if they flew away, it was looked upon to be an ill Augury; If
the contrary happened, they drew a happy presage from it. From these Pullets
the Augur was called Pullarius.

Q. What was the fourth?

A. It was taken from four-footed Beasts, as Wolves, Foxes, Goats, Asses,
Weasils, Rats, etc. which either should cross the way, or appear in some
unusual place.

Q. How was the fifth?

A. From any extraordinary Accident either within doors, or in the Fields. As
for instance, suppose a man had seeen a Weasil, or if Rats had eaten Honey, if
one had heard a strange voice, etc. all this they called Dirae.

Q. What did the Soothsayers do with the Victims?

A. First, they considered the different manner they followed those that led
them to the Altar, if they did it easily or with difficulty, the lesser or
greater quantity of Blood that came from them.

Q. What other Observations did they make?

A. They observed the good or bad disposition of the heart and liver. Lastly,
from the brightness or gloominess of the flame, they drew either a good or a
bad Augury. Those that observed the Fire and Smoke were by a peculiar name
called Capnomantes from the Greek, which is as much as to say, Smoke Prophets.

Of the Roman Apparel.
Q HOW were the Romans clothed?

A. They wore over their Tunic a woollen Robe. The Graecians had their Mantle
called Pallium, which was as peculiar to them as the Toga to the Romans.

Q. What sort of a Robe was it?

A. The figure of it was generally in a demi-circle, and sometimes foursquare.

Q. Were there any plaits or folds in this Gown?

A. There were two, so placed that one was above the other; the uppermost came
slopeing cross from the right to the left, after the manner of a Belt, and the
lower came from the wast of the Gown to the bottom.

Q. Who wore their Gowns edged?

A. The Magistrates and Priests, but especially Children, who till they were
seventeen years old wore it with another mark of their Nobility in the form of
a golden Heart, which was fastened to the Collar.

Q. And when they were seventeen years old, what Robe did they wear then?

A. They took the Toga virilis which was wholly plain. Nay, young Gentlewomen
wore the same Habit till they were married, the Edges of which were covered
with Purple.

Q. What did they wear under this Gown?

A. One or two Tunics or Coats, that which was next the Skin was called the
Subucula, and the other kept the name of Tunica.

Q. What sort of a fashioned Coat was it that the People wore?

A. It was without Studds. The Knights wore one with small Studds, and the
Senators theirs with large ones.

Q. How were these Studds made?

A. They were nothing but knots of Purple in the form of broad Nail-heads,
sowed or embroidered upon the Stuff.

Q. Who wore the Robe which they called the Palmata?

A. Those that triumphed. This Robe derived its name from Palms which were
painted upon it. All the different Habits which we have no English Names to
express them by, were different Military Vestments which they wore over their
Tunic.

Q. Those Sumptuous Cloaks called the Paludamentum and Chlamys, how were they
made?

A. They were made of Scarlet, Purple and Gold, and served to defend them from
the cold.

Q. How many sorts of Shoes had they?

A. Two, one which only covered the Sole of the Foot, the other which covered
it wholly.

The Roman Games.
Q. HOW many sorts of Games were there among the Romans?

A. Several sorts.

Q. Where were they kept?

A. Some in the Circus, or on the Theater, and took their names from thence;
others were sacred, and celebrated in Honor of the Gods.

Q. How were these sacred Sports called?

A. They were generally named from the Deity in whose Honor they were kept.
Others were made upon the account of some Vow. Funeral Sports were only kept at
the death of some person, and others for mere exercise.

Q. How many sorts of Sports were represented in the Circus?

A. Seven sorts. First, they either fought at Whorle-bats, or at Fisticuffs, or
Cudgels, or Swords, or Javelins, or Pikes, etc. Or else they were Gladiators,
or men fighting with beasts, or lastly, they wrestled with one another, to see
who could give the first fall.

The second was Running.

The third was Leaping, and that either on a level place, or else from a low
place to a high one, or from a high one to a low one.

The fourth was shooting.

The fifth was Fighting on Horseback.

The sixth was driving Chariots drawn by three or four Horses.

The seventh was a Naumachia, or Sea Fight, representing in fresh water the
manner of a Naval Engagement.

Q. After what manner were the Amphitheatres built?

A. They were built in a Circular or Oval Form, the middle part was called the
Cavea, or Arena.

Q. Why was it called so?

A. Because it was covered with Sand.

The Games called the Megalenses, were celebrated in honor of Cibele the
Mother of the gods.

Those kept in honor of Ceres, as also those kept in honor of Mars, Flora,
and Apollo, took their name from these Divinities.

The Capitoline Games were celebrated in memory of the preservation of the
Capitol.

The Roman Games, which were likewise for distinction called the Great Games*
were kept in honor of the three Deities Jupiter, Minerva, and Juno.

The Plebeian Games were instituted after the return of the people to Rome.

The Compitalitij were kept in the crossways and open Streets.

The Secular Games were so named, not because they were celebrated but once in
an Age, but because they were very seldom exhibited.

Young Gentlemen were only concerned in these last, and he that presided in
them was called the Princeps Iuventutis, or Prince of the Youth.

Of their Funeral Rites.
Q. WHat Customs did the Romans observe, when they perceived a body dying?

A. The next of the Kin received his last ga^p of breath into his mouth, to
show how unwilling he was to part with him, and as soon as he was dead closed
his eyes.

Q* What was the first thing they did when a person was dead?

A. He was washed, anointed, and embalmed. If he was a Man of Quality, they put
him on a Garment peculiar to his degree, then placed his Corpse in a Bed near
the Gate, and on the eighth day carried him to the Pyra or Funeral Pile. During
these seven days his Friends met together, and made great Outcries about his
Body, hoping to awake him if he were not perfectly dead. This was called
Conclamatio; whence we proverbially cry Conclamatum est, when we give a thing
for lost.

Q. Who carried his Body?

A. The greatest men of Note in the Republic carried him in a Bed all covered
with Purple.

Q. But if he was a man of an indifferent Fortune?

A. He was then carried in a Bier by one of his nearest Relations, to the
Puticuli, places of Public Interrment, supposed to be the same with the
Catacombs; or else by those whose business and Employment it was, who were a
vespertino tempore, called Vespae, or Vespiliones, because they buried them in
the dusk of the evening.

Q. What appeared at the head of this Funeral Pomp.

A. The Marks of his Nobility, the Trophies of Arms, the Spoils and Standards
he had taken in War, lastly, the Bustoes and Statues of his Ancestors either
done in Wax, or painted, were carried before him.

Q. What followed after this?

A. His Relations, Friends, and Children, with their hair disheveled, and in
mourning; from following the body a sequendo, these Funeral Rites have been
called Exequiae.

Q. Did not the Women likewise follow?

A. Yes, but bare-headed, and apparel'd in white, besides a great number of
Praeficae, or Female Weepers, who with their studied Lamentations gave an
Example to the rest.

Q. If the deceased was a person that had done great Services to the
Commonwealth, whither did they carry his body?

A. It was carried to the Forum, or Public Place, where a Funeral Oration was
delivered in praise of him.

Q* When that Harangue was over, whither did they go?

A. They carried him to the place where his body was to be burnt: Here they
erected a large Pile or Tabernacle, composed of the Wood of Resinous Trees,
garnished all about with Branches of Cypress.

Q. What did they do afterward?

A. After they had cast his Arms and Apparel upon this Pile of Wood, the Body
was to be burnt. His Friends were formerly used to cut off one of his fingers,
which they buried with a second Solemnity.

Q. After all these Ceremonies, what did they do with his Body?

A. They placed it at last upon the Pyra, and the nearest Relation to the
deceased Party either in Blood or Friendship, turning his face averse, set it
on fire with a Torch.

Q. What did they do about this Pile?

A. Sometimes they s^^d human blood either of Captives or Gladiators, and
sometimes these weeping women slashed their cheeks.

Q. When the Body was burnt, where did they put the Ashes?

A. They washed them in Milk and Wine, then put them into an Urn, after which
the Priest thrice sprinkled the company with clean water, and the eldest of
these Praeficae cried aloud, Licet, which is as much as to say, Now you may go.

Q. What answer did the standers-by make?

A. They sighed, and said, Farewell, farewell, we will follow you in our turns,
when it shall please Nature.

Q. Whither were his Bones and Ashes carried?

A. They were carried to a Sepulcher, before which an Altar was built, and upon
it they burnt Incense.

Q. After all these last offices were performed, what did his Heirs do?

A. They gave a Feast to his Relations, and sometimes to the People, but always
prepared a Funeral Supper for the old and aged men, which was called
Silicernium, and figuratively signifies an old fellow.

Q. Did the Romans use to bury within the City?

A. By a Law of the Twelve Tables it was provided, That none besides the
Emperor and Vestal Nuns should be buried within the City; tho some few for
particular reasons have obtained it. They generally buried them near the
Highway, to put Passengers in mind of their Mortality; hence we meet the word
Viator so frequently in old Inscriptions.

Q. What was the ancient way of burying among the Romans?

A. Interment; but afterward to prevent the ill treatment of their Enemies,
they burnt their Bodies, as the Graecians did. However, it is credible the
poorer sort were still Interred, as being the cheapest way; and that only
persons of Condition used Burning.

Of their Eating.
Q. HOW many stated times do you find the Romans had for eating?

A. They breakfasted in the Morning; toward Noon they dined, but always very
soberly, because they dined alone; a little after followed their Beaver, and
toward Nine a Clock at Night they went to Supper, which was generally very
magnificent, because they invited their Friends to it.

Q. What did they do in the beginning of their Entertainments?

A. They gave each of the Guests a Billet, wherein was set down the Number, the
Quantity, and Order of the Courses.

Q. Upon what did they sit at Supper-time?

A. They lay upon Beds. They placed no more than three Beds about the Table,
and three in a Bed, because they had seldom more Guests than Nine, and they
were covered with Purple.

Q. What did they use to do before they lay upon these Beds.

A. They washed their Body, changed their Garments, and pulled off their Shoes
for fear of spoiling the Beds.

Q. Into how many Parts did they usually divide their Supper?

A. Into Three, which they called their first, second, and third Course. In the
first were always served Eggs, and in the last Course (whether second or third)
always Apples, whence we say proverbially, Ab ovo usque ad mala.

Q. What was the Sportula?

A. A Dole of Meat distributed by Persons of Eminent Quality, to the People,
which from the Panier or Basket in which it was brought, was called Sportula.
Sometimes they distributed Money instead of Meat; so that Sportula denoted any
kind of Dole either of Meat or Money; and as often as it was given in lieu of a
Supper, it was opposed to Coena recta.

Q. What was a Coena recta, or Coena dubia?

A. Both signify a handsome Entertainment, where there is Plenty and Variety of
Dishes. Recta here signifies as much as Vera, and is opposed to Sportula, a
light and short Supper: It Is called Dubia, because in so great a variety the
Guest does not know where to begin. Coena Ambulatoria is a Supper where one
Dish walks through the Table.

Of their Priests.
Q. WHat was the Chief-Priest's or Pontifex Maximus's Office?

A. He looked after all the other Priests, and to him it belonged to judge of
all matters that had a relation to the Worship of the Gods.

Q. Who was the first Emperor that assumed the Title of Pontifex Maximus?

A. Augustus Caesar; and the succeeding Emperors followed his Example, as we
find in their Coins and Medals. Nay, the Christian Emperors retained the Name,
till Gratian issued out a Prohibition for any one to give him that Title.

Q. Why were Flamines so named?

A. From the Hat or Mitre they wore, which in ancient times was called Flama.

Q. By whom was the Temple of Vesta instituted?

A. Either by Aeneas, or Ascanius; at least the Vestal Virgins were by Numa
Pompilius.

Q. What Rules did they observe?

A. They were obliged to take none into the number of Vestals, as were born
either of a Slave or a Freed-man, or were ill-shap'd, or were above Ten, or
less than Six Years old. It was an Honorable Order, and they were extremely
respected by all people.

Q. What was their Office?

A. To keep the Sacred Fire; which is by some Misfortune or Neglect it were
extinguished, they were to kindle it with nothing but the Fire of Heaven: For
which purpose they used to contract the Sunbeams in a Burning-Glass.

Q. How many Years did they continue in the service of this Goddess?

A. Thirty years; during the first ten they learnt all the Ceremonies, which
they put in practice the ten years next following; and the last ten they
employed in instructing the Novices.

Q. After this time was expired, what Privilege had they?

A. They were at liberty to quit their Sacerdotal Habit, and marry.

Q. When the Sacred Fire was suffered to go out through Negligence, what
Punishment did the Criminal endure?

A. She was publicly whipped, and if any of them lost their Virginity, they were
buried alive.

Q. Where?

A. Without the Town, in a very dark Vault, where they had a Bed, and a Lamp
lighted.

Q. Did they leave them any Food in the Vault?

A. Lest the Criminal should immediately dye of Hunger, they left a little
Bread, Milk, and Oil.

Q. When the Vestal was shut in, and the door made up, what did they use to do?

A. That day a profound silence was kept in Rome.

Of the Roman State.
Q. INto how many parts was the Roman People divided?

A. Into Three: First, the Senators, which was the most Powerful Body, so that
nothing was done without their Advice.

Q. Which was the second?

A. That of the Knights, which next to the Senators made the greatest Figure in
the Government. In this number the Sons of Senators were reckoned, till such
time as they were of Age to be Senators.

Q. Which was the third part?

A. 'Twas the People, by which we are to understand all those that were neither
Knights nor Senators.

Q. What were the Roman Comitia?

A. Assemblies, where they used to give their Votes; and because they gave them
when they were divided sometimes into Curiae or Wards, and sometimes into
Tribes or Centuries, thence arose the different Names of these Assemblies.

Q. Had not all these Assemblies their respective Privileges?

A. Yes; and they were convened for some special occasion, as to create
Magistrates, to enact some Law, or give their Opinion. The different places
where these Laws were made, gave them different Names.

Q. Who were there in the Assembly of Magistrates?

A. Besides Citizens, there were those that stood for Offices, and were called
Candidates, because they wore a white garment.

Q. Who were there besides these in this Assembly?

A. Distributors, in Latin Diribitores, who gave the people Wooden Tables as
they passed over certain Bridges, and collected their Votes.

Q. Were no other persons admitted there?

A. There were Guards that took care lest there should be any Cheat in
gathering their Votes, and Cryers who proclaimed aloud who had most Votes.

Q. How did they manage Judicial Causes?

A. There was the Plaintiff, the Council, and the Defendant, who had his
Friends about him, and appeared in a very ordinary Garb, with a long Beard, his
Hair and every thing about him negligent and out of order.

Q. How did they give their Suffrages?

A. At first they used to give them viva voce, but afterward in all Assemblies
for Laws or Judgments, they gave the people Wooden Tables; in one were these
two Letters, U. R. that is to say, Vti Rogas, Be it as you desire it.

Q. What was writ in the other?

A. The letter A, signifying Antiquo; i. e. I forbid it.

Q. If the number happened to be equal, how did they then?

A. The Sentence was void, unless in the case of Criminals, for the Century
which did not condemn, was supposed to absolve.

Q. How many Assemblies did they keep to elect Magistrates?

A. Two. The first to elect; Whom would you have, said he who presided, for
your Consuls or Prae^ors? and after the Election was made, Are you contented
that M. Cicero, and M. Anthony, whom the people have pitched upon to be
Consuls, should stand.

Q. What does the word Forum signify?

A. 'Twas either the place where they bought and sold, or signified the same
with Curia, the place where the Assemblies were held.

Q. What is the meaning of the word Rostra?

A. It signifies the Tribunal, from whence they harangu'd the People.

Q. Why was it so called?

A. Because it was formerly adorned with the Beaks of the Ships which the
Romans took from the People of Antium.

Of their Gladiators.
Q. AT whose expense were these Prizes performed.

A. Sometimes at the expense of private Persons, who to make themselves
popular, exhibited these Shows; and because they were freely bestowed upon the
People, to whom by a public Bill they gave notice what day they should be
fought, therefore they are frequently denoted by the Latin word Munus.

Q. What was the original of these Spectacles?

A. It was derived from a common practice among the Heathens at the burial of
their Friends, who were of opinion that the shedding of man's blood would be
propitiatory to the Soul deceased, and for this purpose bought Captives and
Slaves to be sacrificed upon these Occasions. These particular kind of Fencers
were called Bustuarii, but afterward these Spectacles were played not only at
Tombs, but in the Circus, and Amphitheatre. Nay, the Humor prevailed so far at
last, that they were given as Legacies by Will and Testament to the People.

Q. When they met on the day appointed, what Weapons did they fight with?

A. They were of two sorts. Lusoria tela, with which they only showed Feats of
Activity; and Decretoria, with which they really encountered one another for
life or death. Their skirmishing with the former was properly termed praeludium.

Q. When a Gladiator received a dangerous wound, what became of him?

A. He was not immediately discharged, for this depended upon the pleasure of
the Emperor, or the People, or the Person that gave the Show. If they thought
fit to make him continue the Fight, though in never so great extremity, they
signified it convertendo pollicem, by turning up the Thumb, as they did the
contrary premendo pollicem, by turning down the Thumb. This discharge was
called Missio.

Q. What reward did the Conquerors receive?

A. Sometimes Money, sometimes a Garland of Palm Tree, whence figuratively
Palma has been used to signify the Victory it self; sometimes the People gave
them a Wand called Rudis, and somes a Cap or Pileus, both which last were
Badges or Tokens of Liberty, and of their being wholly discharged from this
slavish sort of life.

Of the Sibylline Oracles among the Romans.
Q. HOW many Sibylls were there?

A. They are generally reckoned to be Ten. The first was called Persica, the
second Lybica, the third Delphica, the fourth Cumaea, the fifth Erythraea, the
sixth Samia, the seventh Cumana, the eighth Hellespontica, the ninth Phrygia,
and the tenth Tiburtina. They were all of them Women very famous for the Spirit
of Prophecy.

Q. Where were their Books kept?

A. Within the Capitol under ground in a Chest of Stone, where they continued
safe till the burning of the Capitol in Sylla's time. But to retrieve this
loss, the Senate dispatched Envoys into Greece and Asia to collect all the
Prophesies which went under their name. They were supposed to be of that
certainty, that when they affirmed any thing to be undoubtedly true, they used
to say it was Sibyllae folium, as true as Sibyll's Oracle.

Q. Did not Tarquinius Priscus institute a certain number of Priests to expound
and keep their Oracles?

A. Y^s, who were at first from their number called Duumviri, afterward they
were increased to ten, and called Decemviri; and lastly, Sylla, as it is
supposed, added five more, and then they were called the Quindecimviri. These
Oracles were constantly consulted in all times of public Calamity and Exigence,
and to the abovementioned Priests it belonged to see that Sacrifices,
Supplications, Processions, Expiations, and in short, all Ceremonial Rites
prescribed by these Books were duly performed.

Q. Which of the Sibylls was it that writ her Oracles upon Leaves of Trees?

A. The Sibylla Cumaea, and as these Leaves were frequently scattered by the
winds, it was a difficult matter to place them in due order again. Hence arose
the Proverb, Labori^sius est quam Sibyllae folia colligere.

Q. Is Sibylla a proper name?

A. No; it is an appellation common to all Women that have the gift of Prophecy,
from (...), which in the Aeolic Dial^ct is the same with (...) God, and (...),
i. e. Counsel; because they revealed the will and pleasure of the Gods to the
people.

Of their Sacrifices.
Q. WHat was the manner of Sacrificing?

A. First, the Priest laid his hand on the Altar, and rehearsed certain Prayers
to Ianus, and V^sta.

Q. Why so?

A. Because the Romans were persuaded, that without their intercession they
could not have access to the other gods. His Prayers being ended, he laid upon
the Beasts head a little Corn, together with a Cake made of Meal and Salt,
called in Latin Mola. From this Ceremony the Act of Sacrificing has been termed
Immolatio.

Q. What did he do after this?

A. He drank some Wine out of a wooden or earthen Chalice, which was afterward
carried about to all the people that they might also libare or gently taste of
it. This Rite was called Libatio.

Q. Proceed.

A. When this was over, the rest of the Wine with Frankincense mixed in it, was
poured upon the Beast's Head between the Horns, o^e crying out with a loud
voice, macta est hostia, i. e. magis aucta, and then they immediately began to
kill the Sacrifice.

Q. After what manner was this done?

A. First, the Priest plucked off some of the Hairs between the Horns, and threw
them into the fire; then turning his Face toward the East, he drew a long
crooked Knife upon the Beast's Back, and commanded his under Officers or Popae
to kill the Beast.

Q. Were the Standers-by Idle all this while?

A. No, for some saved the Blood in Vessels, others Flead the Beast, and others
washed it. Then the Priest observed the Entrails, and if he discovered no ill
Omens in them, the abovementioned Popae rolled them in Barley-meal, and sent
them in Baskets to the Priests, who taking them up in a broad Platter, laid
them upon the Altar and burnt them. This was properly called litare.

Q. And how did they conclude?

A. After the portion laid out for the Gods was burnt, the people repaired to a
common Feast, where as they were eating, they sung Hymns, and danced about the
Altar.

Of their Marriages and Divorces.
Q HOW was the manner of Contracting?

A. For the greater security they writ down the form of the Contract upon
Tables of Record, and had them sealed by some Witnesses there present, who from
this Action were termed Signatores. But first they consulted the Augurs, as
they were used to do in all Actions of any importance.

Q. Why did the Woman wear the Ring, which the Man in token of his Affection
gave her, on the fourth Finger of her left Hand?

A. Because they supposed that an Artery from the Heart proceeded to that
Finger alone.

Q. Whence is the word Nuptiae derived?

A. From Nubo, which signifies to cover, for the custom was that the Woman
should be brought to her Husband with a Flammeum, or yellow Veil thrown over
her Face.

Q. Why was the Bride by a seeming violence taken away from her Mother, or next
Relation?

A. Because of the good Success which Romulus and his Followers had in the
violent taking away of the Sabine Women.

Q. What other Ceremonies did they use?

A. Toward night the Woman was led to her Husband's House (whence the common
Phrase Vxorem ducere to marry a Wife) with five Torches, to intimate the need
which married Persons had of five Deities, viz. Jupiter, Juno, Venus, Suadela,
and Diana, who is oftentimes called Lucina.

Q. What were these Torches made of?

A. Of a pitchy Liquour that issued from a Tree called Teda. Hence the Poets
figuratively called both the Torches, and the Wedding it self Tedas.

Q. When the Woman was brought to the door, what did she then?

A. She anointed the Posts of the Door with Oil, from which Ceremony a Wife was
called Vxor quasi Unxor. Then the Brideman lifted her over the Threshold, and
so carried her in by a seeming force.

Q. Why so?

A. Because she could not in modesty seem to go without violence into that
place where she was to resign her Virginity.

Q. As she was carried in, what was it the Company cried aloud?

A. They cried Talassio, Talassio, as the Greeks did Hymen Hymenaee; for which
this reason is alleged; That at the Rape of the Sabine Women some of the
meaner sort carrying away one of the fairest Women, certain Citizens would have
taken her from them, which to prevent they pretended that they carried her to
one Talassius, a man of great esteem, and so brought their Prey off, the others
accompanying her, and often crying, Talassio, Talassio.

Q. What followed after this?

A. Being thus brought home, she received the Keys of her Husband's House, to
denote that the custody of every thing in it was committed to her care.

Q. How was the Marriage Bed styled?

A. Genialis lectus, and sometimes lectus adversus, quod eum in atrio collocari
januae ex adverso mos fuit, that is, because they placed it in the Court,
directly opposite to the Gate.

Q. What Ceremonies did they use the next day after the Marriage?

A. They gave a solemn Entertainment where the Relations and Friends of the
married Couple met to make merry. This Feast they called Repotia.

Q. How many sorts of Divorces had they?

A. Two: One between Parties only contracted, the second between married
People. The first was properly called Repudium, in which the party sueing for a
Divorce, used this form Condition tua non utar; the other was called
Divortium, and the party that desired it used these words, Res tuas tibi
habeto, or res tuas tibi agite.

Q. What is the reason of this Phrase, mittere, or remittere nuncium?

A. Because in these Divorces they usually sent their Wives a paper containing
the Causes of their Separation per nuncium by a Messenger.

Q. What Formalities were used in a Divorce?

A. The Ceremonies were quite contrary to those observed in Marriage. For after
the Censors were made acquainted with the just Causes of the Divorce, the
Marriage-Tables were broken, the Dowry restored, the Keys of the House taken
from the Woman, and she turned out of doors.

Of other Roman Customs and Antiquities.
Q. WHat Ceremonies did the Romans use in the building and razing of Cities?

A. In the building of Cities the Founders generally made their Augural
Observations; which being ended, they marked out the place where the Wall was
to be built, by ploughing up the Ground. Where they designed the City Gate to
be, they gently carried the Plough over it, whence a Gate was called Porta a
Portando. The like Ceremony of Ploughing was used in the demolishing of Cities.

Q. What is the difference between Ara, and Altar?

A. The Ara was made foursquare, and covered with Turf, not very high from the
ground, or as some say, close to it, and upon this they sacrificed to the
Terrestrial Gods. The Altar was lifted somewhat higher from the ground, and
upon this they sacrificed to the Celestial Gods only.

Q. What was the Scrobiculus?

A. A Furrow or Pit containing an Altar in it, into which they poured down the
Blood of the Beast slain, together with Milk, Honey, and Wine, when they
sacrificed to an Infernal Deity.

Q. What was the Focus?

A. In strict propriety of speech it is taken for an Altar on which they
sacrificed to their Domestic Gods, such as were their Penates, or Lares, whence
arose the Proverb, Pro aris and focis certare, to fight for the defense of
one's Religion and Country, which was part of the Militare Sacramentum, or
Oath administered to the Roman Soldiers.

Q. Who were the Dii majorum Gentium?

A. Gods of the first Rank and Quality, whom Ennius has thus comprised in a
Distick. Juno, Vesta, Minerva, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars, Mercurius, Iovis,
Neptunus, Vulcanus, Apollo. They were likewise called Dii consentes quasi
consentientes, because Jupiter would do nothing without the consent of all.

Q. How was the second sort of Gods named?

A. They were called Semidei, or Demigods; also Indigetes, i. e. God's adopted,
or Canonized, men deified, and Divi. This last Title they bestowed upon their
Emperors, because for their Merits they thought them worthy to be Gods.

Q. What were the Dii Patrii, or Tutelares?

A. Such as had undertaken the protection of any City or Place; and therefore
the Romans, when they besieged any Town, used by certain Charms to call out
their Tutelar Gods, because they thought it impossible to take the City as long
as they continued in it, or at least supposed it a Crime to make the Gods
Prisoners.

Q. What were the Genii?

A. They were looked upon to be of a middle essence between Gods and Men, and
every man so soon as he was born, was supposed to be invisibly accompanied by a
good and evil Genius or Angel.

Q. What were men used to write upon before the invention of Paper?

A. They sometimes writ upon the inward Rinds of Trees, called in Latin Libri
(whence we still call our Books Libri) sometimes in great Leaves of the
Egyptian Rush Papirus, from whence comes our English word Paper, and the Latin
Papirus. Shortly after a Contest happening between Ptolomy King of Egypt, and
Eumenes King of Pergamus, the latter found out the use of Parchment, and called
it from the place Pergamena. At this time the Romans used to write in Tables of
Wood, covered over with Wax, so that Tabellae is employed to signify Missive
Letters, and Tabellarius a Letter-Carrier. These Tables or Books were made of
the Caudex, the Trunk or Stock of a Tree, whence we still call our Books
Codices, a Caudicibus.

Q. What did they write with?

A. With a Stylus, an Instrument of Steel or Iron, having a sharp point at one
end, and being broad, but keen and well-edg'd at the other. With the sharp
point they writ what they pleased; with the broad end they scraped out what
they had written; whence the Phrase, Stylum invertere, which signifies, To say
and unsay a thing.

Q. What was the name of the Mark which they made at the end of their Books?

A. They called it a Coronis; which the Interpreters of Aristophanes describe
to be linea brevis ab inferiore part flexa. All are agreed it was some known
and common dash, usually subjoined to the end of Books. This gives light to the
Greek Proverb, (...), i. e. from the beginning to the end.

Q. After what manner were their Books written in former Ages?

A. They writ a whole Book in one continued Page, which was not cut into many
leaves, and bound up, as the fashion now is, but that one entire Page was used
to be rolled upon a Staff fastened at the end of it. Hence a volvendo, we call
our Books Volumina, Volumes.

Q. What was the Vmbilicus?

A. The Staff on which the Book was rolled, they called metaphorically
Vmbilicus, because as a Navel is the middle of a man's body, so when the Book
was rolled up, this Staff was the middle of it. However, because it was always
fastened at one end of the Page, hence Vmbilicus, but especially when applied
to a Book, signifies The End, as in Horace, ad Vmbilicum ducere.

Q. How were the two knobs or ends of the Staff, which appeared on each side of
the Volume, called?

A. Cornua, and they used to adorn them with Silver and Gold. The Title, which
was the beginning of every Book, was named Frons.

Q. What Customs and Ceremonies were used by the Romans in handling their Suits
of Law?

A. First, there was, in jus vocatio, that is, the citing of one into the
Court. Secondly, Postulatio, a Request put up to the Praetor, That it might be
lawful for the Plaintiff to enter his Action against the Defendant; whence
postulare aliquem de hoc vel illo crimine, is to accuse one of this or that
Crime. Thirdly, nominis delatio, the taking of the Defendant's Name into the
Court-Book, and this was called, intendere actionem vel litem, and diem alicui
dicere; that is, to enter an Action against one.

Q. When Request was made by the Plaintiff to the Praetor, That he might enter
his Action against the Defendant, did he not vadari reum, i. e. demand Sureties
or Bail of him to appear on the day appointed?

A. Yes; and promisit vadimonium, that is, he entered likewise into Bond for his
own appearance on the same day, which was commonly the third day following,
called properly dies perendinus, and sometimes dies tertius simply.

Q. Who were the Viri Consulares?

A. Not every one that was capable of a Consul's Office, but those that had
actually born it.

Q. How did the Romans date their Deeds and Charters?

A. At first they did it by naming the Year wherein their City was founded; as
for instance, ab urbe condita the twentieth, thirtieth, or fortieth year; but
afterward by subscribing the Name of their present Consuls. Nay, to know the
Age of their Wines they signed their Vessels after the same manner.

Q. What was their manner of selling sub corona?

A. An Enemy was said to be sold sub corona, when in the Marketplace a Crown
was put upon his head in token of such a Sale; or else because at that time he
was surrounded with a Circle of Soldiers called Corona.

Q. What was their way of dismissing an Enemy sub jugum?

A. They erected two Spears, with a third lying across, in manner of a
Gallows; then they caused them, being disarmed and their Belts taken away, to
pass under, in token of Bondage.

Q. Why did Lapis in old time signify a Mile?

A. Because at every Mile's end a great stone in manner of a mark-stone, was
erected.

Q. Why did the Romans call the space of Five Years a Lustrum?

A. Because they did once in Five Years Revolution lustrare exercitum Romanum,
purge the Roman Army by Sacrifice. Hence we say, duo lustra, ten years, tria
lustra, fifteen years, etc.

Q. Does not Nomen sometimes signify the same as Debitum, a Debt?

A. Yes, and the reason is, because the Creditors did use to write down their
Debtors Names: Hence they were said, Nomina sua liberare, when they paid the
Debt; as on the contrary, they were said Nomina faeere, when they contracted a
Debt.

An Explication of some Letters and Names that occur in this History.
A. Aulus. C. Caius. D. Decimus. L. Lucius. M. Marcus. N. Numerius. P. Publius.
Q. Quintus. T. Titus. Ap. Appius. Cn. Cne^us. S. Spurius. Ti. Tiberius. Mam.
Mamereus. Ser. Servius. Sex. Sextus. F. Filius. N. Nepos. Q. Quatuor. S. P. Q.
R. Senatus, Populusque Romanus. S. C. Senatus Consulto. Cos. Consul. Coss.
Consules. HS. S^stertium.
The Geographical Names explained.
ALlobroges. The People of Savoy and Piedmont. Ambrons. People of France living
by Pillage. Albanians. People dwelling between the Caspian Sea and the
Georgians. Daci. The People of Transylvania. Iberians. The Georgians. Insubres.
The Milanese. Liburnia. Hodie Croatia. Ligurians. The Genoese. Marcomanni.
People near Austria, whose Country is Marck; according to others the
Bohemians. Quadi. The Moravians. Sarmatia. A large Country, part in Europe,
part in Asia, comprehending all Polonia, Russia, Muscovy, and most of Tartary.
Suevi. The Inhabitants of Schwaven. Teutones. The Germans. Vaccaei. People of
the Kingdom of Leon in Spain.
A Table of the Principal Matters contained in this Book.
THE Original of the Romans Page 1 A Chronological Table of the Latin Kings 3
The Building of Rome 4 The means that Romulus used to people the City of Rome 5
The several sorts of Government in the City of Rome 6 The Seven Kings of Rome 8
Romulus the 1st King of Rome 9 Numa Pompilius the 2d King of Rome 14 Tullus
Hostilius the 3d King of Rome 16 Ancus Martius the 4th King of Rome 19
Tarquinius Priscus the 5th King of Rome 20 Servius Tullius the 6th King of Rome
23 Tarquinius Superbus the 7th King of Rome 27 Of the Alterations made in Rome
31 The Wars in which the Romans were engaged 33 The War of Hetruria 34 The War
of the Latins 36 The War of the Volscians 37 The War of the Vejentes 40 The War
of the Gauls 42 The War of the Latins 46 The War against the Samnites 47 The
War against the Tarentines 49 The first Punic War 53 The second Punic War 58
The War of Macedonia 69 The War of Antiochus 70 The second Macedonian War 71
The third Punic War 74 The War of Corinth 75 The War of Portugal 76 The
destruction of Numantia 77 The War of the Slaves 78 The War against Jugurtha 80
The War against Mithridates 82 The Civil War between Marius and Sylla 85 The
taking of Jerusalem 87 The War between Caesar and Pompey 88 Of the several
Seditions 92 A Chronological Table of the Roman Emperors 100 Julius Caesar the
first Roman Emperor 103 Augustus the 2d Emperor 116 Tiberius the 3d Emperor 128
Caligula the 4th Emperor 133 Claudius the 5th Emperor 138 Nero the 6th Emperor
142 Galba the 7th Emperor 148 Otho the 8th Emperor 149 Vitellius the 9th
Emperor 151 Vespasian the 10th Emperor 154 Titus the 11th Emperor 158 Domitian
the 12th Emperor 161 Nerva the 13th Emperor 165 Trajan the 14th Emperor 167
Adrian the 15th Emperor 173 Antoninus Pius the 16th Emperor 177 M. Aurelius and
L. Verus, making together the 17th Emperor 180 Commodus the 18th Emperor 183
Pertinax the 19th Emperor 185 Julian the 20th Emperor 187 Severus the 21st
Emperor 188 Caracalla and Geta, making together the 22d Emperor 191 Macrinus
and his Son, making together the 23d Emperor 194 Heliogabalus the 24th Emperor
195 Alexander the 25th Emperor 197 Maximin and his Son, making together the
26th Emperor 200 Balbinus and Pupienus, making together the 27th Emperor. 202
Gordianus the Younger the 28th Emperor 203 Philip and his Son, making together
the 29th Emperor 205 Decius the 30th Emperor 206 Gallus and Volusianus his Son,
making together the 31st Emperor 207 Aemilianus the 32d Emperor 208 Valerianus
the 33d Emperor 209 Gallienus the 34th Emperor 211 Claudius II. the 35th
Emperor 213 Quintillus the 36th Emperor 215 Aurelianus the 37th Emperor ibid.
Tacitus the 38th Emperor 217 Florianus the 39th Emperor 218 Probus the 40th
Emperor 219 Carus the 41st Emperor 221 Numerianus the 42d Emperor 222 Carinus
the 43d Emperor 223 Diocletian and Maximian, making together the 44th Emperor
224 Galerius and Constantius, making together the 45th Emperor 227 Constantine
the Great the 46th Emperor 230 The Division of the Empire between the three
Sons of Constantine the Great, making together the 47th Emperor 236 Julian the
Apostate the 48th Emperor 239 Jovian the 49th Emperor 242 Valentinian the Great
the 50th Emperor 244 Valens the 51st Emperor 245 Gratian the 52d Emperor 247
Theodosius the Great the 53d Emperor 248 Arcadius the 54th Emperor 253 Honorius
the 55th Emperor 254 Of the Fall and Decay of the Roman Empire 257 Of the
increase, purity and decay of the Roman Eloquence and Learning 263 An
Abridgment of the Principal Customs of the Romans 271 Of their Months ibid. Of
their Year, and the distinction of their days 273 Of the Republic 275 Of the
Army 277 Of the Soldiers 280 Of the Leaders 282 After what manner they ranked
their Army for Battle 286 Of the Honors paid to the Conquerors 288 Of the
Augurs 290 Of the manner of the Roman Apparel 293 Of their Games 295 Of their
Funerals 297 Of their Eating 301 Of their Priests 302 Of the Roman States 305
Of their Gladiators 307 Of the Sibylline Oracles among the Romans 309 Of their
Sacrifices 311 Of their Marriages 313 Of several other Roman Antiquities and
Customs 316
THE END
Books Sold by Richard Baldwin.
THE Works of F. Rabelais, M. D. In Five Books; or the Lives, Heroic Deeds and
Sayings of the Good Gargantua and Pantagruel, and his Voyage to the Oracle of
the Bottle. As also his Historical Letters. To which is added, the Author's
Life, and Explanatory Remarks. By Mr. Motteux. Never before Printed in English.
Bibliotheca Politica: Or an Enquiry into the Ancient Constitution of the
English Government; with Respect both to the just Extent of Regal Power, and to
the Rights and Liberties of the Subject. Wherein all the chief Arguments, as
well against as for the Late Revolution, are Impartially represented and
considered. In XIII. Dialogues. Collected out of the best Authors both Ancient
and Modern. To which is added, An Alphabetical Index to the whole Work. The
Four Epistles of A. G. Busbequius, concerning his Embassy into Turkey. Being
Remarks upon the Religion, Customs, Riches, Strength and Government of that
People. As also a Description of their Chief Cities, and Places of Trade and
Commerce. To which is added, His Advice how to manage War against the Turks.
Done into English. The Bounds set to France by the Pyrenean Treaty; and the
Interest of the Confederates not to accept of the Offers of Peace made at this
Time by the French King. To which are added some short Reflections, showing how
far England is concerned in the Restitution of that Treaty. Together with a
List of the Towns and Countries that the French have taken since that time.
Letters of State, Written by Mr. John Milton, To most of the Sovereign Princes
and Republics of Europe. From the Year 1649. till the Year 1659. To which is
added, An Account of his Life. Together with several of his Poems; And a
Catalogue of his Works, never before Printed. Mathematical Magic: Or the
Wonders that may be performed by Mechanical Geometry. In Two Books. Concerning
Mechanical Powers, Motions. Being one of the most easy, pleasant, useful, (and
yet most neglected) part of Mathematics, not before treated of in this
Language. Mercury; or the Secret and Swift Messenger Showing how a man may with
privacy and speed communicate his Thoughts to a Friend at any distance. The
Second Edition. By the Right Reverend Father in God, John Wilkins, late Lord
Bishop of Chester. Printed for Rich. Baldwin, where are to be had, The World in
the Moon. England's Interest; Or, a Discipline for Seamen: Wherein is proposed,
a Sure Method for Raising Qualified Seamen for the well Manning Their Majesty's
Fleet on all Occasions. Also a Method whereby Seamen will be obliged mutually
to Relieve each other on board the Men of War yearly, or thereabout; except
where any Seaman by his own voluntary Consent shall be willing to stay longer.
Likewise is showed the Advantages which by these Methods will accrue to the
Nation in general, and in particular to the Merchants and Seamen: For hereby
the Wages now given in Merchant-Ships will be brought lower, and every Seaman
will have the liberty of choosing his own Commander, after the first year, and
continuing with him, if he so likes. By Captain George St. Lo. An Answer to a
Paper written by Count d'Avaux, the French King's Ambassador in Sueden,
concerning the Proposals of Peace made by France to the Confederates. An Essay
concerning Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and the Duty of Subjects in all
Revolutions. With some Considerations touching the present Juncture of Affairs.
An Essay concerning the Laws of Nations, and the Rights of Sovereigns. With an
Account of what was said at the Council Board by the Civilians upon the
Question, Whether Their Majesty's Subjects taken at Sea acting by the Late
King's Commission might not be looked on as Pirates? With Reflections upon the
Arguments of Sir T. P. and Dr. Ol. Both by Matthew. Tyndal, Doctor of Laws. The
Second Edition. The Antiquity and Justice of an Oath of Abjuration. In answer
to a Treatise, Entitled, The Case of an Oath of Abjuration considered. A
Sermon preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, and the Court of
Aldermen of the City of London, at St. Mary-le-Bow, on the 29th of May, 1694.
By John Trenchard, M A Rector of Wrexhall in the County of Somerset, and
Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Manchester. A Poem on the Late
Promotions of several Eminent Persons in Church and State. By N. Nate, Servant
to Their Majesty's. The Doctrine of the Holy Trinity placed in its due light,
by an Answer to a late Book, Entitled, Animadversions upon Dr. Sherlock's
Book, etc. Also the Doctrine of the Incarnation of our Lord asserted and
explained. The Memoirs of Monsieur Deagant: Containing the most secret
Transactions and Affairs of France, from the Death of Henry VI. till the
beginning of the Ministry of Cardinal de Richelieu, etc. Memoirs concerning the
Campaign of Three Kings, William, Lewis, and James, in the Year 1692. With
Reflections on the great Endeavors of Lewis the 14th to effect his Designs, of
James the 2d to Remount the Throne, and the proper Methods for the Allies to
take to hinder both. Liturgia Tigurina: Or, the Book of Common Prayer and
Administration of the Sacraments, and other Ecclesiastical Rites and
Ceremonies, usually practiced, and solemnly performed in all the Churches and
Chapels of the City and Canton of Zurick in Switzerland, etc. State-Tracts. In
two parts. The first part being a Collection of several Treatises relating to
the Government, privately printed in the Reign of King Charles II. The second
part consisting of a farther Collection of several choice Treatises relating to
the Government, from the Year 1660, to 1689. Now published in a Body, to show
the Necessity, and clear the Legality of the late Revolution, and our present
Happy Settlement under the Auspicious Reign of Their Majesty's King William and
Queen Mary. The Tragedies of the Last Age, considered and examined by the
Practice of the Ancients, and by the common sense of all Ages; in a Letter to
Fleetwood Shepherd, Esquire Part I. The Second Edition. A short View of Tragedy;
its Original, Excellency, and Corruption; with some Reflections on Shakespeare
and other Practitioners for the Stage. Both by Mr. Rimer, Servant to Their
Majesty's. A New, Plain, Short, and Complete French and English Grammar;
whereby the Learner may attain in few months to speak and write French
correctly, as they do now in the Court of France; and wherein all that is dark,
superfluous, and deficient in other Grammars, is plain, short, and methodically
supplied. Also very useful to Strangers that are desirous to learn the English
Tongue; for whose sake is added a short, but very exact English Grammar. The
Third Edition, with Additions. By Peter Berault. Truth brought to light; or the
History of the first 14 Years of King James I. In Four Parts, etc. Travels into
diverse parts of Europe and Asia, undertaken by the French King's order, to
discover a new way by land into China; containing many curious Remarks in
Natural Philosophy, Geography, Hydrography, and History. Together with a
Description of Great Tartary, and of the different People who inhabit there.
Done out of French. To which is added a Supplement extracted from Hakluyt and
Purchase, giving an Account of several Journeys over Land from Russia, Persia,
and the Mogul's Country, to China, together with the Roads and distances of the
Places. Europe's Chains broke; or a sure and speedy Project to rescue her from
the present Usurpations of the Tyrant of France. The Cabinet opened, or the
secret History of the Amors of Madam de Maintenon with the French King.
Translated from the French Copy. Saul at Endor; or the Ghost of the Marquess de
Louvois consulted by the French King, concerning the present Affairs. Done out
of French. An Answer to the late King James's Declaration, dated at St.
Germains, April the 7th. S. N. 1693. Licensed by Mr. Secretary Trenchard.
Reflections upon two Pamphlets lately published; one called, A Letter from
Monsieur de Cross, concerning the Memoirs of Christendom; And the other, An
Answer to that Letter; pretended to have been written by the Author of the said
Memoirs. By a Lover of Truth. A true and exact Account of the Retaking a Ship
called, The Friends Adventure of Topsham, from the French, after she had been
taken six days, and they were upon the Coasts of France with it four days;
where one Englishman and a Boy set upon seven Frenchmen, killed two of them,
took the other five Prisoners, and brought the Ship and them safe to England,
etc. A Project of a Descent upon France. By a Person of Quality. A Compendious
History of the Taxes of France, and of the Opressive Methods of Raising of
them. An Impartial Enquiry into the Advantages and Losses that England has
received since the beginning of this Present War with France. The Gentleman's
Journal: Or the Monthly Miscellany. In a Letter to a Gentleman in the Country.
Consisting of News, History, Philosophy, Poetry, Music, Translations, etc.
Sold by R. Baldwin, Where are to be had complete Sets for the two last years,
or single ones for every Month. A Collection of Speeches of the Right
Honorable Henry late Earl of Warrington, viz I. His Speech upon his being
sworn Mayor of Chester, in November 1691. II. His Speech to the Grand Jury at
Chester, April 13. 1692. III. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the
Quarter Sessions held for the County of Chester, on the 11th. of October, 1692.
IV. His Charge to the Grand Jury at the Quarter Sessions held for the County of
Chester, on the 25 th. of April, 1693. Victoriae Anglicana: Being an Historical
Collection of all the memorable and stupendous Victories obtained by the
English against the French, both by Sea and Land, since the Norman Conquest,
etc. A Brief Disquisition of the Law of Nature, according to the Principles and
Method laid down in the Reverend Dr. Cumberland's (now Lord Bishop of
Peterborough's) Latin Treatise on that Subject. As also his Confutation of Mr.
Hobbs's Principles, put into another method. With the Right Reverend Author's
Approbation. The Life of Lewis of Bourbon, late Prince of Conde. Digested into
Annals. With many curious Remarks on the Transactions of Europe for these last
Sixty Years. Done out of French. Nevil Pain's Letter, and some other Letters
that concern the Subject of his Letter. With short Notes on them, for the
clearer Information of the Members of Parliament, in order to Nevil Pain's
Trial.

