A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN AT WHITE HALL, On Sunday, MARCH 22. 1690/1.
By EDWARD FOWLER, D. D. Chaplain in Ordinary to Their Majesty's. Published by
Her Majesty's Special Command.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Ric. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Church Yard, 1691.

Dr. FOWLER's SERMON Preached before THE QUEEN, March 22. 1690/1.

A SERMON Preached before the QUEEN.
James 2.10. For whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
Point, he is guilty of all.
THERE are several Passages of our Savior and his Apostles, which at the first
hearing do sound very harshly, and seem to savor of overgreat Severity, that
upon due Consideration are found to have nothing in them, but what is highly
Reasonable. To omit others, this Text is one of those Passages; and many, no
doubt, have been startled at it, and been ready to say as the Disciples of our
Savior did upon another Occasion, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? For
can this Doctrine be true, that whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet
offend in one Point, is guilty of all, and we be in the mean time dealt with
according to the Gentleness and Clemency of a Covenant of Grace? Is this the
GOSPEL we talk so much of? Is this the Glad-Tydings which our Savior has
brought us? We find none so bad, we read nothing so sad, in all the Old
Testament. The worst Passage there is, and that is bad enough, Cursed is he
that continues not, in all that is written in the Law to do it. It is no where
there said, that he who is never so careful to observe the whole Law, if he
chance to transgress in any one Point, shall be looked upon as a Transgressour
of all the Commandments, and dealt with like such a one. That other Saying is a
very terrible one, but this is much more terrible.

If this be so, we may well Repeat that other Question of the Disciples, Who
then can be saved? In many things we offend all; if therefore he who keeps
the whole Law, and yet offends in one Point, be guilty of all, how Desperate
must the Case not only of the Generality needs be, but of every Individual
Person?

I must confess that these Words may well Confound us, and fill us with
Amazement, were they to be understood in the severest Sense they are capable
of; but we are certain they are not so to be understood; and therefore that the
forementioned Paraphrase upon them, is by no means a true one: And the Context
shows, that this is the plain Meaning of them, viz. Upon Supposition that a
Man were careful to observe all the Laws of God but one, his living in the
Breach of that one, shall be so far from being connived at upon the Account of
his Obedience to all the rest, that he shall be liable to the Punishment which
is due to the Transgression of the whole Law: That is, the same Punishment for
kind, not for degree; there being nothing more plainly revealed, than that the
more and the greater Sins Men are guilty of, the greater and severer shall be
their Punishment. And in saying that such a one shall have the same Punishment
for kind, I mean that which consists in being forever Banished from the
Presence of God; and which is called Eternal Death.

Now the Reasonableness of this Assertion of our Apostle, thus understood, may
be fully made to appear by these following Considerations.

First, He who refuses Obedience to any One of the Divine Laws, may as truly
be said to Contemn the Divine Authority, as if he lived in the breach of all.
Men in wilfully Disobeying any One Law, do put as true an Affront upon the
Lawgiver, though not so High a one, as they do in Disobeying all. This Reason
St. James gives in the Words next following, for what he affirms in the Text:
For he that said, do not Commit Adultery, said also do not Kill; now if thou
Commit no Adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a Transgressour of the
Law. That is, it is the same Lawgiver who has forbidden Adultery and Murder;
and His Authority is as truly Contemned in Transgressing one, as both of these
Laws.

Every deliberate Act of Disobedience is flat Rebellion, and so for forth a
Renouncing of God's right to Govern us; It is a virtual denial of His Authority
to Prescribe any Laws to us, and lays a foundation for Universal Disobedience.
For if God Almighty's Sovereignty be Disacknowledg'd in any One Instance, it
may as well be so in all other. The same Reason that leads to the Violation of
one Law, does Enervate and render invalid all other Laws. Again,

Secondly, He who wilfully Disobeys any One of the Divine Laws, is no Sincere
Observer of any of the rest. For whosoever allows himself in any one Act of
Disobedience, has no True Love either for God or Goodness; but it is necessary
to the Sincerity of Obedience, that it proceed from that Love which has both
these for its Objects. That it proceed from Love to God, and (which is indeed
Materially the same) Love to Goodness: Goodness (Or Universal Righteousness,
Purity and Benignity) being that upon the account of which God Almighty is a
Lovely Being.

Now it is Evident, that those who live in any Disobedience to God, do not Love
Him. They love him not according to the Scripture-Notion of Loving God; because
whatsoever that is for the sake of which we can find in our hearts to Disobey
Him, must needs be valued and Esteemed above Him; And the Scripture-Notion of
Loving God, is the Esteeming Him above, and Preferring Him before all
Creatures. He who has No true Love for God, may Obey Him in many instances, as
the poor Pagans Worship the Devil, out of a Slavish Fear and Dread of Him; He
may Obey him too as a mere Mercenary, I mean, for the good things of this Life,
and a Sensual kind of Happiness in the Other: But this Obedience is far from
being Genuine, or the true Evangelical Obedience, as is Easy to show.

And again, it is no less apparent, that the Love of Virtue and true Goodness,
is inconsistent with harboring any thing in our breasts that is contrary there
to.

Thirdly, He who lives in disobedience to any One Law of God, as he Obeys none
Sincerely, so is he prepared to break all other Laws, and that in the grossest
manner, whenever forceable Temptations may assault him. For if the Divine
Authority cannot prevail with a Man, to Abstain from this or that Sin, how is it
to be Expected it should Restrain him from Other Sins, when he may happen to be
incited to them by alike strong and Violent Temptations?

Such a one may forbear not a few sins while he is not at all, or not very
violently set upon by a tempter; but if God should once suffer him to be
sharply encountered, either from without or from within, it is not hard to
divine what Success such Temptations would have upon him.

Hazael once thought that 'twas impossible he should incurr the Guilt of such
horrid Villainies, as he was foretold he would; such as dashing young Children
against the stones, and ripping up Women with Child: What, replied he to the
Prophet, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do such things? But for all that,
when he came into other Circumstances, and so to have such Temptations, as he
never before met with, he was such a Dog as to commit such Barbarities.

And if we will not be prevailed with, to forsake in Will and Affection every
Sin, we shall scarcely stick longer at any Sin, than our forbearance thereof is
consistent with the Satisfaction of that Lust which is dearest to us.

We have Judas also for an Example of this: He was doubtless, as to Outward
Appearance, a very Moral Inoffensive Man; for our Savior would not have given
such Scandal, as to have taken him, had he not been so, into the Number of his
Constant Associates; yet this Judas loving the Bag, being a secretly- Covetous
Wretch, could persuade himself, even most basely to betray his Blessed Master,
when allured by the Bait of Gain to it; and that a very sorry Bait too.

Fourthly, Whosoever makes no Conscience of transgressing some one Law, as he
is Prepared to break all other upon strong Temptations, so he actually disobeys
other Laws, according to that Latitude of Interpretation which our Lord has
given them; and which ought to be given them. Such a one may tremble at the
Thoughts of breaking those two Commandments, Thou shall not commit Adultery,
Thou shall not kill; but Lusting in his Heart, or Hating his Enemy, will be
Venial Sins with him, though his Savior has told him, that these are
Transgressions of those Commandments.

This Man may punctually keep the First and Second Commandments, as to the
shunning of those Sins, which in express terms are forbidden by them: He may
abhor to acknowledge any other God but Jehovah: he may abominate Graven Images
in the Worship of God; but while he prefers the World, either the Riches, or
Honors, or Pleasures thereof, before God (as whosoever lives in the Allowance
of any known Sin does) he is a very Idolater, as the Apostle has told us.

Fifthly, Living in the Breach of but one Law, would as truly Deprave Men's
Natures, and make them unmeet for the Enjoyment of God, as living in the Breach
of all. It would do so as truly and really, though not in the same degree. One
Sin allowed, one Lust cherished, robs the Soul of the Divine Image, renders it
unlike to God, and consequently makes it incapable of taking Satisfaction or
Complacency in that Best of Beings, who is pure Light, and in whom is no
Darkness at all. It is thereby unqualified for the Heavenly, and it sinks it
down into the Hellish State. We say, One Leak will sink a Ship as sure as a
Thousand: And, upon this Account, One Sin entertained, must needs as certainly
ruin our Souls, if we will not part with it, as never so many. Our Four First
Considerations make it highly Reasonable that it should be so, but this Last
makes it Necessary. Necessary from the very Nature of the thing; not only, nor
yet Primarily, from the Will of God. I shall now Present you with Several plain
Inferences from what has been said. As,

I. THat we ought not to account any Sin a Light or a small thing; such a thing
as God Almighty will not Concern Himself about: Such a thing as we may allow
ourselves in, and yet be Objects of the Divine Favor.

This is Evident from what we have said; or rather is our Text it self in other
Words.

But I add, for the farther Clearing of the Truth hereof, that that Sin which
we are apt to Fancy so Light a matter, is either a Transgression of God's Law
or it is not; if it be not, we may not acknowledge it to be a Sin: For Sin, as
says the Apostle, is the Transgression of the Law; and where there is no Law
there is no Transgression. But if it be a Transgression of the Law, how can it
be a Light or a Trivial thing? If it be really so, then must God needs so
account it, for He judges of things as they are; but how can God so account it,
when He has made a Law against it? Will His Infinite Wisdom suffer Him to make
a Law, which He matters not whether it be Observed or no? Such a Law would be a
very Vain and Needless one, and therefore cannot be of God's making. No Wise
Man would be the Maker of such a Law.

But because some Sins are accounted small and others Great, this Distinction
is not to be born, except we mean, that some Sins are small ones in Comparison
of others; not that any are absolutely and in themselves small.

Indeed Considering Sins as Transgressions of God's Law, so all are alike; for
one Sin is not more contrary to the Law than another: All are as Contrary to
the Law as can be. That Stoical Paradox (...), All Sins are Equal, Tully gives
this true Explication of: Parva inquis Res est, at Magna Culpa; Thou say
this is but a small thing, but I say it is a Great fault: in quo peccatur, id
potest esse aliud alio majus aut minus; That in which a Man Offends, may be a
greater or a less thing: ipsum autem Peccare, quoquo te verteris unum est. But
the Offending (the Sinning) it self, is ever one and the same thing. And this
amounts to what was now said, That considering Sins; as Transgressions of the
Divine Laws, so all are alike: But considering them according to various
Circumstances, some may be Comparatively small, or much less than others.

Some are committed with less of the Will than others; and those, Men fall into
upon a Surprise, and before they are aware, are nothing so great in that
respect, as those which are committed with Deliberation. I mean upon
Supposition, that a naughty Custom does not occasion the Inadvertency. There
are those who profane the Sacred Name of God by rash Oaths, and by taking it
into their Mouths lightly and wantonly, and (when reproved) profess they were
not aware they did so: But this is no Extenuation of their Fault, because such
insensibility can proceed from no other Cause, than Men's having acquired a
wretched Habit of so making bold with and abusing God's Name, through their
Minds being void of any awful Sense of His Glorious Majesty.

Some Sins are committed against less Light and Knowledge than others; and Sins
against greater actual Knowledge, or better Means of Knowledge, are in that
respect the Greater Sins; and therefore our Lord has assigned the greater
Punishment to them, Mat. 10.15.

The greater Obligations, and the more Mercies Men sin against, the greater are
their Sins upon that Account. The more of Disingenuity and hateful Ingratitude
there is in sins, the more Heinous and Provoking are they.

Sins are greater or less, according as the Effects of them are more or less
mischievous. Those which injure our selves only, are not in that respect so
great, as those which injure our Neighbor together with our selves. And those
which are injurious to our Neighbors Souls, are the greatest that can be
committed against them. Those which are mischievous to the Community are as
such, much greater than those which are so only to Particular Persons.

The worse End a Man has in a Sin, the greater is it. The more of Ill Nature,
and a Vile Devilish Temper is in a Sin, the more exceedingly Sinful it is.

Those which are Transgressions of the Rules of everlasting Righteouss, are
greater as such, than those which are only Transgressions of Positive
Precepts. The former are more intensively Evil; they are Evil not only as
Violations of a declared Law, but there is also Turpitude and Malignity in the
Matter of them: Which Malignity is the Reason of the Law against them. And of
this Nature are generally those things which are forbidden in the Gospel of our
Savior.

And to these may be added other Instances. But though upon these and other
Accounts, some sins are less than others, yet (as has been sufficiently
proved) it is impossible that any Sin should be Simply, and in it self Little.

Which, by the way, is a sufficient Confutation of that dangerous Doctrine of
the Church of Rome; That there are a sort of Sins which are Venial in their own
Nature, and that cannot put us out of God's Favor, though committed never so
frequently or deliberately.

II. What has been said may serve to Vindicate our Savior's Dealing with the
Young Man in the Gospel, from being too severe. Such as are apt to pass hasty
Judgment upon the Actions of others, without duly considering the Reasons of
them, may be apt in reading that Story, not only to Pity the young Man, but to
take his Part: As thinking him too hardly dealt with, in not being accepted for
his having Observed the Ten Commandments even from his Childhood, but having
such father Terms imposed upon him, as forced him to go away sorrowful.

Surely, may such say, our Lord was utterly averse to the bestowing of Eternal
Life upon this poor Man. It is said, Blessed are they that do his Commandments,
for they shall have Right unto the Tree of Life, but here is one who must be
excepted, since Obedience to the Whole LAW, and that of so long a standing too,
might signify nothing to the intitling of him thereunto. Nay our Lord did at
first plainly intimate to him, that keeping the Commandments should be all he
would expect from him; for said he, If thou will enter into Life, keep the
Commandments: But when he had replied that this he was not to begin to do now,
but h^d ever done it, then was more required of him; and that no less than the
Selling, and having sold, the giving away his whole Estate; which was very
great. It seems as freely as Eternal Life was offered to Others, this Man must
Buy it, and that with no less a Sum, than the Price of all he had.

But we are to take Notice, that our Blessed Savior designed to Try him by
this Injunction, whether he really was, as he thought himself, Universally
Obedient; and it seem to be such another Command as that of God Almighty to His
Servant Abraham, for the Offering of his only Son Isaac. But as Abraham by his
readiness to obey that Command, demonstrated the Sincerity of his Love to God,
as God Himself told him, so this Young Man by his Unwillingness to Obey this
Command, gave as great a Demonstration of his having been nothing less, than a
sincere Observer of all God's Commandments. In short, he was by this Means
Convicted of wretched Covetousness; in that, as desirous as he was of Eternal
Life, he preferred his Temporal Estate before it.

That our Savior did not thus treat him out of Prejudice to his Person, and
with a design to affright him from Him, is plain from what we find in this
Narrative, as St. Mark relates it. It Is said, Chapter 10 21. upon his telling him
that he had observed all the Commandments from his Youth, that Jesus loved him.
Now it is very Clear from our past Discourse, that there was great Reason, why
this Young Man, as good as he was, should be sent away sorrowful, since he was
no better. For though he was no Murderer, nor Adulterer, nor Thief, etc. in
the gross Sense, yet he might be all these, according to the Spiritual Sense
and Meaning of the Law; for it is certain that in this sense he was an Idolater,
in that the World lay deepest in his Affections, and was esteemed above GOD,
and Eternal Life.

III. I infer from what has been said, what a great Weakness it is in any Man
to hope for Salvation, because he perceives that there are many who are far
greater Sinners than himself, when yet he lives in the wilful Commission of
some known Sins, or in the wilful Neglect of some known Duties.

I doubt there are too many, who because they are not Drunkards, nor Unclean
Persons, nor Profane Swearers, etc. as they see Multitudes are, do fa^^^ all to
be well with them, though they are conscious to themselves of being faulty, and
that wilfully too, in other respects. They can possibly overreach their
Brother, when they can do it slyly; or if they stick at plain Injustice, they
can do Hard things; which will be found another day to be Unjust also, and
which those know to be so now, who take their Measures of Right and Wrong from
their Savior's Golden Rule, Matthew. 7.12. They can make an Idol of the World,
are inamoured with either the Riches, or Honors, or Pleasures thereof; if not
with all, yet with one or other of these, and are with great difficulty drawn
to Works of Mercy and Charity.

Some seem mightily Devout, and Zealous for the Duties of the First Table, and
therefore take themselves for good Christians, though they are as Remiss in
Reference to diverse Duties of the Second. Others again are seemingly very
Observant of those of the Second Table, are Sober, Orderly, Governable, good
Subjects, quiet and inoffensive Neighbors; when perhaps they are as Culpable
in Relation to the Duties of the First: Live under little Sense of God, of
their Dependence on Him, and their Obligations to Him: Worship Him with their
Bodies, when their Hearts are far from Him; and content themselves with a mere
External, though not with a mere Ritual Righteousness.

But why should any of us think our selves in a Good State, because we live not
in any of the Scandalous Sins? Were not those Laws made to be Obeyed which we
Break, as well as those we Keep, or at least think we Keep? And, if so, how can
we Expect God's Favor, and live in such Contradiction to His Will? Will you
approve of that Servant who wilfully Disobeys some of your Commands, because he
observes others? No surely, all Masters will Expect to be in every thing
obeyed; or at least that their Servants should endeavor to obey them in all
things.

God will say another day to the Partially Obedient, These things ought you to
have done, and not to have left the other undone.

But how came it to be ever imagined, that God will be put off with a Partial
Obedience? The mischief is, those who live not in Open Sins, the world, not
seeing farther, has a good Opinion of them; and therefore they will please
themselves with a Conceit, that God Almighty has the same. Or it may be their
own Party will applaud those things in them, which are far from being
Praiseworthy. But let us not be deceived, God is not mocked, as men are; nor
will He flatter us as men do. Let no man deceive us, nor let us deceive
ourselves with vain words or thoughts; for, for the sake of whatsoever Sins we
will not part with, be they what they will, the wrath of God will fall upon us,
except it be diverted by timely Repentance; that is, by timely Reformation.

Was the Pharisee accepted of God, because he could say, God I thank thee that
I am not as other men are, Extortioners, Unjust, Adulterers, or even as this
Publican? We know he was not; for though he was free from the Sins of many
others, yet was he a Pharisee still: There were Secret and less Observed Sins,
which he allowed himself in; and therefore that Publican he so despised, being
a true Penitent, went away Justified before him.

IV. Methinks those who make none, or but very little, Conscience of their
ways, and dare to live in open Sins, should not be able to forbear being
mightily Concerned at what has been said. For as the Apostle says, If the
Righteous scarcely be saved (or have such a Portion of Misery in this life)
where shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear? We may say, if those who are
seemingly Righteous, or have a regard to most of God's Laws, not heartily
Endeavoring to Obey them all, shall fall short of Salvation, what shall become
of such as are apparently, and in the Eye of the World, Wicked and Ungodly?
Profane and Debauched people are Universally acknowledged to be Objects of the
Divine displeasure; and therefore whatsoever vain hopes those, who are not
guilty of the Crimes which speak men such, may have of the goodness of their
State, one would presume that these could have no Temptation to hope well of
themselves, while they Continue impenitent and Unreformed.

Some men's Sins, 1 Timothy 5.24.
says St. Paul, are Open before hand, going before to judgment; and some, they
follow after. Some men's Sins are so Conspicuous, that they may be pronounced to
be in the gall of bitterness and bond of iniquity, in this life: The Sins of
others are more secret, the judgment of whom is to be reserved to the Great Day.

But alas, such is the nature of Sin, that the Greatest Sinners are least
Sensible of their Danger. None shall be more forward than they, to persuade
themselves of God's Pardon; Especially if after a Wretched life they can but
make a good End, as the Phrase is; that is, be sorry for their Sins, for fear
of Hell, when they can Sin no longer, and Call upon their Savior at the last
Gasp. But if the Hopes of a man who cannot be prevailed with, to be entirely
Obedient, be Vain and Groundless, then the Hopes of such Sinners as these, must
needs be (do I say vain too? they must be) Mad Hopes.

Job, 27.8.
What is the Hope of the Hypocrite, when God takes away his Soul? Said Upright
Job: And therefore what Hope can those have, who to that time have lived
dissolutely, and been Open Violators of Gods Laws?

And now I shall shut up this Discourse, with seriously Applying my self to
those, who dare not run with the now mentioned sort of Sinners to their Excess
of Riot, but yet Harbor in their Breasts some Secret Sins still. I beseech you
think well of the words of our Text, which taken in the most Candid Sense may
well scare You also; may thoroughly Convince you of the Absolute Necessity of
Entire Obedience. And that you may be effectually persuaded of it:

First, Consider how wonderfully you are Obliged to your infinitely Good God,
in that He has, through Christ, declared Himself so Exceedingly willing, to
pardon all Sins not allowed and lived in. Can you be so Foolish and
Ill-natured, as thus to requite the Lord?

Is it not matter of Unspeakable Thankfulness, that God will be Reconciled to
Sinners upon any Terms possible, and can we desire He should be, upon more
Reasonable Terms? Psalm. 130.3, 4.
If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand? But there is
forgiveness with Thee, that thou may be feared. This is the use we ought to
make of the goodness of God, and His readiness to forgive; and it is an Argument
of an intolerably bad Temper, not to be induced to fear to Offend Him, by the
Consideration hereof.

Seeing God is pleased to assure us of His Pardon through the Sacrifice of His
Son, so we will do what lies in us for the time to come to please Him, He is
as Gracious to us as we can Reasonably wish He would be. With what Face then
can we desire to persist longer in any one instance of Disobedience?

There is no Honest Soul, but thinks it extremely too much, that He sometimes
Trangresseth against his will, and before he is aware, and his Weaknesses and
Infirmities do very heartily afflict him; then surely if we are sincere, we
shall not endure to add Wickednesses to our Weaknesses, nor Deliberate
Presumptuous Sins to those of Infirmity. It will grieve us at heart, that we
find our selves constrained to beg Pardon so often for Weaknesses; so far shall
we be from making through Wilfulness, or Carelessness, more work for Repentance.

Secondly, Consider how Gracious God has been to you, in continuing His
Restraining Grace, whereby you have been kept from Scandalous Sins; whereas He
has had most just Provocations to leave you to your selves, in regard of your
allowance of secret ones. Many fearful Examples there have been of those who
have been thus punished, for their Hypocrisy and playing fast-and-loose with
God; Obeying Him in some things, and making bold with Him in others: And it is
Gods infinite Mercy that you are not yet in the Number of such Examples.

While any Corrupt Affection is gratified by us, we are Prepared (as has been
showed) to Close with the very worst of Temptations, when so ever we may be
violently assaulted by them. Now it is only the good Providence and Grace of
God, which has hitherto kept off such Temptations; and the Wicked One not
flinging the most fiery darts he has in his Quiver at us, is wholly to be
imputed to the Divine Restraints: But how soon we may be Abandoned by the
Divine Providence, to the Rage and Fury of that Roaring Lion, which goes up
and down seeking to devour us, we cannot tell; but have Cause still to be
expecting so great a Judgment, while we refuse to be Entirely God's Servants.

Thirdly, Let the partially Obedient Consider, what unaccountable Folly and
Madness it is, to Disobey God in any thing. What can you say for your selves,
why you should obey Him but just so far?

Is there not the same Reason, why you should be in every thing Obedient, that
there is, why you should be in any thing so? Is it most Reasonable to Obey Him
in some things, and is it not so to Obey Him in all things? Can we say that God
goes beyond His Power in imposing some Laws; or that those we dislike, are less
Reasonable than His other Laws? Surely we dare not admit such a Thought.

Is it possible then, that we can think it Fit or Tolerable, that the great
Creator and Governor of the World should be in any thing Disobeyed? Such a
Worm as thy self art highly offended with thy Servant, when he willingly
disobeys thee; and too often when he does so against his Will: But is thy
Authority over thy Servant equal to God Almighty's over thee? Are the
Obligations in which he stands to thee, like those in which thou stand to
God? Or is there any Comparison between those Encouragements, thou art able to
give thy Servant to please thee, and those which God gives thee to please Him?
Who would not think himself greatly Affronted, to have such Questions seriously
put to him?

And this minds me to Entreat you,

Fourthly, To Consider what a Glorious Reward is assured to us, to Encourage us
to Obey. It is called a Crown of Righteousness, a Crown of Life, and a Crown of
Glory. There are given to us, for this End, exceeding great and precious
Promises, as St. Peter calls them. A Promise of seeing God even as He is: Of
being forever with our Lord Jesus Christ: Of Beholding the Glory which the
Father has given Him; and of Partaking too of His own Glory, and that to all
Eternity: A Promise that the Righteous shall shine forth like the Sun in the
Kingdom of the Father: Of their being (...). Equal with the Glorious Angels:
And of having their Vile Bodies made like unto Christ's most Glorious Body.

Which, and many other such like, Promises our Lord Confirmed by Innumerable
Miracles, Wonders and Signs; and then Sealed them With His Blood, and next, by
His Resurrection from the Dead, and Ascension into Heaven: Whither He declared
He went, as the Forerunner of His Obedient Disciples, there to prepare a Place
for them; that where He is, there they may be also. And lastly, He Confirmed
these exceeding great and precious Promises, by sending the Holy Ghost,
according to His Promise before He left the World.

Now, who can have any worthy Sense of the Reward of Obedience, and think much
of Obeying in any one Instance, though much more were required of him than there
is? If the Apostle said of the Sufferings of that Present Time, (which were
Extraordinary and Prodigious Ones, and especially those which himself
underwent) that they are not Worthy to be compared with the Glory which shall
be revealed in us; much more may this be said of the Services of this Life, of
all the Duties to which our Creator and Redeemer have obliged us. And therefore,

Fifthly, Let it be likewise considered, that, as vastly great as the Reward of
Obedience shall be, there is no more required of us under the Gospel
Dispensation, than, all things considered, needs must. It may with the greatest
Assurance be affirmed, that nothing is now commanded, but what is necessary to
make us capable of the Glorious Inheritance purchased for us; or does tend to
the better Inabling us for those Duties, which are of indispensable Necessity
to this End: And that nothing is Forbidden us, which does not either directly
or consequentially tend to make us unmeet for that Inheritance. So that to
complain of any one of our Lord's Precepts, is the same thing with finding
fault with Him, for designing to make us such Happy Creatures.

Sixthly, Consider also, that the LAWS which are given us, as they are most
necessary, so they are not so many, as that we need to be scared at them. Many
are apt to think, that because the Bible is a Great Book, the Divine LAWS are
almost Numberless. But the far greater Part of the Bible consists of History,
and Relations of Matters of Fact, and of Pious Men's devout Prayers and Praises,
etc. And in the Preceptive Part, there are very many Laws which are Abrogated,
and never concerned Christians: And those which are of Force, are many of them
abundance of times Repeated and Inculcated.

In short, our whole Duty may be brought into a very Narrow Compass. St. Paul
reduces it to Three Heads, Sobriety, Righteousness and Godliness: And our
Blessed Savior to Two, The Love of God, and our Neighbor; and the particular
Instances of each of these, are easily and quickly learned. Nay they are
generally written in our Hearts, Romans 10.8.
as St. Paul tells us; i.e. are the plain Dictates of Natural Reason.

Seventhly, Let us farther Consider, that there is so close a Connection between
them all, that Obedience to one Law will enable us to obey another, and so on:
And the Performance of one Duty, will prepare us for another, and make it easy
to us. And on the other hand, the Breach of one Law will cause Carelessness in
keeping other Laws; and no Sin goes alone. So that it is but a bare Supposition
in the Text, that a Man may keep the Whole Law, and offend but in one Point, or
slight one Law, and observe all the rest; for there can really be no such
thing; as is evident from what has been now discoursed.

Eighthly, I may also add, that there is no necessity of being very solicitous,
about any more than one thing, in order to our keeping God's Laws; and that is
the Vigorously possessing our Souls with the Love of God. This, says St. John,
is the Love of God, that we keep His Commandments, (or, this is a necessary
expression thereof) and His Commandments are not grievous: Namely to those that
Love God.

And what can we imagine so Natural to Creatures Capable of understanding God,
as Loving Him with all their hearts, Considering the infinite Loveliness of His
Nature, and the Inexpressible Obligations He has laid upon them?

What so Agreeable to our Nature, as to love Him who is the Author of our
Being, after whose Image we were made, who is the Center of our Souls, and in
whom alone consists our True Happiness? And it is very easy to show, that the
Love of God will naturally draw after it, all those duties which relate, either
immediately to Him, or to our Neighbor, or to our own Souls and Bodies.

Now, Considering these things, well may God Almighty Expostulate with
Partially Obedient Christians, as once He did with such Jews, and that with
greater reason, O my people, what have I done unto thee? Mica. 6.3.
And wherein have I wearied thee? Testify against me. He has been indeed so
far from wearying us with His Impositions, that every good Christian's
Experience is able to Testify that the greatest satisfaction, the truest
self-Enjoyment, arises from the Observance of His Laws. Nor can it be
otherwise, since Love, and the Love of God, is the fulfilling of them. For what
so Pleasant as Love, and much more as love placed on such an Object as God is?
We ought therefore to be so far from thinking much of yielding Obedience to all
His Laws, that we are highly disingenuous, if we be not heartily thankful to
Him, for giving us so few, and those such as in Obedience to which consists
such Pleasure.

In the last place, and with these words I will Conclude, What a sad thing, and
miserable disappointment, must it needs be, to come near to the Kingdom of
Heaven, and yet at last fall short of it, for want of going a little farther?

May all Partially Obedient Professors of Christianity, Consider this also, and
lay it well to heart.

FINIS.

