FOUR GRAND QUESTIONS PROPOSED, And Briefly ANSWERED. Wherein is Discoursed,
The Authority and Duty of the Magistrate in the Matters of RELIGION. The
Unlawfulness of a Toleration and General Liberty of Conscience. The Divine
Right of Christian Liberty in Things Indifferent. The Unlawfulness of Repealing
the Laws against Popery and Idolatry.


LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1689.

The PREFACE.
IT cannot but be generally understood, what an abundance of Heats and
Animostties have been raised in the Nation, about a Toleration, Liberty of
Conscience, and Repealing the Laws about Religion, which have been pleaded for
by many, whether with greater vehemence, or with greater absurdity, is hard to
say; for the Lawfulness of it has rather been supposed than proved by any: For
whilst they have been considering how to secure a Toleration, and Repeal the
Laws that establish Religion, they never considered, Whether it could be
consistent with the Office and Duty of the Christian Magistracy, to do either
one or the other. Though such a Toleration and Repealing the Laws does carry in
it nothing less, than an Exemption from the Obligation of all Humane Laws in
the Matters of Religion; which must necessarily suppose no Authority nor Duty
incumbent on the Christian Magistracy, to take Care for True Religion and the
Worship of God; which, if that could be proved, would be indeed the strongest
Arguments of all for a Toleration and Repealing the Laws; and unless that could
be proved, whatever Arguments else may be brought for it, from other Respects
and Considerations, they are of no Force, if this be taken for granted, That
it is against the Duty incumbent on the Government, by the Law of God to do it.
And though there are indeed weighty Arguments against such a Toleration and
Repealing the Laws, drawn from the ill Effects, Means and Ends of it; yet this
Argument seems to be most cogent, and of greatest force, that is drawnfrom the
fundamental and principal Cause why it is Unlawful, namely, Being against the
Office and Duty of the Christian Magistracy.

Upon this Principle therefore I have always been persuaded, ^at not only a
general Toleration, but Repealing the Laws, was ^orally Unlawful, unless better
Laws could be made by the Government to Secure Religion; which no man of Sense
can think, unless such Laws have also a Penalty; for, What Force or Obligation
can Laws have to this End, without a Penalty?

I have therefore in this little Treatise, under the following Questions, (as
compendiously as possible) proved the Magistrate's Office and Duty about
Religion, to be Moral and Perpetual, and not belonging to the Old Testament
Administration; only from this, as a Principle, I have argued the Unlawfulness
of a general Toleration, and of such a Liberty of Conscience as is opposed to
all Humane Authority and Laws in the matters of Religion; yet nevertheless,
lest any should hence conclude, That a Humane Authority can impose Laws on the
Church, in things of Religion not necessary, or commanded by the Word of GOD; I
have proved the Divine Right of Christian Liberty in things Indifferent,
especially if the same Indifferences be matter of Doubt or Scandal; and, That
the practice of such a Liberty in Religion in things Indifferent, though
restrained by Laws, is no matter of Scandal given, nor any Assent to a general
Toleration, or the Dispensing Power: And in the last place I have proved the
Unlawfulness of Repealing the Laws against Popery and Idolatry, and Answered
the most specious Pretenses alleged for it.

If that which is here briefly discoursed may obtain its designed end, to set
the Judgments of some men right, in those great and weighty points, the Author
will have his end in exposing the same to public view, which was first
composed for his own satisfaction.

Now to the King-Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only Wise God, be Honor and
Glory for ever and ever Amen.
Four Grand QUESTIONS proposed, and Briefly Answered; (VIZ.) I. Whether it be
the Duty of Magistrates under the Gospel, to promote and preserve by Laws the
True Christian Religion. II. Whether it be lawful for the Christian Magistrate
to give a general Toleration of All Religions; or, what Liberty in Religion he
ought to Allow. III. Whether it be lawful for Subjects to give their Actual
Consent to a general Toleration. IV. Whether it be lawful for Subjects to
Consent to the Repealing these Laws, that Establish and Preserve the True
Religion.

Of These in Order.
I. Whether it be the Duty of Magistrates under the Gospel, to promote and
preserve by Laws the True Christian Religion.
BUt before we proceed, it will be necessary to lay down, by way of
Supposition, what we understand by Magistrates, and what by the True Christian
Religion.

But here we shall not meddle with the diverse Forms of Lawful Government, but
rest satisfied, that our own form of Government is either Best in it self
considered, or at least Best for us.

By Magistrates therefore we understand chiefly the Supreme Legislative Power
of a Nation, or of a Body politic, not excluding Subordinate Magistrates also
within their respective limits.

By the True Christian Religion, we understand the Protestant Religion, in
those essential matters of Protestant Faith, Worship, and Discipline, wherein
it is truly such.

Now, that the Office of Magistracy is founded, both in the Law of Nature, the
Moral Law, and also is of a Divine Institution, by the positive Command of God,
I take for a granted Truth, and will be denied but by few: All the Question
then before us is, About the Extent of the Magistrates Power: Some will have it
now under the Gospel, to respect only Civil Matters and Moral Justice between
Men, but that he has no Authority in the Institutions of Revealed Religion
under the Gospel. Hence it would follow, that he is not obliged to maintain by
Laws the Gospel-Institutions. But the Affirmative is that which I undertake to
make good, and that by the following Arguments.

1. From the Efficient Cause of Magistracy. 2. From the Formal Cause of
Magistracy. 3. From the Final Cause or End of Magistracy. 4. From
Scripture-Precept, and Precedent.
1. That it is the Duty of Magistrates to promote and preserve by Laws the True
Christian Religion, will appear from the consideration of the Efficient Cause
of Magistracy, which is no other than God himself. Now God may be said to be
the Cause, and so the Author, of Magistracy, in a threefold respect, viz. By
his Law Natural, Moral, and Positive.

1. By his Law Natural, implanted and written in the Heart of Man, by which
Mankind is enabled to know and understand both the reasonableness, necessity,
and utility of Political Government, in order to promote and preserve the good
of Societies.

2. By his Law Moral, thus the Fifth Commandment establisneth the Relation, and
enjoineth the Duties between political Fathers and Subjects, as well as between
natural Parents and their Children.

3. God is also the Cause of Magistracy, by his positive Ordinance and
Appointment: Thus he appointed Magistrates, both Ordinary and Extraordinary,
under the Old Testament: And we find also the Office and Power of Magistracy
ratified and confirmed by the New Testament, under the Gospel; the Apostle
tells us, That all Powers are of God, and that not only by his providential
Allowance and Toleration, but by his special Assignation and Appointment;
therefore said to be ordained of God, Romans 13. 1, 2. and therefore the
Magistrate is said to be the Minister of God, ver. 4. Hence we find that all
that Justice which the Magistrate executes, is called the Justice of God, 2 Chronicles. 19. 6. They are also called Gods, Psalm. 82. 1, 6. because they are God's
Deputies and Vicegerents, representing his Presence and his Power in the World.

Now it cannot reasonably be supposed, that God would thus delegate his Power
and Authority in the World to Magistrates, and so signally dignifie and
authorize them, but in order to some special Service they are to do for God in
the World: And it is most reasonable, and morally just, that the Magistrate
having his Power and Authority from God, he should employ it best for his
Service in the World, which he cannot do, but by promoting and maintaining True
Religion.

Secondly, This will further appear from the consideration of the formal Cause
of Magistracy, to wit, The Laws; for it is the Law that gives Form and Being to
the Magistrate, and is the life and soul of Government. Hence are those Axioms,
Lex facit Regem, -- Rex nihil potest, nisi quod jure potest. Now Laws do
originally derive all their force from Religion, because the Moral Law of God
is the Supreme Law of all Nations, and therefore the Ground and Rule of all
Humane Laws; which Law of God, we see, does in the first place take care for
Religion and the Worship of God, as the bottom and ground of all Duties of
Moral Justice between men. Our Savior tells us, That the first and great
Commandment of the Law is, to love the Lord our God with all our heart, soul,
strength, and mind, Luke 10. 27. which does indeed include and prescribe the
most exact way of Religion and Holiness that can be.

Now this Divine Law being both the Foundation and Directory, of all other
Laws, it must therefore follow, That all Humane Laws by which Magistrates ought
to Govern, should in the first place provide for True Religion and the Worship
of God; for the Moral Law of God being the Supreme Law, and Rule of Life for
all Mankind, is therefore the Rule of all Laws and Government, and all, Humane
Laws, that have the true nature of Laws, are grounded on it, or reducible to
it, or else theyare but Tyrannical Impositions. Hence it is that the political
Laws of Nations are said to have a kind of Sacredness in them, which is to be
understood when they are founded (as they ought to be) on the Principles of the
Law of God, and their Agreement thereunto gives Force and Obligation to them;
for the Obligation of Laws arises from the good End they tend unto, and are
useful for, in conjunction with the lawful Authority that imposes them.

So that now the Law of God, being the Rule of humane Laws, whereunto they
ought to correspond in all the precepts thereof respectively; it follows
therefore, that the Laws of Magistrates, in conformity to the Law of God,
which, we see, gives the preference to first Table-Duties, ought also in the
first place to provide for the Exercise of True Religion, and the Worship of
God, as the ground of all other Laws that respect Moral Justice amongst men.

Thirdly, From the final Cause or End of Magistracy, which is threefold; 1. The
Glory of GOD. 2. The Good of Societies. 3. The Good of the Church.


First, The Glory of God; which as it is the chief and ultimate end of Man, so
of all God's Ordinances and Institutions, for the sake and good of Mankind,
that in and by them the glory of God may be advanced: God then being the
efficient Cause of Magistracy, it therefore follows, that his Glory must be the
principal End: now it is the proper End and Use of Religion, to give glory to
God; and without the practice of true Religion, the Divine Perfections are not
actually adored and advanced. If then the end of Magistracy be to advance and
set up the glory of God in the World, he ought to set up and maintain True
Religion, as the greatest Glory can be brought to God in this World.

Secondly, The good of Societies is the subordinate End of Magistracy; for as
the Fundamental Humane Causes of Government is the Necessity of it for the
Public Good, so the End of Magistracy in that respect, is, that the Temporal
Good and Tranquillity of Societies may be promoted and preserved.

Now, if there were no higher Causes and Ends of Magistracy than this, (as we
have already, and shall further prove there is) yet nevertheless, it would be
the Duty of Magistrates to take care for Religion, because it is very certain,
that True Religion does best of all conduce to the Temporal good of Societies:
This is plain not only from the Scriptures, that assure us, that Godliness is
profitable unto all things, 1 Timothy 4. 8. but also from the reason and
experience of Mankind. Therefore we see, that even in those Nations that were
void of the knowledge of True Religion, yet those that were Legistators and
Governors amongst them, always with their Laws mixed some Precepts of
Religion and Opinion of God, some pretending they received their Laws from God
himself. Whereby we see that they thought, that Laws and Government could not
stand without something of Religion; which though their religious Precepts were
superstitious and idolatrous, in the want of Divine Revelation, yet
nevertheless it thence appears, That the Law of Nature taught them not only the
necessity and obligation of Government and Laws, but also that the sense of
Religion was the most necessary Foundation of it.

And then it will follow, that if any thing of Religion be necessary for the
temporal good of Governments, that the True Religion is then best of all, and
most necessary, that being the Spring and Fountain of all Virtues, from whence
is to be drawn, not only the best Directions for, but the strongest Motives and
Engagements unto all those Duties of Moral Justice and Charity amongst men,
which are so absolutely necessary, even to the temporal good of Societies. It
would be easy to demonstrate, that True Religion is certainly the best
Foundation of all Political Government, and of the Execution of Laws, the
Obedience of Subjects, and of the Exercise of that Justice and Charity between
men, which only can render the life of man peaceable and (...) in this World.
If then the End of Magistracy and Civil Go^ernment were only for the temporal
good of Societies, yet it would follow, that it is the Duty of Magistrates, to
advance and maintain True Religion, because it chiefly conduces, and is so
necessary to this End.

Thirdly, and lastly, The Special End of Magistracy is for the good of the
Church, and that because Magistracy is not a mere natural and humane Policy,
but an Ordinance of God, still remaining such now under the Gospel, Romans 13. 1.

Now it is certain, that all the Ordinances and Institutions of God, both Moral
and Evangelical, do now in special belong to the Gospel Church; for whatever
Advantages any of the Heathen World do receive at any time by any of Gods
Ordinances and Institutions, (as particularly by this of Magistracy) it is but
for the sake of the Church, as the Dogs eat of the Childrens Crumbs: For it is
to be noted, That as the Scriptures. themselves, so also all the Precepts,
Promises, Rights, Privileges, and Ordinances, granted and confirmed thereby,
or contained therein, belongs primarily and especially to the Church of God. So
that Magistracy then being an Ordinance of God, and having its Foundation in
the Law and Word of God, it must follow, that the End of Magistracy is
especially for the sake and good of the Church, and not only for the World.

As for that lawful Magistracy that may be found in Heathen Nations, or without
the Visible Church, the Power is truly said to be from God, because the Office
of Magistracy is founded on his Law and Ordinance; but the Execution of this
Power has been and is in most Nations wickedly abused, and perverted from the
proper and special Ends of it, appointed of God, to serve the Ambition,
Tyranny, and Lusts of men; the ground and occasion of which proceeds from the
same common Original with all other Immoralities in the life of man, to wit,
the defection of mankind from God, and the depravity of the Humane Nature by
Sin. But as it is therefore no wonder, that the Ends of Magistracy are
perverted, especially in those Nations that have forsaken God and fallen to
Idolatry; so it is no Argument, that Magistracy is only for the world, as some
suppose, and not especially for the good of the Church.

Thus we find, that to this end was Magistracy appointed by God under the Old
Testament, but while the Church of God, in the first Ages of the world, was but
in small Families, and sometime only in one Family; their Civil Government
cannot so properly be called Political, belonging to a State or Commonwealth,
as Oeconomical, or the government of a Family: Yet we find, that then the care
of Religion did belong to the Lord or Governor of the Family. And indeed, all
lawful Government whatsoever being from GOD, does carry in it an Obligation to
the Care of Religion, for those under their power. Thus God says of Abraham,
Genesis 18. 19. I know him, that he will command his Children and his Household
after him, and they shall keep the way of the Lord.

But when the Visible Church of God, to wit, the Israelites, was multiplied
into a Body of People, and set at liberty, from the Yoke of Egyptian Bondage,
and so capable of being formed into a political Body or Commonwealth, God
himself instituted an ordinary state of Magistracy, to continue in all their
gates, Deuteronomy. 16. 18. (besides extraordinary Magistrates from time to time, as
Moses, Joshua, etc.) and to the Supreme Magistrates especially, was committed
the Care of the right Administration of Religion and the Worship of God, as
well as of Civil Justice between men; by which Examples God himself teaches us
not only the necessity and obligation of having a Magistracy over a Body of
People, but also the office and duty whereunto it ought to be applied.

And though under the Gospel all the Kings and Governors of the World were in
the first Ages of the Christian Church, and have been, for the most part, ever
since Enemies to the Church, yet it does not therefore follow, that because
they have thus perverted their power, that it ought not to have been applied
for the Churches good, under the Gospel; for we find that it is prophesied of
Kings, and promised also to the Gospel Church, that Kings shall be her
nursing-Fathers, and Queens her nursing-Mothers, Isa. 49. 23. And this
prediction and promise has in it the force and obligation of a Command, upon
all Kings and Magistrates in the World; not only to believe in Christ, but to
become nursing-Fathers to the Church; which Expression cannot imply less in it,
than to employ their Power and Care, as Magistrates, to promote, succor, and
defend the Church. Hence Kings are exhorted to kiss the Son, Ps. 2. 12. which
is a token of Homage and Subjection to Christ, who is now King of kings, and
Lord of lords, Rev. 19. 16. And all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto
him, Mat. 28. 18. And therefore some would have all Magistratical Power to be
derived from Christ, as he is Mediator of the Church.

Moreover, if we consider how much good pious and godly Magistrates may do to
the Church, it will from thence further appear, That Magistracy, under the
Gospel, is for the good of the Church, as by promoting its Interest, preserving
its Privileges and Ordinances, suppressing Heresies, purging out Corruptions,
opposing its Enemies, etc. Now we argue thus; that, If God has made the Christ
an Magistrate, by his power and place in the World, capable of doing so much
good for the Church, it is certain then, that he is morally obliged to do it,
for that every person, in his Place and Calling, is, for the sake of the
Church, to seek its Good. Psalm. 122. 9. Because of the house of the Lord our
God, I will seek thy Good.

Fourthly, The last Argument to prove, that it is the Duty of Magistrates under
the Gospel, to promote and preserve True Religion, is drawn both from
Scripture-precept and precedent.

As for Scripture-Precept, we find, that by the Low of God, Sins against
Religion and Divine Worship, which respect the first Table commands, were to be
severely punished by the Magistrate. Thus the Blasphemer was to be put to
death, Lev. 24. 16. The false Prophetor Teacher, that would draw off any from
the true Worship of God, or him or her that committed Idolatry, were to be put
to death; Deuteronomy. 13. 9, 17. and the City that fell to Idolatry, was to be
smitten with the edge of the Sword, Deuteronomy. 13. 15. Now the Magistrate bearing
the Sword of Justice, and being the Avenger of God against evil doers, it is to
be understood, that by his Authority and Direction this was to be done.

And for Scripture-Precedent, we find, that those that were godly Kings and
Magistrates under the Old Testament, purged the Church from Idolatry, when
corrupted, and restored the true Worship of God, caused both Priests and People
to keep the Law of the Lord. Thus good Hezekiah suppresseth Idolatry, and
sets up the true Worship of God, 2 Kings, 18. 4. Josias did the like, and
slew all the Priests of the high places, 2 King. 23. 20. Jehu destroyed all the
Worshippers of Baal, 2 King. 10. 25. And King Asa with the people made a Law,
That whosoever would not seek the Lord God of Israel, should be put to death, 2 Chronicles. 15. 13. And these are approved for so doing; whereas those Kings that
took no care of Religion, but did either set up Idolatry, or did not suppress
it, are branded for such as did evil in the sight of the Lord.

Object. But it will be objected, That what the Magistrate thus did under the
Old Testament, for the Cause of Religion, was but the Execution of God's own
Laws, which he was obliged to do, but that this is no Precedent for Christian
Magistrates under the Gospel, because those Laws are now abrogated, and there
are no new Laws prescribed by God under the Gospel, for the inflicting of any
punishments, either pecuniary or corporal, for any Offenses against Religion;
and therefore the Magistrate has no Authority to make Penal Laws for this end.

Answ. Though it be granted, That the Gospel prescribes no punishments for
Offenses against Religion; and that the Judicial Law also, as it was peculiar
to that Nation, so is not precisely binding on any Nation under the Gospel; yet
it will not therefore follow, that Magistrates may not make Penal Laws for
Offenses against Religion: for then upon that ground he may not make Laws for
Offenses against Second-Table-Commands, as Murder, Adultery, Th^ft, etc. for
the New Testament does not prescribe any. And therefore, on this account, some
have been so wild, to think that no corporal punishments should be inflicted
under the Gospel, by Christian men.

But it is generally agreed by all, That the natural and moral part of the Law
of Moses, (to wit) that which is founded on Reason and Moral Justice, is still
obligatory on all Nations; and it is certain, that a great part of the Judicial
Law is but an Exposition and Enforcement of the natural and moral Law of God:
Hence most of the Penalties inflicted by that Law, for Offenses against any of
the Precepts of the moral Law, we may find that the reason and ground of the
Penalty may in many things be drawn from the moral nature of the Crime, as well
as from the Will of God prescribing the kind of Penalty. Now it cannot be
denied, that where the reason and ground of the Penalty, for such and such
Offenses, is natural and moral, there those Penal Laws are so far still in
force, that they remain on Record, both as Precedents and Engagements on all
Nations, to make Laws in conformity to them. And surely, where we cannot so
clearly see the reason of the penalty, yet where the Offense against the Law of
God is the same there the Will of God imposing penalties, for such and such
Offenses against his Law, is the best Rule and Pattern for the Laws of all
Magistrates in the world.

Now, If the Abolition of the Jeuish Pedagogy, and their Civil State, for which
these Penal Laws were more peculiarly adapted, does not null the power of the
Christian Magistrate, to make Penal Laws, for the Violation of
Second-Table-Commands, as for Murder, Wheredom, Theft, etc. Why should it any
more null his power to make Penal Laws, for the Violation of
First-Table-Commands, as for Idolatry, Superstition, Blasphemy, etc. for the
First-Table-Commands have still the precedent Obligation to the Second; and the
Violation of them have the same moral Obliquity and Guilt as under the Law?
Therefore Laws to punish those Sins, have the same Reason and moral Justice in
them as the other: Hence it will follow that Magistrates are under equal
Obligations to impose such Laws as the other.

Object. But it will be further objected, That Jesus Christ has only
appointed, under the Gospel, the Ministry of the word (which is the Spiritual
Sword) for the propagating and maintaining the Christian Religion: And Men are
invited to believe and embrace this Religion upon free Choice and Election, and
upon principles of pure Conviction and Conscience, and not compelled or forced
to it by the power of the Sword; and that it is not agreeable to the Gospel
Dispensation, that the Christian Religion should be promoted by a Temporal
power, or men punished for disobedience to it.

Answ. For answer, this mistake of denying the Authority of the Civil
Magistrate in the matters of Religion, comes to pass, by not distinguishing
between those two distinct Offices, viz. of the Ministry, and of the
Magistracy; which are Offices of a different Order, that have each their
peculiar Properties and Employments, though both to the great and general end of
the Glory of God, and also the Good of the Church: The Ministerial Office is
properly founded on Christ's Commission, as Mediator of the Church, to whom are
committed the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, both of Doctrine and of Discipline;
but the Office of the Magistracy is of another Order, and founded on God's Law,
as he is Rector of the World, to whom is committed the Sword of Justice, and
that not only between man and man, but between God and man. Magistracy
therefore is not properly a Gospel, but a moral Institution. Now, as the Gospel
does not abrogate, but on the contrary does establish the Obligations of the
moral Law, Romans 3. 13. so by consequence it does not null either the Office, or
any part of the moral Duty of the Office of Magistracy, but on the contrary
does ratify and confirm it, as it does all other matters of moral Duty and
Religion.

It Is true also, that our Savior only appointed the Ministry of the Word for
the propagation of the Gospel, for he came into the world in the quality of a
Prophet and Minister, and so propagated his Religion, and in that Capacity
commissionated and sent forth his Apostles and Gospel Ministers: He did not
intermeddle with the Office of the Magistracy, but left that to stand on its
own bottom, as founded on the Law and Ordinance of God; for though he were a
King, yet his Kingdom were spiritual, and not of this world; and therefore as
he took not the power of the Temporal Sword himself, (as he might have done
upon Divine Right) so he gave no such power to any of the Ministerial Order.

And we find also that God Almighty, in whose power are the Hearts of Kings and
Magistrates, did not use their Power and Authority for the promotion and
advancement of the Christian Religion, at the first; which he might have done,
by effectually calling and converting them by his Grace, as well as others, and
so inclining their Hearts to improve their Power and Office for his Glory, as
was their Duty to do; but he did not, and that, no doubt, in great wisdom, that
so the Gospel being propagated, by such weak and contemptible Instruments as
the Apostles were, without the concurrence of the Civil Power, yea, and against
such great opposition from them, might be given to the world one of the most
convincing Evidences that could be, of the truth of the Christian Religion.

But it does not follow thence, but that it was then the Duty of Magistrates,
even when they were Enemies to Christ, both to believe in him, and to employ
their Power for the Advancement of God's True Religion and Worship, for this
they were morally obliged to do from the nature of their Office. And therefore
Christ's employing the Gospel Ministers in a Ministerial way, does not dissolve
those Obligations that lie upon tho Magistrate, by the moral Law of God, to
take care for the Advancement and Security of True Religion; for seeing the
Office of Magistracy is contiuned under the Gospel, we need no New
Testament-Precepts to enforce his Duty in this respect, which is incumbent on
him, not immediately by any Gospel-precept, but by a previous Obligation,
antecedent to the Gospel Ministry, which is moral and perpetual, inherent in
his very Office and Dignity; that having Authority from God, and being in his
Stead in the world, should employ his power best for God's service and glory.

And as the Magistrate is not disobliged to promote and preserve True Religion
under the Gospel, from the office of the Gospel Ministry, employed to that end,
neither is it disagreeable with the Gospel Dispensation, that he should do so,
more than formerly under the Law; for the difference between the Law and the
Gospel does not lie in any of the moral Obligations of Religion, but chiefly in
the Positive, and Typical, and Ceremonial part, which is now fulfilled by the
Coming of Christ, and so done away: but the moral part is still the same, as
under the Old Testament, and those few positive Doctrines and Institutions,
that are peculiar to the Gospel, are all included in the moral Law; for the
First-Table Commandments do comprehend all the Doctrines and Ordinances of the
Gospel, and require belief of them, and obedience to them; and indeed, the
moral Law does comprehend the whole Duty of man, for it requires Belief in
whatsoever God shall reveal, and Obedience to whatsoever He shall command.

Now I argue thus; That if the whole Law of God be the Foundation and Rule of
Laws and Magistracy, (as we noted before) then certainly the Magistrate is
Keeper of both Tab^es of the Law, or else he is Keeper of neither. Hence it
will then follow, that all the Gospel Institutions, thus included in the
First-Table-Commands, are under the care of the Magistracy, as well as those
Duties that respect the Second-Table-Commands.

Thus it is very clear, That the Magistrate under the Gospel is bound by the Law
of God to employ his power and care for true Religion, and the Worship of God.
And if so, then he ought, no doubt, to make Laws for the promotion and support
of it, for that the power and office of Magistracy is exerted by Laws, to which
Laws it is necessary that there be a Sanction of Penalties upon the Breach of
them; for if the Magistrate have only a mandative and preceptive power in the
matters of Religion, and not power to inflict Penalties for the Violation of
Laws, he may be said to bear the Sword in vain in that respect. And it is
necessary to Laws, that they be backed with Penalties, not only to further
obedience, but also to maintain the honor of the Law, and the authority of the
Magistrate.

But as to the Magistrates forcing persons to believe in Christ, this he cannot
do, because Faith is an Act of the Understanding and the Will; but where the
Faith of Christ is not generally professed he may both require the Attendance
of the Person on the public preaching of the Word, and also prohibit and
suppress all public profession and practice of Idolatry and false Religion:
But this is not: the Case in such Governments, where all have taken up the
profession of Christ and his true Religion, at least in the speculative and
doctrinal part of it, and have vowed by Baptism to adhere to that Religion both
in profession and practice. Also where some have taken on them the Ministerial
Function in the Church, and thereby have obliged themselves to the Duties of
the same. In these cases, doubtless, the Christian Magistrate may, according to
the example of good Kings, under the Old Testament, require and cause by good
Laws, both Ministers and People to do their respective Duties in Religion, and
impose penalties for defections or neglects agreeable to the merit of the
fault; and for grievous Offenses against Religion, as Idolatry, Heresy,
Blasphemy, etc. when they are certain and apparent, may doubtless inflict
corporal punishments, after the example of God's own Laws.

And that the infliction of corporal punishments for great Offenses against
Religion, is not disagreeable with the Gospel Dispensation, appears plainly by
the Examples of St. Peter, Act. 5. 10. who using an extraordinary Authority,
above that of the Ministry, did wonderfully put Ananias and Saphira to death,
for Sacril. dge and Lying; and Paul struck Elymas the Sorcerer with Blindness
for opposing the Gospel, Act. 13. 11. which miraculous ways of punishments
were accommodated to that present state of the Church, in the want of Christian
Magistrates to succor and desend it, who were then so far from maintaining the
Interest of the Church, that they were the greatest Enemies to it, and
Persecuters of it: But yet nevertheless those Examples prove, that corporal
punishments for great Offenses against Religion, are consistent with the Gospel
Dispensation.

Thus, I hope, I have sufficiently proved the power and duty of the Magistrate
under the Gospel, to promote and maintain by Laws the True Religion, and so
pass on to the Second Question.

QUEST. II. Whether it be lawful for the Christian Magistrate to give a general
Toleration of all Religions; or, what Liberty in Religion he ought to allow.
Answ. TO this I answer in the Negative, That he may not give a general
Toleration of all Religions: Put what has been laid down and proved in Answer
to the former Question, may indeed serve for an Answer likewise in part both to
this and the following Questions, which will be easily and plainly answered in
the Negative, upon supposition of the Truth of the former Hypothesis, namely,
That it is the Duty of the Magistrate to promote and maintain the True Religion:
From thence it will follow, that he may neither give a general Toleration of
all Religions, nor the Subjects Consent to such a Toleration, or to the
repealing the Laws that establish and preserve the True Religion.

That he may not give a general Toleration of all Religions; I urge therefore,

First, From the Inconsistency of giving such a Toleration with his Duty to
promote and maintain the True Religion, for thence it will follow, that he
ought not (willingly at least) to tolerate any but the True Religion; and that
he ought also to endeavor by all expedient and lawful means, to suppress and
exterminate all Idolatry and False Religion. And though (as we noted before) the
Magistrate cannot force any without the Visible Church to believe in Christ,
yet no doubt it is his Duty, where the True Religion is not generally known and
professed, not only to provide that the Ignorant and Erroneous People may be well
instructed in the True Religion, but also to prohibit and suppress the public
Profession and Practice of Idolatry, Heresy, Blasphemy, and suchlike, as
being so repugnant and prejudicial to the True Religion, which he is obliged to
promote and maintain: But to give a Toleration of these, and of all Religions
whatsoever, is so far from suppressing it, that it is not only an Allowance of
it, but a kind of setting it up.

Secondly, It may be further proved Unlawful, from the Command of God on the
Magistracy of the Old Testament, to suppress all false Prophets, Teachers, and
Idolaters, Deuteronomy. 13. 2, 6, 10.

Thirdly, From the Example of all good Kings and Magistrates, that did so, and
are approved for so doing.

And, Lastly, From the great injury and hurt that the Cause of True Religion
and the Church of God is like to receive by such a Toleration, by giving
occasion to Satan by false Teachers, to infest the Church with the Seeds of
False Doctrines, and to corrupt the pure Worship of God, with Idolatry and
Superstition; which the Christian Magistrate, as a Watchman over the Church,
should labor to prevent.

This, in short, might serve sufficiently to demonstrate the unreasonableness
and great impiety of such a Toleration, but because a general Toleration under
the specious pretense of Liberty of Conscience, has been, and is a matter so
vehemently argued for by many, I shall a little enquire into the nature and
ground of this Liberty of Conscience pleaded for, by which I presume, most
understand nothing else, but an Exemption from the Obligation of all humane
Laws in the matters of Religion; therefore I shall in the first place examine
those Grounds, upon which such a Liberty of Conscience seems to be claimed and
pleaded for, which being found rotten and unsound, such a Toleration will then
further appear unlawful to be given by the Christian Magistrate. And then,
Secondly, I shall further examine what that lawful Liberty is in the matters of
Religion, which of Divine Right ought to be allowed by the Magistrate to every
Christian.

First, Concerning such a Liberty of Conscience as is opposed to all human
Laws, in matters of Religion, I shall enquire into these things.

First, What Obligation of humane Laws there is upon the Conscience in the
things of Religion.

Secondly, Whether an Erroneous Conscience do exempt from the Obligation of
Just Laws.

Thirdly, Whether the consideration of an Erroneous Conscience, under the
infliction of a Penalty on such a Person to be Unjust: Of these very briefly.

First, As to the Obligation of humane Laws upon the Conscience, we
acknowledge, that it is only the Law of God, that does immediately bind the
Conscience, because the Conscience is only subject to God, and under his
Authority alone; the Magistrate has only power over the Body and outward
practice, but yet nevertheless the Conscience is bound by the Law of God to
obey all lawful and just Commands of the Magistrate. Now those Laws of the
Magistrate about Religion, that are but the Inforcement of God's own Commands
and Institutions, have a double Obligation upon the Conscience, both by Virtue
of the immediate Divine Authority appointing them, as also from the Command of
God requiring Obedience to humane Authority chiefly in such things.

Secondly, Neither does an Erroneous Conscience exempt from the Obligation of
Just Laws; for though every man have a Judgment of private discretion in and
about what he ought to do in Religion: yet if he judge erroneously of what is
justly required by Laws to be done, his Judgment and erroneous Conscience
therein, does not exempt him from the Obligation of those Commands; for though
it is true, that he sins in acting against an erroneous Conscience, yet he ought
to lay it down, and then to act; and if it be a necessary Duty, he sins if he
do not.

Thirdly, Neither will the infliction of a Penalty be unjust, that is laid on a
Person, for doing or omitting that which he is led to by an erroneous
Conscience: This is the grand mistake about Liberty of Conscience, that because
every man has a liberty to judge for himself, what he ought to do in Religion,
that therefore, if he judge erroneously, yet he ought to be tolerated in so
doing; No, he ought to lay down his erroneous Conscience, or else, as he sins,
so he justly suffers from Authority in following the Dictates of it: But, that
he sins in following an erroneous Conscience, I think no one of sense will
deny; for if it be lawful for a man to act in Religion, according to the
Dictates of his own Conscience, when it is erroneous, then it is lawful for him
to commit Idolatry, speak Blasphemy, etc. if his Conscience lead him to it.
Therefore, if the Plea of an erroneous Conscience will not free a Man from the
Guilt of those Sins that he is led into by it, then certainly it will not
exempt a Man from the Just Obligation of Punishment, from the Magistrate, for
those Sins, who is the Avenger of God against all evil Doers: And the
Magistrate does offer no Violence to Conscience, by either requiring Obedience,
or exacting the Penalties for Disobedience to Just and Righteous Commands; for
if Men's erroneous Consciences will not suffer them to Obey, it is no force upon
Conscience for the outward Man to bear the Penalty.

But besides, If such a Liberty of Conscience be due to every man, as shall
exempt him from the Obligation of all humane Laws in the matters of Religion,
it will then follow, that the Magistrate has no Authority in the matters of
Religion, and so it will null the chiefest part of his Office; for where there
is no Obligation to Obedience, there can be no Authority to Command, those
being Correlatives, and cannot be one without the other.

But to conclude this particular, If it be so as we have proved, that the
Conscience be bound by such humane Laws, the matter of which is the Inforcement
of God's own Commands and Institutions, and that if an erroneous Conscience
does not exempt a Man from the Obligation of such Laws, nor render the Penalty
inflicted for breaking of them to be Unjust, then certainly there is no such
Liberty of Conscience as an Exemption from all humane Laws about Religion due
to any Christian, and therefore ought not to be granted by the Christian
Magistrate.

Secondly, I proceed now to the second thing proposed, to wit, What that lawful
Liberty is in the matters of Religion, which of Divine Right ought to be
Allowed by the Magistrate; for though we have asserted and proved the Duty and
Power of the Magistrate, to make Laws for the promotion and maintenance of True
Religion, yet we may not think that the Magistrate can by Laws entrench upon
any of the Rights, Liberties, and Privileges, which of Divine Right do belong
to the Christian Religion, which he is obliged to maintain every Christian in
the Enjoyment of: Or, That any humane Power has such an exorbitant and
unlimited Authority of imposing Rights and Ceremonies on the Church as they
think good; which Principle has been the ground of so many Corruptions imposed
in the Church of Rome; and indeed upon which Principle may be brought upon the
Christian Religion, by the restraint of Liberty in indifferent things, and the
Imposition of Ceremonies, a greater Yoke and Burden than was imposed by God's
own Law. But we may not think that God has now freed the Christian Religion
under the Gospel, from the Bondage of his own Ceremonies, and yet left them
under a humane Power to impose what they think good.

But we desire, that what is said on this Subject by way of Argumentation, may
not be interpreted a prescribing to Authority, or limiting their Power; and
therefore we humbly conceive, that the Magistrate has Power in the matters of
Religion, to impose nothing but that which is lawful, certain, and necessary.
Hence then he may not enjoin in Religion things that are Either, 1. Sinful. 2.
Doubtful. 3. Merely Indifferent.


First, Not things Sinful: This, I think, will be acknowledged by all, That no
humane Power can lawfully require to be done that which is in it self sinful.
And if any such Laws are made, they must necessarily be void in themselves, as
to any Obligation to Obedience, having not the proper matter of Laws, which
must always be some useful Good.

Secondly, Not things Doubtful and Uncertain in Religion; and such things we
call Doubtful and Uncertain, that really in themselves and in the Judgment of
many learned and good Men, have no apparent Foundation in the Word of God; for
the Magistrate can make Laws in the matters of Religion, only of such things as
Christ has commanded, and to do them decently and orderly, because there is
but one Legislator and Lawgiver in and over the Church, Christ Jesus, Jam. 4.
18. And humane Authority has no proper Dictatory or Legislative Power, but
only a Ministratory and Directive one, in the things of Religion; therefore
whatever the Magistrate commands in Religion, must be the observation of the
Laws of Christ in the Church, and not his own Laws: for the state of the Church
is not like a Civil Body, that humane Laws are the constitutive form of it; but
the Church and all its Laws, Privileges, and Liberties, are all sounded on the
Word of God. Thus, as under the Law, all that Power which the Magistrate then
had about Religion, was directed and limited by the Word of God, those things
which God had instituted and appointed in his Worship to be done, he was to
take care for the due observation of it, but was not to add thereto, nor
diminish from it, Deuteronomy. 12. 32. So under the Gospel, all the Power of
Magistrates in the matters of Religion, is in such things as are plainly
prescribed in the Word of God, or by evident consequence deducible from it; and
what is not so, may be called a thing Doubtful and Uncertain at the best, and
therefore should not be enforced by Laws.

Thirdly, Nor in things merely Indifferent: By things ind^fferent, I mean
things not necessary, nor required by any Divine Law. Now there is a twofold
necessity of things, the one Natural and Intrinfical, the other Circumstantial
or Accidental only; and of Indifferent things, I call that so, that is
Intrinsical and in its own nature Indifferent, yet such indifferent things by
reason of circumstances about necessary things, or by Accident, may become
either inexpedient, and also scandalous, and so unlawful, or they may become
expedient, and so circumstantially necessary. Now that, in Religion, that
intrinsically and in its own nature is necessary, or else is necessary, by
reason of Circumstance or Accident, is the only proper matter of Laws; and what
is not such, I call a thing merely Indifferent.

Now such things should not be put into Laws that are either, 1. Merely
Indifferent, 2. Much less when such indifferent things bebecome inexpedient;
and, 3. Least of all, when they become scandalous.

First, Such things about Religion that are in their own nature indifferent,
and have no Circumstantial necessity attending it that requires a Restraint, is
that wherein Christians ought to have their liberty, and not to be restrained
by Laws: because if Authority can restrain Christian Liberty, further than in
things necessary, barely upon their own Authority and Will; they may upon the
same Foundation take off all liberty in things indifferent. But this they
cannot do justly, without wrong, because liberty in things indifferent is a
Branch of that Christian Liberty we have by the Gospel, and is an Appendix to
the very Essence of the Christian Religion, Gal. 5. 1. 1 Cor. 10. 23. Now, as
the Magistrate cannot justly deprive any Man of any of his Civil Rights and
Properties, without just reason and cause; much less may he deprive us of any
of our religious Rights and Privileges, without a just and necessary cause;
and liberty in things indifferent, being one of these Rights, we ought
therefore to be preserved in the enjoyment of it, and not to be brought under a
rest raint therein, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 6. 12. All things are lawful for
me, but I will not be brought under the power of any thing; by all things, he
means things indifferent and lawful only, and not necessary, yet would not be
brought under the power of any of these. Which proves, that no Christian should
be brought by Laws, under a power either of doing or not doing things in their
own nature and use only indifferent and lawful: And the Scripture in diverse
places asserts the liberty of Christians in things indifferent, 1 Cor. 10. 23.
Romans 14. 3, 5. And we see also that our Savior vindicated his Disciples, in
using their liberty in the forbearance of a thing in its own nature
indifferent, though injoined by Authority, Mat. 15. which proves also, that
Authority, as it may not impose things merely indifferent, so cannot make them
necessary when imposed. And indeed, if it had been lawful to restrain
Christians of their liberty in things indifferent, how easy had it been for
the Apostle Paul to have silenced all Disputes about the observation of Meats
and Days, and suchlike indifferent things, by determinining the practice of
Christians in those things on one side or other, by some Law or Canon, and by
directing the Church in aftertimes in the like cases, to make Laws in order to
heal and take off such Differences; but because he did not, but on the contrary
does so frequently assert the liberty of every Christian in things indifferent,
to use with prudence and charity; it follows therefore, that such Laws should
not be made, which violate and infringe Christian l^berty.

Secondly, But much less may indifferent things be imposed, when they become
inexpedient; which they do in Religion, when they are unprofitable, and tend
not to Edisication. Thus the Apostle, 1 Cor. 10. 23. All things are lawful for
me, but all things are not expedient: all things are lawful for me, but all
things edify not. Where the latter Clause expounds the former; such lawful
things as do not edify, are not expedient, and therefore not to be put into
Laws, because all humane Authority, in the matters of Religion, is only for
edification, 2 Cor. 10. 8. 13. 10. therefore such Constitutions about Religion
cease to oblige, when they cease to edify, because the Obligation to obey in
the things of Religion, can extend no farther than the Authority to command;
which we see is only things for edification.

Thirdly, Least of all should indifferent things be imposed, when they become
scandalous, for then the use of them becomes in most cases unlawful and sinful,
and therefore much more unlawful to be imposed by Laws. And indeed, this is the
great reason why Indifferent things should rarely be imposed by Laws, because
Scandal is so apt to rise out of the use of Indifferent things; and therefore
we are to use our liberty, or to deny it, according as such or such
circumstances require, for the avoiding of Scandal; for we may not do a thing
merely Indifferent, to the Scandal of our Brother, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 8.
13. If Meat make my Brother to offend, I will eat no Flesh while the world
stands, lest I make my Brother to offend.

Authority therefore cannot justly command such an indifferent thing to be
done, when it is apparent thereby Scandal will follow, for this will be to make
void the Commandments of God by the Commands of Men; the Command of God is,
Give no offense, 1 Cor. 10. 32. and this Command of God is Obligatory on
Rulers, in making Laws in Indifferent things; as well as on private Christians,
in their practice toward each other. If Rulers therefore command such an
Indifferent thing to be done, which cannot be done by many without a doubting
Conscience, they do in effect command that which is evil, Romans 14. 23. He that
doubts, is damned if he eat; and yet this was but in an indifferent thing: If
Authority had then commanded him to eat, (and so in the like case) it had been
to command a Scandal, and so unlawful. It Is true, if it be a necessary Duty by
a Divine Law, that is commanded by Authority, there if Scandal follow, it is
Scandal taken, and not given, and the fault is wholly in him that takes the
Offense; but if it be an unnecessary Indifferent thing, it is Scandal given by
the Authority that imposes it.

And also hereby they not only give Scandal to the Doubting, but oblige all
others, as much as they can, by the practice of such Indifferences, to give
Scandal also; for to say, that humane Authority makes an indifferent thing,
that in it self has no necessary use, to become necessary, in the case of
Scandal, is to make the Laws of Men to supersede the Law of God; No certainly,
if the thing were really scandalous, antecedent to the command, or the use of
it would be so, were it not commanded, there no humane Authority can put such a
necessity into an indifferent thing, as to make it necessary to be done when
Scandal follows; because the Obligation to avoid Scandal in indifferent things,
being a moral Duty, will supersede any Obligation, that results from the
Command of Authority in such indifferent things: for this is but a mere Ritual,
and Rituals must give place to Morals.

Thus we see, that such Indifferent things being unnecessary in Religion, much
more, if inexpedient and scandalous, ought not to be imposed by Laws. But yet
we do not hereby plead for such a Liberty in Religion, as is opposed to things
in Religion, either necessary in their own nature, or necessary by reason of
some circumstances. And thus Indifferent things, that serve for the ordering
the Worship of God in decent and comely manner, according to the Apostle's
Rule, 1 Cor. 14. are so far lawful to be imposed, as they are expedient and
necessary to those ends; for all the Power of humane Authority in the matters
of Religion, besides imposing what God has commanded in his Word, is only in
ordering what God has so commanded to be done in decent and comely manner, and
to edification: and as such things appertaining to God's Worship are necessary
in their general nature, as Time, Place, etc. so in their Particulars, when
they are indifferent in their own nature, yet do, by reason of Circumstances
and Accidents, become necessary to be determined, they then lose their nature
of Indifferences, and become necessary, antecedent to any Imposition of them by
Authority.

But yet nevertheless, the determination of such Indifferent things should not
be imposed by Laws in the case of Scand^l, unless in these Cases, viz. 1.
Unless the necessity of imposing them be great, apparent, and certain, and not
pretended only. 2. Unless the Good that is brought to Religion by the
imposition of Indifferent things, be not greater than the Evil of Scandal it
brings with it. 3. And unless the Good End they are necessary for, cannot be by
some other means so well attained, without so great a scandal: But where is no
such necessary Good, or but little, comparative to the Evil of Scandal; or if
the Good End designed may be by other means attained, without so great Scandal,
there certainly in reason Scandal should be avoided, because 't^s so great an
Evil, and so much condemned in the Word of God, in the use of Indifferent
things.

Obj. But that which is usually objected against liberty in Indifferent things,
is the Judgment of Authority, seeing them necessary; for, say they, Who shall
judge of what is necessary in Religion, to be imposed by Laws, but Rulers
themselves? For if a liberty be allowed to the People, to judge of the
lawfulness or necessity of what is commanded, and accordingly to obey or not
obey, as they judge of them; this will overthrow all Government.

Answ. The Magistrate has a public Authoritative Judgment in what they are to
require, and the People have a private Judgment of Discretion in what they are
to do and obey; and though both these may be abused, yet both may very well stand
together, without either overthrowing the Authority of Government, or
dissolving the Obligation to Obedience; but very ill consequences will follow
on denying either; for if we deny the Judgment of Authority to command, this
indeed is to overthrow all Humane Power to command in the matters of Religion;
and to deny the Peoples Judgment of private Discretion, is both to take off the
use of their Reason, and to lay upon them a necessity of sinning; for if only
the Judgment and Will of Authority be the Rule of Laws, or the Obligation to
Obedience, it will then follow, that we are bound to obey whatever they
command, though sinful, if they judge it not so: But as the Magistrate's
authoritative Judgment does not bind to Obedience, when he judges erroneously
in that which is required, so tho Peoples Judgment of private discretion does
not disoblige them from Obedience, nor render them inculpable when they judge
erroneously of what is required: Therefore each party, both Ruler and Subject,
should be very careful to judge aright, namely, the Ruler, in judging nothing
fit to be commanded in Religion, but what is evidently lawful and necessary,
and then their Commands are binding: And the Subjects should be very careful,
not to judge erroneously of the Commands of Authority, for then they justly
suffer for Disobedience. Each party indeed must judge for so much as concerns
themselves and their own Duty, both Authority in commanding, and the People in
obeying; but the Judgment of neither does change the nature of the things
themselves, so as to make that lawful and necessary, or unlawful and not
necessary, that are not really so in themselves. But we find, that this
Argument of enforcing Obedience in the matters of Religion, merely from the
Judgment of Authority, is never made use of, but when men want sufficient force
of Argument from the matter of the things themselves, then they flee to the
Judgment and Obligation of Authority-commanding, which indeed will equally hold
in Popery it self, upon supposition, that the Authority, either Civil or
Ecclesiastical, be a lawful Authority that commands.

But this Objection is of no force in such things, wherein it is acknowledged,
That there is no necessity in the nature of the things themselves, why they
should be imposed; besides the will of Authority commanding it, there the
obligation to Obedience is urged merely from the will of Authority requiring
it, and not their Judgment of the necessary usefulness of such things. But what
force and obligation the mere will of Authority has in the matters of
Religion, without sound Reason from the Matter required, we shall have occasion
to say somewhat unto under the next Question.

Thus I have endeavored with all possible Brevity to demonstrate what that
lawful Liberty in the Matters of Religion is, which the Christian Magistrate
should justly allow to every man: but to allow an unlimited Toleration in the
practice of Religion, is to run into the contrary Extreme, of imposing
unnecessary and doubtful things; and it is to be supposed, that much of that
mistake that has been about a Toleration, has come to pass, by not duly
considering this Golden Mean of Liberty only in unnecessary things in Religion,
between the two Extremes of unnecessary Impositions, and an unlimited
Toleration; but as the former is bad, being against Christian Liberty and
Charity, yet the latter is much worse, because it tends to subvert the
Christian Faith, and to overthrow all Government in the Matters of Religion.

QUEST. III. Whether it be lawful for Subjects to give their Actual Consent to
a general Toleration.
Answ. TO which I answer in the Negative, That they may not. And indeed there
will be occasion to say but little in answer to this Question; for having
before proved, in Answer to the foregoing Question, That the Magistrate may not
lawfully allow such a Toleration; it will thence follow, That the Subject may
not consent to it, for by consenting to that which is unlawfully done by
others, we become partly Guilty of the Evil so done.

But yet it may be proper for us under this Question, to enquire, Whether it
may come under the Charge of an Assent to such a Toleration, to practice some
Liberty in the Exercise of Religion that is restrained by Laws, when it is
allowed by such a Toleration.

I shall answer this in these Three Particulars: 1. That such a liberty in
Religion, as consists only in an Exemption from the Obligation of things in
their own nature unnecessary, doubtful, or scandalous, may lawfully be
practiced, though the same be restrained by Laws. 2. That there is no Scandal
given by the practice of such a Liberty. 3. Nor any Assent thereby to a general
Toleration.


1. That such a Liberty in Religion as consists only in an exemption or
omission of things in their own nature unnecessary, doubtful, or scandalous,
may lawfully be practiced, though the same be restrained by Laws, because the
matter of such Laws cannot be Obligatory upon the Conscience, by virtue of any
Law of God, there being no Divine Law upon which to bottom and authorize such
Laws, which is necessary in all Laws about Religion, as we have before noted.
And wherein there is no Authority to require, therein can be no obligation from
the Command to obey, and the mere will of Authority can lay no Obligation in
the matters of Religion; but much more when any humane Laws about Indifferent
things do interfere with the Law of God, of avoiding Scandal in such
Indifferent things, there certainly such Laws do lose their force and
obligation, because the obligation from humane Authority cease, and becomes
void, when a previous and greater obligation to the Law of God is to take
place: by which we are obliged not to do that about Religion, which being in it
self not necessary, is in its use scandalous to many. And indeed, such Laws
that enforce the observation of such things, doubtful and scandalous in
Religion, seem to lose the force of Laws, and to be void in themselves, having
not the proper Matter, nor answering the end of Law; and therefore a liberty in
omitting such things, though injoined by Laws, is lawful to be practiced.

2. And that there is no Scandal given by the practice of such a Liberty; for
it may be said, That though there be no obligation, either from the matter of the
things required, or from Authority requiring it, to use some Indifferent
things; yet they being Indifferent, we are bound to use them, to avoid Scandal
to Authority, and to others that will be scandalized by our omitting them. And
therefore upon this ground diverse learned Conformists have thought it lawful to
omit the Ceremonies injoined by Laws, when Scandal does not follow, being
neither necessary in themselves, nor from the Command of Authority, any further
than in the case of Scandal. Here we may observe, That such as esteem such
things not merely Indifferent, but Doubtful in themselves, if not Unlawful,
cannot be obliged to use them to avoid Scandal to others: But if they are but
merely Indifferent in their own nature, yet proving Scandalous to many, and
upon supposition of the Truth of what we have proved, that there is no
Obligation from Authority in such Indifferent things, when they become
scandalous, it will then follow, that there can be no scandal given by omitting
them; though Scandal be taken, or though in the use of an unnecessary thing in
Religion we really give Scandal, yet by the omission of it is now given, though
Scandal may be taken thereupon: because Scandal given, arises either out of
the omission of something necessary to be done, or doing something either
unlawful, or unnecessary though lawful. Now, if the Command of Authority does not
make that in Religion not necessary in it self, to become necessary when
Scandal follows, as we have proved it cannot do, then certainly no Scandal is
given by omitting such unnecessary things. For this we have a parallel
Instance, in our Savior's justifying his Disciples in omitting a lawful, but
an unnecessary Ceremony, though injoined by lawful Authority; notwithstanding the
Pharisces were scandalized by it, namely, in omitting to wash before Meat, Mat.
15. 13.

Therefore it being thus lawful and necessary, to omit such indifferent things
in Religion as are doubtful and scandalous, but yet also necessary to do and
perform the essential and necessary parts of Divine Worship, the Practice of
Christians then, in keeping to all the necessary part of Protestant Doctrine and
Worship, omitting only that which is in it self unnecessary, and in its use
doubtful and scandalous, cannot justly be condemned as unlawful or scandalous:
for herein they do but save and improve their own Right and Liberty, which they
have by virtue of the Divine Law, without respect to the obligation of such
Laws, as either restrain a necessary Duty, or require an unnecessary Ceremony.
And the doing of a necessary Duty, and the omitting an unnecessary
Circumstance, does not render a man culpable of giving Scandal, the Scandal may
perhaps be taken, or follow thereupon.

3. Hence it follows, that this Liberty used in Religion ss no practical Assent
to a general Toleration; for there being nothing in this practice granted
thereby, but what was an original Right, antecedent, and without respect to
such a Toleration, it cannot follow, that Christians thus using their liberty
in the exercise of all the Essentials of the Protestant Religion. omitting only
such things, different and doubtful, cannot be said to give any practical or
(...) to the lawfulness of a general Toleration of all Religions, because the
ground and reason of the Exercise of this Liberty is not founded on the
Toleration, but both on the lawfulness and obligation of the Duty so to
practice, without respect to such a Toleration.

Much less is it any practical Assent to a supposed power in the Supreme
Magistrate, to dispense with such Laws as are of known use and necessity, to
the support of the Fundamentals both of the Civil Government and the Protestant
Religion: for though we should grant, that the Supreme Magistrate may dispense
with the observation of things indifferent and doubtful in Religion, though
injoined by Laws, as well as from the Penalties imposed for omitting them, and
that when the supreme Law of Piety and Charity require it; it will not follow
thence, that he may dispense with all Laws that require both the profession and
practice of True Religion in the Essentials of Doctrine and Worship, and that
prohibit Idolatry and False Religion, and give a general Toleration of all
Religions. I hope that all true Protestants, that accept their liberty only in
an exemption from such things indifferent and doubtful in Religion, do utterly
disown the lawfulness of such a Toleration, or of any such power in the Supreme
Magistrate, to dispense with the Laws: those that through Ignorance or Error
have professed any actual Consent to it, are much to be pitied and blamed.

QUEST. IV. Whether it be lawful for Subjects to Consent to the Repealing those
Laws, that Establish and Preserve the True Christian Religion.
Answ. I Answer, That they may not, but that which has been proved under the
foregoing Questions, has anticipated much of that might be said in Answer to
this; for the force of this Question loses its strength, upon supposition of
the Truth of the former Hypothesis, and needs little to be said in Answer to
it; for it is easy to see, that if it be the Magistrate's Duty, and so
especially the Duty of the Legislative Power to maintain the True Religion,
it is then their Duty to maintain those Laws, that both establish, and are
necessary to the maintenance of it, because the Magistrate's Office and Power
is exer^ed by Laws.

Now those Laws are either such as require the profession and practice of the
True Religion, or such as prohibit and punish the profession and exercise of
False Religion; neither of which may be lawfully repealed, unless better Laws
for the Security and Establishment of True Religion be first provided: for by
repealing the Laws that establish the profession and exercise of the True
Religion, the Magistrate dis^eth his care and regard for the Church of God, and
so frustrates and makes void one of the special ends of his Office, and
likewise betrays the Cause of Religion to the Rapine and Violence of its open
and professed Enemies.

And then also the repealing the Laws that prohibit False Religion and
Idolatry, is not only an Allowance of it, but a constructive setting it up, at
least becoming partly guilty of it. Hence is that Rule in Morality, Cujus manu
est ne quid fiat, ^i deputatur cum jain fit: In whose hand and power it is,
that an Evil Act be not done, to them it is imputed if it be done. And this Rule
does most properly respect Magistrates, and those that have Power over others,
who are truly said to be guilty of that Evil, which they are able by good Laws
to prevent, and do not. And therefore, that Magistrates ought to prohibit, at
least the public profession and exercise of Idolatry and False Religion, was,
no doubt, the ground of those good Laws which prohibit the same, which our
Forefathers, with so much zeal for the Truth of the Protestant Religion,
obtained against Popery and Idolatry: But with what zeal for, or security unto
the Protestant Religion, they may now be repealed, I do not understand.

If then it be not morally lawful for the Legislative Power to repeal those
Laws that establish and preserve the Protestant Religion, I need not then
further prove, that it is not lawful for the People to consent thereunto; which
will thence follow. But I shall conclude all, by making some short Answer to
Three of these Arguments, which I judge are the most specious that are urged for
repealing the Penal Laws; and those also are of so little weight, that there
need little to be said in answer to them.

First, It Is said, That the Penal Laws made against Popery have been perverted
from their proper end and use against Papists, to oppress and persecute
Protestants, for Dissenting only in matters of Circumstance and Ceremony in
Religion.

Answ. But this is not the fault of the Laws, but of those that had the
executive Power, and was so done (as now appears plainly) to serve the Design
of Pope^y, then carrying on: But though the Peral Laws have been so perverted,
yet seeing it appears, that they are of such necessary use, for the Security of
the Protestant Religion against Popery, they may not for that reason be
repealed. But as for those Laws that impose Penalties on Protestants, adhering
to all the essential and necessary parts of Protestant Doctrine and Worship, but
upon scruple of Conscience, dissent in some Matters of Circumstance and
Ceremony in Religion, which to them are doubtful and uncertain; it is to be
hoped, that the Wisdom, Piety, and Charity of another Parliament may either
give a greater latitude in the terms of Church Communion, amongst all
Protestants, or abate the rigor of those Laws, that impose Penalties for
Nonconformity only in such matters.

Secondly, It Is further alleged by some, That there are some Abuses and
Corruptions in Religion, still remaining in the Church of England, and that all
those Penal Laws establish and confirm them, and require full Conformity to
them, as to the essential part of Religion, upon pain of Penalties annexed to
those Laws, and that therefore they should be repealed for the sake of those
Abuses.

Answ. Though we suppose there are Abuses and Corruptions about the Circumstances
of Religion, confirmed by the same Laws, whereby the substantial and necessary
part is confirmed; yet it will not follow therefore, that for the sake of those
Abuses, those Laws should be made void, that confirm the essential part, unless
(as we said before) better Laws could first be obtained, that might at least so
well Secure the essential part, because a lesser Evil is to be chosen, to wit,
the burden of those Abuses, rather than a greater, namely, The Overthrow of
the whole Frame of the Protestant Religion, and the Introduction of Popery:
Therefore where a less-necessary Good cannot yet be attained unto, there the
most necessary Good already attained must be preserved.

Thirdly, It Is further objected, That those Laws never did, nor never will
answer their End, of bringing all Persons into an Uniformity in Religion, for
which they are intended* And this is the main Reason given by some for
Repealing them.

Answ. To which may be answered, That the same is objected by Papists against
the Scriptures themselves, of being the Rule of Faith, that they never answered
their End of reconciling Differences in Religion. And indeed, upon as good
grounds it may be said of the Law of God, That it is not the Rule of Life,
because it does not attain its End of being such, for that all Men will not be
ruled by it.

But for further Answer, Those Laws have attained their End so far hitherto, as
to support and maintain the essential and necessary parts of Protestant Doctrine
and Worship, against the prevalency of Popery, for which end most of the Penal
Laws are especially intended; but that they have not also attained their end of
procuring Unity and Uniformity in lesser matters, relating to Modes and
Ceremonies in Divine Worship, has been doubtless the too much overdoing, by
the Imposition of such things unnecessary and doubtful in Religion; which will
perpetuate Divisions to the World's end, whilst they are made necessary
Conditions of Communion amongst Protestants.

But alas, either Unity, or Diversity of Opinion and Practice in such matters
as these are, is not of that moment and concernment that some men imagine, that
lay so much stress and weight upon things of Ceremony and Circumstance, and so
little value the Substantial and Great things of Religion. The principal Bond
of Christian Unity is an Unity in the profession and practice of the Protestant
Faith, to the preservation of which, those Laws are especially to be esteemed
as useful; and therefore should not be repealed, unless better Laws, conducing
more effectually to those great ends of Religion, can be made and provided.

FINIS.

