Dr. FOWLERS SERMON Preached at BOW-CHURCH, ON THE FAST - DAY. April the 16th.
1690.

PILKINGTON, Mayor, etc.
Cur. Special. tent. apud Dom. Mansional. Domini Mayor. Die Lunae, xxio. Die
Aprilis, 1690.Annoque Regni, Regis and Reginae, Willielmi and Mariae, Angliae,
etc. Secundo.
THis COURT does desire Dr. Fowler to Print his Sermon, Preached at St. Mary le
Bow, the 16th. of this Instant April, 1690. before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen,
and Citizens of this City.

Wagstaffe.

A SERMON Preached at BOW-CHURCH, April the Xvith. 1690: Before the LORD MAYOR,
AND Court of Aldermen, AND CITIZENS of LONDON. Being the FAST DAY.

By EDWARD FOWLER, D. D.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for Brabazon Alymer, at the Three Pigeons over
against the Royal Exchange in Cornhil; And Awnsham Churchil, at the Black Swan
in Ave-Mary-Lane. MDCXC.

To the Right Honorable, Sir Thomas Pilkington, LORD MAYOR Of the CITY of
LONDON: AND THE Court of Aldermen.
Right Honorable,
SINCE Your Favorable Acceptance of this Sermon, has Produced Your Order for
my making it thus Public, I do here Humbly Present You with it: In Composing
whereof it was my whole Aim and Endeavor, to promote as well as I was able,
the Proper Business, and that which ought to be the only Design of Public Days
of Humiliation. Namely, the Atoning of the Divine Displeasure, by so Penitent a
Sense of our Personal Sins, and the Sins of our Nation that cry aloud for
Vengeance, as is followed with the Forsaking of them, and with hearty
Endeavors, in our several Stations, to be Instrumental as much as in us lies,
toward a General Reformation. To which, I doubt, there never was in any People
a more Obstinate Aversness, than is at this present to be observed among us.
The Consideration whereof makes the hearts of Good Men Ache to think, what at
last may become of us, after the Wonderful Things God has from time to time,
and now of late, done for us. It can be at no time Excuseable, but is on
Fasting-days Unpardonable, to be Mealy-mouthed, and Shy of justly Representing
the Untoward State we are in, with the true Cause; thereof; or of impartially
Enumerating and Exposing our Reigning Sins; or to be sparing in Reproving those
Vices and Follies, which are grown so Popular, as with very many among us to
pass for Virtues. And the only Apology I shall make to those, who may happen to
be Offended at several Passages in the Applicatory Part of this Discourse, is,
that if we spare to speak now, we may for ever hold our Peace. But the Truth
is, We are under no small Discouragement to hope for Success upon those men,
who stand in most need of Plain-dealing; since long Experience assures us, that
these have made themselves Sermon-Proof. Yet however, Whether they will Hear,
or whether they will Forbear, there is great Satisfaction in having faithfully
done our Duty, and discharged our Consciences.

Now that God would Multiply His Blessings, upon this Great and Renowned City;
and especially on Yourselves, who (under Their Majesty's) have the Chief
Government thereof: And make You Happy Instruments in the diverting of His
Judgments from it, by Vigorously Setting Yourselves to the Suppressing of the
Vices that Abound in it (which will be Your Crown and Glory at the Great Day)
is the Hearty Prayer of,

Right Honorable, Your most Humble Servant, Edward Fowler.

A SERMON Preached before the LORD MAYOR AND THE Court of Aldermen, etc.
Hosea 11. 8. How shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee,
Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine
Heart is turned within me, my Repentings are kindled together.
THere is nothing to be affirmed of Almighty God with more absolute Certainty,
than that the making of his Creatures happy, according to their Capacities of
Happiness, is highly pleasing to him. Let him that glories glory in this, that
he understands and knows me: That I am the Lord which exercise
Loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the earth, for in these things I
delight says the Lord, Ier. 9. 24. The Divine Nature is all Love and
Benignity: God is Love, says the Apostle St. John. The Sun and Light may be as
soon separated, as God and Goodness, the Deity and Loving Kindness: Nor is that
Glorious Lamp of Heaven more free in communicating Light and Heat to the
several Parts of the World, according as they are capable of receiving them,
than is God in spending the benign Rays and Influences of his Goodness upon his
whole Creation, according as it is qualified and disposed for them. And
whenever he withdraws the Light of his Countenance and Fatherly Care from
any People, whenever he turns their Joy into Heaviness, and puts them into
unhappy Circumstances, it is long of themselves, not of the least Defect of
Goodness in Him; it is wholly owing to their rendering themselves unmeet to be
any longer Partakers of his Grace and Favor: So that he cannot act the Part of
an Indulgent Father toward all sorts of men, and do like an infinitely Wise
and Holy Being, who is above all things concerned to promote the Interest of
Righteousness and Universal Goodness in the Universe. God is ever a like Good
in himself, and a like willing to do good to all, as the Sun is equally full of
Light at all times, and a like free in displaying his Beams: And therefore, as
it is not to be ascribed to any deficiency in the Sun, that we are every night
in darkness, but to the Earth's interposing between it and us; so is it not, I
say, to be imputed to any want of Goodness in God, that Nations or particular
Persons are at any time deprived of his wonted Protection, but they must blame
themselves for it. Your Iniquities (says the Prophet) have separated between
you and your God, and your sins have hid his Face from you, etc. Isaiah 59. 2.

In short, God as God is always inclined to do good to his Creatures, but
considering Him as Governor of the World, he is too often under a necessity of
being very severe; though indeed he may be truly said to do good in inflicting
Evil, nay, he designeth herein the greatest good; he aims at the good of
their Souls whom he punishes, till they grow obdurate and are incorrigible:
But he ever designeth a general good in the Judgments he executes, viz. The
Reformation of those Corrigible People who are Observers of them, or made
acquainted with them. When thy Judgments are abroad in the Earth, the
Inhabitants of the World will learn Righteousness, Isaiah 26. 9. Which is as
much as to say, Men's learning of Righteousness is Gods Design in his Judgments,
and they are very powerful means in order thereto, in their own nature.

Now this being the true State of the Case, it is apparent, that God Almighty
inflicts his Judgments, not out of Free Choice, but from Constraint, and with a
kind of unwilling willingness. And this he has expressly told us, Lam. 3. 3^,
etc. The Lord will not cast off forever, but though he cause grief, yet will he
have Compassion, according to the multitude of his Mercies: For he does not
afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men. And the Pathetical Words,
which I have chosen for my present Subject, may give us as great an assurance
hereof, as any Text in the Bible; and before I will repeat them, I Will give you
an Account of the Occasion of them.

In the Four First Verses of this Chapter, we find God Almighty, by his
Prophet, making a sad Complaint of the Israelites inexpressibly Vile Returns to
him, for wonderful Engagements he had laid upon them. When Israel was a Child,
then I loved him, and called my Son out of Egypt. As they called them, so they
went from them, (or as Moses and the Prophets called them to Piety, and the
Reformation of their Lives, so they despised their Calls) they sacrificed unto
Baalim, and burned Incense to Graven Images: I taught Ephraim also to go,
taking them by their Arms; but they knew not that I healed them. Or I took the
same Care of these People, from their very beginning to be a Nation, that
tender Mothers take of their weak Children; but they never would be persuaded
to lay it to heart. I drew them with the Cords of a man, with Bands of Love (or
with the greatest Expressions of Love and Kindness; which is the best and most
proper Method to be taken with Free Agents) and I was to them as they that take
off the Yoke on their Iaws, and I laid meat unto them. Or I delivered them out
of the most miserable Bondage, and gave them a Land flowing with Milk and
Honey; and fed them in a Miraculous Manner in their Journey thither, through
the Barren Wilderness.

And Verse 5, 6. we find their gracious Father so highly provoked by their long
intolerable Behavior toward him, as to pronounce very terrible Threats
against them, viz. They shall not return into the Land of Egypt, (or they
shall not be suffered to flee to the Egyptians, who were now their great Friends,
and on whom they relied more than on the Divine Safeguard) but the Assyrian
shall be their King (he shall subdue them, and carry them away Captive) because
they refused to return; or to return to me, after so many earnest Calls. And
the Sword shall abide in his Cities, and shall consume his Branches, or choice
Men, because of their own Counsels. Because to save themselves, they take
forbidden Courses, making wicked Alliances; and are perpetually revolting, and
backsliding from me; as it follows verse 7. And my People are bent to back
sliding from me, though they called them to the most High, none at all would
exalt him. Though I sent my Prophets from time to time, to admonish them to
repent and amend their lives, yet they have generally still refused to give
Glory to me, by harkening to these Admonitions, but still persist obstinately
in their Rebellions against me.

But we see, after all this, as highly as they had incensed the great God
against them, and as dreadfully Threatened, as they now were by Him; He yet
farther makes good, when one would least expect He should, that Saying of the
Son of Syrach, As is His Majesty so is his Mercy: This He does in the Words of
my Text; How shall I give thee up Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee, or deliver
thee up, Israel? How can I find in mine heart to be as bad as my Word in
Executing such fearful Threatenings? How shall I make thee as Admah? How shall I
set thee as Zeboim? How shall I be able to make an utter end of thee, as I did
of those two, and their neighboring Cities? Mine heart is turned within me, my
Repentings are kindled together. My Bowels do yearn toward you still, as
little as you deserve the least Compassion. I feel my Nature strongly inclined
to spare you yet a while longer, and to give you a longer space for Repentance,
and I will comply with this inclination: As it follows in the next verse. I
will not execute the fierceness of mine anger, I will not return to destroy
Ephraim; or I will not do it yet; for I am God and not man (my Compassion is
inconceivably beyond what a Mortal man is capable of) the Holy one in the midst
of thee; and I will not Enter into the City; or into the Head City Samaria; I
will not Enter into it in an Hostile manner, to make a ruinous Heap of it.

I say the words of my Text, with the verse following, contain a most gracious
Declaration of Almighty God, that he would hold his Hand yet for some longer
time, from destroying these People (after His Patience seemed to be perfectly
spent, by the Threatenings just before uttered) if happily they might at last
come to themselves, and return to their right minds. But we find that these
Desperate Wretches would not to the very last be in the least wrought upon,
either by the most scaring Menaces, or astonishing Patience, or the most
melting and indearing Expressions of Divine Pity; and therefore in Conclusion,
the wrath of God came upon them to the uttermost; they were carried away
Captive by the King of Assyria, and he made a clean riddance of them: For to
this day they never returned, but are quite lost among the Gentiles. Where as
Judah returned, after seventy Tears, from her Captivity under the King of
Babylon.

But we see that God here Expresses, the greatest averseness imaginable, to
the bringing of utter Ruin upon this Nation, if consistently which the Honor of
His Laws, and the Wisdom, and Righteousness of His Government, it could have
been avoided. From whence we learn, That nothing less than apparent Necessity
can prevail with the infinitely good God, to make his Creatures miserable; and
much more, those whom He has taken into Covenant with Himself, His visible
Church and Professors of the true Religion: And this will farther appear, by
these following Considerations.

First, God's Earnest and most Pathetical exciting of sinners to Turn and
Repent, that Iniquity may not be their ruin, is of it self sufficient to assure
us hereof. His sending His Prophets and Messengers to cry aloud in their Ears,
Turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways, Why will ye dye? does assure us of this.
The Bible is full of Calls to sinners of this Nature, enforced with Gracious
Promises to those who shall obey these Calls, and as scaring Threatenings
against those who will not obey them.

Secondly, It Is God's ordinary Method to give Warnings to sinners before He
strikes; and what can His meaning therein be, but that He may not strike, that
Repentance and Reformation may stay his Hand, and prevent the Blow? How many
inspired men did He heretofore send, upon this Sole Errand? Thus did He give
warning to the Old World by the Preaching of Noah, and his Preparing an Ark for
the saving of Himself and His Household, before He overwhelmed it with an
Universal Deluge. And this Ark was Noah in preparing for Forty Years together,
that so it might give the longer Warning; for otherwise, it is likely he might
have finished it, in a much shorter time.

How long, and how frequently had both the ten Tribes and the two, Warnings
sent them by the Prophets, before they were carried away Captive? And what an
Awakening Warning had the two Tribes, from the fulfilling of the Threatenings
against the ten, to prevent the fulfilling of the like against themselves?

Nor did God thus concern Himself to give Warnings only to the People of
Israel, but He did the like also to Heathen Nations. As the Moabites, the
Syrians, the Egyptians, the Tyrians, the Ninevites, etc. I say, the Threatenings
sent to all these, were designed for Warnings. God's meaning in them was
nothing less, than to torment them before the time. They were sent to Rouse
sleepy Souls out of their security, and to awaken them to a speedy Repentance,
that so there might be no necessity of making good His Threatenings; which the
Ninevites found by happy Experience. Well was it for them that they were so
Threatened, since they had been actually destroyed, had they not first been
threatened with destruction: Because then they would not have repented as they
did.

And the Design of those other Threats, which were fulfilled to the utmost, was
the very same with the design of those pronounced against Nineveh; as the
Prophets do abundantly assure us. Conditions we plainly perceive were employed
in such, as were most absolutely expressed; as what Threatening could be expressed
more absolutely, than tha^ against Nineveh?

Even our Savior's so punctually Predicting the Destruction of Jerusalem, with
the heavy Calamities leading to it, and the strange Prodigies which gave notice
of the near approach of it, we are to reckon in the number of Warnings;
although the Destruction of that City was irreversibly decreed, for the
murdering of the Lord of Glory there, which was at hand; as also were the
Miseries that befell the obdurate Jews. That Prediction and those Prodigies were
Warnings to the sincere Christians that they might escape, as accordingly they
did, the dreadful Judgment: And likewise to those who were not hardened to the
utmost degree among the Jews, that they might Repent of their Infidelity, and
embrace the Gospel, and so might escape too.

And as I have showed, how God did of old give Fore-warnings by the Prophets of
great Judgments, so I think it no hard matter to make it out, that He has
given Presages in all these latter Ages, by very significant Providence, and
extraordinary Events, which our Savior calls Signs of the times, before
especially Great Revolutions, or General and Extraordinary Calamities. History
has surnish'd us with abundance of Instances of this nature, and our own
Histories with not a few, that have been observed in these Kingdoms. And we
may, if we please, call to mind several of these Presages, which have happened
in our own time, before great Judgments. But this is a Topic, which the
Skepticism of the Age will scarce bear the handling. But I cannot forbear
saying, that I much fear, we have some ill-boding Signs, at this present, of
God's sending, viz. Instances of a mavelous Infatuation, no whit, I doubt,
inferior to that we observed a while ago with no less pleasure than wonder in
our Adversarys. I say, at this present we have Instances of such an
Infatuation, as all must needs observe who are not in the number of the
Infatuated; and which seems perfectly unaccountable, if it be'nt Judicial. No
doubt the wiser and better sort, ought to look on these as Warnings designed
for them especially, if not only.

Thirdly, It Is Gods usual Course to try a wicked People with Lighter Judgments,
before He brings the Heaviest upon them. We have a Remarkable Place to this
purpose, Amos 4. 6, etc. Here God minds his People, First, that he had given
them great scarcity of Bread, and yet have ye not returned unto me, says the
Lord. Next, that he had given them the like of Water, and yet have ye not
returned unto me, says the Lord. Next, that he had sent upon their Vineyards
and Olive-yards, etc. blasting Winds, and devouring Insects, and yet have ye
not returned unto me, says the Lord. Next, that he had sent among them a
sweeping Plague, and moreover the Heavier Judgment (as King David accounted it)
of a bloody War, and yet have ye not returned unto me, says the Lord. And, by
the way, you can scarce need to be minded, that these three last were our Late
Calamities, and since they were I fear as much lost upon us, as they were on
those Jews, we have the greater reason to attend to what follows in the next
verse, which is a dreadful one indeed: Therefore thus will I do unto thee O
Israel, and because I will do this unto thee, prepare to meet thy God O Israel.
Which is as much as to say, seeing so many other Judgments have proved
ineffectual to the Reforming of you, do you now expect some Fearful thing,
which shall be nameless: Some Judgment far more dreadful than any that have
hitherto fallen upon you; and therefore put your selves into a posture of
defense, and see whether you are able to contend, and try it out with me.

And the Author of the Book of Wisdom tells us, that God dealt after the same
manner, with the Canaanites, themselves; that before they were for their Horrid
Practices devoted to Destruction, He Executed upon them his Judgments by little
and little, and by so doing, gave them place for Repentance, Chapter 12. 8, etc.

Fourthly, When God had determined to pour down the Vials of his Vengeance on a
wicked People, He has some times plainly intimated, that he did it not, till
their wickedness was come up to such a Height as did necessarily call for
them. For instance, When he was resolved on the destruction of the old World,
he declared that the wickedness of man, was not only great upon the Earth, but
so great, that every thought and imagination of his heart was only evil, and
that continually: And that mankind was grown so horribly depraved, that it even
Repented him that he had made man; or he was become as hateful to him, as if he
repented his Creating of him. God did not rain down Fire and Brimstone upon
Sodom and Gomorrah, before he had signified to his Servant Abraham, that the
cry of their wickedness was come up unto him; that it was great, and their sin
very grievous. The reason he gave for his deferring the Destruction of the
Amorites to the fourth Generation, was, that the Iniquity of the Amorites was
not yet full. And our Blessed Savior supposes, that there is a certain
Measure and Proportion of wickedness, which sinners do come up to, before God
is so severe, as to inflict the heaviest Judgments upon them, in those words to
the Scribes and Pharisees: Fill ye up the measure of your Fathers, Mat. 23. 32.

Fifthly, It Is likewise apparent, that God Almighty is most backward to the
destroying of a wicked People, or putting them into miserable circumstances,
till necessitated, in that he has again and again declared his being diverted
from so doing, by such Motives, as one would think could have but very little
influence upon such a Being as He is, or rather none at all. As if (to speak
with Reverence) he were glad of any Excuse for the longer sparing those, who
had made themselves liable to the stroke of his Justice.

1. A mere partial Humiliation, an Humiliation far short of true Repentance,
has been one of those Motives. Thus upon Ahabs putting on Sackcloth, Fasting,
and going Softly, said God to the Prophet, See thou how Ahab humbles
himself, because he humbles himself before me, I will not bring the evil in
his days, etc. It Is said of Ahab, that he sold himself to work wickedness in
the sight of the Lord, whom Iezebel his Wife stirred up. And I need not recite
unto you the abominable things he did, for which God threatened him by the
Prophet Elijah, that He would bring evil upon him, and take away his Posterity,
and cut off from him, him that pisseth against the Wall, and him that is shut
up and left in Israel; and would make his House like the House of Jeroboam, the
Son of Nebat, who made Israel to sin. 1 Kin. 21. 21, etc. And it follows ver.
27. And it came to pass, when Ahab heard these words, that he rent his clothes,
and put Sackcloth upon his Flesh, and Fasted, and went softly. Would any one
have thought now, that this Humiliation of so Vile a man, could in the least
have moved the Divine Compassion? We are not to think, that he only acted a
part, and played the Hypocrite, in this Humiliation; for then he would have so
much the more provoked God against him. But yet God knew that this his humbling
himself, proceeded from mere dread of the Threatened Judgment; that there was no
Detestation of his wicked doings at the bottom of it, and therefore that no
Reformation would be produced by it: Yet it pleased the Almighty to show how
averse he was to great severity, by being wrought upon by so very imperfect an
Humiliation as this, to the putting off the Execution of this Threatening till
after his time. It follows verses 28, 29. And the word of the Lord came to
Elijah the Tishbite, saying, see thou how Ahab humbles himself, because he
humbles himself before me (because he does not mock at this Threat, but so far
humbles himself as thou have seen) I will not bring the evil in his days, but
in his Sons days will I bring the Evil upon his House. Which Threatening, we may
suppose, had this tacit Condition; I will bring the evil in his Sons days, if
another sort of Humiliation than the Fathers was, does not prevent it.

Again, We have another instance like this of Ahab, 2 Chronicles. 12. 7, 8, We read
in the beginning of the Chapter, that when Rehoboam had Established the
Kingdom, and had strengthened himself, he forsook the Law of the Lord, and all
Israel with him. And that in the Fifth Year of his Reign, Shishack King of
Egypt came up against Jerusalem, because they had transgressed the Law of the
Lord, with 1200 Chariots and 60000 Horsemen, etc. And ver. 5. Shemaiah came to
Rehoboam and the Princes of Judah, and said unto them: Thus says the Lord, you
have forsaken me, and therefore have I also left you, in the hand of Shishack.
And what effect this terrible Message had upon them, we are told in the next
words: Whereupon the Princes of Israel and the King humbled themselves, and
they said, the Lord is Righteous. Now what could be expected less than this
from them, under such frightful Apprehensions; when they were in sight of so
Formidable an Enemy, and when (as we read) they had already taken the Fenced
Cities of Judah, and were come to Jerusalem? And it appears by ver. 14. that
this was but such a kind of Humiliation, as that of Ahab; but, for all this,
the next verse tells us, that when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves,
the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, they have humbled themselves,
therefore I will not destroy them, but I will grant them some deliverance, and
my wrath shall not be poured forth upon Jerusalem, by the hand of Shishack:
Nevertheless they shall be his Servants (or Tributaries to him) that they may
know my service, and the service of the Kingdoms of the Countries, i. e. That
they may feel the vast difference between My service, which they refuse, and
the service of Foreign Nations. And again it is said, ver. 12. And when he
humbled himself, the wrath of the Lord turned from him, that he would not
destroy him altogether, and also in Judah things went well.

2. Another Motive by which God has also been diverted from destroying a
wicked People, is, the Prayers of a few good People, nay, of one good man. It Is
said, Psalm. 106. 23. that God said he would destroy the Israelites, had not
Moses his Chosen stood before him in the Breach, to turn away his wrath lest he
should destroy them. And there is a strange passage, Ezekiel. 22. 30. where God
complains, that there was no one to be found to intercede for those, whom he
had often threatened with Destruction. I sought, said he, for a man among them,
that should make up the Hedge, and stand in the Gap before me for the Land,
that I should not destroy them; but I found none. Therefore have I poured out
mine indignation upon them, etc.

But to prevent the making an ill use of God's having been persuaded from
executing the fierceness of his Wrath, by an Humiliation short of Reformation,
or by the Intercession of good People, we are to know, that neither the one nor
the other Motive will always do, nor is it fit they should. These two Motives
have, no doubt, prevailed again and again for this Nation of ours, but it
follows not, that therefore they shall still prevail; and the oftener they have
so done, there is much the more danger, of their not doing so for the future.
Besides, such Motives as these do only prevail for the longer staving off of
Judgments, not the keeping them off for altogether. There was a time when God
professed concerning his Ancient People, That though Moses and Samuel stood
before him, yet his mind could not be toward them, etc. Ier. 15. 1. And he
said the like concerning the Intercession of Noah, Daniel and Job (those great
Favorites of Heaven) that were they on the Earth again, it should nothing
avail them, and that they should only deliver their own Souls by their
Righteousness, Ezekiel. 14. 14.

3. We may see another Motive God laid hold on for the sparing the same
Rebellious Israelites, Deuteronomy. 32. 27. I said I would scatter them into Corners,
I would make the Remembrance of them to cease from among men, were it not that
I feared the Wrath of the Enemy, lest their Adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, and lest they should say their Hand is high, and the Lord
has not done all this. That is, were it not that I knew, they would take
Advantage from the Destruction of my People, to bepride themselves the more in
their own strength; and not look on themselves as the Rods of mine Anger, or
Executioners of my Vengeance; and so their Destruction would lose the Force of
an Example for the deterring of the Heathen from their wicked Practices. Were
it not that I feared the Wrath of the Enemy: This is one of those many Examples
we find in Scripture, of God's speaking to Men after the manner of Men.

4. We shall find another like this, Ezekiel. 20. 14. Where God says, I said I
would pour out my Fury upon them in the Wilderness, to consume them; but I
wrought for my Name's sake, that it should not be polluted among the Heathen,
in whose sight I brought them forth. That is, that the Egyptians might not say,
That for Mischief he brought them out, to slay them in the Mountains, and to
consume them from the Face of the Earth. Which was the Motive used by Moses to
prevail with God to turn from his fierce Wrath, and to repent of this Evil
against his People, Exodus 32. 12.

But what could the Great God suffer, by the Enemies taking occasion from their
destroying his People, to bepride themselves the more in their own strength,
since (as the Psalmist speaks) In the things wherein they dealt most proudly,
He is above them? And what Damage could accrue to the Divine Majesty, from
their Reproaches? Yet you see such Motives as these did stay God's Hand (seeing
he had no better) from their Destruction, who had done all that lay in them, to
draw down his Vengeance. And I say again, that such Motives as these four do
plainly show, that he is naturally extremely averse, to the giving of sinners
their due desert; and that, when he does so, it is an effect of Necessity,
rather than of Free Choice.

Sixthly, God's Infinite Goodness, and His Infinite Greatness too, do
absolutely assure us of this. For taking pleasure in Destruction or Misery as
such, is perfectly inconsistent with Goodness, and much more with Infinite
Goodness; but to destroy or make miserable, when there is no Necessity in the
case, is much the same thing, with delighting in Destruction and Misery as
such. And again, he has but a very sorry notion of Almighty God, who needs to
be satisfied, that he has innumerable other ways of procuring his own
Pleasure, and therefore can not need to do it by any of His Creatures
Destruction or Misery, were He capable of delighting himself therein.

Lastly, The many Express Declarations, which God has made concerning this
matter, do make us not to need any Consequences for a Proof hereof. You have
heard that he has Professed that, He does not aff^ct willingly, nor grieve the
Children of Men. And since it is impossible for God to lie, this one Text ought
to weigh down a thousand Objections, could the wit of man invent so many,
against the truth of this Doctrine. And again, from a great concern that we
should not admit the least doubt of it, he has so wonderfully condescended, as
to back such Declarations with a Solemn Oath. As I live, says the Lord God, I
have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his
way and live. Ezekiel. 33. 11.

Again, We have God Almighty expressing a vehement Wish, that his people had
not given him such Provocations, Plal. 81. 13, etc. Oh that my People had
harkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways, I should soon have subdued
their enemies, etc. But he could not wish this for any Good, his Creatures
observance of his Laws could signify to himself; since it is no gain to him (as
Eliphaz speaks) that we make our way perfect: And man cannot be profitable unto
God, as he that is wise may be profitatable to himself.

Again, We farther find him expressing a very ardent Wish, that his people
would Cease to give him Provocations; and that for this reason, that he might
be under no necessity of making them miserable. This he does, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. Oh
that there were such an heart in them! that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it may be well with them, and with their Children
for ever.

And what an astonishing Consideration is it, that the Infinite Majesty of God
should stoop so low, as that he should express himself to vile Dust and Ashes;
nay, to the most obdurate and hard-hearted Wretches in the World, after the
manner he has here done, in the words of our Text. How shall I give thee up
Ephraim? How shall I deliver thee Israel, etc?

Now to make Application of what has been Discoursed on these Words.
First, WE Learn from thence, what strange Folly, or rather desperate Madness,
does lodge in the hearts of Sinful men. Lord! that they should be such deadly
Enemies to themselves, that they should be so resolutely bent upon plucking
down Ruin and Misery upon their own heads, Ruin and Misery both in this World
and in that to come, when God has done all that could reasonably be desired,
and much more than ought to have been expected from him, to prevent their being
Miserable, and to make them Happy both here and hereafter. What reason have we,
when we consider this, to take up that wish of the Prophet Jeremy? Oh that mine
head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and
night! This sottishness of sinners can never be enough Lamented, nor can we
sufficiently Wonder at it. There is nothing to be observed in all Gods Creation
so Unaccountable, so Amazing. There is no sort of Creatures under the Cope of
Heaven, besides wretched Mankind (which alone is endued with Understanding and
Liberty) but do provide as well as they are able for their own safety; but are
so concerned for their own welfare, as not to expose themselves, without
apparent necessity, to the least danger. A poor Bird needs no other warning to
avoid a snare, than the sight of it; in vain (says the Wise man) is the Net
spread in the sight of any Bird. But unhappy Man will run into the Pit, with
his eyes open. For the gratifying of a brutish Appetite for a little little
while, he will adventure being utterly ruined and undone, both Soul and Body, in
this World, and to all Eternity. And that, though God himself by his holy Word,
and by innumerable Examples of his Justice, and by the Feeling he often gives
him of the evil of sin, takes the most effectual course thoroughly to convince
him, of the horrible Madness of wilfully transgressing his Righteous Laws. What
words are significant enough to give this its due Aggravation! Be astonished O
ye Heavens at this, and be ye horribly afraid, be ye very desolate: As the
Prophet cries out in this same case, Ierem. 2. 12.

Secondly, Will sinners still persevere in this their Madness? Will they never
return to their wits more? Remember this, and show your selves men; bring it
again to mind O you Transgressors. Do I say, show your selves Men, as the
Prophet did; I say farther, show that you are not more Brutish than the very
Brutes. That you are not inferior to the Beasts which perish, in Prudence or
Sagacity, in Ingenuity or good Nature. Can we take our selves for men, and not
flee those infinite dangers, to which sin exposes us, by sincerely applying
our selves to the use of those means which God has appointed, for the avoiding
and subduing of it? Nay, can we believe our selves a better sort of Creatures,
than the very Devils, and not be lead to Repentance, by God's unspeakable
Goodness, and his strange Patience, and Long-suffering toward us, and his
mighty unwillingness to destroy us, while there is any hope?

O let not us of this City, and this Kingdom, be acting the Israelites still
over and over, those fearfully hardened People who had even made a Covenant
with death, and were at an Agreement with Hell; and were resolved upon it, what
ever they suffered in this life, nay, though they were damned for it too, in
the life to come, they would not repent of their wicked doings, and return to
God; let him invite them never to graciously, or address himself to them never
so pathetically. Shall we, I say, still tread in the steps of those Sons of
Belial, and be immoveably bent upon holding on in our Rebellion against Heaven,
as they were? Did they fare so well, as that we need not be scared from
following their Example? Shall we mock the Messengers of God, as they did?
Shall we despise his Word, and all his Warnings, as they did; till at length
the wrath of the Lord brake forth against us, as it did against them, until
there be no Remedy? Truly if so, we are more desperate than they were, because
we are forewarned of the dismal consequence of such doings, by their fearful
Example; what things happened to them were for Ensamples to us, says S. Paul,
and they are written for our Admonition, upon whom the ends of the World are
come, 1 Cor. 10. 11. But especially shall we, then, be more mad than they,
because our Christianity has furnished us with far more powerful Motives to
obedience, and greater Helps and Advantages, as great as theirs were, than they
had: And in no Church in Christendom, is the Gospel more truly Preached, or
better means of Grace afforded than in the Church of England: Which is no small
Aggravation of our sins.

How often has God repented him of the Evil, that in all appearance, he was
just doing unto us, and which we had all the Reason in the world, to look for
from him? Look we to it, that he be not constrained by us, as he was by the
perverse Jews, to say, I am weary of repenting; for when once he is so, those
who have tired out his Patience, shall assuredly find it a fearful thing to
fall into. the hands of the Living God. And though he should still dissipate
black Clouds hanging over our heads, and show infinite Compassion still to our
Un-reformed Nation, as a Nation; yet Impenitents in their own Persons shall,
instead of faring the better, fare much the worse for it.

But let not our Nation, or our Church either, fancy it self deeper in the
Divine Favor, than were the Israelites. Though we would gladly hope, that
those Words of Manoah's Wife, may be applied to our present Case, viz. If the
Lord had pleased to kill us, he would not have received a Burnt-Offering and
Meat Offering at our hands; neither would he have showed us all these things;
nor would as at this time have told us such things as these. If the Lord had
designed at last to Un-Church us, or to make us a Prey to our Enemies, he would
not, we may hope, have done such Great Things for us in Answer to the Prayers
of good People among us. He would not, from time to time, have so wonderfully
discovered the deep-laid Plots of Rome against us; nor so strangely have
basfled all the Attempts of our Popish Adversaries, for the reducing of us to
our Old Bondage; nor so infatuated the Crafty Jesuits, as he did, in the last
short Reign; and turned the Counsels of those Achitophels into folly; nor by so
many Amazing Providence have sent us Deliverance, when we were on the very
Brink of Ruin. And because we had so few Revolters to Popery; and many who
were Bad enough in other Respects, showed a great Zeal against the
Superstitions and gross Corruptions of that Religion: for these Reasons we
have, I say, Encouragement to hope, that God will deal nothing so severely with
us, as he did with the Ten Tribes, nor as he did with the Two neither. Yet
considering the many things he has (for all this) against us, it will be very
strange, if we should see those happy days, which we lately were apt to promise
our selves, without first more severely smarting for these things, than we have
yet done. And especially, when we reflect upon the Requital God has had, for
our late most wonderful Deliverance, we may tremble to think, how he must needs
resent it, and how he may punish it.

Our Church and Nation have had Two such Deliverances, within the space of
Thirty Years, as perhaps never any People in the World, except the Jews, were
blessed with, in one whole Age: But as to the Former of these Deliverances, I
mean that in 1660, I need not say how lamentably it was abused; nor need you,
sure, be minded, what dreadful Judgments did ensue upon the Abuse of it; and
which came very thick upon one another: And in which this City had the far
deepest share, as it had also in that Guilt, which brought them down upon us.
Nor need I tell you, what Reason we had to expect, Two far heavier Judgments
than any we have met with, or than altogether, viz. Popery and Slavery: Toward
the Introducing of which, there was made so great a Progress in the Former of
the Two last Reigns, and which was apace perfecting in this last.

But in the Mount was the Lord seen: As loudly as our high Provocations called
for these Judgments, and such Concomitants of them, as have made the French
Protestants the most deplorably miserable of all People, our infinitely
Gracious God seemed to Address Himself to Us, as he did to the Israelites in
our Text, and to say; How shall I give you up? How shall I deliver you into
your Enemies hands? How shall I make you as your poor Brethren of France? How
shall I set you, as your Fellow-Protestants of Piedmont? Mine heart is turned
within me, my Repentings are kindled together. Nay, he did not only not
execute the fierceness of his Anger, when we looked for nothing more than that
he should; but he sent us Deliverance, while we only Feared the foresaid
Calamities; for comparatively very few of us had Felt any thing: Though we saw
too many Proeludia to Arbitrary Government and Popish Cruelty, yet, I say, but
a small Number comparatively had felt the least Smart of either.

In short, God Almighty by a Series or Train of very Admirable Providence, was
graciously pleased to Rescue both our Religion and our Laws, from the
Destruction Threatened them, and near Effected. He set a Protestant King, with
a Protestant Queen, upon the Throne. He blessed our Church with a Nursing Father,
and (which is a great Rarity in these Nations) with a Nursing Mother too: And
he gave us these never to be sufficiently Valued Blessings, without putting us
to the expense either of Blood or Treasure.

But has he been better Requited for this, than he was for the former
Deliverance? Alas no, no whit better. How many of us, whose mouths were filled
with laughter, and whose tongues with singing, upon their first receiving it,
did as much in a little time slight it, did quickly grow weary of it? Some,
because themselves or their Party did not happen to be such Gainers by it, as
they looked they should have been. Others, in regard of the Taxes which have
followed upon it; though they cannot but acknowledge, that 'twould have been a
good Bargain but the other day, to have parted with one Half of their Estates,
to secure the other Half: And they must needs also be sensible, that these
Taxes are no whit Heavier, than the miserable Condition of our Fellow Subjects
of Ireland, do necessarily call for; and which one would have thought, no
sincere Protestant could have grudged at, for the Delivering of that oppressed
Kingdom, since our Own Deliverance did cost us nothing. And how many did so
soon lose all sense of the Divine Goodness herein, because it came so Early,
and the evils they are delivered from, were only, as I now said, Feared, not
Felt by them. Although, truly Ingenuous Minds would esteem this Deliverance, as
much the Greater upon this account, and think themselves obliged to be so much
the more thankful for it.

Nay, how many of us would never account this any Deliverance, and look upon it
as worse than none? And if we are capable of understanding the Signs that too
too many now make, which I think are Broad enough to be easily understood, we
must conclude they are all a gog upon returning into Egypt again; and that they
are so very sick of the present Government (whose greatest fault perhaps is,
that it is too kind to them) that they would run, to be rid of it, the most
apparent danger, or rather are content to fall into the (humanely speaking)
inevitable necessity, of wearing the Iron Yoke, and toyling in the Brick-kilns
of so cruel a Pharaoh, as never had his Match in the Land of Egypt. How well
the Obedience of these Gentlemen, as mightily Passive as they would have us
think it is, is able to brook King Lewis his Government, I much Question; but
never was there a more absurd Fancy, than to think it a duty to expose that to
the most imminent danger, which is the only Design of Government, viz. the
Safety of the Community (the Safeguard of both its Spiritual and Temporal
Interests) for the sake of any Person or Persons whatsoever. Or that the
Obligation of an Oath of Allegiance is so Unlimited, as that the Safety of the
Community, which is the first and principal Intention of such Oaths, must be
Sacrificed to it. If this be sound Doctrine, those ought to be accounted the
greatest Enemies in the World to Humane Society, who were the first Inventers
of Oaths of Allegiance. Nor can there be a Leuder Instance of Uncharitableness,
than to tax those, as these men do, with Apostafy and Perjury, who cannot be
convinced that so Incredible and Destructive a Notion as this is, a Doctrine of
the Gospel, or of the Church of England.

In what I have now said, I am far from designing to reflect on any, who do
modestly dissent from us about the Lawfulness of the New Oaths; and whose
Virtuous and Pious Conversations oblige us to judge them, truly Conscientious
in this dissent. I have a more tender regard to Conscience, than to be severe
upon such Persons. I hope in time they may be satisfied in this great Point;
but in the mean time, it greatly becomes us to treat such with all Christian
Candor.

But to proceed on our present Sad Argument: Whereas Almighty God by the
Psalmist says, Call upon me in the day of trouble, I will deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me; and cannot dispense with this return of Gratitude for
his Answering our Prayers: And whereas he has frequently assured us, that he
expects to be Glorified by our Lives; and that the praises of our Lips whilst
our Lives are Unreformed (and the like he has told us of Fast-days too) are no
whit better than a Mocking of him. What Reformation has our late Deliverance
wrought among us? Are not those who were Debauched before, as Debauched still?
That were Profane before, as Profane still? Are not Drunkenness and
Uncleanness, Unrighteousness and Oppression, Profanation of the Lord's Day, and
Contempt of Religion, as common Vices Now, as they were before this Deliverance
came? Don't we hear as we pass the Streets, as Horrid Oaths and as Tremendous
Curses, and as many of these, as we heard before? Nay, how few in Authority
seem heartily concerned for the suppressing of any of these Vices? And among
those who have escaped, the more Gross and Scandalous Pollutions of the World;
are not Covetousness and corrupt Selfishness, a dear love of the World, Pride
and Ambition, (which as light matters as most make them, are Vices which have
the most mischievous influence of any upon the Public) Formality in the
Worship of God, and loathsome Hypocrisy, and Placeing Religion in little
Trifles, compared with the plain and express Injunctions of the Gospel (in a
Warm Zeal for them, or against them) Uncharitableness, bitter Strife and
Emulation, as much as ever observable among us? Have we ever known the Form of
Godliness less accompanied with the Power of it, than now it is; or the Spirit
of Religion more decayed, and nearer lost, than it seems to be in most Places
at this present? Nothing is more Notorious than that, as all Ranks, Degrees,
and Orders of men among us, have most grievously Corrupted their ways, so they
continue still to do so, without any visible Amendment. Not one Order to be
excepted, which is sad indeed.

But where as I said, that we seem generally no whit the better for our great
Deliverance, I am constrained to add, that at least in one respect, we are
apparently the worse for it; namely in this: While we were under the Melancholy
Apprehension of losing our Religion, and of Suffering in a short time for it,
those who differed in Opinion, began to be more United in Affection, and to
have more Charity for each other; and Healing Discourses, both from the Pulpit
and the Press, grew much in Fashion; and Moderation was become all the Mode.
And in this respect, the last Year of King James his Reign, I thought, was the
most comfortable Year, that ever fell within my Memory. But alas! When was the
Breach wider than it is now again? Not only the old Nicknames and Terms of
Reproach are now revived, but never did the Differing Parties make less
Conscience of Defaming and most Shamefully Belying one another: As if they
thought themselves delivered for no other end, but that they might have the
more leisure, and the greater Advantages, for the Biting and Devouring of one
another.

Now nothing of Condescension in Order to an Agreement upon Tolerable Terms,
will be listened to, by the (I fear) far major Part on either side; no not so
much as to the satisfying each others very just demands: And men of Healing and
Generous Principles, and whose Names have heretofore been sufficiently wounded
for their Moderation, and made Betrayers of the Church, or of the Government,
begin again to be abused as much as ever. It Is matter of Amazement, that so
many Years Experience should convince so very few, of the most Pernicious
Effects of Bigotry, a Stingy Narrowness, Unyielding and Inflexible Stiffness,
and Furious Zeal, to both Church and State. It Is an Astonishing thing that at
this time of day, any of us should need being fully satisfied, that if ever we
again be made an Happy Church, or a Settled State, it is Christian Moderation
and Mutual Condescension in Unnecessary and Inconsiderable things, that, by the
Blessing of God, must make us so.

But was the late professed Inclination to Unity, mere Dissembling? Was it
rather Stifled than Extinguist Emnity? Which like Fire that has Rubbish thrown
over it, when it breaks out again, Flames the more furiously. No, I can not, I
will not think so; for it is a true Observation, that Vexatio dat Intellectum.
Afflictions make men wise: And Expectations of them do so too. They do so, as
they make us Serious, and administer Calm and Sedate thoughts; and as they
check that Pride, and cool those Passions which will not suffer men to see their
true Interest. And moreover, there is no such Natural Reconciler of Persons or
Parties, as a Formidable Enemy; and especially when he has them at his Mercy.
And nothing is more natural, than for Conjunction in the same Interest, to
beget mutual Kindness: And this is no less observed of being Sharers in the
same Misfortunes. Even Bears (as I have been told) that are Baited together at
the same Stake, have a great Fondness for one another. But what a shame is it,
that all the mighty Gospel Motives to Love and Unity between Christians, should
have a weaker influence on Professors of Christianity, than such Motives as
these? And that upon the Removal of them, all those Motives together should be
insufficient to prevent our immediately returning to our Old Emnity. This
Monstrous Infatuation bears a strange Resemblance with that of the Jews, before
the Destruction of Jerusalem. And God grant, that it proves not as Ominous as
that was.

And having given you too true a Representation of our present Case, can we
persuade our selves, that God will put up all these horrible Abuses, of his
scarce to be paralleled Kindness toward us, without a very Remarkable and a
speedy Reformation? But alas, of such a Blessing as this, we see as little
Ground of Hope, as can be: For though it is not absolutely, it seems morally
Impossible, that a Generation of men, who have never been much the better for
Judgments, but always much the worse for Mercies and Deliverances, should be at
length Reformed by God's ordinary Methods. What should God Almighty do with
such a People as we are? As he said to the Israelites, Hos. 6. 4. O Ephraim,
what shall I do unto thee? O Judah, what shall I do unto thee? He may well say
to Us; O England, what shall I do unto thee? O London, what shall I do unto
thee? For your Goodness is as the Morning Cloud, and as the Early Dew, it
passes away.

How far such Motives, as I told you, God was pleased of Old, to be prevailed
upon by, may prevail for Us, for the yet longer sparing us, we cannot tell: Nor
can we tell how merciful he may be to us, for the sake of His Great Name; or
what Respect he may yet farther have to the Intercessions of those many good
People in the Land, who sigh and mourn for the Abominations of it; or to these
Monthly Days of Humiliation (which Their Majesty's, like Religious and Pious
Princes, have obliged us to the Observance of) as they are a Public Owning of
Him, and Solemn Acknowledgments of his absolute Sovereignty over us, and of our
ill-deserving at his hands, in the Face of the World: Or how much the Nation in
general may fare the better for the truly Primitive Charity, that our poor
Brethren of France and Ireland have experienced from very many, and especially
in this City: Which God forbid should ever grow cold, so long as their
Necessities call for the Continuance of it; for that would be as Ill an Omen.
Or whether God may still be merciful to us, and prosper our Forces by Land and
Sea, for the sake of that Glorious Work, he is now in all likelihood a doing in
the World, (wherein we trust he will make our Sovereign a Blessed Instrument)
we know not: Or were there a way found out, for the effectual putting our Laws
in Execution against the blacker Crimes, and enforcing them with more scareing
Penalties, we know not what Blessings such a Partial Reformation may procure
for us. I understand that there is such a Way projecting by some Worthy
Persons, to be offered to the Parliamen. I pray God give his Blessing to their
Pious Design.

But after all the Encouragements we can think of to hope well, I believe that
never were truly Wise and Good Men, at such a Stand, nor at so great a Loss, as
in making a Judgment, what at last will become of such an Untoward and
Untractable, such a Murmuring and Repining, such a Fickle and Inconstant, and
such a miserably Divided People, as We are? Who are, for the most part, as
unqualified as a People well can be, for the perfecting of this our already
great Deliverance: Who are no sooner taken out of one Snare, but are intangling
our selves again in others, and are violently bent upon bringing down Misery
and Confusion upon our own heads, let God Almighty do what he will for us: And
I think I shall have the Concurrence of all Considerative People, should I say,
that we never observed a more strange and wonderful Dispensation of the Divine
Previdence, than would be the happy Re-settling of this Church and Kingdom,
after such Tossings and Tumblings, and Wild Confusions, without having the Way
prepared thereto, by being again broken all to pieces, or by sharper Sufferings
than we have yet met with: And the miserable Condition of the Kingdom of
Ireland, and the too bad State of Scotland, and the Powerfulness of the Haughty
Tyrant of France; together with the Horrible Ravages and Devastations he has
made in so many Neighboring Countries, besides his Own, and the Spoils and
Rapines with the other terrible Effects of War and Tyranny, which for several
Years together, the most Part of Europe has drank so deep of, and are still
like to do; while We have only heard of these things, and enjoyed great Peace
and Plenty: I say, all these are mighty Loud Warnings to Us, so to Fear, as to
do what lies in us, to Prevent our Feeling the like Miseries.

BUT (to exercise your Patience no longer) however, God may deal with this
Nation as a Nation, or this Church, as a Church, particular impenitent Sinners
must expect to be punished in the other World, with everlasting Destruction
from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power: When he shall
come to be Glorified in his Saints, and to be admired of all them that believe.
And then they will be all convinced of the Truth of that Doctrine, we have so
fully proved: That when Sinners are made miserable, it is not an Effect of God's
Free Choice. And as comfortable a Doctrine as this is in it felf, they will
find it no small Aggravation of their Misery.

O that all such would Consider this, and lay it well to heart, before it be
too late: And would in this their day, know the things which belong unto their
Peace, before they be hidden from their Eyes!

Which GOD give us all His Grace to do, for Christ IESUS's Sake, to whom be
Glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.

