Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswell.
DR. TENISON (now Lord Bishop of Lincoln) His Sermon of Doing good to Posterity.

-- His Sermon concerning Discretion in giving Alms.

-- His Sermon against Self-Love, before the House of Commons* June 5. 1689.

-- His Conference about Religion with Pulton the Jesuit.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, concerning the Wandering of the Mind in God's
Service, Feb. 15. 1690.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, of the Folly of Atheism. February 22. 1690.

Dr. FOWLER (now Lord Bishop of Gloucester) his Sermon before the Queen, March
22. 1690.

The Bishop of Sarum's Sermon, at the Funeral of the Lady Brook, Feb. 19. 1690.

-- His Fast Sermon before the King and Queen, April 29. 1691.

Dr. FREEMAN (now Dean of Peterborough) his Sermon at the Assizes at
Northampton, before the Lord Chief Justice Pollexfen, Aug. 26. 1690.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Commons, November 5. 1690.

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
PIEDMONT. By PETER ALLIX, D. D.

A Vindication of their Majesty's Authority, to fill the Sees of the deprived
Bishops, in a Letter out of the Country, occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of
the Bishopric of Bath and Wells. 4to

V. CL. GVLIELMI CAMDENI, and T^^strium Virorum ad G. C^^ndenum EPISTOLAE. Cum
Appendice varii Argum^nti Accesserunt Annalium Regni Regis Iacobi I. Apparatus,
and Commentarius de An^^^ate, Dignitate, and Officio Comitis Marescalli
Angli^^. Pramittitur G. Camdeni(...). Scriptore Thoma Smitho S. T. D. Ecclesiae
Anglicanae Presbytero, 4to.

MEMOIRS of what past in Christendom from the War begun 1672. to the Peace
concluded 1679. 80.

Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of the
ALBIGENSES. By PETER ALLIX, D. D. Treasurer of the Church of Sarum. 4to. will
be shortly published.

A Sermon Preached at White Hall, on the 26 th. of November, 1691. being the
Thanksgiving-Day for the Preservation of the King, and the Reduction of
Ireland. By GILBERT Lord Bishop of SARVM, 4to.

A Thanksgiving Sermon before the Lords, on the 26 th. of November, 16^0. for
the Preservation of their Majesty's, the Reducing of Ireland, and the King's
safe return. By SIMON Lord Bishop of ELY.

ADVERTISEMENT.
PROPOSALS will be shortly published by Richard Chiswell, for Subscription to a
Book (now finished) Entitled, ANGLIAE, SACRAE PARS SECVNDA; sive Collectio
Historiarum, antiquitus Scriptarum, de Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Angliae, a
prima Fidei Christian Susceptione, ad annum MDXL. Plures antiquas de Vitis and
Rebus gestis Praesulum Angli^orum Historias sine certo ordine congestas
complexa.

A SERMON Preached at the Meeting OF THE Sons of the Clergy IN S. Mary-le-Bow
Church, On Tuesday the Sixth of December, 1692.

By EDWARD Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed by T. M. for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange, and A. and I. Churchil at the Black Swan in Paternoster Row,
1692.

To his Honored Friends, the Stewards of the late Feast OF The SONS of the
CLERGY, Viz. Sir Salathiel Lovel, Recorder of London, Thomas Paske, Esquire Mr.
Thomas South, Mr. John Reeve, Mr. Samuel Knowles, Mr. John Thresher, Capt. John
Willimott, Capt. Abraham Robarts, Mr. Robert French, Mr. Francis Sedgwick, Mr.
Robert Sedgwick, Mr. Thomas Granger, Capt. Theoph. Blechynden, Alexander
Duncomb, Esquire Mr. John Dillingham.

Gentlemen,
Though I was not difficultly persuaded to comply with your Request, that I would
be your Preacher, as little Time, as I truly foresaw I should be Master of, to
prepare a Discourse proper for the Occasion; yet I could not consent to your
desire of having this, which you heard, Printed (as really not thinking it
worthy to be made more public) till you were pleased to back it with such
Importunities, as I could not withstand, without the imputation of Incivility.
I therefore here Present you with it, most earnestly wishing, and humbly
praying, it may do that Service, which your Zeal for the promoting of Love and
Good Works induced you to think it fitted for, and remain,

GENTLEMEN, Your Affectionate Brother, and Humble Servant, E. G.

JOHN 13. 34. A New Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I
have loved you, that ye also love one another.
THE Design of this Meeting of the Sons of the Clergy being to promote Love and
Amity among our selves, and to exercise Christian Charity, I think these Words
are no improper Subject to be discoursed on upon this Occasion.

A New Commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another. A New
Commandment! Was Love to each other no Duty before the coming of our Blessed
Savior? Was it never enjoined under the Old Law? Our Lord himself assures us
of the contrary, Mark 12. 31. As in the foregoing Verse, he says, that the
Love of God comprehends the whole first Table, so in this, that the Love of our
Neighbor is the Sum and Substance of the Second: The Second is like, namely
this, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. And we find the Duty of loving
our Neighbor, often repeated and inculcated in the Old Testament.

The New Commandment therefore was not, that we should merely Love one another,
but that we should Love one another, as Christ has loved us. A New Commandment
I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also
love one another. We have in the Words,

First, A Duty enjoined, viz. Loving one another.

Secondly, The Pattern we are to follow in so doing* As I have loved you. And
in the handling of them I shall observe this Method.

I. I shall show, What it is to Love one another. II. The Necessity of so
doing. III. How far this Phrase One Another is to extend. IV. What
Qualifications our Love to each other ought to have. V. In what Instances it
ought to be expressed.
First, What it is to Love one another. The Word Love signifies either
Complacency, or Benevolence and Good Will. And it is our Duty to Love one
another, according to both these Acceptations of the Word, though not every
individual Person, according to both Some we are obliged to Love
Complacentially, to take Delight and Pleasure in them; but there are others,
whom we are not bound so to Love; nay whom we are bound not so to Love.

Some we can not so Love though we would; and there are others whom we may not
so Love, though we could. For instance, Churlish Nabals, People of Sour,
Morose, or Captious Tempers, to whom scarce a free Word can be spoken, without
danger of Offense: We cannot Love these with a Love of Delight, though we would
never so fain. To whom may be added Narrow-soul'd People, who have no Concern
for any but their own dear Selves; and much more such as make no Conscience of
injuring others to serve themselves. As Good natured People can take no
satisfaction in such as these, so can hardly any of these, be pleased with the
Society of one another: Especially, Proud, or Envious, or Churlish, or Testy
and Waspish People, are no Company for one another; and much less for those,
who are of contrary Qualities; Similitude being the Foundation of all Love of
Complacency. Though where there is Similitude there may be no such Love, viz.
when it lies in unlovely and troublesome Qualities; yet wheresoever there is
such a Love, there must be more or less Similitude: And according to the degree
of Similitude, will be the degree of Complacential Love.

Again, if such a Person be sensible, that such a one Hates him, and watches
all Occasions to do him Mischief, he cannot have this kind of Love for him.

Now when I say that some we can take no Complacency in, I suppose that
therefore we are not obliged to it. Nemo tenetur ad impossible. Nor is it
agreeable to the Divine Goodness, to impose unnatural things on Men.

There are again Others, whom we may not Love with this Love of Delight, though
we could: Namely, Profane or Debauched People; those, who though they may have
the Form of Godliness, deny in their Practice the Power thereof. The Apostle
admonishes his Son Timothy, to withdraw himself from such as these. To be
pleased with the Conversations of such People, is to express a liking of their
Ways; at least it argues a very Lukewarm Temper, and a great Unconcernedness
for the Honor of God, and the Interest of Religion.

But no Man can be of so Unlovely a Temper, or so wicked a Wretch, as that it
should not be our Duty to love him, in the Second Sense of the Word, viz. to
wish well to him, and endeavor, as we have Opportunity, his Welfare and
Happiness. Which supposes, I need not say, a Change of his Nature, without
which he cannot be capable of Happiness. And therefore this Change of his
Nature is in the first place to be desired and endeavored.

Secondly, As to the Necessity of Loving each other; there is no Duty more
plainly enjoined, or more vigorously urged in the Holy Scriptures: Especially
by our Blessed Savior and his Holy Apostles. And therefore those who are
better acquainted with the Christian Religion, than with the Spirits and
Behavior of those who profess it, may think it needless to spend any time,
upon this Argument. But because the Religion of too too many who are called
Christians, and that Religion which our Savior brought into the World, are
very unlike, it will not be amiss to give a short Account what this is, in
reference to the Point before us.

As our Blessed Lord calls it His New Commandment, That we Love one another as
He has Loved us; so in the Words following, he makes this the distinguishing
Character of his Disciples. By this, says he, shall all men know that you are
my Disciples, if ye have Love one to another. And so desirous was he that they
should not be defective in Love, that above all the excellent Petitions he puts
up for them John 17. this of Love is the only Grace, he particularly prays for
in their behalf, viz. ver. 21. That they all may be one as thou Father art in
me and I in thee; that they may be united in Love, have one Heart, and one
Soul. And the Reason for which he thus prays, does mightily Commend this
Grace, viz. That the World may believe that thou have sen^ me. Which is as much
as to say, that Christian ex(...)ing in the Grace of Love, will be a great
Conviction to the World, of the Execllency, and therefore of the Truth, of the
Christian Religion. And again Verse the last, I have declared, says he, to
them thy Name, and will declare it, that the Love wherewith thou have Loved me,
may be in them. And his Beloved Disciple S. John thought, he could never enough
extol this Grace. He makes Love the very Essence of the Deity, 1 Ep. 4. 16. God
is Love; and adds, that he who dwells ^n Love, dwells in God and God in
him. And v. 7. he says, that Love is of God, and every one that Loves is born
of God, and knows God. Knows him practically and experimentally. And Chapter 3.
14. We know, says he, that, we have passed from Death to Life, because we love
the Brethren: We know that we are Regenerate Christians by our Love and
Charity. He that loves not his Brother abides in Death. He is certainly an
Unregenerate Man, a wicked Creature. And ver. 15. Whosoever hates his Brother
is a Murderer, and ye know that no Murder has Eternal Life abiding in him.

Nor is S. Paul wanting in Recommending and pressing this Duty. Owe, says he,
no man any thing but to love one another; for he that loves another, has
fulfilled the Law. Or this is the Christian Perfection of the Law, as it
relates to our Neighbor. And in what follows he shows, that the whole second
Table is herein employed. And in short, this great Apostle prefers Charity
before all other Endowments and Accomplishments: Before the speaking with the
Tongues of Men or Angels, before (...) all Mysteries, before all Kn^^^^^^ and
(...) all Faith too, even the Faith of Miracles; nay before the greatest Zeal,
nay such a zeal as will make men give their Bodies to be burnt, 1 Cor. 13
chapter. He there tells us, that Charity is so much above all these, that they
are none of them worth any thing without Charity. Much more may be said to
show, what a mighty Figure, this Duty of Loving each other makes, in the
Religion of our Savior.

Thirdly, I come to show how far this duty of loving one another is to extend;
or what we are to understand by one another in the Text. In a word, it takes in
all Men whatsoever: Not only our Friends and Acquaintance: Not only our own
Party, and those that say as we say, and think as we think: Not only those that
oblige us and do us good turns; but all the World, all that partake of the same
common Nature with our selves, be they who or what they will.

1. This is apparent from the Text. A new Commandment I give unto you, That you
love one another, as I have loved you. Now the Love of Christ was Unlimited, He
dyed for all mankind. S. John says, that He is the Propitiation for the Sins
of the whole World. S. Paul calls him, The Savior of all Men: That is, so
their Savior as to exclude none from Salvation, who will comply with the Terms
on which He offers it. He has shut out none from having benefit, by what he
did and suffered in the behalf of Sinners; nor ever will he any, who shall not
reject the Counsel of God against themselves. And lest we should think that by
the World, and the whole World, and all Men, we are only to understand some of
all sorts, this same Apostle assures us, that this Phrase all Men is to be
taken in the same Latitude, in referrence to the Remedy brought by Christ, that
it is to be taken in, in reference to the Mischief done by Adam. Therefore as by
the offense of one, says he, judgment came upon all men to Condemnation, even
so by the Righteousness of One, the free-gift came upon all men to
Justification of Life; viz. the gift of the new Gracious Covenant. And the
Author to the Hebrews, chap. 2. 9. tells us, that Christ tasted death for every
man. Now if our Savior loved all men, loved all so as to put them into a
Reconcilable state; so that it must be their own Personal fault, and long of
their Wilfulness and Obstinacy, if the worst of Sinners be not actually
reconciled to God; then, since he has commanded us to love others as He has
loved them, our Love is to extend to all without exception. And well might our
Lord call this a New Commandment, for no such is to be found in the Law of
Moses, or in the Prophets.

2. This farther appears from those other words of our Savior, Mark. 12. 31.
Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self. You may say, the word Neighbor
seems to be Limiting and Confining. But we must understand this word, as our
Lord himself has Explained it, Luke 10. 29. Here is a Question put by a Lawyer
to Him, Who is my Neighbor? Now see His Answer in the following words: A
Certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho, and fell among thieves, who
stripped him of his Raiment, and wounded him, leaving him half dead; and by
chance there came a certain Priest that way, and when he saw him, he passed by
on the other side; and likewise a Levite, when he was at the place, came, and
looked on him, and passed by on the other side: But a certain Samaritan, as he
journeyed, came where he was, and when he saw him, he had Compassion on him,
etc. Now says our Savior, v. 36. Which of these three, think thou, was
Neighbor to him that fell among thieves? And the Lawyer answering, He that
showed mercy on him; Our Lord replied, Go thou and do likewise. Which is as if
he had said, Thou have now answered thy self; every Person that needs thy
relief, though he be unto thee as Jews and Samaritans are to one another; though he
be of a different Religion from thee, nay though he be thine Enemy, as the Jews
and Samaritans were to each other, he is thy Neighbor; and therefore thou art
obliged to love him as thy self; to do to him, when in an afflicted state, as
thou would be done unto in the like Condition. Again it is Evident,

3. That we are not to confine our Love and Charity to some particular Persons,
in that we are farther required by our Savior, to imitate our Heavenly Fathers
Love and Charity. Be Perfect, says he, as your Heavenly Father is perfect,
Mat. 5. 48. That is, as appears from what goes before, let the exercise of your
Charity extend as far as God' s extends, For, as it follows v. 45. He makes
His Sun to rise on the Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and
on the Unjust: And, as the Psalmist declares, His mereys are over all his
works: The Lord is good to all, and His tender mercys are over all His works.
But,

4. Express Texts enjoin this. If any are to be excluded from our Love, they
must be our Enemies; but what says our Lord of these, Mat. 5. 44? But I say
unto you Love your Enemies, bless them that curse you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you and persecute you, that you may be the Children of your
Father which is in Heaven. And v. 46. If you love them which love you, what
Reward have you? Do not even the Publicans the same? And if you Salute, (...)
embrace, your Brethren only, what do you more than others? Or, what Excellent
thing do you? Do not even the Publicans the same? And Gal. 6. 10. The Apostle
says, Let us do good unto all men; and the next words show, that though we ought
to love all without exception, as that word signifies Benevolence, yet we are
not to show neither this kind of love to all alike: For it follows, Especially
to them who are of the Household of Faith. That which makes our Brother a
Member of Christ's Church, does give him a Title to our greater Affection in
both the foresaid Senses. And here let me mind you, that we ought to have a
higher degree of love, for all that own Christ for their Lord and Savior, than
for Infidels, and such as are Enemies to his Religion; and those that own him
most in their Practice, we are obliged to have a greater love for, than for
mere Professors of Christianity; or such as whose lives are less Conformable
thereunto. It Is highly Reasonable, that the most Lovely Persons should have
most of our love. There is nothing so Amiable as true Goodness, and according
to the degree thereof in any Person; should be the degree of our Love to him.
God is to be the Object of our Highest Love, because He is Perfectly and
Originally Good; and according as Men are more or less like to God, the greater
or less Complacency ought we to take in them; and more or less ardently to
Desire and Endeavor their Welfare. The true Christian Love does chiefly
consist in loving His Image from whom we are called Christians: And where there
is most of that, whether the Persons are in all things of our minds or no, we
do not Love as becomes Christians, if there we do not most love.

I speak now of Christian Love, as I said, such a love as is the effect of our
own choice, directed and Governed by our Savior's Laws. I speak not of a
Natural Love, which is necessary, and not the effect of Choice. This love do we
what we can, will ordinarily flow most freely toward our Yoke-Fellows;
Children, Brethren, and Sisters, as being parts of our selves. And so for those
that are Naturalized to us by a long Acquaintance, we cannot in that respect
but love them better, than such as are less known to us; and those that have
greatly obliged us, we naturally love with a greater Passion, than those to
whom we are not at all, or less beholden.

But though Scripture, Nature, and Reason do enjoin us to love one another with a
different kind and degree of love, yet it has been fully made to appear, that
it is our duty to extend our love to all; to wish well to, and desire and
endeavor (as we are able and have opportunity) the happiness of every man.

Fourthly, I proceed to show, what Qualifications our love to each other ought
to have. Our Text tells us, that we ought to love one another as Christ has
loved us; and the other Text in S. Mark, that we are to love our Neighbor as
our selves. And that is,

1. Most Heartily and Sincerely. My little Children, says S. John, Let us not
love in word, neither in tongue, but in Deed and in Truth. Let love be without
dissimulation, says S. Paul. I need not say that Christ's love to us was most
hearty, nor that our love to our selves is so. Indeed, if our Love be not
hearty, as we love not like Christians, so we do not love at all. Love is
seated in the Heart only, so that Professions of love, and love it self are no
more the same thing, than are Shadows and Substances, Realities and mere
Appearances.

2. We ought to love Ingenuously as well as Heartily. To love Men Ingenuously,
is to delight in them, or wish well to them, for their own sakes, without
respect to our own Interest. So, you need not be told, our Savior loved
Mankind; next to the Glory of God, and the Advancement of Righteousness and
Universal Goodness in the World, He was acted by a vehement desire of Our
happiness. He did not Love Men, as men love their Horses, and too commonly
their Servants, only or mostly for his own Advantage.

Now, as I said that to Pretend to love, is not to love, so to love others
merely with respect to our own good, is rather mere self- love, than a love of
them. And to love others principally for our own sakes, is more to love our
selves than them. And that such a love is far from deserving to be called
Christian Love, will appear by what a Pagan says of it. Tully tells us in his
Laelius, that Ipse se quisque deligit non ut aliquam a seipso mercedem exigat
Charitatis suae, sed quod perse sibi quisque Charus est, etc. Every man loves
himself, not that be may obtain a reward from himself for so doing, but because
he is, for his own sake, dear to himself: And except (as he proceeds) men so
love one another, they cannot be true Friends. And this (says he farther) is
seen in the very Brutes, how much more then ought it to be found among Men. But
many Impudently desire that others should be such Friends to them, as they will
be to none; and expect that love from others, which they will not bestow on
others. That is, they expect that others should love them purely upon their own
account, and not that their love to them, should Ultimately Terminate in
themselves. And as the Example of our Savior, so that of God the Father
obliges us thus to love one another. For Man cannot be profitable to God, as
he that is wise may be profitable to himself. Is it any Pleasure, or Courtesy,
to the Almighty, that thou art Righteous? etc. Job 22. 2, 3. And therefore he
cannot desire, that Sinners should turn from their Wickedness and live, for any
gain to himself. If therefore we would be the Children of God, we must love
each other not only sincerely, but generously and ingenuously.

And indeed, if we consider the Nature of Mankind, we shall find that this, as
well as the Commands of God and our Savior, does oblige us to such a love of
all Men. And this, indeed, is the reason why they have obliged us hereunto by
their Commands. They Command it because it is fittest in it self and best. And
therefore are we required to love and wish well to all for their own sakes,
because every man is in himself considered, and as abstracted from Vicious
Habits, and from what is Preternatural, an Excellent, and therefore a Lovely
Creature. Every man, as to his pure Naturals, bears God's Image; and
consequently it is most reasonable to love every man, and desire his greatest
happiness, for his own sake.

Nay, we ought to bear such a sort of Good Will to God's whole Creation; thus
to love Brutes as well as Men, though in a far lower degree, and to desire for
them all that Happiness their Natures are Capable of, without as well as with
respect to our own Advantage, and the service they may do us. I say we ought to
desire the well-being of all Creatures whatsoever, for their own sakes (I mean
so far as it is consistent with the Well-being of Men) because all God's Works
are good, and whatsoever is so has a Right to our Benevolence as such. A
merciful man, says K. Solomon, Is merciful to his Beast: And not only is he
so, because by his ill usage of his Beast, he will disable him from being
serviceable (for this would not speak one a Merciful Man, but a Man that
considers his own interest) but because the poor Creature has a Right to good
Usage. And if such a Love as this be due to Beasts, much more is it so to
Mankind.

By the way, what an ill-natured Principle is that of the Malmsbury
Philosopher, viz. That our Need of each other, is the only Cause of our entering
into Societys, and the Ground of all Friendship. He might judge so by himself,
but every one whose Nature is not miserably depraved, knows by but reflecting
on himself, that this is wretched Doctrine.

3. We are obliged to have such a degree of Love for one another, as will make
us most Prompt and Ready to the Performance of all Offices of Mercy and
Kindness, as shall be shown presently: And so to love the Souls of our
Brethren, as to be willing even to lay down our Lives for the procuring of
their Eternal Happiness, if it be necessary. Hereby, says S. John, Perceive we
the Love of God, because He laid down his Life for us, and we ought to lay down
our lives for the Brethren. And thus to love one another as Christ has loved
us, is not only o love our Neighbor as our selves, but even better than our
Selves, that is, than one part of our selves, our viler part. And as severe as
this may seem, nothing is more highly Reasonable, than that we should prefer
our Brethrens Souls before our own Bodies; than that we should be more
solicitous for their Eternal, than for our own Temporal life. This appears so
Reasonable at first sight, that such a Man as Tully, had it come into his Mind,
would certainly have asserted it to be our duty. This Love I might show, S.
Paul professed to have for his Unbelieving Countrymen, and he gave the
greatest Demonstrations of the sincerity of that his Profession; and so did the
other Apostles too of the like Love. And the same ought we all to aspire after.

Fifthly, I come, in the last place, to show in what Instances our Love to one
another ought to be expressed. Many I might lay before you, but I cannot insist
on above two or three.

1. It ought to be Expressed by Sympathizing with each other in Afflictions, and
Rejoicing in each others Prosperity. Rejoice, says the Apostle, with them that
Rejoice, and Weep with them that Weep. And look not every man on his own
things, but every man also on the things of others. Not that he would have us
be Busy-bodies in other folks matters; this we are elsewhere Cautioned against
by the same Apostle: But he would have us enquire after, and be affected with,
the State of others; if it be good not to Envy them, but to be Glad for their
sakes; and if bad to Compassionate them. This was the Temper of our Blessed
Lord, when on Earth. We again and again read, that upon the sight of People in
Calamity (...), His Bowels yerned toward them. And this we must have a special
care to be like Him in, as we profess to be His Followers. Love as Brethren
(says S. Peter) be pitiful. But then,

2. To our Affecting Sense of the Condition of others, we must add our Relief
of all Objects of Pity, according to our Ability. And our Nature is endued with
such a Passion as this of Pity, for this reason only, that we may be the more
strongly thereby excited to Relieve our Afflicted Brethren; so that it is for
this end that we ought to cherish this Affection. And to be affected with the
sufferings of others, without administering what help we can, is so poor and low
an expression of love, as to be of no Account at all with God. If a Brother or
Sister (says S. James) be Naked and destitute of daily Food, and one of you
say unto them, Depart in Peace, be ye warmed or filled; notwithstanding ye give
them not those things which are needful for the Body; what does it profit? That
is, if you be so little Affected with the Condition of your poor Indigent
Brethren and Sisters, as only to bestow good Wishes on them, it will neither
profit them nor your selves.

I will present you with two or three Texts, which if we will Consider, we
cannot think our selves sincere Christians, while we live in the neglect of
this duty of Charity. The first shall be that of S. John, Whosoever has this
Worlds Goods, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his Bowels of
Compassion from him, how dwells the love of God in him? 1 John 3. 17. He has
no more love for God, than he has for his Brother. The second shall be that of
S. James, Pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to
visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction; and to keep ones self
unspotted from the World, James, 1. 27. The third shall be that of the Prophet
Micah, He has showed thee O man, what is Good; and what does the Lord require
of thee, but to do justly, to love Mercy, and to walk Humbly with thy God?
Mich. 6. 8. And so great a number of Texts of the like nature, may be produced,
as you must needs be satisfied are more than enough, to overthrow all the Hopes
of a Covetous Hard-hearted Professor of Christianity, let him have built his
hopes upon never so many- other Evidences.

3. Another Expression of Love to each other, should be wholesome Advice and
Counsel. As Ointment and Perfume (says the Wise Man) rejoice the heart, so does
the sweetness of a man's Friend by hearty Counsel. And if in our Temporal
Concerns, the good Advice of a Friend is to be valued, How highly valuable is
it in our Spiritual! And therefore, How much more should our Love prompt us to
give it in such Concerns! Exhort one another daily, says the Apostle, While it
is called to day, left any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin.
And let us consider one another, to provoke unto love and to good works. Can I
be a Friend to any man, and not be so to his better Part, his Soul? And can I
be Friend to his Soul, and decline giving him that Advice which I am sensible
he needs, either for the Taking him off from some sinful Course, or prevention
of his falling into some Sin, or of his Continuance in the neglect of some
necessary duty? And to encourage us to this great Instance of Friendship, let
us consider those words with which S. James concludes his Epistle, Brethren,
if any of you do Err from the truth, and one Convert him; let him know that he
who Converteth a sinner from the Error of his way, shall save a Soul from
death, and shall hide a multitude of Sins. Or, this will be a prevailing Motive
with God to pardon his own many sins.

But yet, as Noble and necessary an instance of Charity as this is, and as
great a Reward as is Promised to it, there is no duty more neglected in this
Lukewarm, nay most Profane Age; in which such an Expression of Friendship,
too generally passes for a Piece of Fanaticism. But Honest Heathens have had a
much more honorable Opinion of it. And I will conclude this Argument with this
saying of Cicero: Consilia, Sermones, Cohortationes, Consolationes, interdum
etiam Objurgationes, in Amicis vigent maxim. Good Counsel, wholesome
Admonitions, Instructions and Consolations, and severe Reproofs too, when there
is Occasion for them, do most take place in Friendship.

I might proceed to other Instances of Love, to which we are necessarily
obliged; As a Readiness to forgive offenses: A Forwardness to make up
differences. Putting the most Candid interpretations we reasonably can, upon
each others Actions: Concealing each others Faults, except when it is necessary
to make them Public: And Condescension to each others infirmities. But I may
not do more than Mention these, lest I trespass too much upon your Patience.

The Application.
NOw what remains, but that we put in practice with all our might, this
Great, this New Commandment of loving one another, as Christ has loved us. And
we of this Society, who are many of us Clergymen, and all Sons of the Clergy,
are in these respects under a special Obligation, of Excelling in this, with
all other Christian Virtues.

Those of us who are Clergymen are strictly bound, as S. Paul tells us, in the
Person of Timothy, to be Examples to the Flock; and so to demean our selves, in
all respects, as to be able to say as that Apostle did, Walk as ye have us for
an Example. As it is our great Business to Teach others their duty, and to
press them thereto by the most persuasive Arguments, so must we make great
Conscience of it our selves, as we would not lose our labor; nay as we would
not do more hurt than good. And those ought to Expect, at least to have their
labor lost upon their People, whose Examples do not back and enforce their
Doctrine. If we are not such our selves, as we tell them, as they hope to be
saved, they must be, each of them will be ready to make this shameful
Reflection, upon our Sermons and good Admonitions, Cur verba audio, cum facta
non videam?

And particularly, as to this duty of loving one another, it will be in vain to
use Arguments with our Flocks to stir them up hereunto, while they perceive us
wanting in any of the Necessary instances and Expressions of Love: I mean such
as are within our own power.

And I say this, because a Multitude of our Clergy are, God knows, in very
sorry Circumstances to be Exemplary, in that great Expression of Love,
Almsgiving. I much doubt, that the far greater Part have not wherewith to be
so. Nay 'twould pity any good Man to see, how many of them are reduced to such
Streights (especially of late years) as to want a Competent Subsistence for
themselves and Families. And it is very sad to Observe what Contempt is by this
means brought upon their Holy, their Honorable Function. Necessitas cogit ad
turpia.

And this puts me in mind to wish, that the Condition of the Clergy were better
Considered, in the Taxes and other impositions, than it lately has been.

What I have now suggested, I am too well Confirmed in the belief of, by the
sad Informations I have received, and Observations I have made, up and down in
my own Diocese: Which yet, I think, is not the poorest in the Nation.

In the next place, I would mind you, my Brethren, not only that the Clergy, as
such, are most concerned of all Persons, to be Exemplary in the Virtue of the
Text, and all other, but the Sons too of the Clergy are in an Especial manner
obliged here to, upon the account of their coming out of the Loins of such
Parents, and their having generally had so Religious Educations, as they are to
be supposed to have.

Next to the Faults of the Clergy, those of their Children are exceeding
Scandalous; Nothing being more common, than for Profane People, and such as
catch at all Opportunities, to cast Dirt upon our Excellent Religion and
Church, to charge the Sins of such upon their Parents loose Education of them.
Nor is any thing more Ordinary, than for People to Encourage themselves to do
Evil, by the bad Examples of the Children of their Teachers, as well as of
their Teachers themselves. These two things, it is likely, the Apostle had a
Special regard to, in making it a necessary Qualification of an Elder, to have
faithful Children, not accused of Riot, or unruly, as well as to be blameless
himself, and the Husband of one Wife; Titus 1. 6.

But in reference to this duty of Love, I will repeat what I now said, viz.
What remains, but that we Endeavor to practice it with all our might. That All
bitterness, and wrath, and anger, and clamor, and evil-speaking, be put away
from us, with all malice. And that we be kind one to another, tenderhearted,
forgiving one another; Even as God for Christ's sake has forgiven us:
According to the earnest Advice of the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. That we be
kindly Affectioned one to another, notwithstanding any differences of Opinion,
with Brotherly love in Honor preferring one another; As the same Apostle
Exhorts, Romans 12. 10. Oh how many pressing and powerful Motives to this duty of
Love, Universal Love, Catholic Charity, does the New Testament, and Natural
Reason too, present us with!

But I will now only Observe to you, that what Nerves and Sinues, are to our
Natural Bodies, that is Love in all Bodies Politic, It Is Love, above all
things, which Cements and holds together Societies and Communities. And
therefore another short and sad Digression is here too Seasonable, viz. It Is a
Wonderful thing, that this Church and Kingdom should not long since have been
utterly Broken to pieces, as they has both been miserably shattered, by means
of our most Unchristian, and indeed Inhumane Breaches; by means of our having
so banished Love: Not only Christian, but Natural Love, in a very great
measure: Not only Universal Love, but Love to one another, taking that Phrase
in the most restrained Sense. We should before now have been Woeful Examples of
the Truth of that observation of our Blessed Savior, A City or Kingdom,
divided against it self cannot stand, but is brought to Desolation, had it not
been prevented by a Series, a long Train of such Providence, as have scarcely
been much short of Miracles.

Desolation is the Natural Consequent of great Divisions, of Divisions not
greater than Ours have long been. If ye bite and devour each other, take heed
ye be not Consumed one of another, said S. Paul to the divided Galatians, chapter
5. 15. But especially is it so, as Divisions give a mighty Advantage to a
Common Enemy. And therefore nothing can hinder their produceing this Effect,
but a (...), signal interpositions of the Divine Providence: Which I say, and
you need not be told it, we have from time to time had* Oh what a History of
such Interpositions have these five last years given us! And never had we a
more Eminent one, than this last Spring. But what a Dangerous Condition are
those People in, who have little to Encourage their hopes with, but the
Continuance of Extraordinary Providence! And especially when they have no
other Reason still to Expect them, but because they have had so many of them.

But, alas, we of all* People have the least cause still to depend upon them,
because no Visible good Effect upon us, has been produced by them; We will not
be Reformed in any One instance. And particularly, we will still Obstinately
persevere in our Old Emnity to one another, which daily Increases too instead
of abating, Let God Almighty do what He will, and a Formidable Enemy do what he
can, to make us Friends. But I must not lengthen out any father so Melancholy a
Digression, since we are now met upon so Pleasant an Occasion.

And therefore I add, that Love is the main thing, that makes such Meetings as
these, and our Eating and Drinking together, a true Pleasure. Better, says
King Solomon, is a Dinner of green Herbs, where love is, than a Stalled Ox, and
Hatred therewith.

And as Love makes Meetings of this nature, very pleasant Diversions, so the
professed Design of them being to Increase Friendship, and to Express Love by
showing Mercy, it makes them highly Commendable and Praiseworthy.

And of All Works of Mercy there is no one more Acceptable to our Heavenly
Father and Blessed Savior, as is Evident from what has been said, than that
of Comforting distressed Widows, and making their Hearts to sing for joy; and
Taking Care of poor Orphans, and Enabling them to live Comfortably and usefully
in the World.

And the Relief of the poor Widows of Clergy men; and providing for their
helpless Children, being the only Design of our being Incorporated, let their
Names be had in Everlasting Remembrance, who first set on foot this Noble
Project; and, next to them* theirs, who have chiefly Contributed to the
Encouragement of it*

And the Latter of these Charities, viz. That which relates to the poor
Children of deceased Ministers, being the Special Design of these Annual
Assemblies, may This at least Equalize each of the former ones, in this
Excellent Work!

Our Courts of Assistants, and Stewards of these Feasts, have ever been made
too sensible of what I but now observed, of the miserably straight
Circumstances of Abundance of our Clergy, by the Vast Number of their Widows
and Children, whose deplorable Condition is, year after year, laid before them.
And though the Bounty which Worthy persons have from time to time deposited in
our Treasurers hands, be very Considerable, yet it is grievous to see how little
falls to the Share of particular Supplicants, by reason of their Excessive
Number.

Nor is the Parade, which makes such a noble show on these days, in our
Streets, any Objection against what I have sadly observed to you; since it
would be very strange, if so many Thousands of Ministers as our Church consists
of, should not always produce a very great Number, whose Natural parts, and
Liberal Educations, have Enabled them, to improve the Advantages put into their
hands by the Good providence of God, to the Arriving at very plentiful
Fortunes. And, upon a just Computation, I doubt not but it will be found, That
there are Extremely Few of the Sons of the Clergy, whose large Circumstances in
the World are owing to their Patrimony, in Comparison of those who are
enriched, by the Blessing of God, upon their own Industry.

I hope I need not tell such, how much they are Obliged in Gratitude to their
Great Benefactor, for making such a difference between them, and most of their
Brethren, To be Liberal in their Contributions toward the Relief of the
Necessitous part of them.

And this is the most Effectual Course you can possibly take, to secure Gods
Blessing to your Posterity; and to prevent their Ever Coming into the Number of
Petitioners for Charity.

And, which is a far greater Consideration, being Compassionate toward Widows
and the Fatherless is such a sort of Charity, as will make those who are in
love with it, the Happy Objects of Gods Special Love. Be as a Father to the
Fatherless, says the Son of Syrach, and instead of an Husband unto their
Mother; so shall thou be as the Son of the most High, and He shall love thee
more than thy Mother does.

THE END.

