White Hall, March 18. 1690.
Let this be Printed.

SYDNEY.

AN ANSWER To the PAPER Delivered by Mr ASHTON at his Execution TO Sir Francis
Child: SHERIFF of London, etc. Together with The Paper it self.

LONDON: Printed for Robert Clavell, at the Peacock in S. Paul's Churchyard.
1690.

Mr. Ashton's Paper.
Mr. Sheriff,
HAVING observed that the Methods of making Speeches at the place of Execution
was not always attended with the designed Success; And thinking it better to
employ my last Minutes in Devotion and Holy Communion with my God; I have
prepared this Paper to leave in your Hands, as well to assert my Principles as
to testify my Innocence. As to my Religion I profess, by God's Grace, I dye
in the Faith into which I was baptized, that of the Church of England, in whose
Communion (nothing doubting of my Salvation through the Merits of my Savior) I
have always thought my self safe and happy; according to her Principles and
late much esteemed Doctrines (tho now unhappily exploded) I have regulated my
Life, beleiving my self obliged by my Religion to look upon my rightful
lawful Prince (whatever his Principles were or his Practices might be) as
God's Vicegerent, and accountable (if guilty of Maladministration) to God
only, from whom he received his Power, and always beleiving it to be contrary
to the Laws of God, the Church, and the Realm, upon any pretense whatsoever to
take up Arms against him, and let all the World take notice, in this Belief I
dye. But I have more particular Obligation to the King my Master, whom I have
had the honor to serve, and received many signal Favors from him, for sixteen
years past, so that Gratitude (a thing not much esteemed at this time) as well
as Duty and Religion Commanded the utmost Service I could pay him; and when I
add these Considerations that we were born his Liege Subjects, that we have
solemnly professed our Allegiance, and often confirmed it with Oaths, That his
Majesty's Usage after the Prince of Orange's arrival was very hard, severe,
(and if I may so say) Unjust; And that all the new Methods of settling this
Nation have hitherto made it more miserable Poor, and more exposed to Foreign
Enemies. And the Religion we pretend to be so fond of preserving, now much more
than ever likely to be destroyed: There seems to me no way to prevent the
Impending evils, and save these Nations from poverty and destruction, but the
Calling home our Injured Sovereign, who as a true Father of his Country has
(notwithstanding all his Provocations and Injuries) a natural love and
tenderness for all his Subjects, and I am so far from repining at the loss of
my life, that had I ten thousand I should think my self obliged to sacrifice
them all rather than omit any just and honest means to promote so good and
necessary a work; and I advise and desire all my fellow Subjects to think of
their Duty and return to their Allegiance, before the severe Judgment of God
overtake them, for their Perjury and Rebellion, but certainly the good and
Interest of these Nations, abstracted from all other Considerations, will ere
long convince them of the necessity of doing it.

Having thus frankly declared my Principles, I know the Inference will be, that
I have acted accordingly and consequently that am I now justly condemned; but
as I ingenuously own the Premises, so as I positively deny the Consequence;
for whatever my Inclinations or Actions have been, yet, as to the Matter I was
sentenced to dye for, I declare my self innocent, and will appeal even to the
Judges themselves, whether or no, upon my Trial, there appeared the least proof
that I knew a tittle contained in the Papers, but Presumption was, with the
Jury, thought sufficient to find me guilty, tho I am told, I am the first Man
that ever was condemned for High Treason upon bare Suspicion or Presumption,
and that contrary to my L. Coke's and other eminent Lawyers Opinions. The
knowledge of my own Innocence, as to the Indictment and Charge against me, was
that that armed me with so much assurance, and occasioned my casting my Life
upon the first Twelve Men of the Panel, without challenging any. But tho I
have, I think, just reason to complain of the severe Charge given by the
Judges, and hard measure I have received, not to mention my close Imprisonment,
the hasty and violent Proceedings against me, nor the Industry used in the
Return of fitting Persons to pass upon me, the denying me a Copy of the Panel,
etc. Yet, as I hope for Pardon and Forgiveness at the hands of my God, so do I
most heartily pray for, and forgive them, and all my Enemies, all the World,
nay even that Judge and Iury-Man who did so signally (contrary to common
Justice) expose themselves to destroy me. But let the Will of God be done: I
rely wholly upon his Mercy and the Merits of my blessed Savior for Salvation,
I do cheerfully and entirely resign my self into his Hands, as into the Hands
of a faithful Creator, in sure and certain hopes of a happy Resurrection.
Bless, protect, and strengthen, O Lord God, my good and gracious King and
Master; in thy due time let the Virtue, Goodness, and Innocence of the Queen,
my Mistress, make all her Enemies blush, and silence the wicked and unjust
Calumnies that Malice and Envy have raised against her; make her and these
Nations happy in the Prince of Wales, whom from unanswerable and undoubted
Proofs I know to be her Son; restore them all when thou see fit to their just
Rights, and on such a bottom as may support and establish the Church of
England, and once more make her flourishe, notwithstanding the Wounds she has
received of late from her prevaricating Sons.

Forgive, forgive, O Lord, all my Enemies, bless all my Friends, comfort and
support my dear afflicted Wife, and poor Babes, be thou a Husband and a Father
to them; for their sakes only I could have wished to live; but pardon that
Wish, O good God, and take my Soul into thy everlasting Glory. Amen.

JNo ASHTON.

The ANSWER.
THE Paper which passes under the Name of Mr. Ashton's SPEECH seems to me to
be composed with too much Art and Care to be the Work of one who professes, he
thought it better to employ his last minutes in Devotion: And if he was so
illiterate and unskilled in the Law, as he said at his Trial, Fol. 111. one may
justly wonder not only at such Terms as Impending, Prevaricating, Premises,
and Consequence, etc. but at such a peremptory Judgment as he gives about the
Laws of the Realm, in a Case that must be acknowledged by all ingenuous men of
his own Party to have a great deal of Difficulty in it.

But there are some Men who think to bear down all others by their Confidence,
and would have it taken for granted that the whole Nation (themselves excepted)
is under the guilt of Perjury and Rebellion.

These are the modest Terms in this Speech, which at least do not become the
Charity of one just going out of the World. Therefore I rather believe it to be
drawn up by some Persons of more Art and Leisure; who thought it best to convey
their own Sentiments (as they call them) under the more popular Name of one who
suffered for their Cause.

But the Weight of what is said does not depend on the Person, and therefore I
shall calmly and impartially consider the Things themselves and show how unjust
and unreasonable the Insinuations are which respect the present Government, and
all such who act in Obedience to it.

There are two Things this Paper is said to be designed for, to assert his
Principles and to testify his Innocence. For his Principles he professes, that
he dies in the Faith and Communion of the Church of England. And he might have
lived longer in both if he had pleased; for I cannot see how the Faith and
Communion of the Church of England obliged him to do that for which he
suffered: But, by the Faith of the Church of England he means the Doctrine of
Passive Obedience. Be it so: however he suffered not for his Passive Obedience,
but for the want of it: If he had regulated his Life by this Principle, he had
preserved it; yet he says he did so, and dyed for it. There must be certainly
then some great Mistake about the Doctrines and Principles of our Church. I
always thought those are to be found in the Articles and Constitutions of it.
Which of these did he suffer for?

They are, he says, her Principles and late much esteemed Doctrines tho now
unhappily exploded. I know of no Doctrines or Principles of the Church of
England which are exploded among us; and therefore this is unhappily insisted
on by a dying Man, unless he had given some Proof of it.

Well; but he believed himself obliged by his Religion to look upon his
Rightful, Lawful Prince (whatever his Principles were or his Practices might
be) as God's Vicegerent, and accountable to God only, from whom he received his
Power. All this he might have done, and have been alive still; for the Matter
in dispute is not whether Rightful, Lawful Kings are to be obeyed, but who in
our present Circumstances is our Rightful, Lawful Sovereign; not whether Kings
be not God's Vicegerents,' but whether God does not sometimes confer the Right
of Sovereignty by a Law superior to the Laws of particular Countries, that is,
by the Law of Nations, which establishes such a Right upon the success of a
just War; not whether Sovereign Princes are not accountable only to God, but
whether Allegiance be not due where the Rights of Sovereignty are placed, by an
extraordinary Act of Providence and the concurrent Consent of the Nation. But
he goes on; And always believing it to be contrary to the Laws of God, the
Church, and the Realm, upon any Pretense whatsoever to take up Arms against
him, and let all the World take notice in this Belief I dye. I had much rathor
have taken notice that in this Belief he lived; for I see no Reason of his
dying for it. For, why must a Man be said to die for not taking up Arms, who
was Condemned to die for a Design just contrary, viz. for the subverting the
present Government by Domestic Insurrections and Foreign Power?

So that the Question is not about Passive Obedience but to whom it is due; I
grant that the Laws of God and of the Realm are to determine the Measures of
our Obedience; but here lies the only Point, whether the Rights of Sovereignty
may not be transferred by the success of a just War and the Consent of the
People: For if they may, then according to his own Principles he suffered
justly. And if the Directors of his Conscience did not speak to this Point,
they led him into a dangerous Error, and have been too much the Occasion of his
suffering.

Therefore to clear this whole Matter, and to prevent the like Mistakes in
others; I shall endeavor to state the present Case of our Government, so as to
show both that it is our Duty to submit to it, and that no Principles or
Doctrins of the Church of England are violated thereby.

To do this, we must of necessity look back to the Occasions of this great
Revolution: And there were two principal Occasions of it.

First, Great and violent Presumptions of an Injury to the Right of Succession.

Secondly, Too great Evidence of a formed Design to subvert the established
Religion and Civil Liberties of the Nation.

Now there are two very material Questions which arise from hence.

First, Whether these were the just Occasions of a War?

Secondly, Whether upon the success of this War the Rights of Sovereignty were
duly transferred?

If these were just Occasions of a War, and upon the Success thereof the
Sovereignty was duly transferred, then there can be no Dispute left to whom our
Allegiance is due.

It is taken for granted by all who understand these Matters, that as there is
a Law of Nature, which determines the Rights and Properties of particular
Nations; and that all private Persons are bound to submit to the municipal Laws
of those Societies for their Peace and Security: So there are other Laws which
concern those Nations, as they make up several independent Governments upon
each other. And there are several Rights which belong to them with respect to
one another, which do not belong to private Persons as they live in subjection
to any particular Government.

And as there are such Rights, so there must be a just and lawful way for
Reparation of Injuries. In particular Governments, the thing is plain by
established Laws and Courts of Judicature, whose Sentence is Executed by the
Civil Power; but in Separate Nations and Independent Governments, although
there be Laws by consent called the Law of Nations; yet there is no common
Judicature to determine of Right and Wrong, and therefore in case of Injury
there is an allowance for the injured Party by this Law of Nations to Right
himself by Force, as there would be to every particular Person, if there were
no Laws nor Power to see them executed.

There is then a Right in every Sovereign and Independent Prince to exercise
Force against another Prince, who detains any Right from him, or does any
Injury to him, or to those he is bound to defend.

The Question then comes to the Just Occasions of such a War, and here are two
assigned,

First, great and violent Presumptions of an Injury to the Right of Succession.
This is expressly mentioned and insisted on, in the Declaration of the then
Prince of Orange (our present King) in these Words -- But to crown all, there
are great and violent Presumptions inducing us to believe that those evil
Counselors, in order to the carrying on of their ill designs, and to the
gaining to themselves the more time, for the effecting of them, for the
encouraging their Accomplices, and for the discouraging of all good Subjects,
has published that the Queen has brought forth a Son; tho there have appeared
both during the Queen's pretended Bigness and in the manner in which the Birth
was managed, so many just and visible grounds of Suspicion, that not only we
our selves, but all the good Subjects of these Kingdoms do vehemently suspect
that the pretended Prince of Wales was not born of the Queen: And it is
notoriously known to all the World, that many both doubted of the Queens
Bigness, and of the Birth of the Child, and yet there was not any one thing
done to satisfy them and to put an end to all Doubts. And since our Dearest
and most entirely beloved Consort, the Princess, and likewise we our selves
have so great an Interest in this matter, and such a Right as all the World
knows to the Succession to the Crown -- And since the English Nation has ever
testified a most particular Affection and Esteem both to our Dearest Confort
and to our Selves; We cannot excuse our Selves from espousing their Interests
in a matter of such high Consequence, and from contributing all that lies in
us, for maintaining both of the Protestant Religion, and of the Laws and
Liberties of those Kingdoms, and for the securing to them the continual
Enjoyment of all their just Rights.

Here we have an Hereditary Right to the Crown asserted both remoter in Himself
and nearer in the Queen, who was unquestionably the next, if there were no Heir
Male: It was possible this Right might be really defeated by a Prince of Wales,
and it was possible it might be pretended to be so when it was not: For there
have been many Instances in History of suborned and supposititious Princes, and
therefore there was reason that sufficient Evidence should be given in a Case
of such Importance and which was under so great Suspicion. But if there was no
reasonable care taken to prevent or remove these Suspicions, then the Parties
most concerned have a Right to assert their own Pretensions in such a way as
the Law of Nations does allow.

And in this Case no private Depositions or confident Affirmations of such as
are Dependents or otherwise liable to Suspicion, can in Reason be taken for
satisfactory Evidence; for let any one consider what the Laws of Nations have
thought sitting Evidence in a Case of this Nature, and he will soon find how
very much short such proofs are of what the Nature of the Thing has been
thought to require -- The Civil Law is very strict where there is any occasion
of Suspicion.

It requires notice to be given twice a Month to D. 25. Tit. 4.
the Parties concerned that they may receive full satisfaction. That the Mother
is to be kept in a House by itself: That thirty Days before she expects to be
delivered, she must give Notice of it to those who are most concerned, that
they may send such as they can trust to be present: that there ought to be but
one Door where she is to Lie in, and if there be more, they must be done up;
that at that Door there are to be Three Men and Three Women and Two Assistants:
That all Persons are to be searched who go in, especially at the Labor, at which
time there must be sufficient Light in the Room. When the Child is born it
ought to be first shown to the Parties concerned, and great care is taken about
the Persons in whose Hands he is put, and Satisfaction must be given from time
to time that it is the same Child, and if Satisfaction be not given as to these
things, the Roman Law does not allow any Right of Possession. By the Old Common
Law of England, in case of Suspicion, a Writ of Inspection was allowed, the
Form whereof is in the Books, and if there were any doubt, Bract. l. 2. c. 32.
the Woman was to be put into a safe place, where no Suspicious Persons were to
come near her till she was delivered. This was then thought so reasonable a
thing, that the Old Law Books have a Chapter on purpose Fleta l. 1. c. 15.
De Partu Supposito, wherein Directions are given to prevent and discover a
Subornation.

These things I mention to show what Satisfaction is necessary to be given in
case of Suspicion, and the higher the Persons are, and of so much greater
Importance as the Succession is, so much clearer ought the Evidence to be, that
no occasion of Doubt may remain: But if no such care was taken, If the
principal Persons concerned had not the least Satisfaction given them; If the
whole thing were managed with Secrecy and suspicious Circumstances, then I can
see no Reason to exclude those who are most concerned from a Right of demanding
Satisfaction by Force of Arms.

But Mr. Ashton thinks he has cleared this matter, when he affirms that he
knows there was no Supposititious Birth by unanswerable undoubted Proofs and
this is put into his Prayer, that it might look like an appeal to God as to the
Truth of what he said. This is one of the boldest and most artificial Strokes
of the Penner of this Speech, not barely to make him af firm it with so much
assurance, but to do it in his Prayer too. But a matter of so great Consequence
is not to be determined upon the Testimony of any single Wittness, although he
were the most competent Witness as to such a matter, which does not in the
least appear as to Mr. Ashton: For how could he know it by unanswerable and
undoubted Proofs; when considering the Circumstances that were in this Case, it
was hardly possible to produce such Proofs, as would pass for unexceptionable
Evidence upon a Legal Trial? For there has been such a Trial here in England
within the Memory of Man, wherein the Father and Mother In the Case of one
Robins's Child, at Hereford Assizes about An. 1668.
and Midwife have all sworn to the Truth of the Birth of a Son, and yet the
Jury upon hearing the whole Evidence have given Judgment that it was
Supposititious.

Therefore bare Affirmations of some Persons concerned are not Evidence
sufficient in Case of strong and vehemont Presumptions to the contrary; and
such Evidence ought to have been given as might have either prevented or
removed any just grounds of Suspicion.

But since no such unanswerable undoubted Proofs were made to those who were
most concerned, the same just Right does remain to the undoubted Heir of the
Crown, as it did in the former Case to the next Heir at Law, who upon a fair
Trial and the Verdict of the Country, recovered the Estate. But between Princes
there are no such ways of Trial or Courts of Judicature, and therefore in such
Cases the Right of War is allowed by the general Consent of Mankind.

Secondly, There was a further just Occasion for that Expedition, which was the
Design to subvort our Religion and Civil Liberties. As to the Particulars they
are fully set down in the Declaration, and need not to be repeated; that which
I am to make out is, that the then Prince of Orange by his Relation to the
Crown had a just Right to concern himself in the Vindication of both, and that
this is not repugnant to the Doctrines and Principles of the Church of England.

It was not thought disagreeable to them for Q Elisabeth to assist the Dutch
against the King of Spain; yet she had no such reason for it as our King and
Queen had to prevent the suppression of their own Religion here, and the Rights
of that People to whom they were so nearly related. For there was nothing in
her Case so considerable as the growing Power of Spain and the danger of
overturning the Religious and Alberic. Gent. de Jure Bell. l. 1. c. 16.
Civil Liberties of a neighbor People. The Queens Professor of Law in Oxford
at that time says, that it was then made a Question by some whether Q. Elis.
had just Reason for that War in assistance of the Dutch, and he resolves the
Lawfulness of it upon 3 Grounds: First, That it was to prevent ensuing
Mischief; Secondly, From the ancient Alliance between the two Nations; Thirdly,
That if the Dutch were totally vanquished by the Spaniard, they would be made
Slaves under an Arbitrary Power. The Queen herself owned this as the Ground of
her Resolution, That it was Christian Piety to relieve them who were of the
same Religion which she professed, and Wisdom to prevent the pernicious designs
of her Enemies. And in her Declaration she published this as the Reason of her
sending Forces to the Aid of the Netherlanders, That they might peaceably enjoy
their ancient Freedom.

In the latter end of the Reign of King James I. the War broke out in Germany
wherein the Emperor used his utmost endeavor to establish absolute Power and
Popery together. There was occasion offered to try whether the giving
Assistance against these were against the Principles and Doctrines of the
Church of England. For the Prince Elector Palatine was chosen King of Bohemia,
and sent over for King James's Advice about it: But his Designs lay then so
much another way, that he had no mind he should engage in it: But the
Archbishop of Canterbury in his Letter to Sir R. Naunton then Secretary of
State, says, That God had set up this Prince his Masters Son in Law, as a Mark
of Honor throughout all Christendom, to propagate the Gospel and to protect
the oppressed; that for his own part he dares not but give Advice to follow
where God leads, apprehending the Work of God in this and that of Hungary; that
he was satisfied in Conscience that the Bohemians had a just Cause; that the
King's Daughter the Elector's Lady had professed, she would not leave herself
one Jewel, rather than not maintain so Religious and so Righteous a Cause.

In the beginning of the Reign of King Charles the First, when I suppose it
will be granted, That the Doctrins and Principles of the Church of England were
understood and followed; the King of Denmark had taken up Arms, to settle the
Peace and liberty of Germany, as he declared: But he met with a great Defeat.
Whereupon King Charles the First thought himself concerned to give Assistance
to him: And Archbishop Laud was then employed (as Dr. Heylin confesses) Life
of Archbishop Laud, sol. 161.
by the King's Command, to draw up a Declaration, to be published in all the
Parishes of England; which was read by the King, and approved by the Council,
wherein the Greatness of the Danger they were in is set forth, and the People
are exhorted to serve God and the King, and to labor by their Prayers to
divert the Danger. Wherein lay this Danger? It is there said to be, That by the
Defeat of the King of Denmark, there was little or nothing left to hinder the
House of Austria from being Lord and Master of Germany. And what then? Why then
there will be an open way for Spain to do what they pleased in all the West
part of Christendom. It seems then, it was not thought disagreeable to the
Principles and Doctrins of our Church, to hinder the growth of a Western
Monarchy, although it be by assisting Subjects against their Princes who
promote it: And then follow these remarkable Words;

You are to know therefore, that to prevent this is the present Care of the
King and State; and there is no proba^le way left, but by sending of Forces,
and other Supplies, to the said King of Denmark, to enable him to keep the
Field, that our Enemies be not Masters of all on a sudden. And not long after
-- If he be not presently relieved, the Cause of Religion is not only like to
suffer by it in some one part, (as it has already in a fearful manner in the
Palatinate) but in all places where it has got any footing. So that if we
supply not presently our Allies and Consederates in this case, it is like to
prove the Extirpation of true Religion, and the Replanting of Romish
Superstition in the Neighboring parts of Christendom. And the Coldness of the
State shall suffer in all places, as the Betrayers of that Religion elsewhere,
which it professes and honors at home; which will be an Imputation never to
be washed off: And God forbid this State should suffer under it. -- And in the
last place: You are to call upon God your selves, and to incite the People to
join with you, in humble and hearty Prayers unto God, That he will be pleased
now, after long Affliction of his dear People and Children, to look in mercy
both upon them and us; and in particular for the Safety of the King of Denmark,
and that Army which is left him, That God would bless and prosper him against
his and our Enemies. Thus far Archbishop Laud.

Let those who now with as much Ignorance as Confidence, upbraid Men with
Renouncing the Doctrins and Principles of the Church of England, read and
consider these Passages; and if any thing will make them more wise and humble,
this will. Did Archbishop Laud go off from the Church of England, or King
Charles the First, who both suffered for the sake of it? But some Men have
never thoroughly penetrated into the Doctrins and Principles of our Church, but
look only on some Principles in opposition to the late Times of Rebellion, and
think there is nothing farther to be looked after. Whereas the Consideration is
very different as to our Duties, with respect to our own Princes, and those of
a more general Concernment as to the state of Religion and Government in the
World. But from hence it is plain, that it was then thought not only Lawful,
but a Duty, to prevent the dangerous growth of such a Monarchy, which designs
to suppress Religion and Civil Liberties; and not only to give Assistance to
those who join in the same Design, but to pray God to bless and prosper it. And
accordingly a Form of Prayer was then Appointed for those Dangerous Times.

Not long after this a Breach with France happened, and the King Published a
Declaration of the ground of the War; wherein it is laid down as the first
Ground, That the House of Austria Conspiring the Ruin of all those of the
Reformed Religion (as plainly appeared in the Affairs of Germany) had such an
Influence on the Councils of France, as to make them break Promise in such a
manner, as hazarded the loss of the whole Party in Germany. The next is, "That
he had broke his Articles with his Protestant Subjects, when he had been a
Mediator of Peace between them, and they had done nothing to violate them. So
that a Design to suppress the Protestant Religion, in a Neighbor Country, was
looked on as a just Cause of War, when he was concerned to preserve it. And
then another Form of Prayer was Appointed to be used suitable to that Occasion;
which plainly evidence, That such a Design was no ways thought repugnant to the
Doctrins and Principles of the Church of England.

But since the French Conduct seems to be now admired by this sort of Men, I
shall bring some remarkable Instances from them.

It is Notorious to the World what Powerful Assistance the French gave to the
Confederate Princes of Germany, against the Emperor, their Lawful Prince, and
what Defense they made for this. They Published an Account to the World of the
Reasons of it, and the Chief was this; Motifs de la France pour la guerre d'
Allemagne, p. 94, 95, 117.
viz. That they had Reason to suspect, that from Charles the Fifth's Time the
difference of Religions had been secretly supported by the Emperors, in order
to their making themselves Absolute; and that the Changing the Form of
Government in the Empire, was sufficient for a Neighbor Prince to interpose by
force of Arms.

In the Revolt of Catalonia from the King of Spain, their Lawful Prince, the
French King accepted of the Sovereignty over them, being offered him by the
States of that Country, and caused Discourses to be written in Justification of
their Transferring their Allegiance: And yet their Complaint was nothing but
the Severity of the Spanish Government, and a desire of some greater Liberties
than they enjoyed under it. Why then should it be now thought an Unjust thing,
for a Sovereign Prince (so nearly related to the Crown of England) to espouse
the Cause of our Religions and Civil Interests, when the Design was so apparent
for the Suppressing them? If that Opportunity had been lost, they might before
this time have been past all reasonable hopes of Recovery.

II. But suppose this were allowed; yet here is another Difficulty arises,
concerning the transferring Allegiance from a Lawful Prince, to him that met
with unexpected Success in his Design.

And here I shall endeavor to make it plain, That this is not against the
Doctrins and Principles of the Church of England. If we allow the Church of
England, to have declared its Sense in the Matter of Government, it can only be
with respect to Subjects. But I think the Measures of our Obedience, are not to
be taken from the Rules of the Church; but from the Laws of the Realm: Because
they are not the same in all Countries where the same Religion is Professed; as
is plain in the Case of France and Poland: The Reason of the different Measures
in these Countries is not from the Church, but from the different Constitution
of the Kingdoms.

And I do not see how the Rules of the Church can alter the Fundamental Laws:
For the Church only enforces the Duty of Obedience on the Consciences of Men;
but it does not prescribe or limit the Bounds of it.

Whether our Monarchy be Absolute, or Limited; or if Limited, whether in its
Exercise of Power, or in the Right of Sovereignty; how far the Limitation gives
a Right of Resistance, in case of the Breach of it; are nice Questions, but not
to be Resolved by the Rules of the Church; but by our Legal Constitution and
the General Reason of Mankind: And therefore in such Cases, where the Right of
War and a Foreign Power are concerned, we are not to judge merely by Municipal
Laws, but we are to proceed by a more General Law, viz. that of Nations, which
takes in the Effects of a just War, which the particular Laws of a Country have
n^ regard to.

But where has the Church of England declared its sense about the Right of
War? The Articles of our Church declare, that the chief Government of all
Estates of this Realm, does appertain to the Civil Magistrate: But they no
where say, that in a just War the Supreme Power cannot be acquired; or that God
does never confer it in an extraordinary method.

The Book of Homilies is very severe against Disobedience and wilful Rebellion;
but it is no where said, that where the Right of Sovereignty is transferred by
a successful War, there is no Allegiance due to those who possess it: On the
contrary it is said in the first Part, That If God for their wickedness, had
given them an Heathen Tyrant to Reign over them, they were by God's Word bound
to obey him, and to pray for him. Can it then be agreeable to the Doctrins and
Principles of our Church, to refuse Allegiance to good Religious Princes, whom
God has made the happy Instruments of preserving our Religion and Liberties?

In the same Part, the Jews are commended for praying for the King of Babylon,
when they were in Captivity, that they might live under his Protection, and do
him Service, and find Favor in his sight. And what is this short of Allegiance
to one, who had nothing but bare Success in War, to plead for his Title to it?
If any Princes of their own Religion had rescued them from that Captivity,
would they have scrupled Allegiance to them, when we see how far the Maccabees
went in the Defense of their Religion and Laws?

In the Second Part, the obedience of the Jewish Nation to Augustus is
commended; and it is evident that he had no Authority over them, but by the
Right of War. And our Blessed Savior's example is mentioned, who being brought
before the Roman President, acknowledged his Power and Authority, to be given
him from God. And how was this Authority conveyed to him, but by the success of
War?

So that we can find nothing, in the certain established Doctrine and Principles
of our Church, which is repugnant to our Allegiance to the present Government.
I might easily produce considerable Testimonies, of some of the greatest
Divines of our Church, which assert, that Soverignty may be transferred by a
just War; but I leave that to others, and proceed.

Mr Ashton says, That we were born liege Subjects to another; that we have
solemnly professed our Allegiance, and often confirmed it with Oaths. I know no
body denies it. But is this all? Is our Allegiance so inseparable from the
Person we have once sworn to, that no Case whatsoever, can alter it? Not the
Case of plain voluntary Dereliction? Not the Case of putting the Kingdom under
a Foreign Power? Not the seeking the utter Ruin and Destruction of the People?
Is Allegiance inseparable in these Cases, because we were Born Subjects and did
swear Allegiance? If not, then it is not always so, notwithstanding the Oaths.
For these and several others are allowed, by such who have written the most
warmly against the republican Principles. But we need not run to any difficult
Cases: Ours is only the case of a just War; which is allowed by all sorts of
Casuists, who do agree, that Allegiance is due to the Party that prevails in
it; and if it be due to one, it cannot be due to another, at the same time,
although he be living and do not discharge Persons from their Oaths; for the
obligation of Oaths, depends on the nature and Reason of things, and not upon
the Pleasure of those to whom they are made. But where there is a Right to
govern, there must be a Duty of Allegiance: And that Success in a just War,
does give such a Right, I could produce so many Testimonies, of all kinds of
Writers, as would make the Reading of them as tedious, as of those in the
History of Passive Obedience. Nay, some go so far, as to assert a Right of
Sovereignty to be acquired by success, even in an Unjust War: But we need none
of these Testimonies.

But does not all this resolve this whole Controversy into a Right of Conquest,
which is not so much as pretended in our present Case?

I Answer, That we must distinguish between a Right to the Government, and the
Manner of Assuming it. The Right was founded on the Just Causes of the War, and
the success in it: But the assuming of it was not by any ways of force or
violence, but by a Free Consent of the People, who by a voluntary Recognition,
and their Majesty's acceptance of the Government, as it is settled by our Laws,
take away any pretense to a Conquest over the People, or a Government by Force.

Thus I have endeavored to set this matter in as clear a light, and in as
little a compass as I could: I now return to Mr. Ashton's Speech.

Next to his Obligation on the Point of Religion, he mentions that of Gratitude
to the King his Master, whom he had served 16 years, -- But this, he adds, is a
thing not much esteemed at this time. As little as it is esteemed, I know no
body would have blamed his Gratitude, if it had not carried him beyond the
bounds of his Duty. But it is strange, he should be so much for Gratitude, and
yet should allow none for so great a Deliverance. What is 16 years service to
the Preservation of a Nation, from the imminent danger of Popery and Arbitrary
Power? Such men look but a very little way, who talk at this rate: And can they
imagine a French Power, under our Circumstances, could secure any thing to us,
but Ruin?

As to his Master's usage, which he says, after the Prince of Orange's
Arrival, was very hard, severe; and, if he may say it, unjust. I would desire
his Friends to consider a little better, and to think, if any such thing as
Severity had been intended, how easy it had been to have Executed it, and to
have prevented his going away; and consequently, a great deal of the charge of
the War, he complains of immediately after. Let them name any one Person in
such Circumstances, who was allowed so great freedom as he had, of disposing of
himself: But this is very far for Mr. Ashton's occasion of Suffering.

Well, But all the new Methods of Settling, have hitherto, he says, made the
Nation more miserable, poor, and exposed to Foreign Enemies. It is possible
such may believe, that the Nation would be less miserable and poor under the
French Power, than it is now. But no man who observes the vast designs of
France, and the incredible industry of the French Monarch, to enlarge his own
Power and Dominions, can think (if he thinks twice) that ever he should
undertake so great a Work, out of kindness to any but himself; much less, out
of perfect good will to the English Nation. Has he given so much evidence to
the World of his Sincerity in his Promises, when the keeping of them has been
prejudicial to his Interest? Suppose he should compass his end upon us, and
under so fair a Color, make Provinces of these Kingdoms; what possible remedy
would there be for this, then indeed, poor and miserable Nation? What comfort
will it then be to say, they did not think he would have broken his word so
with them? In the mean time, Is it not great Wisdom and Policy, to venture our
Religion, and all our Liberties on the sincerity and kindness of France? But if
there be any present hardship, it is no more than a necessary War involves our
Neighbors in as well as our selves; and that in a common Cause, for preserving
the Liberty of Europe, against the growing Power of France, as it did formerly
of Spain.

But there is another Insinuation of a higher nature, viz. that the Religion we
pretend to be so fond of preserving, is now much more than ever, likely to be
destroyed. What is the meaning of this? What! More in danger than when Penal
Laws and Tests were taking away, in order to the taking away our Religion after
them? When the design was as plain, and open as a thing of that nature could
be, in such a Nation? When some of the Factors themselves complained, they made
too much haste, and were too eager and forward, to accomplish it. And although
nothing was then pretended, but the settling Liberty of Conscience upon a new
Magna Charta, yet all wise Men saw through these pretenses, and that nothing
was really designed but Popery; which the Jesuits did not conceal in their
Letters to each other: One of the which happened to be intercepted; and the thing
it self, is now fully owned in the Kings own Letter to the Pope, printed at the
end of the late Trials. So that there must be a design, either to deceive the
Pope, or the Nation; and which is the more probable, let any man of sense judge.

But where lies the danger of our Religion now? Have we not the same Laws, the
same Protection, the same Encouragement, which we ever had, at any time since
the Reformation? If our Religion be now in danger, it is by such men who would
bring in the French Power to establish it; however it be disguised under
another Pretext.

After this follows a Charge of no less than Perjury and Rebellion, upon his
Fellow Subjects; whom, he advises to return to their Allegiance, before the
Judgments of God overtake them, for their Perjury and Rebellion. This is a
heavy Charge indeed, upon the Body of the Nation, which has taken the Oaths of
Allegiance to their Majesty's: But if it be true, it is accusing the greatest
part of mankind of these Sins, who have happened to live in the time of any great
Revolutions, or changes of Government. Was the Nation Forsworn, in the times of
William the Conqueror, and his two Sons, and his Nephew? Was it Forsworn all
the time of King John, and the several Reigns of the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th
Henry's? One would think it better became a dying man to judge more charitably
of his Fellow Subjects. Had he never heard of the Law of England, requiring
Allegiance to the King, on account of the Possession of the Crown; and that our
most eminent Lawyers, in peaceable and quiet Times, have been of that Opinion?
Methinks at least, that should make modest men, not so peremptory in such a
Charge; for it is to make, such an Oath unlawful, which the Law makes not only
lawful, but a Duty. And when the greatest Lawyers this Nation has had thought
this a part of our Law; shall such who confess themselves unskilful in the Law,
charge the Nation with Perjury, for taking an Oath, which the Law requires?

But if our Law did not require it, there is such a general consent in mankind
about it, that it seems to me, to be a Law of Nations, That an Oath of Fidelity
should follow Possession; because otherwise, there would be infinite snares to
the Consciences of all such who are required to obey, but are not bound to
enquire into the Rights of War.

Is it Perjury and Rebellion in the new French Conquests, for the Inhabitants
to take Oaths of Fidelity to the French King? If not, how comes it to be so
here? Is there not the same Right of War here as abroad?

Was it Perjury and Rebellion in the Subjects of the King of Spain in Portugal,
to take a new Oath of Allegiance to the Duke of Braganza, when he was declared
King? And yet they were all sworn before, not only to the King of Spain, but to
his Heirs: And even the Duke himself, had not only taken this Oath; but the
Spaniard particularly charged him with Perjury, and great Ingratitude: Yet the
obligation to his Countries good* was then thought to overrule that Personal
Obligation to the King of Spain.

But if they were all guilty of Perjury and Rebellion; how came the other
Princes of Europe so frankly and readily to own his Government; and the French,
as much and as early as any, sending Assistance by Sea and Land to support it?
But in this Revolution of Portugal, the best Title was the Success of War,
sounded on a remote Title to the Crown, when the King of Spain had enjoyed the
Possession of that Crown to the Third Generation.

But it may be said, That the Practices of other People are to be no Rule ^o
us; and that we are not to be guided by bad Precedents abroad, but by the
Principles and Doctrins of our own Church. This were to the purpose, if our
Church had any where declared, Taking such an Oath to be Perjury. But where is
that done? I confess, I can find no such thing: And if Mr Ashton (or his
Friends) had made such a Discovery, they ought to have told the World of it.
But if there be no such Declaration to be met with, then we are left to the*
General Rules of Conscience, and the Common Reason of Mankind; according to
which, I see no ground for this heavy Charge of Perjury and Rebellion in our
present Case.

But although Mr. Ashton be so abundantly satisfied in the Design he mentions,
that if he had ten thousand Lives, he would sacrifice them all in so good and
necessary a Work; yet the Remainder of his Speech is spent in clearing his
Innocence as to the Fact for which he was Condemned. If it was so Meritorious
an Act to Die in such a Cause, a Man might have been tempted to be thought
Guilty.

But before he could think fit to Die in Charity with all the World, he says
several things with a Design to blacken the Judges, the Jury, and the
Government.

The Judges he Accuses of a Severe Charge, and the Hard Measure he received --.

As to the latter, it is a very odd kind of Hard Measure, when he was so very
little sensible of it then, that he said, He did not Complain of the Court, fo.
112. and more fully afterward, fo. 115. I cannot but own I have had a fair
Trial for my Life. Where was the Hard Measure then? Therefore this could not be
Mr. Ashton's Sense, unless he would contradict himself; and those who would
free him from it, must take these Words to have been written by others, who
thought to serve another End by it; and were not so near giving an Account for
such Calumnies.

The severity of the Charge lay in applying the Statute 25 Edw. 3. to his Fact.
Which was a Design to carry into France a Treasonable Scheme and Project of an
Invasion, in order to the deposing the King and Queen. This last the Judges
declared, had been always held to be High Treason. All the Question was then,
Whether such a Fact were an Overt Act of such a Design; and so it was left to
the Jury, whether Mr. Ashton intended to go over with such a Design or not. If
there be any Severity here, it must be in the Law; and that all those who
suffer by a Law, are apt to complain of.

He particularly charge that Judge, and that Iury-man, who did, he says,
signally contrary to common Justice, expose themselves to destroy him. This is
a very hard Charge from a Dying man, and ought to have great Evidence to
reconcile it to common Charity; but he offers none. The Jury were to Act
according to their Consciences; and if they did so, how could they expose
themselves contrary to common Justice to destroy him? But what Evidence does he
give, that they did not so? Some have told him, that he was the first man that
was ever Condemned for High Treason, upon bare suspicion or Presumption, and
that contrary to my Lord Cook and other Eminent Lawyers Opinions.

The main point as to the Jury, was, Whether they were satisfied in their
Consciences, that Mr. Ashton intended to go into France with such a Design? And
where the Fact lies in the Intention. there can be no direct Evidence (without
seeing the Heart;) but it must be gathered from a Concurrence of Circumstances,
strong enough to determine an honest man's Judgment: And such the Jury believed
to be in his Case. My Lord Cooks words are on the Case of Treason That the
Compassing, Intent: or Imagination, tho secret, is to be tried by the Peers,
and to be discovered by Circumstances precedent, concomitant and subsequent,
with all endeavor evermore for the safety of the King.

It is true, he says afterward, Fol. 1^. That conjectural Presumptions, or
Inferences, or strains of Wit, are not sufficient, but there must be good and
manifest Proof; but still this Proof must be such as the thing will bear; for
there can be no direct and plain proof of a secret Intention: Either therefore
no man can be justly Condemned for a secret Intention, manifested by an
Overt Act, or there must be such a Proof allowed, as is sufficient to satisfy
a man's Conscience, although it come not up to plain and direct Evidence, as it
is opposed to the highest degree of Presumption.

But it may be said, that the Presumption lies in judging the Intention from
the Overt Act, but that Overt Act must be manifestly proved.* The Overt Act in
this case was the carrying over Treasonable Papers into France, in order to an
Invasion. The sole Question then was, Whether there was manifest proof as to
these Papers. That the Papers were found about him was manifestly proved; and
he owns Fol. 110. that they were unfortunately found upon him; but he says
that he knew not the Importance of them. It was manifestly proved, that he had
an extraordinary Concernment to have these Papers thrown Over*board; which he
says was perfectly out of Friend ship, and whether that was a true Answer, was
left to the Consciences of the Jury, who were to judge of this by all the
Circumstances antecedent, concomitant and subsequent, by which they did
conclude him Guilty. And I cannot see how they went against Common Justice
therein; especially since Mr. Ashton well knew* that one of the most material
Papers taken, was of his own Hand writing; not the first Draught, but the Copy
which was showed him in the Court; and when it was so, he desired, Fol. 106.
that the Original may be read, and not the Copy; and he had good reason for it:
For as far as I can judge, upon perusal of both, it is the very same Hand in
which this Speech was written. But what said Mr. Ashton to the Jury, to clear
this matter? He faith, Fol. 129. That his hand was not proved to any of the
Papers, and therefore there was nothing but supposition or suspicion against
him. It is true, there was no direct and plain proof of the Hand, as there was
in the case of my Lord Preston; (and it is a wonder it was omitted, for that
would have been plain proof of his knowing what was in those Papers:) However,
all the other Circumstances put together, were a sufficient proof of his
Privity to the Contents of them.

And I wonder how Mr. Ashton, could so confidently in his Paper declare himself
Innocent, as to the matter for which he was Sentenced to Die, when he knew the
Paper was of his own Hand writing, and plain proof has been since made of his
own delivery of it to a third Person. Can a man be Innocent and Guilty of the
same thing?

The only thing to be taken notice of, which remains, is, a Reflection on the
Government for his Close Imprisonment, and the hasty and violent Proceedings
against him. If there were any thing more than usual in such cases, as to his
Imprisonment, he ought to have mentioned the particulars; for otherwise it is
to Arraign the Common Justice of the Nation. As to the hasty and violent
Proceedings of his Trial; it was then told him, That the greatest Advantage he
had, was in putting off his Trial: For by that he knew how to lay the Papers on
my Lord Preston; which yet could not clear him* as to those Papers which were
not written with my Lord's Hand, nor related any ways to him; but one of them
was Written with his own Hand.

Upon the whole Matter, I cannot see how he has either Proved his Innocence,
or that he acted according to the Principles and Doctrins of the Church of
England.

As to his Concluding Prayer, I cannot but observe* That in the Beginning of
the Speech the Reason he gives why he would not make any to the People, was,
because he would employ his last Minutes in Devotion and holy Communion with
God: Which I hope he did. But those who contrived the Speech, were to make a
Prayer for him too; but not a Prayer of Devotion, but rather of Faction and
Sedition: For it has no other meaning, than that God would overturn this
Present Government, and restore the Former, in order to the Flourishing of the
Church of England; notwithstanding the Wounds she has received from her
Prevaricating Sons.

I cannot imagine how a Man could join these things together in a Prayer,
unless he could think all those are Prevaricating Sons, who are against Popery.
For I know no Bottom large enough for Popery, and the Church of England, to
stand upon together.

But this I do not think of Mr. Ashton, and therefore Conclude, as I began,
That this seems rather the Speech of a Party, than of Mr. Ashton; who made use
of his Name and Hand, to convey into the Minds of the People, the most
malicious Insinuations against this Present Government, and all who live in
Obedience to it.

A Catalogue of some Books, lately Printed for R. Clavell.
FORMS of Private Devotion for every Day in the Week, in a Method agreeable to
the Liturgy; with Occasional Prayers, and an Office for the Holy Communion, and
for the Time of Sickness. Humbly recommended to all the Pious and Devout
Members of the Church of England.

A Sermon Preached before the Queen at White Hall, February the Fifteenth,
1690/1. By Henry Dove, D. D. Chaplain to Their Majesty's.

Roman Forgeries in the Councils, during the first Four Centuries, together
with an Appendix, concerning the Forgeries and Errors in the Annals of
Baronius. By Thomas Comber, D. D. Precentor of York.

A Scholastical History of the primitive and general Use of Liturgies in the
Christian Church; together with an Answer to Mr* David Clarkson's late
Discourse concerning Liturgies; in Two Parts, in Octavo. By the same Hand.

Seasonable Reflections on a late Pamphlet, Entitled, A History of Passive
Obedience since the Reformation; wherein the true Notion of Passive Obedience
is settled and secured from the Malicious Interpretations of ill-designing Men.

The Golden Rule, or the Royal Law of Equity explained: By I. Goodman, D. D.

The Frauds of the Romish Priests and Monks set forth in Eight LETTERS; lately
written by a Gentleman in his Journey into Italy.

A late Letter concerning the Proceedings in Scotland, and Sufferings of the
Episcopal Clergy there; in Quarto, price 6 d.

Political Arithmetic, or a Discourse concerning the Extent and Value of
Lands, People, Buildings; Husbandry, Manufacture, Commerce, Fishery, Artizans,
Seamen, Soldiers; Public Revenues, Interest, Taxes, Superlucration,
Registries, Banks; Valuation of Men, Increasing of Seamen, of Militia's,
Harbors, Situation, Shipping, Power at Sea, etc. As the same relates to every
Country in general; but more particularly to the Territories of His Majesty of
Great Britain, and his Neighbors of Holland, Zealand, and France. By Sir
William Petty, late Fellow of the Royal Society.

Their present Majesty's Government proved to be thoroughly settled, and that we
may submit to it, without asserting the Principles of Mr. Hobbs; showing also,
That Allegiance was not due to the Usurpers, after the late Civil War;
occasioned by some late Pamphlets against the Reverend Dr. Sherlock.

FINIS.

