The Bishop of Gloucester's SERMON Preached before the SOCIETIES FOR
Reformation of Manners. June 26. 1699.

A SERMON Preached at the Church of St. MARY le Bow, TO THE SOCIETIES FOR
Reformation of Manners. June 26. 1699.

By EDWARD Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

LONDON: Printed for B. Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1699.

Ephesians. vi. 7, 8. With good Will doing Service, as to the LORD, and not unto
Men: Knowing that whatsoever good thing any man does, the same shall he receive
of the Lord; whether he be Bond or Free.
THE Design of these Quarterly Sermons being to Encourage those Worthy Persons,
who are Entered into Societies for Reformation of Manners, to persevere and
abound more and more, in the Extraordinary good Work they are Engaged in; as
also to Excite others, in their respective Stations, to follow their Example:
And it being moreover very Seasonable, to Discourse at this time of the
Principle, by which we ought to be acted in all our Services; and especially in
a Service of this high Nature, I thought I could not make Choice of a more
proper Subject for this Occasion, than the Words now read.

I. We meet with in them a great Duty: With good will doing Service; as to the
Lord, and not unto Men.

II. A most Persuasive Motive thereto: Knowing that whatsoever good thing any
Man does, the same shall he receive of the Lord, etc.

I. As to the Duty. We find an Injunction of the same, Col. 3. 23. Whatsoever
you do, do it heartily; as to the Lord, and not unto Men.

With good Will, (...), as it is in the foregoing words, from the Soul, i. e.
most freely and cheerfully.

Doing Service, or any Service you do, whether Sacred or Civil. Whatsoever you
do, as it is in the parallel Text. And these Words do immediately relate to
Services of a mere Civil Nature, because they are in both places directed to
Servants of Men, for their Instruction in reference to their mean Services
particularly. But if even these are to be done as to the Lord, much more should
far higher Services; and most of all those which immediately relate to Almighty
God.

As to the Lord, and not unto Men; or, not as to Men. i. e. Having a greater
Regard to the Lord than to Men. This is an Hebreism, which expresses what is
not to be done, but in a certain limited Sense, as if it were not to be done at
all: Of which Forms of Speech there are in Scripture abundance of Instances. I
will name but one, viz. those Words of our Savior, Labor not for the Meat
which perishes, but for that Meat which endures to Eternal Life.

And not unto Men, i. e. for the pleasing of them, and obtaining from them a
Reward for your Service.

We will, in discoursing on these Words, show

I. What is Employed in thus doing our Services.

II. Under what Obligations we are thus to do them.

I shall defer speaking to the Motive, to the Application.

I. What is Employed in this doing our Services as to the Lord, etc.

These three things are herein employed, Having a respect to God's Command: And
to his Glory: And to both Chiefly and Principally.

1. Having in our Services a Respect to God's Command. To His Command either
particularly or in general, expressly or by evident Consequence, requiring them.
And therefore in the two Verses before the Text, Servants are enjoined to
perform their Services in Singleness, or Simplicity and Sincerity, of Heart, as
unto Christ. Not with Eye service as Men Pleasers, but as the Servants of
Christ, doing the Will of God from the Heart. Which is expressed in the Verse
before the other Text by fearing God, -- in Singleness of Heart, fearing (or as
fearing) God. Whatsoever Service we are employed in without any Consideration
of the Divine Law, we are not therein obedient to God: Obedience to Him being
not a mere doing what He requires, but doing it because He requires it; under
the Notion of its being required by Him.

2. Herein is employed doing our Services, with Respect also to the Glory of
God. To have Respect to God's Command, and to His Glory, are different things;
so different, that the one may be without the other. As when a Man obeys God
from a slavish Dread of Him, as the poor Americans worship the Devil. Or when
Obedience to the Divine Majesty proceeds from no higher a Motive, than hopes to
obtain thereby temporal Blessings, or a sensual Happiness in the other World;
such a Sort of Heaven as is the Turkish Paradise. But that our Services ought
to have Regard to God's Glory, as well as to His Command, must necessarily be
employed in the Text, in that our Apostle expresses it in that Injunction of
his, Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the Glory of
God. Or, make all your Actions subservient, as far as they are capable of being
so, to the Honoring of God.

The Glory of God, which we so often read of in the H. Scriptures, is the
displaying of some or other of His Glorious Perfections; or the making
Reasonable Beings to feel or observe them in their Effects. And We are said to
Glorify Him, when we are His Instruments herein; and when his Moral
Perfections do shine in our selves; which are those alone wherein we are
enabled to imitate Him, and which are called His Image. These are His Loving
Kindness, Righteousness and Holiness; and may be all comprised in this one Word
Goodness. To do good consequently from the Love of Goodness, is an Instance of
designing God's Glory in the good we do; as also to do good with a Design to be
like to God, and by this means to be qualified for the Enjoyment of Him.

God glorifieth Himself by Exerting His Goodness, or His Power and Wisdom in
doing good, from the Delight he takes therein. I am the Lord, which Exercises
Loving Kindness, Judgment and Righteousness in the Earth; for, or because, in
these things I delight, says the Lord. Jer. 9. 24. Who is a God like unto
Thee, that pardon^th Iniquity, and passes by the Transgression of the Remnant
of His Heritage! He retains not His Anger for ever, because He Delights in
Mercy, Mic. 7. 18. Thou art good, says the Psalmist, and do good; or,
therefore thou do good. because Thou art good; and what is God's being good,
but His delighting in Goodness? Loving Kindness and Righteousness are too
Excellent things, to be Exercised as a mere means to a farther End; for these
are the very best things (as Tully discourses admirably in his Book de Natura
Deorum) and as they are in God they are the Divine Nature it self, not as
qualities in their Subject. It may be said, that the same may be affirmed of
the Divine Power and Wisdom: That Is certain, but these Perfections do concur to
the Constituting of the Divine Nature, as they are necessarily determined to
the Serving of the Ends of Loving kindness and Righteousness; as it is easy to
demonstrate. And in saying, that God Glorifieth Himself in Exerting His
Perfections in doing good, from the Delight he takes therein, I say also, that
We do glorify Him in herein resembling Him.

So that, in short, to have Respect to God's Glory in our Services, is the same
thing with being acted from a Principle of Love to God and Goodness. Of Love to
God, not considered merely as good to us or ours, but chiefly as infinitely
good in Himself, and as unspeakable good to His whole Creation. And he who
loves Goodness as such, with what is employed therein, will so as we now said
love God; as he who so loves God, will necessarily love Goodness as Goodness.

3. To have Regard to the Command and the Glory of God, chiefly and
principally, must needs also be employed in doing Service as to the Lord. This
rather is expressed, in that it is said as to the Lord and not unto Men, or
more to the Lord than to Men. But indeed it is too little a thing to say, that
in all our Services we are obliged to a merely greater Regard to God than to
Men; or than to the Serving of any selfish worldly Interest; for nothing is
more undoubted (as will be shown presently) than that the Serving and
Glorifying of God must be so the Principal, as to be the Ultimate End of all
our Services: Such an End, as that whatsoever other Ends we propose to our
selves in them, should be intended to be subservient thereunto; should be
designed as Means to the promoting thereof. For instance, our Blessed Savior
says, Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works;
or let the immediate End of your doing good Works publicly be, that Men may
take Notice of them: But in what follows, he says, that their being taken
Notice of should be wholly designed as means to the Glorifying of God, and
glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Not to the having the Praise of Men,
but to glorify God, by doing Credit to your Religion, and so bringing the
Observers of your good Works, to the embracing thereof, and to the following of
your Example; whereby they will bring Glory to God too.

Nay, the Praise of Men, or a good Name, may very lawfully be designed in doing
good Works; but then it is a bad End, a very bad one, when our Motive thereto
is the gratifying of fond Imagination, and an Ambitious Humor (for which our
Savior so condemned the Pharisees) and not from a Desire to be enabled to do
the more good in the World, by the means of our good Name, or the more to
Glorify God. I proceed to show,

II. Under what Obligations we are thus to perform our Services as to the Lord.
I shall speak to three, and they are the greatest imaginable.

1. We are obliged hereunto, in that all we have, or are, is from God. All the
Faculties, Abilities and Powers, both bodily and spiritual, whereby we are
fitted for any Service; all the Means, Opportunities and Advatages we have for
the doing of good; nay, our very Willingness to improve them for that purpose:
These are all from God. What a devout Acknowledgment does K. David make of
this! 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. But who am I, and what is my People, that we should be
able to offer so willingly after this sort? For all things come of Thee, and of
Thine own have we given Thee. And once more, All the good Success of our
Endeavors is from God too. O Lord (says the Prophet) I know that the way of
Man, is not in himself; it is not in Man that walks to direct his Steps. It
is not in Man, either to do what is most eligible, for the bringing about this
or that good Design; nor, when he is directed to the best and fittest Means, to
bring his Affairs to a good Issue. Paul can but Plant, Apollos but Water; it is
God alone that gives the Increase.

Now, who is not able, at first fight, to perceive the mighty Force of the
Obligation which arises from hence, to do all his Services as to the Lord? Are
we our Selves, all our Powers, all our Opportunities for the Doing of them,
from God? Are we not sufficient of our selves, so much as to think any thing as
of our selves (as the Apostle speaks) but our Sufficiency is of God? Is our
very Willingnefs to endeavor owing to the Grace (though not the irresistible
Grace) of God; and is all our Success from his Blessing; and can any thing then
be more evident, than that we are bound to have principally, and ultimately, an
Eye to Him in them?

There is no First Principle more apparent, than that the Glory of Him who is
our First Cause, and who is All in All to us, ought to be our last End. Of Him
and through Him, and to Him are all things: To whom be Glory for ever and ever,
Amen. Romans 11. ult. Or, therefore to Him be given Glory by the whole Universe
for ever and ever. There is so inseparable a Connection between that Premise and
this Inference, that they can not be parted by the Divine Power it self.
Especially since,

2. We are farther obliged hereunto, in that God made us and all things
belonging to us, for the glorifying of Himself; the exerting and displaying of
His glorious Perfections. This Consideration does very much heighten our
Obligation to do all our Services as to the Lord. Had He only made us, and
placed us in the Circumstances in which we are; and then left it free to us
(which it is impossible he should) whether we would serve Him, or not serve Him,
with our Souls and Bodies, His own Gifts and Blessings, we should
notwithstanding be eternally Obliged hereto by the Law of Gratitude: But when
He has given us our Being, and all we enjoy, that we may glorify Him, we
contradict the Design of our Great Creator and Benefactor in making us what we
are, and doing as He has done for us. I need not tell those who are acquainted
with the Divine Oracles, that there had been no such Creatures as our selves,
but for this End. But were this never revealed, we are assured of nothing more
from natural Light, than that it must necessarily be so. For He who is infinite
Wisdom and Goodness, can not but have the best of Designs in all His Actings;
but what Design can be Comparable to this, of making His Creatures to observe
and teel, how Glorious He is in His Power, Wisdom and Goodness; and those of
them to be His Instruments in setting forth the Glory of these, which he has
made capable of being so?

If it be Objected, that the Brutes and inanimate Creatures are made to
Glorify God, as well as Men and Angels; and therefore Designing His Glory is
not necessarily employed in Glorifying Him: I answer, that God aims at His own
Glory, in a far higher and more excellent Manner, in rational Agents, than in
Creatures void of Reason. That is, He has made those so to Glorify Him, as to
Intend and Design the Glorifying of Him. And farther, we can not conceive, how
Brutes, and insensible Creatures, can be said otherways to Glorify their
Maker, than as they give occasion to Reasonable ones so to do. Origin, indeed,
was of Opinion, that because the Sun, Moon and Stars are called upon by the
Psalmist to praise the Lord, they are endued with Reason as well as our selves:
But he might for the self-same reason as well have asserted, that Cattle, and
Fowls, and all creeping things; nay, Mountains and Hills, Fire and Hail, Snow
and Vapors, and all God's Works, are reasonable Creatures too; these also, and
that in the same Psalm, being called upon to praise Him. But Plato was, in this
matter, a better Divine than that holy Father; for having styled the World
God's Temple, wherein all His Creatures do join together in the Worshipping of
Him, he calls Mankind His Priests, by whom the Worship of the Universe is
Performed.

3. Our Obligation to the Duty in the Text, is also founded upon our own
Interest; our infinitely greatest Interest. And therefore, as it appears from
the two former Considerations, that it is the most disingenuous and the most
unjust thing, not to make the Glory of God the chief and ultimate End of all
our Services; so this Consideration speaks it to be the most unkind thing to
our selves: Since it is only our good God aims at, in desiring to be Glorified
by us: For none can accrue to himself from any thing without Him, nor the
smallest drop added to His Fountain-Fulness. If there could, He could not be
God; that is, a Being of Absolute, Infinite Perfection.

The Apostate Emperor was much disgusted at the Second Commandment, and would
have had it struck out of the Decalogue (as the Romish Church, for a reason too
well known, has left it out of her daily Offices) because God in that
Commandment expresses so great Jealousy for His own Honor; which he would
have to be very unworthy of the Divine Majesty: But St. Cyril well answered
him, That it is by no means so, Because Man's greatest Happiness consists in
the due Apprehension of God, and giving Glory to Him.

God, I say, is not more Glorious in Himself, by means of the Glory His
Creatures give Him, but all the Gain thereof is their own; they by this means
becoming like to Him, and therefore qualified for everlasting Communion with
Him.

I will farther observe to you suitably to the two former Considerations, That
God Almighty must needs also expect our designing His Glory in all our
Services, as it is a necessary Act of Righteousness, it being (as has been
showed) most highly reasonable, sit and just, that we should have such a Sense
of His infinite Goodness, as thus to do, He cannot but look for it for this
reason from us, and oblige us thereto. So that, as God exercises Goodness and
Righteousness because He delights therein, so will He have us to exercise the
same, because He delights in our so doing. Not (as we said) in regard of any
Advantage that He can reap thereby, but because the Exercise of Goodness and
Righteousness wheresoever it is, is as such most highly pleasing to Him; and
the contrary thereto, as abhorrent to His Holy Nature.

And now, to make Application of what has been discoursed, To You, my
Brethren, who are Members of of our Societies for Reformation of Manners: The
Service in which you have engaged your selves, is incomparably the most Noble,
the most highly Praiseworthy, that it could be possible for you to be employed
in. So it is, as the most Public and General Good is the Design of it; not the
Good of some particular Persons, or Bodies of Men, or only of this Great City,
but of our whole Nation: In several Parts of which a good Progress is made
therein. Nor is this Design confined within our own Country, but it has taken
in that of Ireland too; where (thanks be to God) it has had as good Success,
as could reasonably have so soon been hoped fer. And to what People may not the
Influence thereof reach, sooner or later, according as it prospers where it is
undertaken? And the setting it on foot hitherto is, under God, wholly owing in
every Place to your worthy Example, Gentlemen, and to the Directions they have
received from Some of you.

And as this is a Service of the most Public Nature, so is it of the greatest
Concernment imaginable to the Public; as highly conducing to both the Temporal
and Spiritual Interest thereof. He knows not what this Phrase Spiritual
Interest signifies, who can question, whether a Reformation of Manners be
absolutely necessary thereunto. And he must be sunk below Paganism, who can
doubt of its being necessary also to the Temporal Welfare, both of particular
Persons, and of Nations as Nations. Even that Atheist Epicurus (as Tully has
demonstrated him to have been, as much better Thoughts as many since have had
of him) as he forbad Adultery to his Disciples, in regard of the great
Mischiefs which he saw attended that Vice; so he condemned the indulging of any
unreasonable and vicious Appetite, as inconsistent with all Tranquillity of
Mind, and Self-Enjoyment. And as to Nations, the wise King Solomon has
observed, that Righteousness exalts a Nation, but Sin is a Reproach to any
People. And it is easy to show, that there is no one Maxim wherein the wisest of
Pagans are more agreed. That excellent Tully has this very remarkable Saying,
Omnia Prospera eveniunt colentibus Deos, sed Adversa spernentibus. All things
happen well to those People, who have a Care of Religion; but as ill to the
Contemners thereof. And those who are acquainted with Divine Revelation, and
such as have only Natural Light, together with Experience and Observation, for
their Instruction, are very unanimous in declaring the Toleration of Vice to be
the most pernicious thing to Bodies Politic, both in regard of its Natural
Consequents, and the Provocation it gives to the Divine Majesty severely to
visit for it. Surely therefore those among our selves, who have no Sense of the
fatal Consequence of a general Corruption of Manners, upon both those Accounts,
must either have little more of Men than the Figure and Shape; or (which is
infinitely worse) be given over to a Reprobate Mind.

Now, notwithstanding God Almighty has constituted one Order of Men, whose
whole Business it is, to turn Sinners (with the Assistance of His Grace) to
Righteousness; and to Advance Piety and Virtue in the World, by inlightning Men
in the Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion; by instructing them in the
Divine Laws, and exciting them to the Observance of them, by the Glorious
Promises, and Terrible Threats annexed to them; and by the Exercise of
Spiritual Discipline: Yet such is the Depravation of Humane Nature, that He saw
it moreover necessary, to ordain Civil Magistrates for the Punishment of
Evildoers, (as St. Peter speaks) and for the Praise, or Encouragement, of
those that do well. For the Punishment of Evildoers, by enforcing their
Creators Laws, with Laws of their own Enacting, with the Sanction of Corporal
and Pecuniary Penalties; and the due inflicting of them on those who are too
much hardened in their wicked Practices, to be reformed by the Menaces of
Punishment in another Life; and by Spiritual Methods.

And it being the Business of the foresaid Societies, to do their utmost to
Awaken the good Laws of our Land against Profaneness and Immorality, which
have for the most part a long time lain a sleep, and served to little better
purpose, than the reproaching of those (too generally speaking) who have been
entrusted with the Execution of them: What more worthy Enterprise, or of
greater, or so great Importance, could enter into the hearts os you, my Worthy
Brethren, who have entered into these Societies, to undertake! And the method
you have pitched upon for the carrying on of this Blessed Work, is so
excellently well contrived, that it has succeeded, by the Blessing of God, to
Admiration, in and about this City. This has been a great Age for Projects;
but this of Yours (though I undervalue it in so calling it) does infinitely
excel them all; as very beneficial as some of them are found to be.

It must be Acknowledged, that no Man is the more Religious for abstaining from
the Practice of any Vice, merely for fear of temporal Penalties: Yet those on
whom this fear works an outward Reformation, are in a much more hopeful way to
a through Conversion from Religious Motives, than the more hardy Sinners.
Besides, by the vigorous Execution of the Laws, wicked wretches are restrained
from doing open dishonor to Almighty God; that dishonor to his Authority,
which may well be called National, when Connived at, and as such deservedly
punished: And, by this means they are forced to give over offending
Scandalously, and debauching others by their infectious Example, and insnaring
Practices. Whereupon will necessarily follow, that our Youth for the future,
will be nothing so liable to be corrupted; and a happy stop will be put to that
propagation of Vice, which for so many Years has been greatly increasing.

And as nothing is more evident, than that this your Undertaking is the most
excellent one considered in it self; so we ought not in the least to doubt but
that it is likewise so, with respect to the Principle by which you are acted.
For what Motive can you have thereto, besides the Love of God and Goodness, and
an earnest desire to promote both the Temporal and Eternal Welfare of your
Fellow Citizens and Countrymen; together with the hope of being qualified
thereby for greater degrees of that Happiness which our Blessed Lord has
promised to his faithful Servants, and chiefly confisteth in Likeness to GOD,
and the Eternal Enjoyment of him? Which hope must as much proceed from Love to
God, as to your selves.

Can you design any Secular Advantage, by being thus employed? Expense it
brings upon you; but can it make you a Recompense for it, and for all your
pains, by bringing in what the World calls Profit? I must be an idle Man, if I
seriously asked you these Questions. There is a Reward from Men, which you
could not but expect, when you entered into this Service; and you have
accordingly found it: But I verily believe this was no Motive to you. I mean,
the Reward of hard Censures, as a Company of Busybodies, and Medlers in Matters
that don't concern you; though if they concern not you, they can concern no body.
But, indeed, nothing is more evident, than that every Man without Exception, is
obliged to Concern himself in this great Work, suitably to the Circumstances in
which Providence has placed him. And none can accuse those of you who are not
Magistrates, as Seizing upon their Office. The best of it is, you cannot be
Censured, as Exercising your selves in things too high for you (though you do in
great Matters) this your Success demonstrates.

Brow-beatings also from too many, who ought to have given you the greatest
Encouragement, is a Reward which I suppose did not neither come unlookt for;
nor yet that of Vexatious Prosecutions; nor that of running imminent dangers
from Lewd Mobs: Neither these, nor worse things can surprise those, who are
bent upon doing their utmost toward the Overthrowing of the Devils Kingdom;
who express the greatest Emnity to the darling Lusts of his Children, and to
the Ungodly Trades of a great number of them.

And, whether you Expected them or no, you cannot be ignorant what Reflections
upon your proceedings, many Sober People have been too forward to make; and
some who have the Repute (and very justly I doubt not) of truly Religious
People too; through their rash Credulity, and lending too favorable an Ear to
idle Tales; and from jealousies of what Consequence such Combinations may in
time prove to be to our Constitution in Church and State. On which Topic I
never yet heard one wise word; and do persuade my self I never shall. And since
Experience assures us of nothing more, than that no great Undertaking can be
managed with any considerable Advantage, otherwise than by Societies; and
therefore in all Professions they are found to be necessary: It is very
wonderful to me, that the least danger to either of these Constitutions can be
suspected from such Societies, as are formed wholly for the promoting of the
grand Design of both; as I need not say the Reformation and Regulation of
Manners is. But it will be well for those Regular Persons, who are so forward
to find fault with these Societies, if there be nothing of Envy at the bottom,
arising from their Consciousness of being much out done by them, in Concern for
the Public Weal, in Activity in doing good, and in Zeal for the Honor of
Almighty God. And, mentioning their Zeal, I cannot but observe, that were it
not as Prudent as Pious, their Adversaries would never have been baffled in
Courts of Judicature, as they have been.

And as, my Brethren, you might reasonably have made account of far worse
requitals for your Pains, than any of you have found hitherto, through the
special protection of the Divine Providence, and yet you would run the Venture;
so have I not heard, that the furious Rage which some have met with, for giving
informations against Impious and Profligate People, has in the least
discouraged any of them. And by the way, none but such as are either wicked, or
very silly, can look upon this as a base Employment; as infamous as the Trade
of Informing was against another sort of Men, we know when. For since Crimes
must ever go unpunished, if there be no Informations; and therefore no care can
be taken, either of the Honor of God, or the Honor of the Government, and the
Welfare of the Public, or of the Souls of Obdurate Sinners; this cannot be a
more necessary than Honorable Service.

But to return to what I was now saying, the principle of this your Zeal may
not, without great Uncharitableness, nor apparent Injustice, be called in
question: Since, considering what has been said, you must be the Weakest Men in
the World, if you do not this Service, as to the Lord, and not as to Men:
Considering likewise, how not only Atheism and Deism, speculative Profaneness,
and Contempt of Religion, but also a Gallio like indifferency in such as retain
the Profession of Christianity, have gotten ground among us; and how much the
very form of Godliness is grown out of fashion among such as may not be accused
of being irreligious in their Principles. So that there can be very little
Temptation now, what so ever was heretofore, to the vice of Hipocrisy: It being
become also very Modish, to give jerks at all Zeal as a fanatical,
enthusiastical, and hot-brained thing. As indeed Zeal is, when it is not
according to Knowledge; and the World has had lamenrable Experience, and
particularly our Church and State, of the horrible Mischievousness of such a
Zeal. But this is a Superstitious, it may by no means be called a Religious
Zeal.

But does not St. Paul say, It is good to be always zealously affected in a
good thing? And it is the Best of things, in the Opinion of all but the worst
of Men, in which these Societies are zealously affected. To be inspired with a
Zeal in things of this weighty Importance, which is well Principled and well
Governed, is the most Blessed Thing we can pray for. The more we have of it,
the more shall we be filled with all the Fruits of Righteousness, unto the
Praise and Glory of God. The more like shall we be to our Blessed Savior,
whose Zeal for His Father's Glory, and the Salvation of Men, and their bodily
Welfare too, did put Him upon always going up and down doing good. And I need
not stand to show, that the greatest Blessings that ever have accrued to the
Church of God, by the Ministry of Men, have been the Effects of a warm Zeal:
Nor was ever GOD much glorified, nor the public well served without it; let
our Fleerers at Zeal think what they please. And therefore to be called Zealots
in such a Cause as you, my Brethren, have espoused, is so far from a
Disparagement, that it is a Name to be glorified in.

So that I once more say, Your doing this Service as to the Lord, and not as to
Men, may not be in the least doubted of; and the less may it, for what was now
sadly observed, viz. That the prevailing Humor of the present Age, is such, as
gives as little Temptation as can be, to affect Popularity by Undertakings of
this Nature.

And having reflected upon the deplorable Degeneracy of the Age, I can not
forbear professing to you, That the greatest Hope I have, that God has still
Mercy in store for us, notwithstanding the intolerable Returns we have made to
as mighty Obligations, as he has ever laid upon any People, is, from the
excellent Spirit with which He has of late endued so great a number of good
Christians among us, for the running down of Wickedness, by the most
justifiable Means, in their respective Stations: And from His Majesty's having
given them so great Encouragement, by his late Proclamation, For the more
effectual Suppressing of Immorality and Profaneness; and his recommending this
great Work, again and again, to the special Care of the Houses of Parliament.

And I pray God, they may comply with the King's Desire the next Session; by
preparing for the Royal Assent as effectual a Bill or Bills, against the other
Reigning Vices of the Age, as is the late Act against Profane Swearing and
Cursing. And who were the Contrivers, and chief Promoters of this Act, some
Gentlemen of the chief of these Societies do best know.

But I must not forget to take notice of Another most Pious and Charitable
Design, which has for some time been carrying on with very great Industry, by
these Societies, viz. The Setting up of Free Schools in the great Parishes
within and without this City; for the Teaching of poor Children to Read and
Write, and cast Account, to enable them for honest Callings; and especially for
the imprinting in them the Principles of Christianity; and the forming of them
to true Piety and Goodness.

There are several of these Schools already set up by them; particularly in the
Parishes of Aldgate and Wapping, and St. Margarets Westminster. And an Account
will be shortly published of the Progress of their Endeavors; and their
Methods and Orders for the Securing, and rightly applying what is and shall be
given, for the promoting of so excellent a Design.

And surely it is impossible that any good Christian, should not freely
contribute according to his Ability, to such a Work as this. Nay all such,
certainly, must needs be very glad of the opportunity now given them, of being
engaged in the best of all Charities; and of having such faithful and skilful
Hands at their Service, for the employing and Management of this their Charity.

Now for your Encouragement, my worthy Brethren, to persevere in doing these
incomparable public Services as to the Lord; and the more powerfully to excite
us all thus to do all our Services, of what Nature soever, I shall lay before
you a few Considerations; upon which I want time to enlarge, as I would do.

I. This doing our Services as to the Lord, will make those very pleasant and
delightful, which would otherwise be as grievous and burdensome. You have
heard, that thus to do, is to Act from a principle of Love to GOD and Goodness:
And who knows not, that Love is an Affection most highly Pleasing? And
therefore how much there is of it in any performance, so much of delight there
must needs be. Now, if Love, whatsoever is its Object, carrys pleasure with it;
what Pleasure must necessarily arise from that Love which is placed upon the
Infinitely most Lovely Object, GOD, and that which is the next Lovely,
Goodness; or rather, which is scarcely to be distinguished from Him; and no
otherwise at most, than as Rays from the Sun, or streams from their Fountain.

II. This will greatly Dignifie our Services, and therefore our selves. 'Twill
make all Acts of Justice and Charity, Acts of Piety: 'i will hallow all our
Civil Employments, and make them Sacred; it will make even drugery Divine,
says our devout Poet Mr. Herbert. The meanest Servant of Men, by having
respect to God in his Services, becomes HIS Servant, and a Fellow-Minister with
the Glorious Angels: For, the doing God's will on Earth, as it is done in
Heaven; for which our Blessed Savior has taught us to Pray, consists in
doing it from This Principle; many of the Services of Angels being, for the
Matter of them, such as We are utterly incapable of performing, in This state
at least.

The Angels, considering the Dignity of their Nature, may be said to be more
meanly employed than the meanest of Men; as being Attendants on us poor Worms,
who are mueh more their Inferiors, than the poorest Peasant is the greatest
Peers: But they designing their Great Creators Service, in being serviceable to
us, makes them to be employed Honorably, and like themselves.

III. Nothing but this hearty Regard to God in our Services, will secure our
Constancy in well-doing. The discouragements we shall therein find, upon the
failing of our expectations, will sooner or later quire dishearten us, when we
chiefly propose to our selves the poor low ends of Gain or Credit; but
especially, upon our meeting with a quite contrary Reward to what we hoped for.
We shall be ready then to say, with those profane Jews, It is vain to Serve
God; and what profit is it, that we have kept His Ordinances?

IV. This will be consequently a great Support to our Spirits, when we find our
good Services not accepted by Men; or not to have their desired success. When
we do good Offices either to the Bodies or Souls of Men, and find our selves
unworthily requited, it goes to our Hearts: But we are soon easy again, when we
can thus Reflect, I did these Services as to the Lord, more than to Men; and
God is not Unrighteous to forget my Work and Labor of Love, which I have
showed to His Name; which is the Encouragement Given by the Apostle, Heb. 6.
10. and was that which enabled him, to express himself so bravely as he did. 2
Cor. 12. 15. I will very gladly spend, and be spent for you, though the more
abundantly I love you, the less I be loved.

V. Nothing will secure to us the Divine Assistance in difficult Services, but
being governed by this Divine Principle. Nor can we reasonably have the least
suspicion, of Gods readiness to go along with us in those Services, to which we
are induced by the love of Himself, and a generous desire of doing good.

VI. This is that only which can give us a well - grounded hope of Success in
any good undertaking. I know no Argument that Man can urge, to incline God
Almighty to give a Blessing to his Endeavors, who is chiefly acted by little
private selfish ends.

VII The successes those have who Chiefly design themselves, or the gratifying
of their Animal Appetites, will prove more unhappy to them, than their greatest
disappointments: They will help to make them so much the more miserable, both
here and hereafter. Hereafter, as they will aggravate their Punishment, by
aggravating their Sins; and here, as they will more and more Encourage them in
those gratifications.

The Self-designer who obtains that Credit, that Profit, or Sensual Pleasure,
he hunteth after, becomes by this means more uneasy than he was before: For the
more any Lust is pampered, the stronger it grows; and there is nothing a Man's
Observation, Experience and Feeling, do more fully prove to him, than that all
Lusts are very troublesome things; and therefore no wonder that Perturbationes
was the common Philosophical Name for them.

There may also be given not a few Instances of Outward Mischiefs, that attend
on Men's prosperous Successes in Selfish Designs: But I proceed to our last
Consideration, viz.

VIII. By principally designing the Glory of God in all our Services, we
infinitely best consult our own Interest. This was touched upon in the
Doctrinal part. By our own interest, we are to understand the interest of our
Souls: Our Souls being our selves, our Bodies ours not our selves; as some of
the Philosophers, both Greek and Latin, have observed. And therefore the
interest of our Bodies, is no otherwise Our interest, than as it is subservient
to that of our Souls. The Glory of God, and our Happiness are so inseparably
conjoined, that in promoting the one, we promote the other also. So that he
loves himself best, who loves God most; and he who chiefly designeth His Glory,
in the best and truest sense is the most Selfish Man.

And thus are we come to the Motive in the Text, knowing that whatsoever good
thing any Man does, (viz. as to the Lord, and not unto Men) the same shall he
receive of the Lord, Or (as we have it in the parallel place) Knowing that of
the Lord you shall receive the Reward of the Inheritance. And this Reward of
the Inheritance, we find in our Text shall be proportioned to the Services we
do: To our Services, not to our Successes; Endeavor only being our Work. This
the Prophet Isaiah did ^^mfort himself withal. Chap. 49. ^^. 5. Then said I, I
have labored in vain; I have spent my Strength for naught, and in vain: Yet
surely my Judgment is with the Lord, and my Work (or Reward) is with my God.
And now, says the Lord, who formed me from the Womb, to be his Servant, to
bring Jacob again unto Him; though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be
Glorious in the Eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my Srength.

Oh how Admirable, how Astonishing, are the Expressions by which this Reward of
the Inheritance is set forth to us! It is called an Inheritance incorruptible
and undefiled, reserved in Heaven for us: A Building of God, and an House not
made with hands, Eternal in the Heavens: A Crown of Life, of Righteousness and
of Glory: A Kingdom prepared from the Beginning of the World: A being with
Christ, and beholding the Glory which the Father has given Him: A Sitting with
Him upon his Throne, even as he Sits on his Father's Throne: A transcendently
transcendent (as the Words may be rendered) and everlasting weight of Glory. By
these and more such Amazing Words, is this Reward expressed by our Blessed
Savior Himself, and His holy Apostles.

But by our interest, I understand likewise the interest of our Souls, with
respect to the Bodies with which they shall be Clothed: Since the happiness of
the other Life is set forth by St. Paul, by having our vile Body so changed by
Christ, as to be fashioned like unto his Glorious Body. And our Savior might
have a special reference to the Glorified Bodies of the Righteous, in saying,
that They shall Shine forth like the Sun, in the Kingdom of the Father.

And by the Exceeding great and precious promises of the Gospel, as St, Peter
calls them, viz. The Promises of so unspeakable a Happiness as is therein
described, What may we not be Encouraged to do, for the Glorifying of our most
Blessed Creator, Redeemer and Sanctifier! And What may we not be Encouraged to
Suffer too, for the same end! The Sufferings of this present Life, being not
Worthy to be Compared with the Glory, that shall be revealed in us; as says
St. Paul.

And therefore, my beloved Brethren (to conclude with the Exhortation of that
great Apostle) be ye steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the Work of the
Lord; for as much as you know, that your Labor is not in vain in the Lord: Our
Labor will be so far from being in vain, that we have now heard our Reward
will infinitely exceed the greatest Services, we can ever be capable of
performing: Through the Merits of our Dear Lord and Savior, Christ Jesus; to
whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be Ascribed by Us and the whole
World, all Honor and Glory, now and for ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Published at the Request of the Societies, Which should have been placed in
the Title.

ERRATA.
PAge 13. line 14. read sight. Page 35. line 13. read gloryed.

Some BOOKS Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhill.
AN Account of the Societies for Reformation of Manners in London and
Westminster, and other parts of the Kingdom; with a Persuasive to Persons of
all Ranks, to be zealous and diligent in promoting the Execution of the Laws
against Profaneness and Debauchery, for the effecting a National Reformation:
Published with the Approbation of these Lords, with many more.

Lords Temporal, Lords Spiritual, Judges, Pembroke P. T. Carliol. Ed. Ward.
Lonsdale. H. Bangor. Ed. Nevill. Leeds. N. Cestriens. Nic. Lechmere. Bedford.
S. Eliens. Tho. Rokeby. Lindsey. J. Oxon. John Turton. Kent. E. Gloucestr. John
Blencowe. Bridgwater. R. Bath and Wells. Hen Hatsell. Thanet. J. Bristol.
Guilford, etc. J. Cicestriens.

A Discourse of the Great Disingenuity and Unreasonableness of Repining at
afflicting Providence; and of the Influence which they ought to have upon us,
Job 2. 10. Published upon Occasion of the Death of our gracious Sovereign Queen
Mary of Blessed Memory; with a Preface containing some Observations, touching
her excellent Endowments, and exemplary Life.

Certain Propositions, by which the Doctrine of the Holy Trinity, is so
explained, according to the ancient Fathers, as to speak it not Contradictory
to Natural Reason, together with a defense of them; in Answer to the Objections
of a Socinian Writer, in his newly printed Considerations on the Explications
of the Doctrine of the Trinity; occasioned by these Propositions among other
Discourses, 4to.

A second Defense of the Propositions, by which the Doctrine of the Holy
Trinity is so explained, according to the Ancient Fathers, as to speak it not
Contradictory to Natural Reason; in Answer to a Socinian Manuscript, in a
Letter to a Friend. Together with a third defense of those Propositions, in
Answer to the newly published Reflections contained in a Pamphlet, Entitled, A
Letter to the Reverend Clergy of Both Universities, in 4to. All three by the
Right Reverend Father in God Edward Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

A Sermon Preached at St. Mary le Bow, to the Societies for Reformation of
Manners; by Lilly Butler Minister of St. Mary Aldermanbury.

A Sermon Preached at St Mary le Bow, to the Societies for Reformation of
Manners; by Samuel Bradford Rector of the said Parish.

A Sermon Preached at St. Mary le Bow, to the Societies for Reformation of
Manners; by John Hancock D. D. and Chaplain to his Grace the Duke of Bedford.

FINIS.

