A SERMON Preached Before the Right Honorable, THE Lord Mayor, OF LONDON, AND
The Court of Aldermen, etc. ON EASTER-MONDAY, 1692.

Being one of the Anniversary Spittal-Sermons.

By EDWARD Lord Bishop of Gloucester.

LONDON, Printed for Ric. Chiswel at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard. MDCXCII.

THE Bishop of Gloucester's Sermon ON EASTER - MONDAY.

STAMP, Mayor.
Jovis xivo. Die Aprilis, 1692. Annoque Regni Regis and Reginae Willielmi and
Mariae, Angliae, etc. Quarto.

THis COURT does desire the Right Reverend Father in God, Edward Lord Bishop of
Gloucester to Print his Sermon Preached at St. Brides-Church on Monday in
Easter-Week, before the Lord Mayor, Aldermen, and Governors of the several
Hospitals of this City.

Goodfellow.

1 COR. vi. 14. God has both Raised up the Lord, and will also Raise up Us by
His own Power.
BOTH this great Festival of the Catholic Church, and the special occasion of
this Anniversary Meeting, have directed me to the Choice of these Words for my
present Subject.

A Discourse on that greatest Article of our Christian Faith, Our Lords
Resurrection, you need not be told, is what this Festival calls for; and a
Discourse on our own future Resurrection, and the Life to come, as we shall now
Apply it, you will be satisfied is no less suitable to the design of this
Meeting.

And in speaking to the Former of the Propositions which our Text consists of,
I shall with all possible brevity lay the Evidence before you, which commands
our Belief of Our Lord's Resurrection from Death to Life.

That He was put to Death, is no more to be doubted than that such a Person
once lived; nor did either the Jews or Pagans, who lived in those days, ever
question it. He was Publicly Crucified, and in the sight of a Great Multitude,
between two Thieves; and not taken down from the Cross, till after the Spear
had pierced His Heart: And all the Spectators were so satisfied He was dead,
that they brake not His Legs, as they did His Fellow sufferers; where by a
Prophecy concerning Him, was, unawares to His Enemies, fulfilled by them. After
which His Body was Buried, and the Sepulcher watched till the Third Day by a
Guard of Soldiers.

The Jews His Inveterate Enemies, do to this day upbraid Us Christians with His
Death, and scoff at us for Believing in a Crucified Savior: And His
Ignominious Death is the great Scandal which has hitherto prejudiced them
against the Christian Faith. Christ Crucified, says the Apostle, is to the
Jews a Stumbling - block, and to the Greeks Foolishness. The Turks indeed say,
that Our Savior did not dye, but was Translated, Mahomet having told them,
that Judas was Crucified in the place of Jesus. But if the Followers of that
Great Impostor were not miserably Bewitched, they could never have rested on
his sole Authority, about a Matter of Fact of six Ages standing, against the
Evidence of Universal Tradition. And besides, what Blindness are they under,
who prefer Mahomet before Christ, whilst they believe Christ so dear to God as
to be received up into Heaven, when they acknowledge Mahomet not only to have
dyed like other Mortals, but likewise still to remain among the dead! There
were also those in the Primitive Times among the Gnostics, who to their other
monstrous Forgeries, added this, That Simon, who was compelled to bear Christ's
Cross, being changed into His likeness, was Crucified for Him; Christ himself
standing in the Crowd looking on him, and deriding him, But S. Irenoeus and
Tertullian who lived in their Time have given us such an Account of these
People, as speaks them scarcely otherwise distinguishable from the Devils, than
as they had humane Bodies.

And as it is no less Evident that our Lord was put to Death, than that he once
lived, so it is as manifest that He Rose again, as that He Dyed and was laid in
the Grave. For,

First, Those who bare witness to His Resurrection, were themselves at first
most averse to the Belief of it. Notwithstanding His having plainly told them,
that after He was put to DEATH, He would rise again, yet (as if they thought
those Words were not to be taken in a Literal Sense) they had no Expectation of
any such thing. And whereas the Two Mary's and Salome went Early, on the Third
Day, to His Sepulcher, their design was so far from being to be satisfied
whether He were Risen or no, that it was to Embalm His Dead Body: Which alone
was a Demonstration of their not imagining it should Rise again till the Last
Day; the end of Embalming being to preserve Bodies from Putrefaction. Nay, when
they missed His Body in the Sepulcher, this did not at all incline them to
think 'twas Risen, for they concluded upon it, that it was taken away. Mary
Magdalen makes her Complaint to Peter and John, that they had taken away the
Lord out of the Sepulcher, and she knew not where they had laid Him. And the
other Mary stood weeping at their Disappointment, and made the same Complaint
to the Angels, whom she took for Men; and immediately after to her Lord
Himself, whom she supposed to be the Keeper of the Garden where the Sepulcher
was, and modestly taxed Him with taking Him away. If thou have born him hence,
said she, tell me where thou have laid him and I will take him away: Or I will
provide some other Burying Place for Him, if He may not lie here.

And when these Women had informed the rest of the Disciples, that the Body was
not in the Sepulcher; and how that Two Men in shining Garments said unto them,
why seek ye the Living among the Dead? He is not here but is Risen. Remember
how He spoke unto you, when He was in Galilee, saying, The Son of Man must be
delivered into the hands of sinful men and be Crucified, and the third day Rise
again, they could by no means persuade them to give them Credit. Their Words,
it is said, seemed to them as idle Tales, and they believed them not, Luke 24.
11.

And when their Lord Appeared to them, as He quickly after did, they took him
for some Spectre, and were Frighted at the sight of Him; so far were they from
being hereby convinced that He was Raised to Life. And when He spoke to them,
and told them that it was He Himself, and moreover, showed them His Hands and
Feet, or the Wounds in them, we read that they believed not for Joy and
Wondered; they thought 'twas infinitely too good News to be true. So that He
was fain to Call for Meat, and did eat before them, for their full satisfaction
that what they saw, was not a Fantastical but His Real Body.

And after all this, Thomas, being then absent, when he was told these things
by the Eyewitnesses, would not believe them, but roundly Answered them, That
except he not only saw in His hands the Prints of the Nails, but also put his
Finger into them, and thrust his Hand into His Side, he would not believe.

So that, I say, the Witnesses of our Lords Resurrection were at first most
averse to the Belief of it. They were so far from being Credulous, that never
were there more unreasonably incredulous People. They would not believe the
Resurrection of their Lord, till invincible irresistible Evidence had compelled
them to it.

Secondly, These Witnesses had not only the forementioned, but all imaginable
Evidence given them of His being Risen. As some of them were informed thereof
by Two Angels, and as they all saw Him, and heard Him speak, and He showed them
His Pierced Hands, Feet and Side, so they farther Handled Him, they Ate and
Drank with Him, they Conversed with Him; and that not once or twice, but, at
times, for forty days together. So that well might S. Luke say, That He showed
Himself alive after His Passion, to the Apostles, by many infallible Proofs,
Acts 1. 3. And at last, after He had given them Commission to Preach and
Baptize, and promised to be with them to the end of the World, they saw Him
ascend toward Heaven, till a Cloud received Him out of their sight. And
therefore S. John begins His first Epistle with these powerful Words: That
which was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our
eyes, which we have looked upon, and our Hands have handled of the Word of
Life, etc. That which we have seen and heard declare we unto you. And those
Words of S. Peter do well deserve to follow these, though they chiefly relate to
what he and two other Apostles saw before Christ's Death, viz. We have not
followed cunningly devised Fables, when we made known unto you the Power and
Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ; but were Eyewitnesses of his Majesty. For He
received from God the Father Honor and Glory, when there came such a Voice to
Him from the excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased.
And this Voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with Him on the
Holy Mount, 1 Ep. 1. 16, etc.

Nor was He only seen by the Eleven Apostles, and the forementioned good
Women, but by above five hundred Brethren at once; as S. Paul told the
Corinthians, adding, That the greater part of them were at that time living.
And after His Ascension, He was seen by this Apostle too in his Journey to
Damascus; and that in so astonishing a Brightness, as both blinded his eyes,
and struck him to the Ground. And He farther spoke audibly these Words to him,
Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou Me? It Is in vain for thee to kick against the
Pricks. And asking Him who He was, he received this Answer, I am Jesus whom
thou persecutest. So that He who was an outrageous Persecutor of the Witnesses
of our Lords Resurrection, was now compelled to be one of that Number, and
became as Courageous an Attestor of it, as any of those he before had
persecuted.

And many years after this, our Lord appeared to His beloved Disciple in the
Isle of Patmos, in the most Glorious Form. His Countenance being as the Sun,
when it shines in its strength. And so terrified was he with the sight, that
he fell as dead a! his feet, Apocal. 1. 17. And when I saw Him, I fell at His
feet as dead; and He laid his Right Hand upon me saying unto me, Fear not, I am
the First and the Last; I am He that lives and was dead, and behold I am alive
forevermore: And have the Keys of Hell and Death.

And Lastly, His so abundantly performing His promise of Sending the Holy
Ghost, was so great an Evidence of His Resurrection and Ascension too, as a
greater was not possible to be given. He made this Promise not only before His
death, but likewise immediately before his Ascension: Some of his last words to
His Apostles being these, That they should not depart from Jerusalem, but wait
for the Promise of the Father which they had heard of Him. And they waited no
longer than ten days, for the Accomplishment thereof. For on the tenth Day,
there came a Sound from Heaven, as of a rushing mighty wind, and filled all the
House where they were sitting. And there appeared Cloven Tongues like as of
Fire, and they Sat upon Each of them. And they were all filled with the Holy
Ghost, and began to speak with other Tongues, as the Spirit gave them
utterance, etc. Acts 2. beginning. And v. 43. We read, that many wonders and
signs, besides that of Speaking all Languages for the Preaching of the Gospel
throughout the World, were done by the Apostles. Nor did the Miraculous Gifts
of the Holy Ghost quite cease, for at least the three first Ages, or till
Christianity became the Religion of Nations; when it was protected by the
Emperors Sword and Encouraged by their Laws. By which means the Church was
under no necessity of the longet Continuance of those Gifts.

To our Lords Accomplishment of this Promise may be added the wonderful
fulfilling of his Threats against the Jewish Nation for their Obstinate
persisting in Unbelief, and His prediction of the Destruction of Jerusalem;
which came to pass within forty Years after his death. And it is mavelous to
see, what an Exact Agreement there is betwixt Josephus his History of the
Miserys that then befell that People, with diverse Circumstances relating to
them, and our Blessed Lords Predictions of them.

Thirdly, The Apostles Witnessed most boldly their Lords Resurrection before
His Crucifiers and most deadly Enemies; Nor could they be deterred from it by
all their Threats, nor by the Executions of them neither: And therefore Chose
to Suffer, not only the greatest Shame and Ignominy, but all manner of
Calamitys, and the Cruellest deaths, rather than desist from Preaching this
Doctrine. He who had been so great a Coward, as to deny Him in his very
presence, and to be scared thereto by a silly Maid, had the Courage to Own him
even in the midst of His Murderers, after the Descent of the Holy Ghost. Ye
men of Israel, said He, Acts 2. 22, etc, hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth a
man approved of God among you by Miracles, Wonders and Signs, which God did by
Him, in the midst of you, as you your selves also know. Him being delivered by
the determinate Counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken and with
wicked hands have Crucified and slain: Whom God has raised up, having loosed
the bands of death, because it was impossible He should be holden of it, etc.
And in the next Chapter, he and S. John having cured a Cripple before a great
Confluence of People, at one of the Gates of the Temple, he immediately
declared to them, that this they had done by the Power of that Jesus whom they
had Murdered. Ye men of Israel, said he, v. 12. why marvail ye at this? Or why
look ye so earnestly on us, as though by our own Power or Holiness we had made
this Man to walk? The God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob has glorified His Son
Jesus, whom ye delivered up and denied Him in the presence of Pilate, when He
was determined to let Him go. But ye denied the Holy one and the just, and
desired a Murderer to be granted unto you; and killed the Prince of life, whom
God has Raised from the dead, whereof we are Witnesses. And His name, through
faith in His name, has made this man strong, etc. And we find that by the
Sermon of which these words are part, there were Converted to the faith of
Christ about five thousand Souls; and by the foregoing Sermon about three
thousand.

But the Priests and Captain of the Temple, and the Saducees being Enraged at
this Boldness of theirs, with the Success thereof, laid hands on these two
Apostles; and the next day being brought before the High Priest, with the
Rulers, Elders, and Scribes, and being asked by them, by what Power they had
done this Miracle, S. Peter declared to them as he had done before to the
People with the Self-same Courage, Chapter 4. 10. Be it known unto you all, and to
all the People of Israel, that by the Name of Jesus of Nazareth, whom ye
Crucified, whom God has raised from the dead, Even by Him does this man stand
before you whole. This is the Stone which was set at naught by you Builders,
which is become the Head of the Corner. Neither is there Salvation in any
other, etc.

It would take up a long time to show, with what Admirable Resolution these and
the other Apostles, and especially S. Paul, persisted to the death in Preaching
the Resurrection of Jesus, with the other Christian Doctrines; and what Miserys
they Underwent, because they would not be taken off from this Work. So that who
is able to suspect such Witnesses as these, who is not as hardened an Infidel as
the most Obdurate of our Lords Enemies?

That they could not be deceived themselves, we have seen is as apparent as the
Light, and (setting aside the Consideration of their most Exemplary Goodness)
it is impossible that any Interest could prevail with them to deceive others:
Except we should suppose them so unlike all other of their Fellow Creatures, as
to be in love with Ignominy, Torment and Death.

But there are some who Object, that Our Lords Resurrection would have been
more Unquestionable, had he at least showed Himself alive after His Passion to
Herod and Pontius Pilate, the Chief Priest, and the great Sanhedrin, that
Condemned Him.

In answer here to I will say these four things.

1. That this is most impudently to prescribe to the Great God. Was not He who
is infinitely Wise the best judge, what Evidence was fittest to be given in
this Case? And shall not He choose His own Way and Method?

2. Those most perverse and Obstinate Infidels had rendered themselves utterly
Unworthy of so great a Favor, who would not be Convinced by such an Abundance
of most Miraculous Works, which Jesus had wrought before their Eyes; but still
followed Him with the most horrible Calumnies, until they had put Him to the
most horrible death. It seems Unworthy of Almighty God thus to necessitate and
extort by main force Belief from those, who had so maliciously shut their Eyes
against the Clearest Light, and had in the most insolent manner, Rejected the
Counsel of God against themselves.

3. In that those who were chosen to be Witnesses of Christ's Resurrection,
were endued with such Divine Power, and did such Mighty Works for the
Confirmation of the truth thereof, there was every whit as Effectual a Course
taken, for the Conviction of all not utterly incurable, as if He had appeared
to every one of them, and Suffered Himself to be Handled by them. And they
might as reasonably have Questioned their own Senses, as the Truth of those who
did so admirably Confirm their Testimony. But,

4. Had He showed Himself alive to His Enemies, they might have Objected that it
was not He, but the Devil in His likeness, with as great an Appearance of
Reason, as they could before impute His Casting out Unclean Spirits, and His
other most Supernatural Works, to the power of Beelzebub the Prince of the
Devils.

We will make a very short Application of what has been delivered on this
former Part of the Text, and then proceed to the latter Part.

First, We hence Learn the Strange Force and Power of Prejudice. A rooted
Prejudice is so Masterly, so Unruly a thing, that there is no dealing with it.
The Rulers and Generality of the Jews being strongly prejudiced against our
Savior, chiefly upon the account of His being in diverse Respects, quite a
different person from what, without ground, they expected their Messiah should
be: And because He declared that He came upon as different a Design from that
which they vainly fancied, and promised themselves, He would come upon, viz,
Not to deliver them from the Roman Yoke, but from the Power of incomparably
worse Enemies, Sin and Satan: Not to bless them with a great Affluence of
Worldly Wealth, and a Mighty Dominion in the World, but to purchase Eternal
Happiness for them in the Life to come, and to Qualify them for it: I say this
great disappointment of their Carnal Expectations, did make them Conclude it
impossible that He of all men should be the Messiah. And because such Sensual
Wretches as they were, could not bear the thoughts of His being so, His giving
them the greatest Demonstrations imaginable that He was so, was labor in vain,
they were all lost upon them.

Not only the most Rational Evidence in the World, is Ordinarily compelled to
yield to the Power of Prejudice, but even Sensible and Ocular Demonstrations
have Submitted to it. Our Blessed Savior having had such sad Experience hereof
among the Jews, it is said, not only that he Bewailed, but also that He
Marvailed, at their Unbelief. And Constant Experience assures us, that the
greatest strength of Argument signifies nothing to those, who come with Biased
and Prepossest minds to the hearing of Truth: Who judge of what is offered to
them by their Wills, not by their Understandings. Nay, the clearer and more
irresistible the Evidence is, the more are the Prejudiced incensed against the
Proposer of it, if they have but Ill Will equal to their Prejudice.

Secondly, We learn from what has been discoursed, That we ought exceedingly
to admire, and deeply to be affected with the Divine Goodness, in that there is
given us such Wonderful Evidence of the Truth of the Gospel. This none can call
in Question who believe Christ's Resurrection (as I need not though I had time,
stand to show) and it is apparent from what has been said, that God has done
much more than barely enough, to remove from us all Uncertainty concerning this
great Point. I cannot doubt but that the quarter Part of the Evidence for it he
has vouchsafed us, would be sufficient to prevail on the Minds of all such, as
can persuade themselves to be impartially considerative. And therefore how
utterly inexcusable must those, who are made acquainted with the Whole of it,
needs be, if they continue not withstanding Unbelievers! And by Unbelievers we
are to understand, not only those who disbelieve the Gospel, but such also as
yield so weak and feeble an Assent there to, as not to govern their lives by
it. For we had every jot as good give no Credit at all to our Lords Doctrine,
as refuse to live in Obedience to it.

We now come to discourse a while on our own future Resurrection, expressed in
the following Words of the Text, And will also raise up us by His own Power.
And two things are herein employed.

First, That God will not suffer our Souls, when our Bodies dye, to go out of
Being.

Secondly, That our dead Bodies shall be raised to Life again.

First, That God will not suffer our Souls, when our Bodies dye, to go out of
Being; or to dye with them. For as much as to Sense, the Man seems to dye, and
not his mere Body, (and therefore we always say such a Man is dead, not such a
ones Body) the Restoration of the Soul, which alone is truly the Man, to the
Exercise of its Faculties, after the Stound of Death is over, is in several
places of Scripture expressed by the Word Resurrection. Our Savior proves the
Resurrection of the Dead, Mark 12. 26. from Gods saying to His Servant Moses, I
am the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob. But this saying did imply necessarily
no more than this, that they were not gone out of Being, but that their Souls
were still alive, though their Bodies were dead, and crumbled to dust. And so
much is intimated in the next Words: He is not the God of the Dead, but the God
of the Living. And it is plain, that the Word Resurrection is taken in the same
sense, Acts 23. 8. where we read, That the Sadduces say there is no
Resurrection, neither Angel nor Spirit, but the Pharisees confess both. And (to
name but one Place more, as we might do diverse) it is so to be understood too,
1 Cor. 15. 32. where the Apostle says, If after the manner of men, I have
fought with Beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me, if the dead rise not?
Would only the Resurrection of S. Paul's Body have made him an amends for all
his Sufferings? Would not his Souls Enjoyment of his dear Jesus to all
Eternity, have been an abundant Recompense, though he never had seen his Body
more? Yes undoubtedly; and therefore by these Words, If the dead rise not, he
meant, If there be no Life after this. But,

Secondly, By He will also raise up us by His own Power, is especially to be
understood, He will raise up our dead Bodies as He did our Saviors. Our Souls
and they shall be reunited by the Divine Power.

There is no Doctrine more clearly or fully revealed, than is this of the
Resurrection of the Body. We have a very Particular Account thereof.

We are informed, who shall rise again. Not some few, or so many, but all the
Sons and Daughters of Adam, without Exception. 1 Cor. 15. 22. Our Savior says
that, That, The Hour is coming, in the which, All that are in the Graves shall
hear His Voice, and shall come forth. John 5. 28. And S. Paul, That there shall
be a Resurrection both of the just and of the unjust.

We are told in what Order they shall rise, The dead in Christ, or True
Christians, shall rise first. 1 These. 4. 16.

We are told by whom they shall be immediately raised, viz. by Jesus Christ; or
by the Power of God the Father given to Him. By which Power He is also again
and again said to have raised Himself. We now heard that it is His Voice that
shall raise us: And He says, John 6. 40. This is the Will of Him that sent me,
that every one which sees the Son, and believes on him, may have eternal
Life, and I will raise him up at the Last Day.

And thus we see we are informed too, of the Time when the Dead shall be
raised, viz. at the Last Day; And in the end of the World; as our Lord says,
Mat. 13. 39.

We are told for what End Christ will raise the dead, viz. That they who have
done good, may come forth to the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done
evil, to the Resurrection of Damnation.

Lastly, We read also, what Kind of Bodies the Raised ones shall be: 1 Cor. 15.
35, etc. But some man will say, how are the dead raised up, and with what body
do they come? Or, how can it be that Dead Bodies being Putrified and Rotten
should be made to Revive, and what Kind of Bodies may we suppose they will be?
It follows, Thou Fool that which thou sowest is not quickened except it dye. Or,
is any thing more Common, than things rising to life from Putrefaction? Don't
we see that the Rotting of the Corn is so far from making it impossible that it
should Spring up again, that it is necessary thereto? And that which thou
sowest, thou sowest not that Body that shall be, but (...), bare mere Grain, it
may Chance of Wheat or some other Grain. Or, thou sowest not the Grain with the
Ear or Blade, but it comes up again with both. But God gives it a Body as it
pleases Him, and to every Seed its own Body. A Body of the same Kind,
Proportion and Form.

All Flesh is not the same Flesh, etc. There are various Sorts of Flesh, as
there are of Grain. And there is great variety of other Bodies, as it follows,
There are Bodies Celestial and Bodies Terrestial, but the Glory of the
Celestial is one, and the Glory of the Terrestial is another, etc. And our
Bodies, when raised, shall be of a different nature and quality from what they
were when laid in the Grave; as we see v. 42. They are sown in Corruption, they
are raised in Incorruption: They are sown in Dishonor they are raised in
Glory; they are sown in weakness they are raised in Power: They are sown
Natural Bodies, or Animal ones, which need to be sustained and nourished with
meat and drink, they are raised Spiritual Bodies, or such as need neither.

Thus have I given you the substance of what we find in Scripture upon this
Argument; and if we can be satisfied with the Scriptural Account of the
Resurrection of the Body (and he is a Wanton Wit that cannot) it will not
appear to be so Contradictious or impossible a thing, as many have endeavored
to make it; or at all Contradictious, or impossible to the infinite Power of
God. We find in the Holy Scriptures that the Bodies Raised are in some sense
the same with the Bodies buried, and in some sense not the same: And we find
their Sameness illustrated, by the Sameness of the Corn Sprung up, with the
Corn Sown. And those who affect not to be wiser than the Apostle S. Paul in
this matter, are not at all Concerned to trouble themselves with the Cavils
which have been often raised, against the Resurrection of the Body; they all
supposing such a Sameness, as is no where to be found in the sacred writings;
nay the Contrary to which the Apostle, in the forecited words, has at least
intimated.

And the Argument taken from our Bodies being such Fluid things as we know they
are, do nothing hinder, but that the Dead may rise with as much the same Bodies
with those that were Buried, as the Buried are the Same with those they were
Born with, or that they had but a few years before they dyed.

But, in short, we shall doubtless Rise with as much the Same Bodies, as it can
be our Interest to desire we should; and he who believes this, needs not fear
in the least, that he believes too little relating to this great Doctrine of
the Resurrection of the dead. And though he may not have so large a Faith as some
others, yet if it has its due Influence upon his Practice, he has every whit
as good a one to all Intents and Purposes.

Now as to our Evidence for the truth of this Article, we have the greatest
that can be, since our Lord did so plainly Reveal it before His death, and
Confirmed the truth of all His Doctrines by His Resurrection. Or, which is the
same thing, demonstrated hereby that He was no Imposter, in having declared
Himself to be Sent of God, and the Son of God. We are therefore altogether as
certain of our own future Resurrection, as we can be of the Resurrection of
Jesus Christ. And from what has been said we may be assured, that we can be
certain of no matter of fact, which we have not beheld with our own Eyes, if we
are not sure of this. But the Apostle does not stick to say, that if there be
no Resurrection of the dead, then is not Christ risen, 1 Cor. 15. 13. And he
both repeateth this and Enlarges upon it, v. 15, 16. Yea, says he, and we are
found false Witnesses of God, because we have testified of God, that He raised
up Christ, whom He raised not up, if so be that the dead rise not. For if the
dead rise not, then is not Christ risen.

And farther, Christ in rising again is declared by S. Paul to be the
Representative of all true Christians. He says, Now is Christ risen from the
dead, and is become the First Fruits of them that Slept. Now the First Fruits
under the Law did represent the whole Harvest; and their being offered to God
brought a Blessing on all the Other Fruits; and by the offering of them (as he
also says) the rest were sanctified; or Consecrated to God. And so is the
whole Church both in Soul and Body by Christ's Resurrection. And I add, by His
presenting Himself to His Father in Heaven, upon that very day, on which the
First Fruits were offered according to the Law. And so, His Resurrection to
Glory, was a proof and pledge of all His sincere Disciples rising to Glory
also. And therefore this Apostle tells the Ephesians that, as they who were
dead in Sins were quickened together with Christ, or raised from the death of
Sin to the life of Righteousness, so likewise God has raised them up together,
and made them sit together, in Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus. That is, in
Christ their Head their dead Bodies are already raised, and with their Souls
may be said to be at present Glorified in Him: in Him, I say, considered as
their Head or Representative.

And thus we see there is a necessary Connection between the two Propositions in
our Text: God has raised up the Lord, and He will raise up us by his own Power.

Now, to make Application of what has been said on this Part of the Text;

In the First place, Is it so certain that God will raise up us by His own
Power, even as certain as that He has raised up Christ, then are we not all of
us infinitely concerned, to make it our greatest Business, while we remain in
these Bodies, which is our state of Probation and Trial, to be found in the
Number of those, who shall be accounted worthy to obtain that World (to use our
SAVIORS own Words) and the Resurrection from the Dead, and to stand before the
Son of Man? That is, to attain a Glorious Resurrection, and to stand with
Courage and Confidence before the Son of Man. And how should we Watch and Pray
always, that we may escape those dreadful things which shall come upon the
wicked. S. Paul having said, That he had hope toward God, that there shall be
a Resurrection both of the just, and of the unjust, immediately adds, And
herein do I exercise my self to have always a Conscience void of Offense, both
toward God and toward men. And no man can be persuaded of this, and withal
consider it, but it must of necessity have this effect upon him. Especially
since, though the Resurrection of the Body may still be at a great distance,
yet the other Life is at the door, and near at hand, as to each of us: The
Doctrine of the Soul-sleepers being plainly confuted both by our blessed
Savior, and the now mentioned great Apostle. And indeed that Doctrine is no
better Philosophy than Divinity, it speaking great Ignorance of the Nature of
Souls. Nor have I ever met with a Philosopher, who believed a Future Life (as
they all did, or were inclined to do, except the professed, or the sly Atheists)
but took it for granted, that humane Souls are so far from being deprived of
all Sense and Consciousness of Being, that they gain much the freer use of
their Faculties, by their leaving these Bodies: They looking upon them as
Prisons and dark Dungeons to Souls, in which they are miserably straightened and
pent up. And they were so far from thinking, that Bodies do give Life and
Activity to Souls, that they held the quite contrary. And not only that the
Life and Activity of Bodies is wholly from their Souls, but also that Souls can
never be so truly said to live, as when they are let loose from these Bodies.
And the Book of Wisdom presents us with the same Doctrine, Chapter 9. 15. Where
it is said, That the Corruptible Body presses down the Soul, and the earthy
Tabernacle weighs down the mind, that museth upon many things.

And in saying, that we are all upon the Borders of the other World, I say we
are very near to great Happiness or great Misery. Good Souls in the separate
State being very Happy, by their having got rid of that Body of Death, with
which they were here so clogged, and by the free Exercise of Love to God, and
to one another, and of all the Divine Virtues thereby obtained; in which their
Bodies, to their great grief, miserably interrupted them. As also they must
needs feel great Happiness, from comfortable Reflections on the good they did,
or endeavored to do, in these Bodies; and the joyful Foresight of that Crown
of Righteousness, which their Righteous Judge has declared He will confer upon
them, at the day of his appearing.

And wicked Souls must necessarily be as miserable in this separate State, by
reason of as bad Company they shall be confined to; and the evil Affections and
corrupt Habits they carry out of their Bodies with them; which are mightily
disquieting in this Life; and must much more be so in the other, through the
want of those Satisfactions of inordinate Appetites this World abounds with.
And their Condition must needs be extremely sad too, through the Lashes of
their Guilty Consciences, and their certain looking for of Vengeance, and fiery
Indignation.

Now then what inexpressible Folly is it, and especially in us Christians, who
profess to believe the Resurrection of the Body, and the Life everlasting, so
to dote upon these vile Bodies, and this vain World, as generally we do! As if
our inward thought were, that there shall be no Resurrection, that there is no
Life to come. This is great Folly even in those who are utter Strangers to the
Christian and all Revealed Religion; but that they who are acquainted with the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, with His description of the Future State both of the
Good and Bad, and with the abundant, the superabundant Evidence He has given
us of the Truth thereof, with all His other Revelations; that they I say should
be so Unconcerned about these things, is most amazing. This is such Madness as
no Tongue can give it its due Aggravation.

Let me address my self to those who remain under the Guilt hereof, in the
Words of the Prophet, Remember this, and show your selves Men; bring it again
to mind O ye Transgressors. Let it appear that you are a sort of Creatures
superior to the Brutes, in being no longer only affected with present things,
and those which can signify nothing to you one moment longer, than while you
continue in these Bodies. Let this appear by your so laying to heart what you
have now been minded of, relating to the Doctrine of the Resurrection, as in
all your Actions and inward Affections to be powerfully influenced thereby, for
the time to come. But to be more particular,

In the Second Place, Let me commend to you those Words of our blessed Savior,
Luke 16. 9. (a Text which I formerly discoursed on to you upon this same
Occasion) viz. I say unto you, make to your selves Friends of the Mammon of
Unrighteousness, that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting
Habitations. The Argument I have now been upon contains, one would think, an
irresistible Motive to abound, during our stay in these Bodies, in Works of
Piety, Mercy and Charity, according to the Ability God has given us.

This is evident from too many Texts of Scripture to be now recited, in which
the Happiness of the other Life is entitled to the sincere Performance of such
Works as these.

Our Lord does particularly assign no other Reason, for the pronouncing of that
most joyful Sentence to the Sheep on His Right Hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you, from the Foundation of the World,
but this, I was an hungered, and ye gave me Meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me
drink, etc. Or my Brethren were so, and you Relieved them, as He explains
Himself in the Words following. Nor does He express any other Reason, for the
fearful Sentence which shall be pronounced against the Goats on His Left Hand,
Depart from me ye cursed into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his
Angels, but their Averseness to Works of Mercy and Charity. Though there will be
many other Reasons for each of these Sentences, yet these only are
particularly mentioned, to show what a mighty Weight shall be laid upon them,
at the day of Judgment.

And He declares, Matthew. 5. 7. That Blessed are the Merciful, for they shall
obtain Mercy. And Luke 6. 35. That The Reward of such shall be great, and they
shall be the Children of the Highest.

He likewise calls the employing of Riches in the forementioned good Works,
laying up a Treasure in Heaven, in Opposition to Hoarding them up, which He
calls laying up Treasures upon Earth, Mat. 6. 20, etc.

And He commands His Disciples, as poor as they were, to sell what they have
and give Alms, Luke 12. 33. And farther expresses this Injunction of Giving
Alms by such Words as these, Provide your selves Bags which wax not old, a
Treasure in the Heavens which fails not; where no Thief approaches, neither
Rust corrupts. S. Paul calls being Rich in good Works, laying up in store for
our selves a good Foundation against the time to come, that we may lay hold on
Eternal Life. And that is the Motive with which he backs the Charge, which he
requires his Son Timothy to lay upon Rich Men, 1 Ep. 6. 17. Charge them who are
Rich in this World, that they be not high-minded, nor trust in uncertain
Riches, but in the Living God: Who gives us all things richly to enjoy. That
they do good, that they be rich in good Works, ready to distribute, willing to
communicate.

And S. James, having divided Pure Religion into Two Parts, makes visiting the
Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, or being bountiful and
compassionate, the whole former Part, Chapter 1. 27. And he puts this Question, Chapter
2. 14. What does it profit, my Brethren, if a Man say he has Faith and has
not Works? Can Faith save him? That is, it can not profit a man to say he has
Faith, when he has not Works; no nor to have Faith neither without Works, such
a Faith cannot save him. And the next Words tell us what Works he means,
without which Faith cannot save, If a Brother or Sister be Naked and Destitute
of daily Food, etc.

And S. John has pronounced him a false Hypocrite in pretending to be a Lover
of God, who makes little Conscience of these good Works: For says he, Whosoever
has this Worlds Goods, and sees his Brother has need, and shuts up his
Bowels of Compassion from him, how dwells the Love of God in him? 1 Ep. ^ 17.

So that we see, there is nothing more indispensably Necessary to our
Resurrection to a Blessed Immortality, than is our being endued with such a
Love of God and Goodness, as powerfully inclines us, and makes us forward, to
works of Mercy and Charity.

There is no duty more Earnestly Pressed, nor the Recommending of which is
enforced with more Promises, nor so many neither (as may be showed out of the
Old as well as New Testament) than is this of being Charitable, and doing good
with this Worlds Goods, in proportion to the Share of them wherewith God has
blessed us.

I might show also, how greatly this Grace of Charity is perfective of our
Nature, how it dignifieth and Beautifieth our Souls, and so is not only a
necessary Condition of, but likewise as necessary a Qualification for, that
Blessedness which Consists in the Enjoyment of that God, who is Goodness and
Charity it self, always showering down Bounty and Mercy on the whole Creation.

I might Show too, that nothing is so Amiable as this Virtue in the Opinion of
the World, that nothing procures such Love and Esteem, and how it Perfumes men's
Memories, like Precious Ointment, when they are dead and gone: Of which I need
not tell you there are Innumerable Examples.

And it is impossible to Recount, how many of these, This Renowned City may
make her Boast of, whose greatest Renown is Owing to the great Numbers of most
Exemplarily Charitable Christians, who will be had in Everlasting Remembrance,
which from Age to Age She has produced.

And, thanks be to the Divine Grace, This City, with the Sub-Urbs, is Blessed at
present (as lamentably degenerate as the Age is grown) with not a few, whose
works both of Piety and Charity do praise them in the Gates.

I am sure our persecuted and distressed Brethren of France and Ireland, as
well as Multitudes of Miserable Families in Our Out-Parishes, have great cause
to Praise God for them; and to Remember them and theirs in their daily Prayers.
For Abundance of them, notwithstanding the Public Collections, and their
Majesty's Exceeding great Bounty, must have Perished, had it not been for the
private Contributions of these good Christians.

And by the way, I must needs put in a word here, for our French Brethren,
whose Extreme sufferings you know are for the Best of Causes. I Certainly
inform you, that their Condition is so deplorable at this time, by the means of
the Ceasing of the public Charity, that between three and four thousand of
them (and among these, many Ministers and Persons of Quality) must Starve, or
Beg about our Streets, if Extraordinary and Speedy Care be not taken of them.

There is a Noble project newly set on foot, by certain worthy and Excellent
Persons, for their daily Relief; and I promise my self that all those will
gladly, according to their Power, close with it, who are Sincere Lovers of our
Blessed Lord, whose Suffering Members they are, and of His Religion, for which
they are next to Martyrs.

But to proceed, There is One Sort of Charity which This City is deservedly
very Famous for, that the Present Occasion requires my particular Taking Notice
of; namely, That of improving, and from time to time Supplying, Ancient
Hospitals. And most worthy Instances of this Nature, are presented to you in
this Paper.

A True Report, etc.
WE see by these Reports, Which have for a long time been Published Every
Easter, what a Vast Treasure of Charity has been Deposited in Each of these
Hospitals; and Especially in that of Christ's Church. As also how very
faithfully and prudently it has still been Employed, by the Respective
Governors.

We have a yearly Account of great Numbers of poor Orphans, Extraordinarily
well Maintained and as well Educated, both in Learning and Piety, and
afterward put forth to good Callings, and the best Qualified sent to the
Universities, by that most Noble Hospital of Christ Church.

We have the like Account of Abundance of Sick, Lame and Wounded People,
Restored to their Health and the use of their Limbs, in the Hospitals of S.
Bartholmew and S. Thomas.

Of Many poor Lunaticks, whose Case is the most Compassionable of all Mortals,
Restored to their Understandings in the Hospital of Bethlem.

And of many idle and Vicious People taken out of Harms way, and kept to Work,
and indigent Vagrants taken in and Relieved, in order to their being returned
to their Proper Homes; as also poor Youths well brought up and Bound to Honest
Trades, by the Hospital of Bride-well.

All these, I need not say, are great Works of Charity, and works, most of
them, of the greatest Charity; being so no less to the Souls than to the
Bodies, of Helpless Wretches. So that the Charitably disposed among us can
never be at a loss, where Excellently well to bestow their Charity. Where it
may be secured from Embezzlement, and from being conferred too upon the less
Necessitous.

But to come to a Conclusion, The only thing that can make more than a mere
Competency, for our selves and Families, in the least desirable, is the
Advantage that is gotten by Riches, of having the great Pleasure in this World,
of being Benefactors, and of Increasing our Happiness in the World to come. And
it is a Wonderful thing, that so few men's Observation and Experience should
convince them, that nothing besides these two things can make any amends, for
the innumerable Troubles and Vexations that attend Riches. And that Spending
them in the Gratifying of Fleshly Lusts, or on Pride and Vanity, will make them
far more Unhappy Even in this life, than they can be made by the Want of them.
But it is impossible that those should not be persuaded, to Employ themselves in
doing good, Suitably to the Talents they are entrusted with, who do so firmly
believe, as to bestow Every day a few Serious Thoughts on, Such Texts as this,
God has both Raised up the Lord, and will also Raise up Us by His own Power.

THE END.
Books lately Printed for Richard Chiswel.
JACO BY USSERII Historia Dogmat. Controvers. inter Orthodox. and Pontificios
de Scripturis and Sacris Vernaculis. Nunc primum Edita. Descripsit Digessit and
Notis atque Auctuario locupletavit Henricus Wharton, A. M. Dr. PATRICK (now
Lord Bishop of E L Y) His Exposition of The Ten Commandments, and Lord's Prayer.

-- Private Prayer in Difficult Times.

-- Thanksgiving for our late wonderful Deliverance.

-- Two Prayers for the Happy Success of their Majesty's Forces by Sea and Land.

-- Prayer for Charity, Peace, and Unity.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon before the Lords, on the 26th of November, 1690.
for the Preservation of their Majesty's, and the Reducing of Ireland, and the
King's safe Return.

Dr. TENISON (now Lord Bishop of Lincoln) His Sermon of Doing good to Posterity.

-- His Sermon concerning Discretion in giving Alms.

-- His Sermon against Self-Love, before the House of Commons, June 5, 1689.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, concerning the Wandering of the Mind in God's
Service.

-- His Sermon before the Queen, of the Folly of Atheism. February 22. 1690.

-- Dr. FOWLER (now Lord Bishop of Gloucester) his Sermon before the Queen,
March 22. 1690.

Dr. BURNET (now Lord Bishop of Sarum) His Sermon before the King and Queen,
April 29. 1691.

Dr. FREEMAN (now Dean of Peterborough) his Sermon at the Assizes at
Northampton, Aug. 1690.

-- His Thanksgiving Sermon before the House of Commons Nov. 5, 1690.

Some Remarks upon the Ecclesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of
PIEDMONT. By PETER ALLIX, D. D. Treasurer of the Church of Sarum.

-- His Remarks upon the Ecelesiastical History of the Ancient Churches of the
ALBIGENSES.

A Vindication of their Majesty's Authority, to fill the Sees of the deprived
Bishops, in a Letter out of the Country, occasioned by Dr. B -- 's Refusal of
the Bishopric of Bath and Wells.

A Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New Separation on account of
the Oaths: With an Answer to the History of Passive Obedience, so far as
relates to Them.

A Vindication of the said Discourse concerning the Unreasonableness of a New
Separation, from the Exceptions made against it, in a Tract called, A brief
Answer to the said Discourse, etc.

The present State of Germany; by a Person of Quality. 8vo.

The Judgment of God upon the Roman Catholic Church, from its first rigid Laws
for Universal Conformity to it, unto its fast End. With a Prospect of these
near approaching Revolutions, viz. The Revival of the Protestant Profession in
an Eminent Kingdom, where it was totally suppressed. The last End of all
Trukish Hostilities. The General Mortification of the Parts of the Roman Church
in all Parts of its Dominions. By DRUE CRESNER, D. D. 4to.

ANGLIA SACRA Sive Collectio Historiarum antiquitus Scriptarum de
Archiepiscopis and Episcopis Angliae, a Prima Fidei Christianae susceptione ad
Annum MDXL. Opera Hen. Whartoni A. M. in 2. Vol. Fol.

Mr. RUSHWORTH's Historical Collections, the Third Part in Two Volums in Folio;
from the Beginning of the Long Parliament, 1640. to the End of the Year 1644.
Wherein is a Particular Account of the Rise and progress of the Civil War to
that Period.

The Bishop of ELY's Fast Sermon before the Queen, April 8. 1692.

-- His Letter to the Clergy of his Diocese.


