Imprimatur,

C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land a sacris Dornest.
16. Nov. 1685.
THE Great Wickedness, And Mischievous Effects of Slandering, Represented in a
SERMON PREACHED AT St. GILES without Cripplegate, On Sunday Nov. 15. 1685.

By EDWARD FOWLER, D. D.

Together with a Preface and Conclusion In his Own VINDICATION.

Thou shall not bear False Witness against thy Neighbor. They are Grievous
Revolters Walking with Slanders,

Jer. 6. 28. LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the Three Pigeons against
the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1685.

THE PREFACE.
IF the Readers of the Following Sermon knew how very little Time I had for the
Composing of it, They would not be Offended with its Plainness: Nor Those that
are Ingenuous, Critical in observing Faults or Over-sights. The Conclusion of
the Sermon, which contains the Occasion of my Penning and Preaching it, I have
here Published with some small Additions, which I think fit to mention, because
those of whose Humanity I have had such plentiful Experience, will be forward
enough, I presume, to give out, upon their finding any Passages they did not
hear from the Pulpit, that I have Lied in the Title Page.

The Design of this Preface is to Vindicate my self from a great Slander of
theirs (and I am prepared to do the like, as to all the Other I have heard of)
which notwithstanding my Endeavors, both by Word of Mouth and Letters, to
Clear my Self of, does (as I understood the Last Week) still stick upon me: And
it is this, That I should give, about a Year and three Quarters since, to a
certain Fanatic, a Knavish Certificate, to bring him off, in a Court of
Justice, from an Indictment of so Scandalous a Crime, as the Depraving of the
Common Prayers. And in short, That I Certified him to be a good Churchman,
whereas he never came to the Communion but once, in order to his being
Qualified for the Office of Common-Council-Man. And if I ever gave to any such
Person such a Certificate, I will freely acknowledge, I was a Knave indeed.

But before I proceed farther, I will say this, That I know not that I ever
Repented of any Certificate I gave in my Life, except of One that two of my
greatest Enemies, before they discovered their Malice toward me, did unawares
draw me into; which was to this Effect, and, to the best of my remembrance, in
these very Words, That for ought I know, they were Men of Peaceable and
Christian Spirits; which Certificate was of their own Penning. I must Confess,
I then shrewdly suspected that they were not Men of such Spirits, but because I
had no certain Knowledge of the Contrary, upon a little deliberation I
Subscribed it. But within a few days. I was made sensible what a Trapan this
was, being informed, That these very Men had Represented me, at White Hall, as
an Encourager of Fanatics in our Freedom-Vestry. This was told me by a Person
of Honor, who had it from Mr. Secretary Ienkins. But I Appeal to the present
Recorder of London, and to the Alderman of our Ward, whether, in their
Presence, I did not abundantly Clear my Innocence, as to this Charge. The
Latter of these Gentlemen, meeting me in, or near, Cornhill, some days after
the Hearing which we had in the Recorders Chamber, desired me to Pardon the
Chief Man of them; and the Recorder, at the Conclusion of the Hearing, I think
before most of the Vestry-Men were gone out (for there was a full Appearance of
them too) was pleased to Declare (my Self standing by him, and diverse Others)
That he would justify my Honesty (that was, with respect to my Proceedings in
the Vestry) on any Ground in England.

My Adversaries thus failing of their Design, they, with one or two more, have,
almost ever since that time to this, turned every Stone to Ruin me: And London
Rings of their Carriage toward me. Nor has it Satisfied them to abuse Me in
the grossest manner, but they have put an intolerable Abuse upon a Great-Man or
Two; for when they have been Expostulated with, for making my Life so Uneasy,
they have Endeavored to remove all Blame from themselves, by pretending that
what they had done, was in mere Obedience to their Commands. And when it was
replied (as once it was by my Self, to this Effect) You first instigate Great
Persons by your wretched Stories, and then Hypocritically pretend that my
Troubles Originally proceed from them; there was no Answer, but perfect Silence.

It might make a Competent Volume, to give an Account what Slanders they have
devised, and Methods they have taken, from time to time, to do Me Mischief. I
have a Narrative by me of the Molestations they have given me, to about Half a
Year since, which I intended then to Publish, but upon Second Thoughts I judged
it more prudent to hold my hand for some time longer.

But to return to this Knavish Certificate; The Person I certified for, was one
Mr. R. W. who is one of my nearest Neighbors. The Occasion of the Certificate
was This, Two of these Three or Four Men, who have so long been my Adversaries,
accused this Man to me before his face (which fair play they rarely use) of
having called the Common Prayers an Innovation, upon a Motion to have them
Read, at the meeting of their Quest, in the Quest-House. Mr. W. Professed that
he only called the Reading of them upon That Occasion so, for that never any
such thing had been done before, that ever he heard of in this Parish: And that
he opposed the bringing up of such a Custom, for the Poors sake, because he
presumed they would pay the Reader out of the Purse, that at That Meeting
annually was made for Them. But he told me he declared to them, that if they
would pay the Reader out of their Own Purses, they might have the Prayers in
the Church with all his heart; and acknowledged then that he gave them a
Proverbial Saying, which they made a mighty business of, that signified no more
than that every Body might have his Liberty, either to go, or to stay away;
which, though it might be decently enough used in most Cases not relating to
Religious Affairs, yet I told him it was Irreverendly done of him to use it in
this Case; And though I could not impute it to his Disaffection to the Prayers
(he having ever since I came to this Parish, and I understand, for some Years
before was a constant attender on them upon Sundays) but to mere Rashness and
Inconsideration, they being then in the heat of Passion; yet at that time, and
more then once since, I rebuked him for it with severity enough. And I further
Reproved him before these Men, for not being as forward as any to so good a
Motion; though it was evident enough, that the Motion was not made from so good
a Principle, as that of true Love to the Worship of God, but upon a design that
was very Obvious. I farther added, that to encourage the Reading of the
Prayers, at this Yearly Meeting, I would My self first read them at their
Meeting again the next Year, and so for the future, which accordingly I did the
last Christmas. They had another Story of a most indecent Scoff at our Church
Music, but this he utterly denied, and persists in doing so; and the Truth is
I never Believed it, but now, for a reason I will not mention, I disbelieve it.

After all the Passionate Fending and Proving was over, and I had, as I said,
smartly enough reproved Mr. W. I told them 'twas evident, he did not call the
Prayers an Innovation, but only the Reading them in the Quest-House, or upon
that Occasion, and then Exhorted them to more Christian behavior toward one
another, and to be Friends again; Having heard that there was an elder Grudg
between one or both of these Men, and this Mr. W. And that the Difference did
not begin now: Although one of them had been sometime before his great
Intimate, and he Constantly gave Mr. W. the Title of his Master. Hereupon they
Drank to each other, more than once, and shook hands. But the Next News I heard
of them, which surprised me much, was, that they had made a Complaint of him to
Mr. Recorder, and that the Constable had carried him away to Guild Hall, and
that there he was bound over to answer for his Depraving the Common Prayer;
upon these Men's Oaths, at the Kings Bench Bar. Whereupon this Mr. W. signified
to me, That the Lord Mayor had advised him, to get a good Petition drawn up to
my Lord Chief Justice, and as good a Certificate as his Minister and other
Creditable People of the Parish, could give him; and that His Lordship promised
him to present both with his own hand, and accordingly He performed that
Promise. Hereupon I again Reproved him, and told him I hoped this would be for
the future a Warning to him; and finding him much dejected, I said I would
willingly certify for him whatsoever I knew to be true of him. And the
Certificate I gave him was this, That he was a Constant Attender on the Prayers
of the Church, a Frequenter of the Holy Communion, in the way of the Church of
England, and a forward man to Public good Works in the Parish, and
particularly at that time, to the Repairing of our Church and Steeple. And in
the close, I expressed how far I was from going about to excuse his fault; but
in what Words I did this, I don't now remember.

This is the plain and Naked Truth of this matter, and I am yet to learn where
lay my fault. Nay I am still fully satisfied in my Conscience, that I did
nothing but what I might Lawfully do, nay nor any thing but what I was bound in
Common Justice to do. For I never knew him other, than a Constant attender on
the Prayers of the Church, nor than a Frequenter of the Holy Communion, I mean
upon his Knees and at the Rayles. And, whatsoever Faults he may have been
guilty of, I have found no one Parishioner more Public Spirited, both in
reference to the Church and Parish. And he was one of the best Churchwardens
(I finding him in that Office when I first came hither) that I believe the
Parish ever knew. It has been Objected to me, that he behaved himself
Disloyally at the Election of Sheriffs, and therefore this Certificate was
taken the Worse at my hands. But I need make no other Reply, than that this was
more than I Knew. I have but little Acquaintance in this Parish to this Day,
and had less then, so that I might very well be a stranger to his Behavior at
that Election. For my part, I never perceived any Disloyalty in him, but the
Contrary, when he has come to me, which he does very rarely, but when Business
brings him, though he lives close by me. And had he discovered Disaffection to
the Government, either in Church or State to Me, What is commendable in him
should not have made with Me an Atonement for it. But there is no end of these
my Obliging Friends Stories; I hope though, for the future they will be more
Innocent ones; I mean, that their Tongues will be no Slander. The worst thing I
knew of this man was, that he would be too easily Provoked, but as soon (that
I Will say for him too) Pacified. But why should I better know what this W. was,
than what These Men were? I was I confess often told what Two of them were, but
I would not believe it, till they did me the kindness to make me understand
them whether I would or no; and since I have been sufficiently upbraided with
my Charitable Incredulity. But in order to the more Blackening of Me, One or
More of my good Friends have reported, That he was upon the Scaffold when the
King was Murdered. I never heard of This till this very day, but I concluded
'twas a Wicked Lie, before I sent for him to ask him the Question. His Reply
was, that he was then but a Boy about sixteen Years Old, (as any one may
believe that knows him) and that he was at that time Fourscore Miles from
London.

In short, Mr. Attorney General had a full Hearing of the forementioned Cause,
was fully satisfied of the Baseness of it, and gave Mr. W. a Noli Prosequi.

My Enemies after this, made an Article against me of this Certificate, at
Doctors Commons, and it was thrown out again with Contempt enough. And yet, it
is still made a heinous Crime in me, and if it must be so for the future, after
this pains I have taken to clear my self of being faulty therein, so let it.
Pervicaciae nullum opposuit remedium Deus. Tertul.
But I declare farther, that if I had refused to certify what I knew to be
true of this Man, I had not only been Unjust, but highly Dis-ingenuous. For at
my first coming to this Parish, though he was a mere Stranger to me; and I
never once heard of him before; he highly obliged me by standing up for my
Right to Houses that were Built on the Churchyard Ground, and which I
recovered without going to Law, and by no Man's Assistance more than by his. And
so much for That.

I am accused too of this very Whiggish Trick, and in My mind a More Knavish
one, than the pretended Certificate, viz. That the Lord Mayor, or some Great
Man (no body knows who) sending to me to give my Judgment of Persons fit to be
chosen Common-Council-Men, and to do my best toward procuring the Choice of
Loyal Persons, I recommended Fanatics, or at least Whigs, and stickled for
them. But the Reader shall not need to be scared with the fears of another tedious
Tale, for a Word or Two will do this business, viz. I solemnly profess both
upon the Word of a Christian and a Divine, That I never concerned my self,
either directly or indirectly, in that Affair, nor ever was defired by any
Mortal to Meddle in it. But yet this Goodly complaint of me, was told me by no
less a Man than a Lord, this last week. And I am not to seek to understand, why
just at This Nick of time, (I mean within this Week or Fortnight) there are
such Strenuous but Secret Endeavors used by these Men, to make me all that is
naught to our GOVERNOVRS.

It may be expected I should here Clear my self of Discouraging my
Churchwardens from Presenting Dissenters, which they made an Article of, but I
need to say no more than this to it, That as they could make nothing like a
Proof of it in the Court, so the contrary appeared there, by the Deposition of
the Principal of their own Witnesses. And I had full Evidence ready to prove,
That I only Charged them to Present Impartially, and not to Gratify any ones
Revengeful Piques, but it was not produced because 'twas needless. And I had,
after a full Hearing, Ten Pounds Costs given me against them. And now my Hand
is in, a Word or Two to their Grand Article, That I gave the Communion to two
of my Churchwardens together, Who were Excommunicated in the Court, near a
Year and half since. But as I had Leave to Defer the Publishing of that
Excommunication, so the Sacrament was given them before 'twas Published; and I
had then great Assurance, That Excommunications can take no Effect till they
are Published; and what I did, was done upon the best Advice I was capable of
having, and I Relied upon the Authority of more than One Ecclesiastical Judge;
and the same Article had been Exhibited against many other Divines besides my
self, had they been so unhappy as to have had in their Parishes any People of
such Venomous Spirits, as those Few I am infested with. So that, if this were a
Fault in me, it was a Fault of most Excuseable, if I may not say Invincible,
Ignorance. I no way Consulted mine own Interest in doing this thing, and I
Abominate the breaking of any Order of the Church to Gratify any Person
whatsoever.

There is one thing more which I ought not to omit, viz. That whereas I might
say (but that it may be replied, I live far from Neighbors) that no Man could
live more Peaceably than I have done in this place, nor have been more forward
to Oblige all Men, I have wondered sometimes, and so have others too who know my
Conversation, how I should happen to have in my Parish such Bitter Enemies,
though, I thank God, I have but a very few that I know of. But I have been for
some time satisfied, that my Impartiality in Preaching has netled some, and
particularly my frequent exposing certain Vices of some among us, who value
themselves mightily upon their Loyalty and Conformity, whom I have plainly
told, That they are a Disgrace both to the King and the Church; and it may be I
have but seldom dealt Severely with the Fanatics, and Men of Factious,
Seditious, and Rebellious Principles, but I have had a Bout with them too. Now
this is a Fault I will not make the least Excuse for, and if it be a Fault, I
believe most of the good Service I have done here to the King and Church, has
been principally Owing to it.

A Second Cause of my Troubles I am too sure (and I question whether I can name
a Third) is, My Refusing to part with Mr. S. after all Endeavors that have
been used to Set me against him. And for my great Aversness to Gratify his
Enemies herein, I will Exercise my Readers Patience with this short Apology.
viz. That, besides one Personal Pique, I soon perceived, the Bottom of the
Emnity against him, to be some Sermons he Preached of the Absolute Necessity of
Restitution, that grievously Galled some, who were too well known, to have
Wronged the Poor, together with his declaring his Mind Elsewhere with some
Severity, against several unjust Practices, before I had any Relation to this
Parish. And it would have lain heavy upon my Conscience, while I had a Day to
Live, should I have Joined with Those against him, who, I was Satisfied, did
Set themselves in Opposition to him, for the Zeal he had expressed upon so
highly Commendable an account, as that of endeavoring to do Right to Those who
are not in a Capacity of Righting Themselves. Besides, should I have dismissed
Mr. S. I could not but expect the Curses of Hundreds of Needy Families, for,
excepting two Noted Citizens, I know not his Fellow for bestirring himself, to
get Relief for Poor People. I am Confident, That never was a Parish so obliged
to a Curate, as this Parish has been, for many Years, to Him, as Ill as he
has now, for a long time by some few, been Requited for it. And, to speak my
Conscience, I am certain this Parish could very much better spare my Self, than
it can Him.

I Confess, at my first coming, there was some Misunderstanding between Him and
Me, which some hoped would have ended in a settled Enmity like to Theirs: But
in a very short time, We came to know each Other Better, and then immediately
all That Vanished, and has never been in the least Revived to this Day.

And, as to his Preaching up Loyalty, and Conformity to the Church, I know not
a Divine in London that is, or, ever since I came hither, has been more
Zealous; as many Hundreds, I may say some Thousands, can bear me Witness. I
will make no other Apology for troubling the Reader with this long Scribble,
than this very short one, viz. Mere Necessity has, sorely against my
Inclination, Compelled me to it. But, for all that, I expect to have the old
lame Distick flung in my Dish, viz.

Hoc mihi pro certo est, quod si cum sterc^re Certo,
Vinco, seu vincor, Certe Ego Maculor.
And if I have this Wipe, I Will take it Patiently, though of all Gibes, I
confess, I Most hate True Ones.

St. Giles Cripplegate, Nov. 16. (85.)
THE Great Wickedness, And Mischievous Effects of SLANDERING Represented.
Psalm. 101. 5. Whosoever privily Slandereth his Neighbor, him will I Cut off.
I Shall not detein you with any thing of Preface, but fall immediately upon
the Business I designed in the choice of these Words, for my Present Subject.

The Just and Pious KING, who was the Penman, spends this short Psalm in
declaring to his People, how he was resolved to manage himself, in reference
to the encouragement of Piety and Virtue among them; and the discouragement of
Vice and Wickedness. And among other particular Vices which he tells them
should by no means escape Punishment, that of Slandering their Neighbors comes
in, in the Words of my Text. Nor is here any one Vice which he expresses so
great an abhorrence of, or so severely Threatens, as this of Slandering. For,
whereas he says, A froward Heart shall DEPART FROM ME: I will not KNOW a
Wicked Person: And him that has a High Look, and a Proud Heart will not I
SUFFER: And he that Works Deceit shall not DWELL WITHIN MY HOUSE: And he that
tells Lies shall not TARRY IN MY SIGHT; He makes Slandering their Neighbors,
a Capital Crime, and declares That Whosoever Slandereth his Neighbor, him would
He CUT OFF.

First, I will endeavor to show, what is here Meant by Slandering ones
Neighbor.

Secondly, Upon What accounts we may presume this Good King did thus Threaten
those that should be Guilty of this Practice.

I. What is here Meant by Slandering ones Neighbor. Thus to do, is either to
Devise a Tale of another and then Tell it; That is, Such a Tale, as tends to
the bringing of a Blot upon the Person of whom it is invented and told: Or to
tell a false Story from other hands as true, and with a design to have it
Believed without sufficient Evidence of the truth of it. Now although this
Latter way of Slandering be a very Great Sin, as proceeding from great want of
Charity, and being perfectly opposite to that Golden Rule of our Savior, What
you would that Men should do to you, do you even the same to them, (than which
no Maxim in Morals is more plainly taught by the Law of Nature, i. e. Right
Reason unassisted by Divine Revelation, and which a Pagan Prince gives us in
Negative Terms, viz. Quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris. Whatsoever
thou would not have done to thy self, do not offer to do to another: I say,
as this Latter way of Slandering is for these reasons a very Great Sin, and
consequently will meet with, where it is not timely repented of, very Sore
Punishment from Gods hands) yet the Former way, viz. Slandering by Inventing of
Stories to the Blemishing of any ones Good-Name, is a Greater Sin, (as is
evident at first hearing) and therefore deserves Greater Punishment. And the
more the Tale Blackens his Reputation of whom it is told, and the greater, or
more useful the Person is in the World who is defamed, as also the greater the
Injury is that is designed him in telling it of him, the greater still is this
exceedingly great Sin. Now the Slanderers that King David must needs mean here
in the Text, and whom he threatens with being Cut off, are such as shall
Devise and Invent Lies to the Injuring of their Neighbors, i. e. of any
Persons, be their Rank and Quality what it will; which the word Neighbor does
import. And they are only such Slanderers as these which must be here thus
threatened, because the other Sort (viz. Such as do not Invent, but only Rashly
give Credit to and Report Lies of their Neighbors) though They are great
Sinners too, yet we cannot think that the King would doom them to so great a
Punishment. For in all Places, there are too many of these Offenders to be made
Obnoxious to so severe a Sentence. And besides, it is not so easy a matter for
the Magistrate to find Evidence sufficient in such a case as this, to found
such a Sentence as that of Death upon it.

II. I come to show upon what Accounts this Good King did thus threaten such as
Privily Slandered their Neighbors. There is very great reason for his being
thus Incensed against them.

First, Because Inventers of Slanders are in the number of the most Injurious
and Mischievous People in the World.

1. They are most Mischievous to those Persons who are the Objects of their
Slanders; None are more so, except those Instruments of Satan, who by drawing
others to Sin destroy their Souls. After the Divine Graces and Virtues, which
are necessary to Qualify for the Heavenly Happiness, a Man's Good-Name is the
most highly Valuable. It is not only Better than precious Ointment, and rather
to be chosen than Silver and Gold (as the Wise Man says) but it is to be
preferred before all Temporal Enjoyments whatsoever, not excepting Life it self.
For who can take any Comfort in his Life, (unless he be divested of all
Humanity, and strangely sunk into the Brutish Nature) that is sensible of
having Outlived his Good-Name? And as for those that are so sunk, it would be
much better for themselves as well as for the World, if they were out of Being.
And as it is Natural to those Men who have any thing of Generousnes and
Ingenuity in their Tempers, above all things to Covet a Good-Name; So there is
this great reason why they should, namely, Because it is the chief Thing that
makes Men useful in the World; and there are no such unprofitable or
insignificant Creatures upon God's Earth, as those are who have lost their
Reputation, or had never any to lose. I mean by a Good-Name and Reputation,
that of a Good Man: Of a Man that has imbibed good Principles, and is true to
them: Of a Man Revering the Great God, and Fearing to break wilfully any of His
Laws. That which either in the Sacred Writings, or in the Books of the
Philosophers is called a Good-Name, is wholly Founded upon Good Morals. A Large
Understanding, shrewdness of Wit and Parts, High Titles of Honor, etc. have,
it is Confessed, acquired to their Owners Great Names, but these alone never
made any Man the Possessor of a GOOD-Name.

Now so far as any Man's Reputation, in reference to his Morals, is Eclipsed,
so much the less Capable does he immediately become of being Serviceable in his
Generation. The less of a Good-Name any one has, the fewer Opportunities and
Advantages will he have, of being Beneficial to his Fellow Creatures, either in
their Temporal or Spiritual Concerns, but especially in their Spiritual. And as
it is chiefly upon this account that a Good-Name ought to be so Highly
esteemed; So to Esteem it upon any other account, separate from this, is
nothing better than a Gratification of Animality or Fond Fancy. But this
Consideration makes it highly reasonable to prize a Good-Name above Rubies, and
above the Wealth of both the Indies, and to reckon our Sufferings herein in the
number of the greatest Worldly Sufferings. So, it is manifest, King David did,
by diverse Passages in his Psalms: As particularly in Psalm. 35. 11, 12. says
he, False Witnesses did rise up against me, they laid to my charge things which
I knew not (or which I was altogether Guiltless of) they rewarded me evil for
good (or this Evil of Slander for all the good Services I have done them) to
the spoiling, or (as it is in our Old Translation) to the great discomfort of my
Soul. And Psalm. 69. 19, 20. he thus Complaints; Thou have known my Reproach and
my shame and my Dishonor, mine Adversaries are all before thee, Reproach has
broken my heart and I am full of Heaviness. So that a Slanderer being a Robber
of that which is deservedly so Precious, or at least he always being so in his
Endeavor, there was great reason why this Holy King should so Abominate him,
as we find by our Text he did: But,

2. As the Slanderer is thus highly Injurious to Those who are the Objects of
his Slanders, so is he the most Pestilent Creature to the Community of which he
is a Member. Those who invent Slanders, are the greatest Pests and Plagues to a
Body Politic. They are continually stirring up Strife and Contention,
Animosities and Emulation: And where these are, St. James tells us, There is
Confusion, and every evil Work. One of these is sufficient to set a whole
Neighborhood together by the Ears, and a Few of them are enough to inflame a
whole City, nay a whole Kingdom. King Solomon says, Prove. 16. 27. An ungodly
Man diggeth up Evil, and in his Lips there is a burning Fire. And St. Paul, 2
Cor. 12. 20. brings in Swellings and Tumults immediately after Backbitings and
Whisperings. Which he had good reason to do, since those are the Natural
Consequents and Effects of these. For they not only sow Seeds of Division among
the People, but beget a mutual Misunderstanding between them and their
Governors. These Backbitings and Whisperings render Governors jealous of
their People, and the People as jealous of their Governors. Princes see with
other Men's Eyes, as they Act by other Men's Hands; and therefore it is the most
difficult Thing, and even next to impossible for them, ordinarily to discern
between Calumnies and True Stories. They have greater Matters always to mind,
than to have Leisure to Dive to the bottom of those Reports that are brought to
them. And therefore, no wonder if they are frequently Abused and Imposed upon;
and so, persuaded to take some for their Worst, who are in the number of their
Best Subjects; and others for their Best, who are really their Worst. And while
the Slanderers are as Cunning and Dextrous as they are Wicked and Malicious,
What can always prevent this, and the horrible Mischiefs occasioned thereby,
but such a degree of Wisdom and Knowledge, as no where resides but in GOD
himself?

Now King David had great reason to resolve upon doing his Utmost toward the
Rooting out of his Kingdom such People as These, when he knew them to be the
great Instruments of their Father the Devil, in making his Subjects uneasy to
himself, and to one another, and himself too as uneasy unto them: When he knew
that all good Order and Government, was inconsistent with the Encouragement, or
Toleration of such a Crew of vile Miscreants. When he was so well aware, that
let such pretend to what Loyalty they pleased, 'twas impossible for him to have
Naughtier Subjects than These are.

Let us Consider what St. James says of a Slandering Tongue, Chapter 3. v. 5. The
Tongue is a little member, and boasts great things; behold how great a matter
a little fire kindles! And the Tongue is a Fire, a World of Iniquity. So is
the Tongue (or a Calumniating Backbiting Tongue) among our Members, that it
defiles the whole Body, and it is set on Fire of Hell.

Secondly, As Inventers of Slanders are the most Mischievous and Destructive
sort of People; so, whilst they are neglected and let alone, they are the most
Successful in their wicked Designs. They are so Successful, that what our
Proverb says of a Flayl, is much truer of a Slandering Tongue, that, There is
no Fence against it. If any thing be a sure Protection from it, one would think
the most Spotless Innocence, and the most Exemplary Virtue needs must, but the
Example of our Blessed Savior assures us of the Contrary. No Man ever arrived
to His Innocence or Virtue; but for all that, never was any one so strangely
Wronged in his Good-Name as He. Though no Man more Practiced or Taught Loyalty,
yet was He Represented as an Enemy to Caesar. Though never had the Devil such
an Enemy, yet was he Calumniated as a Great Wizzard, in league with Beelzebub
the Prince of the Devils. Though never was the Breast of any one so possessed
with Divine Love, nor any man's Mind with so great a Reverence and Veneration
of the Divine Majesty, yet was He Stigmatized with the Blackest of all Marks
and Characters, viz. That of a Blasphemer. And as the most horrid Slanders were
invented and published to the World of Him, so were they generally believed
too. There is Nothing we are Owners of that is so Exposed to the Mercy of
others, as are our Good-Names. Whosoever has a Tongue in his Head, if he be
but Wicked enough, and not Universally known to be a Wicked Man, can, when he
pleases, do our Names a mischief. The Wise man says, Prove. 25. 18. that A Man
that bears false Witness against his Neighbor, is a Maul, and a Sword, and a
Sharp-Arrow. That is, He is made up and Compounded of all fatal Mischiefs. A
Maul cannot give greater Bruises, nor more effectually Fell to the ground, than
this sort of Weapon: Nor a Sword pierce deeper, or Cut and Slash more Cruelly:
Nor a sharp Arrow wound at a greater distance, no nor at nothing so great a
distance; for there is no getting out of the Reach of a Slandering Tongue; nor
is there any where to be found Security against it: I mean, besides the Special
and Extraordinary Providence of God. St. James tells us in the forementioned
Chapter, ver. 7. etc. that Every kind of Beasts, and of Birds, and of Serpents,
and things in the Sea, is tamed, and has been tamed of Mankind; But the
Tongue (viz. The Tongue of a Slanderer, as is plain by ver. 9.) can no Man
tame, it is an unruly Evil, (such an Evil as there is no dealing with it) full
of deadly Poison: Such as is too strong for the most Sovereign Antidote.

Many ( says the Son of Syrack) have fallen by the Edge of the Sword, but not
so many as have fallen by the Tongue: Well is he that is defended from it, and
has not passed through the Venom thereof. Who has not drawn the Yoke
thereof, nor has been bound in its bands? For the Yoke thereof is as a Yoke of
Iron, and the bands thereof as bands of Brass. The death thereof is an evil
death, the Grave were better than it. So that the Slanderer being an Enemy,
against whose Assaults the greatest Human Power, Policy or Wisdom, cannot
wholly defend us; well might King David conceive so high a displeasure against
him, as he here expresses. And the like displeasure does he declare against
him, Psalm. 120. 2, 3, 4. Deliver my Soul, O Lord, from lying Lips, and from a
deceitful Tongue. What shall be given unto thee, or what shall be done unto
thee thou false Tongue? Sharp Arrows of the Mighty, with Coals of Juniper. Or,
with hot burning Coals, according to the other Translation.

I proceed now to make some Application of what has been said; And it shall be
This.

First, This little we have discoursed on this Argument, is abundantly enough
to render the Sin of Slandering our Neighbor most abominable in our Eyes. I
mean,

1. The Sin of Devising and Inventing Defamations and Slanders. This indeed is
such a wickedness as one would think it should be needless to caution those
against it, I will not say, who profess Christianity, but who have not bid
adien to all Humanity. It is such a Black, such a Hellish Sin, as that the
Devil has both his chief Names and Characters from it. (...), i. e. This Name
Devil, signifies the Slanderer. Satan signifies the Spiteful Enemy. The chief
Characters we meet with in Scripture of the Devil, are these two, The Father of
Lies, and The Accuser of the Brethren. And therefore nothing can denominate us
more perfectly like the Devil, than this forging of Lies and Calumnies against
our Brethren. And we see, Psalm. 50. 19, etc. with what severity the Great God
expresses himself against those that dare to commit This Sin. Says He, Thou
give thy Mouth to Evil, and thy Tongue frames Deceit. Thou sit and
speak against thy Brother, thou slanderest thine own Mothers Son. These
things have thou done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest that I was
altogether such an one as thy self: But I will reprove thee, and set them in
order before thine Eyes. And v. 16. He asks such as These, What they had to do
to declare his Statutes, or that they should take his Covenant into their
Mouths: Or to make profession of his Religion, or indeed of any Religion. And
v. 22. He threatens them that He would tear them in Pieces, and there should be
none to deliver, if they would not consider what he now had said, and lay it to
heart.

King Solomon puts this Practice of Slandering, in the number of those Sins,
which God Abominates in a more Especial manner. Prove. 6. 16. etc. These six
thing does the Lord hate, yea seven are an Abomination to him. A Proud Look, a
Lying Tongue, and Hands that shed Innocent Blood: An Heart that devises Wicked
Imaginations: Feet that be swift in Running to Mischief: A False Witness that
speaks Lies: And he that sows Discord among Brethren. And indeed all these
Seven things, except the first, are such as make the proper Character of This
sort of Slanderers I am now exposing. And Rev. 22. 15. Whosoever loves and
makes a Lie, is reckoned with Dogs and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and
Murderers, and Idolaters; who are to have their Portion in the Lake that
burns with Fire and Brimstone.

2. Let us no less hate the Practice of Taking up Evil Reports against any,
that that of Inventing them. We learn from Psalm. 15. 3. That This also will
exclude us the Kingdom of Heaven; in that it is here said, that among those that
shall abide in Gods Tabernacle, and dwell in his Holy Hill, He is one that
Backbiteth not with his Tongue, nor does Evil to his Neighbor, nor takes up a
Reproach against his Neighbor: Or does not without Good Evidence give credit
to it, and much less spread and propagate it. The Wise Man makes him a Wicked
doer, who gives heed to false Lips; and a Liar, who gives ear to a naughty
Tongue. Prove. 17. 4. This is as much a Transgression of the forementioned
Golden Rule, Of doing as we would be done unto, as is Devising and Forging
Slanders. I doubt there is not much less Malice in this Practice, but I am sure
it savours of every whit as little Charity, as that other Practice does. I can
have no Charity for that man, against whom I am forward to believe and report
whatsoever of evil I chance to hear of him. Nay, VVhisperers and Backbiters, as
well as Inventers of Evil things, are reckoned by Saint Paul, among those
obdurate Sinners, of whom he Pronounces, That God had given them over (...) to
a Reprobate mind, Romans 1. 29, 30.

Hasty Believers and Spreaders of false Reports, are the Tools and Instruments
of those that invent them, for the doing of the Mischief they design by them.
And it is almost wholly Long of these, that Those wicked People are in a
Capacity of doing any Mischief by their Forgeries.

We are Bound therefore by the strictest Bonds, by the Bonds of Charity, of
Justice, and of Self-Preservation, to be extremely Cautious of lending our Ear
to Tale-Bearers, lest we be Involved in their Guilt, and so brought to share
with them in their dreadful Punishment. Since this is an express Law of God,
Thou shall not go up and down as a Talebearer among thy People, Lev. 19. 16.
Surely it is as much a Law of His, That we should not give encouragement to
those whom we know to be Tale-bearers, by Listening to their Tales.

Nay, We are obliged to be so far from Believing a Report against our
Neighbor, merely from the Information of any One or a Few Persons, of whose
Integrity, and of (...) certain Knowledge of the Truth thereof, (...) have not
great Assurance, that we may not ne^^ther conclude any Man Guilty, from his
being Accused by the Generality. There is indeed a common saying, Vox-Populi
est vox Dei, The Voice of the People is the Voice of God. And in a certain
Sense it may well pass for a true Proverb. But as it is vulgarly understood,
The Voice of the People is not the Voice of God, as we of this City and Kingdom
have often found by sad Experience. All Wise and Honest Men cannot be, at this
time of day, to seek for Conviction, What great Sufferers, even our Governors
themselves have been Wrongfully made to be, by the Voice of the People. And I
dare Affirm, That he who now takes the common Vogue for unquestionable
Evidence, had he lived in the Days of our Blessed Savior, would have been
made One among that wicked Crew, who applauded the Sentence pronounced against
Him.

And there is this weighty Reason, why Common Fame it self is not to be
Confided in, viz. For ought we can tell this Fame might first arise from but
One Man, and that Man a Liar too; and this we Certainly know, that the
Generality are so void of Charity, as hastily to Catch at Scandalous Stories,
and are much more easily persuaded to think and report Evil Things upon very
slight Grounds, than good and commendable Things, upon the most evident and
apparent Ones. And none have so sad Experience of the Truth of this, as Those
of whose Reputation we are obliged to be the most tender. I mean our Governors
in Church and State.

But suppose we have certain Assurance, that such an ill Report did take its
first Rise from not a few, yet we may not be sure but that these might be
United in one common Interest and Design; but in this Case, the Report of many
carries no whit stronger Evidence with it, than if it came but from One Mouth.
And this was the very Case of our Blessed Lord: They were many who first
divulged vile Slanders of Him, but they were All acted by one and the same
Principle, viz. That of Malice; and by the same Design, viz. That of Disgracing
Him among the People, and Incencing of King Herod and Pontius Pilate against
Him.

But Lastly, Suppose we could be certain, That the many 'first Reporters of Bad
Stories were not Linked together by one Common Tie, yet even in this Case too
we are bound to use Caution and Deliberation, before we give them undoubted
Credit. Especially if those Stories relate to Words or Actions that are capable
of a twofold Interpretation. The same Actions may be Faulty or Commendable,
according to the Circumstances wherewith they are attended. And the same Words
may be so too, according to the Occasion or Connection of them. But People are
generally, even those who have no Malicious Intention, Rash, and Heady in
judging of Actions without weighing Circumstances; and in running away with
half Sentences; or with whole ones, without Considering, What went before, or
followed after.

So that, I say, as we would not fall under the Guilt of that Sin, the
exceeding Heinousness of which I have been representing, Look we to it, that we
be not Hasty in taking up Evil Reports of any Body, let them come to us from
never so many. If this be warrantable, as I have already intimated, the joining
with those who ran down our Savior, and at last Nailed Him to the Cross, had
been very Excuseable, not to say Defensible.

And let us believe as well as, without offering Violence to our Reason, we can
of all Men; and choose much rather in our Judging, and in our Reports of Men, to
offend on the Right than on the Left hand. I am certain, thus much is implied
in those two Precepts of our Lord, viz. Judge not that ye be not Judged; for
with what Judgment ye Judge ye shall be Judged, and with what Measure ye mete,
it shall be meted to you again. Matthew. 7. 1, 2. And Judge not according to the
appearance, but judge Righteous Judgment, John 7. 24.

2. Ought the Slandering of our Neighbor to be so detested by us, then what an
Abominable thing is it, to Slander, and injure the Good-Name and Reputation of
the Kings Majesty, and of those that under Him have Authority over us! It Is an
express Law of God, Exodus 22. 28. and repeated by St. Paul, viz. Thou shall not
revile the Gods, nor Curse (or speak evil of) the Ruler of thy People. And as
to the King, it is so great a wickedness to defame Him, or say any thing to the
lessening of his Honor, that the Wise Man thus charge us, Eccles. 10. 20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought.

And it is as much the Peoples interest, as it is the Kings, that He be not
Slandered* or Spoken Evil of. For Seditious and Rebellious Practices do usually
arise from Men's first taking this Wicked Liberty; as we have all known by very
woeful Experience. And we know by the like experience, that the King suffers
not more by those lewd Practices, than the People necessarily must.

It was a good saying, as I remember, of Aristotle, (...), Whosoever defames
the Prince, is Injurious to the Commonwealth; or Mischiefs his Subjects.

And as for those that take liberty to Invent or Tell Stories reflecting upon
their Ecclesiastical Governors, Pastors, or Teachers, they are in a special
manner injurious to the Souls of Men. For nothing so tends to the prejudicing
of their People against their Doctrine, as their having an Evil Opinion of
their Persons. And for this Reason, I think none are so much concerned to keep
their Good-Names as unspotted as they can, and to clear themselves of
whatsoever Aspersions are cast upon them, as They are.

The Conclusion.
ANd now I will take this Occasion to inform you, That Some having greatly
concerned themselves of late, to carry Tales of Scandalous Passages which they
pretend to have heard from the Pulpits of diverse of my Brethren in this City,
there are Others who have very lately done the like good Office for My self. I
am too well aware Who they are, I will tell you who they are Not; I am very
confident, they are not Papists, at least not Professed ones. But you of this
Parish may have a shrewd guess within a very few; for you must needs know some
to have long expressed as bitter and implacable enmity against me, as if we had
been of two Churches and Contrary Religions: And that without the least
provocation on My part. And I doubt not there are many of the Roman Religion,
from whom I should have had much more Just, Fair, and Christian Treatment. As
silent as I have been hitherto, this is not the first nor second time neither,
that I have been in the self-same manner most vilely abused by These People, as
in due time, I trust in God will be made manifest. My last Accusation was this,
(or at least the last I have heard of) That I vented in this Pulpit, on
All-Saints-Day, viz. This day Fortnight, a Bitter Curse against the Papists,
together with all those (for which I trust to the Memory of an Extraordinary
Person) who give them encouragement. And the Curse I understand was worded to
this Effect; I wish their Names and Memories may Rot Eternally. Whatsoever the
Express Words were, I hear they perfectly Agreed in the self-same, which is so
far from Evidence of their telling Truth of me, that it is a much stronger
Argument of their being Conspirators against me. But may this Curse, instead of
falling upon the Papists, or those that Encourage them, light upon my Own Name
and Memory, if I either Pronounced It, or any Curse like it against either the
One or the other, or any Curse at all against either. And as I solemnly Appeal
to God Almighty, so I Appeal to You my Auditors, Whether there were the least
Appearance or Shadow of an Occasion given by me, for such an Information as
this against me. I Appeal to You also, Whether you can think it Possible, that
such an Accusation as this could arise from mere Mistake. I am Confident, That
All who minded my Sermon, will pronounce, that neither this Charge, nor any
Charge that has the least likeness to it, be it Worded how it will, must be
nothing better than pure Invention; which we have shown is the most Horrible
way of Slandering.

I prevailed with a most Worthy Prelate to hear that Sermon read out of my
Notes word for word, and I cannot call to mind my having said above three or
four Words more than are in my Notes, and those I acquainted his Lordship with,
merely that I might truly say, That He had nothing of the Sermon Concealed from
Him. And after it was read, not one Bit of a Sentence could be fixed upon, that
might put my Enemies in mind to Invent such a Slander as this of me, unless it
were this, viz. If we do not justify to all the World (meaning, as before was
expressed, we Divines of the Church of England) the Representations we have
made of that Religion (viz. the Roman) to our People, let our Names stink, and
our Memories be covered with Eternal shame. And these words next follow, It Is a
most wicked thing to Slander a particular Person, and much more to Slander and
Be-lye a whole Church, and that so Excellent and Famous a Church, as that of
Rome once was. So that if I had been Accused of Curseing my Self, or my
Brethren, instead of the Papists, and those that Encourage them, there had been
a much more Colorable Pretense for such a Calumny.

I know I have not lived such a Life as that after so Solemn Appeals as I have now
made, my perfect Innocence, as to this Charge, should be in the least
Questioned by those, who have the least Knowledge of me. Bur as for those that
are Acquainted with me, I am certain they need no such Appeals to Satisfy them,
that I could not be Guilty of so Un-Christian a thing, as the Cursing of any
Man, upon any account; and much less, as the Cursing of any Sort of Men, upon
the account of their being of a different Religion from my Self. For as to all
such, I have very rarely been blamed for any Defect of Charity toward them;
but I have often been Censured as being in the other Extreme, viz. Of the
Excess of Charity, which I have always concluded to be much the safest.

Good Lord, That any, who profess themselves Christians, should be so depraved,
as to attend our Preaching God's holy Word, with no better a Design, than to be
Spies upon Us, and to catch at all advantages (and when they can find none, to
make them) for the Ruining of us and our Families; Nay, and which is worse, if
worse can be, that such should dare to receive the Holy Communion, and that at
Their hands too, against whom they are always Contriving of Mischief.

God Grant that such People may at length seriously lay to heart, the wretched
State they are in, and consider what a severe Reckoning, they shall one day be
called to for such Practices. And that, if timely Repentance prevent it not,
there will most certainly be Bitterness in the Latter End.

I have sometimes e'ne Trembled to think, what horrid Crimes the Devil in time
may draw such into, who are so forsaken of the Divine Grace, as to be Able to
do such things as These.

I have long Remembered my Adversaries particularly in my Daily Prayers, that
God would be pleased to give them true Repentance for the many great Injuries
they have done me, and for their other Sins, that their Souls may be saved in
the day of the Lord Jesus.

I am under a greater necessity than you are aware of, thus to clear my
Innocence; and what I have now done, has not been without the best Advice.

Thanks be to God, His Majesty is so Just and Gracious a Prince, as instead of
readily crediting ill Stories of us, to give us Opportunities for the clearing
of our Innocence: And very willingly Condescends, Audire alteram Partem, to the
hearing of our Vindications. Nor is His Majesty less forward to the receiving
of Satisfaction concerning our Innocence, than Patient in Hearing Complaints
against us. Which Grace of His lays a Farther Obligation upon us, to Pray for
His Majesty's Long and Happy Reign over us.

I will now Conclude, with that most Christian Petition of our Church in the
Litany. We beseech thee Good Lord, That it may please Thee to forgive our
Enemies, Persecutors and Slanderers, and to turn their Hearts. And with the
Intercession of our Blessed Savior upon the Cross, for his Bloody Enemies:
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

FINIS.

