The POURING FORTH OF THE Seventh and Last VIAL UPON ALL FLESH AND FLESHLINES,
Which will be a Terror to the Men that have Great POSSESSIONS. OR Several
Visions which has bin made out to me of what the All of all things is now
bringing to pass, that so the root of al malice, strife, hatred, and war may be
dug up, and the only way for universal love and freedom to all sorts of
people to be brought in; but in a more especial manner, and higher and most
glorious discovery of God to his peculiar people, whom the All of all things
will make the PRAISE of the Whole EARTH.

ISAIAH 28. 21, 22. and 43. 18, 19. For the Lord shall rise up in mount
Perazim, he shall be wroth as in the Valley of Gibeon, that he may do his work,
his strange work* and bring to pass his act, his strange act.

Now therefore be ye not mockers, lest your bands be made strong; for I have
heard* from the Lord of host, a consumption determined upon the whole Earth.

Remember ye not former things, neither consider the things of old. Behold I
will do a new thing, and now it shall spring forth.

GEORGE FOSTER, or otherwise JACOB ISRAEL.

Printed in the Year MDCL.

The Epistle to the Reader.
MY dear hearts all and everyone of you, whether high or low, rich or poor,
bond or free: I am a creature and one of your Fellow Creatures, forced to send
unto you a small mite, which I have had through the speakings of my infinite
father in me, which speakings in me have bin so burning hot and so powerful,
that I have not bin able to resist as for to keep them in secret, they being
things which in this treatise I treat of, I have seen them as being taken in a
trance and lying for dead about 22 hours: for the most part of them which in
this following discourse, I had made out to me being in that condition, and
as soon as I had seen and heard of them and they were over, so that I had no
other at that time, I was forced to write them, it being the good pleasure of
my father for to make choice of me so poor and and unable a despised
instrument, for to reveal and make known such things as shall surely come to
pass, as concerning the Levelling of that which men for the present call their
own, and so hord up riches and treasures here on earth for to make themselves
great and to be applauded of men, forgetting the exhortation of Jesus Christ,
who bid them lay up treasures in heaven and not here on earth: for the laying
up treasures here on earth Christ said the rust would take it: which the
Apostle James says plainly to such men that have horded up gold and silver,
even the very rust of it will rise up in judgment against them: look to your
selves, here is the last vial to be poured forth, made mention of for to give
you warning of your selves, for behold the day of the Lord is at hand, he is
coming to take vengeance on all his enemies, and for to confound you all that
have bundance of treasures here on earth, and have laid up none in heaven, nay
it seems to be an unpossible thing for a rich man to go into the kingdom of
heaven; for says Jesus Christ, it is easier for a camel to go through the eye
of an needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of heaven: O you
rich men, what say you to these words? do you think to go to heaven, when the
rust of your silver will rise up in judgment against you? you had more need
throw away your riches here, and give them to the poor; that the crying of the
poor might no longer come into my ear, says the Lord, for their sakes do I
come to take vengeance on such hypocrites as you are, because you have forms
of Godlyness, but deny the power thereof, you would fain appear to be holy, but
yet you would be loath to part from that which is the greatest enemy of you, as
the Apostle says, men coveting after riches have erred from the faith, and so
have peirced themselves through many sorrows: but that this may no longer
trouble you and keep you from coming to me, I will show my self for the poors
sake, when you through the hardness of your hearts have rather seen them starve
for want of food then give them a piece of bread, yea though they cry for the
Lord sake give me a piece of bread: when as all things are the Lords, and the
Lord comes; he comes, what to do? he comes to bring down the pride and haughty
looks of men; what pride and haughty looks? even such pride and haughty looks
that scorn their fellowcreatures, even that must be brought down, even all
their glory, and honor too, even that glory wherein you have gloried, and
boasted your selves: as because of your riches you have thought your selves
better then others; and must have your fellow creatures in bondage to you, and
they must serve you, as to work for you, and moyl and toil for you, standing
cap in hand to you, and must not displease you, no by no means; but alas, what
are you now I come, says the Lord? for I tell you that the Lord of host comes
with fire and sword for to bring down your pride, and your glory and honor,
and all these things that you have lifted up your selves with, and have thought
your selves better then the rest, I say he comes to plague you, torment you,
and so to make you weary of your idols which you have made to your selves, for
I must tell thee, and it will prove very true, that the mighty God of Jacob is
at hand, and will come of a sudden when thou art not a ware of, even that
mighty Leveller, for to Level and lay mountains and hills low, even you that
are richer and greater then your fellow creatures, even as low as my may be,
and so will make all equal with the plains; for it is but just for him to do
so, seeing thou fat swine of the earth, whatsoever thou have is not thine own,
but it is all the Lords; and though it has bin his pleasure for to bestow
riches on thee, and so have let you usurp authority over them, yet now the
Lords is at hand, that he will call you. to an account, and finding you to be
unjust stewards, he will put you out of your stewardship, and then you must no
longer usurp, but shall be glad to be fellows with them whom now ye despise
and hate, and cannot abide to let them be in your sight; though this may seem
strange to you and you will not believe it, yet it is the Lords pleasure that I
should send it forth to the public view, there being some that will consider
these things before hand, and so be made for to go before in this manner, as to
count nothing their own, and this they do with joy; when you that are
obstinate, and will not believe the strange work which the Lord did speak by
his prophets along time before this, and that new thing shall be done which
people shall little think of, as I will do a new work, which the prophets point
at, even that the Lord should make you throw away that which you do so much hug
and look after, even the gold and silver which you make Idols of: but whether
you will or no, remember that it is the Lords pleasure to send you this, as a
thing to scourge you, yea a very strange thing it is like it may appear to you,
but read on and fear not, but that the Lord of host who caused me to write
this, will in his own time (when he sees you to be in security and peace, crying
peace to your selves) break in like a mighty man, and confound you of a sudden;
for it is his pleasure to deal harshly with you, and make you weary of your
selves, that so he may bring you through the fire to himself; and make you to
glory in himself, and not in any thing else beside himself, for many reasons
why the Lord should do this may be shown.

First, that the people may understand the Lord of host is no respecter of
persons, as to give liberty to some more then to others, in respect of those
things that be necessary to the body, which was all made for the use of man,
and that man should have the benefit of them all, which man has a long time
bin deprived of the use of these outward things, as riches which other do
enjoy; and therefore seeing it was the pleasure of the Father at the first, for
to give to the creature man, an equal privilege to all a like, and not made
man to be Lord over some part of the creation, and the other part of the
creation be in subjection to some other man, no, but made man Lord over all,
and that all were made for the use of man; it is therefore no reason that man
should be kept in bondage, as now they are, but that the just Lord who is in
the midst of us, may show his power for to restore his creature man from the
bondage they are now in, and so make man know that he was made a Lord over all
other creatures, and so now shall once again by my power says the Lord be
brought for to enjoy the whole work of my hands, and so shall freely enjoy the
whole creation without let or hinderance, in this day wherein I will make them
free from the power of man, and so will bring man to be fellows one with the
other, and not Lords over one another; as they have bin and are now.

Secondly, it is time for the Lord to appear in this way for to soften the
hearts of men, who are so cruel grown one to the other, as if they were not all
of one mold or mettle, what is the reason men are so hardened one against
another, but by reason of private interests which some have, and having more of
their own as they call, it then others, their hearts are pussed up with pride,
and so no longer will they be fellows, but masters and Lords over the rest, and
so ingross more and more into their hands, by craftiness, until such time they
get their desires, and when they have got their desires in some respect, they
cannot rest satisfied, but will still proceed on in cruelty, and in making the
rest of their fellow creatures their slaves, which is abomination to the Lord
that they should do so, that they should enjoy the works of the Lord in full,
and have their fill, and will not give to their fellow creatures any bread, yea
though they beg for the Lords sake for a piece of bread, yet they are so cruel
as they will not bestow any thing upon them, but many poor creatures dies for
want of bread, thus cruelly they deal with their fellow creatures; which the
Lord of host will not suffer long to be, for they have hardened their hearts, and
have made them as hard as a stone, but the Lord will soften your hearts, and
make you know that you have dealt cruelly with your fellow creatures and have
reigned over them, but you shall now no longer reign in pomp, but you shall be
brought to see by the power of the Lord of host, if you consider these
Scriptures which are at the beginning of several visions, you shall see and
know that you are as far off from fulfilling the Scriptures by your cruelty,
and that you may see you break them daily for exercising so much cruelty as you
do, which on the contrary if you did fulfill them, you would freely give to them
that have need of them.

And Reader, I do hereby mind you of the other part, which I have not writ as
my judgment, but by the speaking of my Father to me, as concerning the Jews,
even those that were Jews by nature, and are now dispersed abroad among the
Gentiles, how that it is the good pleasure of my Father, who is infinite in
himself, for to bring home his own people into his own light, and so to make
them see that Jesus whom their fathers crucified, was the King of the Jews,
notwithstanding they could not at that time believe it, yet now through his
almighty power which he will manifest by his strong and powerful hand, make
them know that they have crucified their king, for which cause they have bin
dispersed abroad in the nations; but now the father of love who is infinite of
himself, will in love bring home those, even the Jews, and make them his
spouse and choice Jewels, together with the Gentiles whom he will bring out of
their country both out of mystical and literal Babylon, into their own
country, even into the land of Canaan, a land of rest; whom the father has
appointed to be in Judea, even to make the Material City which the Jews
formerly did inhabit, the praise of the whole earth, and the people that shall
be gathered thither, to be his choice Jews, and his wife; which spouse and
wife shall consist of all his chosen ones, whom he will bring up into his
glory, both Jews and Gentiles; and how it will be his pleasure for to make
others be quiet, and ly in peace, and will not let them come to disturb them,
but will confound and plague them terribly, with such a blow that shall make
them amazed, so that they shall not know what to do, but shall be glad, yea
they shall think themselves happy if they can be at quiet and ly down in rest;
for the power of the mighty God of Jacob, even the infinite Jehovah shall be
seen to be amongst them, so (that they even the Jews) shall not need to be
afraid of any, but they shall ly down in peace and take their rest, and none
shall make them afraid; this will be the state and condition of Sion, that
shall be gathered together to the city Jerusalem; glory and light shall shine
upon them, when darkness shall cover the earth.

Courteous Reader, let not the strangeness of these things make thee hard to
believe, that such things as are here mentioned shall come to pass, by the
rudeness of these lines having no eloquent terms to set them forth, and by
reason of the weakness or contemptibleness of the writer of this piece, which
must prove a torment and a fire to burn and torment the gods of the earth, and
every thing that has bin Idolized of or by men, they having set their fancies
more upon outward objects then upon the All of all things.

But rather let these times move thee to pity, and softness and tenderness of
heart, with a yearning bowels of pity and compassion to thy poor
fellow creatures, who are destitute of the outward creatures, and perhaps have
not bread to eat, or any drink to drink, or cloths to cover their nakedness, I
say, be moved to all thy fellow creatures with such pity and compassion, as to
relieve their wants, and if thou hear any cry in the streets for the Lords
sake give me a piece of bread, give him, and turn not thy self away and say
thou have nothing if thou have, lest the Lord turns away himself from you, and
you cry, and he will not hear; as thou did hear the poor cry and would not;
for know that pure religion is to visit the widow and the fatherless, that if
you will indeed appear to be truly religious and not hypocrites, be kind
hearted and give up to the relief of those that want.

Moreover Reader, I cannot choose but mind thee of a word or two, and that is
this, you may read that Paul was counted mad, but he said whither he was mad,
or whither he were besides himself, it was for their sakes, and so say I,
whether I am mad or besides my self, it is for your sakes: as it is the good
pleasure of my Father for to make me so, that I may give you warning of what he
will do, or God in me speaks to you, for to make you cast away your Idols and
seem to the eye to be less practitioners of religion, that so you may be more
fulfillers of your duties, and less hearers then now you are, that so you may
be more perfect in doing; and however you think of me, let not the notion of
madness possess your spirits, as for you to think that I am mad, but rather
think it is the pleasure of the Father to turn the world upside-down, and so to
make use of me as he did of his son Jesus Christ: and as his son Jesus did do
things contrary to the custom of the world in those days, and all the powers
of the world was not able for to keep him from doing his own work, even so I
say, the infinite God having chosen me for to declare these things to you, I do
not question but he will by his infinite power carry this his own work on, and
none shall be able to hinder him from doing his pleasure.

And however you do think of me, as to judge me by your pharisaicall holiness,
and are ready to cry out, I have a devil: yet it is no other with me then it
was with Jesus Christ: whom the wise pharisees, or those that did seem to be
most religious for those forms and customs as were then in use according to
the law of Moses, which they were loath to be beat off: even I say those did cry
out against Jesus that he had a devil, and was the chief of the devils, and
that he were a blasphemer; notwithstanding he were the only Son, sent of the
Father for to abolish and so put to an end those ways of worships that were
then extant; but they being possessed with a fancy of their own, that God would
not forsake that which he had given to his servant Moses, and so to them for to
continue for ever, and so would not believe that the Christ were the Messiah,
because he came to alter and change the state and condition of their ways and
forms as they walked by, notwithstanding it was the pleasure of the infinite
God to forsake those forms although he had given them for to continue for
ever, which ever came out so soon as the time was at an end, for to appear in
that way, and then to leave that, and so to take to him another: and in
forsaking of these forms which he had given them, his Son whom he had sent, or
his messengers met with many enemies, crying out against him and his Apostles
or Disciples; and among these his enemies were the learned Pharisees and
Priests; and they did stir up the people for to forsake Christ and not to
cleave to him, for he has a devil, he speaks blasphemy, and will you believe
what he says? and so they cried out against Paul, how he turned the world
upside-down, and away with him (said the learned Pharisee) he is not fitting to
live: and if my Fathers only choice son met with such hard servants for to
deal with him so cruelly, and to tell him he had a devil, it is no wonder in
this age of ours why I should (or any of the messengers of the Lord of host
that are sent by him) meet with any other but the same, as to be looked upon as
one that turnth the world upside down, and so not sitting to live, by declaring
new things; as if the mighty God of Jacob had bound himself to be in one form,
and to tarry there for ever, and so it is no more to me why you should call me
a blasphemer, and you even you, O destroying Priests, that run before you be
sent, and so in your pulpits vent your malice as to cry against me, and so to
bid people beware of me, seeing the Priests in old time, and the outside
Hipocritical Pharise in thosedaies did do it to Jesus; and I say it is no moere
to me to be called so by a proud Hipocritical dissembling outside pople, that
would fain appear to be godyl and so for such to say I am a blasphemer, and
have a Devil; and thus some does come as they did to Christ, some out of
malice, and some out of ignorance, being loath to be deprived of these forms and
customs of ways and rules to walk by, for matter of worship, religion being
then grown to be more used for custom sake, then for anything else, as it is
now aday; whereby it is high time for the Lord of host to appear, and so to take
away your life, as your forms and ways of worships now; and so for not making
a right use of them, to deprive you of them, that you may no longer dissemble
with your maker which will be but just with God for to do so: for
notwithstanding all your forms and ways of worships which you have and walk
by, ye are a most eruel and malicious people, full of all manner of hypocrisy,
and dissembling with God and with men; but now your hearts shall be made
manifest, and ye shall now appear in your own colors, and so shall be made
manifest to all what you are; for the day of the Lord of host is now at hand,
to gather his out of mystical and literal Babylon, even to gather Sion together
and so to gather the wheat from the chasse, and though you do, not believe any
thing what I say, as being a people bound up in your own ways, and so loath to
be deprived of that food, ready to reason with the mighty creator why he will
reveal or make out himself to one more then to another, and will you say,
surely methinks I hear you say so, that if God will make out himself by visions
and revelations, surely he will do it as well to me as another, and because he
does it not to me, I do not believe he will do it to another, and thus Oye
proud and stout hearted people, that think all are deluded who have visions
because you your selves have none, and thus you bind and limit the holy one of
Israel for to do nothing but what he will first make you acquainted with, and
so make out to you, or else you will not believe; and not only remain in
unbelief, but you cry out against them, they are deluded, and are possessed
with a devil, and so will rail and speak evil against them, and thus you show
your malicious spirits, which rather declares your self to be possessed with an
evil spirit, or else to walk after the flesh and not after the spirit, for they
that are led by the spirit of God, walk in peace, love, meeknes, quietness,
soberness tenderness, and full of compassion and pity, and these desire not to
be rash and full of malice, speaking of evil, railing, cursing, judging, and
condemning those that are not of the same mind with them, backbiters,
adulterers, Idolaters, covetous persons, thinking themselves better then
others, and these and such as these walk after the flesh, and are the dogs and
sorcerers that shall be left without the City, and shall not enter into the
gates of the new Jerusalem; for the spirit of God is a spirit of light and
love, whereas the spirit of the devil is a spirit of cruelty, and murdering of
their fellow creatures and is in darkness: and the reason why I write my name
to be Jacob Israel, is because my name was changed from Goerge in in a vision,
to Jacob Israel Foster: and so I subscribe

GEORGE FOSTER. or JACOB ISRAEL

The POURING FORTH OF THE Seventh and Last VIAL.
I Saw in a vision a man giving away his money to another, and also giving away
food to feed him, and cloth to cloth him. And I heard a voice say, this man
lends unto the Lord, and that man that feeds the hungry and clothes the naked,
lends unto the Lord.

For he that gives to the poor lends to the Lord, says Solomon. O you rich
men that have abundance of gold and silver, and corn of all sorts: that hord it
up apace, and are loath to feed the hungry and cloth the naked, do you think you
do your duty, no says the Lord of host, you do not do your duty, neither do
you show your selves ever a whit kind to me, for if you did, you would not be
so eager as to lay up abundance and see your fellow creatures starve for
hunger. Therefore remember that he that gives to the poor, sends to the
Lord, but you have not given to the poor (for by the poor I mean those that are
in want) but ye have rather oppressed the poor, and have caused them to cry,
and their cries are come into mine cares, for I the Lord of host to take
vengeance on you for your cruelty against me; for as much as you have not done
it to one of these little ones, you have not done it to me, which if you had
done it, as to cloth the naked and feed the hungry; and freely disperse to them
that are in want, in so doing you had done it to me, and had given me that back
which I had given to you: and then you had done your duty in so doing: but
because you have hardened your hearts and have heard the crying of the poor, and
have not regarded them, but have thought your selves too good for them, and
have not laid it to heart that they are the works of my hand, and are made of
the same mettle and of the same blood as you are, but have thought your selves
too good for them, because of the riches which I have lent you; and have made
your riches and your strength your god, and not me (says the Lord,) therefore
I will now come and will not tarry, but will come quickly, and will take
vengeance on you, and will judge you to be destroyed in my wrath, and
confounded and stand amazed at my sore displeasure; for I now do awake as a
Giant, and as a man of war to make you houl and weep, and to make you see that
the rust of your gold and silver shall now rise up in judgment against you,
and shall be a witness to torment you; because you have not remembered me, as
to feed the hungry, and cloth the naked: for I will now reason with you (says
the Lord) is that which you have your own, or are they mine? surely you will
say they are mine; for I the All of all things have made them all, yea all the
beasts of the field are mine, and therefore you need not be so extraodinarily
covetous as to keep these creatures which I lend you for your own private use:
for if they had bin your own and you could have made them, then you might have
had some color, and have said shall I make them rich by my labor? but know
this (O man) that it is I, and I alone that am the life of all creatures, yea
even thy life, and without me you are unable to do any thing, and it has bin
my pleasure to bestow riches on you for this end and purpose, that thou
might give them freely to those that are in want, and not to make them your
Idols as you have done. But because you have done so, as to make your riches
your Idols and your gods, and have not considered that pure religion (even that
religion that is pleasing to me) is to visit the widow and the fatherless;
that is, to give and disperse that riches which you can spare to the relief of
those that have need of them; and then you had done well; for in so doing you
would have kept Saint James from crying against you, but because you have not
done it, therefore James bids you houle and weep for your gold and silver even
the rust of it, even the rust or cankered stuff that you have laid up for your
sons and daughters portions for to make them rich, while in so doing you have
kept back mine, which I sent you for to give to the poor; therefore houle and
weep, for I Come, I come.

A vision wherein I saw men feeding their enemies, and clothing of them, and so
did show abundance of love to their fellow creatures; and I heard a voice say
that these men do hold forth my Image, and do show themselves to be my sons and
daughters in so doing, but they do nothing but what I have commanded them to do
(says the Lord of host) but I will reward them for so doing, for I will keep
them in my love and favor, when I will plague and torment the other that have
not done so.

If thy enemy hunger, feed him; if he be naked, cloth him; for in so doing you
shall heap coals of fire on his head: hear O all flesh, for I have a
controversy with you, and will now plead with you, especially you that have
abundance of riches: have you fed the hungry? have thou fed them that thou
accounts thine enemies? If thou have, thou in so doing has done well; but what
means the crying of the poor so much; bread, bread, for the Lord sake? surely
this argues that you have not done as you should have done, but have left that
undone which you should have done; thou have not fed thine enemy, neither have
thou clothed the naked, which thou should have done: thy own conscience
accusing thee shall now torment thee; because thou lie under the breach of
that Scripture, where it is said feed thine enemy if he be hungry, and give him
drink, if he be thirsty: O you rich men, should you feed and cloth your
enemies, as this Scripture says you must do so; how can you think that you are
the servants of the most high? whereas instead of feeding your enemies, you
destroy them; for this is quite contrary as black is to white, surely it is a
sin, I know your conscience tells you it is a sin, because you do not fulfill
the Scripture. If this be a sin, how far greater sin is it when you take from
them that that should preserve them from want, or take away their lives? for
you see it is your duty to preserve life, and not to take away life; it is your
duty to feed them, and not to kill them, says I the Lord of host; who will
plague and torment you for not doing your duty, as to give that which you have
of mine, (that overplus which lies by and does no good) unto the poor,
therefore houl and weep, and cry aloud, for the day of the Lord is at hand
that burns as an even, and the wicked shall be but as ashes under the soals
of my Saints seet: you live like Dives in a most voluptuous manner, wearing of
the best, and eating of the best, and drinking of the best; and as he did not
remember poor Lazarus, so you do not think having your fills of the poor, yea
though they cry in your ear, yet you will not give them relief, but will rather
see them starve for want of food: how do you provoke me to anger says I the
Lord of host? do you think that I regard you, and you only because of riches?
no I would have you think that I regard the poor as well as you, even so much
that I must now come down and destroy you, and give you your portion with
Dives, even to throw you into my wrath and there to torment you, and so to take
away your riches and give them to my Saints, even to these poor and hungry
souls that are now in great want and misery: houl, houl and weep, for I come,
even I that will plead for these poor creatures that you tread under foot, and
count them as nothing; I come and will redeem them from you, and from your
powers, and will make you know that I have regard to them, and that they are in
my sight as precious as you; and that I will be such a terror to them that have
abundance of riches, that I will make you weep to think you must part from
them, and to think that every one shall have part in your riches; you shall be
so tormented that you shall have but little rest; for I will make you throw
away your idols of gold and silver, and to hide your selves for fear of me, for
I am risen to destroy you and bring you to nothing, even I the Lord of host,
will consume you in my jealousy.

I saw in a vision that one rich man had fulfilled all the commands of God but
one, and that one was, he was for to sell that which he had, and was to give it
to the poor: but he (like the rich man in the Scripture) rather then he would
do so, he would keep his riches, notwithstanding he was commanded to sell and
distribute to the poor, and so ly under the breach of Gods command; for the
which I saw this man tormented and at length was glad to give up to the poor;
and say, take eat, and fill your selves, for it is not now mine but yours.

Here you may see the power of the infinite Jehovah, and how strict he is to
them that fulfill not all his commands. As if he should say, notwithstanding
your going to Church, and observing Sunday, and making a profession of me: and
therefore you think that you shall escape my sore displeasure, in that you have
done such and such things: but stay, know this before you have rest, that one of
my commands is, that you should sell your riches and give to the poor; for
says Christ go sell all that thou have and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in heaven: as if he should say if you do it not, it will be
unpossible for you to get treasure in heaven, but me thinks, I hear all and
every one almost say, this is a hard saying, must we sell houses and lands, and
give them away? what a condition should we bring our selves into if we should
do so? What art thou as can say, shall we give away our houses and lands? do
you know what you say, are they yours or mine? says I the Lord of host, they
be mine, and all are mine, even whatsoever thou have is mine; though I have
lent them to you it is not that you should only enjoy them, but that you should
freely give up to relieve those that are in want, and so fulfill my
Commandment, sell that thou have and give to the poor, or else I will torment
you as I have done this man in the vision, and will make you be glad to give up
and to say, take eat and drink, and fill your selves, for it is not mine but
yours; and will make you know that I will do a strange work now here on the
earth, for I will make you to see and know, that I have given unto the creature
man, a privilege for to enjoy the whole Creation and so to free them from
bondage and slaverie which for the present they ly under, and if you will not
freely give up before I come in power, I will make you do it against your will,
when I come in power, for behold I come, and will not tarry, in the mean while
do not you deceive your selves, and think your selves too good for to give to
the poor, for I come and will make you houl, houl ye rich men for the rust of
your silver and gold will now rise up in judgment against you, for I come to
destroy all things besides my self, and will suddenly take from man his gods,
and pictures of gold and silver, and will make them for fear of me give them
away; for I come to take vengeance on those that have afflicted the poor: houl
ye therefore that have afflicted the poor, and give up with speed before I take
you and throw you into my wrath, and into my sore displeasure; remember ye rich
men that hear the cries of the poor, and come away, make your hands free to
give; remember that these are the last days, and that you must now use the
world, as if you used it not: do you use the world as if you used it not think
you? that hord up bags of gold and silver, and lay up quarters of grain, when
many poor souls are ready to starve for want of them, but is it not to use the
world as if you used it not, for to have no more then the present necessity
calls for, and so to take no thought for the morrow: therefore up give freely,
disperse abroad, and let not the cries of the poor any longer be in mine ears;
but now follow the Apostles direction, use the world as if you used it not; for
the fashion of this world goes: what is the fashion of this world but to
strive who shall be greatest and richest, who shall have the most power, and
who shall be most applauded, and so have most praise of men: it is very true
that this fashion has been a long time, but this old fashion must go out, and
theremust be a new fashion: which fashion will be instead of striving after
riches, giving away of riches to them that have need of them, and so to make
themselves equal with the rest, and not to lord it over their fellow creatures,
but willingly do them all the good they can: for whether they be tongues they
shall cease, or prophesies, they shall fail; but charity shall abide for ever;
here the most excellent or the most transcendent things which have bin or are
for the present, though little thought of, must go: and whatsoever has been,
must now fly away; for nothing must abide or continue but charity: the striving
after riches must cease, and then there will not be so much oppression as is
now, the striving after honor shall cease, and then there will be no killing
of men for money, striving after self must cease, and then there will be no
envy or malice, as to fight one with the other; striving after learning must
cease, for tongues shall in this manner as it is now gotten by humane industry,
though it may please God to indue his Saints and chosen vessels with tongues at
his first appearing or making out himself to them, as he did at the first
appearing in flesh make out himself to his Apostles; but Charity shall never
cease: for indeed when all the other forementioned shall perish and come to
nothing, then shall this be fulfilled, and not till then; for so soon as all
things that are now at the present passes away, and all things become new; then
will charity take place and so will abide for ever.

I saw in a vision one give away all that he had and would not have any thing
as his own, and I heard a voice say, that this man was come up to be his son,
and was a true convert, and one that is come up in that dispensation, wherein I
will in time bring all, says the Lord of host.

Lord, lo we have left all and followed thee; we have left all, houses, and
lands, and silver, and gold, and whatsoever was near or dear unto us we have
for thy sake sold, and left all: this was the saying of the Apostle who was a
true convert, but you that are rich think it your honor for to keep your
riches, and so to take delight in getting riches: but you see that the Apostle
left all, and so must you if you will have that love of God and favor that the
Apostle had, I come says I the Lord of host, and will bring down all your
pleasant things, and will bring down all your glory honor and strength, and
will lay them down in the dust, I will terrify you, and plague you, and will
make you know that I the Lord of host am a consuming fire, and so will make you
freely give up that which you call yours, to your fellow creatures, for I have
made all nations of one blood, and so will now at my bright appearing make all
people equal and alike for matter of riches, and so will take away the
stumbling block of private interests, and so will make the oppressors and the
opression for to cease, and will make you know that I the Lord of host will do
a new work on the earth, that is you shall now know that I will have all men
(after this little while) be in no want, and so to this effect you that intend
to be kept in my love and favor, be not so stout-hearted as to keep back, but
freely bestow on them that have need of the outward creatures, and I will come
in power, making the rich men houl and weep, and throw abroad, and give away
their Idols of gold and silver, and be glad to creep into the holes and clefts
of the rock for to hide themselves for fear of me, says I the Lord of host.

I saw in a vision a tree, and the boughs spread themselves abroad and was very
great, But at length I saw one come with a sword and lopped off the boughs, and
then cut off the tree in the middle, and at length dug up the roots of the
tree, and so the tree fell away and was no more to be seen.

And I said, Lord, what means this tree? and my excellent Majesty the King of
eternal glory, even that Alpha and Omega, who is the life and fullness of all,
by whom all lives, and moves, and have their being, said on this manner as
follows; by the tree is meant all powers (great or small) whether they be
Popes, or Emperors, or Kings, Princes, Dukes, or Parliaments; he whom you saw
hew off the boughs, first represents I the Lord of host, who will now cut off
those superfluous branches, as those that have made themselves rich by earthly
powers, and not only them, but I will cut the tree in the middle, even the very
heart of all powers in sunder, and so will proceed on for to cut down the very
root and foundation of all earthly powers, as is shown by the digging up the
root of the tree aforesaid: thus as the tree was dug up by the roots, even
so as this tree represents all powers, so will I root up all powers, even I the
Lord of host, the root and foundation of all powers for the present are set up
by the power and strength of men in all Nations. It being the good pleasure of
I the Lord of host that it should be so: and so by the strength and might of
men the mankind that are made all of one mold and clay destroy one another,
which arises from a fleshly domineering and Esau's power, that would reign over
their fellow creatures, which power as soon as one is subdued, another takes
place, and will do so still, but the time comes, and the set time of I the All
of all things is to be at an end, and when the fullness of these days shall be
expired and accomplished, then one power shall not destroy another to set
himself in power to rule over his fellow creatures, no but that power shall
destroy all powers besides my self, as honor and riches shall be destroyed,
and so the root destroyed, that I the Lord of host may be all and in all.

And the word of the Lord came again saying, behold, and lo I saw men and women
runnnig together, and every one said, save my god, save my god: as if men and
women had each of them a god, which god must now be destroyed, and I looked to
see what their gods were that there was such running up and down to save them,
and lo, I saw one company, and their gods were gold and silver, but this god
was destroyed; and another company made houses, and another made their lands,
but these gods I saw destroyed; another made their pride and honor, but these
gods were destroyed also; and so one after another they were all destroyed,
even all those things which men and women have run a whoring after must be
destroyed and brought to nothing: and I said, Lord, what means the people to
call these their gods? and my excellent majesty at whose bright appearing all
things besides himself must be destroyed, who will now suddenly appear to make
men weep and houl for the miseries that are now a coming upon them, said on
this manner as follows, they call these their gods because they have set
their hearts more upon these things then upon me and have with all eagerness
run after these things; but I at my appearing destroys them all, and so will
take from earthly creatures those things wherein they have put most trust and
confidence in, and will destroy them in their sight, even their gods of silver
and gold, and will make them throw away their pictures.

And again the word of the Lord said, behold, and lo I saw a company of men
with their hands upon their loins, weeping and wayling, crying out for help:
and I said, Lord what means these to be so feeble and to stand as they do
crying for help? and my eternal God said, these men represent all my enemies,
and all my Saints enemies, and as they stand with their hands on their loins
crying for help, it shows that I the Lord of host have stricken them with fear
and terror, even I have taken their strength from them, and they shall become
as weak as water, even so weak that one shall slay a 100. and a 100. slay
10000. for all their strength was taken from them: so that I am confident 1.
will make nothing to slay 1000 if it does please God to bring his enemies in
such a condition: which prophecy I look to see fulfilled in the year of
redemtion of the creation from bondage, which will be a year of Jubilee, and
this Jubilee is at hand; for I the Lord of host comes, and will not tarry, but
will arise like a man of war, tearing and devouring in sunder al my enemies,
and will consum them by the breath of my nostrils, and they shall not be able to
stand: for I will tread and trample on them in the fierceness of my wrath, and
will make them come bowing down to the soals of the feet of my saints, and will
give the strength, and glory, and honor to my Saints, and they shall rejoice and
sing for ever and ever.

And the word of the Lord came again saying, behold what do thou now see? and
lo I beheld a woman gloriously arrayed with a Scepter in her hand, and she had
a maid to wait upon her: and I said Lord, what means this? and my God the
most high Jehovah, answered me and said, this woman represents the sons and
daughters of Sion, and as you saw her with a Scepter in her hand, it denotes
unto you that she has power and strength over all her enemies, and so is a
conqueror over them all, and so has them in subjection, be her enemies great
or small, more or less, so then the time is now a coming that Sion shall
rejoice and be glad, and shall sing for joy of heart when her enemies shall
stand a far off and weep for bitterness of spirit, and as you saw her
gloriously arrayed, it shows that the sons and daughters of Sion shall have of
the best, they shall eat and drink of the best, and wear of the best: not that
they shall have the others (which are those whom God in love does not make out
himself unto) in bondage and slavery, and so deprive them of the outward
creatures, no, but they shall have the use of the creation, as to have their fill
with food and al necessaries belonging to the body: so they shall in this sense
be their servants, as is showed by the maid waiting on the woman.

And presently after, I saw one in glory with an army following him, and he cut
down his enemies a pace, and left none to oppose him, and of a sudden I saw all
his enemies destroyed, for this form of glory is the mighty God that is now
risen to take vengeance on his enemies and to make them his footstool, and his
armies are his ministering spirits, by which he will confound all the glory,
honor, and strength of men, yea even bring to nothing all the glory and powers
of all fleshly powers how high soever they be lifted up, for alas poor flesh
what art thou now in my hands? I am now risen to judge thee, to burn thee up,
and so to bring thy flesh to nothing, yea I will not leave thee root or branch,
for there shall not be son or nephew, but I, even I the mighty Jehovah will
make a short work, for I will work, and who art thou that shall hinder me from
doing my purpose? Therefore rejoice and sing for joy of heart, for behold I
come, even I thy king o Sion, shout, shout and spare not; lift up thy voice
like a trumpet, and say my God reigns, even thy holy King of Sion: therefore
sing aloud, and let the high praises of God be in thy mouth and a sharp
two-edged sword in thy hand, and so execute vengeance on them that know not me;
bind their Kings and great men in fetters of Iron, and execute the doom that is
written, even utter desolation upon all the high and lofty ones, bring them to
utter confusion, that they may houl and weep, because they have made you even
my chosen ones, to be in slavery to them, therefore rejoice o ye daughters of
Sion, and shout o daughters of Jerusalem, for they King comes, and he is meek
and lowly, riding upon an As, and upon a Colt the foal of an Ass, sing and
rejoice for joy though ye be never so much despised, he, even I the King of
glory coms riding upon an Ass, even upon such poor despised and harmless
creatures, that are willing to bear any burdens that are laid upon them, even
such do I the King of glory delight to appear in, and not in high and lofty
horses, such as are puffed up in their high conceits, having a form of
godliness, and so runs from scripture to scripture, and by their fleshly wisdom
would have it as they please; no, but even in such do I come, that with a meek
and quiet spirit have waited upon me: therefore ye meek and despised ones sing
and rejoice, and go with joy, for behold I come, even I the Lord of host, and
all your enemies shall be your footstool; for you shall now tread Satan under
your feet, and that by the strength of I your almightiness dwelling in you.

And again the word of the Lord said, behold, and lo, I looked and I saw the
appearance of seven hearts, and they did for a little while oppose one another,
but at length they were still and left off striving one with the other and were
all united together as one, and so became one. And I said Lord, what means
these hearts to be thus joined together of a sudden? and my almightiness, even
the eternal God, by whom all Creatures were made, and by whom all creatures
shall be brought to nothing, said on this manner as follows, these seven
hearts represent my sons and daughters that are now under several dispensations
opposing one another in their judgments, one saying this is the way, another
saying that is the way, and so by reason of their difference oppose one
another, and it is out of a self-ish disposition that rules in them, one would
be fain esteemed above another by reason of his knowledge in the scriptures,
which knowledge I am now about to confound, and all their fleshly knowledge,
let them go under what notion soever, and for that way of baptism which is now
practiced and do hold communion with none but those that are of their own
judgments, but are bitter and envious against those that are not of their way,
judgeing and censuring them to be a people that slight I the Lord of host, and
so are not my beloved, and not those whom I will have regard unto, but now in
the day of my power, I will take away that stone of stumbling, I will break
them and confound them, and so will make them to see that they make much of the
shell when the kernel is gone, and will make them to know that those whom they
looked upon as not worthy to be called brethren, are the choice spouse of I the
Lord of host, and so will turn unto the people a pure language, that may all
serve me with one consent, I will even in such a clear way make out my self unto
them, that they shall all see and know, and all speak by my spirit.

And I saw in a vision all manner of beasts and kinds of creaturs, and I was
commanded to slay and eat: notwithstanding they were none of my own, and my
excellent majesty the King of eternal glory said, I will make all men know in
a short time that what they possess is not their own, but all their treasurs
are mine, even I the Lord of host will recover my wool and my flox, even those
treasurs which they have made use of, and I will take them from them and will
make them know that they shall now be for the use of my Saints, even for the
use of those whom they do most despise; and if any say why do they take away my
goods, as my corn and my wine, and my horses, and my cattle? then shall even
those whom I draw up into my love and favor say, we have need of them, and we
in the name of our creator take them for to make use of them, or the Lord has
need of them, and therefore we take them; and what will you say to this O you
great men that have abundance? this privilege is and will in a more clearer
manifestation made out whereby the Saints even poor despised Sectaries shall
see and know that all things are theirs, whether it be Paul or Apollo, or
Cephas, things present, or things to come, all things are yours, and you are
Christ's, and Christ is Gods: here you may see that the Saints by being Christ's
sons have all things, yea the Apostle tells them that all things are theirs,
houl you therefore, for the rust of your Gold and silver will now rise up in
judgment against you, and it shall now torment you, and vex you; even it will
be such a terror to you, and you shall with speed throw it away, even I the
Lord of host will make you throw away your Idols of gold and of silver, and
hide your selves for fear of me, for whatsoever is in the shambles take and
eat, for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; all the earth is
mine, even mine it is, and all the cattle of the field, therefore slay and eat,
and have all things common, as my saints at the appearing of me in flesh had,
and therefore be contented, O you rich men, to give up, lest I smite you with a
curse; for behold I come and will make my saints break bread from house to
house, as formerly they did; and will make them for to have comunion, and all
things common; so that they shall not say this is mine, or that is mine; but I
will destroy this, and so I will destroy all self in them, and they shall now
live in the pure enjoyment of I the Lord of host, breaking bread with
singleness of heart from house to house: so that my sons and daughters shall
live in more union then they do now, for now they are ready to cut and destroy
one another for a little silver, which shall now perish and be accounted as
nothing: even I will make all sorts of men freely give away that they have, and
be contented to have nothing but what they shall have need of from day to day;
for I will make love and union to increase, that the whole earth shall be a
treasure for all, and not for some; so that according as they are in want, they
shall have one shall have a special care over another; for the emnity being taken
away, and the curse removed from off the earth, self-love shall cease, and
universal love shall flow in, and then righteousness shall look down from
heaven, and spring out of the earth; and there will be no complaining in our
streets, as there is now, crying out for bread, bread, for the Lords sake; no,
but this noise shall cease, and the saying of James come more into their minds:
that they shall now not think it enough to say, be ye warmed, and so give the
poor nothing, but only pity them and feed them with words, but they shall now
say, come in, eat and drink with us, for you are the work of the Lord, and what
we have now you may freely take, for the Lord of host has now made bare his
holy arms, and all the earth shall see the salvation of God, and all shall now
know and see that the Lord has redeemed the creation from bondage into the
liberty of the sons of God; all men shall be freed from the Bondage and slavery
they now are under, and shall now begin to see and know that it is a sin to
have respect to one in glorious apparel, and say, pray Sir come you and sit up
here, when you say to one in poor clothes, sit thou at our foot stool, for I
the Lord of host will make you all know now that you are all of one blood, and
so are all now fellow creatures, and that I have as much respect to one in poor
cloths, as to one in gay ones; and that I will make you know that its your duty
for to love one another, even your enemies; for if you fulfill the royal law
according to Scripture, thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self; which is not
for the present, who art thou that has fulfilled this Scripture that can say
and thy conscience not accuse thee to thy face, that thou does love thy
neighbor as thy self? but rather thy conscience will tell thee, that thou do
not love thy neighbor as thy self; for if thou did, thou would not let thy
neighbor be in want, but would have as much care of him as thy self; if thou
have rost-meat, to let him have rost-meat; and in so doing thou will fulfill
this Scripture: therefore yea that do plead for Scripture so much, and make so
gallant a show of religion as you do, consider the Scriptures aforementioned,
and you shall see that you live far short of fulfilling the Scripture: for what
soever you would that men should do unto you, even so do thou unto them, for
this is the Law and the Prophets: would thou have men to love you and do you
good? if thou would then thou must love them and do them good: but indeed you
will say, why should I love them, they are of a strange opinion: this is but
the Devil in you for hating your fellow creatures, which must be destroyed and
brought to nothing, that I the Lord of host may be exalted; which will not be
till I make my strange work come to pass, as to destroy all self and private
intrest, of saying this is mine; and when this is done, then you will love your
neighbor as your self, and then you shall see and know with the Apostle, that
all things are lawful for you, that is as the Apostle knew that he might do
what he would do, and have what creatures he would have for food and raiment,
in that they are all gods: so you shall now know that you may have the use of
all, and see all to be yours, and that this is the work of God for to bring in
universal love and freedom.

And the Lord said behold, behold: what do thou see? lo I beheld, and there
appeared a tree full of fruit; and the fruit, much like to apples one part of
them, and the other part of them like unto pears, and I said, Lord, what
means this tree? and the Lord said, this tree does represent Christ: that as
thou see fruit upon this tree, and it is very pleasant to see to: even so is
Jesus Christ a tree of life that bears abundance of fruit, and as thou saw
these men and women gather this fruit and eat them, and presently there was new
fruit in the room of that which was pulled off.

These men and women re-present my sons and daughters, who are always a
feeding on Jesus Christ, and yet cannot make him to leave off bearing fruit:
and as thou saw that these men and women that pulled and ate did live for
ever, and were not to die after it, does show that my sons and daughters feeding
on me the Lord of host, shall live for ever: for as thou saw that this food
was very pleasant; even so am I the Lord of host to those that do delight in me.

And moreover this tree does set forth the tree that is spoken of in the
Revelations, to be a tree of life that shall heal the nations, for as thou did
see this tree appear of a sudden with fruit thereon: even so will I the Lord of
life, that lives for evermore, appear in such an hour, and at such a time, when
most men little think of me, to the destruction of them, and bringing of them
to nothing, that so I may appear to be the life of those that do now know me
and enjoy me: for by my appearing will I make my self manifest to be the food
that every one must eat of: and that all other food, which is not of me, must
be brought to nothing: for as I am set forth by a tree, so will I appear in
power to the confounding of those that feed not on me: and so will make wast
all their gods which they have to feed upon besides me, and all and every one
shall be brought to nothing, that I the Lord of host may be all and in all, and
so exalted above all, to which I say amen.

And presently after this there appeared a garden full of flowers, as to my
thinking, I saw them like roses of all sorts, and cornations, pinks, and all
manner of flowers, and I said, Lord, what does these mean? and the Lord said,
these do represent abundance of joy, even the verities of joys which my sons
and daughters shall have, even they shall enjoy the most precious and most
pleasant jewels that are or can be; for they shall have the use of all things
that are precious, and shall have the enjoyment of all the treasurs of the
world, and nothing shall be unpleasant to them, but every thing shall give a
good smell, and shall be very pleasant to them making of them to rejoice, and
sing and set forth the praise of me the Lord of host: for as these flowers did
smell most sweetly; even so, says the Lord of host, will I by my own power,
make all things that appear now to be unsavory or unpleasant, to give a most
pleasant smell, and as thou did see in this garden abundance of green herbs:
these green herbs, does set forth the flourishing conditions of my Saints,
even of my sons and daughters; how that they shall grow and flourish in
dispight of all their enemies, for their bones shall flourish as an herb, and
as herbs be good for all sorts of men and women, even so shall my sons and
daughters be good for all; and by their flourishing and growing up as calves in
the stall, it shows that people that are now kept in bondage, even the meaner
sort, shall be by the flourishing condition of my sons and daughters, restored
from that slavery and bondage as they are now kept under by rich men, so as
they cannot enjoy the creatures of God so as to have their bellys full even
into such a condition shall they be restored as that they shall now enjoy the
good creatures of God, and shall have enough of the outward mercies, as for the
back and belly so that there shall be no complaining in the street.

And presently after this, there appeared one that was very glorious, and he
had a cup in his hand, and it was full, and he gave it to men and to women for
them to drink, and I said, Lord, who does this man represent? and what does his
cup signify? and what is in this cup? and my excellent God the King of eternal
glory said, by this man, is showed I the Lord of host, and the cup does
represent, that I the Lord of host have something for to make men and women
drink of: these men and women represent my sons and daughters; and that which
was in the cup, which the men and women drank of was wine; which holds forth
thus much: that it is the pleasure of me the Lord of host, to give unto my sons
and daughters for to drink-wine: for as much as wine is set forth to be a
nourisher and cherisher of the nature of man, and as thou saw them that did
drink of the wine which I gave them were merry, and did fall to singing and to
dancing: even so by my pouring forth of my spirit, or my self into my sons and
daughters, so as to make my self manifest in a more clear discovery of my self
to them, as to make them see and know that I the God of love, and peace, and
glory, dwells in them, acts in them, and so does all things in them, and that I
have taken them up for to be my dweling place, and habitation, and that nothing
can hurt them or do them any harm without me: will ocasion them in like manner
for to break forth and sing, and dance, and leap for joy of heart, being filled
with new wine of the spirit: for put new wine into old bottels and they will
burst if they have not vent, or else the old bottles will spoil the new wine:
so I by filling my sons and daughters with my self, does cause a spoil first to
be made in the old bottles, their body, and then afterward does cause them to
bring forth my self, and so do my will: though it be the pleasure of me their
king to act them in such a way as will prove the ruin of their good name, yet
they must do it; for the wine of the spirit must have a vent, or else the body
will break.

And the word of the Lord came unto me saying, behold, and lo I looked, and
there appeared a man, and he had in his hand a sharp knife, and he ripped up
the bellys of men and women, even of all sorts, under what religion soever they
were termed to be: And I said, Lord, what is the meaning of this man that does
so as he does. And the Lord said, this man represents me the Lord of host, and
as thou did see him open them, it shows that I the Lord of host have a
peircing eye to discern what is in them, and what they are, notwithstanding
their outward professions, and outward shows of holiness, yet I the God of gods
see all their inward parts, and know their secret thoughts, and the private
intents of their hearts, and how full of hypocrisy they are, dissembling with
me and men, and how they make religion a cloak for to hide their knavery, even
because they may the better cosen and cheat their fellow creatures, and keep
them in bondage and slavery; and also from the enjoyments of the outward
creation, which I have made for man, that they may have the use of them, of the
outward creatures, and so live comforatbly by enjoying the fruits of the earth;
for the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof, and al things are mine even
mine; therefore the crying of the poor, and the hypocrisy of all sorts of men,
makes me make have to declare that I the Lord of host am now coming to judge
the world with righteousness, and so to give them every one according to their
deserts: but shall the son of man find faith on earth when be comes? no, he
shall not, for though I do declare my self by my servants the prophets, whom I
stir up for to make out my self unto them; yet I find and do see; that amongst
all sorts of men there is but little faith, for to believe that I the Lord of
host am now ready to appear in power, and in glory, and in Majesty, for to
confound and bring to nothing al powers beside my self, and so to make bare my
holy arm in all nations, and so to lay open all men's hearts, and make them see
their folly for dissembling with me: for as thou sawst them opened, and when
they were opened to thy view, though before they seemed to be very white, yet
even the most purest, especially those under the name of Presbyterians and
Independents, who seemed very white, that is, they had very magilded outsides,
as forms and ways of worships, as observing of the Sabbath, and being zealous
for they way of worship, even so zealous, as to judge, censure, and condemn
those that were not of their opinion; yet notwithstanding all this, their hearts
are full of hpyocrisie; showed by the blackness that was within them, and so
instead of serving me, and bringing glory to my name, they make use of religion
to serve their own ends, being as covetous, and as proud, and as full of
ambition and cruelty as those that make no profession at al; and likewise the
church called the Anabaptists are linked much in your name, more for to make a
show of religion, then to serve God, even I the God of gods, out of love, as is
showed by your harsh judgment and censureing those that do outstrip, or those
whom I the Lord of host am pleased to take up higher then you; as such as are
deluded and deceived by fancies, and by the devil, as it does appear by your
cruel words and speeches against them: therefore says I the Lord of host, who
sees your outward professions, and knows the secret thoughts and intents of
your hearts, how that you do strive for to exalt your selves, and so to make
your selves great, and are ready for to dissembly with me, the Lord of host, as
though you knew not any god at all; for dissembling, and lying, and cheating
that reigns amongst you, and amongst all sorts of people, ye have hardened you
hearts as if the Lord had spoken to you, and had told you that you shall never
fall, and so you prompt your selves up in your ways, which I the Lord of host
must destroy, even your church ways, that so I may torment you, and purify
that blackness that remains under your gilded professions, and so draw you up
unto me, even to a more neerness and oneness with me, that so lying and
dissembling may be taken away from you, and so make you deal plainly with God,
and with your fellow creatures; and for the rest even those of the world, that
have no knowledge of me, I must torment them, by destroying their gods, and
bringing of them to nothing: yet I must tell you, that they are in one manner
not so much to be blamed as you; because they know nothing; therefore I look
that they should perform nothing: but you that know something, and profess me,
and act and walk contrary to me, you are but dissemblers and hypocrites at the
best; for you know that you must love all men, and yet you hate all that differ
from you in judgment, and so deserve to be a little more tormented for
dissembling with your selves; I promise you you shall be tormented; and though
the world and you be given to dissembling and lying, and to eat and drink, and
marry, and give one another in marriage, as the people of old did, it is but
what our Savior Jesus Christ did prophecy should be the condition of you in
the last age; but as I the Lord of host did forewarn my creatures, even man,
and all creatures from destruction by my servant Noah, and made him a preacher
of righteousness, for to tell them that destruction was coming upon them, and
that they for their wickedness must be destroyed: even so have I now, even I
the Lord of host, raised up a man, or two, or three, yea twenty, to testify
that I the Lord of host will shortly appear, to confound and destroy all things
by myself, as I did in the days of Noah: for the wickedness of this generation
does surpass the wickedness of those that were in those days, but as my servant
Noah was mocked at, and laughed at, and also derided for telling of them that
destruction was at hand, even so it is my pleasure now to send you a
declaration, by one whom I have stirred up, and commanded him to put it in
print, that you may see that I the Lord of host will come and confound you, and
bring you to nothing, and destroy your gods, even your idols of gold and
silver, and will make you throw them away: but hang it say you, this is a
delusion, the devil is in him, and so has filled him full of fancies, and has
distracted his brains, and has made him mad, and so will rail against him, and
revile and speak all manner of evil against him: this I know you will do, as
they of old did unto my servant Noah: but remember that that day as Noah went
into the ark which he builded, and all his family with him, and also all sorts
of creatures, even then I the Lord of host did begin to pour out upon them the
fierceness of my wrath, as I had told them by Noah, so you that mock, and
laugh, and revile against my messengers now, and say the day of the Lord is not
at hand as yet, for him to do such things, (and therefore will not consider for
to relieve the poor, and let the oppressed go free, and so to break the bands
of wickedness but will still persist in the evil of your ways: as if you had no
warning at all; even for your own selves, when you think safty, and cry peace
even then sudden destruction comes upon you, even when you little think of it,
as it did upon the world of old, and then will I torment and plague you for
despising my messengers and servants, and will be a terror and a dread to you,
and you shall houl and weep, and my servants shall sing and rejoice for joy and
gladness of heart; for as Noah and all them that went in with him became one,
and of one family, and all the creatures became one, as being in union and love
one with another, even so will I now make all creatures, especially my sons and
daughters, for to eat and drink together, and so to be of one family, and of
one household, having all things common; and will also make you that now revile
them, be still and silent, and in pain for doing so, and I will make also all the
creatures to be at love and peace one with the other, as they that were in
Noah's Arc together, so that there shall be peace and union.

And the Lord said, behold what I will show thee; and lo I looked, and there
appeared a man, and he went up and down, gathering men together: and I said,
Lord, what means this man togather men together? and what men are these? and
my eternal God said, this man represents I the Lord of host, gathering my
people together: and I said, Lord, what people? and my God said, the Jews,
that I may bring them in to believe on my name, and so to make them come with
weeping and supplications, and and make them know that they have peirced me,
and so have not bin in my way as to see and know that Jesus Christ their King
and Savior is already come, but their eyes have bin blinded and hardened, so
that they could not see as yet: but though they have fell, yet I the Lord of
host, will graft them into the vine again, and they shall see and know that I
have according to my promise sent them a Savior and a King already, whom they
have crucified, and I will now make them see and know that they have crucified
the King of the Jews in their own Land, for which cause I have dispersed them,
and made them to be a people scattered in all nations; and all people have had
them at command, so that they have bin the reproach of the heathen, and all the
heathen or aliens from me the Lord of host, has persecuted them, and have shed
their blood, But I will now even in the fullness of time open their eyes, that
they shall see and know, that they have crucified Christ their King, whom all
their prophets made mention of, and all their leviticall observations did
typifie out: which King they shall now see was not to come at that time to
deliver them from bondage of other nations, but shall now even at this time
which is to come, see and know that all faces shall be made black with
paleness, and a noise from a among them shall come forth, that the Lord has
founded Sion, and the poor of the people shall trust in it; even I will make my
people now come with singing, and with rejoicing, because I have opened their
eyes, and have taken out their stony hearts, and have given them hearts of
flesh, even such hearts, as they shall no longer deny that Jesus their Savior
is come, but shall confess that he is come, and that they have crucified him;
and so shall see that I have caused them to be in such a condition as they are
now in: for it was my good pleasure that it should be so; but now will I rise,
and will show my power for to redeem them from this Egyptian bondage they are
now in; even as I did appear for their fathers of old, and did bring them from
the land of Egypt by my mighty and strong hand, by my servant Moses, whom I
did stir up for that purpose: even so will I make my power seen in all nations,
by stiring my servants up, and also by sending them a leader for to lead them,
as my sons of old had, and as all Kings and great men fell that opposed them,
even so will I make all for to fall and perish, and become as weak as water,
that so I may bring you into your own land again; and all those that hinder you
or rise in arms against you, shall be drowned in my wrath and sore
displeasure, even as Pharaoh of old was drowned in the red sea, so I will set
me glory and honor, and will make you appear to be Kings and Conquerours,
through me that love you; and so will bring you into your one land with joy and
gladness, and there will make you for to ly down in peace, and to be at rest,
when I will torment and trouble all nations that have fought against you, and
they shall weep, and houl, and cry out for sorrow of heart; but I will make you
my Chosen ones, and also them whom I will bring up with you, and have called
them by my name, to come and go up to the height of Sion, with everlasting
songs, singing and rejoicing with abundance of joy, in that I have created
Jerusalem a joy, and her people a rejoicing: for I will make a new Heaven, and
a new earth, wherein righteousness shall dwell, for I will make desolation, and
will destroy all things that are now at the present, and so will make all things
new; new in respect that I have gathered you out of all countries, and have
once again brought you into your own land, for to make you the joy, and the
praise of the whole earth; and the place and land where I will in glory delight
to dwell; and so will make all your enemies come bowing and bending and submit
unto that has and will still bring you in the everlasting joy, where all is joy,
and all shall be joy and peace; so that they shall bring (even your enemies)
their treasurs and riches, and the fullness of the gentiles shall be brought in:
rejoice and sing, and shout O ye daughters of Jerusalem; for behold, I will
come, and will take all sorrow from you, and ye shall see evil no more, and I
will make all your enemies your footstool; and all evil shall cease from
amongst you, and I will make the days of your mourning to end, and so will
make everlasting joy to show it self, and you shall sorrow no more: behold I
come, even I that will save you from all sorrow, and from the cruelty of men,
and will make bare my holy arm, and all the nations shall see the salvation of
God, even all people shall see and know that I have redeemed you, and saved you,
and have gathered you from among the heathen, and have brought you into your
own land, there for to make you the praise of the whole earth; and all the
glory of nations shall be brought into it, even into that City, where nothing
but righteousness shall dwell, and all dogs, and sorcerers, and whosoever they
be that have not right to the tree of life shall not enter into this City, even
into this new Jerusalem, which shall be made the praise of the whole earth; for
this Jerusalem consists of all the sons and daughters of Sion, who shall be
brought out of all countries, and out of all nations, into this land which I
have chosen, for to make my self a glorious name, and so to make my name a
terror and a dread to all that come not into this City; for without are none
but forcerers, and such as makes a ly, as dogs and such filthy creatures; for
dogs are a most beastly creature, and seem to be a creature good for little,
even here such as are to be left out are compared to dogs; for all dogs are
cruel and envious, and are ready to destroy themselves by fighting one with
another, and also their condition is, they always are grumbling and snapping
one at another, as striving for mastery; so are these people that are to be
left out of this City, a people who have given themselves over to rule and
domineere over their fellow creatures, and would have all in subjection to
them, and they would be lords, and so would have their fellow creatures in
bondage to them, and keep them as servants and bondmen, even for to work and
labor for them, when they themselves have all the joy and pleasure; but now,
even upon such dogs, that have risen from Cain and Nimrod the mighty hunter,
that have hunted, and also have catch their fellow creatures in their snare,
and so Esau-like, would have all in subjection to them, even upon such shall my
hand fall very heavy, as for to plague them, and so to punish them, that I may
make them know that my time is now at hand, for to give redemption to my
creatures, especially to my sons and daughters, whom ye Esaus, and great men,
have kept in bondage and slavery, and so to make them a joy and rejoicing,
singing for joy and gladness of heart, where ye Esaus brood that have a long
time reigned over them, shall be trodden as straw under foot, and be fit for
nothing but to be left without, even without my joy and love, because of your
sorceries, because of your estrangness from me; counting all your pleasurs and
happiness to be in things here below even in outward substance, treasuring up
gold and silver, which has bewitched you from the truth, and would not let you
hear that the best and chiefest commandment is, for to sell and give to the
poor, but when this has buzzed in your ears, and your own conscience accusing
you for it, you have like the young man in the Gospel, as you call it, which
fain would go to heaven, and so have rest, but loath to fulfill our Saviors
command; sell that which thou have and give to the poor, and so thou shall have
treasure in heaven, as if my son Christ had said, do not you think that by
observing a little outward way of worship, and so walking on in forms, and
making an outward profession of religion, having a form of godliness, that you
shall enter into my rest, not knowing that you are bewitch from me, in that you
make so much of an outward estate, as of houses, and lands, and also of gold,
and silver, wherein you put more trust and confidence then in me; therefore it
is but just for me the Lord of host to deal, or to give you such a hard lesson
for you to learn, sell all thou have and give to the poor, for they have need
of it, even of my money, and, houses and lands; which if you do not, you are
like to incur my sore displeasure, and so to be deprived of my rest, for not
submitting to this my command; which is one of the greatest commandments, as
that thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self: but O thou proud Esau, and
haughty Lucifer, that exalts thy self above thy Fellow Creatures, what says
thou to this? do I command thee for to sell that which thou have and give to the
poor? and thou instead of doing so, do quite contrary, even the oppress them,
and cosen and cheat them, and bring them before the judgment seat haling them
to prisons, do you think for this that I will be as, well pleased with you as if
you had done what I commanded you to do; sell that which thou have and thou
shall have treasure in heaven? which if thou do not, I will shut thee out of
my love and favor, and so thou shall not enter into the city wherein my glory
shall be manifested, and made for to outshine all the glory of the world,
because thou art disobedient to me, and wilt not love thy neighbor as thy
self, according as I have commanded thee to do, but do still persist in
hording up of corn, and money, and all the best of the things of the world for
thy own private use, and so will not give to the poor, but does count thy
honor for to have abundance of the riches of this world, and will live very
gallantly, and go in the best, and eat of the best, when thy fellow creatures
have none of the worst, whom I love as well as you; but O! thou proud Esau that
exalts thy self above thy fellow creatures, I will reason with you, how or
wherein do thou fulfill my will? I commanded thee, for to sell that thou have,
and give away, but that thou have not, done: thou will have houses and lands of
thy own, and gold and silver in bags and chests, when others have none; and will
not if you hear one of your fellow creatures cry for the Lord sake give me
something, you will turn your ears from the crying of the poor, and will tell a
ly too, and say, you have nothing, when you have something; though they asked
in my name, yet you will not give; though I command thee for to give all that
thou have; but thou will make a ly to save that which I have commanded thee,
even all you that have abundance: to give unto thy fellow creatures: for liars
are and shall be without: and again how do thou love thy neighbor as thy
self, when thou eatest of the best, and drinks of the best, and wears of the
best, and lives at ease, freeing your selves from hard labor, which thy poor
neighbors are made for your cruelty over them to undergo? therefore consider
this, left I take you away from your own pleasures, as you call it, from eating
of the best, and drinking and wearing of the best, and instead of it, give you
rags to put on, and the worst for you to eat and drink, even curse your
dainty things, and make all things become gall and wormwood; because you break
this commandment of mine: love thy neighbor as well as thy self: which if you
did fulfill, which is my pleasure you should; then would you give to your poor
neighbors such things as your selves have: if you your selves have rost-meat,
then would you give them rost-meat, or see that they have rost-meat; if you
your selves have good drink, then would you see that they should not drink
water, but have good drink: if you your selves have good clothes, then would
you see that they should have good clothes, and so would not let them go naked;
but would be like my servant Job, give bread to the hungry, and clothes to the
naked; if you your selves have ease and rest from labor, then you would not
see them labor like horses, and take no pity of them; neither would you then
give your selves over to be so cruel and hard hearted, as to make slaves of
your fellow creatures, whom I command you to love as well as your selves: but
here you may see how you slight me, and how little you regard me; instead of
doing what you should do, you do that you should not: I command you for to love
your neighbor, and instead of my command, you hate your neighbor: but do you
think this may serve my turn, or that I will be pleased for you to do so as you
do? no, I will not be pleased with you, unless you fulfill my commandments, as
in love thy neighbor as well as thy self: which if you did, you would ^^^^^te
them: but you may say, they are my enemies, and shall I love them as well as my
self? though they are your enemies, it is my pleasure that you should love them
as well as your self: love your enemies, says my son Christ, bless them, and
pray for them; that you may show your selves to be like my father which is in
heaven: but if you do not love your enemies, neither your neighbor, it shows
that you do not fulfill my command; neither are you like me, who loves all, and
causes my rain to rain on the unjust as well as on the just: but you cannot
abide to hear of these things; to let your neighbors be as your selves; by
reason of that proud flesh, that rules and domineers in you, as to make you
think better of your selves then you are; Esau-like ruling and domineering over
Jacob, but I will cut you short, and will make you, notwithstanding you go to
Church, and here Sermons and have your children baptized, as you call it, and
observe Sunday; that you have disobeyed my voice, and have not walked humbly
with me; and so you are no other but sorcerers, such as must not come into my
place where I will make my name known more then in any place, which shall be
Jerusalem the city of the living King; whether I will gather my sons and
daughters out of all countries, to go thither and you that have loved to make a
ly shall be shut cut even with dogs and sorcerers, and so having no right to
the tree of life must not enter into the city: but they that have right to the
tree of life, shall enter in, even into my rest and joys, for the Jerusalem
which I have built, and will gather my sons and daughters thither for to be tire
place which I have appointed to be the glory of the earth; and all the nations
of the earth, even the great men, as well as Kings, and nobles, and others, that
heap up corn and money, they shall bring their treasures and jewels thither, and
I will make them to rejoice in me, and I will joy over them and rejoice in the
midst of them; I will be their God, and they shall be my people, even my chosen
and peculiar ones, in whom I have delighted to dwell, and will dwell; and make
them to be full of joy and glory, even the glory of all the world; and all the
world shall become subject to me I the Lord of host in my people, in my bride
and spouse and chosen peculair ones, in whom I will manifest my self to be a God
of power dwelling in them, and they shall dwell in me, and they shall know that I
the Lord of host dwell in them, and will make them to be a terror and a dread to
all people, and all people that shall hear of my infinite goodness, which I will
manifest to them, shall even weep and houl, and know their tongues for pain and
anguish, which shall fall upon them, being sensible of that joy, pleasure,
delight and glory of that love and favor which I will make out to my chosen and
peculier ones, and nothing shall more torment them then the seeing and beholding
my almightinesse ruling in them, making others to be as nothing in comparison
of them, this I say shall torment you, even you O proud and stout ones, that are
loath to be pulled out of your throns of glory, as to be deprived of that self
and fleshly ruling power which in you, but though thou art to be deprived of
it, yet thou shall even of a sudden, yea in an hour when thou art ready to cry
peace, peace, and so to flatter thy self in thy own fleshly pampe, to strive
after riches and honor, and so to get thy self a great name: as when you have
a bundance of oxen and cowes, and two or three Farms and perhaps bushels of
money keeping poor creatures under you, even thy fellow creatures; thus crying
peace, and see no likelyness of a change, thou will not be mindeful of what I
send unto you: but will make slight of this business; not remembering Paul's
expressions, when you cry peace, peace, behold sudden destruction is upon you:
even a consumption to all your outward glory, for a fire is kindling from me
the Lord of host, which shall enter into you, and burn you, until all things are
according to my will and pleasure; for this fire is my spirit, which shall burn
up all your fleshly pomp, and riches, and houses, and shall bereave you of all
your gods, even your gods of gold and silver, and of worships, and houses, and
lands, which you have made Iodls of: even I the Lord of host will consume your
glory, and honor, and will lay it to the dust; and thou self-interest that
says this is mine, and that is mine, shall utterly be consumed by my bright
appearing, and I will make you throw away your idols of gold, and silver, and
also your lands, which now you possess, and your oxen, and horses, and all
things, I will make you say they are the all of all things, even mine the
eternal God, and so say to your fellow creatures whom now we have made slaves
of, we have nothing of our own, for if this be not sufficient warrant or
message for to make you relieve the widow and the fatherless, and so disperse
abroad, telling of them it is yours and not mine; I will come with a far greater
torment, and will appear in such fury, that I will make you think that you see
the devil standing by you at all times tormenting you, and plaguing you,
because you do not give up: therefore give up before I destroy you in my wrath
and fury, for I am now risen to call all my stewards to an account, even you
mighty ones unto whom I have lent much; but finding of you to be very cruel to
your fellow creatures, and that you have not dealt faithfully with them, I come
to judge you, and to call you to an account; for your wickedness is so often in
my ears, that I can stay no longer: therefore I pass this sentence against
you, O rich men; that I will utterly destroy you, and bring you to nothing, yea
I will torment you day and night, that so I may make you know that the last
days are now at hand, which my servant Paul spoke of, even the day is now at
hand, that they that are married, shall be as if they were not, and they that
use the world as if they used it not: why so, as if you should say; the same
Apostle gives a reason; for says he, the fashion of this world passes away: O
you rich men, leave off hording of gold and silver, least the rust and canker
rises in your conscience, and so makes you hang or drown your selves, and so
you run your selves into a pit of misery, even into hell, for the married shall
be as if they were unmarried; that is, I by my bright appearing will so
powerfully manifest my self, that i will be a sharp two edged sword, cutting
and devouring in sunder all the ways that have bin acted contrary to me that
is now on foot: for I will gather my own together from the power of their
enemies, that if any of mine, whether man or woman, be joined together to one,
that is, of my stock, nor will have no heed to my voice, if it be a man, he may
freely leave his wife; if a woman she may freely leave her husband, and in my
sight do it lawfully, because the time is now at hand that those that are
married are as if they were unmarried and I for this end and purpose, even I
the Lord of host will have it to be so: that I may separate the just and unjust,
that I may gather my sons and daughters out from amongst their hateful enemies,
and bring them into their own country; which shall be the Jerusalem that now
lies wast: but it shall be inhabited once again, and made to be the praise of
the whole earth: therefore flee every one of you out of Babylon, for her
judgments are great and reaches to the skies; and go you up into your own
country, and there declare the praises of God: first I would have my people go
out of Babylon, which if they do, they must not tarry here, or in any place
wherein I do not appear for to speak to them: but come you my sons and
daughters out of Babylon, your captivity, and bondage, and come with me out of
this confusion, and out of these false ways and governments, and forms of
worships: for I must pour out my judgment upon them all, and I will plague all
them that will hinder you from doing my will, as to keep you that you shall not
come from them, even every thing that they have shall be a devil to them,
especially to those that do not give up and say to their poor fellow creatures,
these oxen, and cowes, horses, bread, wine, corn, cloth, and all things are
yours, as well as mine, but when I have brought you out from amongst them, even
into your own country, then you shall be at rest; for it is Sion, the place
that I have chosen to dwell in, and will dwell in, even in your O Sion, whom I
will by my strong hand bring back into your own land, even you Jews which at
the present seems to be a people scattered and peeled amongst other people,
even you will I bring, with the fullness of the Gentiles; and will make you
rejoice, and sing, and leap for joy, for the Lord, the king, the holy one of
Israel is in thee, even in every one of you, and none of you shall see evil
any more; O what a bundance of joy will here be! O you Jews natural, that have
a long time bin strangers, but are now called in, and grafted into the true
vine again, and for you also that are gentiles by name, but are taken up with
the love and favor of God, even I the mighty Jehovah, for you shall be both
of you united together, and be but one body and spouse of the King of glory:
from whom I the King of glory have wiped away all evil, and you shall see
sorrow no more; but shall rejoice in me, as a bride does in the bridegroom, and
so also will I rejoice in you, as my wife and Bride and thee only in whom I do
delight to dwell, when others shall be tormented and grieved with my sore
displeasure, and with that work, I am about for to make them do: which is for
to make the riches which they have made gods of, become devils to torment them
that they may remember the words of Paul, the time is coming that they shall
use the world as if they used it not: but O you rich ones, how do you do at
this saying, you must use the world as if you used it not? which if you did,
you would not do as now you do, lay up treasures for the rust and canker to get
at, to be a witness against you, or for you; to lay up great store of riches,
is to use the world as if you would never part from it, or as if that should
never be taken from you, which I tell you, it must be taken from you, and you
also made to throw away your gods of gold and silver, and also all other
things, as to claim no right to them more then another man; in so doing you may
be said to use the world as if you used it not, and not while you do so, will
this saying be fulfilled which shall surely come to pass, for the fashion of
this world passes away, but how may it be said, that the fashion of this world
goes away? the fashion of this world passes away when that which was once in
high esteem goes out, and instead thereof there comes a thing that is in
opposition of what was before; that which was highly esteemed of before, now
grows out of date, and that which was not before comes now in, the fashion of
this world has bin in whole and in general amongst all sorts of men under
what notion of religion soever, to get riches and strive after them with all
eagerness, as may be thereby thinking to get in estimation of the world, and so
to be in great esteem among the rich ones of the earth, and also the fashion of
this world has bin to ly, cosen, and cheat, and also to make war one with
another, one fighting against the other, with all might and strength, and only
through a self and private interest, which has occasioned so much blood to be
spilt, and also has occasioned many poor creatures to starve for want of food,
and others have bin driven to extreme poverty, as to steal for something
whereby to keep life in the body, and all this has bin done by the pleasure of
my own self, even I the Lord of host, who has and will suffer the things of my
appointment to run their own course, until they come to their end, but now
these things being almost at an end, the word must become new, new in respect
of what is now a coming on the world, that as the world has former ly strived
after, shall now become loathsome and abominable and most men shall see and know
it to be so, for riches shall now be a hook which shall be ready to choke,
those that have them, and so they shall see their folly in laying up treasurs
for they know not who; for what treasurs soever, or how much soever they be,
must now be brought out; for the day of the Lord is at hand, which will consume
all things besides himself, and so will make that a plague which formerly has
bin the joy and delight of most men, even of all men: for former things are
passed away, and all things must become new, for this Jerusalem mentioned so
often in scripture, must now be established above the hills and mountains, which
formerly has bin kept under by the power of man, but the world passes away,
gold and silver that has bin made gods of, will now be as plenty as it was in
Solomon's days, and as there were no beggars in Israel, so now there shall be
none to beg any more; for former things are passed away, the saying this is
mine, and this is mine, shall not long continue; but at the end there shall be a
change, which shall be very suddenly, to the amazement of all world-lings, and
those that make riches their god, for these things go out of date, for now the
time is at hand that we shall follow the practice of the Apostles, and so shall
hear them preach, and to break bread from house to house with singleness of
heart, and so shall not so much look to our selves, as to let others be
neglected, no, but we shall see to others, that they shall be in no want, and so
shall have no want of any thing, which if we do, then shall we not only talk of
denying our selves, but we shall wholly deny our selves, and shall not seek our
own good, our own I say, and not another, but with all willingness seek the
good of others, as being fellow creatures, and all of one blood, made of one
and the same metal; then shall wars and contention cease, and nothing but love
grow and increase, and spring forth in abundance; for I the Lord of host will
make all my enemies to ly down and be at rest one with the other, so that they
shall ly like a lamb and a sheep together; and as for bears and wolves, they
shall be taken away, that there may be no devouring, but there may be perfect
peace, and love one with another; for though I do gather my Saints out of all
nations to go to one place, even to Jerusalem, so that they shall be freed from
their cruel enemies, yet will I also make such a work in all the earth, that
oppression shall cease amongst them; even those that are not brought into my
love and favor, shall live and be quiet one with the other, and shall have all
things common; but for my Saints, which have right to the tree of life, and so
enter in through the gates into the city, shall not be twain but shall be all
one, both of one heart and one mind; for I the Lord of host, will preach to
them, and they shall hear me preach, and shall learn knowof me, even so much,
that they shall see and know that they possess all things, and enjoy all things,
and so have all things at command; for this tree of life is my self, which if a
man eats of, he shall live for ever, and also this tree of life, is in the
City; which City may be taken two ways, either mystical, or literal,
mystically, the Saints makes one City, literally, it is the Jerusalem where my
sons and daughters shall be gathered together; the gates of this City is my
power, which all must be endued with before they can enter into it: for the
tree of life is my self, which will be there for ever, keeping of them, my sons
and daughters always in a continual supply, so that they shall have no want of
anything, but the riches of the Gentiles shall be brought into this City, even
into this new Jerusalem, whose children shall be all righteous, and nothing but
righteousness shall dwell there, nothing but the pure and chosen vessels of my
love shall be there even with singing, and dancing shall they come thither, and
leaping for joy, for the Lord has founded Sion, and the poor of the people
shall trust in it: O Sion shout, shout and sing for joy, for all people shall
tremble and quake for fear of thee, even for fear of thy most excellent King, I
the mighty Jehovah that dwells in thee, and I will make thee to be famous, and
thee to be desired far among all people; this word shout, shows abundance of
joy, joy unspeakable in thee, shout and be glad, nothing but rejoice and sing:
let sorrow and sighing, and whatsoever has formerly troubled thee, be now
turned into joy and gladness; I tell thee, that thou shall be made the praise of
the whole earth; even thou (O Sion) that has bin scattered and driven into all
nations, here and there one, but now I have founded Sion, even thee, O Sion,
wherein I do delight to dwell, and will bring thee into my own place, even into
a Canaan of rest, from all thy hateful enemies; so that thou shall no longer be
here and thereon, no, but I will bring you all together, both Jews and Gentiles,
and I will make you to be both one, rejoicing in you, and will be married to you,
and you shall be my spouse, and my wife, who shall always be feeding on the tree
of life; and so I will make you live for ever: for all my joy and delight shall
be in you, and I will be your tower, and rock, and walls, and salvation for you;
and in that day you shall say, we have a strong City; salvation will God appoint
for walls and bullwarks; even a free universal liberty from all sorts of enemies
both within and without, and nothing but joy and love all being knit together
in love, rejoicing in love heaving so strong a City, and all manner of precious
things being there, even such a City and place for delight, that there shall be
none like it in the world; for nothing but joy will I give you, and will make you
for to rejoice in me your King of glory, and you shall be as so many Kings and
Princes that shall reign here on earth, every one of you no less then a King,
that shall have all nations in subjection to you, by my mighty power which I will
manifest in you, I will make you to break the nations in pieces like potters
vessels, even into, shivers shall thou dash all thine enemies, whether they be
Turk or: Pope, or any other Countries, for all shall become as weak as water;
and I in the midst of you will show my self to be strong and powerful; even so
strong, that I will make all nations to be silent, and sit still, and let you
alone, and instead of making wars against you, they shall beat their swords,
and spears, and their weapons of war into pruning hooks, and the nations shall
not learn war any more; but I will make them say, come let us go up to Sion, and
they will teach us their ways O what a bundance of glory will I give unto thee
O Sion, that nations far and near shall come up to thee to be taught of thee;
and indeed they shall have great need, for I will empty all other teachings of
men, and all shall be barren, so that there shall be no perfect rest but to those
that come to Sion, where I the Lord of host will be the a lone teacher, and will
make them all to know me, even from the least to the greatest; not only know
me, and call me God, because of my power being seen, in that I have made the
heavens and the earth, for this knowledge of me all men have, yet they are
ignorant of what I am; which my people that dwell in Sion shall know; they shall
see me in my glory, and know me what and where I be, they shall see me every
where, and know that I am in every thing, and that the whole world is but a
garment to cover me from the visible sight of men: and thus will I appear in my
people, gathering them together, where I will manifest my self unto them, and
raise them from the dead, even all Israel from this death of sin and
corcuption; and will make them to be partakers of the second resurrection, on
which the first death shall have no power; and so all Israel, even the whole
house of Israel, shall be gathered together in righteousness and in truth, and
they shall glory and rejoice in me, even in mount Sion; yea even the place where
my son Jesus was transfigured and changed, so that his raiment became white and
glistering, and the two Apostles seeing of him in this condition, said it is
good to be here; for the glory that was seen there, which was but a resemblance
of my gathering my people to Sion, and so making them to be as one, and when I
had so gathered them together in the last days, there to make my glory shine
in a more lustrious and glorious manner then ever I did when my son Jesus was
on the earth, for his being transfigured and shining so bright, shows forth
abundance of light and glory that shall be manifested to you now in these last
days; for as soon as he was in garments that were white and glistering, it
shows that I will appear to be a light, and a more excellent light to you then
yet I have bin, for the glory was so great at the transfiguration of my son,
that made his disciples say, it was good for them to be there: even so shall my
appearing in you and glathreing of you together, shining in you, and among you
in so glorious a manner, rocking you a sleep in my glory, shall make you say it
is good for us to be here, even in this place where it is thy pleasure we shall
be; for here shall we be in the same condition as the two dissciples were in;
for at the transfiguring of thy self, made them to say, it was good for to be
here, by reason of the more transcendent glory they saw far more then they did
before, notwithstanding they had a long time bin in Jesus his company; so that
notwithstanding those glorious discoveries which you have had of me, and those
glorious breakings forth of light which has bin among you, will appear to be
nothing in comparison of that light and glory you shall have when you are taken
apart from the people, as the two Apostles were had in the mount, even then
shall thou see a more glorious discovery of me, when thou art taken wholly out
of Babylon, and wholly from all thy enemies, and brought up into the mount even
into Jerusalem the place which I will adorn with all manner of precious things;
as jewels of gold, and pearls and precious, stones of all sorts: and I will
change these glimpes of light and glory which thou now have, and these little
sparks of light, into a full and perfect view, wherein thou may see clearly
my light and glory, and so these sparks become coals of fire that shall
appear in a more fuller manner to thee then ever they did before; which will be
in such an extraordinary manner that al things else shall become nothing in
comparison of this glory which I will now make you to see.

And whereas Jesus was transfigured before his two disciples, and they saw him
in glory, and he was not alone in this condition but they did see Moses and
Elias talking with him, this is a mystery which shows, that I the Lord of host
appearing in my bright and glorious dispensations, which will now be, I shall
appear alone; but as Moses and Elias was with Christ when, he was transfigured,
even so shall Moses and Elias now be with me in my bright appearing to you; and
not only Moses and Elias, but all that have bin my faithful servants, even the
whole house of Israel shall appear in glory, and you shall see and know them that
they are Moses and Elias, and the rest of my Saints, whom I have now raised up
to come and be with you, and have given them a body as I have seen good, and
Enoch of old prophesied; the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints, so
now will I come (not only with ten thousand, but) with all my Saints to guard and
keep me company, and so will make my name a glorious name, and a memorial for
ever; and I thus appearing in glory and majesty, will make all my enemies to
tremble and to quake, when they shall hear that I the Lord does reign in mount
Sion, and that I have brought Moses and Elias, and all the rest of the prophets
thither: there for to make thee rejoice in me the Lord of host, clothing them
with my self, and making them for to appear in glory, giving them a revvard,
that they shall come and be in my love and favor, and that they shall now rule
over all their enemies, and all their enemies shall be but their footstool, and
they shall now tread and trample that wicked spirit which has often persecuted
them, to nothing; and so now shall appear to be Kings and conquerours through me
that love them: here is but a glimps of that glory which you shall enjoy when
you come to Sion, when you see me and all my Saints with me, rejoicing in me,
and I in them; but how ever know this, that Sion shall be made the praise of
the whole earth, and all glory shall be there, even all manner of precious
things; and all the nations shall ly down in their dust and be brought to shame
and confusion and the Lord alone shall be exalted, and will magnify himself, and
will get him glory and honor over all his enmies, and so will bring to nothing
all those that have opposed him, and will make Sion a scourge and a torment,
that shall torment all nations, when they hear of the love and favor that I will
do to them, and when they hear of that glory and beauty that I will make to
shine amongst them; and when they hear of that privilege that I will give you,
O you Sion! that you shall always rejoice, and sing, and shall dwell in peace,
and he of one heart, and of one mind, glorying in me, and rejoicing in me, and
blessing your selves in my name; and shall see nothing but joy for former things
be passed away, and all things now become new, nothing but righteousness
dwelling among you, and the glory of me the Lord of host overshadowing you, and
keeping of you from sorrow and weeping; having redeemed you out of the hands of
them that were stronger then you, and have made you now stronger then all your
enemies, and all shall lick the dust of the soles of thy feet, and call thee,
the Sion of the Lord, the holy one of Israel; and whereas thou have been
forsaken that no man went through thee; I will make thee the glory and
excellency of many Generations even the joy and delight of the whole world: a
place wherein there shall be nothing but singing and rejoicing in God; even in
me the Lord of host, who am the All of all things.

And the Lord said within me, behold, and I looked and there appeared three
Suns; and they were one above another; the lowest was not so glorious as the
midlemost, neither was the midlemost so glorious as the highest; for the
highest of them did outstrip the other in glory; and did shine so gloriously,
that it did darken and put out the light of both the rest; for I did see that
the midlemost had put out the light of the first, even so that it did scarce
shine; but the highest did so gloriously shine in such a bright manner, that
the lesser lights were but darkness to that. And I said, Lord, what means
these Suns, and one to be so bright over the other, and so to darken the rest?
and my God said, that these three Suns hold forth three dispensations, one of
them more glorious then the rest, and as they do appear unto you in glory, so
did they shine for the time of their being; and the first Sun does hold forth
the first dispensation, even that, which was given by me the Lord of host to
Moses, even that law that was written in Tables of stone, and the children of
Israel had amongst them; therefore as I did appear to my servant Moses in such
away as to give him a table of stone wherein was written all my statutes, laws
and judgments, as I commanded my people Israel to observe and keep, as the
observing of the seventh day, and the offering of sacrifices, and the slaying
of the pascall lamb, and the giving of them by tribes an inheritance, that they
should not deal with other nations, as to make merchandise with them, were but
all tipes and figures of the appearing of my son Christ in flesh; and so it was
but a dark dispensation, in regard that it was but a dispensation that did
hold forth Christ to come in the flesh; and those that lived under it at that
time until Christ had laws and commandments for to observe; which they were
never able to keep or fulfill; so in this respect it did shine gloriously for
the during or continuance of that time they were to continue; because they my
people Israel, had laws and ordinances which all the nations besides them had
not, and so God did not deal with other people as he did deal with them; as the
psalmist says, God has not dealt so with other nations as he has dealt with
us: that was in regard of my love and favor which I had to them as for to make
choice of them at the first* and so did take them as a peculiar people from the
nations, to whom I did commit my Oracles: yet this was but a weak
dispensation, because it could not give life to them that did keep them; but
those that were in the account of me the Lord of host, it was by looking to my
promise; even to Jesus Christ, which I did promise life by; and so when the
fullness of time came, that my son Jesus was to be made manifest in flesh, and
was borne, then the dispensation of types and figures ceased, and was not to
be; but was put out by the appearing of the Second Sun; which was the second
administration, even Christ a Savior coming in flesh amongst man, and so was
by power declared to be the Son of God; herein even I the Lord of host did
appear most gloriously to the people in that age, by giving of my son Jesus and
his disciples power to do and work miracles, which continued so long as my son
was visible amongst them in flesh, and then it ceased as he ceased from being
amongst them; and this administration, was to continue for a time, as Moses
were, for all the laws, and ways, and rules that are contained in this second
administration, as given out by Jesus in the flesh as he were, was but to
continue for a time; which time was to last so long until all the Kingdom shall
be delivered up into the hand of the Father, that he might be all and in all;
that is at the end of this administration, I will take the power uuto my self
that is I will make my self manifest in such an extraordinary way or manner, as
will appear to the confounding or putting out all other lights besides my self;
as the third Sun did appear very glorious to the rest, so will I in this
administration of making out my self, or preaching my self in my sons and
daughters, make my glory for to shine in a more extraordinary manner then
before I did, for though I by my bright appearing in my sons and daughters, and
in the world, at the time that my son was on the earth, did so powerfully
operate in them, as that they must needs hold forth my Image of love, for it is
love that holds me forth more then any thing, and love it is that is the Image
of God, and I the God of gods did make them show love one unto the other, by
making them give bread one to the other, as they did; And so went from house to
house and break bread together and had all things common, this was but a tipe
of that great work which I will now do, as for to make not only my sons and
daughters live in love and peace, and union, but also will make their enemies to
be at peace with them, and will make them weary of their Idol gods, as gold, and
silver, and so will take from them that oppression that has reigned from time
to time; and this I vvil do in my bright appearing in my sons and daughters,
that shall see me to be their life and joy, and so to have nothing in worth or
esteem besides my self, and so will make them to be the City or temple that
shall have no need of men's light, or candlelight; but I, even I their God,
will be their light, and so will speak and preach in them peace and joy, and so
will free them not only from looking after creature objects, but will wholly draw
them up to live in me, and will make them to see that they are dead, and cannot
eat or do any thing, but all their life is I the eternal God dwelling in them,
and causing them to hear a word behind them saying, this is the way walk in
it; and so the new Covenant shall be written in their hearts, they shall all
know me from the least to the greatest, and they shall sin no more: at by my
bright appearing or making out of my self to my people, I will make them to know
me, and all the rest shall know me, for I will be a terror and a dread to them,
and so will make them to be afraid of me, and know me by my power that I will
exercise over them, when my sons and daughters, even the new Jerusalem, shall
see former things passed away, and all things become new; all those things
which formerly were sin to them, and did trouble them, to be no longer so, but
new, and all sorrow to stay away: then it will and shall be to them that laugh
and mock and revile my Saints now, a fear and a dread, whereby they shall be in
misery and in pain for doing so as they have done, for I will appear very
glorious in my sons and daughters, I will destroy them all, even all their
enemies, even within and without, so that they shall not sin, but shall be wholly
seated in liberty and freedom, and shall do nothing but my pleasure, and I will
joy in them, and they shall joy in me for evermore.

So that in this third and last dispensation, God will appear so gloriously in
his people, that those that God is not well pleased for to make out himself in
love unto, shall acknowledge that these are the sons and daughters of God, and
so shall call us even the Saints, the ministers of Cod, and the Priests of the
Lord, such whom the Lord has raised up to be restorers of the breaches, and
making of paths for to dwell in; for my work is now to make a separation for
them, says the Prophet; then shall ye return and discern betwixt the godly and
the wicked, for I the Lord of host in this last age will make a clear
distinction, by manifesting my power, and by destroying all things besides my
self; so that I will make my Saints to shine as stars in the Firmament, by my
bright appearing in them; for I the day star, being risen in their hearts, will
occasion all darkness to vanish away, and will make them shine so gloriously,
by giving them a new name, which none shall know, but them that have it; for I
will make up my Jewels in that day, and will make them to shine illustriously,
that I will make the wicked acknowledge of a truth, that God, even the eternal
God, dwells in them, and will now be worshipped in spirit and in truth, without
forms, and rules, and ways, which has already been: but by my teaching in
them, I will make them to give up themselves to me; and so to rejoice in me more
then ever they have done as yet, I will fill them with my spirit, for I being of
as great power as I was of old, so that they shall now see and know with
cleerness, and speak as the spirit moves them, and talk as I act in them, even
in such a sure way as my servants the prophets did of old, for my hands are not
yet shortened, but can do such a work still as to make my Saints no longer doubt
and question what they say, but shall surely say the Lord speaks thus, and so
shall speak infallible once again, and not to doubt, as they do now, and have
formerly; for I will now open that mystery that has been sealed up with seven
seals, as a token of darkness, yea perfect darkness: which mystery will be
opened now the seven last trumpets sound, and the last Vial is now a pouring
forth, which mystery is only God appearing to All in all; and I the God, even
the eternal King, taking my power my self, as to make all become subject to me,
and not to forms, and so to make my self known that I dwell in men, and so will
preach in men, and will cause other preaching which has been in my offense to
cease; and I alone will preach and speak to men, and will tell them this is the
way walk in it, when they turn to the right hand or to the left hand, when
they are going astray from me, then I will speak to them for to make them come
in the way which I would have them to walk in; which if rightly considered,
will make my sons and daughters greatly for to rejoice to see their God eye to
eye, or to hear him speak in them, it will save abundance of trouble; as it will
make them leave off running after broken cisterns that can hold no water; and
also from running from mountain to hill, and so finding no resting place: O
saints here is a resting place for you, leave off gadding abroad, and running
after other lovers, for I am your rest, and your dwelling, and be silent and
sit still, and I will speak in you, yea even I will speak peace to you, and no
good thing I will withhold from you; and I will show you where I make my flock
to rest and ly down at noon days, and where I lead them to the lively fountain
of living waters: O this place of rest, and place where I make my flock to
rest, is for to bring them up in to me and then they shall find a Canaan, a
rest indeed, and a river of living water, which shall never be dry, but always
flowing forth with life and nourishing, joy and comfort to you that are thus
brought up from all creatures, and so only wait for the speakings of me the
Lord host in you, which I will surely do to the abundance satisfaction of your
souls; and you shall hear of it, and so shall ly down in ^est when others shall
go about to seek rest by outward objects, and shall find none, or by looking
after outward things, and none shall come.

And I saw a vision wherein is showed that there shall be gathered out of this
land a people that shall go to Jerusalem, and also the Jews that are dispersed
in all nations shall be gathered together, to go with them, and also a remnant
of people out of all lands, that shall go to Jerusalem; that so the saying of
the prophet might be fulfilled, that all nations shall go and worship at
Jerusalem, the vision is as follows.

There did appear a pair of scales, and within each seal a weight, one of them
being a great deal bigger then the other, and it was to me like lead; and the
other being a little one, and like unto silver, was too light for the other for
a while, and so the great one weighed it up, and held it for a while up; but at
length the scales turned, and the little weight weighed up the great weight;
and the great weight fell to the earth, and was no more.

And I beheld that out of this little weight there came men and women, and I
said, Lord, what means this scale, and the hand that holds them up, and the
weights in them? and my God even the eternal King of glory said, the scales
signify the earth, in whole the material frame of heaven and of earth, and the
hand by which the scales were held, is shown my power by which I have erected
them and so does still hold them up from falling down, the weights signify two
peoples, or two powers, the wicked and the Godly, or the earthly powers, or my
power; by the great weight is set forth the earthly powers, and also wicked
men, which have had powers and have ruled over my sons and daughters a great
while, as was showed thee by weighing up the little weight; and so have kept my
people in bondage and slavery to one thing or other, as to the rudiments of
this world, and traditions of men; but as the scale turned, it shows a turning
of things upside down, and as the little weight waighed the great one up, for
as much as by the little one is meant my sons and daughters; and made the great
one fall to the earth, and so to be no longer, is shown a destruction of those
thieves that were, and that which were not, is now to come to pass; as the
powers of the earth and wicked men have ruled over my Saints, the time is now
come, they shall do so no longer, but must become subject to my people; for the
kingdoms of the world shall I now give to my saints, and they shall possess them
for ever, and all the might, and majesty, and glory, and strength of men, shall
be nothing in my sight, for I will bring down the proud and haughty looks of
men, and will lay them low, even to the dust, that they may no longer be; for I
will now stain all the pride and glory of man, and make man appear to be but
dust and of no strength, that I the Lord of host may be exalted, and so become
all the power and strength of men.

And whereas thou did see men and women come out of the little weight, and
sprad themselves abroad, and as they went darkness vanished away and light
increased much; these people are my Sons and Daughters, whom I vvil stir up to
go to Jerusalem; and out of this nation there shall go some, even the principal
and chief leader of them shall be an English man, whom I have already chosen
for to do the work of me: and also vvil I at this appearing stir up the Jews
that are of the natural seed of Abraham, to go with him in their own country;
and I did see also that we that should go up should meet with many enemies,
as Moses did when he brought the Children of Israel out of Egypt, before they
could get into Canaan; but as God destroyed them all before Moses, and loshua
and made way for his people then; even so vvil he now do the like, for he
has chosen one which he has endued with power and courage (like Moses) to
be a leader, and God himself vvil fight our battles, so that al our enemies
shall be made a prey to us in what country soever we pass through; and when
God shall be pleased for to bring us up to Jerusalem, then the Lord vvil make
all the inhabitants to run away, and so the All of all things vvil give us
houses that we builded not, for to dwell in, and orchards and vinyard: which
we planted not, for to eat the fruit thereof: and also in this vision there
was shevved me one that was measuring a place, and it was to build a
material temple, and the Lord said it should be built, and I did see it built,
and it was like unto Paul's, and there we were to meet twice or thrice, and
then it should be destroyed; and of a sudden I savv it destroyed and laid
desolate, that we should no longer meet there in that Material temple; but
should worship God even the eternal King of glory, in spirit; and presently
after this, I savv all that were there, both men and women fall down to the
ground as if they were dead; but of a sudden I did see them all rise up, and
so were as it were changed to a more glorious people then they were before,
and they should never die more; and after this, there went a law out from
amongst them into all Nations and countries, for a law shall go out of Sion,
and so these were shevved me to be the Bride, the Lambs spouse and wife, to
whom all Nations shall become subject, and shall not lift up hand or foot
against them, for they shall be a terror to all the earth, and all the earth
shall be afraid of them, and shall willingly let these that are afterward a
coming up, come up with ease and quietness, and help them forvvard in their
way; after this I savv all tears were wiped from them, and they should sorrovv
and vveep no more; but all things are now to them become new, and everlasting
joy and gladness of heart, singing and rejoicing in God; God speaking in them,
and teaching them, and being the light of them, both by day and night, so as
all darkness shall vanish away, and all become light; and so they shall all of
them be of one heart and one mind; and after I looked and beheld, and I could
see nothing but pleasant Orchards and Gardens, full of fruit, and making a most
pleasant smell, and all there food after this change was nothing but the fruit
of the trees, and that they may have at any time, for as fast as one was
pulled off, another appeared in the room presently, and so there was
abundance of plenty, and joy, and pleasant music, and no more sorrovv and
sighing; but all rejoicing, freed from sickness and pain, and living in the I
enjoyment of eternity; and the joy and glory of this happiness, the more I go
to relate i^, I shall but darken it, and so I leave expressing any more.

And again my eternal God said unto me, behold, what do thou now see? and lo
I looked, and there appeared a woman all in white; and presently after the
woman, there appeared a man, and he took the woman and carried her round about
the room; and when he had brought her round, he brought her in the middle of the
room, and set her upon a high place, even the highest in the room; and I said,
Lord, what does this woman set forth unto me? and the eternal God, even my
father, the King of eternal glory, said, this woman does represent my Church,
my spouse, my wife, even my peculiar and choice ones, whom I have brought up to
see and know me, as I am the eternal being of all things, and how all things
have their right being from me, who am the life all things, and for whom all
things were made and created; and as she was in white, it does set forth, that
I the eternal God have washed her from all her sins, and have taken her from
all her foulness, and so have made her white, even so white, that she shall see
and know now that all her sins and iniquities are pardoned and blotted out, and
shall never come into my mind again, and so she shall know, even my wife, the
spouse of my youth, even from all eternity, the peculiar and choice ones, and
shall now sin no more, but shall be like me, even so as I am, so they shall be,
when I have gathered them out from al their enemies, into the place where it is
my pleasure for to bring them, even into Judea, for this is the place of my
rest, and the place where I will cause my spouse, even my wife, for to rest; and
so to be free from all her enemies, and so shall live in peace, and in
quietness, resting in me, and lying down in peace, being sure that I their King
will preserve them from all their enemies.

And this man which thou saw take the woman and carry her round the room,
sets forth me the Lord of host, who by my own power will do whatsoever I please
with my spouse, my wife; and so will be controuled by none; but will do what I
please for to do, and who are they that shall hinder me from doing of my
pleasure? and as thou saw the woman carried round; it shows forth me the
Lord of host, who will by my own power go round, even the round world, and there
will appear in all places of the world where my sons and daughters are, and so
by my almightiness, even by my infinite strength, bring my sons from them; and
as thou saw the man after he had brought the woman round, carry her still
until he had brought her into the middle of the room, so will I by my own power,
not only find them out, my sons and daughters the Jews only; but I will also
bring them by my power into Judea; which is the middle of the world; and as
thou saw the woman which does represent my sons and daughters, set in the
middle upon a hill; even so will I by my own power bring my wife, which are
the Jews, and Gentiles, whom I have chosen, into Judea, and so will set them
above all hills; even upon the proud hill, and they shall rule over the proud
hil-flesh, and fleshlyness, even over all the nations; and all the greatness of
the earth shall be as nothing in my sight in comparison of them, even my chosen
ones, whom I have purposed for to bring out of the countries; where now they be
under their enemies, and so will free them from their oppressors; and so they
shall be by my mighty power, brought into a Canaan of rest: again I the eternal
God, even the infinite Jehovah, by whom all things subsist and have a being,
and I only am the life of all things; therefore be ye not now as you was before
in bondage to weak and beggarly elements, and so to be led about by the
tradition and rudiments of this world, which shall perish and come to nothing;
but arise, and shine; for thy light is come, and the glory of I the Lord of
host, is risen upon thee; arise from all those foolish things, even from all
things that you have lived in below me; arise, I say, from out of the dust of
the earth, and from that darkness which ye have formerly lain in, arise I say,
from all death and sin, and from every thing that has kept thee at a distance
from me, and arise from all and every one of thy enemies, whom I have stricken
with fear and with terror, and whom I have made to be afraid, arise I say, even
ye O Jews, who are by nature the true olive branches, and once were broken
off; because of unbelief that the Gentiles might be grafted in; arise, I say,
from that unbelief, to believe on me; yea, I say, thou shall be grafted in
again, notwithstanding the unbelief, and hardness of heart; and though thou
have bin as a woman grieved in spirit, and forsaken, having lost thy first
husband, yet thou shall now be found again, and instead of mourning and
garments of sackcloth, I will cloth thee with joy and gladness of heart, and
thou shall mourn no more; for the days of the mourning shall be at an end;
and instead of garments of sackcloth, I will adorn thee with ornaments and with
jewels, even the best and chiefest among all the rich treasures that can be
found thou shall be adorned with; for I do bid thee arise from all former
troubles and sorrows whatsoever thou have bin subject unto, even from all
manner of slavery; as being servants and subject to the pleasures of Kings and
other great men, yea from the Pope and Turk; arise says the Lord of host, for
thy redeemer comes, that shall turn away ungodliness from Jacob, even all
those things that you in my absent have busied your selves about, shall now be
destroyed; and all, yea whatsoever it is, must now by my bright appearing be
brought to nothing and confounded, that I the Lord of host may be all things;
therefore arise from death, yea every thing that you have bin acted in; arise
from them, for the time of the resurrection is now come, that you shall be
raised from a condition of sorrow, and trouble, and slavery, and death it self,
into a condition of joy and gladness of heart, and of life it self; whereas
formerly you have bin at the command of men, and so they have had their wills of
you, it shall no longer be so with you now in this day of the resurrection: but
on the contrary, you shall instead of being their servants, and at their
commands, become lords over them, and they shall withal their treasures, come
bowing and bending unto you, such is the alteration that I will now make here on
earth, to redeem you out of the hands of your cruel enemies, and to bring you
into my promised land, the place where formerly I did make out my glory and my
name to your Fathers of old, which was the people whom I did choose out of all
nations; and so did bring them into that Land where I did make my power and my
name known, which was but a type of that glory which I will now make known unto
you and to my chosen servants the Gentiles; whom I will bring with you into this
place where I the Lord of host does intend to hold forth my glory in a more
powerful manner then ever I have done as yet; and in a far more glorious
manifestation of my self then ever I have done as yet; even in so clear a
discovery of my self to you, whom I will bring up into the place of my glory,
and the place where I will make my self known; and as formerly all were subject
to my servant David, who was King of the Jews, even so shall all people be
subject to you, whom I have appointed to bring into Judea, for this is your
resurrection; I will now raise you from all sorrow and trouble, and so will set
you free from all your enemies; and will make you the praise of the whole earth,
and all the nations shall see and know that I have chosen Judea to be the place
of my rest, where I will make my stocks to ly down at noon days, even in the
heat of the misery of the nation will I make the Jews and the Gentiles whom I
will bring up by my mighty power shall ly down and be at rest and so be in
quietness and so will cause the work of righteousness to increase, and it shall
take effect, and the fwork of rightousness shall be quietness and assurance for
ever for or my people, even for you O jews and Gentiles whom I will bring up
into Judea, and my people shall dwell in peaceable and quiet habitations, even in
such peace and quietness after this first resurrection, that al your enemies
shall be destroyed from you, and shall not be suffered to come to you or against
you by no means, for there shall not be a Canaanite in my house, even in this
city Jerusalem, or in the limits of your abode, but I the Lord of host will
destroy them al, that you may be at rest, and so enjoy me without any let or
hinderance at al, for will I graft thee into the vine again; and so will raise
thee up to thy former condition; even to be my peculiar and choice ones, to
whom I will make out my self in a glorious dispensation and manifestation of my
love and favor once again; so that I will make all thy sorrovvs to be
forgotten, by reason of so glorious an enjoyment of me, who am the Alpha and
Omega, and has now raised you up from from the dead, and from a condition of
darkness into light.

Arise, and not only arise but shine, make it appear by your condition, that
you are not only risen from the dead, but you have also light come into you;
therefore shine, and be not so dark as you have bin, when you were dead, and in
your enemies hands, no, but be on the contrary; shine, hold forth the glory of
me your creator and redeemer, who have ransomed you from the hands of them that
were stronger then you, shine, and let my glory be seen upon you, for they shall
be afraid of you that hate you; shine, ye therefore, and be like so many stars
that shines in the Firmament, and glister like so many as the only people that
are redeemed from death to light: for thy light is come, I am your life and
light, and by being absent from you, your condition was a condition of death
and darkness, and you were compassed about with abundance of sorrow, by being
scattered abroad in the world; but I who am your life and light, even I the
mighty God of Jacob, am now risen to bring you into your own country, even
together, o daughter of Sion, shout and rejoice, and cry aloud, Sing and make
merry, and be glad in your King, who am now Risen with mighty power, for to
bring you into your own land; therefore rejoice and sing, for thy light is come
and Sion that was scattered abroad; but now shall be gathered into your own
country, even into Judea: for the glory of the Lord is risen upon you, even my
glory is risen upon thee, for to bring thee out of a strange country; and as
Pilgrims and sojourners into your country, there for to make my glory and light
shine and rest upon thee: for the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee, even
upon thee o captive daughter of Sion: for to make you see and know that I have
purposed to bring you into your own country once again, and there to make thee
the praise of the whole earth and the earth to see and know my power by which I
do things, says I the Lord of host; who has caused my glory for to arise upon
thee; for you have now a more surer word of prophecy, to which you do well to
take heed, as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and
the day star arise in your hearts: this was given to the church in that age,
who was to observe the word of the Apostles then and at that time, they being
but babes and children, and so had a rule for to walk by, which rule the
Apostle bids them take heed unto, that they walk by it: for how long? even
says the same Apostle, until the day break, until there be some further
appearance of light, a more glorious dispensation then now is, and the day star
in your hearts, that is until you do see and know God dwelling in you, and so do
see and know Christ, who is the bright and morning star: to be one with the
Father, Son, and holy Ghost: but one God dwelling in you, who is your life and
strength, and so to see this God in love, to be your All and in all, and the
very life of all things: til then you being weak, have had need of a written
rule to walk by, but now you have no longer need of any thing to walk by, no
not the Scripture to walk by; for I even your King and Lord, will be unto you
Scripture, and Law, and rule, and ways, and forms of worships, yea I will be
all: arise and shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee, even my glory shall now shine upon thee, for to make thee the praise
of the whole earth, and the joy of all the nations, arise and shine, for behold
darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people; arise, shine,
your condition will and shall be happy, says I the Lord of host, who has made
my glory to shine upon you, even upon you o Sion; whom I will gather into Judea
from amongst other people: but I will tell you one thing, even you whom I do
gather up into Judea: for behold this, darkness shall cover the earth, and
gross darkness the people: even when you shall see light, and walk in light, and
have light to be your guide, and have my glory shining upon you, even then shall
others, the earth, be covered with darkness, for there shall be no clear light,
and sun shining upon the earth, even upon those that come not up to worship me
the Lord of host in Jerusalem, but instead of light, there shall be darkness,
and instead of breaking forth of light, there shall be a mist and a cloud that
shall overspread it self for a while, so that they that go not up to Jerusalem
shall not have that clear light, neither shall they see and know that glory which
I will and shall make out to you o Sion: for you o Sion shall eat, and drink, and
be full, and have the bread of life, and water of life, when they that come not
up shall be in want, and shall be hungry, when Sion shall be full; for I will take
away all their food, even their forms and ways of worship, and will utterly
destroy them and bring them to nothing; for these things, as forms of worship
have they had some comfort in using them; but I will leave these dispensations
wherein I have formerly appeared, and will make darkness cover the earth in this
sense, for I will deprive them of all their forms and Church governments; for I
will forsake them, and they shall receive no benefit by them, even darkness shall
cover them, that they shall not see light in them, even gross darkness, even
such a darkness will and shall light upon poor creatures that walk by forms, and
so think to be carried to heaven upon the sholders of their Priests; but
darkness, yea such darkness that both Priest and people shall be amassed; for
they shall be driven out of their common-road, and so shall be forced to seek a
new way, even this darkness shall light upon those that are malicious and full of
envy, and so would of a sudden destroy their fellow creatures; darkness will and
shall overcome such; for though they preach and pray, yet al will not save them,
but that they must be destroyed and brought to nothing; for says the Lord of
host darkness shall cover the earth: there will be no clear sight of God, and no
clear sight of my way: for they shall not come to my knowledge, and so to the
enjoyment of me here or in any place, but where Sion shall be gathered together,
even my people, whom I have raised from the dead, and so will bring them up to
Sion, at Jerusalem the City where formerly I dwelt, which is in Judea, and
there I will make them shine, and be the glory of the whole earth: and after
this first resurrection that they shall have for to be raised from a condition
of death and slavery, into a condition of joy and life, where the Second death
shall have no power over them: for this is the resurrection wherein I will set
you free from all death: and you shall die no more, for I will be your life, and
you shall live for evermore, for now shall appear the sign of the Son of man
coming in the air: which sign of my coming, is now, forasmuch as I the Lord of
host, does begin to declare unto my servants what I do now intend to do: for
this air where it is said, then shall appear the sign of the Son of man, is
not meant only the air above, but rather that air which is in this earth of
yours; for as your bodies are earthy, so are they aerie, for they, even your
bodies, are not compounded only of earth, but of air, and so I appearing in
your bodies, and so making choice of instruments for to do my work, and my
strange work, that is my sign, or the sign of the Son of man coming in the
air: which sign is for to give people warning of what I intend to do, that so
if I find them not doing what I would have them to do, they may the better be
judged by me: and so punished for not doing of what I would have them do, for
the appearing of my sign, is to declare unto them that I am coming to judge and
destroy all things in man, especially in my Saints, besides my self, and so to
raise my son up from that grave and place of imprisonment, as now for the
present lies in: even to restore her to life, that she may die no more: for
blessed are they that have part in the first resurrection, on whom the second
death shall have no power: it is a most joyful saying to them that have
themselves raised up to be brought into such a place where they shall die no
more: which will be at the place where I have appointed to make my self
glorious; and so vvil appear in my glory, and so make my power known, by
being a God of power, who have raised up Sion from amongst their enemies, and
have brought her into her own land, even into a place where she my wife and I
must be married, and so they shall live for ever, and never die no more, for my
Sion shall be changed, and so shall become new; for the old man which for the
present they carry about them, shall be destroyed, and the new man Christ shall
come forth; and so they shall live for ever, and never die more; and so after
this they shall be as the Angels of God, as my son Christ said, that should
neither marry or be given in marrige but shall live in the full enjoyment of me,
who am the Lord of host, that lives for evermore, for when they are brought
into the full and perfect enjoyment of me, and be at peace with themselves, so
as they shall never marry or give themselves in marriage, according to the
customs of us, now these customs shall wholy be destroyed, and a new one
shall come in, that they shall live in pure and perfect enjoiment of me their
creator, and so shall have the use of those whom I appoint together, and so
shall have the use of one another.

For the Angels that neither marry or give themselves in marriage, are not any
created substances besides man, as to be in a place above the skies, keeping of
me company in one place: yea though it is true, the Angels, the good angels as
you call them, that left not their first estate, do keep me company, and are
where I am, and where I be there they be.

For these Angels made mention of, and also them made mention of in Peter, that
left their first estate, and so are reserved in chains of darkness unto the
great day: are no other angels then what is in man. For I the Lord of host made
man purely good, and before he fell, he was holy, just, and upright, being a
pure Angel of mine, and so one that should never die if he had continued in the
condition as he was set in: but it was the pleasure of I the creator to set him
in such a condition as I knew well enough he should fall: for had it been the
pleasure of I the Lord he should have stood and so have lived for ever; for if
he had stood and lived for ever, then should not my power have bin seen so much
as it is now: for this Adam was made good and just; and all things in him, and
all things besides him were good and not evil: but yet notwithstanding out of
this Adam who was made good and just, did proceed a Serpent for to beguil Eve
the weaker vessel, and this Serpent was not a serpent, a creature that poisons,
and so lives as a creature, no, but this Serpent was within Eve and Adam, and
so was something from Adam degenerated from its institution, from what it should
be, to what it should not be; and that is this, as Adam was made good, and no
evil was to be seen in him, as I the Lord of host has declared at the first:
but that I the Lord gave him reason, and knowledge, and wisdom, which in
themselves were very good: for by these things he did differ from the beasts,
and from every living creature; and by these things, as reason, knowledge, and
wisdom, did he give unto every creature which I the Lord God had made, and
also did he know the nature of every green herb, and of every thing, as to
give them a name.

Thus was Adam in his first estate good, furnished with every thing, and so did
live in paradise, even in God, and so had the pure and perfect enjoyment of the
creator that made him; but it did please me for to let him alone, and Eve
especially, being the weaker vessel and not able to contain her self in that
condition, as to know much and do little: but she did put her self forward in a
way for to eat the apple that she was commanded to let alone, for she had so
much reason, wisdom, and knowledge, as that she knew well enough that if she
did eat of the fruit she should have bin as God; and this the Serpent, who
being a more subtle creature then any of the beasts of the field was, did urge
Eve for to eat of the fruit: which Serpent was no other but that reason,
wisdom, and knowledge, which is the spirit of men, and women, and is in man
very good of it self, if man had but power for to keep it under, from going
about to do that it should not do; and this was the only Serpent that made Eve
to eat of the forbidden fruit: even that reason, knowledge, and wisdom that
was in her, for that reason, and knowledge, and wisdom, that was in her, did
degenerat from what it should do, and did do what it should not: the
degenerating from what it should do, was its pride, by doing what it should not
do: as it was given her for to know how she should keep and perform that she
had a command for to do. It was good in its self, but instead of keeping, she
breaks the command, and that by being beguiled by the Serpent; which is no
other but her own reason, wisdom, and knowledge, as her God had given her,
even I the creator: and so this reason, wisdom, and knowledge, which was a
good Angel, and the Angels of God in Adam and Eve, by knowing more then they
should have done, and so by presuming to go higher, even to be as God, like me
their creator, this reason, knowledge, and wisdom, which was good and the good
Angels of God, even I the creator of all things did for presumption, turn it
from what it was, even from a good angel or spirit in man, into a Serpent, a
wicked angel, an opposer of I their creator; and so I did cast this wicked
angel, even this wicked reason, knowledge, and wisdom, which became wicked,
for presuming to go higher then it should have done, and so for this end and
purpose did I the creator cast out this reason, wisdom, and knowledge, for
opposing me in Eve, and in Adam, to be kept in chains and in bonds of
darkness, until the day of judgment, which chains and bonds of darkness, is
no other but giving it up to its own course, and so to let it run its own race
in running from me, and then giving it ever now and then a touch of my power and
glory, which I do cause them to behold in whom this Serpent does remain, and so
does cause it to receive torment from me, for not making out my self unto them.

And so these Angels good and had are both in man; the good. Angels are the
spirits of just men, that give themselves up to God, and so their reason,
knowledge, and wisdom, which is the spirit of man, are the good Angels of God,
that are called ministering spirits: and these angels are always Gods
companions, and so do keep God, even I the All of all things company, and are
always with me, and in me, I being their rest and place of ease: for when any
of my Saints return from the earth, so that the body becomes to be dust again,
then do I draw up the soul and its spirit to their centers, whose centers is I
the Lord of host, who am the life of all men: and their life is their soul,
which must return to me again, I being its fountain; and as for the spirit that
returns to me when it leaves the body of a Saint; for I am unto them reason,
wisdom, and knowledge, and so their spirit in them answers to mine; which
because it becomes subject to me, it is an Angel of light, and also are Angels
and ministering spirits, whom I the Lord of host sends out to minister comfort
to my people; and sometimes in forms and in shapes as I please; and sometimes
by making their spirits answerable to mine, and so make them rest in me; whence
as the body now lies in the grave, for says the Apostle, are not Angels
ministering spirits, set out to minister to them who shall be heits of
salvation? sent out to them whom I will please to send them to: so then the good
Angels, are the spirits of just men made perfect; and so says the Apostle, we
are come to an innumerable company of Angels, even to the spirits of just men
made perfect, here you may see by your Scriptures that Angels are but the
spirits of just men, for just men made perfect are Angels; ceasing from labor
and sorrow, for to rest in me the All of all things, who am the life of all
things; and so the angels in scripture made mention of, are but the spirits of
just men whom I can make to appear in the form of a man, and what in power, or
otherwise in what shape or form I please, and so good Angels are but the
spirits of just men, even of my Saints which are deceased, or now contiuing and
abiding in me the Lord of host.

The bad angels that fell and are reserved in chains of darkness unto the
judgment day of the Lord of host, is the Serpent that is in man, and is the
wisdom, and reason, and knowledge, that is in man, which is the spirit of man;
and this reason, wisdom, and knowledge, which was made good, for all things
were good, and so there were no evil, this for becoming to exalt it self, as to
know more then I was willing to let it know, did cast it self under my wrath,
and so became a curse, under which curse it still lies, and so will remain unto
the judgment day: for this reason, and wisdom that is in man exalting it self
against God, and not becoming subject to God, is the Serpent that beguiled Eve,
and so it did Adam, and so does and will do until it be taken away: and for
beguiling Eve it became a serpent, and a wicked angel thrown out of heaven,
that is, out of the love and favor of I the Lord of host, into darkness, that
is, into my sore displeasure: and not only a wicked angel, but a devil, and so
al wicked spirits are devils: for there were nothing created evil, but all was
made good; and this reason in man was good if it had but kept his bounds
wherein I had set it, but by taking liberty to do what I would not have it do,
it became at enmity with me, and so became a devil and a destroyer, and so a
murderer; a destroyer and murderer in that it forsook me the fountain of life,
where it might have had rest, and so have bin at quiet, and so has destroyed
it self and has made it self the very curse, and so is become the most odious
and greatest enemy to mankind, puffing it self up, and will not willingly be
subject to I the Lord of host: though it is true I could make it become subject
to me if so be I would show my infinite power for to bring it from the curse,
even then would reason, wisdom, and knowledge, which is the spirit of man, and
so consequently, the devil if it opposes God: become the greatest joy and
comfort to man: for the devil is evil in it self, not made a devil, but he
became a devil by disobedience, it being the good pleasure of I the Lord that
it should be so, and so then the spirits of wicked men and women are witches
and devils: for as you read of men that were possessed with devils; and as you
read that Christ did cast out devils: these devils are nothing but the spirits
of wicked men deceased; which as soon as they go out of the body they are not
at rest, neither can they rest or be at quiet, but they are always seeking
about in whom they may enter; yea though it be my pleasure for to keep them out
of all, yet I do not, but do let them get into some, and there he becomes a
worse devil then he were before, and so does remain for the time of the bodies
being; and after that ceases, it goes into another; and these are witches,
even the spirits of wicked men are witches, and I make use of them as my
instruments to punish and plague other wicked men in whom the same spirit
remains: and I do also allow unto these witches power for to torment, as to
bewitch the cattle of men, for they in bewitching of them they die; for it is my
pleasure to suffer this for a while: and these witches are the devil and
serpent mentioned; and the devil that Christ cast forth which run into the
heard of swine, was no other spirit or devil but the spirit and devil of a
wicked man deceased: its going into the heard of swine by asking Christ leave,
shows that it cannot go into any it self or what it does, it does it by having
permission from me to do it, and so nothing is done but I must give way for it
to be done, as I gave way for the Devil that was cast out, to go into the herd
of swine; which swine sets forth wicked men, for nothing is more like to a
wicked man then a swine, for as a wicked man will drink and be drunk, so will a
swine swil til he bursts himself, if he might be put to some ale or strong
beer; so that the Devil being cast out of a wicked man, and the man become a
convert, there is no place for him to be any longer, but the Devil begging to
go into the herd of swine, shows his earnest desire to be in his element; for
the swine sets forth wicked men, and so the devil that was cast forth went into
the wicked men, even into its center from whence it came.

For the very rise of this Devil, and also of wicked spirits which are Devils,
was not made by God, even by I the Lord of host, to be so, but they departing
from good, and made the good which I gave them evil, and so they became Devils,
declining from doing that which I commanded them to do; and so the very rise
and fountain from whence the Devil came, was from man, his imaginations being
continually evil, though man could never do so much as to do any thing contrary
to me, but must of necessity do my pleasure; for I only am active, and the
creature only and alone passive; so that Devil that does most torment men is
God, who does give power unto wicked spirits for to punish them, and wicked
spirits do nothing but what is the pleasure of I their King, who suffers them
to do as they do, while the time runs round, and comes to the same being and
form as it was at the first.

For the seed of the woman shall break the serpents head; this woman is the
Church, and so the seed is Christ in this Church; so then the Christ which is
the new man, shall in time rise and break in pieces the old man, old Adam shall
be destroyed and consumed to nothing, the Serpent whose head must be broke, is
that reason, knowledge, and wisdom, even that Serpent and Devil that came in
by disobedience, and must be destroyed, and so cast into the lake of fire; for
the day of judgment unto which this Devil is reserved and kept in chains of
darkness, is the day of my power, by which power I will destroy and bring to
nothing this Devil, for the day of judgment when I will judge this Devil, it
will be my bright appearing to confound the adversary, and so to bring to
nothing all the serpentine wisdom of the flesh; and also all the cuning and
craftiness of the proud flesh; for the chains inwhich this Serpent is reserved,
is nothing else, but that I do out give unto all that power and strength to
come into its first station where in it was set, which in time I will destroy al
besides these things, that shall appear gloriously and shine by holding forth my
glory, and will make Christ the new man, appear in power, spreading of it self
in all, for to redeem all from this power of darkness, and will make man to be
as he was at the first, taking away the Devil and wicked spirits from man, yea
out of man, and that which was made good and become a Devil, shall once again
become good, and so become an Angel of light, for my self spreading in my sons
and daughters in my chosen and peculiar ones at Jerusalem first, whither I will
gather my Sion together, and that power that spreads in them shall in time
spread it self, and never leave spreading until it has redeemed the earth from
the curse, and so has redeemed man from being any more subject to the serpent,
and so will never leave spreading its self, until it brings all into its self
from whence all came, and so shall all once again return, even into the same
condition as Adam was in; for all to be as one, and all speak one language; for
as at the building of Babel all were confounded in their languages, even so at
the destruction of Babel shall all be brought to speak one language, which will
be in revolution of all things, when the time, even that time shall be at an
end, then will there be a redemption from all bondage, not some only, but all,
yea the whole creation shall then be wholly set free into the glorious liberties
of the sons of God; all creatures shall then have benefit by Christ, yea the
very poor beasts; for all things shall become as they were in Adams days before
he fell, even in the year when I the Lord even I the mighty God of Jacob will
judge and destroy all that enmity that has bin betwixt the creature, and so all
that enmity that has been betwixt one Creature and another, and all shall be
set free even into liberty once again; so that I vvil make all men to be
changed, and vvil take away that malicious spirit that now is and remains
amongst men; and I, even I vvil bring all things round, and so vvil make my son
Christ to be a great redeemer, and he shall redeem all that did fall in Adam,
from death and misery, into the same condition as Adam was in at the first,
even to set all in purity, and so to make all live in God; and so shall all
Israel be saved, and all ungodliness shall be turned away; for it is my
pleasure for to take pity on the works of my hand, and not to continue in
wrath against my poor creatures, who are not able to do any thing without
me, and so the time of the restitution of all things to the same as they were
in Adam before he fell, shall clearly be manifested after 7000 years be
accomplished and brought to an end, but while then, the creature man shall not
be wholy set free from the curse that is from serpentine vvisdome, and from
being troubled and perplexed, because I the Lord of host does not shine upon
them.

For darkness shall cover the earth, and gross darkness the people, this
darkness that shall cover the earth vvil be by reason it is my pleasure to forgo
all forms and dispensations, and all outvvard worships whatsoever, and so
wholy to give the outvvard court to be trodden under foot, even al forms and
rules, and worships, and governments of men which they have set up, to be
consumed and destroyed, and brought to nothing, and so I alone to be al and in all; when I does this, it shall surely come to pass, even then shall the poor
creatures be in darkness and not able to see light, by reason of my withdrawing
my self to my own place and dispensation, even into my Judea, there for to make
my light shine, and there to appear gloriously in and amongst my Saints, whom
all shall acknowledge that they are the seed which the Lord has blessed;
therefore my drawing my self into this peculiar place for to make my self
glorious, and so to make my name in far greater esteem by all sorts of men then
now it is, I will make my light shine in a far more greater and glorious manner
then now it does, for I will be the praise of the whole earth, I dwelling in my
people, and my people dwelling in me, and I will measure the inward court, even
my Temple, wherein all flesh and fleshlyness shall cease and be no more, and I
alone will appear to be King, and the only ruler, and so will cause my light to
shine upon them, when darkness shall cover the earth, which darkness and gross
darkness shall be by reason of my not shining in the world; for all people shall
be left in darkness and not in light that come not up to the place of rest;
where I will cause my people for to ly down in peace, and so to be at rest, and
so to be quiet, and be in peace.

When nothing but sorrow and pricks of conscience shall accompany those that go
not up to Jerusalem, for that must be built in glory again, and set on her
foundation, and so this manifestation of God not appearing to the creature,
shall be hell and the lake of fire, wherein the wicked and all witches must be
tormented, and ^his hell will be in every place where I do not appear in love to
the creature for wherein I do appear in love there shall be, joy, and peace, and
no sorrow; and where I do not appear in love, there shall be nothing but hell;
for hell shall be in this world, even in these bodies shall men be tormented; even
by being cast out and not suffered to enter into the city, where nothing but
peace shall be, but dogs and sorcerers shall be without, even they shall be in hell
until the restitution of all things come, that there shall be no more devil nor
hell, which will be (for all, the devil, and hell, and all witches shall cease
then, even) in the year 7000. for that shall be a year of Jubilee to all sorts
of people, when all sorts then shall be brought into my love and favor, and
shall so remain; and they shall die, even men shall die as formerly they used to
do, that go not up to Jerusalem, even they shall die and be subject to change,
until the time comes that they shall die no more; but my people shall hear the
sound of the Archangel, and they being dead in Christ, shall be raised up to
meet the Lord in the air, even from that death they are for the present
subject to, and so shall even in a moment at the founding of the last trumpet be
changed, in a moment, even in the twinkling of an eye, and so shall be raised up
from death into life, and from sorrow unto joy, and happiness, and so shall be
ever with the Lord of host, and so shall die no more, but live for ever, and all
the Saints shall come with I the Lord of host, even to be glorified, and so to
receive what bodies it shall please I their King to give them there; for it is
true that my sons and daughters shall be brought to be glorified, and shall have
bodies given them, though not the same bodies of clay as formerly they had,
even they shall beraised up to live and reign for evermore; even my Saints as
the Saints formerly were raised out of the graves and walked up and down, so
shall my Saints be now raised up to be at Jerusalem in glory, for the Jerusalem
is the place which I have chosen for to make my name glorious, and the place of
my Saints heaven: for though people talk of heaven above, there is none: heaven
above is my self drawing my Saints into my fullness, then I bring them into my
third heaven, which is my highest dispensation, and the highest discovery of my
love to them: and this heaven shall be here on earth, even at Jerusalem, and the
place about Jerusalem, where I will appoint my Sons and Daughters to be; and
this shall be their heaven they shall live in the full enjoyment of I the Lord
Almighty, and they shall see all former things to be passed away, and all things
become new; and they shall live in pure love, and in the full enjoyment, of I
the Lord of host, who has made them holy whom I will always cause to rejoice,
and sing, and leap for joy of heart, because former troubles are passed away,
and all are now become new, and all things shall be new; for the Lord comes
with ten thousand of his Saints, and the. Lord will reign in mount Sion for
evermore: even I the mighty God of Jacob will reign for ever over my people, and
over my enemies, and all shall become subject to me.

But the Lord shall arise upon thee, and his glory shall be seen upon thee, when
nothing but darkness shall be in the earth and in the outward court: though
there be nothing else in the earth, but darkness, such darkness as men (earthly
men) shall have no comfort at all in all their outward forms and ways of
worships; which is the outward court, and is not to be measured at all, but is
to be left to be trodden under foot, as that which shall come to nothing, and as
a thing of no account, by Aliens and Gentiles, even by such as know not me the
Lord. But as for my sons and daughters whom I have made choice of, and so will
bring them into Judea, there to make my glory to be seen amongst them: then
shall they see that I am risen upon them, and so consequently, they are the
inward court which is to be measured, and so to be made much of: even that new
man Christ the anointed that is in them, shall increase and grow so strong in
every kind or degree, that their old man Adam shall be destroyed and quite
brought to nothing: and then in these (I mean the Jews and Gentiles) which shall
be gathered into Judea the Land of promise, where my glory shall be seen and
made to appear to all the world, and the partakers of this great glory, shall be
the inward Court that shall be measurable and made glorious; and the inward shall
increase more and more, and so it shall at length break forth in such a glorious
splendor, and in such a clear and bright manner as never has bin as yet,
which inward court shall be taught by my self, and so shall have the enjoyment of
my self, when all flesh, and fleshly actings shall be destroyed and brought to
nothing; and so shall this new man which is spiritual be wholly freed from the
curse, and shall never have the like power again for to come under the curse,
even under that curse which Adam brought into or upon the world, as to die and
so to be subject to death or dying, but shall be wholly freed from the curse,
and so shall be restored into the same condition again as Adam was in before his
fall, and so shall have no power any more to come under the curse; but I their
God will so guide them by my eternal glory, which shall shine upon them, even
upon the new man, which shall make all the old man cease from being, and so this
new man shall be in a more glorious manner discovered to be, even this new man
shall spring forth as to be altogether righteous, even the inocency and right
cousness that was in Adam at the first, when he was commanded not to eat the
forbidden fruit: which fruit was nothing else then that he should not seek to
be higher then I had set him to be, and so should not break my words but
fulfill them, which I knew well enough he would break them and not fulfill them,
by his longing desire after the fruit which I had commanded him he should not
eat of, that is, he should not have any desire to know more then I had given
him, but he should have rested himself in that condition which I had placed him
in, and then had not he eaten of the forbidden fruit, and so had not done any
thing for to displease. It is true I was displeased with him to his
apprehensions, because I did curse the Serpent, which Serpent was that reason,
knowledge and wisdom, which I had given him for to glorify me, and so by
cursing of that, it became a devil and so is my greatest enemy that now I have
in paradise, even in my own peculiar people, to whom I have made out my glory
most too, for the garden of paradise is man, wherein were nothing but glory, or
wherein I had made my self to man to tarry, even in Adam, and so would not have
had him suffered at all, or knew any sorrow at al, had not he have bin so
inquisitive for to have known more then I would let him at the first. And when
he had eaten of the fruit, it is said he walked in the garden and was naked:
that is, knew well enough that he had disobeyed me, and so in that sense he was
naked, as being stripped of my glory, and of that enjoyment of me which formerly
he had; even so that he could not have that free commerce or enjoyment of me as
formerly he had, as to talk with me; and he being naked, and had covered
himself with sigg leaves, that he had sowed together; was nothing but his own
righteousness; by which he would fain have hid his fault from me, and so would
have made Eve have lain in all the fault: and so ever since man being driven
out of the garden as Adam was; which was from the full and perfect enjoyment of
I their Lord: and so from having no more sweet and pleasant mirth with me, as
Adam had at the first; have bin inventing and sowing sigg leaves together, that
is, they have bin justifying themselves in their ways, and so will not be ready
to confess their faults, but to lay it to another, as Adam did his: and Adam
being put out of the garden, there was set a flaming sword that turns every
way, for to keep Adam from the tree of life, that so poor Adam might not eat
again and live for ever: for this flaming sword that did turn every way, was my
power, my infinite power, for to keep Adam from the full enjoyment of me, and so
from the Tree of life: for I had withdrawn my self, even my power from Adam,
and so would not let him have that power again, but would keep him from the
Tree of life; even from the pure enjoyment of me, and so from life which I had
promised him, that he should have lived for ever: which privilege he lost by
disobedience, and by falling from me, and so has never since obtained the same
privilege; but all have lain under the curse for to die: which privilege I the
restoring power will now restore to my Saints first, even to those whom I will
carry out of Babylon, both out of mystical Babylon, which is the very mystery
of iniqity: and out of literal Babylon, by my strong hand into Judea, and so to
Jerusalem the place where I will make my self more glorious then as yet since
the fall of Adam; and so will restore to my Saints there, that privilege as Adam
lost and has not as yet bin obtained, but now shall be obtained, which
privilege shall be a full and perfect enjoyment of I the creator of all
creatures, and so to be freed from the curse which is from self, reason,
knowledge, and wisdom, that is, they shall no longer have that reason,
knowledge, and wisdom, which I did give to every Adam, and so to every man
going beyond the bounds, but they shall by my power stand in the full enjoyment
of me, as Adam did at the first; and so they shall never have power any more (as
Adam had) for to fall from the pure and perfect enjoyment of I their Creator, as
Adam did; but shall be restored into the same condition as Adam was at the
first, even into that condition as for to live for ever, even to all eternity,
and so never to die any more, as Adam did by his fall, but shall be wholly freed
from the curse; as from all kind of sicknesses and sorrows which came into the
world by reason of the curse which I pronounced against Adam for breaking of my
revealed will: which condition they being restored into, there cannot choose but
be abundance of joy, which joy will light upon my chosen ones, whom I will gather
to Jerusalem, and joy and gladness shall be there: even to my Sion that shall be
gathered together at Jerusalem, whom I will make the praise of the whole earth,
foreby light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee; even upon
thee, O Sion, and thou shall be established in glory, but the Lord shall arise
upon thee, and his glory shall be seen on thee, and thou shall be made the
praise of the whole earth; and the Gentiles shall come to thy light, and Kings
to the brightness of thy rising, even unto thy light, O ye Jews, whom I will
gather out of all the countries wherein ye have bin dispersed, even they shall
come to see that light that I will make known unto you when I shall have brought
you out of captivity and bondage into the place of rest, or to that place which
I will make to be the resting place; for thy light shall increase, and grow
bigger and bigger, when all other lights shall be put out; for I am the light,
even I the Lord of host, who will make you to shine most illubriously and
gloriously; even so bright, that the Gentiles, even my chosen ones (whom I have
made much of my glory out unto) they shall see and know that your light does not
shine there, because it is my pleasure for to make my light shine upon you,
even upon the Jews who (through unbelief) were broken off; and Gentiles were
grafted in; but now I will appear unto them, and will give them hearts to believe
on my name, and so will make them the desires of all nations: even all nations
shall long and desire for to come to thy light; because my glory shall be seen
upon thee, when I have forsaken all other administrations besides this of mine,
which I will make more illustriously to shine, even to draw up my sons and
daughters into spiritual communion with my self, and so they shall worship me in
spirit and in truth: and Kings shall come in, even great men of the Gentiles
shall be with you, for Kings shall come to the brightness of thy rising: even
when thou have risen from that death which thou art for the present subject to;
so that thy brightness shall appear in a more extraordinary manner then now it
does, even then shall kings be brought to see thy rising, and to behold thy
glory by my bright appearing and manifesting my glory unto you; then shall thy
glory far surpass all the glory and beauty of the world besides; and none shall
be like to thee for beauty and comeliness; for I will make thee to shine so
gloriously, that thou shall dazzle the eyes of all the earth, and all the earth
shall stand and be amazed at thee, for the kings that shall come to thee, shall be
such whom I have or shall crown with my love and favor, and so my love shall
cause them to come to the brightness of thy rising, even thine, O Jews, who
are by nature descended from Abraham, and so are Hebrews, and are and shall be
made the praise and glory of all nations; for these Kings shall see no light and
comfort besides I the Lord of host, and therefore shall they be brought to thy
rising and shall see I the Lord of host in a more especial manner appear to you
in Jerusalem, whom I will cause to be inhabited, and made the praise of the
whole earth, in such glory as they shall not be able to tarry behind, but shall
come to the brightness of thy rising* even when the nations of the earth shall
see that I the Lord of host has raised thee up from that poor estate and
condition that thou art now in; even from death and slavery; and so from
darkness into a most glorious condition and so to make thee shine most bright
and clear, O Sion, and daughter of Jerusalem, that was a poor and peeled
remnant, scattered abroad in all the world evenwhen I thy God shall raise thee up
from this condition, and make my glory to be seen upon thee, then shall thou
be enquired after, even by kings and great men, who shall stand amazed at thy
glory and honor where with I will honor thee in this thy day from the
resurrection from the dead, which I will raise thee nito a condition of life and
peace, which shall be the first resurrection from the dead; and so no more
darkness, or any longer shall Satan or death have power over thee, but thou
being raised from the dead, shall now live and reign with me a thousand years;
which thousand years shall be for ever, even to eternity, and Satan shall never
have any power over thee, O Sion, the praise of the whole earth; but thou shall
sing and rejoice, and shall go with singing and rejoicing; when others shall be
thrown into hell, even to be deprived of my love and favor which I will show
unto thee, O daughter of Sion; who^ I will gather into the Land of Judea, and
without shall be those that shall apprehend me to be angry with them, and so
their own consciences witnessing against them, and accusing of them will condemn
them, for their unbelief and hardness of heart, and so their hell shall be by
being pricked in their own consciences, that they have offended me, and so shall
suffer by the reason they condemn themselves, and so shall be in hell, because
they shall not have any joy or comfort from me to them; that I am a God of love
to them; and even this portion shall those drink of that styles themselves to
be ministers, and are sent to preach by me the Lord of host, and they know not
me, neither can they by all their humane wisdom or Phylosophie attain to the
mystery which I will make out unto them whom I shall be pleased for to do, even
for to make out my power and name, and so to cause them to see my glory; which
I will hide from the learned ones of the world, and will make choice of the
unlearned; and so will make them to run when I send them to do my message, even
as I stirred up poor herds-men and tradesmen before the Gospel in the old
times, and in the primitive times, when I refused the Priests, pharisees, and
leaders of the people in those days, and so those that pretend to be the heads
and leaders of the people, as Priests and Lawyers, even they shall drink deeper
then any, of my sore displeasure, because their consciences will accuse them,
and so condemn them; for not doing that which they know they should do, and so
they shall with the rest be thrown into the lake that burns with fire and
brimstone; which is not meant material fire or brimstone, but is meant the
apprehensions which the ungodly shall have of me, who am a burning and consuming
fire: not aprehending I their God to be a God of love and peace; which thou
daughter of Sion, whom I will bring with joy into Jerusalem, and will cause it to
be built up in glory, and so will make you for to inhabit there shall do, by my
rising upon you and causing of you to shine so to be glorious in all the earth.

Lift up thine eyes round about, and see all they gather themselves together,
they come to thee; thy sons shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be
nursed at thy sides, Oye my Sons and daughters whom I will bring up into Judea,
even you that are by nature Jews, and so are natural Jews, lift up your eyes,
behold, look, and behold, and see all they gather themselves together, even
the Gentiles gather themselves together for to come up to thee, O Sion, whom I
have gathered in Judea, and have made the praise of the earth even for the
glory wherewith I will glorify thee, they shall (even the Gentiles) make enquire
after you, because you are my chosen people, and you are they to whom I will
make out my self in glory to; therefore shall they come, even those that shall
believe that I will make you the praise of the earth; they come, even the
Gentiles come to thee, because I have withdrawn my self from them, and will not
be in their worships, neither will I cause them for to receive any joy or
comfort in any place or kingdom, for to find rest for their spirits; but at
this place where I have appointed to bring thee, O Sion, out of the hands of
all thy enemies, and from the power of all they that hate thee; for thy sons
shall come from far, and thy daughters shall be nursed at thy sides, even thy
sons and daughters, O Sion, shall come from East, West, North, South, even from
all places, to be partakers of that infinite joy, pleasure, and glory, which
you shall enjoy; sons they shall be, because they come after you to that full and
perfect enjoyment of I the Lord of host, and nursed at thy sides, because they
shall receive of that fullness which you did receive of before; and therefore
they shall come even as a child does when he is hungry, and does receive food
with gladness; even so shall al these that come up to thee, even thy sons and
daughters, to be nursed at thy sides, come to thee as to their mother; for
Jerusalem abore is the mother of us all; even come to thee (o Jerusalem) for
comfort, hearing that I the Lord of host is pleased for to make out my self to
thee in a more especial manner then formerly I have done; and so to receive
comfort from thee, even to suck, and be satisfied with the fullness of that
consolation you do receive from the Father: even to suck and receive comfort
from the same fountain of life, even from I the Lord of host; this shall be the
state and condition of you, you shall have your fill, and be full, when others
shall be in want, and not be satisfied; and they that come up to you, shall
drink abundance of my fullness, when they that tarry behind shall be deprived of
my love, light, and glory; so that they shall find no rest for their spirits,
for I will make you to be like Noah's ark, that was a place of refuge for Noah
and those that were in it, when others were destroyed in my wrath: even so I
have appointed peace and rest to be with you, and nothing but trouble of
conscience to the rest, and to those that tarry behind, and come not up to you;
but some there shall be that shall be like Noah's Raven that he sent forth, which
wandered up and down, and could find no rest for her feet, until it came into
Noah's ark again; even so shall some be troubled, and shall have no rest, until
they come up to Jerusalem, the place of my love and favor, and the place where
I have delighted to dwell, and will dwell forever, and whosoever comes up to that
place, even to Jerusalem, the City wherein I have appointed them to dwell; shall
find rest, and be in peace, freed from sorrow and trouble; even as the Raven
found peace in Noah's ark, and rested there.

Then thou shall see and flow together, and thine heart shall fear and be
enlarged, because the abundance of the Sea shall be converted, the forces of the
Gentiles shall come unto thee, their multitudes of Camels shall cover thee, the
dromidaries of Midian, and Epha, all they from Sheba shall come they shall bring
gold, and incense and shall show forth the praises of the Lord; all the flocks
of Kedar shall be gathered together unto thee, the Rams of Nebaioth shall
minister unto thee, they shall come up with acceptance on my altar, and I will
glorify the house of my glory.

Now shall ye gather your selves together, and rejoice, and be glad because of
those that are converted, for to come up to thee, O Sion, who has bin made a
laughing stock in all Nations, but now shall be made the praise of all Nations,
and that all shall come up to thee that will have any rest, or be satisfied with
my fullness, even those that have bin your great enemies shall now be glad to
come to thee O Sion, which shall be gathered to Jerusalem, with their gold and
incense, to praise and magnify thee, and even I the Lord of host in thee, who
have chosen thee to be the glory of all Nations, look and see who are those
that fly as a cloud, and as Doves to the windows, even these be my sons and
daughters, who are Gentiles, and want rest, and seek for rest, but can find
none, therefore hearing of my glory wherewith I make out my self to thee, O
Sion: in whom I am in the midst of thee, they fly as clouds, they hasten from
their Countries, even to come to thee: that so they may have rest and peace
with thee O Sion, in whom I the holy one of Israel is in the midst of, and will
be king for ever.

Surely the Isles shall wait for me, and the ships of Tarshish, for to bring thy
sons from far, their silver and their gold with them, unto the name of the Lord
thy God; and to the holy one of Israel, because he has glorified thee, even
these Islands, as England for one, that shall be the first that strive to go to
my people, who have a long time bin cast off, but now through my mighty power,
will graft them into the true vine again: and they shall become glorious, and
shall say, blessed be they that come in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the
highest, though formerly through unbelief and hardness of heart they crucified
my son Jesus, and so would not have him to be their King, because he did not
come in pomp and glory, but came of a Carpenters wife, and descended from so
low a lineage: shall we (say they) believe this man is the son of God, seeing
that he is so poor and so mean, and seeing he came for to destroy our Laws, and
forms of worships and governments, and the old customs of offering up
sacrifice, which was that law and Testament that God gave unto Moses for us to
observe and keep for ever? therefore before they would part from their forms
of worships, and so would have a new one: they would crucify my son Jesus, and
would not then have him to be their King, for which cause I did cast them off,
and so did cause them to be dispersed in all Nations.

But now I have in my mercy and pity toward them, remembered the covenant
which I made to their father Abraham, that in him all nations shall be blessed
and so will now restore them by my power from their enemies in what country or
nation they be dispersed, and will make them to be gathered together into their
own Country, and now I will give them hearts to believe in me, and so willingly
to receive me now I proffer my self to them to be their king, and they shall
think him now happy that shall come in the name of the Lord, and shall cry
Hosanna in the highest that is, they shall willingly receive instructions; from
I the Lord of host whom they wait for and whom they do expect daily for to hear
of some tha shall say the Lord of host comes for to redeem them out of all
their enemies countries, and to bring them into their own Land again, which
tidings of their return they shall have from England first, and how the God of
Jacob will appear to be their God, and so they shall see and know that their
redeemer comes, and made himself known to some English men for to bring them
word, even the Jews that are dispersed about in Holland, and Spain Germany and
Italy; and how it is the pleasure of I the Lord of host, for to put my spirit
of courage and valiantness for to make you that are dispersed in these
countries, as Holland, France, Spain, Germany, and Italy, gather your selves
together, and so to meet all of you, and these whom I shall send out of England
to you, for to meet in the year fifty (one now a coming on) in Italy, and I will
be your rock and your strength, and will in chief be your leader, so that you
shall not fear what man shall do unto you, for I have purposed and it shall surely
come to pass that I will bring you to Jerusalem, and not only you, but all the
rest that are dispersed of you in other countries, even for to make you the
praise of the whole earth; and I will stir up armies that shall fight for you, so
that I will bring you safely into your own countries and will make the Gentiles
come with their gold and silver to you and you shall be honorable, and all your
enemies that will not serve you shall perish, for that nation and kingdom that
will not serve thee shall perish, yea those nations shall be utterly wasted, even
the most proudest and stoutest king or governor shall be destroyed, even al
their armies shall come to nothing, for it is my pleasure to bring down the high
and mighty one, and so to lay him low, even will I not favor any, but will bring
them all down to the ground, yea I will bring down that potent enemy that does
so highly exalt himself, and he shall come to nothing, even the Pose of Rome I
mean, and before the fifty five years that is now present and a coming, he shall
be destroyed, even the Pope of Rome shall lose his life in 1654. and so I the
Lord will make known my power, by cutting off great ones, and by bringing them
to nothing, and so will make them all come bending and bowing to my sons and
daughters, whom I will bring to Jerusalem; and because it is my pleasure that it
should be so, I even I the Lord of host will appear for to confound my enemies,
and those that have bin enemies to my people the Jews: even that proud Turk
that rules and domineers now, shall be before the year fifty seven consumed and
destroyed, and the great head turk shall lose his life in the year 1656 and so
there shall never after him, nor never any more Pope be, but there shall be such
alterations and changes, that things present, and have bin by custom of long
standing, turned upsides once again, that I may make Jerusalem the praise of
the whole earth; whose gates shall be continually open, and shall not be shut day
or night, that men may bring unto them, even unto the new Jerusalem, the forces
of the Gentiles, even such abundance there shall be that shall be brought in for
to be your fellows and brethren, one and of the same City, that the places
which I formerly gave unto your Fathers for their inheritances, shall be
enlarged, and strangers shall build your City, even the walls of your Cities;
even such shall build them up for you, that shall not inhabit there; and Kings
shall minister unto you, and shall bring their riches unto you, though you shall
have no need of any; yet it is my pleasure so much to magnify you, that I will
make my self appear to be glorious in you, even in the midst of you: and will
make people say of a truth, that God is in you; and so to acknowledge that you
are the seed which the Lord has blessed, and so to make them see and know,
that I the Lord of host am in you, even in you all, ruling in you, and making
all your enemies become subject to you. But I must tell you, that I will not
appear personally for to reign over you, and so to give you laws to walk by,
no, but I will reign in you, and I the God of truth will be in you, and I will
teach you how you shall walk, by putting my laws in your inward parts, and in
writing of them in your hearts, and so will speak in you, and will also make you
for to worship me in spirit and in truth, and not in outward forms as now you
do: for the glory of Lebanon shall come unto thee, and the Box tree, and the Fir
tree shall come together, to beautify the place of my Sanctuary, and so to make
my feet glorious; such is the work of I the Lord of host, that I will make the
very glory of the world be brought to Sion, even for to make them glorious; and
I will make the place of thy feet glorious, o Sion, and all the sons of them,
the feet that afflicted thee, shall come bowing and bending to the soles of thy
feet; and shall call thee the Sion, the City of the Lord, the holy one of
Israel; such a great work will I do for thee, o Sion, that I will make thee have
power over al thy enemies, and none shall be able for to oppose thee: but all
shall be brought to nothing and confounded; yea even they shall be in such terror
and fear now, that they shall submit themselves to thee, and call thee, even thee
O Sion, whom I will gather to Jerusalem, the City of the Lord, even of I the
Lord of host. And whereas thou have bin forsaken, so that no man went through
thee; even thee O Jerusalem, that has been laid wast; I will now of a sudden
make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations, even I will make
thee to be so glorious, that thou shall be the glory and joy of Nations; for
thou shall be freed from sorrow and trouble, and vexation of spirit, and shall
live in peace, and be at peace, rejoicing in I the Lord of host; when others
shall be troubled and vexed, to think that they do not partake of the same glory
wherewith I have and will glorify thee; and thou shall also suck the milk of
the Gentiles; even that joy and comfort which formerly they had of me, when I
did make out my self to them in forms of worships; which joy and comfort you
shall now have, and thou shall know that I the Lord am thy Savior and thy
Redeemer, the mighty God of Jacob: for brass thou shall have gold; and for
Iron, silver; instead of outward forms, thou shall have the pure enjoyment of I
the Lord of host in spirit: and I will make such a work amongst you now, that
instead of giving oppressors to be your officers, I will give you such that
shall be peacemakers; and I will make your officers or exacters over you now, to
be righteous; nay there shall be none any longer for to be officers one over
another; but you shall be all alike: for as the master is, so shall be the man;
as the mistress, so shall be the maid; as the buyer, so shall be the seller; even
all alike, and none greater then other, but what one has, shall be the others:
for I will now make all things new; for violence shall be no more heard with in
thy borders, but thou shall call thy walls salvation, and thy gates praise:
even thou (o Sion) that shall be gathered together in Judea (and in those places
thereabouts) which by reason of the greatness of thy company, I will enlarge thy
borders; for I the Lord of host will be your walls and your gates, and will be
salvation to you, for to keep and preserve you from all your enemies.

The Sun shall no more be thy light by day, neither for brightness shall the Moon
give light to thee, but the Lord shall be unto thee an everlasting light, and
thy God thy glory; the sun shall no more go down, neither shall the Moon withdraw
her self, for the Lord shall be even I the Lord of the everlasting light, and I
thy God thy glory; and the days of thy mourning sha be ended. Whereas thou
have bin sorrowing up and down and have I gone out of one country into the
other, mourning and weeping, and so have found no comfort: now these shall all
pass from thee, and thou shall weep no more: o Sion, for the Lord has founded
thee o Sion, and will be your King for ever, even your light, life, joy, and
glory, even your All and all: so that thou shall not have need of outward
ordinances, either one or the other: but I will be a Sun and a Moon for to give
thee light, and for to make thee see: though it has a long time been neither
light nor dark, neither day nor night, but now in the evening there shall be
light: even in these last days, light shall now shine in such a perfect and
clear manner, that it shall be known to be light, for I the Lord of host will be
sun-light, and moonlight, and will be day, and so indeed it will be very
glorious, when I the Lord of host will never leave them, nor forsake them; but
will be always with them: even never withdrawing light from them, but always
making it for to increase and grow, and multiply it self: til it comes to be
seven fold more light then formerly there has bin: and until the weakest and
feeblest that are among you be as David. and David as the Angel of God, even as
God, this shall be the estate and condition of you, o Sion: whom I will gather
together to Jerusalem, and so will make you the praise of the whole earth, even
the very weakest of or among you shall know as much, and have as much knowledge
as David had, and shall be in as great favor as David was with I the Lord of
host, who has commanded the writer hereof to write it as my will, and not as
his will, because I have purposed to appear so bright and in such a glorious
manner to them, making them partakers of my glory, that they shall have as much
knowledge as David, and they shall be even as, Angels of God, yea even Angels,
and shall know as much of God even of I the Lord of host, that they shall all be
taught of I their God, and shall have no need of teachers to teach them, for I
will be their teacher and instructor, and so will guide them in the way of truth,
and from it they shall not err, neither shall slip aside as now they do, but they
shall al of them be kept upright by my power, and I will not let them slip aside
from me; but will uphold them with my right hand, and will carry them in my
bosom, and so will make them to rest in me as their only joy, even in I the Lord
of host; thy people also shall al be righteous, they shall inherit the Land for
ever, the branch of my planting, the works of my hands that I may be
glorified, even thee o Judea, whom I have given to my Saints for to inherit,
and will bring al my sons and daughters up by degrees to thee, for to inherit
and be there, even my choice and peculiar ones to be brought up to Jerusalem,
the place which I have chosen for to make my name glorious: for I will make them
appear to be the branch of my planting, and so they shall al be righteous, and
not any one that shall be wicked shall be suffered to be there, no hypocrite or
dissembler, or any one that works abominable mischief, or speaks lies, shall
be there, no, for it is my house and place where I have chosen to dwell, even in
my Saints, and I will now fulfill the prophecy, there shall be no more a
Canaanite in the house of the Lord for ever: but all shall be righteous and
glorious, shining as so many stars in the Firmament, and glistering so clear
and so bright, that all the spectators shall be dasled, for mine shall be as
Angels, for knowledge and glory, and power; for in deed they shall be my Angels,
for a little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation, I the
Lord will hasten it (...) its time, even in those poor and despised ones, who
are but small and little in comparison of the multitudes that are so great, even
these poor and small ones shall increase and grow, even those who have now, the
breaking forth of light in them in this Nation of England which we were at the
first but one, even that one that had light made out to him, as concerning his
going to Jerusalem, even that one shall become a great Nation, and a glorious
Nation, even the joy and praise of the whole earth; which I the Lord will hasten
in my own time, which now will be very shortly; sing and shout o daughter of
Jerusalem; sing aloud o daughter of Sion, for behold thy King, the holy one of
Israel is in the midst of thee, and thou shall see evil no more: but now shall
go with joy and rejoicing; and with gladness of heart to Sion, singing and
leaping for joy to the mountain of the house of the Lord which shall be in
Judea, and there shall sing and dance with the tabret and pipe, and so shall have
all kind of music and mirth: and thou shall see sorrow no more, but weeping
shall now be hid from thine eyes; for I have called thee by a new name, and so
have given thee a new name: for thou shall no longer be termed desolate and
forsaken, but thou shall be called the place where I the Lord of host delights
to dwell; for as soon as Sion traveled she brought forth, and was delivered of
a man child* who has heard such a thing? who has seen such a thing, that a
nation should be born at once? but now as I live (...) the Lord of host, it
shall come to pass, for I will give them a new name, which none shall know but
them that have it. My name changed from GEORGE FOSTER, to JACOB ISRAEL FOSTER.

FINIS.

