A DISCOURSE OF OFFENSES. Delivered in Two SERMONS Aug. 19. and Sept. 2. 1683.
IN THE Cathedral Church OF GLOUCESTER.

Published by reason of the Heinous Offense that was taken at the former of
these Sermons, by some of that City.

By Edward Fowler, D. D.

Give none Offense, neither to the Jews, nor to the Gentiles, nor to the Church
of God. 1 Cor. 10. 32. Whosoever shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in
this Adulterous and Sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of man be
ashamed, when he comes in the Glory of his Father, with the Holy Angels. S.
Mark 8. 38. LONDON, Printed by I. Heptinstall, for Brabazon Aylmer, at the
Three Pigeons, over against the Royal Exchange in Cornhill. 1683.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, ROBERT, Lord Bishop of GLOUCESTER.
My LORD.
LITTLE did I think, when I made these plain Sermons of Offenses, that they
would have made me, in any Place within His Majesty's Dominions, so High an
Offender, as the former of them has, in your City. But whether the Offense
that is so strangely expressed, and without President (of which way of doing
it, I thank the Observator heartily, for being the first Publisher) be Offense
given or merely taken, I leave it to your Lordship to judge, when you have
given your self the trouble of reading it over, together with the Second part
on the same Subject. And it is the only favor, I have now to beg of your
Lordship, that you would give your self this little trouble. I wish your
Lordship had been present at the Hearing of these Sermons, which if you had,
you had heard every syllable of what I took the Freedom to deliver in your
Absence.

I doubt not, your Lordship has had as Odious Representations made of the
Sermon that occasioned the Act of Common Council, as I perceive were sent to
the Observator: And, no doubt, a no whit better Character of the second had
been given you (for I am sure it deserves no better) had not those that were
offended, obliged themselves to be out of the Hearing of it, by that sudden Act
of theirs, the very next day after the first was preached. I solemnly profess
to your Lordship, that this whole Discourse is neither better nor worse in
Print, than it was in the Preaching; Each part of it being published, without
the least Addition, Diminution, or Alteration, of any thing. So that by this
most fair Play, the Act-Makers have all the Advantage imaginable given them, of
going a much more Terrible way to work with me, if any thing either Seditious
or Factious be to be found in either of these Sermons. And I assure you
Lordship, there is as much such Stuff in these, as in any I ever preached,
either in Gloucester, or else where in my whole Life. And therefore, if your
Lordship shall find me guilty of any such Crimes, I need not put you in mind
that you can do no less, than procure to the COVNTENANCER of SEDITION and
FACTION, or (which is the same thing, without mincing the matter, like these
modest Gentlemen) to the Seditious and Factious Preacher, the severest
Punishment that either the Laws or the Canons can inflict upon so high an
Offender: That so an ORTHODOX and LOYAL Person may fill his Stall in the Quire,
and take his turns in the Pulpit for the time to come: And the Innocent City
may be saved Harmless from the Penalty now imposed upon them, of hiring such a
Preacher. I am in great earnest, My Lord, for I had a thousand times rather
fall into a Bishop's hands, than into the hands of any New Committee of Tryers.

I am sorry for the trouble that my Preaching at Gloucester has occasioned to
your Lordship, but I should have been more sorry to have prevented it, by
Dawbing with untempered Mortar, and being Mealy-mouthed, and partial (for fear
of displeasing a very few, though never so powerful) in exposing of that,
which we are all obliged to take all opportunities to expose. Many, I am sure,
will bear me witness, that impartiality is one of the worst faults, I have ever
been guilty of, in any of the Sermons that have made Men angry; but, by the
grace of God, this fault I will never mend: And all that know your Lordship
will easily believe, that you will never like me one jot the worse for it. Some of
the other sort of People in London, I hear took such Offense at the same
Sermon, as to declare they would never hear me more. And this Fate of being
Censured and Reproached by the bad or weak of all Parties, those must make full
account of undergoing, who are resolved to do the Work of their great Master
with all Faithfulness. And this, by God's help, is my sincere Resolution,
whatsoever it costs me; and in the doing of my duty, to have always in my Eye
that advice of the Apostle, Whatsoever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord
and not as to men; knowing that of the Lord you shall receive the Reward of the
inheritance; for you serve the Lord Christ. I hope you will pardon this Freedom
to,

My LORD, Your Lordship's Obedient and Humble Servant, Edw. Fowler.

A DISCOURSE OF Offenses, etc.
MATTHEW. 18. 7. Woe unto the World because of Offenses; for it must needs be
that Offenses come; but woe to that man by whom the Offense comes.
NOT to trouble you with any thing of Preface, we have our Savior in these
Words,

First, Asserting the impossibility of the not Coming of Offenses, or the
Vnavoidableness of them. And

Secondly, Pronouncing Woes upon the account of them. He asserts the
Vnavoidableness of them, in these words, It must needs be that Offenses come.
The Woes he pronounces upon the account of them are two,

First, Against the World, or men in general: Woe unto the World because of
Offenses.

Secondly, Against those particular persons who are the Causes of Offenses: But
woe to that man by whom the Offense comes.

In the handling of this Text, I will endeavor to show I. What we are to
understand here by Offenses. II. From whence the Vnavoidableness of them does
arise. III. That Offenses are of woeful consequence, both to men in general,
and to those particular persons by whom they come.


I. We will endeavor to show what we are to understand by Offenses in this
place. It is in the Greek, (...) Woe to the world because of Scandals. Now the
Grammarians tell us that this word (...) comes from (...), to Halt, or to be
Lame: And its proper signification is a Trap, or Snare; and by a Metaphor is
used in the New Testament to signify whatsoever administreth an occasion of
falling into sin, or is a temptation thereunto. In Romans 14. 13. (...), a
Stumbling Block, and (...)* are put together, to express the same thing: Judge
this rather, that no man put (...), a stumbling block, (...), or an occasion to
fall, as it is translated, in his Brother's way. And 1 Pet. 2. 8. (...), and
(...), a stone of stumbling, and rock of offense, or scandal, are also two
phrases of the same signification. And accordingly (...) signifies to make ones
Brother to offend, or to fall into sin, 1 Cor. 8. 13. And whereas in the verse
following our Text, (...) is translated offend; if thine hand or foot offend
thee cut them off; by offending is to be understood, being an unavoidable
occasion of Offending.

Now an Offense or Scandal is commonly distinguished into Datum and Acceptum,
Given and Taken. An Offense given is, when such things are said or done as have
a natural tendency to the drawing of men into sin. An Offense taken, or taken
and not given, is, when words or actions that are well intended, and in
themselves either good or lawful, are so construed as to be made an occasion
of sinning. And in this acceptance of the word Offense, the best actions that
ever were done may accidentally become Offenses, or Scandals; and the best men
that have ever lived may happen to be Offenders, or Scandalizers. Our Savior
himself (as appears from the now cited Text) was one from whom Offense came,
and that mighty Offense too; He there being said, to be made a stone of
stumbling, and rock of Offense, even to them which stumble at the word. And
this was predicted concerning him by Old Simeon, Luke 2. 34. This Child is set
for the fall, and rising again of many in Israel: As for the rising of many, so
for the fall of many; but not so set for their fall, as for their rising; for
he was designedly set for the rising of many, but he accidentally became an
occasion of the fall of many, through the offense they causelessly took at him,
upon several accounts.

Now both these sorts of Offenses, viz. those given and those only taken, are
to be understood in this saying in the Text, Woe to the world because of
Offenses; and in this too, for it must needs be that Offenses come. But that
Offense only which is given, Scandalum datum, is to be understood in the last
words, but woe to that man by whom the Offense comes. For no woe can justly be
pronounced against him from whom an Offense comes, upon the accout thereof, if
he be but a mere accidental cause of the Offense; and it be wholly the fault of
the Offended that Offense is taken at him: which, as we said, was the case of
our Blessed Lord himself. And indeed no one that ever appeared in the world was
ever so great an accidental cause of Peoples being offended, as He was.

II. I proceed to show, from whence the Vnavoidableness of Offenses does arise.
Our Text says, that it must needs be that Offenses come, (...), there is a
necessity of the coming of Offenses. And St. Luke Chap. 17. 1. does thus
express this Passage, It is impossible but that Offenses will come. So that
there is no preventing them, as unhappy things as in both these places we
understand they are, by the Woes pronounced on the account of them.

But we are now to enquire, from whence the unavoidableness of them, the
necessity of their coming, the impossibility of their not coming does proceed.

And to this I answer, that it proceeds from these two causes conjunctly.

1. From the World's being so full of Folly and Wickedness, as it is; and every
part thereof. 2. From God's determination for great ends not to prevent by his
Omnipotency the natural effects of these.
1. From the world's being so full of Folly and Wickedness, as it is; and all
parts of it. I need not go about to convince you, that the Generality of men in
all places are far from being Wise; are Rash, Heady and Inconsiderative; acted
by Prejudice and blind Passions: And that the number of those who are calmly
and sedately considerative, in their own actings, and in passing judgment upon
the actions of others, is exceeding small. And consequently, most men must
needs be extremely prone to give Offense, and no less liable to the taking of
Offense, when Offense is given, and when also it is not given.

Nor need I go about to convince you, that all places abound with Wickedness as
well as Folly. The whole world, says St. John, lies in wickedness. 1 Ep. 5.
v. 19. So it was in his time, and so it has done, ever since the first
Apostasy, to our times. Moses gives a lamentable account of the Depravedness
of the Old World; which provoked God Almighty to overflow it with a Deluge of
Waters; Genesis 6. 5. There he says that God saw that the wickedness of man was
great upon the Earth, and that every imagination, and the thoughts of his
heart, were only evil continually. And St. Paul gives a like sad account of
the New World, both Gentile and Jewish, Romans 3. from the 9 th verse. He there
sets forth the General fearful depravation, both of the Gentiles and Jews,
as if it were Universal. And I need not tell you that, though the business of
Christ's coming into the world, was to destroy the works of the Devil; and to
Redeem us from all iniquity, yet his Grace is received in vain, and turned also
into wantouness, by the generality of those that profess faith in him. So that
the Jews could not more vie with the Gentiles in wickedness, than the
Christians may vie with both Jews and Gentiles. And, to our great grief and
shame be it spoken, this may too truly be affirmed, of those that pass under
the name of Protestant and Reformed, as well as of Popish Professors of
Christianity. And although all Ages have not been alike wicked, nor all
Countries in any Age, yet the far greater part of all Societies of men in all
Ages have hitherto greatly corrupted their ways. And, which is never
sufficiently to be laid to heart, this Present Age is in diverse respects more
debauched than many, if not than all, the foregoing: And this Nation is more
so, than it has been known to be in formey times; notwithstanding the blessed
means of Grace we have enjoyed, above most other People in the World; and
notwithstanding too the very heavy judgments, which have come for forty years
past so thick upon us.

Now then, considering the great wickedness of the world, and how full all
places are of wicked men, it must needs be that Offenses come: And it is
impossible but that very many in all Ages and Places will be Scandalized, and
fall into Sin, by the means of them. It is impossible but all places must be
full of Stumbling Blocks, and it is impossible too but that many will fall over
them, and break their Necks; as will be shown anon. We add hereunto that,

2. It must needs be that Offenses come, because God Almighty has, for great
Ends, determined, not to prevent these natural effects of Folly and Wickedness;
not to interpose by his Omnipotency in hindering the folly and wickedness, which
are in men's hearts, from being the causes of Offenses. Upon which account we
read in the Prophecy of Ezekiel, Chap. 3. 20. of God's laying a
Stumbling Block before him that turns from his righteousness and commits
iniquity. And it is an idiom of the Hebrew Language, which we find often in the
Holy Scriptures, to express that as done by another, which is only permitted
to be done. To give but one instance of this, God is said in one place, to move
David to number the People, whereas it is said in another, that Satan moved
David hereunto; so that the meaning of God's doing it, must be that he
permitted Satan, for great and wise reasons, to do it. Now,

1. One Reason wherefore God has determined not to hinder the folly and
wickedness of men from being the causes of Offenses, is the same that is given,
why there must be Heresies, or why he will permit Heresies to be. The Apostle
says, 1 Cor. 11. 19. There must be also Heresies among you, that they which
are approved, may be made manifest among you. Even so, there must be Offenses
and Scandals, that there may be a manifest difference and discrimination made,
between the sincere and the insincere Professors of Religion: For this reason
has God determined not to restrain foolish or wicked men, from the laying of
Stumbling Blocks. The cause of this Necessity is far from being his immutable
Decree, that men shall do foolish or wicked things, and so cause Scandals; God
forbid we should entertain so impious a thought: But the cause thereof is the
folly and wickedness of men, occasioned by the abuse of their Liberty, and
God's determining not to prevent their causing Scandals; his determinating this
for great reasons: One of which, I say, is, that by them a Trial may be made,
who are Upright-hearted, and who Hypocritical, in the Profession of Religion.
Who have the Power of Godliness and who the External Form only. That a
difference may be made, between those Wise Builders, who have founded their
houses upon a Rock, and those Foolish ones, who have built them upon the Sand:
Between those who have embraced Religion for its own sake, and those who have
embraced it for the sake of their Temporal interest; and are engaged in the
ways thereof, from corrupt Motives and carnal Principles.

Thus did God Almighty permit False Prophets to work wonders by the Power of
the Devil, to draw the People to Idolatry, in order to the making of this
discrimination; as may be seen Deuteronomy. 13. 1, 2, 3. If there arise among you a
Prophet, or a Dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a Sign or a Wonder, and the
Sign or the Wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee, saying, Let us go
after other Gods, which thou have not known, and let us serve them: Thou shall
not hearken unto the voice of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of dreams: For the
Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord your God with all
your heart, and with all your soul. That is, the Lord your God permits this
stone of stumbling to be laid in your way, that it may be as it were, a
Touchstone, for the Trial of your love to him; that a discrimination may be
hereby made, between those who sincerely love him, and those who only pretend
to love him.

For the same reason likewise, did not God restrain Jeroboam, Ahab, or the
other wicked Kings, Who made Israel to sin, from laying before their People the
great Offenses and Scandals of the Golden Calves, etc. and temptations to
Idolatry by their Precepts and Examples: And by this means, an apparent
difference was actually made, between those who were only Jews outwardly, and
those who were Jews inwardly. By this means were those seven thousand, who
hated Idolatry, distinguished from the rest of the People. I have, says God by
the Prophet, reserved unto me seven thousand, who have not bowed the knee to
Baal.

2. Another Reason, why God has determined the not restraining of men from
giving Offense, or being the Causes of Scandals, is, that by them the Obdurate
may, in his just judgment, be more hardened. For instance, He permitted Simon
Magus and his Followers, to be the Authors of such mighty Scandals, for this
reason; as we read 1 Thessalonians. 2. 11, For this cause God shall send them strong
delusions (or shall permit them to be sent) that they may believe a lie (or
that the hypocritical Professors of Christianity may believe a lie) that they
all might be damned, who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

And we may be assured, that for both the Reasons now given, God has permitted
the Roman Hierarchy to bring so horrible a Scandal upon the Christian Religion,
for so many Ages past; by debauching it with such corrupt and damnable
Principles and Practices, viz.

1. To make a difference between the Sincere Christians, and Hypocrites; which,
I need not tell you, has by this means been made, in innumerable instances:
Many thousands having chosen the loss of all, and even the most Cruel deaths,
rather than to embrace those Principles, and comply with those Practices; and
rather than not to Protest against both. And,

2. In his just judgment to harden such more in their wickedness, as turn the
grace of God into lasciviousness. For it is well known, nothing is better known
than, that the whole Systeme of Popery is so contrived, as to reconcile light
with darkness, the thickest darkness with the most glorious light; gross
Idolatry of several kinds (such Idolatry as that grosser is not to be found
among the Pagans) unsatiable Covetousness and Ambition, and monstrous Cruelty,
with true Christianity; and a careless and dissolute life in this world, with
the hopes of Happiness in the other.

And for both these reasons has God, we may be sure, permitted also fearful
Offenses and Scandals to come by Protestants; by those who make a Profession of
this our holy Religion (of true and genuine Christianity, purged from all
Popish mixtures) which unto all sincere and pious Protestants, are matter of
most bitter Lamentation: Particularly the Drunkenness, Uncleanness and
Profaneness of Multitudes that profess the Reformed Religion, and the Scandal
of Rebellion and Treasonable Conspiracies, that some of them have incurred the
guilt of; and that in this Kingdom, now very lately.

Though all good Protestants do bless God heartily, for the Discovery of such
Conspiracies, and for the Defeating of open Resistences of the Higher Powers,
and secret Plots against them; yet it is a heartbreaking Consideration to such,
that there should be such Antichristian doings found among us; by which a
woeful Blot is cast upon our Religion, and particularly by this last wicked
Conspiracy of some Mad Desperate People, who call themselves Protestants.

Now, I say, for both the forementioned reasons, we may be assured God Almighty
has permitted such fearful Offenses and Scandals, to come by professed
Protestants, Viz.

1. To make a discrimination between those who are well Grounded in our
Religion, and those that are not so. Those who are well Grounded in our
Religion, and embrace it like Wise and Understanding men, viz. because of the
excellency of its Principles, will not be tempted to think one jot the worse of
it, in regard of these Offenses. Such will consider that if these can make a
reasonable objection against the truth of the Protestant Religion, the same
objection lies every whit as strong, against the truth of Christianity: For
even in the First and Purest Ages of Christianity, there were as wicked people
found among the Professors of it, and men that did as wicked things, as ever
were before or since to be found in the World. Such will consider too, that the
Protestant Religion is no more to be charged with Rebellions, or any other
Licentious Principles, than is Christianity: For this Religion is nothing else
but Pure and Uncorrupted Christianity. Nay they will consider, that Rebellion
and Treason, and whatsoever has any tendency that way, and all kinds of
immorality whatsoever, are expressly forbidden by our Religion, under pain of
Damnation. They being so forbidden, as by the Precepts of the Gospel, and the
Doctrine of all the Reformed Churches, so especially by the Doctrine of the
Church of England, as by Law established, derived from the Gospel. And
therefore these Offenses are no objection to Understanding and well Grounded
Protestants, against the truth of their Religion; whilst those that have
embraced it only because it is the Religion of their Country, or on such like
weak and slight Grounds, do often find this Objection too strong for them; and
it frequently occasions their Apostasy. And then especially are such in danger
of Apostatizing, by means of this Scandal of Treasons and Rebellions
particularly (as often as these sins are found among Protestants) when the
Adversaries of our Religion do assault them with the Sophistical Argument drawn
from this Scandal, with all the Advantage of their Sophistry.

Obj. But you may say, If the Popish Treasons and Conspiracies are used by us,
as an Argument against that Religion; why should not the Papists make use of
the Treasons and Conspiracies of Protestants, as an Argument against our
Religion? This seems to be Fair Play.

Sol. I answer, that Popish Treasons and Conspiracies may not be used by us, as
an Argument against the Popish Religion (nor are they so used by any wise man,
that I know of) because, for the reason already given, this is a fallacious
Argument. But our Argument against them is, that their Treasons and
Conspiracies are suitable and agreeable to the allowed Principles of Popery;
provided at least, that they be levelled against Heretical Princes. And if
those committed among us can be showed to be suited to the Protestant
Principles, and by them encouraged, then will not I, for my part, ever more
open my mouth for the Protestant Religion. But this can never be showed, but
the perfectly contrary who cannot show? And as for the Principles that some
Protestants have imbibed, they are not Protestants in imbibing them, nay they
are Papists in so doing: For it is very well known, they at least Originally
received them from their Books: Particularly from the Books (as I can show) of
these Jesuits, Suarez, Lessius, Mariana, Father Parsons, with diverse others.

Again Secondly, God also permits these grievous Offenses to come by
Protestants (as for the making the forementioned discrimination between
Protestants and Protestants, so) for the farther hardening, in his just
judgment, of wicked people: For the farther hardening of irreligious people
against all Religion, and of obstinate Papists against our Religion. In Romans 2.
21, 22, etc. the Apostle says, Thou that teach another, teach thou not
thy self? thou that preachest a man should not steal, do thou steal? thou
that say a man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit Adultery? thou
that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Sacrilege? thou that make thy boast of
the Law, through breaking the Law, dishonourest thou God? then it follows, For
the name of God is blasphemed among the Gentiles, through you.

To keep to the instances of Rebellion and Treason, the Papists, when they see
such doings among Protestants, (willingly overlooking the innumerable instances
of this nature which themselves are so infamous for throughout the world: And
seeming not to know what Principles they have to encourage them in such
Practices) they immediately cry out, These are your Protestants, and this is
their Religion; it is good for nothing but to make men Rebels and Traitors.
Princes can have no security from these Protestants. And they urge the same
Argument for the utter destruction of the Protestant Religion, that was used by
Bishlam, and his Company, to King Artaxerxes, against the Rebuilding of
Jerusalem, viz. This City is a Rebellious City, and hurtful unto Kings and
Provinces. And, no doubt of it, our Adversaries will not be wanting in
improving this Argument to the utmost, at this time: Though there are no sort
of men in the world, but might with a better face do it. And so, by this
means, they more harden themselves (if they can be more hardened) in their
Enmity to our Religion, and more harden others. And, as I said, for this
reason, no doubt, God permits in his just judgment, this sort of Offenses,
as well as others, to come by Protestants. I mean still, by Professors of the
Protestant Religion; for the Authors of such Offenses cannot be more than in
Profession Protestants: Nay, considered as guilty of such Offenses, they are
truly Papists; so far forth they deserve that name.

I may apply to this discourse, those words of our Savior, John 9. 39. For
judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not, might see, and
that they which see might be made blind. That those which sit in darkness, may
have the light; and that those who have the light, but wilfully shut their eyes
against it (as one would think those Papists do who live among us) and will not
be convinced by the strongest and most powerful Arguments, may be made blind.
And Offenses, or Scandals, are great instruments in the hand of the Divine
Justice, for this purpose.

III. I come to show that Offenses are of woeful consequence. We learn from
our Text, that they are so to the world, or to men in general; Woe unto the
world because of Offenses: And likewise, to those particular persons, by whom
they come; but woe to that man by whom the Offense comes. Now,

First, As to their being of woeful consequence to the world, or to the
generality of men. It has been intimated already, that such is the Folly and
Wickedness of the Generality, that when these Snares are laid before them, they
occasion their falling into Sin; and also Multitudes in all places are mightily
hardened in sin, by the means of them.

1. They occasion their falling into sin, to the great endangering of their
Souls; and, as we see very ordinarily, to the ruining of themselves and their
Families, as to all the concerns of this world. Wicked men are the most
Pernicious instruments, the Devil can make use of, in the carrying on his great
work, of drawing men into Sin, and, by that means, into Misery both here and
hereafter, both temporal and eternal. As they are of their Father the Devil, so
his works they do, as our Lord said of the Pharisees; they do this work which
is most properly and peculiarly the work of the Devil, with strange success.
And then do offenses prove the most fatal stumbling blocks, when those by whom
they come are men in circumstances to work forceably upon the hopes and fears
of others: Or when they are such as have laid great Obligations on those whom
they tempt to evil. To be under a great Obligation to a wicked man is a mighty
Snare. The Principle of Ingenuity, as excellent a Principle as it is, does too
frequently, in this circumstance, prove infinitely mischievous. A great
Benefactor is with the greatest difficulty in the world denied any thing he
will demand, by a good natured man; by a man that has much of Gratitude in his
temper, and a quick sense of kindnesses: And this man offers great violence to
himself, whenever he refuses to do that which his Benefactor puts him
upon, or which he knows will please him.

Again then are Offenses very fatal stumbling blocks, when those by whom they
come, are in great repute for Wisdom. Men are apt to give up themselves to be
led blindfold by those whom they take to be mighty Wise. But of more force are
those Offenses to draw men into Sin, which come by Sly Hypocrites, who have
deceived people into a wonderful opinion of their Godliness. Now by such
means, and upon such accounts as these (to which may be added diverse others) we
find by woeful experience, that but few comparatively, when the Snares of
Offenses are laid before them, are so happy as to escape the danger of them.

2. Multitudes also in all places are grievously Hardened in sin, by the means
of Offenses; as when they come by great Professors of Religion especially.
Ignorant people, and such as have little kindness for Religion, be they never
so knowing, are too apt to conclude from thence, that either Religion is a mere
Cheat, and has nothing of reality in it; or, if it has, that it may admit of
certain evil practices, in order to certain good ends: Or that the miscarriages
they behold in those Religious men, are such as a man may be guilty of, and yet
be truly Religious: and that they are but the Spots of God's Children: All
which Conclusions, though they be not errors of a like heinous nature, yet are
of much a like dangerous consequence. And though it cannot but be observed,
that there are many noted Professors of Religion that live Extraordinarily good
lives; yet men that have no mind to be good, and that encourage themselves, as
much as they can, to live wickedly, will not infer from hence, that these do
excel the Scandalous Professors in real Goodness, but rather in Slyness. They
will persuade themselves, to conclude nothing more from hence, than that these
have a better faculty at hiding their sins from the Eye of the World. And they
hope that many of these in due time, may make their vicious inclinations as
public as others have done. And thus, I say, are wicked men rendered more
Obdurate, are more hardened in their sins, by the means of Offenses; and by the
Offenses especially of those who have been noted Professors of Religion. The
horrible Offense that David was guilty of, in those two fearful Sins, caused
(as Nathan told him) the Enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; and so greatly
hardened them in their Irreligion. For which reason, though David was so
forgiven upon his true Repentance, as not to be punished for them in the World
to come, yet he paid most dearly for them in this World.

Secondly, I now come to the Woeful Consequence that Offenses are of to those
Particular persons by whom they come. But woe to the man by whom the Offense
comes.

That the case of such is most deplorable, will be seen by what our Savior
says, immediately before the words of my Text, viz. But whosoever shall offend one
of these little ones that believe in me, it were better for him that a
Millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the depth of
the Sea. And St. Mark relates the same words, Chap. 9. 42. and so does St.
Luke too, Chap. 17. 2. that the greater regard may be given unto them. And this
is the meaning of these words: He that shall either by words, or deeds,
discourage the very meanest of Christ's Disciples, from holding on in his
Christian Practice; shall cause him to fall into Sin; it will be better for him
to have a great heavy weight hanged about his neck, and to be therewith cast
into the Sea; whereby he will be hurried to the bottom of it, and never
suffered to rise again. What an Emphatical expression is this, of the most
woeful state, which that Person is in by whose means Offenses, or Scandals,
come! And mark, the Condition of that man is declared to be thus dreadful, who
has caused to offend any one, and that of the meanest and weakest of those
that believe in Christ. How unexpressibly sad and dismal then, shall his
Punishment be, who in this sense has Offended many! I mean upon supposition,
he prevents it not, by timely Repentance and Reformation.

And what reason have those of us, who are in a Public Station, whether
Magistrates or Ministers, to consider this well, and lay it to heart, and to
have an Extraordinary care of our lives! For our Example will have a much
larger influence on others, than the Example of Private Persons: And if by any
Evil Practice or Advice, we cause any to offend, we are like to cause many to
offend. And, consequently, how extremely miserable must our Condition then
necessarily be in the World to come!

I will conclude the Doctrinal part with those words, Deuteronomy. 27. 18. Cursed be
he that makes the blind to wander out of the way (or that shall put a
stumbling block before the blind, contrary to the Law of God. Lev. 19. 14.) and
all the people shall say Amen.

I now come to make Application of what has been discoursed, and our
Application shall be this.

How Infinitely are we all concerned, as we would not have the Woe pronounced
against those by whom Offenses come, for our Portion, to look to it that we be
not found of that number! And if at present any of us are, to Repent
immediately, to bewail in the bitterness of our Spirits our having caused
Offenses, and to do all that lies in our power, for the time to come, not
only to give no Offense in any thing (according to St. Paul's advice 2 Cor. 6.
3.) but also to Repair the injury we have done to Religion, and to the Souls of
men, by whatsoever Offenses we have occasioned. And that we may so do, it will
be necessary to consider the Several Ways whereby Offense may be taken, that so
we may avoid it in those instances: And if we are Conscious to our selves of
having been guilty in any of them, we may Repent and Reform for the Future.

Here begins the second Sermon.
I. One way of Offending is the Drawing of our Brethren into Erroneous
Opinions. I mean such as have an ill influence upon men's Lives and Natures. I
don't mean such as are merely not true; for, there being diverse points relating
to Religion so disputable, as that no man can certainly tell, whether he be not
mistaken in them: if I should make him guilty of this sin of Offending, who
happens to lead his Brother into any false Notion, I should be forced to
assert, that a man may be guilty of giving Offense, and not be able to know he
is so. But it is not to be imagined, that a Sin which has so great a Woe
attending it as this in the Text, can possibly be a Sin of Unavoidable
infirmity, or invincible Ignorance. So that I say, by Erroneous Opinions I
mean, such as are apt in their own nature to lead men into Sin; to make men
irreligious, or to encourage to any particular Sin, or to the neglect of any
necessary Duty. And all such we are certain are erroneous, and contrary to the
true sense and meaning of God's word, because they have such a tendency. I will
give a few instances of such false and corrupt Principles, viz. That God is the
Author of Sin, That he not only foreknows all the sins of men but has also
decreed them: Which in other words is the same with the former. That all men's
Fates are determined absolutely: that is, without respect to their future
obedience or disobedience. That it is lawful to do evil that good may come.
That Good works are not necessary to Salvation. That the Covenant of Grace is
Vnconditional. That Religion is a mere passive thing; not our work at all, but
wholly God's in us. That mere Attrition (or Sorrow for sin for fear of Hell) is
able to bring a Sinner to justification, if accompanied with the Sacrament of
Penance. Sess. 4. cap. 4.
Which is a Doctrine plainly delivered in the Council of Trent.

All these, to which I might add abundance more of like nature, wherewith men's
minds have been corrupted, do manifestly encourage to a careless, loose and
irreligious Life.

And to these I might add instances of such Principles as encourage to certain
particular Sins, of Commission and Omission. In the number of which are all
those Popish ones, that lead to Idolatry of diverse kinds; that encourage
Rebellion, and Treasonable practices, with which latter too many corrupt and
spurious Protestants have declared themselves to be infected, to the great
scandal of our holy Religion; as has already been observed. Who, See Dr. Hicks
his Spirit of Popery, etc.
while they profess to abhor Popery, have been found to be the genuine
Offspring of the Jesuit.

Of this Rank are also those Doctrines, both Popish and Fanatical, that tend to
make men Fierce and Bitter, Proud and Selfish; that destroy Charity, and spoil
men's tempers.

Now those that propagate any such Principles, as either directly, or by
manifest and plain consequence, tend to make the Embracers of them irreligious,
or that encourage to any particular sins, are great Offenders of their
Brethren: Nor are there any greater destroyers of Souls than Corrupters and
Debauchers of men's Understandings; nor any so great. The Apostle St. Paul
charged Timothy to beware of being found in the number of these, 2 Ep. 2. chapter
15, 16, 17. Study to show thy self approved unto God, a Workman that needs
not to be ashamed, rightly dividing the word of truth. But shun profane and
vain bablings (the wretched Doctrines of Seducers) for they will increase unto
more ungodliness (or greatly encouage wickedness.) And their words will eat as
does a Canker, of whom is Hymeneus and Philetus, who concerning the truth have
erred, saying, that the Resurrection is past already; and overthrow the faith
of some. And whosoever they be, that are guilty of this kind of Offenses; that
are guilty of causing men to sin by corrupting their judgments, may (till they
become true Penitents) look upon themselves as greatly concerned in those words
of our Savior, Matt. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and shall teach men so (shall teach men to evacuate and destroy
the force of any one Commandment of the Moral Law) he shall be called the least
in the Kingdom of Heaven. Or, as Dr. Hammond interprets it, He shall be thought
unworthy of having his name written, in the Catalogue of Christians here, or of
Saints hereafter.

But before I conclude the Argument I am now upon, I think my self obliged to
add, that I would not for a World, have had a hand in possessing men's minds
with those Principles, which have administered to our Lamentable and most
Unchristian Divisions; and, while they are entertained, will make all
endeavors for the Healing of them ineffectual: viz. such as these, That
National Churches are no Churches of Christ. That the Government of the Church
by Bishops is Antichristian. That Liturgies, or Set Forms of Prayer, are a
Stinting of the Spirit; and therefore it is unlawful to join in them. That
nothing is to be done in the Worship of God, but what is expressly commanded.
That indifferent things, when they come once to be Commanded, become sinful;
and the Commanding of them is a violation of our Christian Liberty. That Infant
Baptism is no Baptism; and consequently those that have no other, are no Church
Members; and therefore not to be Communicated withal. That it is Lawful and a
Duty to Separate from a Church, upon the account of Promiscuous Congregations,
and Mixed Communions. That there is no such tie between Ministers and their
People, but that the People may cast them off, whenever they think they can
Edify more by any other: And are obliged to betake themselves to those by whom
they think they can most Edify. That an inward Call (that is, a strong impulse
of Fancy) is a sufficient warrant to any man, to be a Public Preacher. I say
I, would not for a World, have had a hand in the Propagating of these, and many
the like Notions, which of late years have strangely prevailed among us: For,
as they have no warrant or Countenance from Scripture, so have they been
woefully mischievous to the Church of God, and to this our Church. They are
good for nothing, but to cause Schisms and Factions; but to destroy all good
Order, and bring in Confusion; as we too well know by sad Experience. And by
this means, they have done our Common Adversary mighty Service, and the Souls
of men infinite prejudice. And I earnestly desire, that those who are, or have
been, promoters of such Principles, may be before it be too late convinced, how
greatly they are involved in the guilt of Offending; or making people to
Offend: Of making them strangely Censorious and Uncharitable, mighty
Vnmanageable and Vngovernable, extremely Conceited, Vain and Wanton, and most
Vnfixed and Unsettled: Innumerable of those who have entertained such
Principles, having been known to run from one Sect to another, till they have
at last settled in Quakerism, or turned mere Scepticks, or cast off all
Religion: Have been tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine, by the sleight of men, and the cunning craftiness of those, that lie
in wait to deceive.

I pray take notice that what I have now said, has not proceeded from the
least pique at Persons, but from pure good will to those who are herein
concerned: From hearty love and charity to their Souls, and a solicitous
concern for the interest of our Religion, and the welfare of the Public. And
having solemnly declared this, I hope I shall not need to use St. Paul's
Expostulation, Am I therefore become your Enemy, because I tell you the truth?

II. Another way of Offending, or making people to Offend, is enticing them to
Sin by wicked Advice and Solicitations; which is an horribly bad way indeed:
But, as bad as it is, it is very common. Particularly, as to intemperate
Drinking, how common is it grown in this most dissolute Age, not only to
entice, but even to force men to this Sin! notwithstanding the woe that is
pronounced against him who gives his Neighbor drink, and puts his Bottle
to him, and makes him drunk, etc. Hab. 2. 15. And there is a fine device of
Good-Fellows, to force down Drink Civilly and Gentily, namely, that of
multiplying Healths; which not to pledge, or to refuse to pledge them in full
Glasses, and those large ones too, is to be mighty Rude, and at least deserves
a Challenge. But I will trouble my self no longer with these wicked men, than
while I conjure you to fly their Company, and all their Haunts, as you would do
the Dens of the most Salvage Beasts.

I might add, to this sin of enticing to Drunkenness, that of enticing to
Uncleanness, and several other sorts of Wickedness, not much less Common:
Particularly (to name no more) to Plots and Conspiracies against the King and
his Government; which, of late years, to our Amazement have been practiced, by
more among us, than have been known to adventure upon so fearful a sin, in
some whole Ages heretofore.

Now these Tempters of others to Wickedness, are Daring Sinners indeed, Who, as
the Apostle says, Romans 1. 32. knowing the judgment of God, that they which
commit such things are worthy of death, not only do the same, but have
pleasure in them that do them: Which Pleasure excites them to do their
utmost, to make others as wicked as themselves.

What name shall I give to these Sinners? They deserve no better, than that of
Devils in Humane Bodies. These one would think, are afraid of being damned
with too little Company; and they are not content to be damned for their own
sins only, but must have their Reckoning inhaunced by the Sins of others,
which they make their own. And therefore they seem not to be satisfied with the
same damnation for kind, with that of the Devils, without the same damnation
for degree too.

III. Another way of Offending, and laying Stumbling Blocks before others, is
that of Affrighting or Discouraging others, from being Religious, or from the
doing of their duty in particular instances.

1. The highest Offense of this kind is that of Persecution, for Righteousness
sake: Which is a great Offense and Scandal, to those that are actually
persecuted, or in danger of Persecution. And Persecution for Well-doing is such
a Stumbling Block as has occasioned the Falling away of Multitudes of
Professors of Religion. And it is a thousand to one that he who is not well
confirmed in his Religion, or, if he be, is not a Conscientious Practicer of
the duties thereof, will not stand his ground; especially when he meets with,
or finds himself in danger of, the Sharpest sort of Persecutions: When he meets
with a Fiery Trial or is in danger of it. See what our Lord says of the Stony
ground Hearers, Matt. 4. 17. These are they which are sown on stony ground, who
when they have heard the word, immediately receive it with gladness; and have
no root in themselves, and so endure but for a time: Afterward, when
Affliction or Persecution arises for the word's sake, immediately they are
offended: or fall away. And the danger Christ's Disciples are in, of falling
off from him, when they cannot adhere to him, but they must suffer Persecution,
is intimated in those words Matt. 11. 6. And blessed is he, whosoever shall not
be offended in me.

I need not tell you that the Church of Rome is horribly guilty of this kind of
Offense; but so is not our own Church, God be thanked. Her terms of Communion
being none of them such, as contradict any Law of God; as abundance of the Best
of people are verily persuaded: And not a few of our Divines, and other Learned
men, have with great, and, I think, irresistible strength demonstrated.

2. Another Offense of this nature is Representing the ways of Religion as very
Rugged and Difficult, and the duties thereof as over Harsh and Severe; and at
least next to impossible. Representing the Yoke of Christ as an Uneasy Yoke;
and his Burden as an intolerably heavy Burden. This has ordinarily been the
Practice of Sensual People, of people who are wedded to their Lusts and Vile
Affections. And by this means, I fear, not a few poor Souls have been utterly
ruined, who have given more credit to these Wretched People, than to their
Savior, or to those Good men who assure them, that such Representations are
most false and unworthy, from their own Experience.

3. Another Offense under this Head is, that which was charged by our Blessed
Savior upon the Pharisees, viz. Binding of Heavy Burdens; and Teaching for
Doctrines the Commandments of Men: Or, making a great number of Additions of
their own to the Laws of God; and imposing them as necessary to Salvation. And
so making Religion to be indeed a mighty burdensome and uneasy thing.

And of this Offense the Church of Rome is more notoriously guilty, than were
those Pharisees.

But I must again do that right to our own Church, as to pronounce Her
Guiltless, as to this Offense also: She having not made any thing a Part of
Religion, but what is plainly contained in the Holy Scriptures; nor enjoined
any thing of her own as necessary to Salvation; but only in order to the more
Solemn Administration of Divine Worship, according to general Rules laid down
in Scripture: Which has not determined, as all sober men will grant, the
particular circumstances of Worship, but prescribed Rules in general, whereby
the Governors of Churches may determine them.

4. Another Offense, under this third Head, is Treating of those who have
fallen into Errors of Judgment or Practice, with too great Harshness and
Severity. I mean, continually inveighing against them, with mighty Heat and
Fierceness; and taking all Opportunities to expose them, and to make them the
Objects of Hatred, or of Contempt and Scorn.

It is found by Experience, that this is so far from being the way, to convince
men of their Mistakes, and to bring them to Repentance for their Miscarriages,
that it stops their Ears against our Arguments, and fills them with Prejudice
against our Admonitions; and whatsoever endeavors we use, for the Reclaiming
of them. We must first satisfy Offenders that we are their Friends, before we
can hope to work any good upon them. But this kind of Behavior is never like
to convince them, that we love them. I am sure this is not to follow St. Paul's
Admonition, 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25. The Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be
gentle unto all men; apt to teach, patient: In meekness instructing those that
oppose themselves; if God peradventure will give them Repentance, to the
acknowledging of the truth. Dr. Hammond's Paraphrase upon these words, in
meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, is this; Dealing with those
who are of different Opinions from us, with great temper and calmness, though
in opposing us they oppose the truth. Nor again, is this angry passionate way
of dealing with such Persons, to follow the counsel of the same Apostle, Gal.
6. 1. Brethren if any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual,
restore such a one in the Spirit of Meekness; considering thy self lest thou
also be tempted: Considering that thou art no less liable both to Errors of
Judgment and Practice, than is thy Brother; and art not kept by thine own
strength, from falling into his Errors.

And let me take this Opportunity to mind you likewise, A Complaint brought to
me in my own Parish, where I first Preached this Sermon, occasioned that which
follows.
that it is yet more Unchristian, to be severe upon those whom we perceive to
be sensible of their having been in an Error, and are returned or returning to
their duty; to be still upbraiding these with what is past; and to load them
with heavy Censures, as if the change that is observed in them has proceeded,
not from any good Principle, not from Conviction of judgment, but from the mere
Fear of the lash of the Law. But how contrary are these Doings to that Charity,
which the Apostle tells us, Hops all things, and Believes all things; and
makes the best Interpretations and Constructions! And this Behavior toward
such is mightily discouraging, and therefore a great Offense, Scandal and
Stumbling Block, both to them, and to those who still persist in their Errors.
The Former, by this means, are shrewdly tempted to repent of their change, and
to go back again: And the Latter to take warning by their Usage, and are in
danger of being made more Obstinate, and confirmed in their resolution to stand
their ground, and to keep where they are.

Now I entreat such as are guilty of this Offense to consider,

1. That it is a great Rashness, and a great Wickedness too, thus to judge of
Peoples hearts. What is this but to assume to our selves the peculiar
Prerogative of God Almighty?

2. Consider that the Execution of the Laws may be the occasion of fallen
persons rising again, and returning to their duty, and yet notwithstanding they
may so do from the Conviction of their Judgments. That is, the Execution of
the Laws may awaken those to more serious and impartial consideration, which by
other means could not be brought to it; and who can say of such as are now
reduced, either wholly or in part, that this is not their case?

3. If we could certainly know that such or such are reduced by mere bye
respects; that no inward change is wrought in them, but that they are only
become externally conformable; yet such a treating of them as I am now blaming,
would be a mighty fault for all that. For in due time these insincere Converts
may become as sincerely affected toward our National Establishment, as the
best of our selves, if they be but well dealt with: But if they find us an ill
natured sort of People, given to Upbraiding and Censuring, Gibing and Flouting,
we shall tempt them, while they continue with us, to resolve never to be of us;
and still to hold up an Aversation to our Church, for our sakes. But this is no
very comfortable Consideration; for it is not impossible that False Friends may
again become more mischievous to our Church, than Professed Enemies. And this
leads me to entreat you to Consider,

4. That an unkind treating of those who now come over to our Communion, is a
plain demonstration, that we have as little true love for our Church, as we
have for the Souls of those we thus discourage. You shall not find an Hearty
Papist, I Will warrant you, bestowing an unpleasing word, or a sour look, upon
any that go over from us to their Church; but he immediately embraces them
with both his Arms, and bids them Welcome: Nor, surely, can any sincere Lovers
of our Church and Religion, be so much mistaken in their true interest, as to
discourage any from Returning, that have Departed from our Communion, or from
Continuing therein, that are Returned.

Lastly, To give these discouragements, is to put an Effectual Affront upon our
Governors. For those that do so, do as good as plainly tell the World, that
they look upon their Design in the Execution of the Laws, to be mere Revenge,
and not the Reformation of Offenders. Or if they would be thought not to have
such a base opinion of their Governors, they must acknowledge that they do
what they can, to render their true Design therein Unsuccessfull. But I know
not which of these is the greater Affront to them. And therefore I hope, that
all who hear me this day, will carefully avoid this very scandalous practice of
some People; as they would approve themselves Good Churchmen, and truly Loyal
Subjects; and, much more, as they would approve themselves Good Christians, who
dread to fall under the Sad Woe pronounced in my Text, against those by whom
Offenses come.

IV. Another way of Offending is by an evil Example. This is the last I shall
name, as wanting time to discourse of diverse others, with which I might present
you. Evil Examples are extremely Scandalous and Offensive, by the means of the
great inclination of Mankind to Imitation. It Is a known saying, Plus docent
Exempla quam Praecepta, The most powerful way of teaching is by Examples, and
these signify more than Precepts. There is no small force in good Examples,
but much greater in bad, by reason of the Universal depravation of Humane
Nature. And let a man Prescribe to others never so Excellent Rules of Life, if
he himself be observed not to walk by those Rules, he had even as good hold his
peace, for any good he is like to do. This man's Example is a Confutation of
his Doctrine and Advice; and he ought to expect no other Reply to it but this,
Cur verba audio, cum facta videam, What regard is to be had to thy Words, when
they are so contradicted by thy Practice? And, above all, the bad Examples of
Magistrates and Ministers, Parents and Masters of Families, and Instructers of
Youth, and of People that are noted for Wisdom, or for the Profession of
Religion (as has already been showed) have the most Malign and Fatal Influence.

I will single the bad Example of Parents out of all these. It is a plain case,
that the Wickedness of the World is mostly owing to the Examples of
Drunkenness, Swearing, Profanation of the Lords day, and of a Careless and
Irreligious life, that are given by Parents to their Children. And it is very
rare when Parents are bad, but their Children take after them; and imitate them
especially in those Vices, which they observe them to be most addicted to. By
which means, by that time they are grown up to years of Discretion, they are so
habituated to Sinning, that though they afterward should be so happy, as to
light into the Families of Pious people, and so want neither good Advice, nor
good Examples, they are found to be generally Unreclaimable: And so, when these
too come to have Children, their Example proves likewise as Pernicious to them;
and by this means Wickedness is still Propagated and Increased, from Generation
to Generation.

But let all such Parents know that, as none are more concerned than
themselves, in the fearful Woe pronounced in my Text, against those by whom
Offenses come, so may they expect the bitter Curses of their dear Children,
sooner or later in this World, but especially in that to come.

I shall conclude all with a few words relating to the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper. This was the Sacrament-day.
This being an Ordinance most plainly, and in most express terms, instituted by
our Blessed Lord, it must needs be a great Offense and Scandal, in those that
Profess the Religion of our Savior, to live in the constant neglect of it. And
by the same reason that any man does this, he may cast off, with the mad
Ranters, all other Ordinances. And I must add, that to come to the Lord's
Table, but once or twice in a Year, or very seldom, is a great Offense and
Scandal too. And a man may every whit as well, but seldom attend upon the other
Ordinances, as omit, without apparent necessity, the Receiving of the Lord's
Supper, whenever he is presented with an Opportunity, and is invited
thereunto. If Communicating be a Duty, Frequent Communicating is so too; and
there is the same reason for doing it as often, as well we can, that there is
why we should do it at all. The First Christians were very sensible of this,
and therefore 'twas their practice to Receive the Holy Communion, whenever
they met to Worship God. And he that shall think that once in a Month is too
often to perform this Duty, whenever he is persuaded to do it, I think it no
breach of Charity to say, he is far from being duly Qualified for it. An
Affecting Sense of the Infinite Love of God in Christ, and Holy Resolutions to
Walk, by the assistance of his Grace, Worthy of that Love, are necessary
Qualifications for this Ordinance: But how is it possible, that he who has
this Sense, and these Resolutions, can think he can too often Express this
Sense at the Lord's Table, or there get these Resolutions more and more
Confirmed, where Grace is received for that purpose, by all those that
seriously, and with a sincere Design, come unto it?

But whereas there are those very Honest People, who are neither wanting in
good Resolutions, nor in good Endeavors, that are discouraged from coming to
the Lord's Table, as often as they would; because they find, to their grief,
their Thoughts much disordered oftentimes, and there Affections dull and heavy;
and their Power falling mightily short of their Will and Desires, I will leave
with them what is said to the Christian that makes these Complaints, in the
Meditation before the Sacrament, in the For the Month of August.
Christian Sacrifice, viz. Be assured that Christ pitieth thee, that,
notwithstanding this, he will kindly entertain thee; and receive the poorest
Oblation thou art able to make him at his Table. Eat and be satisfied and Bless
the name of the Lord. He has invited thee, He expects thee; He loves to see
thee there; and will make thee know that he loves thee, and delights to do
thee good.

Now the God of all Mercy give us all his Grace, so to demean our Selves in all
our Relations, as that no damage may accrue to the Souls of any, by our means;
nor any Dishonor to our Holy Profession: But that all that know us, may have
cause to Bless God for us; and we may Adorn the Doctrine of God our Savior in
all things: To whom, with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be all Honor and
Glory, now and for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
ADVERTISEMENTS.
The Act of the Common Council of Gloucester, that necessitated the Publication
of this Discourse, and was made the very next day after the Former part of it
was Preached (and which, for Substance, is truly published in the Observator,
that came out on Wednesday, Sept. 5. 1683. Numb. 398.) runs thus, as I am
informed, Verbatim (but I will not be bound to make true Grammar on it) Whereas
Edward Fowler, Doctor of Divinity, and one of the Prebends of the Cathedral
Church of this City, has been frequently taken notice of, by the Mayor,
Aldermen, Sheriffs and Common Council of this City, in his Sermons here, to
Countenance Sedition and Faction, and to Preach those things, which tend to the
disturbance of Well-affected men of this City: It is therefore Ordered by this
House, That when, and as often, as he Preaches at the Cathedral Church in this
City, that the Mayor and Aldermen and Common Council of this City, shall not go
thither with the Sword in their Formalities; but shall go to some other Church
in this City; to hear some Loyal Orthodox Divine, and to be paid at the Charge
of the City.

The Works of the Learned Dr. Isaac Barrow late Master of Trinity College in
Cambridge; Published by the Reverened Dr. Tillotson, Dean of Canterbury: in two
Volumes in Folio. The first containing thirty two Sermons, preached upon
several Occasions, an Exposition of the Lord's Prayer and the Decalogue, a
Learned Treatise of the Popes Supremacy, a Discourse concerning the Unity of
the Church: With alphabetical Tables. Also some Account of the Life of the
Author. The second Volume containing Sermons and Expositions upon all the
Apostles Creed: with an Alphabetical Table; and to which may be added the Life
of the Author. Printed for Brabazon Aylmer, at the three Pigeons against the
Royal Exchange in Cornhill.


