A VVinding-Sheet FOR ENGLAND'S MINISTRY Which has a Name to live, but is dead.
SENT TO John Owen, called Dr. in that Ministry, and late Vice Chancellor of
Oxford. And is in ANSWER to his Printed Paper concerning TITHES.
OR, An Examination of those Scriptures by which he seems to to prove, That the
public Maintenance for Preachers of the Gospel by way of Tithes, is a
Gospel-Maintenance. But upon examination thereof by the Scriptures, he is found
to be a subverter of them, and, That Tithes is no lawful maintenance for
Gospel Ministers.

FRIEND,
I Have lately perused thy printed paper concerning the power of the Supreme
Magistrate about Religion, and the Worship of God; as also, concerning Tithes:
all which thou have proposed in three Questions, and (as thou say) resolved.
Now let me tell thee, it is no difficult thing for any man to propound his own
questions (as thou have done, waving another man's) and then answer them. My
purpose is at this time to speak to that only which concerns Tithes, and to
examine thy proofs which thou thy self have quoted on their behalf, and which
is so much (by the Ministry of England) contended for; that rather then they
will not have upheld, and fully exact from those who in conscience cannot pay
them, they have not only ^^oiled people of their goods, and often taken ten
times more then the Tithes (...) but a(...) their bodies into prison, where
many of them have (...) their (...)money against themby death. But surely where
such cruelty (...) has been exercised, and too often used upon tender
Consciences, or upon men supposed to disrespect the public Preachers of the
Gospel, upon the account of their maintenance, for food and raiment convenient
for them for preaching, they had need be upon infallible grounds, First, That
they are true Ministers of Christ Jesus, sent forth by him to preach the
everlasting Gospel. Secondly, That their lives and practices are agreeable to
the Gospel Ministers in the primitive times; and Thirdly, that Tithes are the
undoubted maintenance for such Ministers, before ever they should have
proceeded to the imprisonment of men's bodies, and forcing from them their
estates, for not paying of them; and if you cannot all manifest your selves by
these things, then give me leave to tll you all, you are deceivers, and not
Gospel-preachers, and the Lord will require the blood of the innocent at your
hands. But I shall come to the question propounded by thee, and examine thy
proofs for tithes.

Question, Whether it be convenient, that the present way of the maintenance of
Ministers or Preachers of the Gospel be removed and taken away, or changed into
some other provision.

Which Queflion thou have in eight particular answered, and toward the close
of thy Answer say; That to take away the public maintenance, viz. the
Tithes, provided, as thou say, in the providence of God for the public
dispensers of the Gospel, upon pretenses of present inconvenience, or promises
of future provision, is a contempt of the care and faithfulness of God toward
his Church, and is in plain terms downright robbery. And further thou say,
that to entitle a Nation unto such an action, by imposing it on them without
their consent, is downright oppression.

1. I shall first speak to the Question propounded, and in answer thereunto, do
positively affirm, and say contrarily, That the present way of maintenance for
Ministers by Tithes, is not only a great oppression, and intolerable in a
Christian Commonwealth, or amongst men professing Christ Jesus to be their
King, Priest, and Prophet, but also Antichristian, and contrary to the
maintenance and practice of Gospel Ministers: And that not to remove such an
oppression, were little less, in plain English, then direct robbery, or to
uphold wickedness by a Law, God having appointed no such maintenance for
Gospel-preachers, but is a maintenance, as you may read, set up by Pope Gregory
the tenth, in the year 1211. and not by Christ, nor was it ever practiced by
the Apostles or Disciples of Christ in the primitive times: And Cook in the
third part of his Institutes also testifies, that Tenths and First Fruits are
but a late Innovation, and claimed by the Pope as Successor to the Jewish
High Priest: and Doctor Seamor, one of your own Divines confessed before the
Committee of Parliament, in the year 1653. that their Call to the ministry had
its (...) first rise from the Pope of Rome; it follows then, your maintenance
must be from thence also.

Now that Tithes is an oppression and an unrighteous thing, examine the
sufferings of diverse of the Mattyrs in Queen Mary's days, recorded by Fox in
his Acts and Monuments, as John Wickliffe, Walter Brute, William Thorp, and
others, who suffered in flames for their testimony against Tithes: And that
this Age is not without a faithful testimony. See the sufferings of the
Christians until death in our days; as Thomas Bromby, John Cason, William
Sykes, William Tucker, Stephen Yaton, Arnold Trueblood, William Sergeant, and
others, who in several Goals of this Nation finished their testimony also
against Tithes, by suffering imprisonment until death, and thousands by
spoiling of their goods* Who is there almost that i but sober amongst is, or
that dares approve himself to be a Christian, but has, or will give his
testimony against Tithes, and say, it is a burden intolerable to be born by
all that (...)

But because I desire that the truth may prevail, and that it may be made
manifest to all that have but a seeing eye, or a hearing ear; I shall examine
the strength of thy proofs by those very Scriptures which thou have quoted to
prove Tithes a fit maintenance for the public dispensers of the Gospel.

Thy first proof is 1 Cor. 9. 4. in which place the Apostle says, They that
preach the Gospel should live of the Gospel. Now I appeal to all indifferent
men, that do not suffer the thick vail of false Doctrine to remain as scales
upon their eyes, whether this text pleads for a maintenance by Tithes, or no:
If thou had known what it is to live of the Gospel, thou would have cried
out against the oppresiing of tender consciences to maintain thee, and not have
cried out to the civil power, for fear that the oppression should be removed.
FRIEND! Is forcing from people the tenth part of their hard labor and estates,
to maintain your generation in pride, idleness, and fullness of bread, a living
of the Gospel? If this be to live of the Cospel, it is a life the Apostles and
true Ministers of Christ never lived, nor their Lord and Master never
commanded; who when he sent forth his Disciples to preach, charged them not to
take any thing for their journey, nor two coats, no scrip, no bread, nor any
money in their purses, Mark 6. 8, 9. But now you are so far from observing
Christ's doctrine, and his commands, that your generation walk quite contrary:
for instead of going forth without provision, you will not go forth unless it
be well assured unto you beforehand. The true laborers in Christ's Vineyard, I
say, never contracted for a settled maintenance, nor divined for money, as you
do; but as they had freely received, so they freely gave, and when they had
done Christ's work, received Christ's wages, but not compelled peoples estates
from them, nor for being unwilling to part with it, cast their bodies into
prison, as many of you have done. Now Friend, because thou art ignorant of
Christ's doctrine, and of the Gospel Ministers maintenance, as also of the
Apostles words before by thee quoted, I shall let thee know, that to live of
the Gospel, is to receive what is freely administered unto thee: Or thus: The
true Ministers of the Gospel first plant a Vineyard, and then partake of the
fruit thereof: Or thus, They receive temporal hings of those to whom they sow
spiritual things, 1 Cor. 9. 11. Yet (lest any should be mistaken, as though the
Apostle would be so maintained) the Apostle says, I have used none of these
things, neither have I written these things, that it should be so done unto me,
verse. 15. By which thou feast plainly, that the Apostle and true Minister of
the Gospel, was no mercenary Preacher nor hireling, but freely as he had
received, so he freely gave: he was so far from compelling any to maintain him
for preaching, as your fraternity do, that he denied his Christian liberty, and
wrought with his hands: I say, Paul sought for no reward from men for preaching
the Gospel, as you all do, but says he, If I do this thing willingly, I have
my reward; and what is my reward, says he, verily this, That when I preach the
Gospel, I may make the Gospel of Christ without charge, that I abuse not my
power in the Gospel, ver. 18.

Now let all the world of unbelievers see, how contrary the practice of the
Ministers of the Church of England is from the true Ministers of Christ, and
how chargeable your Gospel is, even so dear has it been made to some, that it
has cost them their lives in nasty prisons, when as the true Ministers Gospel
is without charge, and is freely preached to all that will receive it. And
says the true Prophet, Hoe, every one that thirsts, come to the waters, and
buy wine and milk without money, and without price: This is the voice of the
true Prophets of the Lord, but the false Prophets they look for their gain from
their quarters: And even as Troops of Robbers wait for a man, so do they
murder in the way by consent, Hosea 6. 9.

Thy next proof for Tithes is this, Gal. 6. 6. the words of the Apostle are
these; Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate unto him that teaches,
in all good things. Truly, Friend, were not thou wilfully blind, or willingly
ignorant, thou would not prodnce this text to prove Tithes a lawful
maintenance for Gospel Ministers, but would ingeniously confess, and in
singleness of heart say, This is from the text, and Tithes are Antichristian.
There needs no other confutation of thee herein, then the aming of the words
themselves, which I recommend to thy review, and all men's else who can but read
English. Friend, be not deceived, nor do thou any longer endeavor to deceive
others: for though thou may do so, yet the Lord will not be mocked, nor the
true Christians deluded by such lines of confusion and palpable darkness, as
thou would draw over the minds and the understandings of the civil powers of
the earth, who have drunk down error for truth, even as the fishes drink water:
and this they and other silly people do, under the specious pretenses of your
being Ministers of the Gospel, when as in truth the Gospel of Christ you are
strangers unto, and so are ignorant of its maintenance. Be advised by a lover
of the truth, to learn wisdom, and no longer to make a trade of the Scriptures;
but let the time past, wherein thou have walked in the vanity of thy mind,
contrary unto truth and sound doctrine, suffice; and peradventure the Lord will
wink at thy ignorance, and accept of thy repentance; for the Scriptures were
not given forth to make a gain of, but to be believed and fulfilled in their
season, and they are profitable for instruction, for correction, for reproof,
that so the man of God may be made perfect: which doctrine of perfection you
all deny, and so are not found in the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, but
out of it, and are strangers and enemies to it.

The third Scripture thou bring, is Luke 10. 7. where our Lord Jesus Christ
in his Commission to his Disciples, commands them to remain in whatsoever house
they should enter, eating and drinking such things as they give; for says he,
The laborer is worthy of his hire.

I shall now examine whether you and your fraternity be such as Christ sent
forth to labor in his Vinyard, or whether you be not such as beat his
servants, (which from time to time he sent forth, and when the Son came, killed
him also, that so the Inheritance might be theirs.) First then, Are you Lambs,
as the true Ministers of Christ were, verse the third of the same Chapter, (and
as the true Ministers of Christ are at this day amongst wolves?) Or are you not
the Wolves your selves, sucking the blood, and tearing the flesh of the Lambs,
and they do not resist you? Secondly, Are you such as go forth without money in
your purses, and without scrip and shoes, saluting no man by the way, as
Christ's Disciples did? verse 4. Or do you not instead thereof, go forth well
accommodated and provided with all these things, and rather then you will stir,
be assured of one hundred pounds by the year, and seldom less, but often times
more? And in your going forth, do you salute no man by the way? Or do you not
rather complement with all you know, and court every man in power (who will be
lead by you) for Augmentations, Plurarities, or greater livings and preferments
then you either want or deserve? Thirdly, Do you say, Peace be to the House
whereinto you enter, as the true Ministers of Christ did, and still do? Or do
you not instead thereof, either sit down in your own great Parsonage-Houses,
and there Lord it more like Kings in their Palaces, then like despised
Ministers of the Gospel? Or if you enter into other men's Houses, whether
instead of saying, Peace be unto it, you do not proclaim war, and with Swords,
Staves, Bailiffs, or Constables, force your selves in, and take by violence,
their goods from them, to satisfy your bellies, and your unsatiable lusts of
the tenths of men's labors and estates that owe you nothing, nor receive no
spiritual things from you. Fourthly, Are you such as eat and drink such things
as are set before you, as the true Ministers of Christ did, and still do? Or do
you not devour Widows Houses, and for a pretense make long prayers? Fifthly:
Are you such as are content with your hire? and do you receive it from those
only that set you to labor? Or do you not require pay from those that know
you to be Loyterers, and never set you to work? Friends and people, examine the
case whether it be not so; if so, they have no title to a Gospel-Maintenance,
no more then they can evidence themselves to be Christ's Ministers, and which
maintenance is no more by Tithes, then they can prove themselves to be
Gospel-Preachers, which by their Doctrine and Practice appears they are not.

The fourth Scripture thou bring to prove Tithes a Gospel-Maintenance, is
the 1 Cor. 9. 7. 11. Where the Apostle says thus, Who goes a warfare any time
at his own charge? who planteth a Vinyard, and eats not of the fruit thereof?
Or who feeds a flock, and eats not of the Milk of the flock? This is thy
proof for Tithes: To which I say, thou have more need to be pitied, then
refuted, as being wholly ignorant of the scope of the Apostle in that place; he
is so far from exacting a forced maintenance, especially upon the account of
his Ministry, that he thus reasons with the Corinthians, Though [saith he] I
be not an Apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you, for the seal of mine
Apostleship [saith he] are ye in the Lord, verse the second of the same
Chapter; and from thence argues as before in the seventh verse. Now say I, If
you would follow the example of the Apostle, and do as he did, to wit, Sow
spiritual things indeed and in truth, and not preach your own imaginations for
Christ's Gospel, then should they to whom you sow spiritual things, administer
unto you their temporal things, and that as freely too, as you should
administer your spiritual things; but if you shall reap where you sow not, as
now most of you all do, then must we needs deny you to abide in the Apostles
Doctrine, and say you are none of Christ's ministers, and deserve none of his
maintenance, but are Usurpers, Hirelings, and no Gospel Ministers, and deserve
punishment rather then pay.

The fifth Scripture quoted by thee to prove tithes a Gospel-maintenance, is in
the same Chapter, the 9, 10, 11, 12, and 13. verses, Which because I will not
repeat, they being all concerning the same Argument before spoken of, I shall
refer the perusal of them to the impartial Reader, and he will clearly see
those texts are so far from proving tithes a Gospel-maintenance for
Gospel Ministers, that the Apostle is direct against a settled maintenance;
first, by his Argument in the 9th. verse, where it is said, Thou shall not
muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn; by which it appears the
Ox must tread out the Corn, whose mouth is not to be muzled. Are you such as
tread out the Corn? If so, then we shall not allow that your mouths should be
muzled, but have food and raiment convenient for you, as the true Ministers of
Christ have; and were you such, you would therewith be contented; and of this
you need not (nay you would not) doubt; for I never yet saw the righteous
forsaken, nor his seed beg their bread, as you and your seed have done, the
more are you to be pitied. The other Argument is from the Apostles words in
the 11. and 12. verses, where he says, If we have sown unto you spiritual
things, is it a great matter if we shall reap your carnal things? yet
nevertheless says he we have not ased this power, but suffer all things, least
we should hinder the Gospel of Christ. So far was the Apostle from owning a
settled maintenance, that you see he denied the lawful use of his Christian
liberty; nay, let me say further, A settled maintenance is most unreasonable and
unjust for Gospel Ministers, because they are to be obedient always to Christ's
Commands, and Christ's Work is not always in one place, and therefore can have
no settled maintenance: I say, his Ministers are to go where (...) and to be
paid where they do their work, sometimes in one City, and sometimes in another,
and where they sow, there are they to reap, and not to reap where they sow not;
so that we deny you and your settled maintenance to be of Christ, but both are
out from Christ's way, and therefore cannot pay you the one, nor allow you the
other.

The sixth and seventh Scriptures quoted by thee, is in Psalm. 2. 8. and Isa.
49. 23. Where in the first, the Prophet David speaking, as I may say, in the
person of Christ, (the Lord having in the seventh verse said, Thou art my Son,
this day have I begotten thee; goes on and) says, Ask of me, and I will give
thee the Heathen for thine Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth
for thy possession: And as to that place in Isaiah, where the Prophet says,
Kings shall be thy Nursing-fathers, and their Queens thy Nursing-mothers, and
they shall bow down to thee with their face toward the earth, and lick up the
dust of thy feet, and thou shall know shat I am the Lord, for they shall not be
ashamed that wait for me. I say, that neither of these two texts is to the
matter of tithes, or maintenance intended by thee; for the one speaks of Christ
his being the begotten Son of the Father, and of the greatness of the Sons
Dominion, and of his power over the Heathens rage, and over the counsels which
the Rulers take against him, and is also a prophecy of their destruction, for
says he, Thou shall break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them in pieces
like a Potters Vessel. And the other text is concerning the Lords owning of the
Gentiles, and setting up a Standard to the people; and because the Lord will
own them, and bring them in to be his people, which were not his people,
therefore it is that Kings shall be their nursing-fathers, and Queens their
nursing-mothers, etc. and they shall not be ashamed that wait for him. Friend,
had thou a discerning in the things of God, thou would have seen also, that
part of this prophecy is to be fulfilled upon the oppressors of the children
of God, even upon the Hirelings, and those that prey upon the Captives of the
Lord, Verse. 25. of the same Chapter; and the Lord says, He will contend with
them that contend with his people, and will save his children; and they that
oppress them shall eat their own flesh, and they shall be drunken with their
own blood, and all flesh shall knew that God is the Savior and Redeemer of his
people, even the holy one of Jacob: Ver. 26. And now let the wise in heart
judge whether these Scriptures hitherto quoted by thee, speak any thing as to
the maintenance of Ministers by tithes, or not.

The eighth and ninth places to prove the public maintenance by way of tithes,
to be a fit maintenance for public dispensers of the Gospel, are these, Genesis
14. 20. Heb 7. 4, 5. and 1 Cor. 9. 14. To the two first which speak of
Abraham's paying the tenth of the spoils to Melchisedeck, and also of Levi's
receiving of tithes, is nothing at all to the maintenance of Gospel-Dispensers,
for which end thou quotest them: And without controversy that Priesthood is
changed, for it made nothing perfect; and another priesthood is arisen, who is
made not after the Law of a carnal commandment, but after the power of an
endless life, who has put an end to the first priesthood, and consequently to
tithes also, and to the Doctrine of all such Hirelings as will not preach
without gifts and rewards. The other text being the 1 Cor. 9 14. which says,
they that preach the Gospel, should live of tbe Gospel, has been largely
spoken to already; and therefore I shall conclude, and tell thee, that thou
have proved nothing by Scripture, that tithes is a Gospel-maintenance, or that
the dispensers thereof are to be afforded tithes by way of maintenance for
preaching the Gospel.

It now remains to make it appear as well to thee, as to all men else, that you
(who call your selves Ministers of the Chnrch of England) are neither Ministers
(...), nor of the Spirit; and if so, I shall leave wise men to judge whether
you deserve to be maintained and upheld as Ministers of the Gospel, yea or no.

First then, I say, you are not true Ministers of the Letter, inasmuch as you
preach contrary thereunto, and that I shall instance in these particulars
following; As first, you say, that the holy Law of God cannot be kept by the
best of Saints while they live upon earth. Which doctrine is contrary to the
doctrine of the Scriptures, and to the experiences of the Saints recorded
therein: for David said that he had kept them; Psalm. 119. 166, 167, 198,
verses. And St. John says, That hereby shall the Saints know that they know
him; to wit, if they keep his commandments, 1 John 2. 3. intimating, that he
that does not keep the commandments of God, does not know him: and again, He
that says he knows God, and keeps not his commandments, is a liar, and
the truth is not in him, verse. 4. What Ministers are you then; that not only
preach contrary to the Letter of the Scripture, but also contrary to the
experience of the Saints? Secondly you say there is no perfection to be
attained here, and so preach a doctrine contrary to the Letter of the
Scriptures, for Christ commanded his Disciples to be perfect, as their heavenly
Father is perfect: and the Apostles doctrine was for the perfecting of the
Saints; and he said he spoke wisdom amongst them that were perfect: this being
so, I shall leave all sober men to judge, whether you be true Ministers of the
Letter? and yet are so bold as to say, you make the Scriptures your rule. I
could clearly instance in many more particulars, that you are no true Ministers
of the Letter of the Scriptures, but these are sufficient.

Secondly I affirm, That you are not Ministers of the Spirit neither, of which
the Apostles were able Ministers, for you (contrary to the Scriptures, and to
the doctrine of our Lord Jesus Christ) say, That Revelation is ceased: whenas
our Savior himself expressly says, No man knows the Son but the Father,
neither knows any man the Father save the Son, and he to whom soever the Son
will reveal him, Mat. 11. 27. So then its evident enough, that all you who deny
Revelation, know neither the Father, nor the Son: whom to know is life eternal,
and without the knowledge of whom you cannot know the mind of the Spirit: for
the Spirit of the Lord reveals not the thing of its self to any, but to those
that receive the teaching of the Father and the Son; and no man can know the
Father and the Son, but by Revelation. So that it appears to all men of a good
understanding, that you are neither Ministers of the Spirit, nor of the Letter.

Now since it is thus evident, that you are no Ministers of the Spirit, as the
true Ministers were, nor yet true Ministers of the Letter; Whose Ministers may
some say, are they? I answer: You are Ministers of Antichrist, and found to be
in the doctrine of the Church of Rome; whose belly is your god, whose glory is
your shame, who mind earthly things: you are fruitless trees cumbring the
ground, and whose end is to be burnt and consumed by the breath of his mouth,
and by the brightness of his coming; and this will be your reward and portion
without speedy Repentance, and turning from your wickedness, whereby you
craftily deceive the simple, and mislead the innocent whom the Lord will teach,
for he has said, His people shall be all taught of him.

FRiend, my purpose is not to plead against a Gospel-maintenance for
Gospel Ministers; no, God forbid, for I own both; but to cry out against
Tithes, and a forced maintenance, as all men of sobriety and moderation do, and
must do if they approve themselves true Christians: I say, the true Worshippers
cannot maintain a false Ministry, nor uphold the Temple of Idols, as well
knowing they must fall, together with all the Ceremonies and false Doctrine
practiced and preached in them, and by them: Nor had I been found to discover
thy nakedness to the world, had thou not so visibly appeared to be clothed
with a shadow, and to be found disowning the Wedding Garment.

And now let me ask thee, and those of your generation and profession, On whose
heads, do you think, all the guilt of that blood that has been shed in England
for Tithes within these seven years past, besides the loss of goods and lives
of many of the dear servants of the Lord will light, if not on you who plead
for, and will have Tithes, and force a maintenance from the servants of God,
contrary to their consciences? Do you think to shuffle it off from yourselves,
and lay it upon the Civil Magistrates? O no! you cannot (though they are not
guiltless herein) the Lord will not be mocked; for you are the men who have
robbed the Lord of his honor, and his people of their goods, liberties, and
lives, to put into your bellies, and to uphold carnal Ordinances, which perish
with the usings and to keep alive your dead Meetings, dead Prayers, dead
Preachings, dead Doctrines, dead Fasts, dead Exercises, and dead Ministry.

Friends, let me tell you, your foundation it in death, and therefore your dead
Structure will fall to the dust, and the house you have built, fall upon your
own heads, all the powers of the earth being too weak to uphold it. And that
in thy Paper which is not answered herein, is left to another hand to answer,
partly because I wanted room in this Sheet, not willing to bestow Sheets upon
thee concerning this matter.

Now that I may not leave you without a word of Counsel, I do in love to all
your souls admonish yon to come out of Babylon, your Land of Confusion, and
where your Language is confounded, and come unto the true fear of the Lord,
which is the beginning of wisdom, and the way to a good understanding in the
things of God, and so in time as you be faithful, may you become
Gospel Ministers, and receive Gospel-Maintenance.

By a Member of the true Church, and of that Society which the world calls
QVAKERS.

The End.

