Dirt wipt off: OR A manifest Discovery of the Gross Ignorance, Erroneousness
and most Unchristian and Wicked Spirit of one JOHN BUNYAN, LAY-PREACHER IN
BEDFORD, Which he has showed in a Vile Pamphlet Published by him, against The
Design of Christianity.

Written for the disabusing of those poor deluded people that are followers of
him, and such like Teachers, and to prevent their farther deluding of others,
and poisoning them with Licentious and destructive Principles.

2 Pet. 2. 12. But these as natural brute beasts, made to be taken and
destroyed (or to catch and corrupt) speak evil of the things that they
understand not, etc.

Prove. 18. 6, 7. A fools Lips enter into Contention, and his mouth calls for
strokes.

A fools mouth is his d^struction, and his Lips are the snare of his Soul.

LONDON, Printed by R. N. for Richard Royston Bookseller to His most Sacred
Majesty. M DC LXXII.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Reader,
I Think my self obliged to make my apology to thee for the writing and
Publication of these Papers; for I know thou will be tempted to wonder, how any
one but of ordinary discretion could persuade himself to set his wit against so
lamentable a piece of proud folly, and not disdain to defile his fingers with
so very dirty a Creature as is the person I have to do with in the following
sheets: and thou may also conclude, that I am ashamed to be seen so meanly
employed by my concealing my name from thee: To deal openly and ingeniously, I
never undertook business that went against the hair as this has done, nor can
I well more deny my self in any thing than in this Condescension: but the
consideration, that there is something of necessity in the case, has
overruled me and brought down my Spirit. Not that there is any thing, that
this John Bunyan has published against The Design of Christianity, that an
intelligent Reader can otherwise entertain than with contempt and scorn; but
the intolerable insolence and naughtiness of the man, together with the
weakness of those many poor Souls into whose good opinion he has and may, to
their infinite danger, insinuate himself, made it, in my opinion, a great piece
of Charity to undertake this drudgery.

Drudgery I call it, not in regard of any difficulty there is in knowing what
to reply, for there was never in this world an easier province; but because
it is an exceeding hard task to satisfy ones self what not to reply: For I
profess most unfeignedly, that I never knew any one so expose himself, nor give
his Adversaries so many advantages of discovering his shameful ignorance,
Erroneousness, dishonesty and base nature, as he in that book has done. And
therefore I add too, that the mere reading it over cannot but be a very great
pain to any understanding and good spirited person.

I say it is the pity I have for deluded people, and my great desire to prevent
an increase of their number, as also, if it be possible, to make this poor man
sensible of his folly and wickedness, that have prevailed with me to set apart
a few days for this employment. For, though I have I must acknowledge, a
particular kindness for Mr. Fowler and his Book (both which he has in the
grossest manner imaginable calumniated and abused) yet my mere concern for the
one or other should never have occasioned one line from me; it being as
impossible for such a thing as he to disgrace either the writings or Person of
Mr. F. by all his railings, as it is for the like rude creatures to eclipse the
Moon by barking at her, or to make Palaces contemptible by their lifting up
their legs against them. Nay, for my part, I should think my self most
effectually disparaged, should any body tell me that this man praised me, and
thereupon should ask that Question of Socrates upon the like account, what evil
have I done?

But not to detain thee with a larger Preface than is necessary, the remaining
part shall consist of but little more than two or three requests to the
followers of this J. B. and of such like Teachers.

1. I desire that those of you that shall meet with this Pamphlet, would put
yourselves to the very little trouble of reading it over, and that with as
little prejudice as well you can; and then if you can but give credit to your
own eyes, you must needs be convinced that this person (as able and godly as
you may now think him) does scarcely excel the most foolish in any thing but
prodigious pride and boldness, and men of the most wicked Spirits in nothing
but a vainglorious show and form of godliness. I would not for all the world
so positively affirm such things of any one, if they were not as self evident,
as that twice Ten make Twenty, and what I have now laid to his charge, you must
necessarily acknowledge to be as manifest to sense, as is that proposition by
that time you have read but one half of this Pamphlet. And for this reason I
also desire you to read it over, namely, because your judgments may be thereby
greatly rectified in the doctrine of the Gospel, if you will consider what you
read.

2. I entreat you that, as you love your Souls, you will not for the future
suffer your selves to be gul'd and cheated by mere noise and Confidence; you
are not so imprudent about the concerns of your frail bodies or perishing
estates, as to make use of that man for your Physician or Lawyer, whose
ignorance and dishonesty you have but the tenth part of that proof of, that you
have here given you of this John Bunyan's: And is it not a miserable thing,
that you should be in nothing so rash and unaccountably foolish, as in the
matters that relate to your eternal welfare?

3. If this man shall have the face to say any thing by way of reply, (as what
may not be expected from such a forehead) I entreat you to compare what he
says with what I have here proposed to your view, and be not so weak and easy
of belief, as to think he has done himself the least service, if he answers
not punctually to the particulars of the charg of gross ignorance,
erroneousness, dishonesty, and a most unchristian spirit, that I have here
exhibited against him. No doubt but the infinite concern that he has for his
credit among you, (which he must needs now conclude to be in eminent danger)
will prompt him to make as plausible a tale for himself, as his together with
his Brethrens inventions can possibly devise; but, I say, be sure to compare
his defense with the things in these Papers laid to his charge, and I Will
warrant you, you shall be confirmed thereby in an ill opinion of him, as much
as by any thing any Adversary of his can write against him.

And lastly, I would desire this J. B. himself to take notice, that Mr. Fowler
is much more profitably employed than to have leisure to return answers to his
wretched Scribbles, but if he had time lying upon his hands, he will not easily
be persuaded to do such bald and rude Scriblers so great an honor. But if any
one that is able to write sense, and to do any thing like a Scholar or man,
will be dealing with him, such a one may be certain that, as busy as he is, he
will find him work. But he will not have so little a regard for his repute with
discreet and understanding persons, as to give himself leave to be in the least
concerned at the brutish barkings of such a Creature as this, though it lies
not in his power to hold the Pens of others from returning upon him. If you
wonder, Reader, that I should use such an expression as brutish barkings, do
but turn to the Catalogue I have given you of some, and but some of his most
scurrilous and vile language at the end of this Pamphlet, and there see at what
a rate he raves at Mr. F. and his Treatise, (whose only business it is to
promote holiness; and for which reason it has had as general a good acceptance
with pious and good people, as most books I have known,) I say, do but turn to
that Catalogue, and then thou will acknowledge that I might have said devilish
contumelies instead of brutish barkings, and not have fouled my Pen with
unseemly words.

But to conclude, whereas Mr. F. is now upon the publishing of an excellent
Scripture Catechism, composed by a Learned and very worthy Person now deceased,
when that is Printed, if I can persuade him, he shall send this J. B. one of
them, which he infinitely more needs than he does an answer; For though he
impudently takes upon him to be a Teacher of others, he has need that one
teach himself which be the first principles of the Oracles of God; And besides,
Mr. F. cannot desire that the doctrine of his Design of Christianity should be
better defended than, to my knowledge, any man may do it by the assistance of
that Catechism.

Farewell.

IMPRIMATUR,

Tho. Tomkyns.
Ex AEd. Lambethanis. Sept. 10. 1672.
ERRATA.
PAge 18. last Line: add in effect. p. 19. l. 3. for justifies read intitles.
p. 19. l. 33. for almost r. at most. p. 22. l. 11. for as r. than. p. 28. l.
24. add on. p. 29. l. 27. for in r. is. p. 32. l. 3. and 4. for where he said
it is r. where it is said.

Courteous Reader,
These and other Faults have been occasioned through the Authors absence, and
by the hasty Printing of this Treatise, which thou art desired both for thy own
sake and for his, to correct with thy Pen, before thou set thy self to the
serious reading thereof.

DIRT WIPED OFF: OR A manifest discovery of the Gross Ignorance and most
Unchristian and Wicked Spirit of one JOHN BUNYAN.
OF all the mischievous things that poor mortals are or ever were infested
with, there is scarcely any one comparable to Ignorant Fanatic zeal; nor are
there to be found in nature so implacably spiteful and cruel Creatures, as
those that are acted by this Fury. And as she has produced unspeakably Sad and
dismal Effects in this our once too too happy Church and State, and in
innumerable other places; so the most horrid impieties that ever the Sun saw,
have received their birth from her Womb. It was this Zeal that hurried those
Proud and ill-natured Religionists the Pharisees on all those horrible affronts
and indignities, that they offered to and heapt upon the Lord of Glory; nor
would it suffer them to rest, till it had made them his inhumane and most
barbarous murderers. And when I consider this prodigious instance of the
Wickedness of those Zealots, I cannot wonder at any Villainies, that I ever
understand are acted by the people of their Spirit: Nor when we call to mind,
how our most Blessed Savior suffered both from their tongues and hands,
because he preached such doctrine as did distaste their humor, and set himself
against their corrupt opinions and practices; can we think it any other than
what ought to be expected, that in all ages his faithful Ministers and Servants
should meet with the same usage for therein following their Lords Example; and
especially since he himself has forewarned them, that they shall be no
otherwise entertained by that Sort of men, than as he was. For (says he Matt.
10. 24.) The disciple is not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord,
it is enough for the disciple that he be as his Master and the Servant as his
Lord: if they have called the Master of the house Beelzebub, how much more
shall they call them of his household? Again (John 15. 20.) if they persecuted
me, they will also persecute you.

And among the many true Successors of the Pharisees, that among our selves do
daily verify those predictions, there are, I have reason to believe, none
whose breasts are fuller of rancour and malice, toward those that are
industrious, not to make Converts to Sects but to Christ Jesus, and to
propagate not the fancies of men, but the genuine doctrines of the Gospel, than
is the breast of the man that has occasioned the publication of this Pampelet,
viz. John Bunyan, a person that has been near these twenty years or longer,
most infamous in the Town and County of Bedford, for a very Pestilent
Schismatic.

Never did any more cry out of Persecution, nor inveigh against others as
Persecutors, than he has done; but in the mean time no one is of a fiercer and
more persecuting Spirit than he himself. For besides that a slanderer is a
cruel Persecutor (as doing what in him lies to deprive his brother of his good
name, which in the Wise man's judgment is rather to be chosen than great
riches, nay to a good man is deservedly more precious than is life it self)
such a one demonstrates, that nothing but want of Power is the true cause, that
he persecutes not by deeds as well as words; Calumnies being ever taken up by
impotent Creatures for want of sharper Weapons. And that this I. B. is a most
Black-mouthed Calumniator, besides innumerable other evidences, his late
Pamphlet, or rather Libel, entitled A defense of the doctrine of Justification
by Faith, etc. will abundantly satisfy any person, that has but the wit and
honesty impartially to examine, how he attempts to make good what he therein
has charged against Mr. Fowler, viz. That he does propagate, in his Treatise
entitled The Design of Christianity, the Doctrine of Quakers, of Papists and
Heathens, writes Blasphemy, is an Enemy to the Son of God and Salvation of the
world, tramples under foot the blood of the Son of God, together with many the
like dreadful and most horrid accusations; which shall be presented together at
the end of the Book to the Readers eye.

Before I go further, I must needs tell thee, I. B. Thou art a man of Metal,
thou scornest, I perceive, to play at small game, to give thine Adversary some
light Scratches, thou art for Neck or nothing. Thou have a mouth for
MACHIAVIL'S money, who has taught such as thy self this rule, Fortiter
Calumniare, etc. which (because thou have little kindness for the Language of
the Beast) take thus in English, Slander lustily and something will stick. Thou
could scarcely hope that any one that knows or has but heard of Mr. F. (nay
though he should be one of thine own herd) can find in his heart to think him
such a Monster of men, such a Devil incarnate, as thou would make him; but
yet, to be sure, thou concludest that all that don't think thee so will, at
least, be suspicious that so loud and hideous an outcry is not made for
nothing, and that he has written a too erroneous book, if not such a damnably
heretical one, and therefore that it is dangerous to read it, and hear or
converse with the Author of it.

But we will now consider what foundation is laid in that Treatise of Mr. F's,
for this Fellow to build so black a charge on; and in order thereunto I shall
not need to do any thing more, than give the Reader a short view of the Sum and
Substance of the Doctrinal part of it, which I will do for the sake of those
that are strangers to it. And I promise to do it with all sincerity and
impartiality, and if I perform not, let me be stigmatized by any that shall
compare the following account with the Book it self, for a man of no
Conscience, and a most false person.

The whole Title of the Book is, The Design of Christianity, or a plain
demonstration and improvement of this proposition, that the induing men with
inward real Righteousness or true Holiness was the Ultimate end of our
Savior's coming into the world, and is the great Intendment of his Blessed
Gospel. The business of the first Chapter is an Explication of the nature of
true Holiness: wherein (after it is said to be by various forms of speech
expressed in Scripture, such as Godliness, Righteousness, Conversion and turning
from Sin, Partaking of a Divine Nature, etc. and that it is originally seated
in the Soul and Spirit, and is a Complication of all virtues) there are four
general and Comprehensive descriptions given of it: all which differ only in
words, not at all in Sense. And they all amount to thus much (as any one of but
a competent understanding will at first sight perceive) viz. That true Holiness
is such an inward living principle, as so far as it prevails, causes the
person that is endued with it to behave himself as becomes him (that is to
avoid and hate whatsoever is any ways known to be morally evil, and to love
and prosecute whatsoever is good) or to be under the government of all those
good practical principles or Laws, which are made known either by Revelation
(that is by the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament) or by Nature or the
use of Reason.

When Holiness is called a healthful complexion of Soul, etc. the purity of the
humane nature, etc. and a divine or Godlike nature, etc. there is no more said
than what is included in this description.

Next, between the third and last description, there is a somewhat more express
and distinct account of the nature of Holiness; but this I shall have occasion
hereafter to take notice of.

In the close of this Chapter it is said, that nothing is more natural to the
Souls of men as they came out of God's hands, than this excellent temper, but
by their Apostasy from God and sinking into brutish sensuality, they sadly
dispossessed themselves of it, and so became like the beasts which perish; but
it pleased God in infinite goodness not to give us over so, but, when we had
destroyed our selves, in him was our help found, and in order thereunto he sent
his only begotten Son to us.

The Second Chapter is spent in proving that the great errand Christ came upon
was, to put us again into possession of that holiness which we had lost: and
this is proved by a Climax of seven particulars, all which are employed in these
Scriptures, which I entreat the Reader to turn to Matt. 3. 1, 2. and Luke 1.
16, 17. Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. Matt. 1. 21. Luke 1. 72, etc. Luke 2. 32. Matt. 3. 11,
12. Matt. 9. 13. Matt. 5. 17. Acts 3. 26. Acts 5. 31. 1 John 3. 8. Titus 2. 12.
1 John 3. 5.

In the third Chapter is shown, that holiness is the only design, ( that is, in
reference to us) of the Christian Precepts* and it is particularly shown that
they require, 1. The most extensive holiness; that is, such as respects God,
our Neighbor and our selves. 2. The most intensive, not only negative but
positive, (that is, not only such as consists in doing no evil, but also in
doing good) not only holiness of words and actions, but likewise of thoughts
and affections, not only such a holiness as puts upon performing good actions,
but also such as puts upon performing them in a right manner, with right ends,
or from good principles, causing us to do every duty as to the Lord and not as
to men, to do all to the glory of God, etc.

Lastly, this Chapter concludes with the answer of an Objection: The Objection
is, that all sober Christians acknowledge, that the Gospel precepts do not
require indefective and unspotted holiness, or at least that Christ will accept
of that which is far short of perfect, and therefore he seems not to be so
great a friend to it as is asserted.

The Answer is that, 1. The attainment of perfect holiness is in this state
impossible to us. 2. That Christ will accept of nothing short of sincerity, and
diligent serious endeavors to abstain from all Sin. 3. That no less than our
absolutely perfect holiness is designed by Christ, though not to be effected in
this yet in the other world.

The Fourth Chapter shows that the promises and Threatenings of the Gospel
have the promoting of holiness for their only design. That the promises have,
it is proved from 2 Pet. 1. 4. 2 Cor. 7. 1. Romans 12. 1. And it is further showed,
that 1. These promises are either limited to holy persons, or made use of as
motives to holiness; as 1 Timothy 4. 8. Matt. 5. 8. v. 3, 5, 7. Romans 27. Rev. 3.
21. chapter 2. 20. And whereas the promises of pardon and Eternal life are made to
believing, it is said that nothing is more evidently declared, than that this
faith is such as purifieth the heart, and is, productive of good works. 2. It Is
showed that the Nature of these Promises is such as is alone sufficient to
satisfy us, that holiness is the design of them. This, it is showed, is
manifestly true concerning the principal promises, which are reduced to 3
heads, 1. That of the holy Spirit. 2. Of Remission of sin. 3. Of Eternal
happiness in the enjoyment of God. For the first, viz. the promise of the
Spirit, that, it is said, is it to which we are beholden for grace and
assistance in the great
work of subduing sin and acquiring holy habits. And for the Second and Third,
none but holy Souls are capable of them. None are capable, but such, of Pardon
of sin; because the guilt, it is shown, and the Power of Sin are inseparable,
and that sin is so loathsome and filthy a thing, that it is impossible the blood
of Christ should render a sinner lovely or not-odious in God's sight, any
otherwise than by first washing away the pollution of it. Lastly, that none but
holy Souls are capable of the Enjoyment of God, is proved from 2 Cor. 6. 14.
Col. 1. 12.

And as for the Promises, that concern the good things of this life, it is
shown that only such are assured by them as may be a help to the exercise of
holiness, not such as serve to gratify sensuality or licourish appetites.

And then as to the Threatenings of the Gospel, it is proved, that they are no
where made use of for any other end, than to scare men from what does tend to
pollute their Souls, and to excite them effectually to industry in the pursuit
of real righteousness and substantial holiness.

In the Fifth Chapter is showed, that the promoting of holiness was the design
of our Saviors whole life and conversation among men. 1. Of his discourses:
not only his Sermons, but also those that occasionally dropped from him. 2. Of
his Actions, whereby he preached holiness to men's Eyes, no less than to their
ears, by giving them the most stupendous Example in his own person of all the
parts of it; whereof these instances are given. 1. He was a person of the
greatest Freedom, Affability and Courtesy. 2. Of the greatest Candor and
Ingenuity. 3. Of the greatest Gentleness and Meekness. 4. Of the most profound
Humility. 5. Of the most generous Spirit, which discovered it self in the
greatest Contempt of the world. 6. Of the most contented Spirit. 7. Of the
greatest Charity and most tender Compassion. 8. Of the most wonderful Patience,
and stupendous submission of Soul to God. 9. Of the most passionate Love to
God, and devout temper of mind toward him. 10. Of a mighty confidence and
trust in God. 11. Of the greatest Prudence.

In the Sixth Chapter is showed, that to make men truly virtuous and holy was
the design of Christ's unimitable actions, or mighty works and Miracles: And
that these did not only tend to promote it, as they were convincing arguments
that he came forth from God, but were also very proper to effect it in a more
immediate manner.

The Seventh shows, that this was the design of his death; which is proved by
these Scriptures, Romans 6. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 15. Gal. 1. 4. Ephesians. 5. 25, 26, 27. Col.
1. 21, 22. Titus 2. 14. 1 Pet. 1. 18. 1 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Next, the
death of Christ is proved effectual to this End; 1. As it gave testimony to the
truth of his doctrine: 2. As the shedding of his blood was a federal rite
confirming the New Covenant, wherein is promised in and through him pardon of
Sin, and Eternal happiness on condition of Repentance, Faith and New obedience.
3. As it is exemplary of the highest virtue, particularly, of the greatest
humility, Self-denial, meekness, Patience and Charity. 4. As it was a Sacrifice
for sin; where it is shown, that in the death of Christ, considered as an
expiatory Sacrifice, the offense God has taken against Sin, and the hatred he
bears to it, as well as his love to Sinners, is infinitely declared. 5. As
Christ has by his death procured that grace and assistance for us that is
necessary to enable us to be in all respects holy. 6. As his death does
vindicate God's right of Sovereignty over his Creatures, and the power he has
to require what he pleases of them, and to dispose of them as seems good to
him. Did ever man speak higher concerning the effects of Christ's death, and
precious bloodshedding, than Mr. F. has in this Chapter done? Is this the talk
of one that trampleth under foot the blood of the Son of God?

In Chapter the Eighth is shown, that it is only the promoting of the design of
making men holy that is aimed at, by the Apostles insisting on the doctrines of
Christ's Resurrection, Ascension, and coming again to Judgment, That is, the
only use which they make of them as to us, is to make them motives to all
holiness of heart and life.

The SECOND SECTION shows upon what accounts the business of making men holy
came to be preferred by our Savior before any other thing, and to be
principally designed by him; and the Ninth Chapter (which is the first of that
Section) gives this first account, viz. That this is to do the greatest good
to men. And it is proved by several Arguments, that the blessing of making men
holy is of all other the greatest; as 1. Because it contains a deliverance from
the worst of Evils, viz. Sin, and this is proved so to be, and that those are
utterly ignorant of the nature of it, that imagine any evil greater than it, or
so great.

The Tenth Chapter is spent in proving by a Second Argument, that holiness is
the greatest of all blessings, viz. Because it is ever accompanied with other
blessings that are most desirable, and do best deserve that name; particularly
with the Pardon of Sin, and God's Special love: And that those things that
Sensual persons are most desirous of, are eminently to be found in that
blessing: As Riches, it is showed that nothing does enrich a man like the
graces of God's holy Spirit; Secondly Honors; Thirdly Pleasures: where it is
proved that both these result from true holiness, and that no other are
comparable to those that do so.

The Eleventh Chapter prosecutes a Third Argument, viz. Because whatsoever
other blessings a man may be supposed to have, that is utterly destitute of
true holiness, they cannot stand him in so much stead as but to make him
not-miserable. And Sinful lusts are here proved to be most tormenting things in
their own nature; and that therefore if we could suppose a wicked man to be
made an object of God's pardon, it could signify no more than an exemption
from being immediately by him punished; and though the divine Majesty should
not in the least afflict him, his very lusts would be of themselves no light
punishment, but such as under which he could never enjoy himself in this life,
but will be found to be intolerable in the life to come. And for the same
reason it is shown that were it possible that Christ's Righteousness could be
imputed to such a man, it would signify as little to his happiness, while he
continues wicked, as would a gorgeous and splendid garment to one that is
almost starved with hunger, or that lies rackt by the torturing diseases of
the Stone or Cholick. And moreover, that wickedness makes men incapable even of
those Effects of the Divine Benevolence and Complacency, that would render them
but not-miserable, and therefore could we suppose a wicked man the object of
both these, (as it is said that nothing is less supposeable than that he should
be an object of the latter) this could not make him, whilst he continues
wicked, to cease to be miserable. And lastly, if our phansies were so powerful,
as that they could place a wicked man in Heaven it self, so long as he
continues unturned from his iniquities, he would carry a hell to heaven with
him, and keep it there; and that it is not the place Heaven, without the
heavenly state that will make men happy; as a diseased body will have never the
more ease for residing in a Princes Court. And in the conclusion of this
Chapter it is asserted, that deliverance of a man from all misery while sin is
vigorous in his Soul, is not an object of any power, and implies a palpable
and apparent Contradiction; misery being no less of the Essence of Sin and
wickedness, than is light of the Sun, so that they cannot be separated, but
must like the Twins of Hippocrates, live and dye together.

The Twelfth Chapter contains the Fourth Argument, viz. Holiness is the
greatest of Blessings, because when it is perfected it is Blessedness it self,
and the glory of heaven does chiefly consist in it: This proved out of 1 John
3. 2. This we know, that when he appears we shall be like him, that is chiefly
in holiness; for as for God's attributes of knowledge and Power, etc, it is said
that the Devils themselves, who are most of all Creatures unlike to God, have
not lost all likeness to him in them, but have still a large measure of them.
By the way observe that J. B. puts this among Mr. F's. Doctrines destructive of
Christianity, but who that believes there are such Creatures as Devils,
especially having read what the Scripture says of them, did ever doubt it?

But to proceed, it is in this Chapter plainly shown, that the perfection of
holiness and the Heavenly happiness are for substance one and the same, and
therefore it may well be affirmed, that the making us holy is the ultimate end
of Christ's coming ( as to us that is,) seeing our Eternal Salvation is by all
acknowledged so to be; and perfect holiness and Eternal Salvation are but two
Conceptions of one and the same thing; Eternal Salvation being primarily a
Salvation from Sin, all Sin; and a Salvation from misery as it is a Salvation
from the Cause of it.

The Thirteenth Chapter gives the second account of our Saviors preferring the
business of making men holy before all other, viz. that as this is to do (as
has been shown) the greatest good to men; so is it also to do the best Service
to God; where it is said, that it is without dispute better Service to a Prince
to reduce Rebels to their obedience, than to procure a Pardon under his Seal
for them; and that Christ, loving his Father better than us, must needs more
concern himself for the recovery of the right of Obedience, that Sinners have
robbed him of, than for the deliverance of wretched Rebels from the misery they
have deserved, but that both these works are carried on together.

And in the close of this Second Section it is shown, that those that say that
the Christian Religion designeth to glorify the infinite grace of God in
Christ to Sinners, if they understand what they say, do assert the same thing
that this Book asserts: Seeing that not only the grace of God is so abundantly
displayed in the Gospel to Sinners, for this end that they may be effectually
prevailed with to forsake their Sins, but also the principal grace that is
therein exhibited does consist in delivering them from the Power of Sin; which
appears, in that Sin is demonstrated to be in its own nature the very greatest
of Evils, and holiness the chiefest of all Blessings: And besides, men are not
capable of God's pardoning grace, till they have repented them of all their
Sins, that is, (as it there follows these words) till they have in will and
affection sincerely left them. And to justify a wicked man, while he
continues so, would far more disparage his justice and holiness, than advance
his grace and kindness; viz. Because to deal with a man living in wickedness as
if he were righteous, would be an Argument that he does not hate Sin, as he
declares he does.

Thus Reader I have faithfully given thee the Substance of the Doctrinal part
of the Design of Christianity; the Third and last Section is spent in improving
that whole discourse in most evident Inferences: and now my hand is in, I Will be
better than my word, and very briefly tell thee what they are.

The first Inference: chap. 14. That it appears from the past discourse, that
our Savior has taken the most effectual course for the purpose of subduing
Sin in us, and making us partakers of his Holiness: where 1. It is largely
shown what mighty and infinite advantages the Gospel gives above any, that even
those Heathens had who were privileged with extraordinary helps for the
improvement of themselves. And if the Reader will run over that discourse he
shall perceive, how wickedly J. B. has slandered Mr. F. in accusing him as
levelling Christianity with mere Heathenism.

2. It Is fully shown that the Gospel contains incomparably greater helps for
the effecting of the design of making men holy, than any God's people the
Israelites were favored with. Then follows a threefold answer to an objection
against the wonderful efficacy of the Christian Religion for this purpose,
chap. 16.

The Second Inference, chap. 17. That we understand from what has been said of
the Design of Christianity, how fearfully it is abused by those that call
themselves the Roman Catholics. This Chapter will soon inform thee, Reader,
what a friend Mr. F. is to Popery, and make thee believe if thou have any
charity, that no man under heaven does more abominate it, than he does.

The Third Inference, chap. 18. That these two sorts are most extremely
Sottish; 1. Such as expect to have their share in the Salvation of the Gospel
without true holiness. 2. Such, much more, as encourage themselves by the grace
of the Gospel in unholiness.

The Fourth Inference, chap. 19. That a right understanding of the design of
Christianity will give satisfaction concerning the notion, 1. Of justifying
Faith, viz. That it is such a belief of the truth of the Gospel, as includes a
sincere resolution of obedience unto all its precepts, that is true holiness;
and that it justifies as it does so: where it is added, that the Faith that
justifies must needs be such as complyeth with all Christ's purposes of coming
into the world, but especially, with his grand purpose; and that it is necessary
it should justify as it receives Christ for a Lord, as well as for a Savior:
Nay, especially when in this matter there is but a notional difference between
these two; it having been shown that Christ as a Savior designs our holiness:
his Salvation being chiefly that, from the worst of Evils, sin.

Can thou think, Reader, that Mr. F. deserves to be accused as Popishly
affected in this point? Are all those Papists in the Doctrine of justification
that deny a dead Faith to be the condition of it? and does not S. James say
that Faith without works is dead: And if a living Faith justifies, is it Popery
to say that it justifies as it is a living Faith? I am sure it is nonsense to
say otherwise. Does Mr. F. any where, contrary to the Apostle Paul, assert the
merit of Works? no, he makes works or a working Faith, only a necessary
condition of justification, as S. James does, and all the Apostles, and Christ
alone to be the meritorious cause of it: And he must needs attribute our
justification to the free grace of God in Christ, when he makes also the
condition of it Faith a free gift, a grace of God's holy Spirit. In short, let
the Reader consult Mr. F's Free Discourse between two intimate Friends, p. 149.
to p. 190. and there he shall see his full sense of justifying Faith, and the
notion given there of it sufficiently defended.

2. The other notion, Mr. F. in this inference says the Design of Christianity
will give satisfaction concerning, is, that of the imputation of Christ's
Righteousness, viz. That it consists in dealing with sincerely righteous
persons, as if they were perfectly so, for the sake and upon the account of
Christ's Righteousness. And he shows, that the Doctrine of the Design of
Christianity makes it impossible, that any other notion of this point should
have truth in it. But mark what he says in the close; But because both these
Points are discussed in the Free Discourse, I have said so little of the
former, and will proceed no farther on this; but refer the Reader thither, etc.
Would any one now have imagined, but that this I. B. (had he the least spark of
ingenuity, or meant at all honestly) would have taken occasion to inform
himself thoroughly from that Discourse concerning Mr. F's. judgment, in these
two points especially, and to try the strength of the arguments, whereby he
there has confirmed his Doctrine; and if he had been sagacious enough to espy
flaws in them, to make a discovery of them; but he takes no more notice of that
Book than if there had been none such extant, nay, though Mr. F. does several
times in the Design of Christianity refer to it.

This is the Blade that loves to tell the world, he is a lover of Truth, but if
she has no sincerer friends than he makes it apparent, by this and all his
other practices, he is, her case would be most deplorable. All that understand
this man may safely conclude, that he has as little will as ability to find
out, and acquaint himself with this precious Jewel. But to the next Inference.

The Fifth Inference, chap. 20. That we learn from the Design of Christianity
what is the great measure and standard whereby we are to judge of Doctrines;
both whether they are true or false, and in what degree necessary to be
received or rejected.

The Sixth Inference, chap. 22. That the Design of Christianity teaches us
what Doctrines and Practices we ought, as Christians, to be most zealous for or
against. Those surely, that are most available to the begetting and increase of
true holiness, it is our duty to be most concerned for, and those that have the
greatest tendency toward the endangering of it, to set our selves with the
greatest industry against.

The Seventh Inference, chap. 23. That the Design of Christianity well
considered will give us great light into the just bounds of our Christian
liberty: And that that being to make men holy, it may safely be presumed that
such things as have neither directly nor consequentially any tendency to the
depraving our souls, are left free to us by our Savior. And it is shown that
this is only to be understood of such things as the Gospel speaks nothing
particularly and clearly concerning.

The Eighth Inference, chap. 24. That it is a most unaccountable thing to do
that which is essentially evil, in defense of the Christian Religion, or of any
opinions presumed to be Doctrines relating thereunto. I would J. B. would well
lay to heart this; I am sure if he had done so when he read it, there would
have been no occasion for these leaves.

The Ninth Inference, chap. 25. That it is most unwarrantable for the Ministers
of Christ to prefer any design before that of making men really righteous and
holy.

The Tenth Inference, chap. 26. That an obedient temper of mind is an excellent
and necessary qualification to prepare men for a firm belief and right
understanding of Christ's Gospel.

The Last Inference, chap. 27. That we are taught by the Design of
Christianity, wherein the Essence, Power, and life of it consists, viz. in a
holy frame and temper of soul, whereby it esteems God as the chiefest good,
prefers him and his Son Jesus before all the world, and prizeth above all
things an Interest in the Divine perfections, such as justice and
righteousness, universal Charity, Goodness, Mercy, Patience, and all kinds of
purity: From whence does naturally proceed a hearty compliance with all the
holy Precepts of the Gospel, and sincere endeavors to perform all those
actions which are agreeable to them, are necessary expressions of those and the
like virtues, and means for the obtaining and increase of them.

What think thou now, Reader, can thou fancy the Design of Christianity to
be another Leviathan? or rather art thou able to retain any tolerable opinion
of that man that calls it so, and represents it as such a piece of monstrous
Devilism? Nay, can he himself have such a Brazen Forehead, as not to be
confounded to think what he has done, upon his reading over (if he can be
persuaded to it) but this short account of that Treatise? I pray God give him
true Repentance, and set home upon his Conscience what has, and shall be
farther laid open to his view in this small Pamphlet: which if ever he does, I
am sure he will acknowledge that Mr. F. has given him as little temptation to
accuse him so highly, as did our blessed Savior the malicious Pharisees to
fasten upon him the imputation of as fearful crimes, viz. profane company
keeping, Treason, witchcraft and Blasphemy. And who can be so blind as not to
see, that the only provocation I B. could have to exclaim at such a rate is
this, that the design of Mr. F's took is utterly to root out that doctrine
which is the grand support of wretched hypocrites, and which does infinitely
disparage our Blessed Lord Jesus and his glorious Gospel: I mean that filthy
doctrine of Antinomianism, with which this man has stuffed his sad Scrible;
and it appears not only by that but by his other lamentable writings, that he
is as rank and Ranting an Antinomian as ever foul'd paper.

I concluded as soon as I had read the Design of Christianity (which no man
has done more deliberately or impartially than my self) that it would be a
very acceptable work to Sincere Souls; but on the otherside, as welcome to all
hardened hypocrites, as our Saviors Sermon on the Mount to the Scribes and
Pharisees. I knew it would make such gnash their teeth, and that the Author
would be an object of their Spite and rage; but I must confess I could not in
the least imagine, that any one that would be thought a Christian had so little
concern for his reputation, as so shamelesly to lay open his hypocrisy to the
sight of all men, as by printing such fearful stuff as this I. B. has done.

In the first place he sets down a Catalogue of the Errors and Doctrines
destructive of Christianity, that he says Mr. F. has presented to the world
in his (as he calls it) Feigned Design, etc. And that it might make a huge
show, he puts it upon the tenter hooks to make it contain so round a number as
just forty. And it is worth our observation, that in order to the making of it
so bulky a thing as he does, he uses this honest Art, (as any one will see
that reads his long bed-roul with the least attention, namely, he makes in
abundance of instances distinct doctrines of different expressions, and proofs,
and illustrations of one and the same thing. As (in the first place) the sixth
damnable wicked doctrine he charge on Mr. F. is, That Christ's grand coming
into the world was to put us again into possession of that holiness that we had
lost. Design of Christianity page 12. The seventh, That John the Baptist, the
Angel sent to Zacharias and Mary (which is his own addition) and Malachi
preached this doctrine. p. 13. The eighth, That by Christ's saving us from Sin,
is meant not first his saving us from the punishment of it, etc. p. 14, 15.
Mark, by the way, that what he refers to here is only two or three words, by
which the proof out of Malachi of the same thing is explained. The nineteenth,
That the Salvation of Christ first consists in curing our wounds, and
secondarily in freeing us from the smart. p. 216. The Twentieth, That pardon
does not so much consist in remission as in healing. p. 216. Note, this is not
Mr. F's saying but only a saying of the Ancient Father Clemens of Alexandria
quoted by him. The 29th. That the grand intent of the Gospel is to make us
partakers of inward real righteousness, and it is but a Secondary one that we
should be accepted and rewarded as if we were completely righteous. p. 226.

The 30th. That it is not possible that any other notion of this doctrine
should have truth in it p. 226. I. B. himself cannot be so blind as not to be
able to see, that all these seven amount to one and the same thing.

Again, the 12th. Error is, That it is impossible a wicked man should have
God's pardon. p. 119. That is, as Mr. F. explained himself, he continuing
wicked.

The 13th. That it is impossible Christ's Righteousness should be imputed to an
unrighteous man. p. 120. That is, he continuing unrighteous.

The 14th. That if it were, it would signify as little to his happiness while
he continues so, as would a gorgeous and splendid garment to one that is
almost starved. p. 120.

The 15th. That for God to justify a wicked man etc. would far more disparage
his justice and holiness, than advance his grace and kindness. p. 130.

The 16th. That men are not capable of Gods pardoning grace till they have
truly repented them of all their Sins. p. 130.

Who that has eyes in his head does not see, that these are all the same.

Once more, The 21 st. pretended error is, That Faith justifies as it includes
true holiness in the nature of it. p. 221.

The 22 d. That the Faith, that Iustifies a Sinner to so high a priveledge as
that of Justification, must needs be such as complyeth with all the purposes of
Christ's coming into the world, and especially with his grand purpose; and it is
no less necessary that it should justify as it does this. p. 222.

The 23d. That he wonders that any worthy man should be so difficultly
persuaded to embrace this account of justifying Faith. p. 222. A special
doctrine this does he know what the word [ doctrine] means that makes this one?

The 24th. That there can be no pretense for a man to think that Faith should
be the condition or instrument of justification, as it complyeth with only the
precept of relying on Christ's merits for the obtaining of it. p. 223.

The 25th. That it is as clear as the Sun at noonday, that Obedience to the
other precepts must go before Obedience to this p. 223.

The 26th. That, he shall be his Apollo that can give him a sufficient reason,
why justifying Faith should consist in recumbency and relying on Christ's merits
for the pardon of Sin. p. 224. This another special doctrine. And anon his foul
dishonesty in this shall be discovered.

The 27th. That, he will take the boldness to tell those who are displeased
with this account of justifying Faith, that in his opinion it is impossible
they should think of any other. p. 225. This a doctrine like the other two;
which no one of common sense would call so.

Here are seven more of his Doctrines that are all the same. To which also may
be added many more that are the very same, but I am weary of this work; and I
think I have done fairly in transcribing these instances, whereby it is
manifest that nineteen of his number are dwindled away into almost but a poor
three. And by these let the Reader judge of the rest, or rather let him Examine
and compare them himself, and he will find enough in all conscience of the same
fair play; and be ready to take up his saying to the Shearer of the hoggs: A
GREAT CRY, BUT LITTLE WOOL.

Next after this doughty performance, our notable Mustermaster of damnable
doctrines thus accosts his Reader. Reader, I have given thee here but a taste
of these things, and by my Book but a brief reply to the errors, that he by his
has divulged to the world, although many more are by me reflected, than the
Forty thou art here presented with. But I must tell our honest John, that
surely he never expected any other Readers than the most arrant Blockheads, or
he (except he be so himself) would never have made them such a present. And
whereas he says, he has reflected many more, to pass by the nonsense I will
assure him, that after his rate of counting, if I may but have the honor to
serve him in completing his Catalogue, it should escape me hard but I would
advance Mr. F's. errors from so modest a number as Forty to at least Four
hundred.

But I must have another remark upon this goodly Catalogue, namely, that I. B.
has very falsely represented, and more than so, invented Doctrines for Mr. F.
which is the part of a marvellously honest man. As for instance;

What think you of his very first; namely, That the first 1.
Principles of Morals, those first written in men's hearts are the essential,
the indispensable and fundamental points of the Gospel. For this he cites p. 8.
281, 282. But there is no such thing, and all that can be gathered thence is
but this, that these are Fundamentals, and in p. 282. there is numbered with
Righteousness, Charity, etc. the preferring God and Christ Jesus before all the
world, and this is set before those too. But I. B. has so worded this, as to
make the Reader think that Mr. F. has asserted so horrid a Doctrine, as that
those are the only Fundamentals of the Gospel. But what Mr. F. does assert, I.
B. if he be in his wits, whatever he thinks, will not dare to deny.

The Second is like the First, viz. That these first Principles 2.
are to be followed, principally as they are made known to us by the dictates
of humane nature; and that this obedience is the first and best sort of
obedience that we Christians can perform. Observe 1. That this is nonsense,
and no where written by Mr. F. he knows not what dictates mean that says, that
the first principles are made known by them; For they are the dictates of
humane nature themselves* But 2. observe, what is far more unpardonable, that
the whole is a pure forgery, consult the place he refers to, p. 8, 9, 10.

The Third, That there is such a thing, as a soundness of soul, 3.
and the Purity of the humane nature in the world. This he cites p. 6. for, but
neither there or elsewhere is this asserted otherwise than thus, That true
holiness is the purity of the humane nature, and a sound Complexion of Soul;
now all that follows hence is, that where holiness is, there is purity of
nature, etc. that is, in what degree soever a man is holy, his nature is pure:
and does not our Savior intimate as much, when he calls holy men (and that on
this side heaven too) pure in heart, Matt. 5. 8. what is the difference between
purity of Nature, and purity of heart? But the vilest thing is this, that I. B.
would by wording it thus make the Reader believe, that Mr. F. denies the
corruption of nature; as will be seen anon.

The very next again is his pure invention, viz. That the 4.
Law in the first Principles of it is more obliging on the hearts of
Christians, than is that of coming to God by Christ, p. 7, 8, 9, 10. Mr. F.
abhors this doctrine, nor is there any thing in those or any other pages of his
said to tempt any well-minded man to gather so wretched an Inference from it.
The most that is said concerning going to God by Christ is but this, that it is
a duty enjoined by a divine positive Law not by the law of nature; and of all
men I hope I. B. will not say it is, who (like a woefully ignorant Creature) so
often speaks contemptuously of this Law. But because Mr. F. said some pages
before, that the law of nature is of an eternal and indispensable obligation,
but not positive laws, he fastens on him that wicked Doctrine; whereas nothing
more, so much as seems to follow from thence, than that, therefore God can
dispense with our obedience to his positive laws, not that we are less obliged
to obey them than the laws of nature, while they are in force; and I never knew
any man in the world that ever questioned this.

Observe Reader, that this that he here so vilely abuses Mr. F. in, he repeats
innumerable times over in his Book, and it is one of the Blasphemies he charge
on him; but how dares that man look God in the face that is no more tender of
his Brothers reputation, as so without any ground to accuse him of the
horridest of all wickednesses?

Again he invents the Tenth Error, viz. That Christ's fulfilling 5.
the Law for us, was by giving more perfect and higher instances of moral
duties, than were before expressly given, p. 17. Does not this man know that he
has put in these words [for us] and that Mr. F. did only repeat that of our
Savior, I came not to destroy the Law but to fulfill it; and then expounded
that word fulfill by the word perfect, intimating that the Greek has that
signification; and adding in the margent that, in Romans 15. 19. and Col. 1. 25.
it is rendered to preach fully.

For another instance of his wicked dealing, take Error 6.
the 26. That he shall be his Apollo that can give him a sufficient reason, why
justifying Faith should consist in recumbency and relyance on Christ's merits
for the pardon of Sins. p. 224. observe here the most palpable knavery of this
citation. 1. He sets down but one half of the Sentence. 2. The half he conceals
is the principal; mark, this is Mr. F's whole saying; He shall be my Apollo
that can give me a sufficient reason, why justifying Faith ought only to
consist in recumbency and relyance on Christ's merits for the Pardon of Sin,
and not also on his power for the mortification of it: Is not there a vast
difference between this whole Sentence, and his clipped one? But 3. to make it
sound yet more odiously he leaves the word, the principal word [only] out of
that part he sets down. And he makes Mr. F. say, he shall be his Apollo that
can give a sufficient reason, why justifying faith should consist in relyance
on Christ's merits; when his saying is, should ONLY consist in relyance on
Christ's merits. And can thou think this, Reader, a wicked saying? It Is as
wicked, as he that has thus notoriously abused it is honest: what but a dear
love of sin can make any one have a less value for that grace of God, that is
through Christ discovered in killing it, than for that grace that is expressed
in the pardon of it? And what but hypocrisy can persuade any man, that it is
not as necessary a condition to our acceptance with God to trust in Christ's
power for the subduing of our lusts, as in Christ's merits for the forgiveness
of them.

Another instance of this man's insufferable baseness is to be 7.
found in his 28. Citation, out of p. 225. The imputation of Christ's
Righteousness consists in dealing with sincerely Righteous persons, as if
they were perfectly so; There my Gentleman stops with an etc. and leaves out
the main business. If you consult the place you will find this the left-out-part
of the Sentence [ for the sake, and upon the account of Christ's
Righteousness.] I do not remember whether he has it right any where in the
body of his Book, but if he has it signifies little, for he knew well enough
that, where one would read through (or any considerable part of) his Book, very
many would read this Catalogue in the front of it, nor could he be ignorant how
much it is his interest that the Reader should not see this part, and that he
would bless himself that I. B. should be so shameless a Creature, as to reckon
that up among Doctrines destructive of Christianity; and much more, that he
would stand amazed to think, that Mr. F. should be accused as a Trampler under
foot of the blood of the Son of God, (as he is in the very Title page) and an
Idolizer of man's own Righteousness, when he asserts, that sincerely Righteous
Persons are dealt with by God as if they were perfectly Righteous, for the sake
of Christ's Righteousness.

For one more Instance take Error the Fifth, which I heedlesly 8.
passed over, when I wrote the first Four, but it is time enough now to make I.
B. most dearly repent of his fathering that doctrine on Mr. F. It is this: The
Precept of coming to God by Christ is in its own nature a thing indifferent and
absolutely considered, neither good nor evil. He knew how this would be
entertained, and that every body that thought him but an indifferently honest
man would cry out shame on the venture of such an assertion; and he in his book
does on every turn make a fearful outcry with this doctrine, stopping his
Ears, and crying, Blasphemy! Blasphemy! But what if Mr. F. has no such passage
in his whole Book? What is I. B. then? Reader, if he has I Will be thy
Bond-slave. I. B. refers thee to p. 7, 8, 9. But (as was before said) all that
is said of going to God by Christ is but this, that it is enjoined by a Divine
Positive Law, and who ever said that it is enjoined by the moral Law? Now
because Mr. F. two pages before says, that Positive Precepts are the
declarations of the arbitrary will of God, whereby he restrains our liberty;
for great and wise reasons, in things that are of an indifferent nature, and
absolutely considered neither good nor evil; he takes occasion from thence to
Calumniate him by making him assert a Doctrine, which does not so much as
follow from any thing he has written. What! because the objects of the
Positive Precepts, or the things they Command, are said to be in themselves
indifferent, etc. (which every body says as well as Mr. F.) may it be inferred
thence, that therefore any positive Precept it self is indifferent, and
particularly that of coming to God by Christ; whose Skull is so thick as not to
discern that this is mad arguing? Are Precepts and the Objects of them the same
thing? But would the Reader know what is the worst consequence that follows
from thence; I answer, not that any divine Precept can be in it self
indifferent, much less that of going to God by Christ, it is Blasphemy I
acknowledge most willingly, and so will Mr. F. too, to say it is; but this
follows, that therefore going to God by Christ, considered without respect to
God's command that we should do so, is of an indifferent nature; and did ever
any mortal deny this? will I. B. himself say, that it would have been our duty
to go to God by Christ, although he had never declared it to be his will that
we should do so, although God had never ordained him to be our Mediator. And
though God's ordaining that Christ should be so, was a declaration of his
infinite Wisdom as well as goodness, yet dare any say that God was bound to it
(that is before he had bound himself) and that God had been unwise, or unjust,
and unholy, if he had not appointed Christ our Mediator? But the duties of the
law of Nature such as loving of God, Justice, Mercy, etc. these are such as it
would disparage God's holiness to give men liberty to perform them or not. God
cannot, that is, he cannot will to give us leave to be disobedient to him, to
hate him or not to love him, to be unjust (that is to take away from another
what is his, he not first altering the property and making it none of his) or
to commit murder, that is, to kill our neighbor out of malice, etc.
Contradictions are not objects of any Power, and it is the greatest of
Contradictions that a Creature can be under no obligation to love and honor
his Creator, etc. And therefore seeing God has made his Son Jesus Christ our
Mediator, and told us so, the law of Nature it self now commands us to go to
God by him, because it commands us to obey God in all things, (nothing being
more a natural dictate, than that God must be universally obeyed) but if God
had done otherwise, if he had never signified it to be his Pleasure that Christ
should mediate between him and us, no dictate of nature would have told us that
we ought to go to God by him, nor could it have been our duty. I should be
ashamed to insist so long upon so plain a thing, But I hope my Reader will
excuse me, when he considers whom I deal with.

I now challenge this man to make one tittle more than what I have said of any
thing Mr. F. has written concerning Going to God by Christ, but this is no
more than every man in his wits will readily assent to.

I also appeal to those that are most fond of this I. B. whether or no he does
not most barbarously abuse Mr. F. in making such hideous clamours as he does of
his Blasphemous Doctrines, and most of all of this? I appeal even to the most
prejudiced of all his profelytes, and desire them to take a measure of his
Conscience and Sincerity by these doings. Most of the things I have laid to his
charge you see are the plainest matters of fact, the truth of which any one
will presently perceive that compares his representation of Mr. F's. Doctrines
with the Book out of which he pretends he had them. But it is no wonder that he
that casts such base Slurs on all Righteousness but what is imputative (as I. B.
does in abundance of places in his Book) should make any bones of these
matters; yet I cannot but admire that so insolently proud a Creature as he is
famed to be, should have no more concern for his own reputation, than to
publish ( to call a Spade, a Spade) such manifest and apparent lies. God keep
us from that Religion that gives liberty to such things as these.

Thus, Reader, I have given thee, I think thou will say, a sufficient taste
both of this man's gross ignorance, and unchristian Spirit, and I assure thee I
have remarkt upon nothing in his account of Mr. F's. Doctrines destructive of
Christianity, but what obviously occurred to me, but I Will warrant thee if,
(when thou have nothing else to do) thou wilt consider them thy self, thou will
find that I have left thee scope enough for more discoveries of I. B's. honesty
and ingenuity.

And who now sees not, that the Holy Scriptures themselves cannot be secure
from being charged with a great number of impious and blasphemous expressions
by this presumptious man, should his impudence once rise so high as to deal by
them, as he has done by the Sayings of Mr. F. Indeed to serve their own turns
of them, neither he (as I can largely show) nor others like him, do stick at so
serving the Sacred Oracles; and no body can warrant us that they shall never be
so fearfully audacious, as to make use of the same wicked arts to render them
as hateful to the world, as they endeavor to make those pious books and men,
that discover the extreme naughtiness of their Principles and Practices. The
Apostle has told us, that Evil men and Seducers shall wax worse and worse,
and, if so, God alone can tell us where they shall stop.

If any Reader now expects that I should next proceed to examine the book it
self, I must tell him I have done enough in all reason to make him perceive
without farther assistance, how I. B. from the beginning to the end has
bewrayed his ignorance and dishonesty.

For though he pretends to have confuted effectually the Doctrines he so rages
against, this is the Sum of his whole performance.

1. Spitting his venom at them all in general. 2. Urging woefully silly
arguments against several of them. 3. Wretchedly misrepresenting many of them:
putting them into Bears Skins and then rudely baiting them. 4. Making Doctrines
for Mr. F. which he never dream'^ of: Setting up men of Straw and then fighting
with them. 5. Exclaiming and raving at the most horrible rate against Mr. F's.
Person. 6. Intermixing a many non-sensical and wicked opinions of his own. 7.
Running over and over innumerable times the very same things.
Now for the First, Fifth, Sixth, I will give more than a taste of them
together in the close of all.

And as for the Seventh, viz. his running over and over the very same things,
it cannot be expected that I should do any more than desire the Reader, if he
will not believe me, to receive satisfaction from his own eyes.

So that it may be thought there remains now to show the Second, Third and
Fourth, but the Third and Fourth I have already shown sufficiently in too many
instances for his credit, and a great part of his Pamphlet is founded upon
those very inventions and misrepresentations of his that have been discovered;
and for the Second, viz. the arguments he urges against several of Mr. F's.
Doctrines they are so miserably Silly, that they deserve not to have one sine
bestowed upon them.

But yet because I will choose rather to offend on the right than on the left
hand, I will as briefly as may be, show both how unable and unwilling this poor
man is to do Mr. F. right in several other particulars; and also answer those
arguments whereby he opposes his main Doctrines.

After he had begun his Pamphlet with a most obligingly civil Address to his
beloved Mr. F. (which shall be seen anon) he next falls foul upon his
Descriptions of Holiness, and not to take notice of the failure of sense in his
Setting down the Second and Third, as not deserving the name of faults in this
man, he claps in between the Third and Last, one of his own devising. You
farther (says he) call it a Principle or habit of Soul originally dictates of
humane nature. Profound sense believe it! But to pass this by too, he cites p.
8. for it. But what is there said is only this, that the Divine Moral laws are
either those that were first written in men's hearts, and originally dictates of
humane nature, or necessary conclusions and deductions from them. So that
Holiness and the Moral laws are with him the same. This I will not also charge
I. B's. dishonesty, but on his woeful ignorance. You see he is so used to talk
and scrible nonsense, that he cannot easily write sense when prepared to his
hand, and therefore we may guess how well he understands it. Is not this a
right goodly Tool to make a Preacher of? But who so bold as blind Bayard. Next
observe that

From Mr. F's. Descriptions of Holiness by an Healthful 1.
Complexion of Soul, and the Purity of the humane nature, he would make us
believe he has asserted that men's natures since the fall (as I have already
intimated) continue sound and whole; and thereupon cries out that no man by
nature has any soundness in him, and sets himself to prove the corruption of
nature, and a mighty bawling he makes about this.

But does not Mr. F. affirm, that men by their Apostasy from God, and sinking
into Brutish sensuality, have sadly dispossessed themselves of this most
excellent temper, and are become like the beasts that perish? This he does
presently after his Descriptions of Holiness. Nay does he not suppose that this
soundness and Purity is lost, in making it the design of his Book to
demonstrate that it was Christ's grand business to restore it?

He says, that this Purity and Healthful Complexion are things 2.
a great way off from the Spirit of grace and the gracious workings of the
Spirit, A fine chime! But does not Mr. F. in the very first Page say, that the
holiness he so describes is a complication of all the virtues? whereby he
understands what the Gospel does by virtues, viz. the graces of Gods holy
Spirit. And does he not say in his Descriptions of Holiness, that it is such a
temper of the inward man, as causes men to be actuated by all those good
principles that are made known by Revelation; that is, to obey all the Laws of
God, and are not all the graces of the Spirit virtually contained in such a
temper as causes men so to do?

He says, it must be concluded that the Divine Nature Mr. F. 3.
talks of, is no other than the dictates of humane nature. If this Fellow were
now at my Elbow, I would know of him what the word Dictates means, it is plain
that a Goose understands that Phrase as well as he; and therefore he infers
that nonsense from Mr. F's. Descriptions. But who sees not, that that which is
to be concluded from them in this good sense, viz. That a Divine Nature does
enable him that is endued with it, according to the measure he has of it, to
obey not only the dictates of Nature, but also whatsoever laws are made known
by Divine Revelation. I. B. could not but know this, if he ever considered
those descriptions, and if he did not, what a sad Creature is he to undertake
(I will not say to confute) but to inveigh against them.

After he had spent almost another Page again in crying out 4.
of the Corruption of nature, and bringing Scripture to prove it, as if Mr. F.
had most plainly denied what he as plainly asserts as words can do it, he comes
to these words in one of the descriptions [ keeps his supreme faculty, in it is
throne] etc. and says, that they suppose it is within the Power of a man's own
soul always to keep Sin out of it self, etc.

But can he think that these words suppose it, when 1. Mr. F. makes holiness
the effect of God's grace and Spirit, not of a man's own power. 2. When he does
deny any such thing as perfect holiness in this life, p. 27. And 3. When he
says immediately after his Third description, that so far forth as holiness is
vigorous and predominant in men, it causes them to perform good actions, and
forbear the contrary.

All this lamentable stuff is in the two first Pages. But I have something else
to do than thus to trace him to the end, for it is all alike: and therefore I
can look for no other, should I do so, from all wise men, than to be called
fool for my pains. I will therefore only take notice of those things that he
builds most noise upon.

After a deal of hideous nonsense, and running over the same things again and
again, he says in p. 13.

That this Righteousness, as Mr. F. has described it, is 5.
not that which justifies us before God.

Because it is our own, and tells us, that there is the righteousness 1.
of men, and the righteousness of God. But is that Righteousness our own that
is wrought in us by God's Holy Spirit? Is not that God's righteousness which is
the effect of God's grace? who sees not that it is? And therefore his Citation
of Phil. 3. 9. will do him no service; for S. Paul meant no other there, by his
own Righteousness which is of the Law, than that which consisted in the
observance of the purely Jewish Law; which he calls his own righteousness
because he could obtain it by his own natural power, it consisting of external
performances. And by the Righteousness of God by Faith in the next verse, he
means the righteousness of the new Creature wrought in him by God's Holy
Spirit; through Faith in Christ's Gospel: And so the Apostle explains himself
in the following words: That I may know him and the Power of his Resurrection,
etc. -- That is, that I may know the power of his Resurrection in raising me up
to newness of life, and of his death, in mortifying all my lusts.

And whereas he abuses Romans 10. 3. to the same purpose, take notice that their
own Righteousness there, is no other than that the unchristian Jews gloried in,
as that by which alone they expected justification and eternal Salvation; and
it is the same with that in the Philippians.

He says, The Righteousness Mr. F. has described is the 2.
Righteousness of the Moral Law only.

But I say, that his general Descriptions take in the Righteousness of the
Gospel too. It Is said that it is such a disposition and temper of the inward
man, as causes men to be under the power of all practical principles made
known by Revelation; and all the Laws of the Gospel, I hope, are such. And Mr.
F. abundantly shows, that this Righteousness is by the Faith of Jesus Christ,
(that is, by effectually believing Christ's Gospel) in showing what an
admirable instrument the Gospel is to work this Righteousness. And this is an
answer to the text quoted out of Romans 3. 21.

Mark* by the way, I. B takes Faith still for nothing else but a bare relying
on the merits or righteousness of Christ, which any presumptious wretch may do;
but I will make it good against men of an hundred times his abilities (if it be
possible any such should be of his mind) that the true Christian Faith is such
a Belief of the doctrine of the Gospel, as implies an hearty compliance with
all its Precepts; whereof that of relying on Christ's merits is one, and but
one.

He says, the Righteousness Mr. F. has described cannot justify 3.
before God because of its imperfections: and then follows another page, within
two or three lines, spent in proving and Crying out of the corruption of
nature; in the midst of which he brings Gal. 2. 16. to prove that his
assertion; where he said it is, By the works of the Law shall no flesh living be
justified. But I have told the Reader already that Mr. F. never affirmed, but
absolutely denies justification by any thing but the Righteousness of Christ
only as a meritorious cause; and he holds the true living Faith to justify as a
Condition, without which no man by the Righteousness of Christ shall be
justified. And whereas the Apostle says, by the works of the law none shall be
justified, his meaning is that none shall be justified by the merit of them,
nor yet in any sense by them considered as opposed to the obedience of the
Gospel.

He Says, the Righteousness which Mr. F. has described 4.
cannot justify because it is not of faith. This he proves from Gal. 3. 12. The
Law is not of Faith.

The meaning of that place is, the law makes no account of Faith, allows no
justification but on condition of legal obedience; as the following words show,
but he that does them shall live in them. But now the Righteousness Mr. F. has
described does make account of faith, it causing men to comply with all Divine
Revelations, and therefore with the Gospel.

He says p. 18. that there are three things essential to 6.
Gospel Holiness, of which Mr. F's Descriptions are utterly destitute. The Holy
Ghost: Faith in Christ: A new heart.

The Holy Ghost. But Mr. F. has shown that this Righteousness 1.
cannot be obtained without the assistance of the Holy Ghost. But it is false
and nonsense to say the Holy Ghost is of the Essence of Righteousuess, and
therefore that he ought to be put into the definition of it: He may as well
say, that a man is falsely described, when he is said to be a Reasonable
Creature endued with a Soul and Body, because God his Creator is left out of
the description.

As for Faith in Christ; I have again and again showed that it is manifestly
contained in Mr. F's descriptions.

And then for a new heart and a new spirit, What difference is there between
these and Purity of nature, and a Sound complexion of Soul, and a Divine or
Godlike nature? does not every body know that these are but several expressions
of the very same thing?

P. 23 He inveighs against Mr. F's saying, that it was Christ's main errand to
effect our deliverance out of that sinful state we had brought our selves into,
and so to put us again into possession of the holiness that we had lost. By
this you see he was not ignorant, that Mr. F. asserted the corruption of
nature, for all his base suggestions to the contrary.

Now says he, I would have the Reader take notice that in this last clause [to
put us again into possession of that holiness which we had lost] is the Sum of
all his large Descriptions, and the Holiness he contends for is only that which
was in Adam before the fall.

I answer that it is the same, the very same for kind; but in what degree Adam
was holy is unknown to us.

This is, at least, without dispute that he was perfectly innocent, and was
also endued with a Principle of Holiness and such powers, as whereby he could
improve that principle to as great a height as humane nature was capable of*
True holiness or inward real Righteousness was ever one and the same in its own
nature; it was never nor ever can be any other than such a temper of soul as
causes an affectionate and hearty compliance with all goodness, and an
abhorrence and detestation of all wickedness; which is the Sum of all Mr F's
descriptions of it. In short, it is the image of the infinitely holy God in
man, and what God's Holiness is we may learn from such scriptures as these; The
Righteous Lord loves Righteousness, etc. He is of purer eyes than to behold
iniquity. The Lord is just in all his ways. The wicked and him that loves
violence his soul hates. The Lord is merciful and gracious, long suffering and
abundant in Goodness and truth* God cannot lie, etc.

Now this Holiness is in God Originally, he is an inexhaustible fountain of
Goodness, nay he is holiness itself, holiness, as it is in him, is his very
nature and essence; But in all creatures, whether Angels or Men, it is by way
of derivation from him. Now observe, the Holiness that was in Adam was the
image of God; God made him after his own image; and take notice again, that the
Holiness of the Gospel is of the same nature is showed by St. Paul. Ephesians. 4. 24.
He there Exhorting Christians to holiness, expresses himself thus: And that ye
put on the new man which after God (or after the image of God, or like to God)
is Created in Righteousness and true holiness. And again he plainly intimates
and more than intimates too, that the Holiness of the Gospel is the same with
that mankind has lost, in the verse immediately foregoing, And be renewed in
the Spirit of your minds. What is it to be renewed but to recover our former
state or that which was lost? Lastly, Holiness is described by Mr. F. by a
Divine and Godlike nature, and so the Apostle Peter calls the Gospel Holiness,
2 Pet. 1. 4. Now what is the difference between a divine or Godlike nature, and
the image of God? but I say once more God made Adam after his own Image, Genesis
1. 27. What is clearer than all this? Not the Sun at noon.

Observe that he chalengeth Mr F. to produce but one piece of a text, that in
the least looks toward a proof, that christ came to restore the holiness we
had lost; p. 36. and I think I have answered his challenge.
But let us now see the goodly Argument whereby this Ignoramus endeavors to
overthrow this Doctrine.

1. Says he, Adam before the fall even in his best and most sinless estate was
but a pure natural man, which he explains thus, consisting of body and soul,
and in this man's heart God did also write the law, that is (says he) the first
principles of morals. But does not every man since the fall consist of body and
soul? and does not the law still continue written in the hearts of men? Does
not the Apostle say concerning the very heathens Romans 1. That they having not
the law are a law to themselves, and that they show the work of the Law written
in their Hearts, etc? Was Adam no more than this comes to? Yes he adds too (for
I will do him no wrong as wickedly injurious as he is to Mr. F.) that Adam was
made of God sinless. But are not all Brutes sinless too? So that according to
this Doctrine, we now differ from Adam before the fall in nothing but what
every beast it self has. But let this man know, that God did not only write
the law in Adams heart, but also endued him with a principle whereby he was
enabled to yield perfect obedience to that law, and this by his fall he lost.
Next see what folly he discovers in proving this gross assertion concerning
Adam, he does it by that of the Apostle 1 Cor. 15. 45. and thus he sets it
down, The first Adam was made a living Soul, howbeit that was not first which
was spiritual, but that which was natural, and afterward that which is
spiritual. The first man is of the earth earthy. Observe 1. He says, that here
Adam is said to be but a natural man, even in his first and best estate earthy
when compared to Christ; or with them that believe in Christ. So that he makes
Christ and them that believe in Christ the same, for Adam is here only compared
with Christ. 2. that which the Apostle speaks only concerning Adams body, this
I. B. understands concerning his soul. This I never heard of any one that once
doubted, and no one can that understands sense, if he reads that Chapter, or
but the context of those words. The Apostle makes it his business in that 15th
to the Corinth. to prove the doctrine of the Resurrection; and from verse 35.
shows what bodies Christians shall rise with; and having said that the body ^s
sown in corruption and raised in incorruption, sown in dishonor raised in
glory, sown in weakness raised in power, he adds V. 44 it is sown a natural
body, it is raised a spiritual body: there is a natural body, (that is an
animal body, for so the word in the Greek signifies, that is, a body that needs
meat and drink,) and there is a spiritual body, or a pure fine immortal body
that needs neither. Now follows that which I. B. has cited, And so it is
written, the first Adam was made a living Soul, the last Adam was made a
quickening spirit (which words he has left out) howbeit that was not first
which is not Spiritual, but that which is natural, and after that which is
Spiritual, (that is the animal body was first, and afterward it is to be
changed into a Spiritual body) the first man is of the Earth Earthy, etc. that
is the first man's body was so, for his Soul (as the history of his creation
tells us) was not from the earth. And whereas Adam is said to be made a Living
Soul, the word (...) Soul is by a Metonymy very often used to signify the
body, and that not only living but dead too, nay, the breath, and the blood
also; of these significations of it I can give abundance of instances out of
the Holy Scriptures, but it is so well known, that I will not lose one moment
upon it. And whereas the Second Adam is called in opposition to the First a
quickening Spirit, that is, he is a quickner of dead bodies. But now, what is
all this to I. B's. purpose? he might as well have quoted for it; in the
beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth. And in interpreting those
words as he has done, he has put as great an Abuse upon the Apostle as he
has done, upon himself, that is, made him a most wretched arguer. You see
again, what a sad Soul this is to take upon him to be a public Teacher, he
that so abuses the most plain Scriptures in Print, (as I can show he does in a
vast multitude of instances besides this) what woeful work may we conclude he
makes with them in his ridiculous Preachments.

He says, that Adam in his best and most sinless estate was 2.
a Type and Figure, a Type and Figure doubtless in his sinless and holy estate,
a Type or Figure of the Holiness of Christ. This must be taken upon his own
word, he says doubtless it is so, but gives not one word of proof. But suppose
it were so, it would be nothing to his purpose; would this prove that Adams
holiness was of a different kind from the Holiness of Christians, or of Christ
either? but I say doubtless it is not so; we only read that he was in his
fallen estate a figure: And that is in Romans 5. 14. By Figure there is meant the
opposite member in a comparison, and there the Reader may see how Adam and
Christ are compared.

He says, the holiness that was in Adam and we lost in him, 3.
was such as stood in, and was managed by his natural perfect compliance with a
covenant of works. On the other side of the leaf, he would acknowledge no more
than that Adam had the law written in his heart, now we see he grants that he
perfectly complied with that law; how thick is his ignorance that knows not the
difference between these two! But what again is this to the purpose? Why, 1.
says he, Adams holiness was a natural perfect compliance, etc. But prithee I.
B. is it ever the worse for being natural, is not the holiness of the good
Angels, natural to them? nay, is not the Holiness of God natural to him? or is
it therefore of a different kind from the holiness of Christians, because
theirs is not natural? I should affront my Reader, should I go about to prove
to him; that the different manner of receiving these two does not make them to
be of a different nature: Because Adam was created with his Holiness, and the
holiness of the Gospel is by regeneration or a new birth, are they not
therefore of the same kind? 2. He says, that the Covenant Christ brings in is
a better Covenant than Adams, a blessed Covenant of grace, and he possesses
his children with the holiness and privileges of that Covenant. But I say, the
holiness that Christ's Covenant of grace requires, is of the same nature with
that required in the Covenant of works, but the difference is, the condition of
the former is true holiness, and that of the latter is perfect holiness: by
virtue of the former sincerity is accepted, and by virtue of the latter nothing
short of perfection; and so the holiness of the one and the other differ only
in degrees; and the holiness required by the Covenant of works is so far from
being meaner, that it is as much above that which the Covenant of grace accepts,
as perfection is above sincerity.

He says, the holiness that was in Adam, and that we lost by 4.
the fall, was such as might stand with perfect ignorance of the mediation of
Christ; for Christ was not made known to Adam as a Savior before he was a
Sinner.

What stuff is here again? Does this make the one and the other holiness to be
of a different nature? And was Adams Holiness ever the worse because it stood
with perfect ignorance of Christ's mediation? Nay, it was therefore far better
than we can attain to in this life because he needed no mediator.

He says, the Holiness that was in Adam was never given 5.
him through the promise, nor encouraged by the promise. Adam had no promise to
possess him with a principle of holiness; it came to him by Creation; neither
had he any promise to strengthen or encourage him in Holiness.

But 1. How does he know he was not encouraged by a Promise? if God did make
him a promise was he bound to tell us so? 2. There was a promise that if he did
not eat of the tree he should live, employed in the threatening, that if he did
eat he should die. 3. But suppose this to be true, what is it to the purpose?
and what does it make for him to say that Adam's holiness was not given him
through the Promise, but by Creation, when (as was said) a different manner of
obtaining a thing makes no change in the nature of the thing it self.

Lastly, He sums up all this sottish prate together, and thereby expresses his
brutish contempt of the Holiness we have lost. In a word (says he) it was a
natural, shadowish, old Covenant, promiseless Holiness such as stood and might
be walked in while he stood perfectly ignorant of the Mediator Christ. You see
Reader, what a vile object of contempt he makes himself.

He next (p. 26.) quarrels with that Saying before the 7.
Descriptions of holiness, namely, that the holiness that is the design of
Christianity is not subjected in any thing without us, nor is made ours by a
mere external or outward application. To this he says,

That these words secretly smite at the justification that comes 1.
by the imputation of the glorious Righteousness, that alone resideth in the
person of the Lord Jesus, and that is made ours by an Act of Eternal Grace, we
resting upon it by the faith of Christ.

Here Is malice with a witness? Does not he know that Mr. F. has asserted the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness, and that the worst he says is, that it is
not the ultimate end of Christianity, but that it is designed in order to the
promoting of inward holiness, as all Christian Privileges are? And does he not
therefore know, that when Mr. F. says, that the Holiness that is the design of
Christianity is such as he there affirms, that he means by the design the chief
and main, or the design by way of eminence? He that has read but the Title
page cannot but see this; for he interprets there the Design of Christianity by
ultimate End and grand intendment. One may sufficiently understand the
naughtiness of this man's Spirit by this one instance.

By the way, I must tell the Reader, that whereas Mr. F. does somewhere in his
Book call Holiness the only design of Christianity, he must needs be most
disingenuous that can interpret that [ onely] so severely as to exclude all
other ends, the whole business of the Treatise being to demonstrate it to be
the ultimate or last end, that is, in reference to men; and no man can think
that he would any where assert more than he designed to prove. And he could
mean no more by only, than as in common Speech it is very ordinarily used,
that is, for special or principal. And so the Reverend and Learned Mr. Baxter
has expounded the word in defense of Mr. Fowler.

These are his words, where he and others do say, that Holiness is the only
design of the Promises, etc. You must not interpret them too severely, nor
suppose them to speak properly, or accurately; but [onely] is an hyporbolical
expression, as many use the word [infinite] as an attribute of created things,
etc.

This I. B. says, But if the Holiness Mr. F. speaks of be 2.
not subjected in any thing without us; then it is not of all that fullness
which it pleased the Father should dwell in us: For the Holiness and
Righteousness, even the inward Righteousness that is in the Saints; it is none
other than that which dwells in the Person of the Son of God in heaven.

Now, Reader, thou understandest what a Ranting Antinomian this man is, or
rather (if he knows what he says) a down right Ranter. For this most
abominable assertion he brings John 1. 16. of his fullness we all receive, and
grace for grace. But would any one that has the least of Sobriety have
understood this Text otherwise than thus; viz. Christ is a bountiful bestower
of grace on his, especially when it is not said, we all receive his fullness, but
we receive of (or from) his fullness, as the Greek Preposition signifies.

Observe here that this monstrous piece of impudence says, that the Saints on
earth are as perfectly holy as Christ himself, in asserting that their holiness
and righteousness is none other than that which dwells in the Person of the
Son of God in Heaven. Now I will cry Blasphemy too, and that upon most just
grounds. There is also another place he abuses to favor this Blasphemy, viz.
1 John 2. 8. but let the Reader see how that makes for him. I sedately, and
without the least inclination to passion, profess; that I cannot remember I
ever knew such a shameless abuser and perverter of the holy Scriptures in all
my dapes.

But I wonder how he came here to escape that Text, Ephesians. 1. 19. That you may be
filled with the fullness of God; where, by fullness of God, we must understand
that height of grace to which God designeth to raise Christians: as the
Righteousness of God signifies (as I showed) the Righteousness that is the
effect of Gods grace and Spirit: but according to this I. B's. wild rate of
interpreting, the sense of the words would be that ye may be Goddified, or be
made God himself; which is a blasphemy that any one but a very Devil would
tremble at the thoughts of. And I pray, Reader, how much short of this do those
strange words of I. B's. come, which I find in p. 63. in heaven there shall not
be in us a likeness only to, but the very nature of God; that is, (if he
understands that word) the Essence and very Deity of God.

And observe to thy amazement, that he proves this by Romans 8. 17. Heirs of God,
and joint Heirs with Christ. As if to be an Heir of God is to be an inheritour
of his nature or Godhead; when to be the Heir of a man, no fool will understand
to be the Heir of his nature, but of all or part of his estate and goods. If he
should think that those words of S. Peter make for this horrid assertion;
namely, that ye may be partakers of the Divine nature, let him know that the
divine nature, ought to be rendered a divine (that is, a God-like) nature; and
our Translators meant no more; though (little thinking how wretches would abuse
it) they put the for a.

I would not so far imitate this man in his most (not only unchristian but
also) inhumane uncharitableness to Mr. F. as certainly to conclude him as bad
as his last cited words make him; but if they don't necessarily speak him
guilty of the highest impiety, they demonstrate him most woefully ignorant, and
therefore judge how dangerous a thing it must needs be for such a one to be
suffered to preach the Gospel.

If he should say, (for I would prevent all his pleas for such mad talk,) that
Christians are said to be even in this life the Temple of God and of the Holy
Ghost, etc. A mere Novice in Christianity can tell him, that the meaning of the
Metaphor is, that they are by their special favor and graces in the Church and
in particular Christians, not that the Divine Nature and Essence it self can be
otherwise there than in other places: whose brain is so wild, as not to
apprehend the absurdity and contradiction of such an assertion?

To say a word or two more to his frantic doctrine of the Holiness that is in
the Saints; he possibly may think that Ephesians. 1. 17. is a friend to it; where
it is said, That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; But none but a Bunyan
that reads the foregoing verse with it, can doubt that the Apostle's meaning is
any other than this, namely, That Christ may dwell by his Spirit, or the graces
and fruits of his Spirit in your hearts, by or thrrugh faith or an effectual
believing the Gospel; not by his individual Righteousness imputed to them, or
accounted theirs.

But lastly to conclude this, let the Reader observe, that there is this poison
also in those words concerning the Saints Holiness, namely, that there are no
holy dispositions wrought by the Spirit of God in them; for (as was said) these
are his words, that even the inward Righteousness that is in the Saints, it is
none other than that which dwells in the Person of the Son of God in Heaven.
So that whatever for his credits sake he acknowledges elsewhere, he professes
here, that the only inward Righteousness or holiness of the Saints is but
Christ's imputed Righteousness; which is to say also, that they have no inward
Holiness at all.

Then next, he puts as wicked a sense on the following words 8.
of Mr. F's. as he does on the abovesaid Scriptures, namely these [But is
originally seated in the soul and Spirit,] and makes Mr. F. to say in them,
that holiness has its original from us: when the plain meaning is, that
holiness is first seated in the Soul it self, not in the outward man; and (as I
have said) he does as expressly as is possible assert, that God's holy Spirit is
the Seater of it there; and that those that have it are beholden to Christ for
it. I have showed this over and over.

Again in the 27. page, he proceeds to his accusation of 9.
Mr. F. as affirming, that coming to God by Christ is in itself and absolutely
considered an indifferent thing. This he says follows from Mr. F's. saying,
that positive precepts are so, in that he makes this a positive Precept. But
Mr. F. never said positive Precepts are so, but the things enjoined by them.
Now see how ignorantly he talks.

If (says he) it be but indifferent in it self, it is not of the 1.
substance of Christianity. But he that is but one remove from a child can tell
him, that this is an egregiously false consequence. To say that a thing is in
itself and absolutely considered indifferent is, (as has already been shown)
only to say, that it is so considered without respect to the command of God, but
the command of God has made going to him by Christ a duty of absolute and
indispensable necessity, and such a grand fundamental and essential of the
Gospel, as that there is none greater: So that it is damnable for any one to
whom the Gospel is revealed to omit this duty.

He says, that an indifferent thing in it self is next to nothing, 2.
and then the blood of Christ is of no value at all, and afterward, he thus
taunts it; How indifferent? as indifferent as the blood of a silly Sheep, etc.
But thou most unsufferable abusive and provoking man, take this answer once for
all; whatsoever is commanded us by the great God, how indifferent soever it was
before, cease then to be indifferent, but is of as absolute necessity to be
done by us, as it is not to incur the penalty of eternal damnation. And I tell
you once again, that no man in his wits ever could think any other, than that
going to God by Christ is made a duty by a Positive Law of God only; nor did I
ever hear of any one that was so mad as to deny this; nay, you your self will
not dare to say, that this duty is commanded by the Law of Nature or the Moral
Law, nay, you more than once say it is not. Go now and confess that you are
either most shamefully ignorant, (as not knowing the difference between a moral
and positive Law) or else that you do most wittingly and designedly calumniate
and defame your brother. All men of any understanding will tell you, that one
of these is most true of you, when they read this, and therefore take your own
choice. But he that reads this whole Pamphlet will not, cannot doubt (if he be
not grossly prejudiced) that you are not less malicious than you are ignorant.

After abundance of repetitions, vile railing, and the most 10.
foolish cavills that ever man read, which I will not trouble my self with, he
comes, p. 60. to tell Mr. F. that his saying that it is an impossible thing that
a wicked man should have Gods pardon, and that Christ's Righteousness should be
imputed to an unrighteous man, proclaim him to be ignorant of Jesus Christ, and
then he undertakes thus to confute him.

Says he, God does not pardon painted Sinners, but such as 1.
are really so. That is granted, but it is when they are sincerely, through his
grace, willing and desirous to leave their Sins; and then they do not, in this
life cease to be Sinners, but they cease to be such as are called wicked and
ungodly, by which phrases is meant Presumptuous Sinners. Then he tells Mr. F.
impertinently, that Christ dyed for Sinners, but he must say he dyed so for
Sinners, as to give them a pardon while they live and delight in sin, and
refuse to be reformed, or he says nothing to the purpose. But where is this
said? I declare, no where, but the contrary in abundance of places: Is it not
said, Repent and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out? Acts 3. 19.
Repent and be baptized every one of you in the name of Jesus Christ, for the
remission of Sins, Acts 2. 38. Him has God exalted to be a Prince and a
Savior to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins. Repentance
first, and then forgiveness Acts 5. 31. Let the wicked forsake his way, etc.
and let him return to the Lord, and he will have mercy on him, and to our God
for he will (or he then will) abundantly Pardon, Isai. 55. 7. Wash ye, make ye
clean, put away the evil of your doings from before mine eyes; cease to do
evil, learn to do well, etc. and what follows? Come now and let us reason
together, says the Lord, though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as
white as Snow, etc. Is. 1. 16. Acts 26. 18. -- I send thee to open their eyes
and to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God,
that they may receive forgiveness of Sins, etc. Have I wrested these Scriptures
(to which I can add innumerable more,) and don't they as plainly speak turning
from Sin to be a necessary condition of pardon, as words can do it? what
blindness have they contracted that don't see this! But I. B. has a Text for
his turn, which all his brethren cry up mightily, namely, that in Romans 4. 5.
God justifies the ungodly. But does not every body see, that that text will
contradict hundreds of other Scriptures, if it be otherwise to be understood
than thus; God justifies those that were once ungodly, not while they are
ungodly: God does not, nay he cannot pass a false judgment, and declare those
Righteous, that are utterly void of Righteousness: God's nature is so holy,
that he no less abominates to be a justifier of the wicked, while they continue
so, than to condemn the Righteous. He has declared, No peace to the wicked.

Now take notice Reader, that there is no doctrine delivered in M. F's. book,
that he is so outragiously mad at, as at this doctrine. Now suppose it should
be false (as it is as true as the Gospel) what danger can there be in asserting,
that men by the free grace of God are delivered from the Power of Sin, before
(that is in order of nature) he delivers them from the guilt of it. And who but
the Devil, or one devoted to his Service, can curse that man with Bell Book and
Candle that delivers this doctrine? Nay, who but a man that loves his lusts
with all his heart, and cannot endure to think of parting with them, would not
be ready to embrace this doctrine as soon as it is sufficiently proposed to him?
And once more, who that has any love for inward real Righteousness, would
desire to be dealt with as if he were a perfectly Righteous man, merely because
he has so strong a fancy as to imagine Christ's Righteousness is imputed to
him? And nothing but this fancy is the Faith of this I. B. He declares p. 17.
(to omit other places) that Faith in the justification of a Sinner from the
curse and wrath of God, respects only the mercy of God, and forgiveness of
Sin for the sake of Christ. So that he that has but confidence enough strongly
to believe (though he has no more reason so to do than because he believes so)
that his Sins are forgiven, has justifying faith. Again (says he) in the next
words, God for Christ's sake has forgiven him that is enabled to believe, that
is, to trust to, and venture the Eternal concern of his Soul upon the
Righteousness that is no where to be found, but in the person of the Son of
God. The destroyer of Souls cannot invent more destructive Doctrine. Nor is
that to be heeded that they say, that Holiness will by way of gratitude be the
consequent of such a faith; for 1. we know by experience that that is false;
for we see that the most hardened wretches have ordinarily the strongest
confidence, that the merits and Righteousness of Christ is theirs, which (as I
said) is this poor man's faith. But 2. this Salvo (as a worthy person says) is
like to prove but a slippery hold, when it is believed ( as those people do)
that Gratitude it self as well as all other graces is in them already by
imputation: They must say something to make their wretched doctrine to seem
less odious, or they would scarcely be endured in a Christian State.

But whereas I said, that the forementioned Salvo is demonstrated by
experience to have nothing of Truth, I must tell the Reader, that I need go no
farther for an example than this poor Creature himself; he is as sad an
instance of the falsity of that pretense as ever I knew. No man discovers a
stronger confidence (as I can prove) in the merits of Christ, nor more presumes
that the Righteousness of Christ is imputed to him, than does this man; but in
the mean time, what is the holiness that this Faith of his has produced? If as
insolent pride as ever man heard of, the most outrageous Fury, the most
turbulent Spirit, the most reviling and defaming Pen and Tongue, and
consequently the most malicious Soul can consist with the mortification of Sin,
and true holiness, then this man may be a holy man; but he that says they can,
affirms this horrid contradiction, viz. that the most thick Egyptian darkness
may have fellowship with pure light, and the most exact and lively resemblances
of the Devil, may consist with the image of the infinitely holy God, and a
Divine nature.

Let him not think himself a Saint because he has a zeal, and pretends to have
it for God too; for so the worst of men the Pharisees had, and the Crucifiers
of the Lord of Glory, Romans 10. 2. or because he preaches and makes long
prayers, for besides that (if fame belies him not) those are such, as alone
declare him not only a very absurd but naughty man, I say besides this, the
Abominable Pharisees were as good at those things as he for his heart can be.
If he thinks that his despising and separating from others as carnal and
profane wretches, (though far better than himself) and such as communion with
whom will defile him, is an argument of his holiness; I will only ask him who
those were that cried Stand by thy self, come not near to me, for I am holier
than thou, Isai. 65. 5. and who those likewise were that S. Jude says
Separated themselves, as being much more perfect than others, and calling
themselves the Spiritual. v. 19.

If he flatter himself with a fond conceit (as no doubt he does) that suffering
persecution is a great evidence of holiness, the Quakers, which he himself
counts most damnable Heretics, have suffered as much, and many of them far
more than ever he has done, whose persecutions have been but fleabites or not
so bad, nay no other than such as have contributed to his purse, far more
plentifully than ever his cast of trade could. But besides the Apostle tells
us, If I give my body to be burnt and have not Charity, (which I. B. proclaims
himself (if the Tree be known by the fruit) utterly void of) it profits me
nothing: Read the 13 Chap. of the first to the Corinthians, and you need not be
told how charitable this man is. In a word, the Devil has his Martyrs as well
as Jesus Christ.

He will not say that being no drunkard or fornicator, etc is any argument of a
holy man, for he inveighs against none as unholy so much, as those he is not
able to tax with the vices that denominate men so, or any other immoralities;
and I must tell him too, (however he take it) that his vices are as far beyond
such, as are those that render men like to Devils more black and filthy, than
those that make them resemble Brutes: And our Savior has told the men of I.
B's Saintship, that Publicans and Harlots shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven before themselves.

I heartily again pray, that this plain and most honest dealing may be
succesful to his true Repentance; but it is scarcely to be hoped it will, so
long as he persists in his gross conceits concerning that blessed doctrine of
justification by faith, and imputation of Christ's Righteousness, (which are but
two expressions of one and the same thing, as is abundantly proved in the Free
Discourse) for while he rouls himself on Christ for Salvation, and strongly
conceits that he is clad with his Righteousness, (which I have with undeniable
evidence shown to be the whole of his justifying faith) he looks upon all his
sins, past, present and to come, as actually pardoned, and therefore who that
is not as blind as a post cannot see, that Repentance is then a needless and
vain thing; nay, and that it is but a mere mockery for such a one as I. B. so
much as to pray for the pardon of his sins. And I entreat those that use to
hear him, to observe whether ever he does so. He contradicts himself
egregiously, if he does any more than pray that God would give them a sense and
assurance that their sins are pardoned; the plain English of which petition is
in him no more than this, that God would strengthen more and more their already
too strong fancies, that they may not doubt, but that their foul pollutions are
all hidden from his all-seeing eye by the garment of the Righteousness of
Christ cast over them; and that they may be more and more assured, that (as bad
as they are) Christ's righteousness does not suffer him to see any iniquity in
them.

I Say it is scarcely to be hoped, that this man should ever repent, or so much
as pray for pardon, till he comes to embrace that doctrine which he now so
detests: viz. That receiving of Christ as a Lord to rule, as well as a Priest
to Save, is a condition without which God will pardon none for the sake of
Christ; and also that no men's sins are actually pardoned before they are
repented of, and therefore much less before they are committed, and that
Christ's individual Righteousness is not made any man's in a proper sense, much
less that it is so merely because he believes it is so; and that there is no
other doctrine true concerning the imputation of Christ's Righteousness than
this, That those only that are enabled by the grace of God to hate and detest
their sins, or are endued with inward real righteousness, shall have the
benefit of Christ's righteousness: For to have Christ's Righteousness imputed
(as is fully proved in the aforesaid book) is only (and that is as much as
heart can wish) to have as great advantages by his righteousness, accruing to
us, as if it were in the properest sense imaginable made ours.

Before I go farther, let me tell the Reader, that this whole Doctrine of Mr.
F's concerning justification by Faith is most invincibly defended by Abundance
of the Orthodox Divines of the Church of England, and by none more effectually
than by Mr. Baxter in his Book against Crandon long since written, and in many
other of his works. Which, if it be possible, thou should yet be
dissatisfied concerning it, thou will do well to peruse; and which if this I.
B. had ever read, (or but anyone of them, and had the wit to understand it) he
had never made himself so infamous as to publish to the world such filthy
stuff; nor brought out the worst of those woeful arguments for the defense of
his doctrine, that have been answered a thousand and a thousand times.

In Page 66. and other places he makes woeful work with 11.
Mr. F's saying, that Christ trod every step before us of the way that leads to
Gods Kingdom; and cries therefore he went to heaven by virtue of an imputative
Righteousness, and by virtue of his own intercession, and faith in his own
blood, and then Christ must come to God, and ask mercy for some great
wickedness that he has committed.

But here he also discovers a most ill nature and perverse spirit, for no man
of any candor could otherwise have understood Mr. F. in those words than thus:
That Christ was an example of all those virtues or graces that qualify men for
the Kingdom of God: was he not an example of all those graces that together
denominate a man pure in heart, can he dare to say he was not? Now does not our
Savior say, Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: But then,
faith he, what say you to going to heaven by virtue of an imputative
Righteousness, and of his own intercession, and faith in his own blood? I say
all these are no other than going thither by Faith in Christ, that being faith
in his blood, and Righteousness and intercession, but those that understand the
Christian Religion will tell him, that the obtaining of this purity of heart,
or the graces Christ was an example of, is the end of this Faith; So much the
Apostle intimates in those words purifying their hearts by faith, and it is the
business of the Design of Christianity to demonstrate this. So that it is most
true, that whosoever follows Christ's example shall see the Kingdom of God, but
we cannot follow it without faith in his merits, faith in his power, or in one
word, without effectual believing the Gospel, which takes in the whole of the
Christian Faith.

And whereas he says, that if this doctrine be true, Christ must ask God mercy
for some great wickedness committed by him; how does that follow? Christ asked
God mercy for us, and do not we do as he did, when we ask it for our selves?
But then he monstrously foolishly proceeds, and says, if this be so, then we
cannot come to heaven before we be accursed of God, we must first make our body
and Soul an offering for the sin of others, then we must go to heaven for the
sake of our own Righteousness. And then he insultingly cries O Sir! what will
thy gallant generous mind do here? This might be a Sad nonplus indeed, were Mr.
F. a perfect Changling. But observe, did Mr. F. say that Christ trod no steps
but those we must tread? is this saying, that he trod before us every step
which he has told us leads to the Kingdom of God, (or that we must go in to
the Kingdom of God) the same with this, that he trod no other but those we
must tread? Can any man be such a sot as not to discern the wide difference
between these two propositions. By the way take notice, that it is blasphemy to
say, that Christ was accursed of God in any other sense than this, that he
suffered such a kind of death as was by the law of Moses pronounced accursed.
So the Apostle explains his being made a curse, Gal. 3. 13. Christ was always
Gods beloved Son, nor was he ever more a darling of heaven than when he hung
upon the Cross. And that the Reader may be truly informed in the Doctrine of
Christ's Satisfaction, (false notions whereof make this I. B. talk most gross
things) I entreat him to get and carefully peruse the Learned Dr. Stilling
fleets Treatise upon that Subject; there you will find that Christ did not
suffer the very same punishment that is due to sinners, but that what he
suffered for sinners sakes was as Satisfactory, and answered the ends of
Government as much, as if all mankind had perished: And thanks be to God that
Doctrine of Christ's suffering the very same is now generally exploded.

But to return, observe but these Scriptures, and you will then need no more
than what has been said, to discern how ridiculously and wretchedly this I. B.
talks in several places about the life of Christ.

Luke 9. 23. If any man will come after me (or be a Christian) let him deny
himself, and take up his cross daily, and sollow me.

1 Pet. 2. Christ suffered for us leaving us an example, that ye should follow
his steps, who did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth, who when he
was reviled, reviled not again, etc.

1 John 2. 6. He that says he abides in him, ought himself also to walk, even
as he walked.

V. 29. If ye know that he is Righteous, ye know that every one which does
righteousness, is born of him.

1 John 3. 7. Little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does
righteousness is righteous even as he is righteous.

1 John 4. 17. Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in
the day of judgment, because as he is or was (the Analage of the tense being
ordinary) so are we in this world.

Now this I. B. says p. 106. that our Saviors life in all duties that
respected morals was not principally, or first, to be imitated by us, but that
the Law, even in the preceptive part thereof, might be fully and perfectly
fulfilled for us. Mark, 1. he says in all duties that respected morals, what
nonsense is this? any body may see he does not know what [ Morals] means. 2.
That our Saviors life in these duties was not principally to be imitated by
us; he dares not say not at all to be imitated, though any body may see that
reads his book, he would be glad to say so with all his heart: But what
Scripture does he bring for this? none at all. So that if you will not take his
word for it, he has nothing to say to you. 3. But says he, that the Law even
in the preceptive part may be fulfilled for us, was Christ's principal design in
living as he did. What proof has he for this? Romans 10. 5. Christ is the end of
the law for righteousness, the end, says he, not only of the Ceremonial law,
but of the 10 commandments too; but is he the end of both alike? then we are no
more now obliged to the one than to the other. In short, the meaning of those
words is this, that Christ by introducing his Gospel, has put an end to the
Mosaical dispensation, but how does this make for him? And whereas he keeps
such a stir with Christ's fulfilling the law for us, he adds to the Scripture,
it is nowhere said he fulfilled it for us, much less in his sense; the Man
Christ Jesus (or Christ as man) was in the same subjection to the law that we
are, and he would have been a sinner like unto us if he had disobeyed it, and
the benefit we get by his perfect obedience is this, that it qualified him to
be a satisfactory Sacrifice for our sins, which without it he could not be; but
Christ never obeyed the law for us so as that, his obedience should be looked
on as ours; for then what necessity can there be of our own personal obedience.

You see, Reader, what a Sweeper down of Cobwebs I am grown! the truth is, all
this man's cavils have nothing so much substance in them as a Cobweb has; they
are rather to be likened to the Apples of Sodom, do but touch them and they
fall to dust, nay, to a perfect nothing. But I will thus idly employ my self
but a very little while longer.

He quarrels with Mr. F. p. 85, 86. for saying, that it is 12.
not needful to give a just Table of the primary fundamentals of the Gospel,
and for keeping hid the secondary fundamentals. But 1. For his saying, that
it is not needful to have a just Table of the sormer; he gives this reason,
because it is impossible that a man that endeavors heartily to understand the
Scriptures, in order to the bettering of his Soul by them, should err in them,
all fundamentals being as clearly revealed as heart can wish. And 2. For his
not particularizing the secondary fundamentals, I think this is a satisfactory
reason; namely, that should he so do, he must transcribe all that is with
indisputable clearness delivered throughout the Gospel.

Then he says, that coming to God by Christ is accounted by Mr. F. but one of
the secondarily fundamental points. But that is wickedly false: He proves it
thus, because it is in itself indifferent. But what if it be so, that is,
without respect to the command of God that has made it a duty, does it follow
therefore that it is not a primary fundamental of the Christian Faith? Such are
said by Mr. F. to be primary fundamentals, as without the knowledge and belief
of which it is impossible to acquire that inward real righteousness, which the
Christian Religion aims at; now God has made going to him by Christ such a
doctrine, as without the knowledge and belief of which it is impossible for us
to acquire that righteousness, and consequently has altered the nature of it.
God has declared that he makes us to be accepted in the beloved, and that he
has exalted him to be our Prince and Savior, and therefore going to him by
Christ must needs now become necessary in its own nature, and quite another
thing than what it was before that declaration. But God has not so ordered
things as that it should be necessary in its own nature to believe, that
Christ's mothers name was Mary; but it is necessary from an external cause not to
deny it, that is, because it is so plainly revealed that no good man can
disbelieve it; and this according to Mr. F's. doctrine is a Secondary
fundamental. And now I hope I have enabled I. B. to understand that, at which
he cries Confusion! darkness! confusion! and if he will not acknowledge that
the darkness and confusion, he so tragically exclaims at, is only in his own
brains, I am sure every intelligent Reader will.

There is something I have let pass in his 29. page, that I Will 13.
take notice of, before I conclude, which is this, that whereas Mr. F. says,
that Calvin, Peter Martyr, Musculus, Zanchy, and others did not question, but
that God could have pardoned Sin, without any other satisfaction, than the
Repentance of the Sinner, he says to it, it matters nothing to me, I have
neither made my Creed out of them, nor any other than the holy Scriptures. What
John! because you have not made your Creed out of them, do the judgment of so
many men famous for Learning and Godliness signify nothing with you? This is
like a saying of your own, that is, of one composed of pride and ignorance; how
came such a piece of nothing as thou art to be so highly conceited of thine own
judgment? He says, he has made his Creed out of the Scriptures, but who are
best accomplished for the understanding of them? the Learned or Idiots? that
would have been in an utter incapacity of understanding one line of the Bible
without the help of the Learned, and must now trust their skill as to the right
Translation of every word of it; and cannot have the least guess at the meaning
of a difficult place but by their assistance. But let us see his arguments,
whereby he endeavors to overthrow that Doctrine.

Says he, Christ was from all eternity appointed to be the ^^.
Savior.

But were not all things that God has effected as much decreed from all
Eternity as this? He dares not say otherwise, as bold as he is; but by the same
argument then, whatsoever God has done he could not but do, and he is no free
Agent.

His Second goodly Argument is founded upon a miserably mistaken notion of
God's justice, and the doctrine of Satisfaction: which I have something else
now to do than to explain to him, especially since this that he here quarrels
with was delivered but by the bye, and signifies nothing to the design of Mr.
F's book.

He makes another Argument of these Scriptures, Matt. 6. 39. If it be possible
let this Cup pass from me. But no body says it was possible, after God had
decreed Christ should suffer, that he should not suffer: But that which is said
is, that God was not necessitated to decree it, though for great and wise
reasons he did: was God necessitated to make men? though he was wise in so
doing, yet could he not have done otherwise?

His Second Scripture is Heb. 9. 22. Without shedding of blood is no remission.
True, but the reason is because it was the free decree of God, that remission
should not be obtained without it.

His Third is Luke 24. 26. ought not Christ to have suffered? But the foregoing
verse says why he ought, viz. because the holy Prophets had foretold it.

The Last is Acts 17. 3. Christ must needs have suffered. But I say, 'twas the
voluntary not necessitated decree of God, that made his suffering necessary.
And the verse before this also shows the same.

These are the old Threadbare Arguments he uses; and I condescend to say what
I have done to them, only to show this I. B's. followers in another instance,
what a judicious Creature they have chosen for their Teacher.

There is yet another thing in p. 70. that I Will bestow two or 14.
three lines upon. He there tells Mr. F. that he will have a little touch upon
his Principle of Freedom, which (says he) you in p. 9. call an Understanding
and Liberty of Will. Observe his nonsense again. But what is it Mr. F. there
says that offends this man? It Is this, that he supposes men endued with
Understanding and Liberty of Will. Now proceeds he, there is no such thing in
man by nature as liberty of will, or a principle of freedom, in the saving
things of the Kingdom of Christ. But 1. Mr. F. says never a word of liberty of
will as to those things, but only supposes this in general, that man is endued
with liberty of will: And this he himself supposes in denying it only as to
the Saving things of Christ's Kingdom. 2. He limits that too, and says there
is no such thing in man*by nature as to those things; will he therefore
acknowledge there is such a thing in man by grace? If he will not, that
limitation is ridiculous; but if he will, he is never like to have Mr. F. for
his Adversary, in this point, nor any of his judgment. He has declared in the
book several times cited, p. 239. that the men of his judgment hold no free
will that is opposite to free grace, and acknowledges in the next page the
necessity not only of assisting but also of preventing grace.

And now let the Reader judge, whether Mr. F. has written the least tittle
contrary to any one of the 39 Articles of the Church of England, and
particularly to those there concerning Free Will, Justification, and Works
before Faith, which in general terms he has charged him with, without showing
wherein he has done it; though I acknowledge, if he has not abused Mr. F's.
Book, that his accusation is no slander. But he is to his perpetual infamy most
sensibly demonstrated to have bewrayed most woeful ignorance, and notorious
dishonesty, and ill nature, besides the foulest erroniousness, in what he has
published against The Design of Christianity.

But it is pleasant to observe, that this wretch, who abominates any thing (if
one may judge by his rude behavior) that bareth the name of the Church of
England, should cite three of her Articles as main Orthodoxy's, in order to the
more effectual defaming of Mr. Fowler. This is just like the Devils making use
of Scripture to assist him in his malicious designs against our Savior.

Lastly, He falls to compare Mr. F's. Doctrine with Campian's the Jesuit, and
Pen's the Quaker, and makes a parallel between several of his Sayings with
Seven of the former, and Eight of the latter.

By the way take notice, that this lamentable piece of work is the labor of
more clumsy Brains than this poor I. B's. For First, How should he come by
Sayings out of Campian? but Secondly, (which is more considerable) he has a
company of Terms and Phrases, that he was never in a capacity of understanding,
as Commixed, Radicals, Abstract, Replication, etc. derived from the Latin.
Again Characteristical, Diametrical, Parenthesis, Paragraph, etc. borrowed from
the Greek Language. And he is up with his arguing from a thing to a thing,
habit and act, which smell of one whose name has had the honor to stand a
little while in a College Buttery Book, and that had the luck sometimes to
hear his Masters chopping Logic together: For I Will warrant him, who ever was
I. B's. fellow laborer in this worthy performance, is a fellow that never was
under a much higher dispensation. And it is he I presume that has helped our
Author to his after-conclusions. p. 9. as if there were fore-conclusions.

Thirdly, The whole is a motly thing piec't and patch't together, as if it were
the product of not so few as two, but a Club of Wise-akers. But yet all that
understand I. B's. manners, ability and temper, will accuse me as injurious,
should I rob him of the honor of the downright nonsense, knavery, Calumnies
and vile language, which make a very great, if not the far greater part of the
Pamphlet.

But to our business, that is, to the parallel between Mr. F's. doctrine and a
few Sayings of the Papist and Quaker set down by him, to which I reply in a few
words.

I know not, whether this I. B. has not as falsely represented 1.
these men's Sayings, as it has been proved he has done many of Mr. F's. I
have neither of the Books to examine the matter, nor have I ever read either,
and therefore I cannot accuse him; but he has been proved so very notoriously
dishonest in this particular, that he ought never more to be trusted upon his
own word.

But suppose he has not too favorably represented any of 2.
them, the Reader will see if he compares them with the Sayings of Mr. F. set
under them, that he abuses most of these in making a parallel between them; as
I would particularly show, but that it will take up too much time, and any man
of understanding that has his book will immediately perceive that I charge him
truly.

But Mr. F. I am sure will not stick to acknowledge, that 3.
there may be put upon most of them such a sense, as may speak them good and
true sayings. As where Campian says, that Faith justifies, but not faith only;
this is no other than what S. James affirms in express words, chap. 2. 24. And
Mr. F's. doctrine is, that faith, if it be taken for a mere relyance on
Christ's Righteousness (which is but one act of faith) does not only justify;
but if it be understood so as to include the receiving of Christ according to
all his offices, or for an obediential faith, so it does only justify. That
is, (as has been shown again and again) not as a meritorious cause but as a
condition. He abhors to assert with the Papists the merit of works; nor does he
affirm that works are a necessary condition of justification, but as they are
virtually in faith, for he every where makes a true and sincere willingness to
obey Christ's precepts, which is employed in Faith, the necessary condition of
justification.

There is not an Heretic in the world, but has some good 4.
Sayings, this I. B. himself (as grossly erroneous as he is) is not out in every
thing. And no wise man will love truth one jot the worse for hearing it from
the Devils mouth. And I freely declare, that if the Papists and Quakers did
assert no worse things than those I. B. has cited, and withal understood them
as he by his parallel makes them to do, I would as heartily defend the
principles of both, as I now oppose them.

Every body knows, that understands these men, that this 5.
I. B. and his Brethren join hands both with Quakers and Papists, in not a few
Opinions and Practices as they are enemies to the Church of England, but does
he think himself and them one jot the more heretics upon that account?

Thus the Reader sees how idle and malicious (that is, like all the rest) this
his last charge also against Mr. F. is.

Before I come to the conclusion of all, I must advertise the Reader, that
whereas Mr. F. p. 300. has these words: Let us declare, that we are not barely
relyers on Christ's Righteousness by being imitators of it: I. B. has p. 111.
for barely put hearty, and so makes Mr. F. to give this most wicked advice: Let
us declare that we are not hearty relyers on Christ's righteousness. I examined
his erratae to find whether it were not a mistake of the Printer (though it is
not easily to be thought it should, there being no resemblance between the
words barely and hearty) but there is no such thing. And to confirm the
suspicion that 'twas done designedly, he makes this to bring up the rear in his
Catalogue of Mr. F's. 40. Doctrines destructive of Christianity, but here thus
words it. To be imitators of Christ's Righteousness, even of the Righteousness
we should rely on, is counted by Mr. F. more noble, than to rely thereon, or
trust thereto, page 300.

Now mark, if he intended honestly, he would have said thus, viz. Mr. F. says,
Let us declare that we are not barely relyers on Christ's Righteousness by
being imitators of it: For those and no other are Mr. F's. words he refers to;
but he knew that none but the most paltry hypocrites could take any offense at
that saying. Or, if he must be giving it in those other words of his own; he
might have added the word barely, and then the saying would have been without
all exception, viz. thus To be imitators of Christ's Righteousness is accounted
by Mr. F. more noble than barely to rely on it. I am confident the Reader will
say, that he never knew any one so impudent, as thus effectually to prove
himself in print, a man of a prostituted and debaucht conscience. And my
observing of this has occasioned my taking notice of the foregoing Doctrine,
viz. this, To do well is better than believing, p. 299. But Mr. F's. words are
only these, Let us exercise our selves -- in studying the Gospel to enable us
not to discourse, or only to believe, but also and above all things to do well.

Now that doctrine of his cannot be so much as gathered from these words, all
that follows from them is this, that any honest man will say as well as Mr. F.
namely, that to do well is better than believing without doing well; for
well-doing supposes believing. The Reader can no longer wonder at his flying
in Mr. F's. face so often with worse than brutish rage and fury, for asserting
that Christ's Righteousness cannot be imputed to a wicked man while he
continues so; his Conscience could not but tell him, that this touched his
Copyhold; and that if that doctrine be true, his case is sad. I will, now I am
gotten to the Catalogue again, take notice of one of the Doctrines more that he
charge on Mr. F. viz. the 37. namely: There is no duty more affectionately
commanded in the Gospel, than that of Almsgiving, p. 284. I don't remember he
says any thing of this in the Book, but only sets it down here, as that the
Reader would presently perceive is a doctrine destructive of Christianity.
Mark, I say, I don't remember he does, I do not positively affirm he does not.
But 1. Mr. F. does not say that no duty is more affectionately commanded, but
recommended; and who knows not that these two are not the same? 2. Now judge,
Reader, whether any duty can be more affectionately recommended when it is said,
that pure Religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit
the Fatherless and widows in their afflictions, etc. James 1. 27. Again S. John
asks how the love of God can dwell in that man that refuses to perform this
duty, 1 John 3. 17. And James chapter 2. 14, 15, etc. Shows that the Faith, that
is void of this particular good work, is a dead Faith; that is, no Faith at
all. And our Savior says, Matt. 5. 7. Blessed are the merciful, for they
shall obtain mercy: That is, those that are merciful from a good principle. And
lastly, our Savior instanceth in no other works but these, that men shall be
judged according to, at the great day, Mat. 25. 34. to the end. Can a duty be
more affectionately and effectually recommended than this of Almsgiving is in
these places? To which may be added many more. What can hard-hearted hypocrites
say to these places? The only fence they have against them is their paltry
explication of the doctrine of the imputation of Christ's Righteousness; by
which also they can make all the Precepts of the Gospel to signify nothing.

Again in the same page, viz. 111. he tells Mr. F. that he has applauded the
Godliness of heathen Philosophers, when as he has no where done so, and but
only cited several of their excellent Sayings, and that too for the service of
the Christian Religion. But this is no more than S. Paul himself does, Acts 17.
28. and Titus 1. 12. But if Mr. F. had said, that very many of the Heathens
were much better qualified for the Kingdom of Heaven than this I. B. has
demonstrated himself to be, I make no doubt but he had spoken truly, and not at
all transgressed the Law of Charity; for there were multitudes of Heathens,
that would have abominated such practices, as have with the most undeniable
evidence been proved against this pretended Christian.

I can give several more instances of this man's unchristian dealing with Mr.
F's. Sayings, and I doubt not but many have escaped my notice, for I have not
narrowly looked for any, but let the Reader, when he finds any thing cited by
him out of Mr. F's. Book, that looks strangely; consult the book itself, and I
dare promise him he shall find, that by either altering the Sentence, or
omitting part of it, or basely wresting the words to another sense than the
Context will bear, I. B. has abused Mr. F. in it.

And now who that has read this I. B's. book will not tell me, that it is much
more than high time I should have done with it; and that I have done abundantly
more than enough to convince the Reader of the apparent folly and wickedness of
it? Indeed I might well have concluded as soon as I had answered his miserably
simple objections against that doctrine, that Christ came to restore the
holiness we had lost; for he says, p. 42. If you can prove that any of these
promises were made to the Holiness we had lost, or that by these promises (viz.
those of the Holy Spirit, remission of Sin, and eternal happiness in the
enjoyment of God) we are to be possessed with that holiness again, I will even
now lay down the Bucklers. And again, when he had done his utmost to confute
that doctrine, he brags that he had rased the foundation of Mr. F' s. book; so
that the bare showing how woefully he has performed that one undertaking, would
have been a sufficient confirmation and defense of it. But (though I have not
found so much as one thing in it, that deserves to have a serious reply made to
it) I have so far denied my self, as not only to say enough to undermine, but
also to give an utter overthrow to the whole of it: And to show, that so far as
it opposes The Design of Christianity, it is composed of nothing else but the
most horrid absurdities, belyings and revilings of that Treatise, Nay, it fully
appears from what I have written, that never did any writing more flatly
(that is in more evident consequences) oppose the doctrine of justification by
faith in Christ Jesus, than this that he styles a defense of it: And that were
Mr. F. a Julian, Celsus or Porphyry, and an utter enemy to Christianity, as he
wickedly accuses him, he could never have wished to have a greater dishonor
done unto it, than this man in his book has done.

So that should I have considered every absurd and base passage from one end to
the other of it, and given it its due remark, I should have made my self a most
unmerciful drudg, and swelled these leaves to a large Volume; and been guilty
of the most profuse and unaccountable expense of my time and Paper: For I
sedately and consideratively profess, that I never read (that I remember) any
thing that was half so full thrapt and crowded with both non-sensical and
wicked stuff.

To conclude, if any Reader is now able to think, that there needs more than I
have written (or so much either) to wipe off the dirt that is flung upon the
Design of Christianity; I must be so free with him, as plainly to tell him,
that he is honored far beyond his merits in having one wise word bestowed upon
him.

A Catalogue of some few, of the abundance, of absurd and most wicked
Doctrinals and Assertions, that are contained in John Bunyans Pamphlet, against
the Design of Christianity.
1. HE calls this Paul's definition of a man: There is none righteous no not
one, there is none that understands, etc. page 4.

Mark, as he most absurdly calls this Paul's definition, so he calls it too his
definition of a man, not of a wicked man: And sutably to this fine doctrine,

2. He makes no real distinction between the humane Nature and Sin. p. 3.

As if Sin were not the corruption of our nature, but essential to it.

3. He Says, that of man's supreme faculty the Scripture teaches, that man in
his best estate is altogether vanity, Psalm. 39. 5. p. 5.

When as David speaks there only of man's bodily frailty. But I might have
spared this, as being but a peccadillo in this man.

4. He says, that the Command of the Law was not the great and principal
argument with Christ, no not in its first and highest principles to do or
continue to do it. p. 14.

Then the first reason of our Saviors obedience was not the Command of God.

5. He interprets those words of the Apostle of moral duties, viz. They speak
of the world, and the world hears them, 1 John 4. 5. p. 19. 6. He says, that
the new man is dead to the Law as to principles of nature, and interprets that
of the Apostle, you are become dead to the law, of the moral as well as
Ceremonial law; and further says, that a man must first be dead to your
principles both of nature and the law; If he will serve in a new spirit, if he
would bring forth fruit unto God. p. 22*

The only sense of which sayings (whatever he meant by them) is this, that a
man must cease to be a man and turn beast, nay and Devil too, before he can
bring forth fruit unto God.

7. He interprets those words in 1 Cor. 15. 46. and after that which is
Spiritual, of Spiritual holiness. p. 23

Whereas the words are only spoken of an immortal body.

8. He says, that the holiness of Adam in his best estate, even that which he
lost and we in him, it was no other than that which was natural, even the
sinless state of a natural man. p. 24

Thus he makes Adam a mere Brute as to holiness, but in this he contradicts
himself elsewhere, as has been shown.

9. He says, that even the inward holiness that is in Saints; it is none other
than that which dwells in the person of the Son of God in heaven. p. 27

Then there are no graces of the holy Spirit wrought in us, then our holiness
is perfect and infinite, and then, according to his rate of arguing with Mr. F.
p. 66. Christ's righteousness is by Faith in himself, and an imputative
righteousness.

10. He says, that Christ dyed to put us into a personal possession of pardon
before we know it. p. 33

He that has read his or this Pamphlet, knows his meaning in this saying, viz.
that Christ dyed to put men into a personal possession of pardon, while they
continue in their wickedness.

11. He Says, that for Christ to come to establish this righteousness (viz.
the righteousness which we have lost) is all one, as if he should be sent from
Heaven to overthrow and abrogate the Eternal purpose of Grace, which the father
had purposed should be manifested to the world by Christ. p. 37.

Let the Reader match me this Saying for the horrid wickedness of it, out of
any other books than this man's, if he can.

12. The wrath that the Law is said to work, Romans 4. 15. he interprets to be,
murmr and anger against the Lord. p. 39

Whenas the next words show that the meaning is, it renders men for their
disobedience to it liable to the judgment of God.

13. He says, that that Repentance which has its rise originally from the
dictates of our own nature, is called the sorrow of the world, and must be
again repented of. p. 40.

So that to be sorry for my sins, because my reason tells me that they are an
unworthy requital of Gods goodness to me, is the worldly Sorrow condemned by
the Apostle, and must be again repented of.

14. He says, that he that looks to or seeks after that holiness we have lost,
is as sure to be damned and go to hell, as he that transgresses the law,
because that is not the righteousness of God, the righteousness of Christ, the
righteousness of faith, nor that to which the promise is made. p. 42.

So that according to this devilish doctrine, to endeavor to bring our hearts
to the love of God above all, and to the hatred and abhorrence of all sin, is
as ready or sure a way to hell, as living in disobedience to all Gods
Commandments. And take notice that it is Proved, that that is the Righteousness
of God, of Christ, and of Faith.

15. He says, That it is a foolish, and an heathenish thing, nay worse, to
think that the son of God should only or especially fulfill, or perfect the law
and the prophets, by giving more and higher instances of moral duties than were
before expressly given* This would have been but the lading of men with heavy
burdens. p. 46.

Observe that those words [ and the Prophets] are of his own adding.

But whereas he says, that our Saviors giving more and higher instances of
moral duties, etc. would be but the lading of men with heavy burdens; he
should have said, it would have been the lading of Hypocrites, such as himself,
with heavy burdens, none but such can think them so.

16. Christ's Exposition (he says) of the Law, was more to show thee the
perfection of his own obedience, than to drive thee back to the holiness thou
had lost. p. 47

Can any Ranter talk at a madder rate? Read but Matthew. 5. and then believe this
wretched assertion if you can: could S. Paul be of his mind when he said, Romans
2. 13. not the hearers of the Law are just before God, but the Doers of the Law
shall be justified?

17. He says, that in Heaven there shall not be in us only a likeness to, but
the very nature of God. p. 63

For this he cites (as has been showed) that of the Apostle, Heirs of God.
That is Heirs of his nature or substance. Here is Blasphemy with a witness!

18. He says, the dictates of humane nature are never urged in the New
Testament, but in order to show men they have forgotten to act as men. p. 72.

That is, they are not urged that they may be obeyed, and yet almost all the
precepts of the Gospel are dictates of humane nature. He himself says
somewhere, that trust in God is one, and so are love to God and our neighbor,
humility, meekness, patience, purity, etc. all such, as we are told are our
duty by the dictates of nature. Never did wicked creature more industriously
set himself to make the Gospel precepts mere insignificant and vain things.

19. Whereas Christ is called a Prince and a Savior, he thus interprets it,
that is a Prince as a Savior, because the righteousness by which he saves,
bears rule in Heaven and Earth. p. 77

I want words to express my amazement at, and detestation of his, as senseless
as wicked perverting this place, to make it favor his Ranting doctrine. Thus
Reader thou see he is as good at abusing and wresting of Scripture as of Mr.
F's words; God grant that his timely repentance may prevent his doing it to his
own destruction.

20. He says, that the obedience or inclination to obedience that is, before
faith, or the understanding of the Gospel, is so far from being an excellent
preparative, or good qualification for faith, and the knowledge of the Gospel,
that in its own nature, which is more than in its consequences, it is a great
obstruction thereunto. p. 96

Still like himself, a blessed faith, that must be in the mean time that is
obstructed by a readiness to obey whatsoever God reveals; and would the Reader
see what his Faith is, let him go back to page 17. of his book; there (as has
been shown.)

21. He says, God has forgiven him that is enabled to believe, (and what is
it, with him to believe? he tells you in the next words) that is to trust to,
and venture the Eternal concerns of his Soul upon the righteousness, that is no
where to be found but in the person of the son of God. p. 17

This is all, and as much as any one can expect from him.

22. He says, that for a man to confine himself only to the life of the Lord
Jesus for an example, or to think it enough to make him in his life a pattern
for us to follow, leaves us through our shortness in the end, with the Devil
and his Angels, for want of faith in the doctrine of Remission of Sins. p. 108
1. How sottish is this Ranter? For faith in Christ and his whole Gospel is
enjoined as a means to bring us to the blessed state of likeness to him, as is
fully proved in the Design of Christianity; and we may not once suppose, that
we can obtain this likeness without that Faith.

2. But how desperately wicked is it likewise? as if a man may be damned that
is exactly like Christ, and has all that done in him, for the sake of which,
Faith in Christ is required: That is, is enabled from holy principles to
perform all holy obedience. But this is another discovery of his wickedness in
contemning moral Righteousness, and advancing only imputative; and I never knew
a brutish creature do it like him. Nay, he cannot forbear somewhere in his book
to speak contemptuously of our Saviors life, in asserting that Mr. F. has
given a mere heathenish account of it, where he (as is to be seen in the
beginning of this Pamphlet) gives the four Evangelists account of it. I do
assure the Reader, that this I have read in his Book, but I do not now remember
the page.

Observe, that I do not call these, two and twenty doctrines, nor yet distinct
assertions, for I have not (nor will I) so much trouble my self about them, as
to consider to how many or few heads they may be reduced; the mere transcribing
them must needs be trouble and discomposure enough to any man, that has the
least affection for the Gospel of Christ and true goodness. I could present not
a few more, but never was horse more tired at a mill than I am at this work:
and I assure the Reader, as I shall answer it at the great day, that I have
been most severely just to him in this Catalogue, as he may quickly see, so far
have I been from dealing with his Sayings, as it is shown he has dealt with Mr.
Fowlers.

And now I conjure the followers of him and his Brethren, as they have any the
least regard for their Souls, that for the future they abandon them, as those
that feed their hearers with the deadliest poison instead of the sincere milk
of the word, and the most wholesome food of the Gospel of Christ: I say I
conjure them to avoid such, as they will Answer it at the dreadful day of our
Saviors appearing with ten thousand of his Saints to execute judgment upon
all, and to convince all that are ungodly of all their ungodly deeds which they
have ungodlily committed, and of all the hard speeches which ungodly sinners
have spoken against him, against the blessed doctrines of his Glorious Gospel,
and his faithful ministers. And now I will present you with another Catalogue
of the hard speeches of this man, of whom whether he be one of St. Iudes
ungodly Sinners or no, the Reader is by this time well able to judge, or at
least will be anon.

A Catalogue of some of John Bunyan's horrible Revilings, and most Abominable
Scurrilities.
1. IN the Title page he tells us, that the design of Mr. F's. Book is proved
to be nothing more than to trample under foot the blood of the Son of God, and
the Idolizing of man's own Righteousness: And that he falls in with Quakers and
Romanists against the Articles of the Church of England. 2. He tells Mr. F.
that he has vilely exposed the rottenness of his heart in Principles
Diametrically opposite to the simplicity of the Gospel; and calls the Doctrine
of his Book, open Blasphemy. Page 1. 3. With the graces of the Spirit of God
you have nothing to do. p. 3. 4. Here are pure dictates of a brutish beastly
man, that neither knows himself, nor one tittle of the word of God. p. 5. 5.
Whatsoever is brought (in your book,) and urged for the proof of this your
description of holiness, it is but the abuse of Christ, etc. p. 17. 6. Why
should this Thief, etc. p. 29. 7. How far off this man's Doctrine is, of Sinning
against the Holy Ghost, let him that is wise consider. ibid. 8. -- Spit your
intended venom at Christ. p. 31. 9. In all you have yet asserted, you have
showed no other wisdom than of a Heathen, or of one that is short even of a
novice of the Gospel. p. 35. 10. -- Sundry and damnable errors that like Venom
drop from your pen. ibid. 11. You have in this your discourse, put an
unsufferable affront upon the Son of God, in making all his life and
conversation to center and terminate in the holiness we had lost. p. 43. 12.
About all these things you are heathenishly dark; there has not in these 150.
pages one Gospel Truth been Christianly handled by you. 13. What man that ever
had read, or assented to the Gospel, but would have spoken more honorably of
Christ than you have done? ibid. 14. All this Villainy against (I suppose it is)
the Son of God; the rest is torn out. p. 77. 15. This is no other than
barbarous Quakerism. ibid. 16. All others like your self being fearful and
unbelieving, despise it, and wonder and perish. Rev. 20. 8. Acts 13. 40, 41. p.
80. 17. Having broken the Head of your Leviathan. p. 85. 18. Your great
Question by which you would have all men make judgment of their Saveable or
damnable estate, p. 236. is, according to your description of things, most
Devilish and destructive. p. 88.

Reader, this is Mr. Fowlers great Question he refers to: Am I sincerely
willing to obey my Creator and Redeemer in all things? Do I entertain no lust
in my breast? Do I heartily endeavor to have a right understanding of the holy
Scriptures, and chiefly of the Gospel, in order to the bettering of my soul by
them, and the direction of my life and actions according to them?

19. He calls the Ministers of the Church of England, The whole Gang of our
Rabling Counterfeit Clergy, who generally like the Ape, ly blowing up the glory
and applause of our Trumpery; and like the Tail, with foolish and sophistical
arguings cover the filthy parts thereof. See also p. 73. p. 90.

I now appeal to Authority, whether this man ought to enjoy any interest in his
Majesty's Toleration, who is so far from being satisfied with his own liberty,
that he falls thus foully upon not only one Minister of the Church of England,
and a Book licensed by Authority, but also upon all the Ministers of the Church
together, and likewise the Discipline and Rites established? And whether the
letting such Firebrarnds, and most impudent malicious Schismatics go
unpunish't, does not tend to the subversion of all Government. I say, let our
Superiors judge of this.

20. But to proceed, he says thus of the Design of Christianity; From the
beginning to the end, from the top to the bottom it is a cursed blasphemous
book; a book that more vilifies Jesus Christ, than many of the Quakers
themselves, p. 92. 21. Had you joined here with such as vilify and trample
upon the blood of the Lord Jesus, preferring the Snivel of their own Brains
before him, you had herein but drawn your own picture, and given your Reader an
Emblem of your self. p. 93. 22. I tell you again, that your self is one of
them, that have closely, privily and Devilishly, by your book, turned the Grace
of our God into a lascivious Doctrine, bespattering it with giving liberty to
looseness, and the hardening of the ungodly in wickedness; wherein if you
persist, I shall not fail (may I live and know it and be helped of God (he
should have said of the Devil) to do it) to discover yet farther the rottenness
of your Doctrine, with the accursed tendencies thereof. p. 90.

Here Is a Rabshakeh! But with what brow can this wicked man thus accuse Mr.
F's. book, when his own Conscience must needs tell him, that the only thing
that makes him thus Spit his venom at it, is, that it is design is to take away
all shadow of pretense for his filthy libertinism and mad licentious
principles? And as to his Threat, I will only say; Do thy worst thou fierce and
fiery Bedlam, and persist in treasuring up to thy self wrath against the day of
wrath, and the revelation of the Righteous judgment of God. But know that all
thy wicked attempts against that Book (that all good men have a most hearty and
affectionate kindness for,) or against the Author of it; and such like books
and men can be no more regarded by people of but common sense and honesty, than
are the Ravings of a perfect mad man.

But I have not yet done with his Raylings, though I shall present the Reader
but with a few in comparison of those I can.

23. He calls Mr. F's. doctrines his filthy errors, compiled and foisted into
the world, by his devilish design to promote Paganism against Christianity. p.
265, 266. p. 96. 24. No man (proceeds he) is more brutish or Heathenish, nor so
void of satisfaction about it, (that is the truth of the Gospel) nor more
involved in error concerning it, than your self; being 1. Grossly ignorant, 2.
Too highly opinionate, 3. Proud in affection, 4. Licourish, 5. A self-lover, 6.
And for your blasphemy under the just judgment of God. p. 102. 25. To Mr.
Fowlers calling these the Divine perfections, viz. Justice and Righteousness,
universal Charity, Goodness, Mercy, Patience, and all kinds of Purity; He
says, To call these the divine perfections, when they are only your own humane
virtues, bespeaks you Fond, impious, and Idolatrous, etc. p. 104. 26. He says,
The way of Salvation, or the Design of Christianity as prescribed by you, is
none other than the errors of your own Brain, the way of death, the sum and
heart of Papistical Quakerism, and is quite denied by the Lord Jesus, and by
his Blessed Testament. p. 109.

Once more he says,

27. I admonish my Reader to tremble at the blasphemy of your book; and account
the whole design therein to be none other, but that of an enemy to the Son of
God, and salvation of the world. p. 110.
And I admonish my Reader to tremble at that Religion, that incourageth such a
most Hellish and Devilish Spirit; that gives men's Pens and Tongues leave to be
such unruly evils, and even helps to fill them with the most deadly poison.
That puts its professors upon thus persecuting Christ's Ministers for
RIGHTEOUSNESS sake, for the sake of inward and real Righteousness, without which
nothing can commend a Religion; let wretched Hypocrites think never so
despicably and basely of it, and inveigh never so villainously against those
that promote it.

Thus thou have seen, Reader, how this Raging wave (like his fellows in S.
Jude) fometh out his own shame. And let him take for an answer to all, the same
that was given to his Great Master (that has assisted him in this Employment)
by Michael the Archangel, Jude 9.

But one word more to this sad object of pity, and then I shall have done with
him: If your Pride and Stomach will not suffer you to make now an
acknowledgement of your most wicked behavior toward Mr. F. and his Treatise,
as open and public, as you have made your Sin; do not so cheat your own Soul,
as to hope for forgiveness upon any account whatsoever at the hands of God:
which God for Christ's sake, by first qualifying you for it, bestow upon you.

Amen.
An Abstract of several of the Excellent Propositions contained in that Tract
of M. Baxter's, wherein he has defended Mr. Fowlers Design of Christianity.
His 27th. Proposition.
THe Sum of Holiness and Morality, which is all one, is the Love of God as God,
(including absolute Resignation and subjection) and the love of man and all
things for God appearing in them, and served by them.

His 50.
Nothing is more sure in Christianity, than that Christ came into the world to
seek and to save that which was lost; and to bring home straying Prodigals to
God, and to destroy the works of the flesh and Devil; and to bring man back to
the love and obedience of his Maker, and to cure him of his worldly love. And
so that Holiness or the love of God, is the end of our Redemption, and our
Faith.

Part of his 51, 52, 53.
We are pardoned what is past, that love may make us sin so no more; and
justification is an antecedent means to our fuller Holiness and obedience to
God, (which I have largely opened in my Confession of Faith.)

It is certain that justification and Sanctification go on hand in hand
together, and it is a notorious error of such as say, that justification is
perfect as soon as it begins.

And it is certain that Sanctification, as it is the work of God, is one part
of the executive pardon of our sins; because it is the taking off of a very
great penalty, which is the privation of the Spirit of Grace.

His 54.
Nothing is more injurious to Christ, than to feign that he is a Patron of Sin,
or came to excuse men by free justification from obedience to their Creators
law of Nature, or to make sin less odious to Mankind; seeing he dyed to redeem
us from all iniquity, and to purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of
good works.

His 55.
And it is an intolerable Blasphemy against God, to imagine that Christ came to
make the Divine Nature more friendly or reconcilable to sin, or to love
complacentially an ungodly person, as if he were Godly, as being such by the
imputation of Christ's Righteousness to him, and to repute any man to be what
he is not; to take a wicked man for a Saint, because that Christ was holy for
him: whatever malicious Papists say, the Protestants abhor such Doctrine. (
Therefore John Bunyan is no Protestant.)

His 56.
And as far are we from believing that Christ was a sinner, or that God ever
supposed him to be a Sinner, or hated or punished him as a Sinner; or that ever
our sin did really become his sin, or that God reputed it so to have been. For
no false judgment can belong to God.

Part of his 57, and 58.
But we believe that Christ dyed for our sins, as a Sacrifice, Ransom,
Propitiation, Atonement, etc.

And though we believe not, that God does judge us to have done all the
Righteousness that Christ did, nor to have possessed the same individual
Righteousness that Christ had, (for God never erreth) nor accounts us as
Righteous as Christ himself; nor yet uses us in all respects as he would have
done, if we had been as Righteous as Christ himself; nor do we think it a thing
possible, that the same individual Righteousness that was in Christ (being an
accident) can be in itself and really given to us, and made ours: yet do we
believe that his habitual perfection, with his active Righteousness and his
Sacrifice or Sufferings, all set together, and advanced in value by their
conjunction with his Divine Righteousness, were the true, meritorious,
procuring cause of our Pardon, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, and
Salvation, etc. And thus Christ's Righteousness is imputed and given to us; not
immediately in it self, but in the effects and fruits. As a Ransom is said to
be given to a Captive, because it is given for him, though strictly the Ransom
is given to another, and only the fruits of it to him.

His 59.
Those Ignorant, Self-conceited, Contentious Teachers, that seek the reputation
of Orthodox zeal in the things which they never understood, and instead of
clear apprehending sound Scripture-doctrine, and plainly expounding it to the
Church, do take on trust and for company, false or insignificant confounding
notions, and proudly make them the instruments of their furious Censures and
revilings, and of dividing the Church by raising slanders against those that
presume to be wiser than they; and so by backbiting tell their hearers, how
erroneous and dangerous this and that man's doctrine is, because they never had
wisdom, study, and patience to understand it; such I say are the men that in
all ages have been the Firebrarnds in the Church, and zealously promoted
Christ's Kingdom by dividing it, and will hardly ever have peace here
themselves, nor endure their Brethrens or the Churches Peace.

His 65.
Those Churches especially that lament the laps of Discipline, and the
confounding of the holy and profane; and those that are constituted by
unwarrantable Scrutinies after the holiness of Members, beyond the test that
was appointed by Christ, should not dishonor themselves, nor bring their
doctrine or persons into suspicion by being the hasty Censurers and condemners
of such writings, as drive harder for the promoting of holiness than themselves.

His 67.
He knows not the hurtful miscarriages of our times, who knows not what the
mistaken notions about free grace have done against free grace it self; and how
the Gospel has been supplanted, by an erroneous crying up the Gospel, and
crying down the Law; and how justification has been abused by men's seeming to
extol it, and sanctification injured by such pretexts. And he that with one eye
looks on that disease and its effects, and with the other looks on the Book you
tell me of (viz. The Design of Christianity) and such like, will quickly see
what Sore this Plaster was provided for, and how much excellent matter there
is in it, which the aforesaid Persons and diseases need.

Part of his 69.
And as to Mr. Fowlers Consectaries (or Inferences) chapter 20. 22, 23. what would
you wish more accommodate to an honest concord, (which is our strength and
beauty) and to the healing of deforming and destroying abuses, than the
practicing the motion, that our union be placed in things necessary to
holiness, etc.

Whose judgment Reader, do thou think is to be preferred concerning these
Inferences, whether this worthy able Divine, or poor J. B' s. (who makes a very
Turk of Mr. Fowler upon the account of them?)

Part of his last Proposition.
To conclude, undoubtedly Holiness is the life and beauty of the Soul; The
Spirit of Holiness is Christ's Agent to do his work in us, and our Pledge and
earnest and first Fruit of Heaven: It is Christ's work, and subordinately ours,
to cleanse us from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, etc. Christ, the Spirit,
the Word, the Ministry, mercies, afflictions, and all things are to bring home
our hearts to God, and to work together for our good, by making us partakers of
his Holiness. Our Holiness is our Love of God who is most holy: And our Love of
God, and reception of his Love, is our Heaven and everlasting Happiness.

Thus thou see, Reader, that if Mr. Fowler be so Devilish a wretch as I. B.
makes him, this Learned Divine may shake hands with him.

Matt. 23. 16, 24, 26, 27, 28. Woe unto you ye blind guides, which strain at a
gnat and swallow a Camel.

Thou blind Pharisee, cleanse first that which is within the Cup and Platter,
that the outside of them may be clean also.

Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, etc. Ye outwardly appear
righteous unto men, but within ye are full of Hypocrisy and Iniquity.

Matt. 15. 14. And if the blind lead the blind, both shall fall into the diteh.

2 Timothy 3. 8. 9. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these also
resist the truth: Men of corrupt minds, reprobate concerning the Faith. But
they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all men,
as theirs also was. Read also the foregoing verses.

THE END.

