A DISCOURSE Of the Great Disingenuity and Unreasonableness Of Repining at
Afflicting Providence: AND Of the Influence which they ought to have upon us,
on Job 2. 10. Published upon Occasion of the DEATH OF Our Gracious Sovereign,
Queen Mary Of Most Blessed Memory. With a PREFACE containing some Observations,
touching Her Excellent Endowments, and Exemplary Life.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1695.

THE PREFACE Relating to the QUEEN.
Reader
THis Plain Discourse being designed at first, to go no farther than the
Pulpit, I was by the late most Afflicting Providence induced (as the Title Page
tells you) to send it to the Press: Considering that a Discourse of this Nature
(though it can be at no time Unseasonable) can never be mo^e seasonably Published
than at this Iuncture; when there is as General a Lamentation for the Death of
our most Gracious Queen, as we have ever known for any Public Calamity. And my
design herein being to promote, what in me lies, a due Acknowledgment of the
Hand of God in all Afflictions, and to instruct those who need such Helps, how
they are obliged to behave themselves under them, and how they ought to improve
them; and to lay before them the most Persuasive Motives to such a Behavior
and Improvement; I humbly hope it may be in some measure serviceable to my
Countrymen in affecting them with such a Sense of this Heavy Storke, as may
have that happy Influence upon them, which I have here showed, God, in His
infinite Goodness, does principally aim at, in all the Evils that befall us.

And because the quicker sense we have of this Loss, there may be the more hope
of our Compliance with Gods Design therein; and it being necessary to the
retaining and more quickening our sense thereof, to keep fresh in our Minds the
Greatness of it, I can not but take this Occasion to Represent, with an Equal
mixture of Admiration and Grief, the Excellency of the Person, and therefore
the Greatness of the Blessing, which we have lost.

But since it would be too great a Presumption (in me Especially) to Pretend to
give so full a Description of Her Majesty's Virtues, and Her Natural and
Acquired Accomplishments, as may deserve the Name of Her Character, I intend
not much more, than to instance in those which lay most open to Observation:
But those are enough to speak Her, The Glory of Her Sex.

We had very Admirable Accounts of Her, from Her Court at the Hague, during Her
Abode there, from most Unquestionable Testimonies, which made us Envy our
Neighbors Happiness in Such a Princess; who Knew their Happiness, (as 'twas
impossible they should not) and had an Extraordinary Value and Veneration for
Her. And since Her Return to Her Native Country, and Her Advancement to the
Throne here, we never knew a more Eminent Exception than She was to that Common
Observation Minnit Praesentia Famam. The Fame that Persons had when Absent,
suffers by their Presence.

The Queen had, to begin with Her intellectual Endowments, an exceeding quick
Apprehension, and as Clear and discerning a Judgment. The late Arch Bishop of
Canterbury has more than once Expressed to me great Admiration, at the Proofs
He knew Her give of these Accomplishments in the weighty Affairs of State, in
the Kings Absences, when the Executive part of the Government was in Her Hands.
And, by the way, That Great and Excellent Man, whose Death is also much
Bewailed, could not have Chosen a Time for His leaving the World, more happy
for Himself, than that which Providence Chose for Him; since He escaped a very
Terrible Shock by being taken away from the inexpressible Loss we are now
Lamenting, which was then at the door.

The Queen has left also a Great Name behind Her, for Her Wisdom and Prudence
in the Management of whatsoever Business She was pleased to be concerned in.
And in difficult Cases no Person certainly, might more safely than She be
trusted, with that Advice of the Son of Sirach, Let the Counsel of thine own
Heart stand. Several great Passages which I have had from the best hands do
make me say this.

And Her Person was not more Amiable than was Her Temper. It was so far from
having the least Tincture of Pride, or Peevishness, or any thing distastful or
disobliging, that the Character of Deliciae Humani Generis, might with as
little suspicion of Flattery be bestowed on this Queen, as on that (...) Roman
Emperor, whose it (...). Nay I am persuaded, that nev^^ was so Great a Person
so Great an Example of Condescending Courtesy, Kindness and Sweetness, as She
was toward all about Her, or that made Addresses to Her; not Excepting the
Meanest of Her poor Supplicants, who were very Numerous. As more of true
Majesty was never seen in a Sovereign, than in Her, So never appeared less of
Loftiness, or of Contemptuous Behavior in a Subject. In the several Yearly
Courses of my Waiting upon Her as Chaplain, I can truly say, I could never
observe Her, to the best of my remembrance, either by any thing she said or by
Her manner of speaking or by so much as a Look, to be Angry or out of Humor.

She did not seem to have any thing of Melancholy in Her Natural Complexion,
and yet, which is very Extraordinary, She was at a great distance from the
other Extreme. She was Easy, Free and Cheerful, but without the least
appearance of Levity. She would neither ^e over whelmed with Grief, nor
transported with Joy, and yet was far from a Stoic; Her Temper was
sufficiently impressible. She has been seen to Shed Tears, with great
Tenderness, for the Death of a Person She had an Esteem for, and would Express
a due Sense at the hearing of Unwelcome Tidings; And She had a great deal of
Sympathy, and Compassion in Her Nature, as will be shown: Yet She still bore
Afflictions with great Patience; they could not Extort from Her an Unseemly
Word, nor make Her Uneasy to any Body but Her self.

Her parting with His Majesty once a Year was always Grievous to Her, and a
Cloud afterward appeared upon Her Countenance for a time, but it was even
Astonishing to observe, not only how soon she Overcame Her Sorrow, and Cleared
up again, but also with what Evenness and Composedness of Mind, she could bear
his Long Absences, and the Thoughts of the infinite Dangers to which He Exposed
his Royal Person. I say this was very wonderful, Considering that She was a
Pattern for the Best of Wives; She always Expressed the Tenderest Affection to,
and the Highest Value for, the King Her Husband. And therefore it was
impossible for Her, notwithstanding the Happiness of Her Temper, so to demean
Her self under such a Trial, had She not a great Faith in the Divine
Protection, being assured of His being Engaged in the Best of Causes.

Such a Pattern was the Queen of Sobriety and freeness from Vanity, that I am
sorry so few of our Ladies could ever persuade themselves to have the Ambition
herein to resemble Her: And that (contrary to the Custom, which till this Reign
has here no less Prevailed, than in other Countries) the Example of a Queen
should be of little force; nay of So little, as not to be able to make such
Childish Vanities as Spot^ed Faces, out of fashion.

And though Queens of all Ladies may be (I hope) Excused, if they should exceed
in their Ward^robe* our Queen was so far from being liable to Censure upon that
account, that a Gentleman of great Worth, whose Office would not let him be
Ignorant of Her Expenses, did sometime since Profess, that he was very
unwilling to say how little she laid out upon Apparel.

And as to the Sobriety which relates to the Palate, She was so far from being
fond of great Dainties, that I heard Her once say, that She could live in a
Dairy.

What an enemy She was to Idleness, even in Ladies, Those who had the Honor to
serve Her, are living instances. It is well known how great a part of the day
they were employed at their Needles, and several Ingenuities; the Queen
Herself, when more Important Business would give Her leave, Working with them.
And, that their Minds might be well Employed at the same time, it was Her
Custom to Order one to read to them, while they were at work; either Divinity,
or some Profitable History.

And what a value She set on Time, appeared by Her leaving Her Pillow by Six in
the Morning, and Her late Returns to it: And by the Hours which She daily spent
in Her Closet. And 'twas Admirable to see how She would Contrive, to be as
little as needs must out of Business. She did not spare so much as Her Dressing
time from it: Which was after She had been first in Her Closet about half an
hour, and then, after a Dish of Tea or Chocolat, about two hours more. She
appointed Her Levy (that is Her Dressing time) for the Receiving of Petitions,
and doing what other Business could then conveniently be dispatched. And even
now also would She have Reading when there was a vacancy for it. And this was
the time which the Ladies knew to be most acceptable for the receiving of
Visits, because then they would least hinder Business. As for those Ladies who
came at Her Working time, they knew they should not be welcome, except they
work't too.

Between the Chappel-Prayers and Dinner, She would commonly walk into the
Gardens, and there see how the Gardners had observed Her Orders, and farther
appoint them what to do.

But we must return to Her Closet, where, how She employed Herself, we may more
than guess, by the Choice Collection of Books She furnished it with; as well of
Divinity, as History, and other Learned and Ingenious Treatises; and by the
great improvement of Her Mind She gained by them: Which those Worthy Men who
were Her Chaplains in Holland, and the Learned Clerk of Her Closet here (who
also for several years waited on Her there) can abundantly Witness. Those
Histories She spent most time in, were such as by which She might be best
Accomplished, for the most Difficult and Weighty Employment of a Sovereign
Queen. And as to Divinity, She had been such a Student therein, as well to
know, upon what Grounds and Reasons, She ought undoubtedly to Believe the
Gospel of our Savior, and the Evidence we have for the Truth thereof: And not
only to have the truest understanding thereof, whereby She could well
distinguish between the true Teachers and the Corrupters of the Christian
Doctrine, but to be able to defend it, and Especially against those of the
Roman Communion; Her greatest danger, as I need not say, having been from that
Quarter.

And it is highly worth our Notice, what a not able Insight She had into the
Errors of that Church, and how understandingly She would Argue against some of
those Errors, when very Young, and what a warm Zeal She would even then
express against Popery; for which she got the Name of Queen Bess, from her
Uncle King Charles.

And a Second Q. Elizabeth She proved to be, both in regard of Her immovable
Constancy in adhering to the Protestant Religion, against vigorous Assaults,
which have not hitherto been made Public; and of her great Affection to the
Church of England, for whose true and just interest She was much concerned. But
yet Her Love to this Church did not leven Her Mind, with any sour Prejudices
against Other Protestant Churches, as That of Holland found by Experience; nor
lessened Her Charity toward Sober Dissenters among Our selves.

I am as sensible as my Reader, that I have now a little deviated from the
Rules of Method; but it is more pardonable to give You such Remarks as These in
a less proper place, than to forget them, when I have a fi^^er for them.

And now shall I need to add, that our Incomparable QUEEN was also a Person of
most sincere and Unaffected Devotion and Piety? whether there be need of it or
no, I cannot decline this Subject.

She was, if Comparisons may be made, Most Exemplary in Her Piety.

It is very well Known, in the First place, how strictly Conscientious She was
in the Observation of the Lord's Day; and that as well Privately, as in the
Public Assemblies.

As She enjoined Preaching in the Chapple-Royal after the Evening Prayers
(though there were always Prayers, and a Sermon twice every Sunday Morning) and
likewise two Sermons, with the Prayers, on all the Monthly Fasts, so was She
constantly a most Serious and Devout Attender on them both parts of those days.
As She was also on the Lords Supper, the First Sunday of every Month. And She
was observed to spend more Time than ordinary in Her Closet, not only the Day,
but also the Week before every Communion.

Nor could any Business detein Her from Her Private Chapel, neither Morning
nor Evenings, throughout the Week. In all the Times of my Waiting, I never knew
Her once absent. And whenever She had Occasion to go Abroad a Mornings, She
gave Order for the Prayers before She went; or if She intended to return to
Dinner, She would have them, though late, before She sat down at Table.

And whereas it was the Practice in former Reigns, to have only the Second
Lesson for the Morning and Evening Service read in the Private Chapel, She
Commanded to have both for the future. And it so fell out, that I had the
Honor of first receiving this Her Pious Command.

But Her Piety was far from being confined to Her Chapels and Closet; She was
every where a like Pious in various Instances. A Reverence of the Deity showed
it self in every thing She said or did.

Who ever heard Her take the Name of God or of our Savior into Her Mouth, in
too light or vain a manner? Though this Practice is grown so common, as to be
little scrupled by very many, whom we may not censure as not truly Religious.
Such is the Force of a General Custom.

I do not, you see, speak of Profaining Gods Name by vain Swearing, for it
would be much too little a thing to say of such a Saint, that She abhorred
this, but of all irreverend Use thereof; but of this, I say, our Blessed Queen
did make great Conscience.

And so did She no less, of Censuring and speaking ill of Others, and of all
other Liberties, which even great Professors of Religion do too commonly give
themselves in Talking. And therefore She was one of St. James his Perfect
Women; for says he, If any offend not in Tongue, the same is a Perfect Man.

And it is no Wonder, if She, who could so perfectly govern Her Speech, should
be as void of Offense in all Her Actions. And it is certain, that so She was.

So Extraordinary Strict was Her Majesty's Life, even from Her Youth, that for
the Seventeen Years of Her Married State, The King, as he has Professed, Could
never see any thing in Her, which He could call a Fault. And no Man can keep a
Stricter Guard upon his words* than his Majesty is always observed to do.

And as to the Positive instances of the Queens Piety, or Fear of God, they
were such as showed She made no less Conscience of Sins of Omission, than of
Commission.

I might speak of the Pious Care She took of Her immediate Attendants; and how
concerned She was, to have them secured from Temptations, when they had
occasion to go abroad. But I cannot omit One Passage, which is an Equal
Instance both of Her Piety and Humility. She having condescended to be
God-Mother to a Daughter of one of Her Servants, and calling to mind those
Words at the end of the Office of Baptism; You are to take Care, that this
Child be brought to the Bishop to be Confirmed by him, etc. She not only took
this Care of Her God-Daughter, but in Order to Her due Preparation for
Confirmation, would instruct her Herself, and hear her say her Catechism. She
did not think it enough, to Command one of Her Servants, or the Clerk of Her
Closet, to do this Office.

And how great a concern She had for the Reforming of the Manners of Her
Subjects, in this very Loose Age, appeared, by Her most Pious Letter to the
Justices of Middlesex: Wherein She vigorously Excited them to do their Duty,
according to their Oaths, in Executing the Laws against Swearers and Cursers,
and Profaners of the Lords day, and all Debauched Persons.

And Her Majesty's Charity ought to be taken notice of next after Her Piety; in
which most Christian Grace, it is impossible So Excellent a Person in all other
Respects, should be defective.

The Queen could well distinguish, between the Religion of the Means and of the
End. And no one can be more sensible, than She was, how little Praying,
Hearing, Reading and the Sacraments do signify, to those who place the Whole of
Religion in such Things, as Necessary as they are. She knew that the Design of
these Great Duties, is the making us more and more to Partake of a Divine
God-like Nature; the Subduing of all Corrupt Affections and inordinate
Appetites, and the making us forward to all Good works.

And it is Evident, that these were the Ends She propounded to Herself, in all
Acts of Devotion; as by Her great Proficiency in Other Virtues, so particularly
by Her Excelling in Works of Mercy and Charity.

She filled Her Almoners with Business of this kind, more perhaps than any King
or Queen Ever did in this Kingdom, within such a space of Time. And tha^ not
only in Distributions at Home, but also in Foreign Parts, among Poor Sufferers
for the Sake of Christ.

And I have good reason to believe from what I Know, that Her Own Hands were
likewise large Dispensers of very Private Charities.

And it is strange, that Her Memory should serve Her to be so Punctual as She
was, in the Payment of Her Private Pensions, at the Times She had set for it,
without being put in mind of those Times when they came. And Her Memory was no
less Faithful in reference to the Performance of Her Gracious Promises; as I
have known by Experience.

These things, I say, are very Strange, Considering how Her Mind was always
Loaded with Business; and with Business of the greatest Weight and Importance,
especially when the King was Abroad: Which I think has mostly been for the
greater Part of Every Year. But it seems She thought nothing could be of
greater Importance, than Works of Charity.

In the Last Place, I cannot forbear taking notice of Another Rare Endowment
with which Her Majesty was Adorned, and which few would expect to find in the
Character of a Woman, though a Queen, viz. Courage and Fortitude. Herein was She
also a Second Queen Elizabeth.

This was Eminently demonstrated by Her Manly (Her more than Manly) Behavior,
when the French Bravadoed it upon our Coast: And great Danger apprehended from
our Busy Enemies at Home, and of Treachery in our Navy; and The King then in
very difficult Circumstances in Ireland.

So that the Straight, the Queen was now in, seemed much like that of David at
Ziklag; and much Greater than that of Queen Elizabeth at Tilbury. But now did
She demean Herself, not only as That Queen, but as David did at that Time, She
Encouraged Herself in the Lord Her God. And Those who should have Animated Her,
had She need of being Animated by them, were chiefly supported by the
Observations they made of the Admirable presence of Mind, She all along showed.
Minding the Business which the Exegency of Affairs called for, and Expressing
no dissidence of Success.

And this, no doubt, was one of those Times, to which a Noble Earl referred, in
this Saying which I heard from him, viz. We have owed our Safety more than
Once, to the Queens Care and Vigilance. And he was at such a Post, in all the
most difficult part of Their Majesty's Reign, as to be best Able of any
Minister of State, to say this of his own Knowledge.

I cannot here Omit the mentioning, (though it would have better come in before)
what Another Great Person, very Eminent for Piety as well as Parts and
Learning, with whom the Queen frequently Conversed, did say to me of Her, about
Four Years since, viz. She is so Good, that when I Compare my self with Her, I
am Ashamed to find, how much I fall short of Her.

She was so great an Example of Piety and every Virtue, that Considering them
altogether, it can be no Hyperbole to say, Certainly a Greater never Graced a
Throne. She had the Virtues of the Best Princes, without the least Mixture of
those Failings, with which the Names of most of them are Stained in History.

As to that One (that only) Thing, which our Malcontents would fix as a foul
Blot upon Her Majesty's Memory; would they once be Persuaded to lay aside their
Prejudices, and the groundless Notions they have Entertained, it is impossible
they should not at length see, with the Generality of their Protestant
Brethren, not only at Home, but throughout Christendom, that That which they
would make such ^n Heinous Crime in the King and Queen, is rather an Instance
of Heroic Virtue.

As to the King, What greater Demonstrations can they desire, than He has
given them, of his not having been Acted in what so much Offends them, by
Aspiring Ambition? For had He been induced by so very Bad a Principle, to take
upon Him the Government of these Kingdoms, Are they able to imagine He would
have Harassed Himself, and run so many Tremendous Hazards, as He has done ever
since, both by Land and Sea? Can they think it Possible for Him to choose such a
Life, had He Accepted of Three Crowns for the Pleasure of Wearing them?

Had this been his Ultimate Design, His Haughty Neighbor had too many Irons in
the Fire, to have given Him the least Disturbance in the Enjoyment of His
Acquisitions: And would have Thanked Him to let Him have owned Him for His
Brother; and to have consented to such a League with Him, as that he made with
the Late Usurper: And would no more have been King James's Friend, than he was
King Charles's, when He fled to him for Succor; but would have served the One
as he did the Other.

Those know Nothing, of that Prince who has made himself so well known to All
Europe, that can make the least doubt of this.

One would think therefore, that Malice it self should not need to be
satisfied, That King William Accepted not of these Crowns, otherwise than as a
Means to the Noblest of Ends, viz. The Rescuing of both These and the
Neighboring Nations, from Popery, Oppression and Slavery.

And would the Men I am dealing with, have had the Queen obstruct This Glorious
Work, by Refusing to sit with her Royal Husband upon the English Throne, merely
because That Prince was her Father who left it Empty? When if He could have
been satisfied, not to Subject Himself to the Tripple Crown, and not to be
Governed by the Counsels of Jesuits, and by the Dictates of the Greatest Enemy
we are capable of having; and to let his People enjoy their Religion, and Laws;
He might have Reigned as happily, notwithstanding his being a Son of the Church
of Rome, as ever did Any of His Royal Protestant Predecessors.

Should the Queen have been so Wilful, as to prefer the False Interest of a
Father, to both the Temporal and Spiritual Interest of many Whole Nations* to
the Interest of so many Millions of Bodies and Souls too) She would have left a
Blot indeed upon Her now Spotless and most Precious Memory.

In what I have here said of Her Majesty, Which is Extremely little,
Considering what She deserved, I sincerely Profess that I have no other Aim,
but to make us the more Affected with that Sad Providence, which has deprived
Us of Her; in Order to our making that good improvement thereof which God
Expects.

Had the Queens High Deserts been Published in Her Life time, the Publisher
ought to have been content to be Cried Shame of, as a Foolish Fulsome
Flatterer; And that I may not now incur the Suspicion of Flattery, you see how
sparing I have been in speaking of the King. But this I may be allowed to say
of his Majesty, That He had an High Esteem for His Royal Consort, upon the
account both of Her Wisdom and Piety.

And the King Bewails Her Death, as an unspeakable Loss to Himself, as well as
to His People. He declared, like a good Christian, when He had no Hope of Her
Life, That He did not Repine at the Will of God: But yet the Thoughts of His
Parting with Her did Put Him, as Great a Soul as He has, into Terrible
Agonies. Which were so far from being Blameworthy, that they made His
Submission to That Hand, which gave Him this Bitter Cup to drink, the more like
His Blessed Saviors.

And the Queens Death was such as it might have been Presumed, such a Life
would End in. Upon Her having the first Intimation of the Danger She was in,
She Replied to this Effect: I have been instructed by the Divines of our
Church, how very Hazardous a thing it is to Rely upon a Deathbed Repentance;
and I am not now to begin the Great Work of Preparing for Death: And, I Praise
God, I am not Afraid of it.

And She was so Composed throughout Her Sickness, that 'twas Evident She had
not the least disturbance upon Her Mind; but that all was Calm and Serene
within Her. One of Her Physicians (a very Worthy Gentleman) was so Affected
with the Observations he then made of Her, as since to say, She seemed to me,
more like an Angel, than a Woman.

Frequently She called for the Prayers, which my Lord of Canterbury still read
to Her; And about Twelve hours before Her Departure, She Comfortably received
the Holy Communion at his Hands, Seven Bishops Communicating with Her. And at
last She went away as quietly as a Lamb, with Her Works following Her.

Oh! What a Dark, What a Black Christmas has this Year brought us! We may well
apply thereto those Words in the Prophesy of Amos, It shall come to Pass, says
the Lord, that I will cause the S^^ to go down at Noonday, (and it was scarce
Noonday, with This our Bright Sun, when it set) and I will turn your Feasts
into Mourning, and all your Songs into Lamentation.

And now, if my Grief could Permit me farther to Aggravate this our Loss, after
the Faithful Representation, as defective as it is, which has been given of
the Worth of the Jewel we have lost, it would not signify much to you: since
the Loss is such, as that you can Conceive, much better than I can Express the
Greatness of it. And if it be not Year after Year more and more Felt, and
therefore better Understood, it will be what we have as little reason as can
be, to expect.

And nothing but wretched Inconsideration can make us Fearless of its being
designed for a Presage and Forerunner of other Calamities; while we continue so
Bad a People, notwithstanding the Great Blessings, both Spiritual and Temporal,
which our Nation has had a long Enjoyment of, above all other Parts of
Christendom: And while most Countries about us have lain under Oppression and
Tyranny, and been in Blood and Confusion: And notwithstanding our late most
wonderful Deliverance, and the strange and unexpected Things which God has
since done for us, toward the Securing and the Perfecting thereof.

The most serious People are much afraid, That Her Majesty is taken away from
the Evil to come, when they Reflect upon the High Provocation, we have given to
the Divine Majesty, by our Obstinate Aversion to the least Reformation, either
of Manners, or of any thing Amiss, after all the Mavelous Interpositions of
Providence, in the Behalf both of our Church and State.

God saw Her to be incomparably too Good for a People, who would not Mend in
the least by Her Example: And therefore what can we reasonably think, but that
He took Her hence in just Judgment to Us, though in infinite Mercy to Herself. At
least, this sad Conclusion may be made from this Providence, if we should be as
insensible of the Hand of God in our Loss of Her, as we have been of the
Blessing we had in Her, while we enjoyed Her. And Her Kingdoms might have
enjoyed Her more than Forty Years longer, had they better deserved Her.

Had Her Life been prolonged to such a Number of Years, it would have been no
strange thing, considering Her Temperance, and the Healthfulness and Strength
of Her Constitution.

We can assign no mere Natural Reason, Why She might not at least have lived to
the Age of Queen Elizabeth, who dyed before She was Seventy Years Old, and yet
was Thirty Eight Years Elder than our Blessed Queen Mary.

And if it should prove, That this sad stroke should be lost upon us, what
Cause may we have to dread, a yet Sadder! I mean the losing of our King too,
who may well be called, The very Breath of our Nostrils, since the Prophet
Jeremiah did so style a Prince, who deserved not to be Named on the same day
with Him.

And well may I say, that the Loss of King William, would be the Greatest, that
(Humanly speaking) can befall us: Since those are worse than Blind, who will not
see, That the Safety of these Nations, and of at least all our Protestant
Neighbors, does wholly, under God Almighty, depend upon His Precious Life; and
must necessarily so do in the Eye of Reason, while our Circumstances continue
as they are Abroad.

Should God call the King from us, before our Danger from France is Over, I can
not think but the Faces of many of his Professed Enemies would soon gather
Blackness, at the Scaring Prospect which those who can see but one Inch before
them, must needs then have a Clear sight of. And then it may Endanger their
Losing that Sense they have left them, to Reflect upon their Prodigious
insensibility of their own interest, whether they Ever Come or no, to have any
Concernment for the Public.

And what Cause have we to Pray Heartily for the Kings Long and Prosperous
Reign Over us, from Affection to Him as well as to Our Selves! Since to Him, as
Gods great Instrument, We Owe the Preservation of our Religion, and of all that
is Dear to us!

To Conclude, Those who are so Irreligious as to look no farther, than the
Natural Cause of the Queens Death, are never like to be Bettered thereby. But
Such as are duly Sensible of Gods Hand therein; who could easily have Prevented
it without a Miracle, and by his Ordinary Providence too, had He seen it in His
infinite Wisdom Fit; Can not but See what an Awakening Providence This is,
Loudly Calling upon us to Atone His Wrath, by deep Humiliation, Hearty
Repentance and Reformation.

But let the Consequents of this Stroke be never so Sad, we ought, with Holy
King David, To be dumb, and not open our Mouths, because it was Gods doing: And
to say, Righteous art Thou O Lord, and just, most just, are Thy Judgments.

And indeed to have such a Blessing as This, Snatched away from us, and one so
Qualified in all respects, and so desirous too, to make us (in Conjunction with
Her Royal Companion in the Throne) both a Good and a Flourishing People; and
that in the very Flower of Her Years, and in an Age which could worst Spare
Her; Religion being now at so low an Ebb, and Wickedness and Infidelity so
Abounding; This is Such a Calamity, as no Considerations can Support Good
People under it, like the Thoughts of His Hands being in it from whence we
receive all our Good, and therefore ought to receive Evil: And the Assurance we
have, that Our Mighty Loss is Her Infinite Gain.

Edward Gloucester.

JOB, II. X. What? Shall we receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not
receive Evil?
THe Wicked Speech of Job's Wife in the foregoing Verse, was the occasion of
these Words. Observing his perseverance in his Integ^^ty; and not only his
Patient Submission to, but also Thankful Acquiescence in the Will of God, under
the Heaviest of Calamities, she brake out into these most Impious and
Blasphemous Words, as they are in our Translation, Do thou still retein thine
Integrity? Curse God and dye. Whereupon the Holy Man gives her this Reply, Thou
speak as one of the foolish Women speaks; What? Shall we receive Good at
the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil?

That speech of hers is variously rendered, but I shall only Observe, that the
Hebrew Word which is here Translated Curse, (...)
properly signifies the contrary, Bless. The Old Latin Version so renders it in
this Place; but I acknowledge so it does too, in that saying of the Devil, He
will Curse Thee to Thy face; where the same Word is used, but our Translation
there must needs be right.

But I have thought it strange, that the Septuagint should render this Speech
of Job's Wife, (...).
Blapheme God and dye; where the Word may very well signify Bless; and yet
render that other of the Devil, (...).
He will Bless Thee to thy face; where it is manifest it must signify Curse; as
it does in some few other Texts.

In short, I see no reason why we should not (with some of our most Learned
Expositors) understand this Word here according to its Proper signification;
and so make Job's Wife to say to him, Bless God and dye.

You may Object, Why then should these Words so strike Job to the heart, as his
Reply shows they did, viz. Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speaks;
that is, Thou speak like a Wicked Wretch.

I Answer, That it is too evident these Words were spoken Tauntingly, and
therefore well deserved so severe a Rebuke: They may be thus Paraphrased: I see
thou art a wonderful Thankful Man: Thou can bless God, when of a vastly Rich
Man, He makes thee a Beggar; when of a Father, of no fewer than Ten Children,
He makes thee Childless in a Moment: Go on to Bless Him still, since thou have
so great Encouragement; the Reward He designs thee being the destroying of
thee, next after thy Children.

And this saying, Bless God and dye, used as a Taunt, I need not tell you was
highly daring and presumptuous; though not so Horribly Profane as Curse God and
dye.

In Discoursing on the Latter Part of Iob' s Admirable Reply, What? Shall we
receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? I shall
endeavor to show, I. That Evil proceeds from the Hand of God as well as Good.
II. What is meant by Receiving Evil at His Hand. III. How our Receiving Good is
a Motive to receive Evil at His Hand too: Or where in lies the Force of this
Motive. IV. I shall draw several Inferences from the whole.


First, That Evil proceeds from the Hand of God, as well as Good. Or, that Evil
Events as well as good, are from the Divine Providence. You see I shall take it
for granted that Good things are all from God; Quod ni it^ sit, quid V^n^ra^ur
quid Precamur Deos? De Not. De^r.
and well I may, since Tully could ask, Why do we Worship Him, or Pray to Him,
if it were otherwise? And he thought, with Posidonius before him, that a Man
cannot deny this, but he must be an Atheist; and therefore made no better Men
of Epicurus and his Followers, though none did more Profess the Belief of a Deity.

But we will a little Enquire, Whether Evil things do come also from God's
Hand; because those who have the Highest Thoughts of the Divine Goodness, may
be most apt to Question how God can be the Author of any Evil; How out of the
same Fountain can Flow, both Sweet Streams and Bitter; Or rather, How
Bitterness can issue forth from the Fountain of Sweetness.

Now that this is very Accountable, will chiefly appear from what we are to say
hereafter. Our present Business is to show, That Evils do proceed from the Hand
of God; as also what Hand He has in them.

That they do proceed from His Hand, is so evident from the Holy Scriptures,
that nothing is more evident. God Almighty says by His Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 45.
7. I form the Light, and create Darkness; I make Peace, and create Evil: I the
Lord do all these things. And by His Prophet Amos, Chapter 3. 6. Shall there be
Evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? And by His Servant Moses, Deuteronomy.
32. 39. See now, that I even I am He, and there is no God with me; I kill and I
make alive, I wound and I heal; neither is there any that can deliver out of my
Hand. And all the Threatenings in the Book of God do suppose this.

And therefore we there find Good Men, still acknowledging God's Hand in their
Afflictions. Thus Upright Job, upon his receiving the Tidings of his Prodigious
Losses, says, The Lord has given, and the Lord has taken away, etc. Chapter 1.
21. The Lord has taken away, as well as given. King David we find frequently
making such Acknowledgments. And our Blessed Savior calls his Sufferings, The
Cup which his Father had given him to drink.

And indeed the Pagans had generally this sense of the Evils (especially the
Greater) that befell them, as well as of their Good Things: And therefore they
had their Catharmata, and many Expiatory Rites, for the Pacifying of their
Gods, whenever Calamities of any kind did light upon them.

Now in order to our Understanding What Hand God has in Evils, we are to take
Notice.

1. That they do not ordinarily proceed immediately from His Hand: Nay we have
no reason to believe that any Evils ever do, but it is probable that those do
proceed from Invisible second Causes, which do not from Visible.

2. Nor is it necessary to make Evils, at least Ordinarily, the Effects of
Second Causes, by any positive Act of God, whereby he uses those Causes as his
Instruments in the most proper and strict sense of that Word. But it may be
enough to say, upon the falling out of Disasters, that His good Providence did
not interpose, in preventing those Evil Effects being produced by their Causes.
Nor can we certainly conclude, that ever God does any more than withhold his
wonted Protection in such Cases.

3. Evils may be truly of God's Appointing, tho not caused by any Positive Act
of His. And whenever His Providence suffers us to fall into such
Circumstances, as that certain Evils inevitably light upon us, and no Care
could prevent them; then, at least, we may look upon them as being of the
Divine Appointment, no less than Permission.

And even those may be so, which are the Effects of other Peoples Wickedness.
As when the Pride, or Covetousness, or Malice of another makes me a Sufferer.
For the Opportunities and Advantages which a wicked Man may at any time have
against me, are from the Divine Providence. So that, though it be infinitely
unworthy of God, to infuse Evil Affections, Inclinations or Dispositions into
any man, or to excite any one to Sin, yet He knowing such Affections and
Inclinations to be in such Persons, and that they only want Objects or
Opportunities for the Acting of them, He may make use of them, for the
scourging of such Particular Sinners, or for the Trial of such or such of His
Servants.

We have an Instance hereof in Shimei' s Cursing King David. Upon Abishai' s
saying, Why should this dead Dog Curse my Lord the King? Let me I pray thee go
over, and take off his Head: The King thus Replied, Let him Curse, because the
Lord has said unto him, Curse David; who shall then say, Wherefore have thou
done so?

David could not mean by these Words, 2 Samuel 16. 9.
that God had laid His Command upon that Wretch to Curse him; This would have
been to make him no Sinner herein, but His Obedient Servant. But his Meaning
was, That God had by his Providence given Shimei this Opportunity of insulting
over him, and venting his Spite upon him. And therefore the good King concluded
that God in just Judgment did not scourge him with the Tongue of Shimei, as He
had done by the Sword of his Son Absalom.

And thus God calls the Assyrian, The Rod of his Anger, Esaias 10. 5, 6.
and says that He will send him against an Hypocritical Nation. And by this
Phrase, we are to understand, God's so Ordering it, as that all Difficulties
and Discouragements should be removed out of his way to the invading of the
Israelites; which He knew he was prepared in mind to do, as soon as he could
have an Opportunity. Nor are we to think it strange that such Words, as
Sending, Commanding, Doing, Determining, and many other like them, should be
used only to Express, either removing Rubs out of the way to certain Evils,
(whether Natural or Moral) or bare Permissions; since these ways of Speaking
are Hebrew Idioms, and as ordinary as can be in the Jewish Language: Of which
there are innumerable Instances in Holy Scripture: I will Name one more, viz.
that in Acts 4. 28. where God's Hand and Counsel and Determination are said to
be in the Horrible Death and Sufferings of His Holy Child Jesus. But it is as
evident as that it is impossible for God to be the Author of Sin, that those
Phrases signify no more than His Permitting, or Decreeing to permit those
Sufferings to be inflicted by His Enemies, and His so Ordering it in His Wise
Providence, as that all Impediments to the Executing of their Malice, should be
removed.

And we may well say, that God's Hand is in the Evils which befall Men, though
there should be no positive Act of His Hand in them, since the Evils of which
Job says, Shall we not receive them at the Hand of God? Were all inflicted by
the Hand of the Devil, through His Permission. All his Heavy Calamities were
the Effects of Satan's Malice, and consequent upon God's not restreining him
from venting it as he did.

It appears by the Story, that it was the Devil who stirred up the Sabeans and
others to Rob him of his Cattle, and to destroy his Servants: That it was the
Devil that brought down the Fire on the remainder of them, although it be called
the Fire of God from Heaven: That it was the Devil who raised the Storm, which
blew down the House upon his Sons and Daughters: That it was He who filled his
Body with Blains and Botches. And these Terrible Evils were not only Permitted
by God, but Appointed too, but His Appointment took place through His mere
Permission: As knowing that Satan was enough his Enemy, to bring all these
Calamities upon him, and worse too, if He would but suffer him. There is no
more than Permission, or not hindering to be understood in that Saying of the
Divine Majesty to him, Behold all that he has is in thy Power, etc. Chap. 1.
12. Or in that, Behold he is in thine Hand, etc. Chap. 2. 6. Not that God gave
him a Commission, or so much as Leave (or License) thus to Torment the Upright
Man; He only withdrew the Restreints he was before under, from thus Worrying
him. This is evident from the Account which the Devil himself gives of his
having hitherto spared him, Chap. 1. 10. Have thou not, says he, made an Hedge
about him, and about his house, and about all that he has on every side? And
whereas he says in the next Verse, But put forth thine Hand now, and touch all
that he has, and he will Curse thee to thy Face: It is plain, he meant no more
by these Words, but Cease to protect him from my hand: And in so Expressing
this his Meaning, he complied with the forementioned Hebrew Idiom, or Manner
of Speaking.

Before we proceed further, Let us stop a while to take Notice, how infinitely
we are obliged to the Divine Protection; in that we find not our present State,
far more Sad and Calamitous than it is. Many Afflictions we meet with in this
World, and sometimes very Heavy ones: But for One Exercise of our Patience, we
should have a Thousand, and those much more intolerable than we have ever yet
felt, did not the good Providence of God continually guard us; were not The
Lord of Hosts with us; were not The God of Jacob our Defense and Refuge: There
are not a few things in all places, which would be both Mischievous and
Destructive to us, but for the Care which God Almighty takes of us, by the
Ministry of His Angels, and very many other invisible Ways* We know, both by
Observation and Experience, that there is no Creature so inconsiderable, as not
to be able to make us Miserable, with the Divine Permission, or to put a Period
to our Lives. And therefore that was a good Reply, which Theodorus made to
Lysimachus, when he threatened to Kill him, viz. What a mighty Matter is that,
the most contemptible things is as able to do this as thy self. The ill
Accidents to which we are daily liable, are innumerable; and so are the Natural
Causes, both without us and within us, of a great Number of Diseases; so that
if they were not overruled by Providence (and that by such secret Means as
make it impossible for us to understand how) we could never have one hours
freedom from Sickness, or Pain; and should be always running into Mischief.

But if the Devils were our only Enemies, who are still watching all
Advantages against both our Souls and Bodies, were it not for the Divine
Protection, the Case of both would be most deplorable. St. Peter compares the
Head of them to A Roaring Lion, and says, that he walks about seeking whom
he may devour. Of these malignant Spirits, and their Malevolence to Mankind,
the Pagans had an Undoubted Tradition, and the poor Americans especially need
no such Tradition, to whom, to this day, they make themselves Visible, and make
them feel sad Effects of their Malice. And we find enough in the History of the
Gospel, to incline us to think it very probable, that many of the Diseases, and
other Evils which happen to us, are of their Procurement. And there needs no
more, but God's saying to any one of them, concerning any of us, what he said
of Job, Behold they are in thine hand, to make this Life a very hell to us.

I say therefore, how unspeakably are we obliged to our Good God, for
protecting us, as He does, with His Watchful Eye, and Almighty Arm! We have
seen that He needs not do any thing, nor Exert His Power in any one Act, to
make our Being in this World most miserable. He needs, in Order thereto, only
not to continue His Care of us; which the Bad as well as Good, and those who
provoke Him every day, such is His Goodness and Long-suffering, are every
Moment protected by; though not alike protected; nor the same Persons always
alike. And how fearful should we be of disobliging such a Friend, lest we at
length provoke Him to pluck up His Hedge of Protection!

Secondly, We come next to show, What is meant by Receiving Evil at the Hand of
God; which Job's Question here speaks to be a most necessary Duty. -- Shall we
not receive Evil? This implies these Four Things.

1. Heartily Acknowledging the Hand of God, to be in the Evils that befall us.
2. Submitting Patiently to His Will under them. 3. Doing this also, Thankfully.
4. Complying with God' s Great End and Design, in them.
First, Heartily Acknowledging the Hand, or Providence of God, to be in the
Evils which befall us. Since God's Hand is, as has been showed, in them, we
must needs be obliged to receive them as from Him; and with a great sense of
the Truth of that Saying of Eliphaz, Affliction comes not forth of the Dust,
neither does Trouble spring out of the Ground: Or it is not to be ascribed
merely to Earthly or Natural Causes. And therefore, as we have observed, we
find Pious Men in Scripture, still owning God's Providence in their Afflictions.

Those consequently, who look no farther than the immediate Causes of them, or
who look not beyond those which are Visible, cannot behave themselves like
Religious Men under them, nor scarely like Men: But do too often resemble those
silly Currs, that fly furiously upon the Stones which are flung at them, taking
no Notice of the Hand from whence they come.

Those must either not believe that God takes care of Men, and deny that there
is any such thing as Providence, (which is as bad as slat Atheism, if it be
ever separated from it) who, when, for instance, they are visited with
Sickness, think of no higher Cause thereof, than the noxious quality or
quantity of what they have eaten or drank, or infectious Steams, or bad Air, or
the like; and never consider, that none of these things could hurt them, had
not God seen it good, not to keep them by some Providence or other out of Harms
way, or not to Overruled such Causes. And the like may be said of those, who,
upon the Death of a dear Relative or Friend, are aware of no other Cause
thereof, than the Nature of the Disease, or the Weakness of the Means which
were used for the Cure thereof, or some ill Accident, etc. and it never enters
into their thoughts, that this Person would have Recovered, had God seen it fit
to prolong his or her Life: Which if He had, more effectual Medicines would
have been applied, or Success given to more ineffectual: Or, in a word, God
would then have raised up the Patient by some Means or other, innumerable of
which He has at His Command; or have done it, if He had pleased, without Means.

He who suffers from the Hand of Malice, does not suffer like a Pious Man, who
looks not upon His Enemy as God's Rod; who considers not, that as much ill Will
as he has, he could have no Power against him, except it were given him from
Above; as our Blessed Savior said to Pilate. And so we might proceed in other
Instances.

Secondly, Receiving Evils at God's Hand implies also, Submiting patiently and
quietly to His Will under them. Patient submission under Afflictions is
expressed by Accepting them, which is the same with Receiving them. If their
Uncircumcised Heart be humbled, and they Accept of the Punishment of their
Iniquity, etc. Lev. 26. 41. And they shall Accept of the Punishment of their
Iniquity, v. 43.

We had as good, not to Acknowledge the Hand of God in our Afflictions, as not
to submit to His Hand. Nay, in this respect it is worse, to Murmur and Repine
at them, while we acknowledge a Divine Providence in them, than to have no
belief hereof, viz. That Repining at any thing which we believe God has an
Hand in, is Charging Him foolishly. It Is at least, a Tacit and Virtual Accusing
God Almighty of Injustice, or Unkindness, or want of Wisdom.

Impatience under God's Hand must necessarily proceed from some false and
unworthy Notion of Him; nor can we grudge at any Dispensation of His
Providence, while we have a Sense of this, That God can do nothing, but what is
most fit to be done. Now it is nothing so great a Reflection upon the Divine
Honor, to deny that God concerns Himself in our Sufferings, as,
acknowledging it, to think that He can do what is Unworthy of Himself, and can
be Cruel or Unrighteous in any of them: Or can at any time Act unlike to an
Absolutely Perfect Being. Nay Plutarch would tell us, that it casts less
Dishonor upon God, to deny His very Being, than to conceive such a thing as
this of Him: For He says, That he had rather the World should hereafter say
there was never such a Man as Plutarch, than that Plutarch was an Unjust and
Naughty Man. And I am sure, every Good Man will be of his Mind.

So that there is no Duty more reasonable, and therefore more indispensable,
than quiet Submission under the Severest of Providence; which does always
imply a Sense of their being Good, as Severe as they may seem to be; and no
less Good really, than they are Severe seemingly and in appearance.

And therefore, where as we have observed, that we still find good men
Acknowledging the Hand of God in their Sufferings, so we have them as
constantly expressing their Submission thereto.

Job was a most Admirable Example of Patience, considering what a prodigious
Sufferer he was; though in the last of his terrible Trials, he discovered too
much weakness.

Old Ely, when the Prophet Samuel had told him the Dreadful Things, which God
had threatened against his House, immediately expressed his Submission in these
Words, It is the Lord, let Him do what seems Him good, 1 Samuel 3. 18.

King David under a very sore Affliction, which he called the Stroke and the
Blow of God' s Hand, thus expressed his Submission; I was dumb, I opened not my
Mouth, because Thou did it, Psalm. 39. 9. And there is another very Remarkable
and Affecting Instance given by him hereof, when he was not only forced to
flee from Jerusalem, but in Eminent Danger of losing his Kingdom, by reason of
the Powerful Conspiracy of His own Son against Him. If, says He, I shall find
favor in the eyes of the Lord, He will bring me again, and show me both the
Ark of God and his Habitation: But if He thus says, I have no Delight in thee,
Behold here am I, let Him do what seems good unto Him, 2. Sam. 15. 25, 26.

But as, all things considered, never was there such a Sufferer as our Blessed
Lord, so never was there a Pattern of Patience and Submission, comparable to
that which He has set us. Never were worse Words heard from Him, than such as
these: If this Cup may not pass from me, except I drink it, Thy Will be done.
Not my Will, but Thy Will be done. The Cup which my Father has given me to
drink, shall I not drink it? And His Example is again and again proposed to us,
as a great Motive to Patience, and the resigning of our selves to the Divine
Will under all Afflicting Providence, Let us, says the Author to the Hebrews,
run the Race that is set before us with Patience, looking unto Jesus the Author
and Finisher of our Faith; who, for the joy that was set before Him, endured
the Cross, despising the Shame, etc. Chap. 12. 1, 2. For consider Him, who
endured such contradiction of Sinners against Himself, lest ye be wearyed and
faint in your Minds, ver. 3. And for as much, says the Apostle St. Peter, as
Christ has suffered for us in the Flesh, Arm your selves also with the same
Mind, 1 Epist. 4. 1.

Thirdly, In Receiving Evil at Gods Hand, is likewise employed Thankful, as well
as Patient Submission. It is evident, that Job intended this too, in saying,
Shall we not receive Evil? Seeing his Wifes upbraiding him with his Blessing
God in these words, The Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, and blessed be
the Name of the Lord, did occasion that Reply to her.

Nor are we to think, that this his Blessing of God, upon his receiving such
Woeful Tidings, was more than his Duty; as greatly honored as he has most
deservedly been in all Ages for it: For it is as highly Reasonable, that We
should receive Evils thankfully, as that we should be Submissive under them;
though it is more difficult.

Not that an Affliction as such is matter of Thankfulness; but it is so,
Considered as designed by God for our Good, our greatest Good; as will
hereafter be showed.

Good People find it a very Easy thing, to thank God heartily for Afflictions
after the Smart of them is over, upon their Experimenting Advantage to their
Souls by them: But there is the same Reason to Thank God for His designing us
Good, that there is for our actual receiving it. I have every whit as much
reason, when I am Sick or in Pain, or when I see one so who is dear to me, or
when I have lost such a one; to Praise God for intending such Sufferings for my
Spiritual Advantage, as I have so to do, after I have found this Advantage by
them.

No Man can doubt, but that Job was Obliged to be Thankful for his Afflictions
(as Heavy as they were) after he was raised to much more Plentiful and Happy
Circumstances by the means of them; and therefore it is Evident that it became
him so to be, while he continued under the weight of them. Because the Notion
he had of God assured him, that he Meant great good to him by them; Possibly in
this World, but Certainly in that to come; which is far better.

All Afflictions as such are Evils, as Job calls them, and therefore it would
be Harsh Doctrine to say, that we ought to Bless God for them Considered under
that Notion; but it Sounds no more Harshly to say, that we are bound to be
heartily Thankful for them, as they are Means of Grace, and Divine Methods for
the more and more qualifying us for the Heavenly Happiness, than it does to
tell me, That my Surgeon deserves not only Thanks but a Reward too, for the
Torment he gives me, as that Torment is designed in order to my Cure.

Considering Afflictions under the notion of Medicines for the Curing of our
Spiritual Maladies, or as Trials for the Exercise of our Graces, they are not
only Good, but some of the Best things; but I shall not need to say, that all
Good things are matter of Thanksgiving; nor that our Thankfulness for them
ought to be proportioned to the degrees of Goodness that are in them.

Fourthly, It is employed too in Receiving Evils at Gods Hand; that we
Cheerfully Comply with Gods Ends and Designs in inflicting them.

We now intimated that they are designed for Good to us, but the Concurrence of
our Endeavors with the Divine Grace, is absolutely necessary to the
accomplishing of Gods good Designs upon us. No Means of Grace can signify any
good to us, without our making use of them as Such.

We said but now, That Patient Submission is Expressed by Accepting the
Punishment of our iniquities; and now we add that Compliance also with the Ends
thereof, the Chief of which is our Reformation, was intended by that Form of
speech. Nor can we be properly said to Receive Evil from God, or to Accept
thereof, if we are merely Passive under it; or at least we then receive it in
vain, as the Apostle beseeches us not so to receive the Grace of God.

Not to improve Afflictions to our Spiritual Advantage, seeing this is the
Design of them, is to despise them; which Eliphaz warned Job against. Happy is
the man, says he, whom God Corrects, therefore despise not thou the
Chastening of the Lord, Job 5. 17. Which is as much as if he had said, Seeing
God does mean the greatest Good to Men in Correcting them, be sure thou so
improve this His Severe Correction; as not to frustrate His End therein. And
Excellent was that Advice which Elihu gave him, Chapter 34. 31, 32. Surely it is
meet to be said unto God I have born Chastisement, I will not offend any more;
That which I see not teach Thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more.

Some may think, that we have omitted one Great thing, in Showing what is
employed in Receiving Evils at Gods Hand, and that is Rejoicing and Glorying in
them; which is more than being Thankful: For there are several Texts in the New
Testament, which speak this likewise to be a Duty. As particularly St. James
says, Chapter 1. 2. Count it all Joy, when you fall into diverse Temptations, or
Trials. St. Paul says, We Glory in Tribulations, Romans 5. 3. And I will rather
Glory in mine Infirmities, 2 Cor. 12. 9. And other passages there are to the
same purpose.

But in Answer hereunto, such Expressions doubtless have not reference to those
Afflictions, which God lays upon us in the Ordinary Course of His Providence,
but to those particularly which Christians meet with, for the Testimony of a
good Conscience, and for Righteousness Sake; which were the Chief sufferings of
the Apostles, and the Primitive Christians. And the Apostle does plainly
intimate, in the words next following those I last cited, that this sort of
Afflictions were those he there meant, viz. Therefore I take Pleasure in
Infirmities, in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses, for
Christ's Sake. Or in Suffering all these for Christ's Sake.

And those words of our Savior may well lead us, thus to understand the
forementioned and the like Texts, viz. Blessed are ye, when Men shall hate you,
and when they shall Separate you from their Company, and shall Reproach you,
and Cast out your Name as Evil, for the Son of Man's Sake. Rejoice ye in that
day and Leap for joy: For behold your Reward is great in Heaven; For in the
like manner did their Fathers unto the Prophets. Luke 6. 22, 23. And there are
three Special Reasons, why Afflictions that are Suffered upon this account,
should be Rejoiced and Gloried in. Namely,

1. Because infinite Honor is done us, when we are called forth to Suffer for
the Sake of Christ. Wherefore it is said, Acts 5. 41. That The Apostles
departed from the presence of the Council, Rejoicing that they were accounted
worthy to Suffer for His Name.

2. Because such Sufferings have the most Glorious Reward Promised to them.
Which you now saw is the Reason, which our Savior gives, why such Sufferers
should Leap for joy.

3. Because a Great Reward does likewise accompany Such Sufferings, viz. A
mighty Presence of Gods Spirit, whereby the Sufferers are Strengthened with
Might in their inward Man. And this was the Reason the Apostle gave, why he
would most gladly Glory in his Infirmities; for it follows, That the Power of
Christ may rest upon me: And why he took Pleasure in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's Sake, viz. Because,
When I am Weak then am I Strong. Or then do I find Great Strength from Above,
when my Sufferings do most Exceed my natural Strength. Again, St. Peter says,
If ye be Reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of
Glory, and of God, rests upon you. So that Glorying in Tribulations, in such
Tribulations, is, if we make Comparisons, rather a Privilege than a Duty.

As it is a very dangerous thing, to make Christianity an Easier Religion than
Christ has made it, so is it to make it a Harder too: For this tends greatly
to the Discourageing of men, and the frighting them away from it. But nothing
could more incline us to think it an impractical Religion, than to be told that
one of its Precepts is, That we must Rejoice, Triumph and Glory under
whatsoever Afflictions we are Exercised with. So that, when I am Tormented with
a Disease, when I have lost a most dear Relative or Friend, or see such a one
in Misery; When a Great Public Blessing (such a one as That which we are now
Lamenting) is taken away from us, it is not Enough to submit quietly to the
Hand of God, nor to Thank Him for His good and gracious Designs in such fore
Trials, toward those who shall duly improve them, but I must also Rejoice and
Glory in them; or I cannot Suffer like a Christian: This in Truth is much too
Severe Doctrine. We must needs say of it, what the Disciples said in another
Case, This is an hard saying, who can hear it? If this were One of the Duties
(as it is not) to which Christianity does oblige us, we could not affirm that
there is no ground for this saying of Trypho the Jew to Justin Martyr, viz.
Those Precepts of yours, which are contained in the Book which you call the
Gospel, are (...), So Great and Wonderful, that I suspect no Mortal can observe
them.

I think it here sit to suggest this also, That neither are we obliged to
behave our selves under Afflictions, as if we had no Sense of Pain. This is to
suffer like Stoics, not like Christians. Afflictions are painful things; They
are not for the present (as the Apostle says) joyous but grievous; and if they
were not Grievous they would not be Afflictions. And when a man is in pain, to
carry it as if he felt nothing, is so far from being Brave, or so much as
Commendable, that it is to play the Hypocrite. Our Savior never taught us such
Doctrine, as not by Precept, so neither by His Example; since He Himself
expressed a sharp Sense of Pain. And so Tender was his Nature, that when He saw
others weep for His dead Friend Lazarus, He could not forbear weeping with
them, although He intended presently to restore him to Life.

And therefore it is so far from being Blameworthy in Us, that it becomes us
to shed tears, and to use other Natural Expressions of Grief under Afflictions;
and as they are greater or less, to express more or less Sense of them. Only
we must do all that lies in us not to be immoderate Mourners: That is, we ought
not to give way to so great a Dejection of Spirit, as will disable us for those
Duties which an Afflicted State calls for.

And as to Weeping, I would be so far from Checking an Afflicted Person for it,
that I would Encourage him to it, if he can weep. For Experience tells us, that
Tears give a Vent to Grief, and so give some Ease. But yet we may weep too
much, for Excessive Weeping raises Vapors, and as much disturbs the Head, as
Moderate does relieve the Heart.

And thus much for our Second Head of Discourse: What is here meant by
Receiving Evil at God's Hand?

Thirdly, We shall now show, How Receiving Good at the Hand of God, is a Motive
to Receive Evil: Or, wherein lies the Force of this Motive.

The Force thereof lies in these Four Particulars; which singly, and much more
Altogether, do make it very Strong and Powerful.

I. The Evils we Receive at God's Hand, are exceeding Few in Comparison of the
Good Things. II. Our Good Things are all Undeserved, even the least of them;
but we deserve incomparably more Evil Things than we meet with in this world,
and incomparably Worse Things. III. We Need Evil Things as well as, and no less
than, Good Things. Which will lead us to show, That, IV. Evil things are
Ordered and Appointed to us by God, from the same Principle that Good things
are: And therefore the Evil things which come from His Hand are Good,
considered as coming from thence.
First, The Evils which we receive at the Hand of God, are exceeding Few in
comparison of the Good things, which are innumerable. Our Good things are so
many, that we are daily loaded with them. Blessed be the Lord, says the
psalmist, who darly loadeth us with His Benefits, Psalm. 68. 19.

And he thus addresseth himself to God, Psalm. 40. 5. Many, O Lord my God, are
Thy Wonderful Works which Thou have done, and Thy Thoughts which are to us
ward: They cannot be reckoned up in Order unto Thee; if I should declare and
speak of them, they are more than can be numbered.

It is impossible for us to draw an Inventory of the Thousandth part of those
Blessings, which in a very short time we all receive from the Bounty of Heaven.
Every Minute of our Lives is full of Mercies, nor can we see any Place, which
does not abound with Effects and Expressions of the Divine Benignity: Whether
we look upwards or downwards, or round about us, or within us, as well as
without us. And all Considerative Persons are able to make a large Catalogue of
more special Favors, from time to time conferred upon them, over and above
those which are the Common Portion of their Fellow Creatures.

Nay, as it is certainly beyond the Ability of a Finite Understanding, to
comprehend all the individual Blessings which every Man is obliged to God for;
so is it too much for an Humane Understanding to number all the several Species
and Sorts of them.

We can begin with Meat, Drink and Clothes, Health and Strength, the Use of our
Reason, and many Bodily and Mental Endowments: And we can proceed to Friends
and Relations, to Preventions of Evils feared, and Deliverances from Evils
felt, etc. But when we have gone as far as we can, we can not say how much we
have fallen short of filling up the Account; and are fain to content our selves
at last, with summing up all in such Generals as these, Necessaries,
Conveniences and Superfluities: Things Profitable, Honorable and Pleasant:
Bodily and Spiritual good things; or those which relate to our Well-being in
this World, and to our Eternal Happiness in the other.

Now what an Argument is this, to persuade us to do what we showed is employed,
in Receiving Evil at God 's Hand! viz. For now and then a Days Cloudy Weather,
I have many Weeks of Sunshine: For a few Weeks Sickness, I have many Months,
and perhaps Years of Health: Evils fall upon me in thin Drops, but Good things
come down in plentiful Showers; Or I have many Thousands of Good things, for
One of Evil.

This Consideration must needs make us sensible, that it is the most
disingenuous thing in the World, to forget our Obligations to God for an
infinite Number of Good things, by means of the Greatest of those
(Comparatively speaking) extremely few Evils, from which His Providence does
not protect us.

Nay, there is One Gift of GOD, which Alone will Weigh down all the Temporal
Evils that do, or can befall us; Namely, That of His own Son: How then are they
Out-weighed by this, and all the other Fruits of the Divine Mercy and Bounty
put together!

Secondly, Another Consideration that adds much to the force of this Motive,
is, That our Good things are all Undeserved, even the very least of them: But
we deserve all the Evils we Suffer, and incomparably more and greater, than are
inflicted in this Life. There is no good man, but will readily say with Jacob,
Genesis 32. 10. I am not Worthy of the least of all the Mercies, and of all the
Truth, which Thou have showed unto Thy Servant.

It is impossible that such poor Impotent Creatures as We are, should be able
to do any Service, whereby we can Challenge the least Reward at the Hands of
our Creator, upon the account of Merit.

Indeed the notion of a Creature is inconsistent with the least deserving from
Him. A creature owing all that it is, and all the Power it has, to its Maker.
It being a perfectly Dependent thing, and Unable to Act or to Subsist one
Moment, but by virtue of its dependence upon its First Cause. And therefore the
Glorious Angels themselves must needs acknowledge, that they are obliged to the
Divine Grace for all the Blessings they Enjoy.

And as the notion of a Creature Excludes all Merit in reference to God, so
does the notion of a God, render it impossible for a Creature to Merit of Him.
For that Notion being Absolute Perfection, and Infinite Self-Sufficiency, it is
impossible to do God a Kindness; and for him to be Beholden to any one. Can a
Man, says Eliphaz, be Profitable to God, as he that is Wise may be Profitable
unto himself? Is it any Pleasure, or addition of Happiness, to the Almighty,
that thou art Righteous? Or is it Gain to Him, that thou make thy ways
Perfect? Job 21. 2, 3. And therefore I say, there can be no proper Meriting at
His Hands.

But on the Contrary, the Evils we receive are all Deserved. We cannot but be
Convinced of our ill deserts, when we Consider that we are Lapsed and Apostate
Creatures; and how we have Transgressed the Eternal Laws of Righteousness, and
Affronted the Great Sovereign of the World, by innumerable Acts of
Disobedience. He knows not what Sin is; what Horrible Injustice is in it; how
Intolerably Presumptuous a thing it is, for Creatures to oppose their wills to
the Wise and Good Will of their Great Creator; nor does he know what Prodigious
Ingratitude, nor what Desperate Madness, every Wilful Sin against God Implies,
who is not sensible that the Worst of Evils are deserved by him.

And whosoever have a due Sense of their Sins, will say whilst under the
Heaviest Calamities with Nehemiah, in the Name of the Rebellious Israelites,
How be it, Thou Lord art just in all that is come upon us, for Thou have done
Right, but we have done Wickedly, Chapter 9. 33. And with Ezra, Thou have punished
us less than our Iniquities deserve, Chap. 9. 13.

And as in the General, all Kinds of Evils are deserved by us, as we have been
more or less Guilty of Wilful sinning, so whatsoever particular Evils we at any
time fall under, we are, I doubt, (ordinarily at least) Conscious to our selves
of having more especially deserved each of them, by such and such Particular
Sins. Who, for instance, when he is cast upon a Bed of Sickness, is not
sensible that he deserves to be deprived of his Health, by having too much
abused it while he enjoyed it; or by having been too unthankful for it? Who
when he has lost a Dear Relative, does not, or ought not, to Reflect upon his
having over-loved him, or not having had a due value for the Blessing he had in
him; or not having discharged his duty toward him, etc. Again, where is that
Man to be found, who, when he has Sustained a great Loss in his Estate, is not
compelled by his Conscience to acknowledge that this is very just upon him, for
his having made it Serviceable to some Lust or other, or his having made an
Idol of it, and Preferred it before God; or for doing too little good with it,
or for minding the great Concerns of his Soul and the other Life, the Less for
it? Who, when he is wronged in his Good-Name, can say he deserves not to suffer
in this kind from the Providence of God, either for having so wronged Others;
or for not being so tender as he ought to have been of their Reputation; or for
having been too forward, to take up Reports against men, without good Evidence;
or over-valuing his own Credit, and Priding himself therein; or for not having
Endeavored as he ought, to promote the interest of Religion thereby; nor
Employed it to those good Ends and Purposes, upon the account of which a good
Name in the World is chiefly desirable?

Now what Stronger Arguing can there be than this? Do we receive good things in
so great an Abundance, from the Hand of God, when our Merits could not Claim
the very least of them; and is it then Reasonable that we should think much of
receiving Evil things also from the same Hand; when our Hearts Accuse us of
having deserved every one of them, and much greater Evils too, than have ever
befallen us?

I will bear, says the Prophet, the Indignation of the Lord, because I have
Sinned against Him, Micah Chapter 7. 9.

Thirdly, It adds still more Force and Strength to this Motive, to Consider,
That We need Evil things as well as Good, and no less than Good things.
Afflictions are needful for all Sorts of People: For the Bad; for the more
Imperfectly Good, and even for the very Best.

I. They are Needful, and most Necessary, for Bad People. For those who live
without God in the World; who make none, or but little Conscience of their
Ways; who live in great Forgetfulness of their being Subject to Gods Sovereign
Authority, of their Continual Dependence upon Him, both for their Well-being
and their Continuance in Being, and of their Unspeakable Obligations to Him;
Who are alienated from the Life of God, and wholly addicted to the Animal and
Sensual Life, and Mindless of the Concerns of their Immortal Souls.

Afflictions are so necessary for such as these, that no other Means are like
to be Effectual to their Conversion, to the Opening of their Eyes, and the
turning them from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan to God, Except
they are enforced by them.

Afflictions are in their own nature apt to make men Serious, and to put Vain
People upon Considering, as well as by their being backed with the Divine
Grace. They are most Proper Means to this End, as they force Sinners to retire
from their Naughty Companions, and from their Sports and Pastimes (especially
if they are very Smarting and Painful) and from all their Secular Employments
too, by setting their hearts on which, they are continually diverted from
concerning themselves in the Affairs of Religion and the other World; and as
they render all Carnal and Worldly Delights and Pleasures unsavory to them.
Afflictions do also naturally Excite men to Call upon God, especially when they
are sensible that He alone is able to Help them; and Awaken their Consciences,
and make them Reflect upon their many Miscarriages, as having Provoked Him to
inflict them. And they as naturally put them upon making Strong Resolutions to
amend their Lives for the Atoning of His displeasure.

Thus the Woman of Zarephath, upon the sudden death of her Child, Cried out to
the Prophet, Art thou come unto me to call my Sin to remembrance, and to Slay
my Son? 1 Kings 17. 18.

And thus Joseph's Brethren, upon the Severity he used toward them, Said one to
another, we are verily Guilty Concerning our Brother; in that we Saw the
Anguish of his Soul when he besought us, and we would not hear; therefore is
this distress come upon us. Genesis 42. 21.

God says, Hosea 5. 15. I will go and return to my Place, or I will withdraw
my Protection from them, till they acknowledge their Offense, and seek my Face:
In their Affliction they will seek me Early.

And it is said, Psalm. 78. 34. When He Slew them, then they Sought Him, and
they Returned and Enquired after God. And they Remembered that God was their
Rock, and the High God their Redeemer. Or, then they called this to mind, who
till they were Afflicted, could never be persuaded to Consider it.

As Stubborn a Wretch as Pharaoh was, his Hard heart was quickly from time to
time Softened by the Plagues, and it retained its Softness under each Plague,
till it was removed.

When the Prodigal Son was brought to extreme Penury, he soon came to himself
and Returned to his Father.

King Manasseh was a Prodigy of Wickedness, yet When he was in Affliction (as
the Text says) he besought the Lord his God, and Humbled himself greatly
before the God of his Fathers. And Prayed unto Him, and He was entreated of
him, etc. Then Manasseh knew that the Lord He is God. Or he had a Powerful
Sense thereof upon his Mind, 2 Chronicles. 33. 12, 13.

Afflictions are so necessary to the Conversion of Sinners, that those who have
spent many years in a Loose Sort of Life, are very rarely Effectually Reclaimed
otherways, than by Gods Blessing upon some Sharp Affliction.

II. Evil things, or Afflictions, are very Needful and Necessary for
Imperfectly Good, as well as for Bad, People. They greatly need them, in order
to their Growing in Grace, and rising to higher degrees of Goodness.

Particularly, in order to their being more Watchful against Temptations to
Sin. This Experience King David had of the Benefit of Afflictions. Before I was
Afflicted, says he, I went Astray, but now have I kept thy Word. Psalm. 119. 67.

In order to the more weaning them from this Vain World, and the Mortifying of
all Remainders of Sensuality.

In order to the more Humbling them, under a Sense of their Frailty and
Impotence, and their more close dependence upon God.

In order to the more Softning of their Hearts, and more opening their Bowels
of Compassion toward others in Affliction. None have such a sympathy with
their Suffering Brethren, as those who are made sensible of the Sadness of
their Condition, by their own Feeling.

In order to their more loving of God, and Trusting in Him. To which the
Experience they have had of Divine Supports under Afflictions, and Deliverances
out of them, does greatly Contribute.

In short, by Afflictions The Iniquity of Jacob is purged, and this is all the
Fruit, to take away his Sin. Isaiah 22. 14.

III. Evil things are needful too even for the Eminently Good. And that, as
upon some of the forementioned Accounts, so more Especially,

1. For Prevention. For which End the most Healthy Persons do sometimes take
Physic. St Paul, as Eminent a Saint as he was, had a Messenger of Satan sent
to Buffet him, lest he should be Exalted above measure, through the Abundance
of his Revelations, as he tells us, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

There are none so Good as to be out of all danger, while they remain in this
World; as to be able to bear long and uninterrupted Prosperity, without being
liable to be the worse for it in several respects.

Who is so Humble, who so Heavenly minded, as to have no Reason to fear his
being too much Opinionated of himself, and loving the world too much, if God
did not sometimes mind him what an infirm and weak Creature he is, by
Afflictions of one kind or other, and never imbittered his Comforts to him?

2. The Best People need them likewise, for the Trial and Exercise of some
Graces and Virtues, which cannot be exerted without them. What Exercise can
there be of the Grace of Contentment, while all things succeed according to a
man's desire and expectation? Of Patience, while he feels no pain? Of
Submission to God's Will, while God never Crosses his Own Will? Of Meekness
and Forgiveness of Enemies, while he has no Enemies to forgive, or meets with
no Provocations from them? And this leads me to Add,

3. That the Best do need Afflictions, in Order to their doing so much the more
Credit to Religion, and the more benefiting the World by their Examples. For we
have now seen, that they cannot be Examples of all Virtues without them.

4. The Best need them also, to make them so much the more to Value, and
consequently to be the more Thankful for, the Good things they enjoy. There is
no Man so good, but he prizeth Health the more, for being some times Sick. No
man can be so affected with his Obligations to God for any Blessing, who never
was without it, as he who has felt how uneasy and grievous a thing it is to
want it.

Nay, were there no Life after this, we should think tolerable Evils necessary
to give the better Gusto, and a more pleasing Relish to the Gratifications of
our Senses. The more Hungry or Thirsty a Man is, the greater is the Pleasure he
takes in Eating or Drinking. How pleasant is a Bed or Couch to a Man tired with
hard Labor; a cool Shade to one parched with Heat; Liberty after Confinement;
the Enjoyment of a dear Relation or Friend, after a long Absence; and even
Indolence or mere Ease, after great Pain! As Socrates observed, in his last
Discourse with his Friends, after he was rid of his Shackles.

And perhaps there are not many Evils, which we are able to bear with any
patience, and that continue not overlong, which do not make us a good
Recompense, by the much more pleasant Enjoyment we have of the Opposite Good
things, upon their Leaving us.

Fourthly, The last Consideration I named, which gives great Weight to the
Motive in the Text, To Receive Evil things at the Hand of God, is, That they
are Ordered and Appointed to us by God, from the Self-same Principle that Good
things are, viz. That of Good Will. And therefore, as was said, the Evils which
come from Him are Good, as they come from Him.

There is an Excellent Saying to this Purpose of an Heathen Philosopher* viz:
In Epictet. Enchirid. c. 34. p. 167
Simplicius, We do not say that the Divine Justice is the Cause of Evil, but of
Good; because the Evil which proceeds from thence, is in order to Good.

We have seen that all sorts of Men do need Evil things, as well as Good; and
we are now to show, that God inflicts them, because we need them.

We have showed, That they are Spiritual Physic, for the Cure of the Maladies
of our Souls; and we find that for this Reason God sends them, in Hebr. 12. 9,
10. The Apostle tells us in some of the foregoing Verses, That in the general,
Gods End in his Chastizements is good; that Good Will is the Principle from
whence they proceed; and in these he shows particularly, that God designs our
Spiritual Advantage by them. Furthermore, says he, we have had Fathers of our
Flesh which corrected us, and we gave them reverence; shall we not much more be
in Subjection to the Father of Spirits^ and Live? For they verily for a few
days chastened us, after their own pleasure; but He for our Profit, that we
might be Partakers of His Holiness.

We have shown, That Afflictions are needful, not only for Correction, in
Order to our Amendment, but, for Trial too; and we read that this End also God
has in them, 1 Pet. 1. 6, 7. -- Now for a Season (if need be) ye are in
Heaviness through manifold Temptations: That the Trial of your Faith being much
more precious than that of Gold which perishes, though it be tried with Fire
(or, it being of much more Advantage to your Faith, than the Trial of Gold is
to Gold, because it will wear out, though it can bear the trial of Fire) might be
found unto Praise, and Honor, and Glory, at the appearing of Jesus Christ. And
1 Pet. 4. 12. Think it not strange concerning the Fiery Trial, which is to Try
you, etc. or, is designed by God for this purpose.

God is alike good in the Evils He inflicts, and the Good things he con^ers
upon us; as the Physician has the same Good design toward his Patient, in his
Griping Physic and Comforting Cordials: He equally aims at the Recovery of his
Health, in making him Uneasy with the One, and Chearing his Spirits with the
Other.

And therefore Considering this Last with the foregoing Particulars; nay, though
there were no other but this to be considered, well might Job say, Shall we
receive Good at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil? And infinite
reason have we, not only to be Patient under Evil things, but to be Thankful
for them too; seeing they are not so Evil Considered in themselves, as they are
Good Considering their Design; seeing, if we will Comply therewith, they are
not more painful than they are profitable, nor so Injurious to our Outward Man,
as Beneficial to our Inward.

I will Conclude this Argument with the Words of another of the Philosophers,
viz. Comment. in Epictet. l. 2. c. 6. p 117.
Epictetus in Arrian; O Man, what do thou? Why do thou not rid thy self of
all this Trouble? Adventure at last, with eyes lifted up to God, to say unto
Him; Use me, O God, for the future at Thine own Pleasure, Thou have my freest
Consent. I am of the same Mind that Thou art, I have a Mind to nothing but what
Thou think Good. Lead me whither Thou will, Cloth me as Thou please. Will Thou have me bear an Office, or shall I live a private Life? Must I stay, or
must I fly? Shall I be Poor, or shall I be Rich? I am ready to Obey, I will
defend Thee against all the World. I will make an Apology for Thy Providence
about these things to every Body. I say that all is Good, because Thou art so.
What could he have said better, had he been a Christian?

But to prevent Mistakes, I desire it may be observed, that I have not said
that in whatsoever Evils men may Suffer, God aims at the benefit and
advantage of the Sufferers; for had I affirmed this I could not have justified
it: There being some Evils which we have cause to look upon as wholly
Judgments, and as proceeding from mere Vengeance, in reference to those on whom
they are inflicted. As when a Notoriously wicked Wretch is Cut off in the very
Act of some Horrible Wickedness. Instances of this kind are not only to be
found in the Sacred Records, but our Own Age has produced such, and Possibly
no Age has been without them. And when provoking Sinners are taken away in
their Sins, without any Previous Warning. But it is notwithstanding most true,
that God Almighty's Design is Good in all Evils; for when He means not the Good
of the Sufferers, He intends a more General and Public Good: That all
Spectators of such Judgments, and those to whom the Notice of them shall come,
may be Scared by them from those Impious Practices which drew them down.

But I will add, That those have not the least reason to fear, that Evil things
of any nature whatsoever, have fallen upon them in mere Judgment, who do not
feel themselves given up to Hardness of heart; by which Phrase we are to
understand Perverseness of Will, or to a Reprobate Sense* but find that their
Afflictions have a good influence upon their Minds; that they make them more
Serious, and Excite in them good Inclinations, and Awaken them to Consider the
things which belong to their Peace, and Eternal Happiness.

Fourthly, We are now come to the Inferences, which are to be drawn from the
Doctrine we have delivered.

First, I Infer from thence, how we are to Pray Against Afflictions, viz. Not
Absolutely, but Conditionally, and with entire Submission.

That it is Lawful to deprecate them, we are well assured, in that we find not
only the best Men so doing in H. Scripture, but also our Blessed Savior
Himself. He did so, John 12. 27. Now is my Soul troubled, and what shall I say?
Father Save me from this Hour. And He does the like, Matthew. 26. 39. O my
Father, if it be Possible, let this Cup pass from me.

But we have also His Example, for Praying against the Bitter Cup
Conditionally, and with Submission to the Will of His Father. This is Employed
in those words, if it be possible: That is, to give it in the words of Grotius,
if it be Consistent with Thy Decrees, that by any other Means Thy Glory, and
the Salvation of Mankind, may be Equally Provided for. And this Condition, we
have in the Expressest terms in the latter part of that Verse, Nevertheless not
as I will but as Thou will. Again, V. 42. O my Father, if this Cup may not pass
away Except I drink it, Thy Will be done. And V. 44. it is said, He went away
and Prayed the third time, Saying the same words.

And the same Submission is Employed in the Text first cited; For after our Lord
had said, Father Save me from this Hour, and so expressed His Natural Aversion
thereunto, it follows, But for this Cause came I unto this Hour. Which is as
much as to say, But being assured that it is Thy Pleasure that I must undergo
this terrible Death, I heartily Submit. But there are others who read these
words, Father Save me from this Hour, with an Interrogation Point, and so they
conceive Him thus to speak, What shall I say? Shall I say, Father Save me from
this Hour? No I will not, as well knowing that Thou have determined otherwise.

And it is evident, that no Temporal Evils are to be prayed against otherwise,
in that Afflictions of one sort or other, are such things, as has been showed,
as we have Need of upon several Accounts; and there is no particular Affliction
but it is better for us to undergo it, than to be without it, for ought we
know. We are therefore to refer our selves to the Unerring Wisdom of God, who
knows in all Circumstances what is best for us, and best in it self, after we
have prayed Him to keep off such an Affliction, or to remove it.

It becomes us consequently not to Beg either, Over-passionately and
Vehemently: For this would be to prescribe to God, and to tell Him what is
best. Those do no less than so, who pray for Health or any outward Blessing for
themselves or theirs, as if they would have no Nay. Instead of so doing, we
ought heartily to endeavor to bring our Minds to a full Acquiescence in the
Divine Wisdom and Goodness; and to a Willingness to bear such or such an
Affliction (with the Divine Assistance) if God sees it fit we should; as
knowing that what He sees fit, must necessarily be so, and that it is Madness
to be averse to what is so.

And by this means shall we be able to say that our Petitions are never denied.
I mean, when we pray with Submission, and desire Absolutely nothing but what is
best for us, or rather what is best in it self; which also will prove to be
best for us, when we are once brought to this happy Temper.

It is said by the Author to the Hebrews, That our Savior was heard in that he
feared. How was he heard, since the bitter Cup of death did not pass from him,
but he did drink it? Why, he was heard, as in other respects so in this, that
he Prayed against that Cursed death, not Absolutely but Conditionally. And
therefore he Prayed for it upon supposition that it was most agreeable to the
Wise and Good Will of God that he should Suffer it: For we have seen that he
said, Not as I will but as Thou will.

To this purpose, Arrian. l. 2. P. 186.
I will present you with other most Excellent sayings of the last Cited
Philosopher. Let us begin every thing without too Passionate a desire, or an
Overgreat aversness. Let us behave our selves like a Traveller, who when he
comes where two Ways meet, asks the first passenger which of them he shall take
to such a Place; having no inclination to the Right hand, rather than to the
Left: But desiring only to understand the ready way to his Iourneys End. Just
so must we go to God, as to our Guide; as to One who ought to dispose of us as
He Pleases. We must not direct Him, what Course to take with us, but embrace
that which He Proposes, and desire only that He will Conduct us in the direct
way to Happiness. This is our Duty and our Safety: Whereas now you shall see
Men running to Him; Saying, Lord have Mercy upon me, Deliver me from such or
such an Evil! Wretch that thou art, would thou have any thing but what is
Best; and who can tell what that is? Is there any thing Best, but what shall
seem so to God? Why do thou endeavor to Corrupt Him, who is thy Judge, and
to Seduce Him who is thy Counceller, and to move Him by thy Cries to do
otherwise than He thinks sitting? Suffer Him therefore to follow His own
Wisdom, etc.

What Admirable Discourse is this! It Is most worthy of the highest rank of
Christians. But yet it is not very Strange, that it should come from the Pen of
a Considerative Religious Pagan; it being perfectly agreeable to Right Reason,
and necessarily to be inferred from a true Notion of God, which very many of
Them had.

And Consequently what a Shame must it needs be to us Christians, not heartily
to Endeavor to get our Minds into this Frame.

But it is a very Melancholy thing to consider, that it should be so Extremely
difficult, as we generally find it is, so to master our Passions under great
Afflictions, as to bring our selves to an entire Acquiescence in the good
Pleasure of God; while we cannot but Acknowledge it to be the most Unreasonable
thing imaginable, not to rest well Satisfied therewith. And that it should be
even next to impossible, without an Extraordinary measure of the Divine Grace,
to make our Minds Easy under Such Afflictions (and especially for those who
are of Unhappy Bodily Tempers, be they never so good Christians) but by the
help of Time, which without the help of Reason, will much deaden the sense of
any Affliction.

And therefore it is alike difficult not to Pray against such Evils, as we are
Naturally inclined most to dread, over Vehemently, and with less Submission
than becomes us.

But God is so Good, as to consider our Frame, and to make Abatements for our
natural infirmities, so long as we do not give our selves leave to Repine and
Murmur at any of His Providence.

One of the Philosophers, I think Epictetus, advises never to Pray to God, for
any External Blessings in Particular, but only that he would do for us in the
general what is Best. And such a Sense may be put upon One or Two of the last
recited Sayings, though they do not necessarily imply it. But he was so careful
to avoid One Extreme, as to run into Another, though the safer of the Two. For we
are sufficiently warranted by the H. Scriptures (and therefore that Extreme was
very pardonable in those who were unacquainted with them) to ask for particular
Outward Blessings; tho with great Care to do it with Resignation to the Wise
Will of God.

And it is very wonderful to see, how Epictetus could himself take that
forementioned Advice, which he gave to Others, in this following Address he
made to the Supreme Deity, viz. Did I ever find fault with Thy Government? I
was Sick when Thou would have me to be so, and so are Others, but I was
willingly Sick. I was always Poor at Thy Appointment, but Rejoicing. I never
was a Magistrate, nor had any Dignity, because Thou would not have me, and I
never desired it. Did Thou ever see me the more out of Humor, or Cast down
for this? Have I ever appeared before Thee with a discontented Countenance? Was
I not always prepared and ready for whatsoever Thou Requiredst? Will Thou have
me depart out of this Festival Solemnity, I am ready to go; and I give Thee all
Thanks for having Honored me so far, as to give me leave to keep the Feast
with Thee, and Behold Thy Works, and Observe Thy Government of the World. Let
Death seize on me no otherwise employed, than thus thinking and writing of such
things.

And he thus Appealed to his Acquaintants, Arrian. Epict. l. 3. C. 22. P. 314.
Behold I am an Exile, without House, without Servants, I lie upon the Ground,
I have no Wife, no Children, etc. But when did you ever hear me Accuse either
God or Man? When did I ever Complain of any one? Have ever any one of you seen
me with a Sad Countenance? O how few Christians can for bear Blushing at the
reading of these Passages!

And what has been said of Private and Personal Evils, is as true of Public
and National. These neither are to be deprecated Absolutely; for they are
designed no less for the good of Nations and Bodies Politic, than the other
are for the good of particular Persons. When Thy Judgments are abroad in the
World, the In^abitants thereof will learn Righteousness, says the Prophet,
Isaiah 26. 9. And that for this end they are inflicted we are abundantly
assured. No Calamity short of utter Destruction, ought otherwise to be
interpreted, than as designed for the Reformation of those Kingdoms, Cities,
and other Societies on which they fall.

And God has Threatened it as an high Expression of His displeasure, that He
will not Punish a Wicked People; nor certainly can there be an higher on this
side Hell. As Hosea 4. 14. I will not Punish your Daughters when they commit
Whoredom; nor your Spouses, when they commit Adultery. And Ver. 17. Ephraim is
joined to Idols, let him alone. And nothing more Severe could well come out of
the Mouth of God Almighty, than those words, Isaiah 1. 5. Why should you be
Smitten any more? You will Revolt more and more.

And therefore, I say, in our intercessions for the diverting or removing of
General Judgments, we must beware of prescribing to God: In Praying for which,
without any Conditions Expressed or Employed, we make our selves Wiser than
infinite Wisdom. And in so doing, we may Curse our Selves and our Country, when
we think we Pray for both.

We do now seem generally impatiently desirous to have a Conclusion put to this
Bloody and Expensive War; but yet we may not Pray Absolutely for it, because we
are far from knowing that it will prove best for us to have our Prayers
granted. Nay indeed we have too great reason to fear it will not, since this
heavy Scourg has wrought no visible Reformation upon us: And that the
Consequence of a Peace, and of the total Removal of our Fears from Abroad, may
be an Occasion (Considering how many Unquiet and Restless Spirits we have among
us) of running us into Confusion at Home: Which is not much less dreadful to
think of, than falling into the Clutches of our Common Enemy; and which
(without a Miraculous interposition of Providence, which it would be Madness to
expect) must inevitably make us a Prey to his Teeth; and fasten for ever, at
least for this Age, our Chains upon us. But if this should not be the Effect of
a Peace before we more deserve it, and are better Prepared for it, God has
Plagues enough for a People who hate to be Reformed, which may make them as
Miserable as any War can do. And so we pass to our Second Inference.

Secondly, We learn from what has been discoursed, how great a Folly it is for
a man to Judge himself or others to be out of Gods Favor, because much
Afflicted. If Afflictions were in all respects Evils, this ought to be
Concluded. But it has been showed that, as they come from God's Hand, they are
good things: That there is not only a Good Design in them but the Best of
Designs; and that they are things apt in their own nature, to promote our
greatest Good.

Those look no farther than the Pain and Smart of an Affliction, that Conclude
it an Expression of God's Ill Will. They fix their Eye only upon the dark side
of the Cloud, and take no notice of the bright side. They are People of very
little Thought, and Consideration; otherwise they would easily call to mind,
that nothing is more common among our selves, than Correcting and Chastising
from a principle of Love, and of the greatest Love: Than putting to Pain from
the greatest Good Will, and for the most Charitable Purposes.

They would also, if they used themselves to Thinking, Consider that nothing
makes People so Serious, or so brings them to their rightminds, as Afflictions.
And they could not (if well acquainted with the Bible) but think of such Texts
as these: Whom the Lord loves he Corrects, as a Father the Son in whom he
delights, Prove. 3. 12. Happy is the man whom God Corrects, Job. 5. 17. Whom
the Lord loves He Chastneth, and Scourges every Son whom He receives, Heb.
12. 6, 7.

If it be Replied, That though every Affliction is no sign of a persons being out
of the Favor of God, yet being exercised with frequent, long and sharp
Afflictions, seems not consistent with His Love: Those who make This Reply,
need only to be minded, of the Calamities which fell on Job; who being declared
by God Himself to be an Upright, and most Exemplarily Good Man, could not but
be His Extraordinary Favorite: Or of the Terrible Afflictions with which King
David, though a Man after God's own Heart, and the Prophet Jeremiah, and many
other of the Best Men in the Old Testament, were exercised: And those of the
Great St. Paul and others, which we read of in the New.

Nay, those who think there are such Temporal Evils, as cannot consist with the
Love of God, must believe that His Only Begotten Son, was an Object of His
Hatred.

But God's Hatred is so far from being to be concluded from any Evils that here
befall us, that we cannot certainly conclude so much as His Anger from any
whatsoever, without taking in other Considerations, besides that of the Nature
of those Evils. For we have seen that they come from God's Hand, for diverse
other Ends besides that of Punishing for Sin. And this may be said even of the
greatest that are of a mere Temporal Nature. For we do not find, that there was
any thing of Punishment in Job's Calamities; and we are certain there was
nothing of it, in our Savior's Sufferings. That is, they could not be
inflicted upon the Account of any Displeasure He had given to His Heavenly
Father, because in Him was no Sin.

And considering what has been said upon this Subject, it would be no
unaccountable thing, if none were ever so Afflicted as God's Children. No nor
if His dearest Children, that is the best CHRISTIANS, and those who have
arrived to the highest degrees of Virtue and Goodness, should be always most
Afflicted of any of His Children. This would be no perplexing Providence,
because such would make the best Examples to the World of bearing Afflictions,
of Patience, cheerful and thankful Submission to the Will of God under them.

Nor would they judge themselves upon a little sedate thinking, hardly dealt
with, if the better Christians they are, the more they should be Afflicted,
because they look not at the things that are seen, as the Apostle speaks, but
at the things that are not seen: The things that are seen being Temporal, but
the things that are not seen, Eternal. They know that they shall have an
Abundant Recompense made them hereafter, for all their Sufferings here: That
they are not worthy, as the same Apostle says, to be compared with the Glory,
which shall be revealed in them: That the extraordinariness of their
Afflictions for a short time, shall (through the Merits of their Savior)
procure to them an extraordinary degree of Heavenly Bliss to all Eternity.

And they find also, especially if their Sufferings be for Righteousness sake,
supports at present suitable to their Burdens; and that as their Sufferings
abound, their Consolations abound likewise.

And thus we see what a weak thing it is, to have the worse Opinion of our
Spiritual Estate, or to conclude our selves out of the Divine Favor, upon the
Account of our being much afflicted: And how Unchristian a thing it is, to
pass, like Job's Friends, severe Censures on others upon the like Accounts.

I could Name one of the most Eminent Persons, and Christians too, of the Age
he lived in, who was so far from looking upon great Afflictions, as a Sign of
God's Hatred, or Displeasure, that one Day reading the 12th. to the Hebrews,
where it is said, If ye be without Chastisement, whereof all are Partakers,
then are ye Bastards and not Sons, etc. fell into a deep Melancholy concerning
his own state, because he did not then remember, that he had ever had any very
Remarkable Affliction. Which being observed by a Friend of his, he humbly
desired to know of him the Cause of the great pensiveness he discerned in his
Countenance. And having his Request satisfied, he Replied, That he wondered his
Memory should so fail him, since he was fallen (through the Iniquity of the
Times) from most plentiful to low Circumstances. The Good Man not acknowledging
this to be any great Affliction, because God had still taken such Care of him
as that he never wanted, his Friend minded him of a Great One indeed, (which it
is much he should at any time forget) which gave case to his Mind. But this
Great Man was herein guilty of the Other Extreme, not considering those words
of K. Solomon, No man knows Love or Hatred by all that is before him.

As for the foresaid Words of the Author to the Hebrews, and that saying of St.
Paul, we must through much Tribulation enter into the Kingdom of God: And that
other, All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution, they
had doubtless a special relation to that Time when they were spoken. When a Man
could not make Profession of Christianity, and adhere thereto, but he must
expect to suffer greatly for it. Though the World was never yet I doubt so good,
as that there has been a Time when this could not be truly said, The greater
Conscience Men make of their ways, and the more strictly they keep to the Rules
of Righteousness and Goodness, the more Trouble they must make Account of:
Especially when it relates to Persons in public Stations. Though it must be
acknowledged too, that these Men's Troubles are not to be compared with those,
in which the bold Transgressors of those Rules are, in a well Governed Nation,
frequently involved.

In short, We are to judge of our own Spiritual Estate, by considering how it
is within us, not without us. And we are to judge of Others, as to that State,
by their Lives and Manners, not by their Outward Circumstances. This Rule our
Blessed Lord has taught us, in the Beginning of the Thirteenth Chapter of St.
Luke's Gospel.

Thirdly, I Infer from what has been said upon this Subject, That it is a part
of great Wisdom, to be, when we are in the most easy Circumstances, often
thinking of a Change, and preparing our selves for New Afflictions. This will
be a means to make them much easier to be born when they come; and may be a
means to prevent their coming, because by thus doing we must needs have so much
the less Need of them. But the more we need one Affliction or other, the more
reason have we to expect it, from the Consideration even of the Divine Goodness.

And Good People should make the less Account of any Long Uninterrupted
Prosperity in this World, because they have not their Portion here, as the
Wicked have. And it is very unreasonable for those to presume upon a kind of
Heaven here, who upon the best Grounds do hope for a Heaven hereafter; and to
conclude on passing through Temporal Pleasures to Eternal Ones.

We ought in all reason, if we think Heaven our Home, to be very well
satisfied, to live on Earth like Pilgrims and Strangers. As the Apostle says
the Good Patriarchs Confessed themselves to be, Heb. 11. 13.

If we look upon Heaven as our Everlasting Rest, how can we so much as hope,
that our Condition here will be better than that of Travelers? Who use to make
full Account of a deal of Rugged and Foul, as well as Smooth and Clean Way; Who
expect not to have Dry and Serene Weather always, nor scarcely for the most
part; who are not at all surprised at Rain, Wind and Storms, as if some strange
thing happened to them. Nor do they think themselves Unhappy, if they meet with
more Scorching Heat, than Cool Shade; or with more Uncivil than Kind and
Courteous Usage in a Strange Country, so long as they hope to get safe to their
Journeys End; and know that they shall find all things there most agreeable to
their desires, and to their hearts Content.

Good Christians need not be minded, that the Captain of their Salvation
Himself was made Perfect by Sufferings; as the Apostle says, Heb. 2. 10. That
He took the Cross in the way to His Crown. That He was a Man of Sorrows and
acquainted with Grief before He could enter upon the possession of That Joy
which was set before Him: That He entered into the Kingdom of Heaven, through
much Tribulation.

Nor can they think that GOD has any Reason, to be more Tender of them than of
His Dear Son; nor imagine themselves ill dealt with, if it fares no worse with
them than it did with Him. Or, if God will have them go the same Uneasy Way to
Eternal Bliss, that He went. They can not see the least Cause to complain, if
He will have the Members to be conformed to their Head in all respects in this
World, as well as in the World to come.

Those are therefore very imprudent, that because of their having suffered
Severe things, presume upon a long Respite from the like again. It is possible
they may have such a Respite, but it ought not to be with any Confidence
Expected; because there is no Reason on which to found such an Expectation, as
has been showed.

And (by the way) it would be a very great Folly, in reference to the Public,
to Conclude upon Happy Times, if we were once eased of our present Burdens and
Complaints, and Effectually Secured from our present Fears. For when we are
biggest with hopes of a most Prosperous State of Affairs, and that God will
make us Glad, according to the days wherein he has Afflicted us, and the years
wherein we have seen Evil, some unthought of Calamity may Suddenly Seize us; as
we have again and again found by Experience. For how often have we seen cause
to say with the Prophet, We looked for Peace, but no good came; and for a time
of Health, but behold Trouble! Ier. 8. 15. And to allude to that in the 18 th.
V. Many a time, when we have been Comforting our selves against more Sorrow,
there has presently happ^ned one Cross thing or other, which has Caused our
Hearts to Faint in us. And so, no doubt, it will be for the future with us, if
we continue as Unreformed as Ever. Except our Good God should give us Over, for
an Obdurate and incorrigible People, and no farther concern Himself for our
Amendment. But, as has been intimated, this is the Saddest of all Judgments;
and it speaks Eternal Destruction to be Sealed upon those People, upon whom it
lights.

But to return to the Matter in hand; We seeing so great Reason, while we
remain in this World, to look for New Afflictions, it greatly Concerns us to be
still preparing our selves for them, that they may not come upon us before we
are Aware. For whenever they do so, we shall find them so much the Heavier
and more ^ntolerable; and that it requires much the longer time for the so
subduing our Passions to our Reason, as to be able to demean our selves
decently, and as becomes Men, and much more as becomes Christians, under them.

As the Son of Sirach says, Eccles. 41. 1. O Death, how bitter is the
Remembrance of thee, to a Man that lives at Rest in his Possessions; unto the
Man who has nothing to Vex him, and that has Prosperity in all things! So may
it be said, How bitter, how unsupportable, is a great Affliction to a Man, when
it falls upon him all of a Sudden; when he thought of nothing less, than
Afflictions! How Weak does a Sad Providence find a Man, when at the time of its
coming he had Put far from him the Evil day, and did not in the least dream of
any Alteration of his Condition!

What a Horrible Surprise must it have been to the Rich man in the Gospel (had
it been no Parable but a real History) to hear those words, Thou Foool this
night shall thy Soul be required of thee, then whose shall those Things be,
which thou have Provided? at that very instant, when he was saying to himself,
Thou have Goods laid up for many Years; Take thine Ease, Eat, Drink and be
Merry!

Fourthly, I infer from the Text, what a Wonderfully Powerful Motive, the Hopes
we have of Receiving such Glorious Things in the Future life, must needs be, To
Receive Evil things at the Hand of God in this life. If our Receiving the Good
things of this Present State, be such a Motive thereto as has been showed,
then What a Motive is that of the Hope of infinitely better Things in that to
come!

I Confess that the Motive in the Text has the Advantage, as the Matter there
of is Things present, and the Matter of the other, Things to come: But
considering all the other differences, between these two sorts of Good things;
and that there is the greatest assurance imaginable given to good People, of
their hereafter Receiving those Good things, there is no Comparison to be made
between this and that Motive.

It is impossible, that he should think God a Severe Master, let him meet with
never so many Evil things in this World, who has a Sure and Certain Hope of
Ere long Receiving such Good things, as Pass all Understanding: As the Eye of
Man never saw, nor his Ear ever heard, nor his Heart is able to Conceive any
like unto them.

It must needs make this Vale of Tears, not only a Tolerable but a Pleasant
Place, to Consider, that at the End thereof is the Mount of Joy: Of Joy
Unspeakable and full of Glory. And that these (comparatively speaking) Light
Afflictions which are but for a Moment, will work out for us (if we are not
inexcusably wanting to our selves) a far more exceeding and Eternal weight of
Glory.

Fifthly, I infer, How unreasonable it is, to have the lower and more
undervaluing thoughts of the Divine Goodness and Beneficence, and the less
Sense of our Obligations to God, in regard of the Evils wherewith our Good
things are mixed, and our Earthly Comforts are allayed. The great
unreasonableness hereof will appear by the following Considerations, over and
above those we have been presented with from the words of the Text.

I. Very many, and perhaps the incomparably greater part of the Evils we
suffer, are not from the mere, or immediate Providence of God. It is Certain,
that innumerable are of Men's own inflicting upon themselves. And not only
deserved by them, but also the necessary Effects of their Sinning, or of their
Inadvertency.

We will take Poverty for one Instance. For the most part, we may well
adventure to say, Men fall into it from Plentiful Fortunes, through their
wicked or foolish wasting their Estates; by either Spending them upon their
Lusts, or their rash Engaging for Non-Solvent Persons, or their Improvidence,
Idleness and Mindlesness of their Business. Where one is brought to great Want,
by the mere Providence of God, our observation I believe will tell us of Many,
who ought to impute it to themselves immediately.

Let Sickness be another Instance. Men, for Certain, do ordinarily fall into
Diseases, by doing what they ought not to do, or neglecting what they ought to
do, and for want of due Care and Caution.

From whence do too Commonly the Tormenting Diseases of the Gout and Stone, and
the Dropsy and Consumption come, but from men's offending as to the Quantity or
Quality of their Liquors; or from such other Causes as by a greater Care of
themselves might have been Prevented?

Fevers are some of the most common Diseases, but are they not ordinarily
Occasioned, either by some intemperance in Meats or Drinks, or Exercise; or
unseasonable Drinking when Over hot, or not taking care to cool by degrees, and
the like? And I am per^waded, that in reflecting upon the Causes of our
Sicknesses of most kinds, there are few of us who are not sensible, that they
were the natural Consequents of some Sin or Imprudence or other, much more
frequently, than of that which was wholly unavoidable.

Except in the Case of the Airs being infected with Pestilential or Malignant
Vapors, we have great reason to think, that the much greater Number are laid
upon Sick Beds by the Ordinary Maladies, through some Neglect of their Health;
and therefore that there may be no more than the Permissive Hand of God in
their being deprived thereof.

When we suffer in our Reputation, or otherways, from the Ill will of others,
ought we not too often to thank our selves for not being so Cautious, as we
should have been, of giving them Offense; and to impute it at least to
Inconsideration and Rashness as to some Actions or Words, which gave occasion
more or less, to their being provoked against us?

Those that suffer from the Misbehaviour, or Vndutifulness of their Children
(which must needs be, especially to Good Men, the greatest of all Afflictions)
are they not, for the most part, too well aware, that these sufferings are in a
great measure owing to themselves; and that they might have had much better
Children, if they had set them a better Example, and given them better
Education?

And I need not add, that the same is to be said, in reference to the Divine
Providence, of those Afflictions which do arise from our Sympathy with those in
Affliction, who are dear to us, when they suffer through their own default.

And the same thing is to be asserted of those Evils, which we have not brought
upon our selves, but are occasioned by the Faults of our Parents, or of such as
whose Interests and Concerns, are necessarily linked together with ours; so
that the one cannot suffer, but the other also must.

As when a Man lives in Penury, by means of his Fathers disabling himself by
his Prodigality, Sin, or Folly, to leave him a Subsistence. Or when a
Tradesman is made a Bankrupt by his means, whom he has taken into
Partnership. Or when Parents, having by Debauchery Marred their own Bodies, and
vitiated their Constitutions, Propagate their Diseases or Weaknesses, to the
Children which are afterward born of them.

Now I say, there is nothing more Unreasonable, than to think God Almighty the
less Good, in regard of such Evils as those now mentioned.

And if it be well Considered, I cannot, I say, doubt but that most of those
which Men complain of, are of that nature.

And what would we have God to do, to keep off such Evils as these? Would we
have him to be continually laying irresistible Restreints upon Free Agents, so
as that it shall be impossible for them at any time to do wickedly, or at any
time to act foolishly? If we think that this would well become Him, we must
think at the same time, that to make Free Agents did disbecome Him. But
supposing such Agents so left to the Use of their Liberty, as not to be so
withheld from either Sinning, or playing the Fools, as that they can not do
either, the foresaid and such like Evils will necessarily follow from the Abuse
thereof. And therefore far be it from us, to have the lower opinion of the
Divine Goodness upon the account of them.

But I ought to add (in order to our having a just Sense of Gods Goodness, and
that it may lose nothing of the Honor due to it) that He does innumerable
times prevent by Special Providence, our running into those Sins, and those
Rash Actions, which we should most Certainly have otherwise been guilty of. And
He does frequently (and possibly as often) in a Secret invisible manner, so
Overrule Natural Causes of Evils, as to prevent their producing them, when they
were ready to do it. Not only History, but many of our Own observations, do
furnish us with great Proofs hereof. And if these Propositions were not both
true, it is not imaginable but that this world would be a far more intolerable
Place than it is, Considering how it Abounds with Wickedness, and how Corrupt
Human Nature is in this lapsed State, and what Foolish and Heady Creatures the
Generality of Mankind are, and what Dangers we are always Encompassed with. And
the worst objectino we can make against Almighty God, for not always thus
interposing, is, that He will not have His Goodness in any one instance, to
thwart and contradict that Wisdom by which He Governs the World.

But suppose we waved the Consideration of the Divine Wisdom in the Case, what
Reason can we have to complain of God's deficiency in Goodness, because He is
not more concerned to keep Evils off from us, than we our selves are? It Is
certain, He is much more concerned for our Good than we can be, and sad would
it be for us, if He were not; but suppose Him only equally so, we should not
have cause to think Him wanting to us, but should see great Reason to Admire
His Goodness; considering that He is infinitely Above even the Glorious Angels,
and can get nothing by any of His Creatures being Happy, nor lose any thing by
their being Miserable.

II. Let us next Consider, That, as Abundance of the Evils which men groan
under, are not from the mere or immediate Providence of God, so very many
things which we are apt to account Evils, and are matter of Discontent to us,
are not Evils. That Stoical Maxim, Men's Minds are not troubled with Things, but
with the False Opinions they have of Things, would be very true, if it ran
thus, Men's Minds are not so much troubled with Things, etc. For there are a
multitude of things which greatly disturb men, which are only Evils of their
own making; and which they would make exceeding light of, would they govern
themselves more by Reason, than by fond Phansy, and the Childish Opinions of
other Folk.

To have nothing of Superfluity, but a bare Competency, how many are there who
account this a great Evil! Though the Apostle says, Having Food and Raiment, let
us be therewith content. And we have a good Old Saying, Nature is content with
a little, and Grace with less. How many lay it to heart, as a grievous thing,
to be necessitated to Earn their Bread with the Sweat of their Brows; nay not
to be able to make such a Figure among their Neighbors, as diverse of them do!
And thereupon they take but slight Notice of the innumerable great Mercies
which they enjoy; and instead of being thankful for them, murmur at the Divine
Providence, because they have not all they would have.

But as God Almighty asked the peevish Prophet, Whether he did well to be
Angry? I ask these, Whether they do well to be discontented, and to have so
little Sense of the Bounty of their Great Benefactor? For (not to mind them
again, that whatsoever the Good things are which they enjoy, they are more than
He owes them, or than their Deserts can claim) they ought to consider, that
the whole World is God's Charge, and not only some particular Persons; and that
His Goodness expresses its self by so proportioning His Blessings to
particulars, as shall be most for the good of the Whole: And that it would be
extremely ill for the Whole, for all to be alike Sharers in His Good things.

And it is necessary for the Wellbeing of the whole, that there should be a
great Variety of Ranks and Orders of Men: By which means, all necessary Offices
have People sitted for them.

And, withal, they ought to Consider, that if it be necessary that many should
be in low Circumstances, for the performance of the lower and meaner Offices,
which yet are every whit as necessary as the higher, what Reason can they give,
why themselves should not be in the Number of those many? And whether, for the
same Reason that they would be placed in one of the higher Orbs, every body
else may not expect it? Self-love is the only Reason, why They would be so,
but why may not Every man Love himself, as well as they love themselves?

They ought to consider too, that at this rate there could be no pleasing them.
For though God should still Humor them, in giving them their desires, it would
but make them rise, still higher and higher in their Cravings.

It is an Unquestionable Truth, that Contentment is not to be fetched from
without, but from an inward good Frame and Temper of Mind. And therefore we
find, that those who are in High Places, are not the most but the least
Contented; are far more Ambitious of Rising still Higher, than those who are in
the very lowest. And for the same Reason, he, who being in a Low Condition, is
discontented because he is not in an higher, will never be satisfied till he
gets to the very Top; nor then neither.

So that, if thy being without such or such Good things, may Reasonably be a
matter of Complaint, or cause an Abatement of Gratitude, thou can never be
put into such Circumstances, as where in thou will see cause to be very
Thankful, or not to Complain.

And I add, that it is highly Worthy of an Infinitely Good God, instead of
being Repugnant to His Goodness, to make such feel real Evils, who frame to
themselves so many Imaginary Ones: To make those Sufferers in good earnest, who
complain of such things as Evils, which are not so, but at worst in a less
degree Good things: And to bring Heavy Afflictions on those, who make by their
Discontent Light Ones Heavy.

III. Consider that, as you want those Good things which many have, so
Abundance of those who enjoy those things, do want others that you have. How
many that have great Estates, and Honorable Titles, are destitute of some of
the most Common Mercies; by which means they are able to take but little
Content, in all their Grandeur! And by which means, Thousands of the Meanest
People, would be very unwilling to change Conditions with them. And who knows
not, that the most common Blessings, are the most Valuable?

What Beggar would lose his Eyesight, to be a Lord? Who would change his
Cottage for a Palace, if he must give his Health and his Ease into the Bargain?
Who would not rather choose to sleep sweetly upon Straw, than to lie Crying out
under the Stone or Gout, upon a Bed of Ivory? What Wise Man would not rather
Eat Course Fare with a good Stomach and Appetite, than to be served with Great
Variety of Choice Dishes, and unable to Digest one of them without Wine, or
Relish one of them without Sauces?

Nay, if we understood what Crosses and Vexations of innumerable kinds, do
attend great Estates, and what Dangers High Places are surrounded with, we
should greatly pity very Rich and Great Men, instead of Envying them; and think
our selves far more Happy with a quiet and a safe Competency.

There is nothing more plainly Observable, than that ordinarily the Meanest
Servants of Great People, do enjoy more satisfaction, than their Lords or
Ladies.

So that put all things together, though there be a vast difference between Men
and Men in their external Circumstances, there is but very little difference
between them, as to their partaking of the Divine Beneficence.

No Man enjoys all Good things, and it is commonly seen that he who falls short
of another in some, as much excells him in Others.

IV. Consider how prone we are, to make the Good things God blesses us with,
Evils to our selves, and the greatest Evils. That is, to convert our Temporal
Good things into Spiritual Evil things; and to make them more Mischievous to
our Souls, than it is possible they should be Beneficial to our Outward Man.

And, as we are all very prone hereto, so, are not most Men actually so much
the more High-minded, Vain, Covetous and Sensual, etc. by how much the more
they Abound in Earthly Blessings? And therefore is God ever the less Good to
men, in either depriving them of those Good things they so Abuse, or in
Withholding many such from those, whom He knows would be in very great Danger
of Abusing them, if they had them?

V. Consider how many do make little Conscience of doing Evil to others; of
making them Sufferers in one respect or other: And how many of those, who would
not be thought Unjust or Cruel, can find in their hearts to be Severe and
Rigid. And how many that are better Natured and better Principled than such
Persons, are nothing so inclined to Pity the Afflicted and Distressed, as they
ought to be; nor to Concern themselves to keep off Evils from their Brethren,
or to Ease them of them, according to their Power.

Now with what Face can such Expect, that God Almighty should be so ^ender of
those, either in Preventing the lighting of Evils upon them, or in taking them
off, when ever they would have Him, who are either Harsh to, or so little
Tender of their Fellow Christians, or Fellow Creatures?

How does it Dis-become the Goodness of God, to say to such, With what Measure
you Mete, it shall be Meted to you again?

What Wretched People then are they, who Complain of God, for Showing no more
Mercy to them, who have no more Mercy for others; and that will have Him to be
the less Good upon this account! Since it is no contradiction to His Goodness,
to Abandon such to Extreme Sufferings, but an Act most worthy of His Justice.

VI. It may be Considered too, that many of the Evils which befall us, others
do Gain more by than the Sufferers lose; and consequently, God is more Gracious
to others in them, than He is Severe to those who Suffer by them. We use to
say, That is an Ill Wind, which blows no body good.

And, as we have showed, that God designs Men's own Good in their Sufferings, be
they never so bad, provided they have not Sinned themselves past Recovery by
Afflictions; and that all that improve them as they ought, do reap great
Advantage by them, especially Spiritual Advantage, so has He Contrived things
in so Wise a manner, as that we are Mutually Advantaged by one another
Afflictions. There may be given a Thousand Instances of this nature, and
therefore it is needless to give any.

Now, He that would take a Measure of the Divine Goodness, by what happens to
Himself, Considered as a Being Separate from the Rest of Mankind, must be so
Silly as to think at the same time, that God has no Body to be Concerned for
besides Himself.

Now, take we along with these Considerations, what has been Discoursed of the
Fewness of our Evil things, in Comparison of our Good things: And of our
Non-desert of the least Good things, but our High desert of the Greatest Evils:
And of the Need we all have of Evil things: And of Evil things being appointed
us by God Almighty, from the Self-same Principle that Good things are; I say,
Let these accompany our last mentioned Considerations, and then, if we are
Able, let us think it a Tolerable thing to Repine at any of God's Dealings with
us; or to Cease to Praise Him, and to have a Thankful Sense of our Obligations
to Him, under even the Sharpest Trials. Then let us think, if we can, that that
Exhortation of the Psalmist, may be sometimes Unseasonable, viz. Praise the
Lord; for it is Good to Sing Praises unto our God: For it is Pleasant, and
Praise is Comely.

If, after all that has now been Offered to our Consideration, we can persuade
our selves thus to think, we must Blame holy Job for being so offended as his
Wife's Taunt, Bless God and Dye.

But now, in the Conclusion, I must Repeat what has been already Suggested,
and which Sad Experience assures us of, viz. That it is far more easy to
Satisfy our Reason, than to bring our Passions under the Government thereof;
and especially in reference to the Bearing of Afflictions. And therefore there
is an Absolute Necessity of adding, to whatsoever Considerations we are
furnished with to Strengthen us under them, our Frequent, Humble, and most
Importunate Supplications to the Throne of Grace, that we may not under the
Afflicting Hand of God, be so Overpowered with Melancholy, as to be unable to
think a Wise Thought; and to be Enabled so to fix our Minds upon Such
Considerations, as that they may make an Effectual Impression; and that we may
have Supports suitable to our Burdens; without which, let us Exercise our
Thinking Faculty as well as we can, we shall be as Weak as Water. And they were
great Divine Supports to which Job was above all beholden; or he had never
Behaved himself as he did, under Such Mighty Calamities; nor particularly given
so brave a Reply to his Wifes Profane Speech, as, What? Shall we receive Good
at the Hand of God, and shall we not receive Evil?

THE END.

