A SERMON Preached before the JUDGES, etc. In the time of the ASSIZES IN THE
CATHEDRAL CHVRCH AT GLOUCESTER, On Sunday Aug. 7. 1681.

Published to put a stop to False and Injurious Representations.

By Edward Fowler, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for R. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred Majesty, and
Walter Kettilby, 1681.

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE desire of many Worthy Gentlemen, who were pleased to think this Sermon
seasonable, could not have prevailed with me to make it thus public, were it
not for the Entertainment it has met with from another sort of Auditors, who
have represented it as Fanatical, and almost all that is naught.

But, as I have not (I thank God) so little of a Christian in me, as to return
Cursing for Cursing, or Reviling for Reviling; but, on the contrary, do most
heartily pray for these men, who express the greatest enmity against me: so
will I no longer trouble the Reader with complaints of their most injurious and
provoking behavior upon the account of the following Discourse, but only
entreat him to be Impartial in the perusal of it; and then to judge between
them and me, whether I have given them any other cause to be so enraged, than
what the blessed Apostle gave the Galatians, viz. Telling them the truth.

And I appeal to the most Censorious and Captious of those that heard me,
whether I have been guilty of the least Unfaithfulness in this Publication.

God is my Witness, that I had the best of Designs in Penning and Preaching
this Sermon, viz. A sincere and earnest desire to do some service to the
Protestant Religion, His Majesty, and the Church of England, as by Law
established: Nor am I conscious to my self of any crime in the pursuing of this
Design, unless honest impartiality in exposing the Doings, which are apparently
most highly prejudicial to the interest of all these (than which nothing in
this world should be dearer to us) ought to render me blameworthy.

But I am not in the least solicitous about what defects may be found in the
Discourse, that are not of a moral nature; for, as the ingenuous will easily
overlook them (especially in a Discourse not designed for the Press) so 'twould
be a great piece of weakness to be at all concerned at the Censures of those
that lie at the catch, and who if they find no faults will be sure to make them.

But the main thing I intended this Preface for is yet behind, viz. A faithful
Narrative of a matter of Fact, which has had the ill fortune to be as falsely
and injuriously represented as this Sermon. It is this, There lately stood in
the West-window of the Quire of Gloucester Cathedral, a most scandalous
Picture, viz. Of the Blessed Trinity: Which, had it been much observed, could
never have outstood the first year of the Reformation; and much less continued
till about two years since. I was first showed it by one of my Brother
Prebendaries about four years since: After which time, the sight of it, when I
read at the Communion Table, did often discompose me. And, thinking my self
obliged to do my endeavor to have it taken down, though no great notice, that
I knew, was taken of it, I made no haste for that reason; but some time after
my return from my Residence, I advised with one who is a most learned and
eminent Prelate of our Church about it; and he, expressing high offense at it,
told me we were all bound in Conscience not to suffer such a thing, now we had
observed it, to stand longer. Hereupon I resolved to complain of it in Chapter
at my next Residence, but there being not above two, or at the most three of us
upon the place all that time, I put off the doing it till my Residence the
following year. And then, having a good opportunity (there being about the
Conclusion of that Residence, our whole number except one, present) at a
Chapter that was called about other business, the very last day of my stay
(which was Mid-summer Eve 1679.) having all of us viewed it before, I moved my
Brethren in Chapter (the officers that were present being first desired to
withdraw, because I would have the matter carried as privately as might be)
that it might be taken down: Representing the hatefulness of such a Picture,
and what scandal it would give, should it happen to become more public (as it
quickly might, it being known to more than our selves, and that not by my
means) and the great seasonableness of doing it at this nick of time, seeing
through oversight it had been omitted thus long: it being not long after the
discovery of the Plot, and many Factious people then at work in vilifying the
Church of England as advancing apace toward Popery. This motion of mine was
readily entertained by the Chapter, and the Idol most cheerfully voted down,
and the Act of Chapter afterward Recorded in the Register Book by some of the
Prebendaries, where it now stands. I moved, as I said, that it should be taken
down, that is, by a Glasier; but for a great reason, which I think fit to
conceal, till provoked to publish it, it was as readily consented to, that it
should be immediately broken, as 'twas before, that it should be taken down,
and new glass set up in the room of it. Whereupon the greater number of the
Chapter went together to the place to countenance the action, and it was done
by my hand. We could not in the least doubt, but that this was done very
regularly, it being a hard case if the Governors of a Cathedral should not be
invested with as much Authority as this comes to. But when it came to be known
abroad, there was a hideous noise and clamor made by some few people; who are,
I dare say, the first Protestants that ever so concerned themselves about such
a vile Relic of Popish Superstition. The Clamor continues to this very day;
and, after I had Preached this Sermon, complaint was made of the high
misdemeanor to the Judges, and some, further to vent their spleen against me
for my Sermon, did what lay in them to have it presented by the Grand Jury of
the City, though a thing of above two years standing; Which doughty attempt (as
well it might) made sport enough.

But that which necessitates my publishing this Narrative, is the several
shameful Untruths they have made to pass for current, far and near, among those
who have little knowledge of them and me; for those that know either of us
cannot easily believe them. Particularly,

First, they represent this Action, as done by me upon my own head. They say
not one word of a Chapters being concerned in the case, and so expose me for a
Rash and furious Zealot.

Secondly, To lay still greater load upon me, they have given it out by
themselves, and their Agents (particularly a See Prove. 26.24, 25, 26. See Prove.
25.18.
little Agent they have in London, a most disingenuous Creature, of whom I have
deserved, as he cannot forget, much better things) that it was only the Picture
of a Saint or Angel, or at worst of our Savior, when the contrary was visible
to us all, and to others also, as I have intimated already. It was the old
Popish Picture of the Trinity; God the Father represented by an Old man with a
very long Gray Beard, and a huge beam of Light about his head: God the Son, by
a Crucifix between his knees: And God the Holy Ghost, by a Dove with spread
wings, under his Beard: which was patcht with a piece or two (as I remember) of
plain glass. I have the Copy of the Picture by me as it stood in the Window,
drawn by one who lives in that City, that had (as he told me) viewed it at
times for twenty years together.

Thirdly, They represent it as done in compliance with the Scotch Rebels, who,
they say, were then in Arms. But as this is most false, (these wretches being
routed before this time, and the news of it come to Gloucester in the Public
intelligence) so every body must needs see the woeful silliness and
Ridiculousness, as well as Malice of this suggestion.

There are some I confess, who are of better Tempers than the Furious people
who have made such a loud clamor, that express their dislike of Breaking this
Picture, which they call a great indecency. But I would fain know of them, why
must it be done so decently? Is it because it was a gross abuse of the Holy
Trinity? But if it was not an indecency to break in pieces the Brazen Serpent,
when it came to be abused, though of God's own institution, much less can it be
so, to break that the making of which God has Deuteronomy. 4.15, etc.
forbidden in so strict a manner. But I have said already that it had been done
after these men's decent fashion, that is, taken down by a Glasier, might I have
had my will, and had there not been a great probability, if not certainty, of
our making our Order to no purpose, if it were not done this way; as my Worthy
Brethren will bear me witness: who are all living, and can testify the truth
of my Narrative of this so Scandalous a thing, viz. The Destroying of an Idol,
that even Moderate Papists have condemned, and some of the better sort of
Heathens also; that is, a Corporeal Representation of the Great God, and which
one would wonder should have any Patrons, besides the monstrous Sect of
Anthropomorphites.

I persuaded my self with great difficulty, to publish this Account to the
world, and could not resolve upon it till I considered, how well it becomes me
to disabuse abundance of people, who have been imposed upon by false stories,
as well as to vindicate my own Reputation. And besides, this I have now done,
will not make the thing much more public than it was before: no nor at all
more public than the late Doings at the Gloucester Assizes, will perhaps make
it. I have only taken a course to make the truth about this matter as public,
as some men have made gross falsehoods. And indeed I am now sensible, I should
have done this long ago, and that I have been much too patient.

I am prepared to say much more of the Unworthy Treatment I have had from some
upon this account, and of what Methods were used to raise clamor, but I have
done enough at present; my Design being only to suppress lying Reports, and to
disabuse (as I said) those who have received them, not the exposing of
particular persons, which I am not like to do, till any of themselves shall
make it necessary.

I will Conclude with this Address to my Adversaries (in allusion to our
Blessed Saviors reply to the Wretch that smote him) viz. If I have spoken, or
done, evil, and transgrest the Law, bear witness of the evil, the Law is open:
But if well why smite you after so unchristian a manner him with your Tongues,
for want of sharper weapons, who never had any quarrel or controversy with any
of you, and who is resolved to requite your malice, with never ceasing to Pray
for you?

ERRATVM.
PAge 24 Line 12, for his Generation, read, this Generation.

A SERMON Preached in the CATHEDRAL of GLOUCESTER, On Sunday Aug. 7. 1681.
1 TIMOTHY 1.19. Holding Faith and a good Conscience, which some having put away,
concerning Faith have made Shipwreck.

NOtwithstanding that the whole intendment of the Christian Faith be the
promoting of Righteousness, True Holiness and Universal Goodness in the Hearts
first, and then in the Lives of Men; and that it is most admirably fitted for
that End: yet there arose even in the earliest and purest days of Christianity
a Generation of People, who labored to reconcile Light and Darkness, the
Christian Religion and a Wicked Life: And although they pretended to adhere to
the Faith of the Gospel, denied the necessity of Good Works, and let open the
Floud-gates to all Ungodliness. They made the Holy Jesus, who was manifested
that he might destroy the works of the Devil, the great Patron of sin, and
turned the grace of God into Lasciviousness; did not only receive this Grace in
vain, and rendered it, as much as lay in them, ineffectual to the bettering men's
lives and natures, but also made it the greatest Promoter and Encourager of
that, for the utter destruction and extirpation of which it was designed.

This they did by corrupting the Christian Doctrine, and bringing into it a
company of wicked and Licentious Principles, and by endeavoring to make that
pass for the Doctrine of Christ, which was no better than the Doctrine of
Devils.

Of these Wretched People S. Paul says that, They professed that they knew
God, but in Works they denied him, being abominable and disobedient, and to
every good work reprobate, Tit. 1.16. And in diverse other places he
discourses of these men, calling them false Apostles, deceitful workers, and
the like; and warns the Christians he wrote to, to beware of them: As do other
of the Apostles also, particularly S. Peter, S. John and S. Jude. Now would we
know how it should come to pass, that the Christian Religion should be so
strangely perverted, and made use of for the building of that which it was
designed to destroy. We are assured that it proceeds not from the Obscurity of
the Writings of the New Testament; for they as plainly, as it is possible for
words to do it, do every where condemn all Unrighteousness and Sin. But it was
caused by Wresting the Scriptures and putting them upon the rack to force them
to speak quite contrary to their intention. Thus S. Peter tells us the Epistles
of his Brother Paul were abused, that those that were unlearned and unstable
wrested them to their own destruction.

But how came it to pass that any should dare to make thus bold with the
Scriptures? My Text Answers this question: The Apostle in these words tells us
that, their making shipwreck of the Faith was occasioned by their having first
put away a good Conscience.

He here exhorts his Son Timothy to take care of holding both Faith and a good
Conscience; and the Motive he uses to quicken his care is, that those who are
not careful to hold both, will be in danger of losing both. So much is employed
in his saying, that some having put away a good Conscience have made shipwreck
concerning Faith.

Holding Faith, or the Faith, and a good Conscience, which some having put
away, concerning Faith, or the Faith, have made shipwreck.

First, We will explain the terms, or endeavor to show what it is to hold the
Faith, and what to make shipwreck of it; as also what it is to hold a good
Conscience, and what to put it away.

Secondly, That holding the Faith will nothing avail us, except we also hold a
good Conscience.

Thirdly, That men's making shipwreck concerning the Faith is occasioned by
their having first put away a good Conscience.

First, For Explication of the terms; we will enquire,

1. What it is to hold the Faith, and what to make shipwreck of it. To hold the
Faith is to adhere to the belief and profession of the Doctrine of the Gospel.
Holding or keeping the Faith sometimes implies also a life answerable to the
Christian doctrine; as where S. Paul says, I have kept the Faith: And where
the Author to the Hebrews exhorts the Christians, to hold fast the profession
of their Faith without wavering. But here it can signify no more than the
belief and profession of that Doctrine, because it is distinguished from
holding a good Conscience.

Again, to make shipwreck of the Faith is to do either of these two things.
Either, First, expressly to Renounce the Articles of the Christian Belief, the
main fundamental Articles; all or any of those on which the whole Frame of
Christianity is erected, and which are the Essential materials of it. As that
Jesus is the Son of God: that he dyed for our sins, and rose again for our
justification: that he ascended into Heaven, and will come again at the end of
the world to judge the quick and the dead: that men shall be rewarded or
punished according to their works: that Faith, Repentance and New Obedience are
of absolute necessity to our obtaining the Divine Favor, and everlasting life.
These and the like Articles which either are declared necessary to Salvation by
our Savior or his Apostles, or which from their own nature appear so to be, as
containing necessary motives, encouragements or helps to a holy life, these are
such as the renouncing any of which is making shipwreck concerning the Faith.

But the misunderstanding such Doctrines as have no such weight and stress laid
upon them, or which considered in themselves appear to be of such a nature, as
that the misunderstanding of them is consistent with true Goodness, cannot be
called a making Shipwreck of the Faith: For if so, it will be impossible to
know who holds the Faith, and who makes shipwreck of it: There being many
points so disputably expressed in the Scriptures, and which there is such a
diversity of Opinions about, even among Good as well as Learned men, that it
may be an argument of too great confidence and presumption in any, to conclude
peremptorily that theirs is the true notion of them. Or, Secondly, The
introducing such Principles and Practices into the Christian Religion as do
manifestly strike at any of its Fundamentals; and particularly such as
directly, or in their evident consequences, enervate the Promises, Threatenings,
or Precepts of the Gospel, and contradict the great design of Christianity,
viz. that of making men Sober, Righteous and Godly, this may also very properly
be called making shipwreck of the Faith. It is truly so notwithstanding it may
be joined with a profession of all the Articles of our Religion: For who sees
not that those who corrupt it with such Doctrines or Practices, are as
injurious to the Faith, as the downright opposers of its main Principles; or
rather the more injurious of the two, there being much more danger of a false
Friend, than of a professed and open enemy.

2. Would we know what it is to hold a good Conscience; this is, in short,
sincerely to endeavor to walk in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless:
To endeavor impartially to acquaint our selves with the Divine Will, and when
we understand it, to comply therewith, although it be never so cross to our own
wills and natural inclinations. And therefore, on the contrary, to put away a
good Conscience is to be bent upon the pleasing our own wills, and gratifying
our sensual Appetites: to give up our selves to be acted and governed by
fleshly and impure Lusts: To be devoted to the Service of corrupt, carnal and
worldly affections and interests. Where the lust of the flesh, the lust of the
eye, or the pride of life, the love of Pleasures, Riches or Honors, are
predominant in the Soul, there a good Conscience is put away.

Secondly, We next come to show that holding the Faith will nothing avail us,
if withal it be not our care to hold a good Conscience. This is apparent in
that the Renewing of men's natures, and Bettering their Lives is the only end
both of Natural and Revealed Religion; and were not this the end thereof,
Religion would be the vainest and most insignificant thing in the world. The
Heathens themselves were well aware of this, and therefore the professed
intendment of their Philosophy was, (...). The purgation and perfection of the
humane life. They well knew that no body is the better for the best Principles,
where they are only believed and not lived.

And as for the Principles of the Christian Religion, which the Ancients used
to call the Christian Philosophy, I shall not need to prove that our belief of
these is required wholly upon the account of the great efficacy they have for
the transforming of us into the Divine likeness, the subjecting our Wills to
the Will of God, and the making us holy in all manner of Conversation. And
therefore we find our Blessed Savior and his Apostles making the whole of a
Christian to consist in keeping his sayings, in doing the things he commands
them, in Faith that works by love, and in the new Creature. And therefore we
see the greatest contempt cast upon Knowledge and Profession and Faith,
unaccompanied with an answerable life and practice. Therefore we read, that
Faith without works is dead, that Faith is dead being alone, as being utterly
unable to stand us in the least stead, and as being so unable to save us, as
greatly to aggravate our Condemnation.

The Papists lay mighty weight upon their Orthodoxy, their believing as the
Church believes, and flatter themselves with a fond conceit, that the goodness
of their Faith will make great amends for the badness of their lives. But
suppose it true, that they are the Orthodox believers, and all the Christian
World Heretics besides themselves, as they would have us believe, yet the
Devils are as Orthodox as they can be for their hearts, but their Orthodoxy
makes them but the more miserable; if they did not believe so truly, they would
not tremble as they do. The Devils also believe and tremble, James 2.19. In
short, we are not more assured from the Holy Scriptures that God made the
Heavens and the Earth, than we are of the truth of this Proposition, that the
most sound belief will not do us the least service while it is accompanied with
a naughty life: That the most Orthodox Sentiments will nothing avail us while
joined with an Heretical Conversation.

Thirdly, We proceed to show, that men's making shipwreck concerning the Faith,
is occasioned by their having first put away a good Conscience. Which (good
Conscience) some having put away, concerning Faith have made shipwreck. The
Apostle, speaking of some that resisted the truth, calls them men of corrupt
minds, reprobate concerning the Faith, 2 Timothy 3.8. Thereby intimating, that
their being reprobate concerning the Faith, proceeded from the corruption of
their minds, or naughtiness of their hearts, and the prevalence of evil and
corrupt Affections. And the same Apostle, speaking of certain Heretics,
attributes their erring from the Faith to their gratifying particularly that
last of Covetousness, 1 Timothy 6.10. The love of money is the root of all evil,
which while some coveted after, they have erred from the Faith. And S. Peter,
speaking of wicked Seducers, says, that they had eyes full of Adultery, and
hearts exercised with covetous practices: And intimates that this is the cause
of their forsaking the right way, and their beguiling unstable Souls, 2 Ep.
2.14, 15.

Now would we be satisfied how this putting away a good Conscience occasioneth
men's making shipwreck of the Faith: It is evident that it does thus these three
ways.

First, As men's addicting themselves to the satisfying of some lust or other,
puts them upon devising shifts and tricks to still the disquieting clamours of
their Consciences. The wrath of God being revealed from Heaven against all
unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, it is no easy thing for any one
willingly to transgress the Rules of Righteousness, without being frequently
tormented with fearful expectations, and the Horrors of an Accusing and
condemning Conscience. Now the most effectual way to be rid of these (next to
sincere Repentance and Reformation) is either for a wicked man to persuade
himself, if he be able, that there is no God, or nothing after this Life; and
consequently, that the Bible is a cheat, and all its threatenings mere
scare-crows. Or if this he cannot do, in regard of the abundant evidence of the
Being of a God, and the Authority of the Holy Scriptures, the course must be so
to wrest and pervert the Scriptures, as to make them give liberty to certain
evil practices, or to promise forgiveness of sin to certain performances that
are short of forsaking it.

Thus those Heretics in the Primitive times wrest^d the places wherein the
Gospel is called the Law of Liberty, and wherein we are said to be delivered
from the Law, so as to take off the Obligation of the Moral as well as the
Ceremonial Law; and to give liberty to sin, and to oppose Faith to Obedience in
the business of Justification and acceptance with God.

Many other instances may be given both of Ancient and Modern Heretics
perverting of passages of Scripture, so as to make them great encouragements to
sin, and discouragements to a Holy life; perfectly contrary to the whole strain
and tenor of the Gospel.

But I must not enlarge farther upon this Argument, because the main thing I
intended in the choice of this Subject is yet behind.

Secondly, The putting away of a good Conscience occasions making shipwreck of
the Faith, through the just judgment of God. The former particular gave us an
account of wicked men's being strongly inclined to make shiwrack of the Faith,
and of their endeavoring it, this of their putting their inclinations into
practice, and succeeding in their endeavors.

Men that are wedded to any lust are very forward, for their own ease, to
endeavor either the embraceing of Atheistical Principles, or so to abuse the
Scriptures as to take encouragement from them to live in sin; but they could
hardly so extinguish the light of their own minds, as to succeed in their
endeavors, were it not for the judgment of God upon them, in giving them up
into the Deceivers hands. To this purpose observe what the Apostle says, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10, 11. Because they received not the love of the truth, that they
might be saved (or they did not so receive it as to suffer it to have any good
effect upon their hearts and lives) for this cause God shall send them strong
delusions (or give them up to be deluded by the tricks of the Devil, the signs
and lying wonders before mentioned) that they should believe a lie, that they
all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness.

Thirdly, The putting away of a good Conscience occasions making shipwreck of
the Faith, as wicked Professors of Christianity do find it a most successful
course to promote their corrupt and naughty designs, by foisting into the
Christian Religion such Doctrines and Practices, as favor and encourage such
designs. I have showed that those who corrupt the Christian Religion with such
Doctrines or Practices as contradict the Design of it, do truly make shipwreck
of the Faith; and whereas there may be given too many instances of such
Hypocrites as have so done, I shall make it the whole business of what remains
of the Doctrinal part of this Discourse, to show that the Church of Rome as she
is now Constituted, is most shamefully guilty in this particular.

It is to be acknowledged, that she retains the Profession of all the
Fundamental and Essential Articles of the Christian Faith; a summary of which
is that Creed which we call the Apostles, and she professes a Reverence for
the whole New Testament. If she in express terms rejected any Doctrine that is
of the Essence, and a vital part of Christianity, her members may not be called
Christians in any sense, and we then do very ill to say the Church of Rome.

We do not stick at calling them a Church, though a most corrupt and degenerate
Church; as (to use the similitude of Bishop Hall) a thief is truly a man,
though not a true man. A woman may retain the name of a wife till she is
formally divorced, though she be an adulteress.

The Church of Rome may as truly be called a Church, as the Jewish Nation the
People of God, after their foul Revolt from him, and Lapse into Idolatry and
other wicked and impious practices.

But this has been abundantly made good against this Church, that, though she
holds the Foundation yet, she builds Wood, Hay and Stubble upon the Foundation:
that is, she mixeth many impure Doctrines of her own, with the most holy and
undefiled Doctrines of the Gospel. Of which I will present you with some
instances, but must be very brief upon most of them.

What say you, in the first place, to her Doctrine of Infallibility? Which
speaks her incapable of erring in any of her Decrees and Determinations: Which
Infallibility the Jesuits will have seated in the Popes Chair; others in the
Pope in conjunction with a General Council; that is, a Number of Bishops and
Priests packt together of his own Faction: For there is nothing he hates more
than a Council truly General.

I call this not only a false but a wicked Doctrine, because of the infinite
mischief that it does in the world: For the Romish Church's pretense to
Infallibility, is that which enables her to Lord it at that intolerable rate,
over the minds and Consciences of her Subjects, and to make them the greatest
of Slaves and Vassals. And it is this also that makes her utterly incurable of
her gross corruptions, her other notorious Heresies, and the ungodly and horrid
practices founded upon them. So that, so long as she continues to assume to
herself the Title of Infallible, there is no hope to be conceived of her being
ever in the least Reformed, either in her Principles or Practices.

But never was a Doctrine more shamefully baffled than this has been; as
easily it may, there being nothing but Interest to uphold it, nor one syllable
in all the Bible to befriend it. As for that promise of our Savior, that the
gates of hell shall never prevail against his Church, the most that can be
concluded from thence is, that he will ever have a Church upon earth in spite
of all the endeavors of Hell to destroy it. But thanks be to God, this Promise
would be no whit the further from being performed, although the Devil should be
permitted totally to extinguish the Church of Rome; though to be sure he
understands his own interest better than once to attempt it.

But if the meaning of this Promise be (as the Romanists would have it) that
the gates of Hell shall never so prevail against the Church* as to occasion her
falling into errors of Judgment, why may we not as well extend it so far as to
secure her also from errors of Practice? these being no less dangerous or
destructive than those of Judgment. But I retain so much Charity for the Romish
Church still, as not to think her so forsaken of all Modesty, as to deny that
in this sense, the Gates of Hell have prevailed against her with a vengeance.

And as for the other Promises which they lay any stress on, they are either
such as it is manifest the Apostles only, and first planters of the Gospel were
concerned in, or else such as belong to all Christians without exception thus
far, as that while it is their sincere endeavor to know the truth, and to live
up to their knowledge, they shall be secured from pernicious and damnable
errors.

Again, What say you to the Doctrine of the Popes Supremacy over all other
Churches and Kingdoms too, and his having a Grant of as vast Dominions upon
Earth, next and immediately under Christ, as Christ himself has under God the
Father, his being King of all Kings, and Lord of all Lords, and that both in
Spirituals and Temporals? I might easily tire you upon this head of Discourse,
but all I will say to it shall be this, that the Charter pretended for so
mighty an Empire is much too obscurely expressed to be ever understood, by any
other people than the Pope and his Vassals. There is not a tittle in the Holy
Scriptures for it, though we know what a noise and fluster they make with two
Texts, Pasce Oves meas, and Dabo tibi Claves, etc. as if this Supremacy were as
plainly legible in each of them, as the Doctrine of the Creation in the first
verse of Genesis.

But, which is worst of all, how many thousands of honest people have been
barbarously butchered, merely because their eyes would not serve them to read
this Doctrine of theirs in those two Texts!

And this is that Doctrine which gives them a pretense for their restless and
unwearied endeavors to get these Kingdoms again within their Clutches, and for
all their desperate and hellish designs against us.

What say you to their Doctrine of Image Worship? with which I will join that
other of Praying to Saints and Angels. In their Adored Council of Trent it is
decreed, that The Images of Christ, the Virgin mother of God, and other Saints,
be especially kept in Churches; and that due Honor and Veneration be given unto
them. And afterward this Council expresses its allowance of Picturing the
Divinity it self; and accordingly Pictures of the Blessed Trinity, (Oh hateful
sight!) are ordinarily to be beheld in the Popish Churches.

Now would we know what the Council means by Debitus honor and veneratio, the
due honor and veneration that is to be given to Images; this appears by these
following words, We decree doing honor to them, because the honor which is
done to them, is referred to the Prototypes which they represent. So that in
the Images which we kiss, and before which we uncover our heads, and fall down,
we adore Christ, and Worship the Saints which they represent, etc. So that the
Honor and Veneration which they determine should be given to Images, do imply
all external Acts of Adoration; and that the Image of our Savior is to have
the self same Adoration paid to it, that would be due unto himself were he
personally present.

And the Universal Practice of the Romish Church (wholly to pass over the Vile
stuff of their Doctors, Schoolmen and Casuists) will tell you the meaning of
their debitus honor and veneratio.

The consent of Nations (says the Learned Grotius) have made Sacrifices,
Oblations and Incense, proper signs of Divine Worship; but, though I had time,
I need not stand to show, that the Images of Christ, Angels and Saints,
especially that of the Blessed Virgin, are every where Worshipped with these
signs, and with all the Rites of the most solemn Invocation in Sacred Offices,
and in places set apart for Divine Worship. And they do all the external honor
to the Saints and Angels in the Addresses they make unto them, whether
immediately or as represented by Images, that it is imaginable they should do to
our Savior himself, or the Blessed Trinity.

Nay, They pray unto them, not only for Temporal or Ordinary Blessings, but for
Spiritual and Supernatural: such as the Pardon of their sins, and the Holy
Spirit, and eternal life, as might be shown at large.

Now what is Idolatry, if such doings are not? why, they tell us, and we cannot
blame them, that the true Notion of Idolatry is only the Worshipping some
Creature for the most High God, supposing it to be the most High God. But if
so, the Worshippers of the Golden Calf, to be sure, were no Idolaters; for they
can be little better than mad themselves, who are able to imagine that the
Israelites were so mad, as to believe that the Calf which they saw made, and
that of their own Earrings too, was that very God which brought them out of
the Land of Egypt. But the Gentlemen of Rome would have us think that they were
so forsaken of their Intellectuals, as so to believe; and we cannot blame them
for that neither. For if they did not impudently bear us down, that the
Children of Israel believed that this Moulten Calf was that God that divided
the Sea, wrought so many Miracles for them, and the maker of Heaven and Earth,
they would, they are sensible, be necessitated to excuse them from Idolatry,
expressly contrary to the words of Scripture. And if this their Notion of
Idolatry be the only true one, we are certain that it will be extremely
difficult, if not impossible, to find out Idolaters among the very Pagans.

What think you of their Doctrine of Transubstantiation, of which take this
account from the Council of Trent. By the Consecration the whole substance of
the Bread is changed into the substance of the Body of Christ our Lord, and the
whole substance of the Wine, into the substance of the blood of Christ. So that
as like as it still looks to Bread and Wine: Though it has the perfect Taste,
the perfect Feeling and Smell of Bread and Wine, yet it is nothing less; it is
that very Body that hung upon the Cross at Jerusalem, and that very blood that
was there shed.

This is the most prodigiously contradictious Doctrine, that I will not say the
Wit but the Madness of men can possibly invent: it is a most wonderful
complication of most horrid contradictions, and absolute impossibilities. But
this is not the worst of it, it is also the foundation of so gross and foul
Idolatry as is scarcely to be named among the Gentiles, or to be found
paralleled in Peruvia it self, or the most barbarous parts of India. The
forementioned Holy Council declares, nullus itaque dubitandi locus relinquitur,
etc. There is therefore no place left for doubt, but that all good Christians
do give the Worship of Latria, quae Vero Deo debetur, which is due to the true
God, to this most Holy Sacrament; according to the always received custom of
the Catholic Church. They should have said, according to the late and upstart
custom of the Romish Faction. Here you see that the Bread and Wine are
Worshipped by them, not as Representations of God, but as God himself.

But what if those words of our Savior, This is my Body, should prove to be a
Figure? like those other of his, I am a Vine, I am a Door, etc. or what if This
is my body should be as much a Figure, as they will confess the words presently
following are, viz. This Cup is the New Testament in my Blood? Where we have a
double Figure, both the Cup put for the Wine in it, and the Wine said to be the
New Testament or Covenant, when, supposing it were the very Blood of Christ, it
could not be the New Covenant it self, but the Seal of that Covenant; I say,
what if these words be to be understood figuratively? (as why they should not
the Papists can show nothing like a reason, but we have shown them the greatest
absurdities imaginable in otherwise understanding them) why then they
themselves will and do acknowledge that they should be guilty of the most gross
Idolatry in their Worship of the Host.

What say you to the Popish Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, which is of
near kin to the foregoing? The Doctrine of the Roman Church is, as you shall
find it in the Council of Trent, That in this Sacrifice which is performed in
the Mass, that very Christ is contained, and in a bloudless manner offered,
which, upon the Altar of the Cross, did once offer up himself in a bloody
manner. So that, according to this Doctrine, our Blessed Savior must still to
the end of the world be laid hold of by Sinners, be ground with their teeth,
and sent down into their impure paunches, as often as the Priest shall
pronounce the charm, hoc est enim corpus meum. And it seems that he was a false
Prophet, when he said upon the Cross it is finished, seeing there was such an
infinite deal of loathsome Drudgery still to be undergone by him. See Dr. More'
s Mystery of iniquity, Book 2. Chap. 5.
And it seems the Author to the Hebrews is found to be a false Apostle, in
asserting so expressly, as more than once he does, that such is the Dignity of
Christ's Priesthood, and its excellency above the Levitical, that by one
offering he has made perfect satisfaction, and expiation for sin.

So that this their Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, is not only False,
but very Corrupt and impious Doctrine.

What say you to their Doctrine of Purgatory? which, in short, is this: That no
souls, except such as are perfectly purified in this life (which they will surely
acknowledge are extremely few) shall go at their departure hence into a place
of happiness or ease, but all, the forementioned excepted, into a place of
torment; where they may abide for an exceeding long time, even many hundreds of
years, except some effectual care be taken for their deliverance.

By this Doctrine the poor people are brought into a most slavish state; by the
means hereof their merciless Tyrants the Priests hale them into worse than
Egyptian Bondage: who, instead of enjoining them the most reasonable duties to
which the Precepts of their Savior oblige them, and which are most admirably
adapted to the cleansing of their natures, and mortifying their corrupt
affections, impose upon them a great number of ridiculous Services of their own
invention.

But though they cannot pretend the least warrant from Scripture for such
doings as those, yet they have a most express Text, they tell you, for their
Doctrine of Purgatory, viz. those words of S. Paul, 1 Cor. 3.15. But he shall
be saved, yet so as by fire. But he who considers these two things will see
nothing like Purgatory in this Text, namely, First, that it is (...), not he
shall be saved by fire, but as it were by fire, or rather through fire.
Secondly, that (...), to be saved as through fire, is a Proverbial Speech (as
those great Critics, Grotius and Scaliger, with others, have showed)
signifying to be saved from most eminent danger.

And as this Doctrine of theirs is groundless, so is it as wicked, it being a
most vile affront to the Merits and and Satisfaction of our Blessed Savior:
For in order to the establishing of this Doctrine they teach, that, The Passion
of Christ takes away only the guilt of Mortal sins, not their eternal
Punishment, which is as non-sensical as false and impious.

It Is an impious Doctrine also, both as it is devised to inslave the
Consciences of the Poor People, and to bring them into absolute subjection to
their Priests; and likewise to gratify their greedy Appetites, and to bring
their Purses no less under their power than their Consciences.

What say you to their Doctrine of the Non-necessity of the Laity's partaking
of the Cup in the Lords Supper, and their being Robbed accordingly of their
share therein? expressly contrary to our Saviors institution, and the Practice
of the first Ages of the Church, and of all other Churches in the world.

What say you to their well known Doctrine, Of the Non-necessity of Repentance
before the imminent point of death? And to this other that goes beyond that,
viz. that mere Attrition (or sorrow for sin for fear of hell) if accompanied
with the Sacrament of Penance is sufficient to a sinners justification and
acceptance with God? This the Council of Trent does plainly take for granted,
in the fourth Chapter of their fourteenth Session.

What say you to the Doctrine of Opus operatum? which makes the mere work done
in all acts of Devotion, sufficient to the Divine Acceptance: particularly the
bare saying of Prayers, without either minding what they say, or understanding
it. And agreeably hereunto the Romish Church enjoins the saying of them in a
Language unknown to the generality of her children; notwithstanding the
perfectly contrary Doctrine delivered by S. Paul in the 14 th Chap. of the
first to the Corinthians.

What say you to the Doctrine of the Insufficiency of the Holy Scriptures for
men's Salvation, and her denying them to be a complete Rule of Faith, and
Practice in things necessary, without her Traditions? Wherein she gives the Lie
to the same great Apostle, who tells his son Timothy that, the Scriptures are
able to make wise to Salvation: and that by them the man of God may be
perfected, and thoroughly furnished to every good work.

What say you to her Doctrine of the Gospels obscurity even in things of
absolute necessity to be believed and practiced? devised on purpose to persuade
the people to an implicit belief in her self, and to receive without examining
whatsoever doctrines she shall please to call Articles of Faith.

This is a wicked Doctrine in it self also, as well as upon the account of the
Design of it: It being most unworthy of God to require all under pain of
damnation, rightly to understand those Points which are obscurely revealed.

What say you to her Doctrine of the dangerousness of the vulgars reading the
Holy Scriptures; and her Practice answerable thereunto, of denying them the
Bible in their own language?

Most plainly to be learned from the Council of Constance Sess. 19.
What say you to her Doctrine that, Faith is not to be kept with Heretics?

What say you to this Doctrine that, the most horrid villainies are then lawful,
when necessary to the promoting of the interest of the Catholic cause? I do
not say that this is decreed in any Council; or that it is in express terms
taught by any of them: But however, if it be lawful to judge of men's opinions
by their constant practices, we may without a Calumny call this also a Doctrine
of the Church of Rome. Particularly, the world has for a long time been well
acquainted with her most horrible Cruelties, upon the account of Religion.

To mind you of a few famous instances: in the persecution of the Albigenses
and Waldenses, P. Perionius.
were miserably murdered no fewer than a thousand thousand: In the Massacre of
France, in the space of three months, an hundred thousand: In the
Low Countries, in a few years, were cut off by the hand of the common hangman
thirty and six thousand Protestants: And by the holy Inquisition (as Vergerius
witnesses, who was well acquainted therewith) were destroyed in less than
thirty years space, one hundred and fifty thousand, with all manner of the most
exquisite cruelties.

I need not mind you what a vast number were Burnt at the stake in our own
Country, in the Reign of Queen Mary: The excellent Mr. Joseph Mede declares it
as his Opinion, that the Papal Persecution does equalize, if not exceed, the
destruction of men made upon the Church by the Ten famous Persecutions under
the Pagan Emperors. And this he wrote before the horrible slaughters in
Piedmont and Ireland.
Nor what additions have been made since to Romes Butcheries, in Piedmont and
Ireland.

And what a horrible slaughter had there been in England, by the Gun powder
Treason, if it had not been prevented by a Wonderful Providence! And also what
work the Romanists would have been at here again before this time, if God in
his infinite mercy had not defeated the Councels of those bloody Achitophels,
all who do not wilfully shut their eyes, and are not Papists at least in
Masquerade, That is, upon supposition that the Evidence be fully known to them.
should, one would think, acknowledge themselves satisfied, after so great
evidence.

So that we need no further proof that the Woman has Rome Christian for her
principal Seat, upon whose head S. John tells us, was a name written, Mystery
Babylon the great, the mother of Harlots and Abominations of the earth: and
whom he saw drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of the
Martyrs of Jesus. But we have farther proof that the now mentioned wicked
doctrine, may truly be charged upon the Church of Rome: For her abominable
Practices do not only justify this charge, but several of the Doctrines of her
darling sons, those precious youths the Jesuits, and which (as they tell you)
are much elder than their order, viz. That of the lawfulness of Equivocations
and Mental Reservations, even before Courts of Judicature, at least, if they
consist of Heretics; of the putting which vile principle into practice we have
had of late diverse marvelous and most astonishing instances.

That of the Popes power of Dispensing with the most Solemn Oaths, and of
Absolving Subjects from their Allegiance to Heretical Princes.

That of the Lawfulness, nay Meritoriousness of taking Arms against them, of
Stabbing and Poisoning them. And we of this Kingdom too well know that the
Romish Church make no bones of practicing upon these Principles.

I might still farther proceed in instancing in her most corrupt and wicked
Principles, but you have had enough in all Conscience: And but that, now
especially, we are obliged to take all opportunities for the exposing of the
vileness of the Romish Religion, I would even be as soon engaged in stirring
Jakes's, and raking dunghills, as in such work as this.

God be thanked for that mighty Spirit that has been stirred up throughout the
Nation against Popery: Oh that it more generally proceeded from our sense of
the hatefulness thereof, and the extreme dishonor it brings to Christianity,
and its infinite injuriousness to the Souls of men, as well as from the concern
we have for our Temporal interest; which is but a mean and pitiful
consideration in comparison of those other. And the better the Principles of
Popery and the Practices of the Papists are understood, the greater and more
lasting must their zeal against them needs be, who have any hearty kindness
either for Christianity or for Natural Religion; either for Christianity or for
good Morality and common honesty, or even mere good nature.

I will not so far imitate the horrible uncharitableness of the Romish Church,
as to say that it is impossible to find any sincere Christians in her Communion;
and much less, that no honest or good natured people are among them: But this
we are very certain may safely be said that, whosoever is thoroughly instructed
in the Popish Principles and acts accordingly, is so much a stranger to
Christianity, that he has totally cast off all Humanity.

Whosoever is a thorough Papist has no Conscience in his own keeping; his
Conscience is perfectly at the dispose of his Holy Father and his Confessor:
Nor is there any villainy, be it never so great, but he is prepared for it,
whenever a Priest or Jesuit by commission from the Pope shall oblige him to
it.

That Protestant does but slightly understand Popery, who dares trust his
throat with a thorough Papist, although he be seemingly a man of never so good
a nature, or of never so good Morals: and the more conscientious he is in his
way, by so much the more dangerous a person is he. That Is a rare Religion in
the mean time, the more true to which any man is, the greater Villain he must
necessarily be. And those are a precious sort of Christians, of which one
cannot adventure to give a true and impartial Character, and to paint them in
their own colors, but he must be in danger to be Censured as a scurrilous
person, as a man of a foul mouth, and a downright Railer.

Let us all therefore take up those words of Jacob, in reference to his
Generation, which he uttered concerning his two wicked sons, Simeon and Levi, O
my soul come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly mine honor be not
thou united.

To make some Application of what has been discoursed.

First, Is the putting away a good Conscience the true cause to which making
shipwreck of the Faith is to be imputed? Is this the account into which it is
to be resolved? Then, as we would be out of danger of falling into Heresy, and
particularly of turning Papists, and of making shipwreck of the Faith as they
have done, let us have a great care to hold fast a good Conscience: To exercise
our selves in keeping Consciences void of offense both toward God and toward
men: To lead lives answerable to the holy Doctrine which we profess to believe.

If any man will do the will of God (or be sincerely willing to do it) he shall
know of the Doctrine whether it be of God, says our Blessed Savior, John
7.17. He shall be able to discern between truth and falsehood, and shall be
guided into and kept in the truth.

The truth has no fast hold of any, but those who receive it in the love of
it, and make it the measure and rule of their lives and actions.

It is not at all strange that Learned and Knowing men should make shipwreck of
the Faith, for Learning and Knowledge is no security while separated from
Honesty and a Good Conscience. There is no error so absurd or dangerous, but we
ought to expect an insincere person will embrace it, when once it becomes
serviceable to that Interest he is most concerned for the promoting of.

Even those of us who do now show the most forward zeal against Popery, if we
be wedded to any corrupt Affection, and have only the Form, but are void of the
Power of Godliness, will be in never the less danger, notwithstanding our
present zeal, of Apostatizing, if ever it should become our temporal interest
(which God forbid) to turn Papists.

Secondly, Is it so apparent that the Church of Rome has made so woeful a
shipwreck of the Faith? Then what an infinite obligation lies upon us to the
greatest Thankfulness to our good God, for rescuing these Nations from under
her yoke; and for those Miracles of mercy which he has wrought for us, in
blasting so many of their deep laid designs, their late great Conspiracy, and
late Sham-plots, for the reducing of us to our old Captivity.

If it had not been the Lord who was on our side, now may England say, if it
had not been the Lord who was on our side, when these men rose up against us;
then they had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us:
then the waters had overwhelmed us, and the streams had gone over our soul. Let
us therefore Bless the Lord, who has not given us as a prey unto their teeth.

Lastly, As we would still be secured from Popish Conspiracies, from the
unwearied attempts of our old Adversaries against us, take we great heed of
provoking the Almighty to withdraw at length his Protection, and abandon us to
their Malice, by walking unworthy of that glorious Light and Liberty we now
enjoy in the Church of England. And while we have the light let us walk in the
light, lest God, in his just judgment, suffer us to be again involved in
Egyptian darkness.

Oh happy Children of the Church of England, if we could be persuaded to prize
our present Vast Privileges, before our having lost them does force us to set
a high value on them.

And, Oh that we were capable of so much Wisdom, as no longer to strengthen the
hands of our common enemy, by our as unreasonable as Unchristian Animosities
against one another. That we had once as great a zeal against the Antichrists
within our own breasts, Pride, Anger, Malice and Bitterness, as we seem to have
against the Antichrist in the Roman Chair: Those Antichrists being the
greatest friends this Antichrist has, and more our enemies than he is capable
of being.

Oh that at length we could be convinced of this great truth, that the
Christian Religion consists not in meats or drinks, mere external things, but
in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. In Humility, Meekness,
Self-denial, Obedience to Authority in all lawful things, love to God, and love
to men, etc.

Oh that we had a vigorous powerful sense of this, that neither the most
admired Gifts nor appearances of Grace, which are not joined with a Benign and
Charitable temper, can at all recommend us to the Divine favor: That he has
no Participation of the God-like Life and Nature, who is of a Quarrelsome,
Contentious, Uncharitable Spirit, be he in a many other respects never so
Saint-like. And that Christian love is a thousand times better argument of a
renewed state, than most of those marks and characters which are ordinarily
given of a godly man.

If we were once brought to this happy pass, to have a lively sense of these
things: to make great Conscience of preserving the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of peace; and to abandon all Separating, Dividing, Sour and ill-natured
Principles and Practices, we shall not then need to fear the malice of the
Papists, were their power greater than, God be thanked, it is; but till then,
all our other endeavors to secure our selves may fail of success.

But alas, I fear, that never had a People sadder Omens of miserable days than
we now have: And nothing bodes worse than this that, we are so far from Uniting
among our selves, notwithstanding we seem so sensible of extraordinary danger
from our common Enemy, that our breaches daily grow wider and wider.

We seem no less infatuated, no less madly bent upon our own destruction, than
were the miserable Jews in the Siege of Jerusalem; among whom there were never
such desperate Feuds, as when they were all surrounded with the Roman Armies.

Those who, by their causeless forsaking of our Communion, have greatly
strengthened the hands of our Enemies, are so far from being yet made sensible
of the mischief of Separation, and the most pernicious consequences of
Dividing, that many of them are now grown fiercer than ever (as appears by
their late Books and Pamphlets, etc.) against that Church, which Rome has
always found to her cost, the most impregnable Bulwark in all Christendom
against Popery.

And on the other hand (for I will not be taxed with Partiality) there are too
too many among our selves, that do little consult our Churches interest, nor
consequently the interest of the Protestant Religion, but greatly disserve
both, by their intemperate heats, and branding all with the names of Fanatics
and Presbyterians who are not come up to their pitch* and in all things just of
their complexion; although they be as obedient to both their Civil and
Ecclesiastical Superiors as themselves, are no less truly Regular and
Conformable.

We ought by Love and Sweetness to encourage men all we can, this is to act
like the Disciples of the mild and most lovely tempered Jesus; and not by
Sowreness and Censoriousness tempt those to depart from us, who would gladly
still hold Communion with us We think it high time to show our dislike of those
against whom we have been ever enough offended, though we could not in this
manner declare it, who under pretense of Affection to Us and Our Service,
assume to themselves the liberty of Reviling, Threatening and Reproaching
others; and as much as in them lies, endeavor to stifle and divert their good
inclinations to Our Service; and so to prevent that Reconciliation and Union of
Hearts and Affections, which can only, with Gods Blessing, make Us rejoice in
each other, and keep our Enemies from rejoicing. King Charles II. in His
Proclamation against Vicious and Debauched people.
.

It Is evident I meant nothing by this passage but that we ought to imitate the
Fathers behavior in the Parable toward his Prodigal Son.
And where we find an inclination toward returning in any that have departed
from us, we should be glad to meet them halfway in order to the bringing them
over to us.

And it becomes us likewise to make a difference between Peaceable and Modest
Dissenters from us, and those who are Turbulent, Seditious and Factious, and
not wind up all together in the same bottom.

I may add also, that there are, God knows, too too many Debauchees in the
Nation, who would be thought great Champions for the King and the Church, but
do infinite prejudice to both, by the mad and frantic expressions of their
zeal. Who do mighty honor to Fanaticism by charging all with it, that run not
with them to the same excess of Riot.

One would suspect that these, whatsoever they pretend, do really design
nothing more, than to make both the King and the Church as friendless as they
are able.

Heaven help them both, should they ever be so unfortunate, (which God forbid)
as to stand in need of this sort of people.

If indeed Huffing and Healthing, Cursing and Damning, and giving vile names
would do the business, then let them alone to protect and defend the King and
Church: but former experience has assured us, that those are the best weapons
that most of them can boast of their being good at.

A Neighboring King, and the Church of Rome, may wish God's blessing on the
hearts of these Gentlemen: but our own King (whom God preserve) and the Church
of England have little reason to Con them thanks, There are likewise another
sort of men, of whom we have heard much, and are sufficiently ashamed, who
spend their time in Taverns, Tipling-houses, and Debauches, giving no other
Evidence of their Affection to us, but in Drinking, our Health, and inveiging
against all others, who are not of their own dissolute temper; and who in
truth, have more discredited our cause, by the license of their manners and
lives, than they could ever advance it by their Affection or Courage, etc. In
the same Proclamation.
for any service they are like to do them.

King Charles the First of Glorious Memory was very sensible of the Consequence
of such men's assistance, which proved fatal to him: The goodness of whose Cause
did sink under the burden of their sins, according to the sad Presage of our
excellent Chillingworth, in a Sermon Preached to the Court at Oxford.

And if ever his Majesty and the Church should be again set upon by Scribes and
Pharisees, God grant us better assistance than that of Publicans and Sinners.

But I wonder in my heart, what should make any Debauched and Profane people
pretend the least zeal for the Church of England; there being no Church in the
world that more condemns all unrighteousness and sin; or which would be more
severe against wicked livers, were she in circumstances to put in execution her
own Discipline. Which she is not like to be, so long as the Civil Magistrate is
so remiss in executing, according to their Oaths, those excellent Laws that are
Enacted against Drunkenness, Swearing, Uncleanness, Profanation of the Lord's
day, and other wicked Practices.

And I add that Popery and Fanaticism will both undoubtedly still grow upon us,
be we never so zealous against both, whilst that Debauchery and Profaneness,
which have so miserably overspread the Nation, do still escape scot-free and go
unpunished.

I cannot but observe one thing more that, it is an uncouth and ridiculous
Spectacle, to behold wild Fanatics, and profane This Paragraph is a little
enlarged.
people, that call themselves Church of England men, (who are far from
deserving that Title, whether they be Clergy or Laity) contesting together, and
falling foul upon one another: One would be tempted upon this occasion, to take
up the Grand Vizier Kuperlees blunt reply to the French Ambassador (upon his
Accosting him with the news of the Spanish Armies being routed by the French,
Ricaut.
) viz. What matter is it to me whether the hog worries the dog, or the dog the
hog, so my Masters head be but safe.

To Conclude.
'TILL I see on the one hand a far greater sense of the hatefulness of Schism,
and of breaking the Peace and Unity of the Church: of which all good people did
heretofore express the greatest Abhorrence and Detestation.

And till I see on all hands more sincere endeavors to put away Anger, Wrath,
Malice and Bitterness.

Till I see that the several divided Parties among us, are more inclinable to
unite heartily with us of the Church of England, and We again with them, so far
forth as unanimously to oppose Popery, that designs the destruction of us all.
Which all but hot-spurs, that never allow themselves leisure to think a wise,
or sedate thought, must needs know to be absolutely necessary to our mutual
preservation at this time. And it would be well, would we herein learn of the
Papists, who, notwithstanding the great differences that are among them also,
can join together against Protestants.

Till I see again that our Zeal against Popery is generally so well tempered,
as not to endanger our running headlong into the other extreme, that of
Confusion: which will, no question, end in Popery.

Till I see that we hate Popery for its Disloyalty, as well as for its
Idolatrous and Cruel Principles and Practices.

Till I see also that our opposition to Poper y arises more generally from a
sense of the infinite scandal it brings upon the Holy Religion of our Blessed
Savior, and its woefully depraving the Souls of men, as well as from our
concern for our Temporal interest.

Till I moreover see that Zeal in any sort of people whatsoever, is not
accounted sufficient to give them the Reputation of Good Protestants or Good
Churchmen, so long as they are bad Christians, and their Conversations declare
them no hearty Friends to any Religion.

And (in a word) till I see that our Excellent Reformed Religion, that the pure
and undefiled Religion of the Church of England, has a more powerful influence
upon the Lives and Spirits, of those who profess themselves Anti-papists and
Anti-sectarians: I say, till I see these things, I shall, for my part, be far
from concluding with Agag, that the bitterness of death is past, that the worst
is not still behind; which God in his infinite mercy, give us wisdom to
prevent, by our timely Reformation in the forementioned instances, for Christ
Jesus his sake: To whom with the Father and the Holy Ghost, be rendered by us,
and by all the world, all Honor, Glory and Praise. Amen.

FINIS.

