THE DESIGN OF Christianity.

QVI SEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS.


Clem. Alexandr. Paedag. -- (...). THE DESIGN OF Christianity; OR, A plain
Demonstration and Improvement of this Proposition, VIZ. That the enduing men
with Inward Real Righteousness or True Holiness, was the Ultimate End of our
Savior's Coming into the World, and is the Great Intendment of His Blessed
Gospel. By EDWARD FOWLER, Minister of God's Word at Northil in Bedford-shire.

LONDON, Printed by E. Tyler and R. Holt for R. Royston, Bookseller to the
King's most Excellent Majesty, and Lodowick Loyd. MDCL XXI.

Imprimatur,

April. 17. 1671. Rob. Grove R. P. Dom. Episc. Land. a sac. Dom.

To the Reader.
Reader,
WHereas there was, somewhat above a Twelve-moneth since, exposed to Public
view* a Free Discourse between the two intimate Friends Theophilus and
Philalethes; which contains an Account of some Principles and Practices of
certain Moderate Divines, etc. together with a Defense of them, I desire thee
to take notice that in this Tractate is pursued the main and Fundamental Reason
of that Dialogue: As, if thou art not a stranger to it, thou may easily
guess by the foregoing Title Page. And if thou shall please to give thy self
the trouble of running over the following Pages, I hope thou will be satisfied
that the Doctrines that are chiefly maintained in that Book, do most naturally
result from, and those which are most opposed in it are confuted by the
Argument that is here insisted on.

If thou conceivest that in Demonstrating the establishment of Real
Righteousness and True Holiness in the world to be the Ultimate Design of our
Savior's Coming, and the Grand and even whole Business of the Christian
Institution, I have taken upon me to prove a Proposition that is as evidently
and imdisputably true as any First Principle; I must tell thee that I most
heartily wish there were more of thy mind than I doubt there are: And that I
have been so far from giving my Reader any the least Temptation to suspect the
Contrary, that I have expressly (as thou will see) shown, That there is nothing
in the whole world more clearly apparent than the Truth thereof, to such as are
not, either through Ignorance or Wilfulness, very strangely blinded; or that
have, with any seriousness, read the New Testament or but a small part of it.

But though this be so, I may not be accused of so idley employing my self in
the first Section, as if I there held up a Torch to show the Sun; for I have
pointed to it by its own light only; that is, exposed to thy View in a few
leaves the sum and substance of that abundant evidence which throughout the
Gospel is given us of that great Truth. And whosoever shall say that to do this
was needless, I shall give him my unfeigned thanks, would he make me sensible
that I am guilty of a mistake in believing otherwise: And, upon that account,
rejoice to be convinced, that I have in that business spent time impertinently.

But, alas, it is no less undeniable, that a Discourse of this nature is
necessary and seasonable, than that the matter thereof is true: For it cannot
be at all doubted, that the Design of the Christian Religion is by abundance of
its Professors very sadly mistaken; and that (though it is with infinite
plainness expressed to be no other than the Reformation of our Lives, and
Purification of our Natures, and is wholly adapted to that purpose) the
complaint that Tully took up of certain Philosophers, viz. that they esteemed
their Philosophy Ostentationem scientiae, non Legem vitae, a boast of science,
not a law of life, may be applied to not a few of those that are called
Christians, concerning their opinion of Christianity.

And besides that there are diverse Opinions that too many among us are greatly
fond of, which make it absolutely certain that they think otherwise than they
ought, and have entertained unworthy notions of the Design of the Gospel, it
must be acknowledged that such Practices are likewise observable in the far
greater part, as are a Demonstration that if they have no false conception of
it, yet it is but little considered, and therefore not thoroughly believed by
them. And this alone is abundantly sufficient to avouch the Usefulness of my
undertaking both in that and the two other Sections.

And till those that Profess themselves Christ's Disciples do more generally
become effectually sensible (as those of the first Ages were) That the Mystery
into which they are initiated is purely a Mystery of Godliness, and that it is
entirely composed of such Principles as tend thoroughly to instruct Mankind in
the Particulars of that Duty that the Law of their Nature obliges them to,
toward their Creator, themselves and their Fellow Creatures; together with
the most Powerful Motives to Excite, and the best means and most successful
assistances to enable them to a faithful discharge of them; we may never hope
to outlive or to see the least abatement of that gross Superstition,
Fanaticism and Enthusiasm, or those mad Enormities and most impious Practices
which have now for a very long time sullied and most miserably defaced the
beauty, obscured, nay and even utterly extinguished the glory of the Church of
Christ; have laid the honor, which she was deservedly once crowned with, in the
very dust; and bring the borridest scandal upon her holy profession and that
Blessed Name she is called by.

But not to detain thee with a tedious Preface; thou will have no reason to
accuse me, upon the account of this Discourse, of starting and troubling the
world with any more Controversies; but may on the contrary be greatly
assured, That there cannot be taken a more effectual course to put an end to
those we are at this day disturbed with, and to the pernicious effects of all
whatsoever, than is the right explaining and well improving of the Subject that
is here handled: For this is to strike at the Grand cause of them, they being
to be imputed to nothing so much as to the Ignorance of, or Non-attendence to,
the Design of Christianity.

I will add no more, but that if thou shall please to accept this small
performance as ingenuously and heartily as it is meant honestly; and believe
that it proceeds not from an Humor of Scribbling, but a sincere desire of doing
some service, thou will be but just to him, who is ambitious of nothing so much
as of being Instrumental toward the promoting of that most Excellent and
infinitely Important Design in thy Heart and Life.

E. F.

The Contents.
SECT. I. That True Holiness is the Design of Christianity, plainly
Demonstrated.
CHAP. 1. The nature of true Holiness Described. Page 5. Chap. 2. A general
demonstration that the holiness described is the Design of Christianity, by a
Climax of seven particulars. page 12. Chap. 3. A particular demonstration that
holiness is the only design of the Precepts of the Gospel. And that they
require, 1. The most extensive holiness, 2. The most intensive. An Objection
answered. page 18. Chap. 4. That holiness is the only design of the promises
of the Gospel, showed in two particulars; And of the threatenings therein
contained. page 28. Chap. 5 That the promoting of holiness was the design of
our Savior's whole life and conversation among men; both of his discourses and
actions. And that he was an eminent example of all the parts of virtue, viz. Of
the greatest freedom, affability and courtesy: The greatest candor and
Ingenuity: The most mavelous gentleness and meekness: The deepest humility:
The greatest contempt of the world: The most perfect contentation: The most
wonderful charity and tenderest compassion: stupendous patience, and
submission to the Divine Will: The most passionate love of God, and devoutest
temper of mind toward him: Mighty confidence and trust in God. An objection
answered: The most admirable Prudence. page 36. Chap. 6. That to make men truly
virtuous and holy was the design of Christ's unimitable actions, or mighty
works and miracles. And that these did not only tend to promote it, as they
were convincing arguments that he came forth from God, but were also very
proper to effect it in a more immediate manner. page 8. Chap. 7. That to make
men holy was the design of Christ's Death, proved by several texts of
Scripture: And how it is effectual thereunto, discovered in six particulars.
page 78. Chap. 8. That it is only the promoting of the design of making men
^oly, that is aimed at by the Apostles insisting on the doctrines of Christ's
Resurr^ction, Ascension and coming again to Iugdement. page 93.
SECT. II. Upon what accounts the business of making men Holy came to be
preferred by our Savior before any other thing, and to be principally designed
by him.
Chap. 9. Two accounts of this: The first, That this is ^o do the greatest good
to men. And that the blessing of making men holy, is of all other the greatest,
proved by several Arguments, viz. Fir^, that it contains in it a deliverance
from the worst of evils; and sin showed so to be. page 99. Chap. 10. The second
Argument, viz. That the Blessing of making men holy is accompained with all
other that are most desirable, and which do best deserve to be so called:
particularly with the pardon of sin, and God's special love. And that those
things which sensual persons are most desirous of, are eminently to be found in
that blessing. page 108. Chap. 11. The third Argument, viz. That whatsoever
other blessings a man may be supposed to have that is utterly destitute of
holiness, they cannot stand him in so much stead, as only to make him not
miserable. And all evil and corrupt affections showed to be greatly tormenting
in their own nature, and innumerable sad mischiefs to be the necessary
consequents of yielding obedience to them. page 115. Chap. 12. The fourth
Argument, viz. That holiness being perfected is blessedness it self; and the
glory of heaven consists chiefly in it. This no new notion; some observations
by the way from it. page 123. Chapter 13. The second account of our Savior's
preferring the business of making men holy, before any other, viz. That this is
to do the best service to God. An objection answered against the Author's
Discourse of the Design of Christianity. page 127.
SECT. III. An Improvement of the whole Discourse in diverse Inferences.
Chap. 14. The first Inference.

That it appears from the past Discourse that our Savior has taken the most
effectual course for the purpose of subduing sin in us, and making us partakers
of his holiness. Where it is particularty showed that the Gospel gives
advantages infinitely above any those the Heathens had, who were privileged
with extraordinary helps for the Improvement of themselves. And 1. That the
good Principles that were by natural Light dictated to them, and which reason
rightly improved persuaded them to entertain as undoubtedly true, or might have
done, are farther confirmed by Divine Revelation in the Gospel. 2. That those
principles which the Heathens by the highest improvement of their Reason could
at best conclude but very probable, the Gospel gives us an undoubted assurance
of. This showed in four instances. 3. Four Doctrines showed to be delivered in
the Gospel, which no man without the assistance of Divine Revelation could ever
once have thought of, that contain wonderful inducements, and helps to
holiness. The first of which has five more employed in it. page 133.

Chap. 15. That the Gospel contains incomparably greater helps for the
effecting of the design of making men inwardly righteous and truly holy, than
God's most peculiar people, the Israelites, were favored with. Where it is
showed. 1. That the Gospel is infinitely more effectual for this purpose than
the Mostical Law was. 2. And that upon no other accounts the Jews were in
circumstances for the obtaining of a through reformation of life and
purification of nature, comparable to those our Savior has blessed his
Disciples with. page 157* Chap. 16. An Objection against the Wonderful ^fficacy
of the Christian Religion for the purpose of making men holy, taken from the
very little success it has herein, together with the prod^gious wickedness of
Christendom. An Answer given to it in three particulars, viz 1. That how ill
soever its success is, it is evident from the foregoing Discourse that it is
not to be imputed to any weakness or ^nefficacy in that Religion. The true
causes thereof assigned. 2. That it is to be expected that those should be the
worse for the Gospel, that will not be bettered by it. 3. That there was a time
when the Gospel's success was greatly answerable to what has been said of its
Efficacy. And that the Primitive Christians were people of most unblameable and
holy Lives. The G^ostiques improperly called Christian^ in any sense. The
Primitive Christians proved to be men of excellent lives, by the Testimonies of
Fathers contained in their Apologies for them to their Enemies; and by the
acknowledgements of their Enemies themselves. An account given in particular of
their meek and submissive temper, out of T^rtulitan. The Admirable Story of the
(...) Legion. page 167. Chap. 17. The second Inference.

That we understand from what has been said of the Design of Christianity, how
fearfully it is abused by those that call themselves the Roman Catholics.
That the Church of Rome has by several of her Doctrines enervated all the
Precepts and the Motives to holiness contained in the Gospel. That she has
rendered the means therein prescribed for the attainment thereof extremely
ineffectual. That she has also as greatly corrupted them. Diverse Instances of
the Papists Idolatry. Their Image worship one Instance. Their praying to Saints
departed another. Other Impieties accompanying it, mentioned. Some account of
their Blasphemies, particularly in their Prayers to the Blessed Virgin. Their
worshipping the Host the third and grossest instance of their Idolatry. Some
other of their wicked and most Antichristian Doctrines. page 193.

Chap. 18. The third Inference.

That these two sorts of Persons are most extremely so^tish. 1 Such as expect
to have their share in the Salvation of the Gospel without true Holiness. 2.
Such much more, as encourage themselves by the grace of the Gospel in
unholiness. page 213.

Chap. 19. The fourth Inference.

That a right understanding of the Design of Christianity will give
satisfaction concerning the true Notion, 1. Of Justifying Faith, 2. Of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness. page 221.

Chap. 20. The fifth Inference.

That we learn from the Design of Christianity the great measure and standard
whereby we are to judge of Doctrines. How we are to judge of the Truth of
Doctrines. page 227.

Chap. 21. How we are to judge of the Necessity of Doctrines either to be
embraced or rejected. A brief discourse of the Nature of Points Fundamental.
How we may know whether we embrace all such, and whether we hold not any
destructive and damnable Errors. page 233. Chap. 22. The sixth Inference.

That the Design of Christianity teaches us what Doctrines and Practices we
ought, as Christians, to be most Zealous for or against. page 237.

Chap. 23. The seventh Inference.

That the Design of Christianity well considered will give us great light into
the just bounds and extent of Christian Liberty. Of complying with the customs
of our Country, and the will of our Governors. The great difference between
the Mosaical Law and the Gospel as to its Preceptive part. page 240.

Chap. 24. The eighth Inference.

That it is the most unaccountable thing to do that which is essentially evil,
in defense of the Christian Religion, or of any opinions presumed to be
Doctrines relating thereunto. The Pope and Church of Rome most prodigiously
guilty in this particular. And not a few of those that profess enmity against
Popery too liable also to the same charge. page 246.

Chap. 25. The Ninth Inference.

That it is a most unwarrantable thing for those that are the Ministers of
Christ to prefer any other Design before that of making men really Righteous
and Holy. That this ought to be the whole Design of their Preaching. That it is
of as great concernment that they promote the same business by their
Conversations, as that they do it by their Doctrine. Infinite mischiefs
occasioned by the loose lives of Ministers. Several Instances of Practices
extremely blame worthy in Preachers of the Gospel. That they ought to have a
regard to the Weaknesses of Persons so far as lawfully they may. That the
Promoting of Holiness ought to be only Design of Ecclesiastical Discipline.
page 252.

Chap. 26. The tenth Inference.

That an obedient temper of mind is an excellent and necessary qualification to
prepare men for a firm belief and right understanding of the Gospel of Christ.
That it is so by virtue of Christ's promise. That it is so in its own Nature.
This showed in three Particulars, viz. in that, 1. It will help us to judge
without prejudice concerning the Doctrines contained in the Gospel. 2. It will
give satisfaction concerning the main Doctrines of Christianity far excelling
any that can arise from mere speculation. 3. It will secure from the causes of
Error in those Points that are of weightiest importance. Six causes of such
Errors laid down; and an Obedient Disposition of mind showed to secure from
each of them. page 267.

Chap. 27. The last Inference.

That we are taught by the Design of Christianity, wherein the Essence, Power
and Life of it consists. Instances of what kind of things it does not consist
in. For what ends the several Exercises of Piety and Devotion are enjoined. How
God is glorified by men, and by what means. Whom it is our duty to esteem and
carry our selves toward as true Christians. That by following the Example of
Christ and making his Life our Pattern, we shall assure our selves that the
Design of Christianity is effected in us, and that we are endued with the Power
of it. page 281.


The Introduction.
THE Accusation that Celsus and Julian, the Grand Adversaries of the Christian
Religion, had the impudent confidence to fasten upon it; namely, That it
indulgeth men in, and encourages them to the practice of immorality and
wickedness, is so notoriously false and groundless; that there is nothing
truer, or more perspicuously held forth in the Books that contain Christianity,
than that the perfectly contrary is the Great Design of it. But yet
notwithstanding, those that shall heedfully observe the lives and actions of an
Infinite number of such as call Christ their Master, would be very shrewdly
tempted undoubtedly to conclude, that they secretly think, what those Heathens
had the face to publish:

And as for (I fear I may say) even most of those Professors of Faith in
Christ, which have escaped the scandalous and more gross pollutions of the
world; that man that shall take an exact survey of their conversations also,
and consider what matters they most busy themselves about, what the designs
are which they chiefly prosecute, and that not only as Men, but as Christians
too; what things they are that exercise most of their Deal, and for and against
which is spent the greatest part of their Religious Heat; will be strongly
inclined to suspect, that, though they have not entertained so highly
dishonorable an opinion of their Savior, as to esteem him a Patron of Vice
and Wickedness, yet they think so undervaluingly of Him, as to judge him so
mean a Friend to Holiness, as that the promoting it in men's hearts and lives,
if it was at all a Design of His coming into the world, and of the Religion He
left behind Him, yet it was at best but a Bye-one, and that some other matters
were much more in his Eye, and principally intended by Him.

Though I will not say that the greater part of our most forward Professors
have their Heads Leavened with such thoughts, yet any one may dare to affirm
that they behave themselves exactly as if they had: And moreover I am
absolutely certain, that it is utterly impossible, men should make such a
Bustle and Stir about matters of none, or but small importance, to the serving
or prejudicing the real Interest of their Souls; and, on the other hand, be as
Lukewarm, unconcerned and Careless in diverse things that have the most
immediate and direct tendency to their Eternal Welfare; if they duly
considered and had a quick sense of what was now intimated, viz. That the
Business that brought the Blessed Jesus by the appointment of God the Father
down from Heaven; and the End of His making us the Objects of such Rich and
Transcendent Kindness, was the destroying of Sin in us, the Renewing of our
depraved Natures, the Ennobling our Souls with Virtuous Qualities and Divine
Dispositions and Tempers, and (in one word) the making us partakers of His
Holiness. And so long as there are but few that either believe or Consider,
that this is The End of Christianity, and that alone which it directly drives
at, it cannot be matter of Wonder, if multitudes of those which lay a great
claim to it, should be (as Excellent a Religion as it is) little the better,
nay, and in some respects even the worse for it.

And on the Contrary, it is not to be in the least doubted. That nothing can be
so available to the introducing of a better state of things, the abating and
perfectly quenching our intemperate Heats, the regulating and bringing into due
order our wild exorbitances, the governing and restraining our extravagant and
Heady Zeal, the induing us with becoming tempers, sober thoughts, and good
spirits, as would the thorow-belief, the due minding and digesting of this one
Principle.

And for this Reason, I am not able to imagine how time may be spent to better
purpose, than in endeavoring to possess men's minds with it: And to Contribute
thereunto, what it can, is the Business of this Treatise: Whereof these
following, are the General Heads: which shall be insisted on with all possible
perspicuity, and convenient brevity, viz.

1. First, A plain Demonstration, that, True Holiness is the Special Design of
Christianity. 2. Secondly, An Account, how it comes to pass that our Savior
has laid such Stress upon this, as to prefer it before all other. 3. Thirdly,
An Improvement of the whole Discourse, in diverse, (and most of them Practical)
Inserences.
SECT. I. That True Holiness is the Design of Christianity, plainly
Demonstrated.
CHAP. I.
The Nature of True Holiness Described.

IN order to this Demonstration it is necessary to be premised, That the
Holiness which is the Design of the Religion of Christ Jesus, and is by various
Forms of Speech expressed in the Gospel (as by Godliness, Righteousness,
Conversion and Turning from Sin, Partaking of a Divine Nature, with many other)
is such as is so in the most proper and highest sense: Not such as is Subjected
in any thing without us, or is made ours by a mere External application, or is
only Partial; But is Originally seated in the Soul and Spirit, is a
Complication and Combination of all Virtues, and has an influence upon the
whole man (as shall hereafter be made to appear) and may be described after
this manner.

It is so sound and healthful a Complexion of Soul, as maintains in life and
vigor whatsoever is Essential to it, and suffers not any thing unnatural to
mix with that which is so; by the force and power whereof a man is enabled to
behave himself as becomes a Creature endued with a principle of Reason; keeps
his Supreme Faculty in its Throne, brings into due Subjection all his Inferior
ones, his sensual Imagination, his Brutish Passions and Affections.

It is the Purity of the Humane Nature, engaging those in whom it resides, to
demean themselves sutably to that state in which God has placed them, and not
to act disbecomingly in any Condition, Circumstance, or Relation.

It is a Divine or God-like Nature, causing an hearty approbation of, and an
affectionate compliance with the Eternal Laws of Righteousness; and a behavior
agreeable to the Essential and Immutable differences of Good and Evil.

But to be somewhat more express and distinct, though very brief.

This Holiness is so excellent a Principle, or Habit of Soul, as causes those
that are possessed of it (I mean so far forth as it is vigorous and predominant
in them,)

First, To perform all Good and Virtuous Actions, whenever there is occasion
and Opportunity; and ever Carefully to abstain from those that are of a
Contrary Nature.

Secondly, To do the one, and avoid the other, from truly generous Motives and
Principles.

Now, in order to the right understanding of this, it is to be observed, That
Actions may become Duties or Sins these two ways.

First, As they are Complyances with, or Transgressions of Divine Positive
Precepts. These are the Declarations of the Arbitrary Will of God, whereby He
restrains our liberty for great and wise reasons, in things that are of an
indifferent nature, and absolutely considered are neither Good, nor Evil: And
so makes things not good in themselves (and capable of becoming so, only by
reason of certain Circumstances) Duties; and things not evil in themselves,
Sins. Such were all the Injunctions and Prohibitions of the Ceremonial Law; and
some few such we have under the Gospel.

Secondly, Actions are made Duties or Sins, as they are agreeable or opposite
to the Divine Moral Laws: That is, Those which are of an Indispensable and
Eternal obligation, which were first written in men's hearts, and Originally
Dictates of Humane Nature, or necessary Conclusions and Deductions from them.

By the way, I take it for granted (and I cannot imagine how any Considerative
supposing he be not a very Debauched, person can in the least doubt it,) That
there are First Principles in Morals, as well as in the Mathematics,
Metaphysics, etc. I mean such as are self-evident, and therefore not capable
of being properly demonstrated; as being no less knowable and easily assented
to, than any Proposition that may be brought for the proof of them.

Now the Holiness we are describing is such, as engages to the performance of
the Former sort of Duties, and forbearance of the Former sort of Sins, for this
Reason primarily, because it pleases Almighty God to command the one, and
forbid the other: Which Reason is founded upon this certain Principle; That it
is most highly becoming all Reasonable Creatures to obey God in every thing;
and, as much disbecoming them, in any thing to disobey him. And secondarily,
upon the account of the Reasons (if they are known) for which God made those
Laws. And the Reasons of the Positive Laws contained in the Gospel are
declared, of which I know not above three that are purely So, viz. That of
going to God by Christ, and the Institutions of Baptism and the Lord's Supper.

Again, This Holiness is such as engages to the performance of the Duties, and
forbearance of the Sins of the second kind; not merely because it is the Divine
pleasure to publish Commands of those, and Prohibitions of these; but also, and
especially, for the Reasons, which moved God to make those Publications: namely
because those are Good in themselves, and infinitely becoming Creatures endued
with Understanding and Liberty of Will; and these are no less evil in their own
Nature, and unworthy of them.

That man that would forbear, gratefully to acknowledge his Obligations to God,
or to do to his Neighbor as he would that he should do to him, etc. on the one
hand; and would not stick at dishonouring his Maker, or abusing his Fellow
Creatures in any kind, etc. on the other; if there were no written Law of God
for the former, and against the latter; does not those Duties, nor forbears
these Sins, by virtue of an Holy nature that informs and acts him; but is
induced thereunto by a mere Animal principle, and because it is his interest so
to do. And the Reason is clear, because no one that does thus, only in regard
of the Written Precepts and Prohibitions of the Divine Majesty, does so out of
respect to them, as such, but as they have promises, but especially threatenings
annexed to them: For to be sure, he that performs the one, and forbears the
other from any Lovely notion he has of Obedience, and any hateful one he has
conceived of disobedience, will also make Conscience of those and the like
Duties, in regard of the goodness, becomingness, and Excellency he discerns in
them; and will abstain from these and the like Sins, because of the intrinsic
Evil, Turpitude, and Deformity he apprehends in them: For those are no whit
less manifestly lovely, and Worthy of Mankind, than is Obedience to the Divine
Will, considered in an abstracted notion; nor these less apparently vile, and
abominable than is Disobedience. For, that very Reason, that makes it an
intolerable thing to disobey a Law of God, ( viz. because it is highly Unjust
so to do) makes it so also to Commit the forementioned, and such like Sins; and
so on the Contrary. Now this Proposition; That it is a base thing to do
unjustly, is one of those which I call first principles; than which there is
nothing Mankind does more naturally assent to: And those Sins with many other
are alike plain instances and expressions of that shameful vice Injustice,
though not of an equal degree of it.

The sum of what we have said in this account of the Nature of True Holiness
is this, viz. That it is such a Disposition and Temper of the inward man, as
powerfully enclines it carefully to regard and attend to, affectionately to
embrace and adhere to, to be actuated by, and under the Government of all those
Good Practical Principles that are made known either by Revelation, Nature, or
the use of Reason.

Now though Nothing is more natural to the Souls of Men considered in their
pure Essentials, and as they came out of their Creatour's hands, than this most
Excellent Temper; yet by their Apostasy from God, and sinking into Brutish
sensuality, did they sadly disposses themselves of it, and so became like the
Beasts which perish. But it pleased the Infinite Goodness of the Divine Majesty
not to give us over so; For when we had destroyed our selves, in him was our
Help found. He greatly concerned himself for the Recovery of Fallen Mankind by
various means and Methods, and when the world was at the very worst, did he
make use of the most Sovereign and effectual Remedy. He, who at Sundry times,
and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the Prophets, did
in these last days send his dearly Beloved, and only Begotten Son to us. And
to prove that the Great Errand he came upon was the effecting of our
Deliverance out of that sinful State we had brought our selves into, and the
putting us again into possession of that Holiness which we had Lost, is now our
Next Business.

CHAP. II.
A General Demonstration that the Holiness Described is the Design of
Christianity, by a Climax of Seven particulars.

IN the first place, in order to the proof of this, it is worthy our
observation, that S. John the Baptist being sent to prepare the way before our
Savior, did so, by teaching the Doctrine of Repentance, and Baptizing men
thereunto: And that we no sooner read of his appearing in Public, and entering
upon his Office of Harbinger or Forerunner, but we find him Preaching this
Doctrine, and making use of the News of the Messiah's Approach, as a Motive to
persuade them to that Duty. Matthew. 3. 1, 2. In those days came John the Baptist
preaching in the Wilderness of Judea, and saying; Repent ye, for the Kingdom of
Heaven is at hand. And this was that which the Angel foretold Zacharias he
should do, when he gave him the first notice that he should be the Father of
such a Son. Luke 1. 16, 17. And many of the children of Israel shall he turn to
the Lord their God; and he shall go before him in the power, and Spirit of
Elias, to turn the Hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the disobedient
to the Wisdom of the just; to make ready a people prepared for the Lord: That
is, He shall make way for the Messiah with the same zeal against all
wickedness, as was expressed by Elias, and likewise with an immediate
Commission from Heaven, as he had, in order to the working of a General
Reformation among the Jews. This shows that Christ's Great errand into the
world was men's thorow-conversion from Sin, and the making them truly Holy;
seeing that the only preparation necessary for the entertainment of him
consisted in having this work begun in them.

Secondly, Upon the first news of Christ's near Approach brought by Malachi the
last of the Prophets, this is expressed by him as that which should be his
Grand Business when he was come, Mal. 3. 1, 2, 3. -- The Lord, whom ye seek,
shall suddenly come to his Temple, even the Messenger of the Covenant whom ye
delight in (or, have a longing expectation of:) Behold, he shall come, says
the Lord of Hosts: But who may abide the day of his coming? Or who shall stand
when he appears? For he is like a Refiner's fire, and like Fuller's Soap: And
he shall sit as a Refiner, and purifier of Silver; and he shall purify the
Sons of Levi, and purge them as Gold is purged, etc.

Thirdly, Immediately after his conception in the womb of the Blessed Virgin,
this was foretold to Joseph Concerning him by an Angel, Matthew. 1. 21. She shall
bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name Jesus; for He shall save his
people from their sins. This Blessing of making men Holy was so much the design
of Christ's coming, that He had his very Name from it. Observe the words are;
He shall save his people from their sins; not from the punishment of them: And
(as will fully appear hereafter) that is the primary sense of them, which is
most plainly expressed in them: That he shall save his people from the
punishment of sin is a true sense too, but it is secondary and implied only; as
this latter is the never failing and necessary consequent of the former
Salvation.

This again was foretold by Zacharias, betwixt his Conception and Birth. He
says, Luke 1. 72, etc. That God performed his covenant in sending Christ;
which covenant consists in this, That He would grant us, that We being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, might serve him without fear, in
Holiness and Righteousness before him, all the days of our Life.

Fourthly, We likewise find this expressed by Simeon, immediately upon his
Birth, Luke 2. 32. Where having called him God's Salvation, which He had
prepared before the face of all people, he adds that, He is a Light to lighten
the Gentiles: whereby is meant, that he should bring them into the way of
Righteousness and true Holiness. Holiness is in not a few places expressed by
the Metaphor of Light, and Wickedness by that of Darkness: Turning from
Darkness to Light is explained by Act* 26.
Turning from the power of Satan unto God. And the following clause, viz. And
the Glory of thy people Israel, signifies the same thing: Namely, that in the
place of their outward and Ceremonial observances, called by the Apostle Gal.
4. 9
Beggarly Elements; He should bring in among them a far more Noble, viz. an
inward substantial and Everlasting Righteousness; and by abrogating that, and
establishing only this Righteousness, He should enlarge their Church, an
accession of the Gentiles being by that means made unto it.

Fifthly, This is expressed by S. John the Baptist, immediately before our
Savior's solemn entrance upon his office, as the business he was undertaking,
Matthew. 3. 11, 12. I indeed baptize you with Water unto repentance (that is
especially from the more plain and confessed exorbitances) but he that comes
after me, is mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear; he shall
baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire: (which will take away those
stains and pollutions, that Water cannot:) whose fan is in his hand, and he
will thoroughly purge his floor.

Sixthly. Again, after our Savior's entrance upon his office, he himself
declared, that, He came to call sinners to Repentance: And that he was so far
from coming to destroy the Law and the Prophets, that he came (...), to fulfill,
or perfect them, Mat. 5. 17. Or (...), may signify Fully to Preach, as Romans
15, 19. and Col. 1. 25.
that is, by giving more and higher instances of Moral Duties than were before
expressly given: And he tells the Jews presently after, that, Except their
Righteousness shall exceed the Righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees (that
is, unless it be above their Practical and merely External Righteousness) they
shall in no case enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. And he abundantly made it
appear, (as will be quickly shown) that the Reformation of men's lives, and
Purification of their Natures were the Great Business that he designed.

Lastly, This was frequently asserted, after he forsook the World, by the
Apostles he left behind him. S. Peter told his Contrymen, Acts 3. 26. That
as God sent Christ to bless them, so the Blessing designed them by him,
consisted in turning them from their iniquities. To you first (says he) God
having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless you, by turning every one of
you from his iniquities. Again, Acts 5. 31. The same Apostle, with others,
says that, Him has God exalted with his Right Hand, to be a Prince and a
Savior, to give Repentance to Israel, and forgiveness of Sins. Repentance
first, and then Forgiveness. S. John tells us, 1 Epist. ^. 8. that, for this
purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the
Devil. And S. Paul calls the Gospel of Christ, The Mystery of Godliness, 1 Timothy 3. 1 Timothy 6. 3.
16. The Doctrine that is according to Godliness. And gives us to understand
that, that which the Grace of God which brings Salvation teaches, is, that
denying Ungodliness, and all worldly Lusts, we should live Soberly,
Righteously, and Godlily in this Present World, Tit. 2. 12.

CHAP. III.
A Particular Demonstration that Holiness is the only Design of the Precepts of
the Gospel. And that they require, 1. The Most Extensive Holiness, 2. The most
Intensive. An Objection answered.

BUT to give a more particular proof of what we have undertaken.

First, It is most apparent, That Holiness is the Design, the only Design of
the Christian Precepts, and that this is the Mark which they are wholly
levelled at. What the Romans 7.
Apostle spoke of the Jewish, may be much more said of the Christian Law, that
It is Holy, just, and Good. For as Clemens Alexandrinus in his Paedagogus
says, (...), etc. Even InfantChristianity is perfection, compared with the Law
or the Mosaical Dispensation.

There is no Affirmative Precept in the Gospel, but it either Commands Holiness
in the general, or one or more Particular Virtue, or Habit of Holiness, or some
Essential Act or Acts of it; or Means and Helps to the Acquiring, Maintaining,
or Increase of it. Such as Hearing and Reading the Word, Prayer, Meditation,
Good Conference, Watchfulness against Temptations, Avoiding occasions of evil,
etc.

And there is no Negative Precept, but does forbid the Contrary to some one or
more of those Duties; but does forbid some thing or other that does tend either
directly or indirectly, immediately or mediately, in its own nature or by
reason of some Circumstance to the depraving of Humane Nature, and rendering us
Perfectly Wicked, or in some degree or other less holy.

To make this appear by going over the Several Precepts contained in the
Gospel, would be a work of too much time; but whosoever, as he reads them,
shall duly consider each of them, cannot be to seek for Satisfaction,
concerning the truth of what I have now said; and I dare undertake he will
readily acknowledge, That there is nothing that is not upon its own, or some
one or other, account, greatly Becoming us, and Perfective of Humane Nature, in
the whole Gospel Commanded: And that there is not any thing in it self, and in
all respects innocent, there forbidden. This can be by no means said concerning
the Precepts of the Law of Moses; but that it may concerning those of the
Gospel, is absolutely Certain.

But my whole Discourse upon this present Argument shall be confined to these
two Heads: Namely to show, That the Christian Precepts require the most
Extensive, and most Intensive Holiness; that is, exactly such a Holiness as
has been described.

First, They require the most Extensive Holiness, Not only toward God, but
also toward our Neighbor, and our selves. In the forecited place, Tit. 2. 12.
S. Paul puts all these together, under the Phrases of Living Soberly,
Righteously, and Godlily, as making up that Holiness which the Grace of God,
that brings Salvation, teaches. The Precepts of our Savior command us not
only to give unto God the things that are God's; but also to Caesar the things
that are Caesar's: Not only to obey God in all things, but to be subject
likewise to every Ordinance of Man for the Lords Sake, that is, to every
Ordinance of Man that does not Contradict the Law of God: Not only to fear God,
but also to honor the King, and to obey our spiritual Governors likewise, which
watch for our Souls, etc. and to behave our selves toward all persons sutably
to the Relations we stand in to them: Wives to submit themselves to their own
Husbands, as unto the Lord; Husbands to love their Wives even as Christ loved
the Church: Children to obey their Parents in the Lord; and Fathers not to
provoke their Children to wrath, but to bring them up in the nurture and
admonition of the Lord: Servants to be obedient to their Masters, with
singleness of heart as unto Christ, etc. and Masters to do the same things unto
them, forbearing threatening, or a harsh behavior toward them, knowing that
they have a Master in Heaven, with whom is no respect of persons. We Ephesians. ^.
are commanded to love not our Relations or our Friends only, but also all
Mankind; and to do good to all without exception, though especially to the
Household of Faith; to good men. Nay our Savior has laid a strict charge upon
us, not to exclude our malicious enemies from our love (that is, of
benevolence) but to pray Mat. 50
for them that despitefully use us, and to Bless those that Curse us. Which Law
as harshly as it sounds to Carnal Persons, they themselves cannot but
acknowledge that what it enjoyneth, is heroically and highly virtuous.

Secondly, The Christian Precepts require the most Intensive Holiness; Not
only Negative but Positive, as was now intimated; that is, Not only the
forbearance of what is evil, but the performance also of what is good: Not
only Holiness of Actions and Words, but likewise of Affections and Thoughts:
The worship of God with the Spirit, as well as with the outward man; a Holy
frame and habit of mind, as well as a holy life. They forbid cherishing sin in
the heart, as well as practicing it in the Conversation. They make Iusting
after a Woman, Adultery, as well as the Gross Act of Uncleanness. They make
Malice, Murder, as well as Killing; They forbid Coveting no less than
defrauding; and being in love with this worlds goods, as much as getting them
by unlawful means.

And I shall digress so far as to say, That there is infinite Reason that
Thoughts and the inward workings of men's souls should be restrained by Laws,
upon these two accounts.

First, Because Irregular Thoughts and Affections are the immediate Depravers
of Men's Natures; and therefore it is as necessary in order to the design of
making men Holy, that these should be forbidden, as that evil Actions and Words
should. But suppose this were otherwise; Yet

Secondly, Laws made against evil words and Actions would signify very little,
if men were left at liberty as to their Thoughts and Affections. It would be to
very little purpose to forbid men to do evil, if they might think and love it:
For where the sparks of Sin are kept glowing in the Soul, how can they be kept
from breaking out into a Flame in the Life? From the abundance of the Heart the
Mouth will speak, and the Hands act.

But to proceed, The Precepts of the Gospel command us not only to perform
good Actions, but also to do them after a right manner, with right ends, etc.
or in one word, from good Principles. Whatsoever we do, to do it heartily, as
to the Lord and not as to men. To be fervent in Col. 3. 23. Romans 12. 11. 1 Cor.
10. 31. 1 Pet. 1. 15 Mat. 5. 48.
Spirit in our service of God. To do all to the glory of God. To be holy as he
that has called us is Holy, in all manner of Conversation. To be perfect as
our heavenly Father is perfect: Which Precepts show that we ought to imitate
him, not only in the matter of our actions, but likewise in the qualifications
of them: Among which, that which I said is Essential to true Holiness, is a
principal one; namely, To do good actions for those Reasons which moved God to
enjoin them, and, I add, which make it pleasing to him to perform them
himself, viz. because they are either in themselves and upon their own account
excellent, worthy and most fit to be done, or are made so to be by some
Circumstance.

Our whole Duty to God and our Neighbor (as our Savior has told us) is
comprehended in the love of them: But the love of God required by him is a most
Intense love: we are commanded to love him with all the Heart and Soul, mind
and Mat. 19. 19.
strength; And that of our Neighbor which he has made our duty, is such, as
for the kind of it, is like the love which we bear to our selves; such as will
not permit us to wrong him in his good name, ^it. 3. 2.
any more than in his estate or person; such as will not allow us rashly to
speak, or so much as think ill of him; such as will cause us to put the best
constructions on those actions of his that are capable of various
interpretations, etc. And for the degree, 1 Cor. 13. 5
such, as will make us willing to lay 1 John 3. 16.
down our very lives for him, that is, for the promoting of his eternal
happiness.

To sum up all together, We are commanded to add to our faith virtue, to
virtue 2 Pet. 1.
knowledge, to knowledge temperance, to temperance patience, to patience
Godliness, to Godliness Brotherly Kindness, and to Brotherly kindness Charity.
To behave our selves in all respects toward our Creator as becomes his
Creatures, and those which are under unspeakable obligations to him; Toward
one another, as becomes those that are endued with the same Common nature, and
according to the diverse relations, engagements and other Circumstances we
stand in each to other; and Toward our selves according as the Dignity of our
Natures require we should. In short, whatsoever things are true, whatsoever
things are honest, Whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things are pure,
whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good report, whatsoever
things have virtue and praise in them, are Phil. 4.
the objects of the Christian Precepts, and by them recommended to us. Let any
one read but our Saviors incomparable Sermon upon the Mount, the 12th to the
Romans, and the third Chapter of the Epistle to the Colossians, and well
consider them; and it will be strange should he find it difficult to assent to
the truth of that Proposition.

Even Trypho himself, in the Dialogue betwixt Justin Martyr and him, confessed,
that the Precepts contained in the Book called the Gospel are (...), Great and
Admirable. He says indeed, that they are so admirable, as that he suspected
them not to be by Humane Nature Observable; but in that he spoke not unlike to
himself, that is a prejudiced and Carnal Jew.

If it be now objected, that notwithstanding what has been said concerning the
Christian Precepts recommending the most elevated Virtue to be practiced by us,
it is acknowledged by all Sober Christians, that they are not to be understood
in so high a sense as to require of us indefective and unspotted Holiness, or
at least that our Savior will accept of and reward that Holiness which is far
short of Perfect; and therefore he can be no such Great Friend to it, as has
been affirmed: The answer is very easy and obvious, viz. That our Savior's
not rigidly exacting such a degree of Holiness as amounts to Perfection,
proceeds from hence, that the attainment of it is in this state impossible to
us; and therefore it is not to be attributed to his liking or allowance of the
least Sin, but to his Special grace and good will to fallen Mankind: Nay,
moreover it proceeds from his passionate desire that we may be as pure and
holy, as our unhappy Circumstances will admit; he well knowing, that should he
declare that nothing short of Perfection shall be accepted at our hands, he
would make us desperate, and take the most effectual Course to cause us to give
over all thoughts of becoming better, nay, and to let the reins loose unto all
ungodliness. But yet nothing short of Sincerity, and diligent, serious
endeavors to abstain from all Sin, will be admitted by him in order to our
being made the objects of his Grace and Favor: And as for Wilful and
Presumptuous Sins of what kind soever, he makes no allowances for them, but
has by himself and his Ministers declared very frequently, that they shall not
be pardoned, without our unfeigned Reformation from them. And, Lastly,
notwithstanding the allowances and abatements that in tender Compassion to us
he is pleased to make us, no less than our absolutely Perfect Holiness is
designed by him, though not to be effected in this, yet in the other World.

CHAP. IV.
That Holiness is the only Design of the Promises of the Gospel, showed in Two
Particulars: And of the Threatenings therein Contained.

SEcondly, The Promises and Threatenings of the Gospel have most apparently the
promoting of Holiness for their only Design.

First, The Promises, it is plain, have. This S. Peter assures us, 2 Epistle,
chapter 1. v. 4. Whereby are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises,
that by these you might be partakers of the Divine Nature, having escaped the
Corruption that is in the world through lust. And S. Paul does more than
intimate the same, in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having (says he) these Promises, dearly
beloved, (viz. those which the foregoing Chapter Concludes with) let us cleanse
our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting Holiness in
the fear of the Lord. Again, Romans 12. 1. I beseech you by the Mercies of God,
that ye present your bodies a living Sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which
is your Reasonable Service. And be ye not conformed to this present world, but
be ye transformed by the Renewing of your Minds, etc.

1. We always find these promises either limited to Holy persons, or made use
of as encouragements and exciting motives to Holiness. The Apostle tells us,
that it is 1 Timothy 4.
Godliness which has the promises of the life that now is, and of that which
is to come. The promise of the Beatifical vision is made to the Pure in Heart.
Blessed are the Pure in Heart, for they shall see God. That of the Mat. 5. 8.
Kingdom of Heaven to the Poor in Spirit, verse. 3.
or those that are of humble and lowly verse. 7.
tempers. The promise of obtaining Mercy to the Merciful. That of inheriting
the verse. 5.
Earth (of temporal felicity) to the Meek, or such as live in obedience to
Government, etc. That of Eternal life to those that patiently Continue in
Well-doing. That Romans 2. 7.
of sitting with Christ on his Throne, to Rev. 3. 21. chap. 2. 10
those that overcome, that is, that mortify their Lusts and corrupt
affections. The promise of a Crown of life is used as a motive to persuade to
faithfulness to the Death. But to what purpose do I multiply instances, when as
there is not a particular promise throughout the whole Gospel, but it is
expressed or plainly enough intimated, that its performance depends upon some
duty of Holiness to be on our parts first performed, or at least heartily
endeavored. And whereas the Promises of Pardon, and of Eternal Life are very
frequently made to Believing, there is nothing more evidently declared than
that this Faith is such as purisieth the Heart, and is productive of Good
Works. 2. Nay the Nature of these Promises is such, as is of it self sufficient
to satisfy us, That Holiness is the Design of them.
1. This is manifestly true concerning the Principal Promises, or those which
relate to the other life. They may be reduced to these three Heads; That of the
holy Spirit; of Remission of Sin; and of Eternal happiness in the Enjoyment of
God.

Now for the first of these, viz. The Promise of the Spirit, that is it to
which we are beholden for grace and assistance in the great work of subduing
Sin, and acquiring the habit of Holiness; and this is the very business for the
sake of which that Promise is made to us.

And for the second and third, they are such as none but holy Souls are capable
of. That none but such are capable of having the Guilt of their Sins removed,
and of being freed from the displeasure and wrath of God, is self-evident; for
the Guilt of Sin must needs remain while its power continues; these two are
inseparable from each other: Sin is so loathsome and filthy a thing (as shall
hereafter be shown) that it is perfectly impossible that the blood of Christ it
self should render a sinner lovely or not odious in the sight of God, any
otherwise than by washing away the pollution of it. And nothing is more
apparent, than that holy Souls alone are in a Capacity of the Happiness that
consists in the Enjoyment of God in the other World; than that, as without
Holiness no man shall see the Lord, (as says the Author to the Hebrews) So
without it none can see him: For the full and Complete participation of God,
which our Savior promises his Disciples and faithful followers, arises out
of the likeness and Conformity of men's Souls to him: But there is such a
perfect unlikeness and contrariety in impure and polluted souls to the
infinitely Holy God, that it is impossible there should be any Communications
from him to them, any friendly agreement and complacency between Him and them.
He is not a God that has pleasure in wickedness, neither can evil dwell with
him. Psalm. 5. 4. What Communion has Light with Darkness, says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 6. 14. But vicious and unholy souls are full of Darkness, whereas God is
pure splendid Light, and in Him is no Darkness at all. The Platonists would not
admit that any man is Capable of being acquainted with Divine things, that is
not purged from that which they called (...), and (...), Remissness of Mind and
Brutish Passions. How utterly impossible then is it, that such as are not so,
should be acquainted with the Divinity it self? Hierocles says (...), etc. As
a Bleer eye cannot look upon (...) things very bright and shining, so a Soul
unpossessed of virtue is unable to behold the Beauty of Truth: How unable then
is such a soul to behold the Beauty of God himself, to see him as he is, and be
happy in the sight of him? Those eyes which have continually beheld Vanity (as
says an Excellent late writer of our own) would be dazzled, not delighted, with
the Beatifick Vision. Thanks be to God (says the Apostle) who has made Col.
1. 12.
us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in Light. Those can
by no means partake of it, that are not by Holiness made meet and disposed for
it. What happiness can we find in the enjoyment of God when he is of a
perfectly contrary nature to our own? and moreover, how can we then enjoy him?
There must be in us a likeness to him, or we cannot see him as he is; for S.
John proves, that when he appears, we shall be like him, by this Argument. It
was one of the Maxims of the Excellent Socrates: (...)
It is unlawful for an impure nature to touch pure Divinity. Now this being the
Happiness promised in the Gospel, we easily learn from the consideration of the
Nature of it (it being not at all gross and sensual, but purely spiritual) what
is the Design of those Promises that contain it. At the first hearing of them,
though they should sound (as they do not) like Absolute ones; we may be certain
that Holiness, and sincere endeavors after a participation of a Divine Nature
must necessarily be tacit conditions of them, as without which our Souls cannot
possibly be qualified and put into an apt disposition for them.

2. As the Promises which concern the other life are such as none but Holy
Souls are Capable of, So those that only relate to this li^e are such as none
but such Souls will be contented with. They are only necessaries which the
Gospel gives us an assurance of, and such things as may be a help to the
Exercise of Virtue and Holiness; not Supersluities and such as serve to
gratify liquorish appetites. So we are to understand that of our Savior, Mat.
6. 3. First seek the Kingdom of God, and his Righteousness; and all these
things shall be added unto you: The words foregoing show, that by [ all these
things] we are only to understand meat, drink, and clothes. The temporal
blessings that Christ engages himself to bestow upon his Disciples, are such
alone as tend to answer moderate desires, not to satisfy inordinate cravings:
in short, they are only such as are needful to keep their bodies in such a
state as that they may be meet habitations, and instruments of their souls, so
long as it shall be fit for them to continue in them.

Secondly, And as for the Threatenings of the Gospel, which are most terrible
and dismal, that they have the same Design that the Promises have, is out of
Question: For they are never used to scare men from any thing but what tends to
pollute and debauch their souls: And the end of them is every where to excite
us effectually to diligence and industry in the pursuit of Real Righteousness
and Substantial Holiness.

The wrath of God is revealed from Heaven in the Gospel against all
Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of men: Such as Romans 1. 18
disbelieving and disobeying Christ's Gospel, in the general; And particularly,
such as Idolatry, Adultery, Fornication and Uncleanness 1 Cor. 6. 9, 10. Mat.
5. 22. Mat. 11. 26. ^ha. 18. 28 ^ha. 25. 42 1 John 3. 15. (...). 7. 1. Revel.
21. 27. Jam. 4. 6. Matthew. 23. 13 Rom 13* 1, 2.
of all sorts, Theft, Covetousness, Drunkenness, Reviling, Wrath, Contemptuous
Behavior, Implacability, Unmercifulness, Illiberality, Malice, Censoriousness,
Lying, Pride, Hypocrisy, Rebellion and Disobedience to Governors, etc. And
therefore are the Committers of these and such like sins threatened, that so
those, which from the consideration of their vile nature and ugliness will not
be withdrawn from them, may from a principle of self-preservation be afraid of
them: And our Savior is infinitely Good to us in his Terrifying Threatenings,
as well as in his Alluring Promises. For (as Clemens Alex. in his Paedagogus,
says) His Threatenings proceed not from Anger, but from Great Good Will; and he
therefore threatens punishment, that sinners being thereby scared into
Reformation, may by that means prevent their being punished. He does not (as he
proceeds) like a Serpent bite before he gives warning. And therefore only
does he give warning, that he may not bite.

CHAP. V.
That the Promoting of Holiness was the Design of our Savior's whole life and
Conversation among men; both of his Discourses and Actions. And that he was an
eminent Example of all the parts of Virtue, viz. Of the Greatest Freedom,
Affability and Courtesy: The Greatest Candor and Ingenuity: The most
mavelous Gentleness and Meekness: The Deepest Humility: The Greatest Contempt
of the World: The most Perfect Contentation: The most Wonderful Charity and
Tenderest Compassion: Stupendous Patience, and Submission to the Divine Will:
The most Passionate Love of God, and Devoutest Temper of Mind toward him:
Mighty Confidence and Trust in God. An Objection answered: The most Admirable
Prudence.

THirdly, The Promoting of Holiness was the Design of our Savior's Whole Life,
and Conversation among Men. All his Discourses that are on Record carried on
this great business: Not only his Sermons, but likewise those which were less
solemn, and that occasionally, and as it were by the Bye dropped from Him. There
is not a Parable he uttered, but some thing highly conducing to the instilling
of virtue into those to whom he directed it, was the Moral of it: And all
advantages and occasions he greedily embraced for the infusing of true piety
and holiness into the Souls of Men.

To give a few instances: When it was told him that his Mother and Brethren
sought for him; He took that opportunity to tell them, that whosoever will do
the will of God, the same is his Brother, Sister, and Mother, Mark 3. 35. When
he observed a reasoning among the Disciples, which of them should be the
Greatest in the Kingdom of God; He took occasion from thence to preach to them
the necessity of the Grace of Humility and becoming as little Children, of
Self-denial, Mortification of their most beloved Lusts, and to teach them
several other very excellent Lessons, Matthew. 18. in the beginning. Upon a
certain woman's saying to Him, Blessed is the Womb that bare Thee, and the Pap^
that gave Thee Suck; He minded his Hearers of the Blessedness of Obedient
persons: yea rather (said he) are they blessed that hear the word of God, and
keep it. Luke 11. 28. Upon Martha's desiring him to command her Sister to help
her in serving, he reproved her over-solicitousness about the affairs of this
life, and put her in mind of the one thing needful, Luke 10. 41. From a
Pharisees ma^velling that he washed not before dinner, he took an Advantage to
reprove their Superstition, Hypocrisies, Partial Rig^eousness, Pride and
several other Immoralities, Luke 11. 38, etc. From a Person's desiring him to
speak to his Brother to divide the inheritance with him, he took an opportunity
to discourse against Covetousness, and to dissuade from s^ing the heart upon
earthly riches* from solicitousness and Carking Carefulness and to exhort to
several most weighty and important duties, Luke 12. 15, etc. Upon some men's
talking of the Lamentable disaster that befell the Galileans, he took occasion
to give a caution against Rash Judging, and to preach to them the absolute
necessity of Repentance, as that without which they should all perish Luke 13.
begin. Upon his observing how that at a Feast they chose the Uppermost Rooms,
he laid hold of that opportunity to teach the virtue of Humility, Luke 14. 7.
And in the same Chapter he took the advantage that was offered him by other
Passages for the instilling of diverse other profitable Instructions. And you
may find in the four Evangelists abundance of Observations of this Nature.

And as it was the business of all his Discourses to teach virtue, so was it
also of all his Actions: He Preached holiness to men's Eyes no less than to
their Ears, by giving them the most stupendous Example in his own Person, of
all the parts of it. His whole Life was one Continued Lecture of the most
Excellent Morals, the most Sublime and exact Virtue.

For instance; He was a Person of the Greatest Freedom, Affability, and
Courtesy, there was nothing in his Conversation that was at all Austere,
Crabbed or Unpleasant. Though he was always serious, yet was he never sour,
sullenly Grave, Morose or Cynical; but of a marvellously conversable, sociable
and benign temper. Those who had Checks from his Disciples, as rude and
troublesome, were never accused by Him for being so, but were most kindly
listened to, and lovingly received: even little Children, as unwelcome as they
were to them, were tenderly embraced, and blessed by him. He never blamed any for
interrupting him in his Discourses, or other business; Nor was put into the
least Chafe by their so doing, but ever patiently heard them, and sent none of
them from him (supposing they had no ill design in coming to him) without
Satisfaction. When he was invited to men's Tables (as little as their cheer
could tempt him) he readily went; nor did he esteem it as disbecoming his
gravity to make one at a Marriage Feast; nor to contribute to it himself
neither. He did not think himself defiled by bad company, nor baulked the
Society of Publicans and Sinners themselves, (as loathsome as they were to
worse men, the Pharisees) but freely in order to the reforming of them sat
down, when there was occasion, and conversed with them. His first entertainment
of the woman of Canaan, as uncivil as it might seem, was nothing less than so;
for the unkind and contemptuous Language he gave her, though it was but the
same which the Jews always bestowed upon those people, proceeded from no
Contempt of her; nor was it designed, as the event showed, in the least to
discourage her, but on the Contrary, to give her occasion to show the Greatness
of her Faith, in the answer she returned to it. The ever and anon infirm,
imprudent and impertinent talk of his Disciples and others, could not at any
time put him out of his good temper, but only gave him an opportunity of
imparting to them seasonable Instructions and Wise Counsels.

The Candor also and Ingenuity of his Spirit did to great admiration discover
it self: Whereof take this one Instance. Where as he (as was said) forbad
censorious judging of other men; and commanded, consequently, to put the best
constructions upon those actions of others that are capable of various
interpretations, he has given us no small encouragement so to do, by his
behavior toward those three Disciples, whom he could not persuade for a
little while to forbear sleeping, no not in his Agony; as infinitely great
obligations as he had laid upon them, to do any thing he should please to
desire of them. That their sleeping at such a time looked as exactly as could
be like an infallible argument of extreme unconcernedness for their blessed
Lord, and of excessive coolness of affection to him, especially he having (I
say) before desired them to Watch with him, and given them the reason why he
did so: Yet for all that, would he impute it to no worse a cause than mere
infirmity, nor entertained any ill opinion of them upon that account; and when
they themselves had nothing to say to excuse their fault, he makes this Apology
himself for them; The spirit indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak: Nay
though, for all this, and notwithstanding that friendly expostulation of his
with Peter, [Couldest thou not watch with me one hour?] they fell asleep again,
yet did he not at his last return to them pass any censure upon them, but
carried it toward them as he was wont to do.

And the Gentleness and meekness of his Disposition was very mavelous: When
James and John in a great heat, would have persuaded him to call for fire from
Heaven after the Example of Elias to consume the Samaritans for their
inhospitable and barbarous refusal to give him entertainment, he rebuked them
immediately for that revengful motion, and gave them this reply; ^e know not
what manner of Spirit ye are of; For the Son of Man is not come to destroy men's
lives, but to save them, Luke 9. 55. and so, silently went his ways, without
giving them so much as a lash of his Tongue for so rude an affront. Never had
any one so strong provocations to Wrath and Revenge, as the Blessed Jesus; but
never were either so undiscernible in any as they were in him. In his carriage
indeed toward the Pharisees he might seem to some to be once or twice
transported with a fit of unordinary passion, but it would not have become the
zeal he had for God and true Goodness to behave himself otherwise toward such
Monstrously immoral wretches and most hatefully conceited and proud Hypocrites.
Nor was his overturning the Tables of the Money Changers, or Whipping the
Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple, any other than a very befitting and
seemly expression of his just displeasure against those Sacrilegious and
Profane people. But he was never so concerned for himself, for his own
Reputation or ought else that belonged to him, as to be put into the least heat
by all the ignominious Language that was from time to time given him, and the
vile reproaches and unsufferable abuses that were heaped upon Him. When he was
acosted with a never-to-be-parallel'd impudence by his Old Disciple Judas in
the Front of an Armed Multitude; who could have forborne to receive such a
villainous and intolerably base Traitor with the most Emphatical Expressions of
an Exasperated and Enraged mind? But with what wonderful Mildnes was that
Monster of Ingratitude and Dissimulation treated by our Dear Lord! The worst
words he bestowed upon him being these, Judas, betrayest thou the Son of man
with a Kiss? Nor did he more angrily bespeak the wicked Followers than he did
their Leader, when they rudely assaulted and apprehended him. And so far was he
from revenging himself upon them, as able as he was to do it effectually; and
notwithstanding (as he gave them to understand) that he could, if he listed,
have no fewer than twelve Legions of Angels employed in his service, that he
wrought a miracle for the healing of the wound that one of them received from
the Sword of Peter; and withal charged him to put up that Weapon.

Nor was it ever in the Power either of the Calumniating and black Tongues, or
rude and Cruel hands, of his bitterest Enemies to draw from him so much as a
reviling or fierce word. But of so rarely moderate a temper and serene spirit
was he, that (as S. Peter says) When he was reviled, he reviled not again;
When he suffered, 1 Pet. 2. 23.
he threatened not, but committed himself to him that judges righteously. He
gave his Isa. 50. 6.
back to the Smiters, and his Cheeks to them that plucked off the hair, he hid
not his face from shame and spitting. He was oppressed Isa. 53. verse. 7.
and he was afflicted, yet he opened not his mouth; He is brought as a Lamb to
the slaughter, and as a Sheep before her shearers is dumb, so he opened not his
mouth. And thus has he taught us by the most excellent Example to obey those
Precepts of his whereby the Practice of that virtue of Meekness and sedateness
of spirit toward injurious persons is enjoined on us.

Nor was his Meekness less to be paralleled or more observable than his great
Humility; from whence indeed that proceeded, and was of this no small
expression. And especially considering his high descent, most transcendent
perfections and infinite worth, it was impossible he should have been so meek
as to put up such contemptuous usage and inexpressibly provoking affronts as he
did, if his Humility were not equal to his other excellencies, if he had not
been most lowly minded and of a profoundly submiss spirit. God only had the
Glory of all his mighty works, he would not ascribe to himself the least. The
Father, said he, that dwells in me, he does the works, John 14. 10. Verily,
verily I say unto you, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the
Father do: For, whatsoever things he does, these does the Son likewise, John 5.
19. I can of mine own self do nothing; as I hear, I judge; and my judgment is
just, because I seek not mine own Will, but the Will of the Father which has
sent me, verse. 30 -- I do nothing of my self: but as my Father has taught me,
I speak these things, John 8. 28.

Though He was King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, yet did he hide his greatness, told his Disciples that his Kingdom is
not of this world, and chose the condition of a Subject and a private Man in
it: Nor would he be persuaded to assume to himself so much authority, as
judging but between two persons in a case of Civil right did amount unto. In
the above cited place ( Luke 12. 15.) When one desired him, to speak to his
Brother, that he divide the inheritance with him, he returned him this Answer,
Man who made me a judge or a Divider over you? Nay he put himself into the
Condition, not only of a private, but also of a mean, a most despicably mean
person. As He chose to be born of a mean Woman, in the meanest and even vilest
of places, a Stable, where a Manger was his Cradle, and Brute Beasts his
Chamber-fellows; so did he afterward subject himself to his poor Mother, and
the Carpenter her Husband. He was not unacquainted, when he was but a Child,
with the Nobility of his Descent, the Greatness of his Extraction, He even then
did well understand whose Son He was, and that no less a Person was His Father
than the Infinite God of Heaven and earth; for said He to Joseph and Mary, when
after a sorrowful search after him they found him in the Temple, Wist ye not
that I must be about my Father's Business? Yet notwithstanding He went down
with them from Jerusalem, and came to Nazareth, and was Subject unto them, Luke
2. 49, 51. And under Joseph, though he knew him to be but his Reputed Father
(if we may believe Justin Martyr.
one of the most Ancient Fathers) he wrought at his own Trade, and, as he
says, (...), did Carpentrywork; and particularly busied himself in making
(...) Ploughs and Yokes.

Again, the persons that he took for his most intimate Associates were of no
better quality than sorry Fishermen, and men of the lowest rank. As for his
worldly estate, I cannot say 'twas mean, for he had none at all (that is, but
what he was beholden to others for.) The Foxes, said he, have holes, and the
birds of the air nests, but the Son of man has not where he may lay his head.
And as for employments, he thought not himself too good to undertake the
vilest, even one in comparison of which making Ploughs and Yokes was most
Gentile, viz. The washing of his Disciples feet. In short, so marvellously
humble was this Infinitely Great Person, that (as he says, Matthew. 20. 28.) He
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister; And was in this world as one
that serves, Luke 22. 27. and that, though he was rich, he became poor, that
we through his poverty might be rich. That, 2 Cor. 8. 9.
though he was in the form of God, he thought it no robbery (or spoil) to be
equal with God; but made himself of no Reputation, and took upon him the form
of a Servant, and was made in the likeness of men; and being found in fashion
as a man, he humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of
the Cross, Phil. 2. 6, 7. And our Savior has declared that he was our Pattern
both in his Meekness and Humility; For, Learn (said he) of me, for I am meek
and lowly in heart, Matthew. 11. 29. And therefore did he submit to that meanest
office of a Servant (which was but now mentioned) that we might from the
Consideration of his Example, not look upon the lowest, whereby we may serve
our Brethren, as below us: For, after he had washed his Disciples feet, and was
sat down again, he said thus to them, John 13. 12. Know ye what I have done
unto you? Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I am: If I then
your Lord and Master have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another
feet. For I have given you an example, that ye should do, as I have done unto
you. Verily, Verily, I say unto you, the Servant is not greater than his Lord,
neither he that is sent, greater than he that sent him. If ye know these
things, happy are ye if ye do them.

Considering what has been said of his choosing so mean and despicable a
condition in this world, I need not spend time in showing what an Example he
has given us of Contempt of it. Never was any one so dead to its pleasures as
he was: Nor were ever its Glories so trampled on by the feet of any, as by our
Savior's: And that, not as were the Carpets of Plato by that Cynick Diogenes,
who was truly enough (no question) told by that great Philosopher, that he trod
under foot the pride of Plato, with a greater Pride; for he was guilty of no
insolent behavior either toward Great men, or their Greatness, nor of any
thing that looked in the least like it. But he gave most eminent demonstrations
of the mean opinion he had of Popularity and Applause among men, of Titles of
Honor, and Vast Revenues, and that he infinitely despised them in comparison
of mental Endowments and accomplishments. He confuted the idle fancies of the
world concerning these and the like things, and disparaged those vain
estimations that are founded upon them, in that he chose to be wholly devoid of
them, and in the very other extreme to those which abounded with them: whereby
he likewise signified how little evil he apprehended in Disesteem, Reproach and
Poverty; which we vain Creatures have such frightful conceptions of, and so
greatly dread; in that he did not at all matter them, nor in the least concern
himself at them.

So Great, Generous, and Gallant a Soul had he; that he was so far from
suffering his mind to be at all disquieted with them, that He voluntarily and
freely chose them. For it lay in his power to be the Richest man under Heaven,
and most to abound with this Worlds Goods, if it had so pleased him; and he
could, if he had listed, have been also the most popular person upon earth;
could always have kept the Credit which for a while he had among the Common
People, and gained the like among all sorts: For he had infinitely the
Advantage above all that ever appeared upon this Stage of the Word to have
raised to himself a most mighty Renown, and to be adored by all people. So that
the truth of that saying of Epictetus, [They (...)
are not the things themselves which so affright and sear men, but the false
opinions they have conceived of them,] is greatly confirmed as to the
forementioned reputed evils by our Savior's Practice.

And this Blessed Person, Choosing so mean and contemptibly poor a condition of
Life in the World, I need not tell you that he was perfectly contented with it;
nor that he was altogether free (though he had many times scarcely from hand to
mouth) from thoughtfulness and anxiety of mind concerning his future
maintenance. For as he Cautioned his Disciples against taking thought for their
Life, what they should eat, what they should drink, and wherewith they should
be clothed; and showed the folly and sinfulness thereof, as proceeding from
distrustfulness of the Divine providence, ( Matt. 6. 25, etc.) So was he so far
from being guilty of that fault himself, that he was no less liberal than he
was poor. For when he was provided with a small pittance of victuals, instead
of hoarding it up, or being saving of it, he would not think much of spending
it upon others whose needs craved it: We read twice of his bestowing the little
stock that he and his Disciples had gotten between them, upon the Hungry
Multitude, and of his working a Miracle to make it hold out among them.

And how full he was of Charity, and under Compassion, is beyond expression:
For as he commended to his Disciples and inculcated upon them nothing more, nor
scarcely so much; so in the exercise of no virtue was he more exemplary. We
read often of the yerning of his Bowels toward miserable mortals, and his Pity
did always exert it self in acts of Mercy. Never did any make application to
him for deliverance from the Evils that did afflict them, that had not their
requests granted them: Nor were any more forward to beg relief of any kind of
him, than he was to bestow it upon them: Nay he frequently made poor Creatures
the objects of his merey before it was sought for by them. It was even his
whole business to oblige the world by signal kindnesses, and (as shall be
farther shown anon) he continually went up and down doing good either to the
bodies or souls of men. Nay his charity was of so large and Universal extent,
that the Wicked and unthankful, and even his bitterest enemies, were (as well
as other^) very ample partakers of it. Whereas the duty of blessing those that
curse us, and praying for those that dispitefully use us, is to our corrupt
natures one of the harshest and most difficult of any he has imposed upon us,
he has taken a course by the admirable Example he has herein given us, to
make it one of the easiest and most pleasant to us. For the Devilish Malice
that by the vilest of men was expressed toward him, could not in the least
imbitter his spirit or harden his heart against them: Nor could he be dissuaded
by it from persisting in doing good to them: but continued to entreat them to
accept of life from him, to grieve at their infidelity, and with tears to
bewail their most obstinate perverseness. And lastly, when their inveterate and
implacable hatred came to vent it self in the cruellest and most barbarous
manner imaginable upon him, did he pray to his Father for them; even whilst
they were tormenting him, did he beseech him to forgive them; Nay, and in order
thereunto laid down his very life for them; even for them, I say, that took it
from him.

And this gives occasion to discourse something of his most wonderful Patience,
and the stupendous submission of his Soul to God, which he gave us in his
Extreme sufferings an Example of. We are exhorted, Heb. 12. 1, 2. to run with
patience the race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and
finisher of our Faith; who for the joy that was (...) before him, endured the
Cross, despising the shame, etc. The Ignominy that was cast upon him by ungodly
Creatures, he despised; and as for the excessive tortures felt by him, them he
endured: He did not indeed despise these also, but neither did he saint under
them; according (...) we are forbidden to do, verse. 5. of the ^ow mentioned
Chapter, My son, despise (...) thou the Chastisement of the Lord, neither saint
when thou art rebuked of him* There were on the one hand no Stoical Rants heard
from him, such as that of P^donius in the Presence of Pompey (when he was
afflicted with a fit of the Gout, or some such disease,) viz. Nihil ^gis color,
etc. O pain, thou art an insignificant thing, I don't matter thee: For we find
that our Savior had as quick a sense of pain, as have other men; and his Agony
in the Garden did so affect his soul, as to force, (...), Clodders of blood
through the Pores of his Body. We read that he was sore amazed, and very heavy;
and he told his Disciples that his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto
death: But yet on the other hand, notwithstanding the immense weight and most
heavy Pressure of Grief his mind suffered under, through his Fathers
withholding the wonted influences of his love from him, and the intolerable
torments of body that he underwent, (though both in regard of the greatness of
his sufferings, and also his Most perfect innocence, and therefore non-desert
of them, he might have the greatest temptations Imaginable to be impatient) he
never uttered a murmuring or discontented word, nor conceived the least
displeasure at the Divine Majesty, or doubted either of his Justice or
Goodness; but entirely submitted himself to this his severe dispensation of
Providence, and willingly acquiefced in it. He prayed indeed to his Father,
that this Bitter Cup, if it were possible, might pass from him; but it was with
this condition, that it might seem good to him. And as so much is implied in
those words [ If it be possible] so is it expressed, Luke 22. 42. where it is
said, Father, if thou be willing, remove this Cup from me: And it immediately
follows; Nevertheless not my will, but thine be done; according as he has,
in the absolute form he left us, required us to pray. And again, says he, John
18. 11. The Cup which my Father gives me, shall I not drink it? And John 12.
28. After he had put up the forementioned Petition to be delivered from that
most dismal hour that was approaching near him, he does as it were, recall it
presently, in these words, But for this cause came I unto this hour; and then
puts up this second, Father, Glorify thy name: which is plainly as much as if
he had said, Father, as dreadful and terrifying as the thoughts are of my
future sufferings, seeing Glory will redound to thy self by them, I am not only
contented but also desirous to undergo them.

Celsus having mentioned that celebrated Bravado of Anaxarchus to the Tyrant of
Cyprus, when he Cruelly pounded him in his Mortar; and the merry saying of
Epictetus to his Master when he brake his Leg, and thereupon scoffingly
demanded of the Christians, what saying like to either of those, was uttered by
their God in the midst of his sufferings, Origin makes this handsome Reply to
him, viz. That our Savior's silence, in the midst of the Tortures he endured,
showed greater Patience and Fortitude of mind, than did all the sayings of the
Greek Philosophers in the like cases: And he adds that those words of Christ,
Not as I will, but as thou will, were not only (...), etc. the voice of one
that patiently suffered, but also that was well pleased with his sufferings,
and spoke his preference of what was appointed for him by the Divine Providence
before his own desires and natural affections.

In the next place, our Savior gave us the most noble and eminent example of
Love to God, and the devoutest temper of mind toward him. That love of him,
with all the heart and soul, mind and strength which he commended to us as our
duty, did he himself give the highest demonstrations of. His last mentioned
Patience, and perfect submission to the Divine Pleasure under the most Dreadful
sufferings, is alone sufficient to Convince us that his Love to his Father was
most intense: For it was utterly impossible that his will should be so entirely
resigned up to the will of God, if his love of him had not been, as sincere, so
of the highest degree and absolutely perfect. So his heavenly Father might
thereby be Glorified, he was willing to endure the extremest miseries, that
ever were inflicted on any Mortal: And indeed his mere well interpreting so
severe a Providence was a great and very significant expression of no small
affection. And besides, it was (as he told his Disciples) his very meat to do
the will John 4.
of Him that sent him, and to finish his work. As he was heartily well pleased
to suffer his will; so he took infinite Content, Satisfaction and Delight in
the doing of it. It was to him the most pleasant thing in the whole world to be
about his Father's Business; and therein he abounded, and was indefatigable.
All that he did was referred by him to the honor of God; and of each of his
Glorious works he gave him the Glory, and him only: which thing was no less an
argument of the ardency of his Love, than (as we have said it is) of the depth
of his Humility. In all his ways he acknowledged God, and took all occasions to
make mention of him, and to speak of his Excellent Perfections. When the Ruler
called him but Good Master; which was an Epithet, had he been but a mere man,
he was infinitely worthy of; as slight an occasion as this may seem to some,
it minded him to speak of God's Goodness, and he presently replied, Why call
thou me good? there is none good (that is originally and from himself) but God
only. He was much in delightful converse with God, and in prayer to him, and
ever and anon retired from all company for that purpose; according as he has
enjoined us to do, Mat. 6. 5, 6. And we read Luke 6. 12. of his continuing on a
Mountain alone a whole night in Prayer.

A mighty confidence and Trust in God, as it could not but be an effect of our
Savior's most Passionate Love to him, so did he give of it very strange
instances. The Storm that put his Disciples into a dreadful consternation,
could not terrify, nor so much as discompose him; No, though he was suddenly
awaked out of a sound sleep by their dismal cries. When he was hoysed up into
the Air by his Grand Adversary, the Devil, and set upon a pinnacle of the
Temple, and then by abusing Scripture solicited to cast himself down; as much
as he seemed to be abandoned to his power, and under as great a disadvantage as
he was through extreme fasting, his mind was as strong as his body weak, his
Constancy remained unshaken, his thoughts undisordered, and with an undaunted
courage he readily replied to him, It is written again, Thou shall not tempt
the Lord thy God: Matt. 4. 5. Where you have also two other signal instances of
the like nature. By all which he showed that his trust in God was so invincibly
strong, and his adherence to him so inseparably close, that the utmost attempts
and fiercest assaults of the Devil could have no other effect than to prove
them so. Our Savior could never be prevailed upon to go the least Step out of
God's way, in order to his preservation from the most eminent dangers, so firm
was his Faith in him: And he still doing the things that were pleasing in his
sight, he was confidently and undoubtedly assured of the Continuance of his
presence with him. This he has himself told us, John 8. 29. And he that has
sent me, is with me, the Father has not left me alone, for I do always those
things that please him.

So visible and apparent was his Trust in God, that when he was given up to his
Adversaries most barbarous rage, they themselves could not but take notice of
it, and scoffingly when he hung on the Cross (and therefore seemed to be in a
desperate condition) did they upbraid him with it: He trusted in God, said
they, let him deliver him now if he will have him, for he said, I am the Son of
God, Mat. 27. 43. And where as it has been objected by some of our Savior's
Adversaries that a little before his death, he expressed very great distrust,
if not perfect despair of his Father's love, in that Tragical exclamation, My
God, my God, Why have thou forsaken me? There are those that conceive that it
may be satisfactorily enough answered, that it is an unreasonable and most
barbarous thing to take any advantage from words uttered in the very pangs of
death, accompanied with unsupportable torment, to the prejudice of those they
are spoken by; it being not ordinarily supposable that those can be themselves
that are in such Circumstances; and why the man Jesus, or our Savior according
to his humane nature should not be under as great disadvantages as others in
such a condition, (He being (as was said) no less sensible of pain than others
were) no reason can doubtless be given by us; But however we stand not in any
necessity of this Reply. But I say, secondly, Though we should suppose our
Savior to be now as perfectly master of his thoughts as he ever was, these
words may not be understood in so harsh a sense, for they were but a repetition
of the first verse of the 22. Psalm; and thereby he declared himself to be the
true Messiah, for whom it is apparent (and by the Ancient Jews themselves not
doubted) that this Psalm was penned; and is not to be understood to relate to
David's case only, but also to his whom he often personated, and was a Type of.
Nor can it be gathered from our Savior's rehearsal of these words, that it is
in the least probable that he either concluded or at all doubted that he was
utterly rejected and cast off by his Father, but the contrary: For several
verses in the forementioned Psalm do give us assurance that they are not there
to be so understood; for David does diverse times afterward, not only pray
for, but likewise expresses good hopes, nay and undoubted assurance of a
gracious deliverance, and praises God for it too, as if it were already
effected. So that this sad complaint of the Blessed Jesus, as it could not be
occasioned by the least distrust, so it may be more than presumed, to have
proceeded from the highest and intensest degree of Love, which caused in his
soul the most pungent and smart sense of his Father's hiding his face, and
absenting himself (though but for a while) from him. But the least favorable
interpretation that it is capable of is no worse than this, viz. That our
Savior did thereby express how excessive the misery was which he then felt,
especially since the word [ Lama] does signify How as well as Why. But lastly,
his Dying words and the last he uttered did express his retaining his
confidence in God (as much as he might seem to be cast off by him) to the very
last; which were these, Father, into thine Hands I commend my Spirit.

I will instance in one Virtue more wherein our Savior was also singularly
exemplary. Whereas he advised his Disciples to be wise as Serpents and Innocent
as Doves, they beheld in his Conversation a pattern to walk by in followiug the
former as well as the latter part of this advice: Nor was the Wisdom of the
Serpent less Conspicuous in him, than was the Innocence of the Dove. Prudence
is the first of the Primitive virtues, or of those from whence all other take
their Original, and are derived: She is the chief Governness of humane actions;
and those which are performed without her direction, do want a main
circumstance that is necessary to give them the denomination of truly virtuous.
A rash and heady doing of those actions which are for the matter of them
praiseworthy, will render them culpable as to the manner of their performance:
And he that has no regard to Prudence, though he may do good things, and
possibly may some times mean well, yet he will never merit the Commendation of
a Well-doer. I say therefore that our blessed Savior, as he has by his
Example, no less than by his Doctrine, taught us the exercise of all other
virtues, so has he of this also; and his prudence did wonderfully discover it
self through his whole life. As very great as was his zeal for the Glory of
God, and the good of men, it was not too strong for, nor over-match'd his
Reason; it was not a blind Zeal; but he was ever very careful to give each of
his Actions their due Circumstances. As eagerly as he was bent upon
accomplishing the work that he was sent into the world about, he was not for
making more haste than good speed. He showed great prudence in his injunctions,
his preaching, and several discourses: He never urged any duties unseasonably,
and had a care not to give such severe Precepts to his Novice Disciples as
might discourage and overburthen them. He was not for putting a piece of new
Cloth into an old Garment, See Mat. 9. 14. to 17
nor new Wine into old Bottles.

He very wisely timed his discourses; did not preach all his Doctrines at once:
What was said of the Orator Demosthenes, cannot be truly affirmed of him, viz.
That he knew what to say well enough, but not what not to say: For as he well
understood what Doctrines to Preach, so did he also what not to Preach. He
spoke the word unto them as they were able to hear it, Mark 4. 33. And, said
he, John 16. 12. I have yet many things to say unto you, but ye cannot bear
them now. He knew both when to speak, and when to hold his peace; and in
whatsoever he said, he considered the genius, temper and capacity of his
Auditors. He would not cast Pearls before Swine, as he cautioned his Disciples
not to do, for this reason, Lest they turn again Mat. 7.
and rend them. When he thought good to deliver those Doctrines that were
likely to exasperate, as that of the calling of the Gentiles and rejection of
the Jews, etc. he chose to fold them up in Parables, unfolding them in private
to his Disciples, who were fitly disposed for the receiving of them; and
therefore had the favor bestowed upon them to understand the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, as he told them.

We find that till he knew his time of suffering was come, he wisely still
avoided danger (wherein he properly showed the wisdom of the Serpent) one while
by withdrawing himself, as Matthew. 12. 14. and at other times (as was now said)
by concealing those Doctrines, which he was well aware the unbelieving Jews
would be so far from embracing, and making good use of, that they would take
occasion from them the more industriously to design his Ruin: We read Ioh. 10.
33. to 36. That he would not expressly own himself to be the Son of God in any
other sense than such a one as he might acknowledge with the least danger; and
concealed that which he very certainly knew would but confirm them in their
opinion of him as a wicked Blasphemer, and make him so much the more obnoxious
to their Spite and Rage. So far was he from running headlong upon sufferings,
and making himself through a rash and indiscreet zeal liable to those that
hated him; so far was he from being in love with Persecution that he did (as
the Apostle exhorted the Ephesian Christians to do) (...) buy out or gain time,
because the days were evil and full of danger.

Again, how wisely did our Savior from time to time defeat and render
unsuccessful, the Plots and Machinations of the Pharisees and his other enemies
against him! We find in Matthew. 22. 15. the Herodians (or those of the Jews that
adhered to the Caesarean and Roman Authority) and the Pharisees (who esteemed
it as an usurpation) combining together to entangle him in his talk: And they
so ordered their plot, as that they might get an advantage from whatsoever he
should say, either to render him Obnoxious to Herod, and the Roman Party, or to
Inrage the most popular and highly esteemed Sect of the Jews, the Pharisees. In
order hereunto they cunningly put to him this Question, viz. Whether it were
lawful to pay tribute to Caesar? If he should answer that it was, he would make
himself liable to the latter mischief; if that it was not, to the former and
the far greater. Now (as is to be seen in the 19, 20, 21. verses) our Savior
with such admirable prudence contrived his answer, that ( verse. 22.) both
factions are said to wonder at it, and to be basfled by it. When they had heard
these words, they marvelled and left him and went their way. Diverse other
Instances there are of a like nature; as in John 8. 3. to 9. Matthew. 21. 23. to
27. Matt. 22. 41. to 46, etc.

And thus we have sufficiently and fully enough proved, that it was the whole
business of our Savior's life to make men in all respects Pertuous and Holy;
and that thereunto were subservient, as his Discourses with them, so his
Actions likewise and whole Behavior. Plus docent exempla quam praecepta:
Examples are the most natural and easy way of teaching, and they are so by
reason of Mankinds being so greatly addicted to imitation; and, I say, it does
from our past discourse sufficiently appear, That our Savior's whole
Conversation was a rare exemplification of all kinds of Virtue and true
Goodness.

CHAP. VI.
That to make men truly Virtuous and Holy was the Design of Christ's unimitable
Actions, or Mighty works and Miracles. And that these did not only tend to
promote it, as they were convincing Arguments that He came forth from God, but
were also very proper to effect it in a more immediate manner.

BUt it cannot be amiss if we moreover add, That it was not only the Design
of our Savior's imitable Actions, to teach the world Virtue, but also of those
which are not imitable, viz. Of his Miracles and Mighty works: And that these
did not only tend to the promoting of that Design, as they were convincing and
infallible Arguments that he came forth from God, but were likewise very proper
to effect it in a more immediate manner. For they were not only Argumentative
or a proof of the Truth of his Doctrine, but also Instructive, and minded men
of their Duty. Those Miracles which he chose to work, were of such a nature, as
to be hugely fit to accomplish at one and the same time both these businesses.
They were not such as the foolish and carnal Jews expected, that is, signs from
Heaven, that were apt to produce directly no other effect than that of pleasing
their Childish Phansies, or striking their senses with admiration and
astonishment by making prodigious and amazing shows and Representations before
their eyes; but most of them were expressions of the greatest kindness and
Charity to Mankind. For instance; his Healing the sick of all manner of
Diseases, his making the lame to walk and the blind to see, and the deaf to
hear; his cleansing the Lepers, Feeding the Hungry, Raising the Dead, and
ejecting of Evil Spirits out of those that were, miserably possessed with them
and tormented by them, etc. In Acts 10. 38. The Apostle expresses our
Savior's working of Miracles, by this Phrase [ Doing good] who (says he) went
up and down doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the Devil. And
in his Miracles did he give Instances of great kindness and good will even unto
those which did least deserve it: For he made use of his Divine Power for the
Healing and relief of the Disingenuous and Unthankful, Ill-natured and Wicked,
as well as of the better-disposed and more worthy persons: Therein imitating
his heavenly Father (as he required us to do) who makes his Sun to rise on the
Evil and on the Good, and sends Rain on the Just and on the Unjust, Matthew. 5.
45. And, as I take it, the last Miracle, that before he ascended the Cross was
wrought by him, was the Cure of one of those his Enemies that came with Clubs
and Staves to apprehend him.

And the few Miracles besides those that consisted in doing kindnesses to Men
(for those we have on record are almost all such) were such as by which he gave
us an Example of other Virtues: As particularly of Piety, Trust in God, and
zeal for him. Of his Piety and Trust in God his Fasting forty days and forty
nights was a great evidence: It was so of his Trust in him and constant
adhering to him, as by thus doing he put himself by his Father's appointment
upon most violent and strong temptations; in Conflicting wherewith (as has
been shown) he came off a most Noble Conqueror. Of his Zeal for God was his
whipping the Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple no small expression; and I
add, it was so also of his most gracious and loving respect to the contemned
Gentiles, whose Court (as Master Mede and others have most evidently
demonstrated) they were whipped out of; they making their house of Prayer a Den
of Thieves, as our Savior told them. And this may deservedly be numbered among
his Miracles, because it is unconceivable how a Man unarmed, in no Authority,
and of mean esteem in regard of his Parentage, poverty and low Circumstances,
should strike such a fear into those people, as to force them without the least
offer of Resistance to flee before him, if the cause thereof were not
extraordinary and more than natural.

And even that Miracle which might seem the most inconsiderable, namely his
causing his Disciple Peter to catch a Fish with a small piece of money in its
mouth, was also Instructive of a Duty; It being an Instance of his Loyalty to
the Supreme Magistrate; for the money was expended in paying Tribute, and taken
out of the Sea in that strange manner for no other purpose.

In short, I know no one Miracle that our Savior wrought, but over and above
its being a Seal for the Confirmation of his Divine Mission, it teaches some
one or other good Lesson, and is proper for the bettering of the Souls of those
that seriously consider it.

And that great Miracle, which after his Ascension (according to his promise)
he showed in sending the Holy Ghost, did promote the business of making men
holy, in a far higher way than that of Example: For the grand and standing
office of the Spirit in the world, is the exciting in us Holy Desires, and the
assisting of us in the performance of Holy Actions: It is the making the Gospel
and all means effectual to the Renovation and Reformation of our Hearts and
Lives.

If it be objected that we read of two Miracles, namely, his cursing the
Fig Tree, and sending the Devils into the Herd of Swine; which are so far from
containing any Lessons of Morality, or tending to the least good, that they
seem to be on the contrary only of an Evil and Mischievous Consequence.

I answer, That as for our Savior's Cursing the Fig Tree that bare leaves, and
had no fruit on it, it was a most significant document unto Men, that their
Profession, which is answerable to bearing Leaves, must be joined with a
suitable Practice, and have fruit accompanying, or 'twill be nothing worth: And
Fruitless Persons were taught by that Emblem, what they must look for, if they
continued so. But the most pregnant meaning of it is (as the Learned Doctor
Hammond has shown) that the Jews which were just like that Leafie-tree without
fruit at that time on it, a mere Professing People, were to expect speedy
destruction from him, on supposition that they persisted in their
unfruitfulness. It is not once to be imagined that this which our Savior did
to the Figtree was any other than Emblematical; for no one that deserves but
the Name of a Man, would be guilty of such a piece of Impotent Revenge, as to
wreak his anger on a Senseless tree, that was not upon the account of its
barrenness, or any thing else, in a capacity of being faulty or blame worthy.
And besides it is mentioned in the story as related by S. Mark, Chap. 11. 13.
that the time of figs was not yet, Or, it was not then a season for Figs; that
is, it was not a good Fig-year; which is given as the cause of the Tree's being
at that time without fruit: And it seems to me very probable, that, that clause
was purposely added, that it might be the more easily observed that our
Savior's Curse was not designed to be terminated in the Tree, but that it was
pronounced against it only as it was an apt Resemblance of a Professor that is
barren of good works. So that our Blessed Lord, who was so meek and forbearing
toward wicked and the worst of men, and likewise so very gracious and kind to
them, could not be supposed to have been at all, much less so very angry with
an innocent Vegetable, as to destroy it for no other reason than that he once
found no fruit upon it; but it is evident that he only took hold of this
opportunity to do as I now said. So that this Miracle was designed no less than
the forementioned to be Instructive to the spectators of it, and to all that
should afterward hear or read the story concerning it; which none could be so
dull as not to understand, that had but the least knowledge of him.

And as for that other, viz. his sending the Devils, which he had ejected out
of a Poor Man, into a Herd of Swine, and by that means causing them to run
violently down a steep hill into the Sea, and to perish there: We read, First,
that our Savior did not command them, but only suffered them (as it is
expressed both by S. Mark and S. Luke) at their own request Mar. 5. 13 Luke 8.
32
to take possession of those Beasts. Nor does the saying unto them, Go, (which
is in S. Matthew's Relation of the Story,) speak any more than a bare
Permission; seeing their beseeching him to suffer them to go Matthew. 8. 31, 32.
is there expressed as the occasion of his so speaking. So that the Mischief
that was done, the Devils only were the Authors or the proper Cause of. Nor,
secondly, could our Savior permit this, either to make sport, or to please
himself with the Destruction of the poor Creatures; for both these were
infinitely below him, and perfectly Contrary to the Seriousness of his Spirit,
and Goodness of his Nature; but there were very weighty and great reasons why
he should thus do.

As, first, To expose the Hateful Nature of the Devils, and to give men to
understand and take notice, how extremely they delight in doing Mischief; which
it does greatly concern the welfare of our Souls, both not to be ignorant of,
and well to Consider. By this experiment it appeared, that those unclean
Spirits are so maliciously disposed, and so bent upon mischievousness, as that
rather than want objects to vent their Spite on, they will be glad to do it
upon Bruit Beasts. But especially the Devils most inveterate and deadly hatred
to mankind was hereby showed; in that when they were no longer permitted to do
them a greater, they were glad of an opportunity to make them the objects of a
less mischief: And to procure to them what hurt they were able in their Goods,
when they ceased to be in a Capacity of tormenting them in their Minds and
Bodies.

2ly, By this means there was a discovery made what a multitude there were of
them that possessed that one, or at most (according to S. Matthew) two persons;
insomuch as that those which were cast out of them were enough to actuate the
Bodies of a great herd of Swine, and consisting of no fewer than about two
thousand, as S. Mark says; and none could tell (but he that cast them out of
the men, and suffered them to enter the swine) how very many each of these
might be possessed with. This was of great importance to be known, in order to
the understanding of the Greatness of the Miracle that was wrought in behalf of
the Miserable wretches, and to their being made sensible of the exceeding
vastness of the deliverance that by their Savior was brought unto them. For
though the Devils declared that their name was Legion, to signify that they
were a very mighty multitude; Yet what they said was too incredible to be
received upon the bare word of those which from the very beginning were always
Liars: but this permission of our Savior gave a plain demonstration that in
this saying of theirs they spoke the truth.

Thirdly, These Persons were by this means most effectually taught how
infinitely they were obliged to the Divine Providence, in not suffering this
huge number of Fiends all the time they had possession of them to destroy them;
when as they no sooner entered into the herd of Swine, but immediately they
dispatched them all.

Fourthly, This permission was also a just punishment to the Gaderens to whom
those Beasts belonged; who (as afterward it appeared) were a generation of
Covetous Muck-worms, and preferred their Swine before their Souls; and so
likewise it was as effectual and proper a course as could well be taken for
their Reformation. Several other Reasons of this action might be instanced in,
but these, nay any one of them, may well suffice. So that it is apparent that
this Miracle was so far from being a Mischievous one or of no use, that there
was scarcely any one wrought by our Savior, that is so pregnant with
profitable Instructions, and in so many respects of great importance to the
good of our Souls as this is.

CHAP. VII.
That to make men Holy was the Design of Christ's Death, Proved by several
Texts of Scripture: And how it is effectual thereunto, discovered in six
Particulars.

FOurthly, the making of us Holy, as it was the Business of our Savior's whole
Life, so was it also the great End and Design of his Death. And this are we
assured of by abundance of Express Scriptures; Some few of which we will here
produce, Romans 6. 6. Knowing this that our Old man is crucified with him, that
the Body of Sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin.

2 Corinthians, 5. 15. -- He dyed for all, that they which live should not
henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose
again.

Galatians, 1. 4. Who gave himself for our Sins, that he might deliver us from
this present evil world, (viz. From its corrupt practices) according to the
Will of God and our Father.

Ephesians, 5. 25, 26, 27. Husbands love your wives, as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with
the washing of Water by the word, that he might present it unto himself a
Glorious Church, not having Spot or Wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it
should be holy and without blemish.

Colossians, 1. 21, 22. And you that were sometimes alienated, and enemies in
your minds by wicked works, has he now reconciled in the Body of his flesh
through death, to present you holy and unblamable and unreprovable in his sight.

Titus, 2. 14. Who gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity and purify to himself a peculiar people zealous of Good Works.

1 Pet. 1. 18. For as much as ye know that ye were not redeemed with
Corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain Conversation received by
Tradition from your Fathers* but with the precious blood of Christ, as a Lamb
without blemish, and without Spot.

1 Pet. 3. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the just for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, etc. That is, says Calvin upon the
place, that we might be so consecrated to God as to live and die to him.

1 Pet. 2. 24. Who his own self bare our Sins in his Own body on the Tree, that
we being dead to sins, should live to righteousness, by whose Stripes ye were
healed.

Now the Death of Christ is greatly effectual to this end of making us Holy,
these several ways.

First, As it gave Testimony to the Truth of his Doctrine; which (as has been
shown) has no other Design. Christ took his Death upon it that that was true;
was willing to expose himself in the Defense thereof to a most ignominious and
painful death.

Secondly, As the shedding of his blood was a Federal right confirming the New
Covenant, wherein is promised in and through Him the Pardon of our Sins, and
Eternal happiness, on Condition of our sincere Repentance, Faith and new
obedience. So the Blood of Christ is called the Blood of the Covenant, Heb. 10.
29.

And the Blood of the Everlasting Covenant, Heb. 13. 20.

Thirdly, As it is exemplary of the highest virtue. 1 Pet. 2. 21. Christ also
suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his Steps; who
did no sin, neither was guile found in his mouth: who when he was reviled,
reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened not, but committed himself to
him that judges righteously. The Greatest Humility and Selfdenial, the
greatest Meekness, Patience and Submission to the Divine Will, the most
wonderful Charity, and Forgiveness of Enemies, etc. are exemplified in our
Savior's Death; and so it must needs be very highly Effectual toward the
promoting of these most Excellent Graces, and the like, in us, and the
expelling and utter extirpating out of us the Contrary Vices.

One would think it impossible that he should be of an Haughty Spirit and a
proud mind, that seriously Considers how the Onely-begotten Son of God humbled
himself to the death, even the shameful and ignominious death of the Cross:
That he should Covet great things in the world, that frequently affects his
mind with the thoughts of his Savior's emptying himself and becoming poor,
that we through his proverty might be made rich, and preferring the death of
the Vilest of wretches before the life of the greatest and most Honorable
Personages. How can he be vain and frothy, that considers his Savior's horrid
Agony, what a man of Sorrows he was, and how acquainted with Griefs? How can he
storm at the receiving of injuries, and swell with indignation against those
that offer him incivilities and rudely behave themselves toward him, that
fixes his thoughts upon his Savior's meek putting up the Vilest and most
Contemptuous usages, and considers how gentle, sedate and Lamb-like he was
when Barbarous Villains Mocked, Buffetted and Spit upon him, Crowned him with
Thorns, put a Robe in a jear upon his Back, and a Reed for a Scepter into his
hand, and at last acted the parts of the most inhumane Butchers toward him.
One would think it no uneasy matter to persuade our selves to forgive very
heartily the Spitefullest and most malicious enemies, whilst we take notice
that Christ shed even his precious blood for those that carried in their
breasts the greatest malignity against him and bare him the most deadly hatred;
that he suffered death for those which in the Cruellest manner they were able
took away his life. What temptation can be forcible enough to prevail upon us
sinners to murmr and repine at the hand of God in the afflictions he inflicts
upon us, while we observe how much greater sufferings than ours are, were with
profoundest Submission to, and likewise the heartiest approbation of the Divine
Will, endured by the not only perfectly innocent, but also the highly meriting
and infinitely Well deserving Jesus?

Fourthly, As the Death of Christ was likewise a Sacrifice for sin, it was in
an Eminent manner effectual to this great purpose. In the death of Christ
considered as an Expiatory and Propitiatory Sacrifice, is the offense that God
Almighty has taken against sin, and the hatred he bears to it, as well as his
Love to us sinners, infinitely declared; in that he would not forgive it to us
without the intervention of no meaner an offering than the Blood of his
onely-begotten Son. Observe what the Apostle S. Paul says to this Purpose,
Romans 3. 25, 26. Whom God has set forth to be a Propitiation through Faith in
his blood, to declare his Righteousness for the remission of sins that are
past, through the forbearance of God, to declare I say at this time his
Righteousness, that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believes
in Jesus. The Plain sense of which words (as I conceive) is this: That God
might at one and the same time demonstrate how holy he is, and how much he
hates sin on the one hand, and how infinitely gracious he is in his
willingness to forgive sinners on the other, was Christ set forth by him to be
a Propitiation through Faith in his blood. There are many (and they no
Adversaries to the Doctrine of our Savior's satisfaction) that do not question
but that God could have pardoned sin without any other Satisfaction than the
Repentance of the Sinner, (and in the number of them were Calvin, P. Martyr,
Musculus, and Zanchy, as might be fully shown out of their several works, but
that this is not a place to do it in) but he chose to have his Son die for it,
before he would admit any terms of Reconciliation, that so he might perform the
highest act of Grace, in such a way, as at the same time to show also the
greatest displeasure against Sin. And therefore would he thus do, that so he
might the more effectually prevent wicked men's encouraging themselves by the
consideration of his great mercy, to persist in their wickedness. Therefore was
Christ set forth to be a propitiatory Sacrifice for Sin, I will not say that
his Father (who is perfectly sui juris) might be put by this means into a
capacity of forgiving it, but that it might be a Cogent motive, and most
prevailing Argument to Sinners to reform from it.

There is an excellent place to this purpose, Romans 18. 3. For what the law
could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh: God sending his own son in
the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin (or by the means of sin) condemned
sin in the flesh; that is, what the Precepts of the Mosaical Law could not do,
in that they were weak by reason of the impetuosity of men's fleshly
inclinations, that the Son of God (coming in the humane Nature, and in all
respects becoming like to us, sin only excepted) did, and by being a Sacrifice
for Sin (so the word [ Sin] signifies in diverse places, as Leviticus 4. 29.
Chap. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 21. and, as I suppose, also Genesis 4. 7.) Condemned Sin in
his flesh; he by this means showing how hateful it is to God, took the most
effectual course to kill and destroy it. And moreover the most dearly beloved
Son of God undergoing such extreme sufferings for our Sins, it is evidently
thereby demonstrated what dismal vengeance those have reason to expect that
shall continue impenitent, and refuse to be reclaimed from them: For says he,
Luke 23. 31. Is they do these things in a green Tree, what shall be done in the
dry? If God spared not his own most innocent, holy and only Son, than whom
nothing was, or could be, more dear to him, but abandoned him to so shameful
and horrid a death for our Sins; how great and severe sufferings may we
conclude he will inflict upon those Vile Creatures, that dare still to live in
Wilful disobedience to him.

And from the Death of Christ considered as a Sacrifice we farther learn, what
an esteem God has for his holy Laws, that he would not abate their Rigor, nor
remit the punishment due to the Transgressors of them, without a Consideration
of no meaner value than the most Precious blood of his own Son.

And lastly, in that Christ has laid down his life at the appointment of God
the Father for the purpose of making an Atonement of Sin, this gives all men
unspeakably greater assurance of the Pardon of True Penitents than the bare
Consideration of the Divine Goodness could ever have done: And so by this means
have we the greatest encouragement that our hearts can wish to become new men
and return to obedience; and have all ground of Jealously and suspicion removed
from us, that we have been guilty of such heinous and so often repeated
impieties, as that it may not become the Holiness and Justice of God to remit
them to us though they should be never so sincerely forsaken by us.

In the Death of our Savior thus considered, are contained (as we have seen)
the strongest and most irresistible Arguments to a Holy Life; and I farther
add, such as are no less apt to work upon the principle of Ingenuity that is
implanted in our natures, than that of self-love. For who that has the least
spark of it, will not be powerfully inclined to hate all sin, when he
considers, that it was the Cause of such direful sufferings to so
incomparably Excellent a person, and infinitely obliging a Friend as Christ is?
Who but a Creature utterly destitute of that principle, and therefore worse
than a Brute Beast, can find in his heart to take Pleasure in the Spear that
let out the heart-blood of his most blessed Savior; and to carry himself
toward that as a loving friend, which was (and still is) the Lord of Glory's
worst enemy?

Again, has Jesus Christ endured and done so much for our sakes, and are we
able to give our selves leave to render all his sufferings and performances
unsuccessful by continuing in disobedience? Can we be willing that he should do
and suffer so many things in vain, and much more do our parts to make him do
so? Is this possible?

Nay has he been Crucified for us by the wicked Jews, and don't we think that
enough? but must we our selves be Crucifying him afresh by our Sins, and
putting him again to an open shame by preferring our base lusts before him, as
the Jews did Baral bas?

Has he expressed such astonishing love to us in dying for us, and will not we
accept of it? which we certainly refuse to do so long as we live in Sin. Has
he purchased Eternal Salvation for us, and such great and glorious things as
Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, and which have not entered into the heart of
man, to be conceived by him; and can we persuade our selves to be so ungrateful
to him, as well as so wanting to our-selves, as to refuse to receive these at
his hands on those most reasonable terms on which he offers them?

Has he bought us with such a price; and can we refuse to be his Servants, and
rather choose to be the slaves of Satan, the Devil's Drudges?

Where can we find so many strongly inciting Motives to hate and abandon all
sin, as are contained, and very obvious in the Death and sufferings of our
Savior for it?

Fifthly, The Death of our Savior is in a special manner effectual to the
making of us in all respects virtuous and holy, as he has thereby procured for
us that Grace and Assistance that is necessary to enable us so to be. In regard
of his humbling himself as he did, and becoming obedient to the death of the
Cross, has God highly exalted him, and given him a name that is above every
name; that at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and
things in Earth, and things under the Earth: And that every Tongue should
Confess that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father, Phil. 2. 9,
10, 11. Now by virtue of the Authority he is by this means invested and
dignified with, and particularly as he is King of his Church, has he sent the
Holy Ghost to Sanctify us, to excite us to all holy actions, and to assist us
in the performance of them.

Sixthly, The Death of Christ does also apparently promote this great Design,
as by his patient submitting to it he vindicated God's Right of Sovereignity
over all his Creatures, and the power he has to require what he pleases, and
to dispose of them as seems good to him. Whereas the First Adam by Contumacy,
Pride and Rebellion did put an high and unsufferable affront upon the Authority
of his Maker, and his wretched posterity followed his Example, and have by that
means done what lay in them to render his Right to their obedience
questionable; this Blessed Second Adam by acting directly Contrary, viz. by
Obedience, Humility, and Subjecting himself to the Divine pleasure in the
severest expressions and significations of it, has done publicly and before
the world an infinite honor to his Father: And his absolute Right of Dominion
over his whole Creation, and the power he has to prescribe to it what laws he
judges sitting (which was before so eclipsed by wicked sinners) has he by this
means in the most signal manner manifested and made apparent. And of what force
this is to promote our Holiness and Universal obedience, the dullest capacity
may apprehend.

From what has been said it appears to be a most plain, and unquestionable
Case, that our Savior in his Death considered according to each of the notions
we have of it, had an eye to the great work of making men Holy, and that this
was the main Design which he therein drove at.

And I now add, that where as it is frequently affirmed in the holy
Scriptures, that the End of Christ's death was also the Forgiveness of our
sins, and the Reconciling of us to his Father, we are not so to understand
those places where this is expressed, as if these Blessings were absolutely
thereby procured for us, or any otherwise than upon Condition of our effectual
believing, and yielding obedience to his Gospel. Nor is there any one thing
scarcely which we are so frequently therein minded of, as we are of this.
Christ died to put us into a Capacity of pardon; the actual removing of our
Guilt is not the necessary and immediate result of his Death, but suspended
till such time as the forementioned conditions, by the help of his grace, are
performed by us.

But moreover, it is in order to our being encouraged to sincere endeavors to
forsake all sin, and to be universally obedient for the time to come, that our
Savior shed his blood for the Pardon of it: This was intended in his death as
it is subservient to that purpose; the assurance of having all our sins
forgiven upon our sincere Reformation, being a necessary motive thereunto.
Therefore has he delivered us from a necessity of Dying, that we might live to
God; and therefore does God offer to be in his Son Jesus reconciled to us, that
we may thereby be prevailed with to be reconciled to him. Therefore was the
Death of Christ designed to procure our Justification from all sins past, that
we might be by this means provoked to become new Creatures for the time to
come. Observe to this purpose what the Divine Author to the Hebrews says,
Chap. 9. 13, 14. If the blood of Bulls and Goats, and the Ashes of an Heifer
sprinkling the Unclean, Sanctifies to the Purifying of the flesh: How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit ofsered himself
without Spot to God, purge your Consciences from dead works (for what end? it
follows) to Serve (or in order to your Serving) the Living God.

And thus much may suffice to be spoken concerning the Design of our Savior's
Death.

CHAP. VIII.
That it is only the promoting of the Design of making men Holy, that is aimed
at by the Apostles insisting on the Doctrines of Christ's Resurrection,
Ascension and coming again to Judgment.

I Might in the next place proceed to show, that the Resurrection of our
Savior did carry on the same Design that his Precepts, Promises and
Threatenings, Life and Death aimed at; but who knows not that these would all
have signified nothing to the promoting of this or any other end, if he had
always continued in the Grave, and not risen again as he foretold he would. If
Christ be not risen, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15. 13. then is our preaching
vain, and your faith is also vain. So that whatsoever our Savior intended in
those particulars, the perfecting and final accomplishment thereof must needs
be eminently designed in his Resurrection. The Apostle Peter tells his
Countrymen the Jews, Acts 3. 21. that, To them first God having raised up his
Son Jesus, sent him to bless them in turning every one of them from his
iniquities. But farthermore we find the Doctrine of Christ's Resurrection very
much insisted on, by S. Paul especially, as a principle of the Spiritual and
Divine life in us; and proposed as that which we ought to have not only a
Speculative and Notional, but also a Practical and Experimental acquaintance
with. And he often tells us, that it is our Duty to find that in our Souls
which bears an analogy thereunto. He says, Phil. 3. 10. That it was his
ambition to know (or feel within himself) the Power of his Resurrection, as
well as the fellowship of his sufferings; to have experience of his being no
longer a dead but a living Jesus by his inlivening him, and quickening his Soul
with a new life. And again he says, Romans 6. 4. that, Therefore we are buried
with him by Baptism unto Death, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead
by the Glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life;
that is, Christians being plunged into the Water in Baptism signifies their
undertaking, and obliging themselves in a spiritual sense to die and be buried
with Jesus Christ (which death and burial consist in an utter renouncing and
forsaking of all their sins) that so answerably to his Resurrection, they may
live a Holy and a Godly life. And it follows, verse. 5. For if we have been
planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also in the likeness
of his Resurrection; that is, If we are ingrafted into Christ by Mortification
to Sin, and so imitate his death, we will no less have a Resemblance of his
Resurrection, by living to God, or performing all acts of Piety and
Christianity. And then from verse. 8. to 11. he thus proceeds: Now if we be dead
with Christ, we believe that we shall (or we will) also live with him: Knowing
that Christ, being raised from the dead, dies no more, death has no more
dominion over him. For in that he died, he died unto Sin once (or for sin once
for all) but in that he lives, he lives unto God, (that is, in heaven with
God:) Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto
God through Jesus Christ our Lord; that is, after the Example of his Death and
Resurrection account ye your selves obliged to die to Sin, and to live to the
Praise and Glory of God.

And the same use that the Apostle here makes of the Resurrection of our
Savior, he does also elsewhere of his Ascension and session at the Right hand
of God, Coloss. 3. 1. 2. If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, where Christ sits at the Right Hand of God; set your
Affections on things above, not on things on the earth: for you are dead (that
is in profession, having engaged your selves to renounce your past wicked life)
and your life is hid with Christ in God, etc. that is, and the life you have by
embracing the Christian Religion obliged your selves to lead, is in Heaven
where Christ is. So that this shows the Informations the Gospel gives us of
these things to be intended for Practical purposes, and Incitements to
Holiness. And Christ's Resurrection with his following Advancement we are
frequently minded of, to teach us this most excellent Lesson, that Obedience,
Patience and Humility are the way to Glory; and therefore to encourage us to be
followers of Him, to tread in his holy steps, and make him our Pattern. This we
have in the fore cited place, Phil. 2. 5, 6, 7, etc. And Hebr. 12. 1, 2. We are
exhorted to lay aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us,
and to run with patience the race that is set before us: looking unto Jesus the
Author and Finisher of our Faith, who for the joy that was set before him,
endured the Gross, despising the shame, and is set down at the right hand of
the Throne of God. And verse. 3. To consider him that endured such contradiction
of sinners against himself (that is especially how he is now rewarded for it)
l^st we be weary and faint in our Minds.

And that the meaning of our being so often minded of our Savior's coming
again to Judgment, is to stir us up to all holiness of conversation, who can
be so ignorant as not to know? For we are sufficiently told that we must be
judged according to our Works, especially such works, as the Hypocrites of this
age do most despise and leave to be chiefly performed by their contemned
Moralists; as appears from M^. 25. 34. to the end of the Chapter. And, Lastly,
that is very certain, which is intimated in the 123 Page of the Free Discourse,
Namely, That all the Doctrines of the Gospel, as merely speculative as some at
the first sight may seem to be, have a tendency to the promoting of Real
righteousness and holiness, and are revealed for that purpose. But as I did not
there, so neither will I here proceed to show it, in all the several instances,
or in any more than I have now done: and that for the reason that is there
given. But besides I conceive that what has been discoursed already in this
Section, is abundantly sufficient to demonstrate what we have undertaken, viz.
That to make men truly virtuous and holy, is the design, the main and only
design of Christianity.

SECT. II. Upon what accounts the Business of making men Holy came to be
preferred by our Savior before any other thing, and to be principally designed
by him.
CHAP. IX.
Two Accounts of this: The first, That this is to do the greatest good to men.
And that the Blessing of making men Holy, is of all other the Greatest, proved
by several Arguments, viz. First, That it contains in it a Deliverance from
the worst of Evils; and Sin showed so to be.

I Proceed in the next place to show how it comes to pass, that of all other
good things, the making Mankind truly virtuous and Holy, is the grand and
special Design of Christianity. There are these two Accounts to be given of it.

First, This is to do the Greatest Good to Men.

Secondly, This is to do the Best Service to God.

First, The Making of us really Righteous and Holy is the Greatest Good that
can possibly be done to us. There is no blessing comparable to that of
Purifying our Natures from Corrupt affections, and induing them with Virtuous
and Divine qualities. The wiser sort of the Heathens themselves were abundantly
satisfied of the truth of this: And therefore the only design they professed to
drive at in their

Philosophy was the Purgation, and Perfection of the Humane life. Hierocles
(...).
makes this to be the very Definition of it: And by the purgation of men's
lives, he tells us is to be understood, the Cleansing of them from the dregs
and silth of unreasonable appetites; and by their perfection, the Recovery of
that Excellency which reduces (...) to the Divine likeness. Now the Blessing
of making men Holy, is of all the greatest,

First, Because it contains in it a Deliverance from the worst of Evils. Those
are utterly ignorant of the nature of Sin, that imagine any evil greater than
it, or so great. It was the Doctrine of the Stoics that there is nothing evil
but what is turpe and vitiosum, vile and vicious. And Tully himself who
professed not to be bound up to the Placita of any one Sect of Philosophers,
but to be free-minded and to give his Reason its full scope and liberty, takes
upon him sometimes most stiffly and seemingly in very good earnest to maintain
it and dispute for it. But as difficult as I find it to brook that Doctrine as
they seem to understand it, that more modest saying of his in the first book of
his Tusculan Questions has without doubt not a little of truth in it. viz.
That there is no evil comparable to that of Sin. Hierocles a sober Philosopher,
Ne malum quidem ^lum cum turpitudini^ malo comparandum.
and very free from the highflown humor and Ranting genius of the Stoics,
though he would allow that other things besides Sin, may be (...) very grievous
and difficult to be born, yet he would admit nothing besides this to be (...)
truly evil; and he gives this reason for it, viz. Because that certain
Circumstances may make other things good, that have the repute of evils; but
none can make this so. He says that the word (...) [ well] can never be joined
with any vice, but so may it with every thing besides: As it is proper to say
concerning such or such a person, (...) he is well diseased, he is well poor,
that is, he is both these to good purpose, behaving himself in his sickness and
poverty as he ought to do; but (proceeds he) it can never be said (...), etc.
he does injury well, or he is rightly and as becomes him intemperate.

Now that wickedness is the greatest of evils, is apparent, in that it injures
men's better part, their Souls, whereas it lies in the power of no other (as
the now mentioned Philosopher also (...), etc. (...). in Car. Pythag. page 10^.
observes) so to do. Do I say, it injures them? that is too gentle a word, it
even marrs and spoils them, as again that person does (...). page 162.
in another place speak. Other evils may ruin our Bodies, our fortunes, etc.
and may, I confess, by that means disquiet and disturb our Souls; but they can
be depraved by naught but sin, this alone can deprive them of the image of God
wherein consists their Excellency. And when I say that Sin undoes our Souls and
sin only, I say that this and this alone undoes our-selves: For (as says the
same brave man,) Thy Soul (...). page 153.
is thy-self; thy Body thine; and all outward things, thy Body's. And the
Excellent Simplicius speaking of Death, has this saying, that it is only
(...) an Evil to our Bodies, not to us. And this both the Stoics and
Platonists do much insist upon, and make great use of it. They stick not to
tell us, that it is improper to say that a man consists of two parts, whereof
the Body is one; and that this is not (...), a Constituent part of man, but
only his instrument: that it is but our Prison wherein we are confined, our
Leather-bag, our Satchel, our Case, our Sheath, our House, our Clothing, and
the like. And we find such a notion of the Body in the Holy Scriptures, as well
as in the Heathen Writings. S. Paul also calls it our Clothing, our Earthly
house, our Tabernacle, 2 Cor. 5. 1, 4. S. Peter calls his body, this
Tabernacle; I think it meet, (says he) so long as I am in this Tabernacle,
etc. 2 Pet. 1. 13. Knowing that shortly I must put off this Tabernacle, verse.
14. So that other evils have that denomination because they are so to such
things only ( immediately I mean) as belong to our-selves, but sin is an
immediate evil, and the greatest imaginable to our very selves; in that in
whomsoever it is entertained, it changes the man's nature, spoils his
constitution and makes him quite another thing: From a Lovely, Noble and
Excellent, it transforms him into an ignoble, base and contemptible Creature.
We are not ignorant what names the Scripture bestows upon wicked men, even
those of the Uncleanest and most impure Beasts. There is no such filthiness
(said Cicero) (...) lib. ^. de (...).
as the F^ditas Turpificati animi, that of an unclean Soul: And the
Philosophers used to express vice by Turpitudo and (...) Filthiness, as being
that which is infinitely disbecoming, below and unworthy (...). ^ieroc. page 78.
of humane nature. And the Wise man in his Book of the Proverbs says, that a
wicked man is loathsome, and comes to shame. There is no such hideous monster
in nature as a Reasonable Creature living in Contradiction to the Dictates of
his Understanding, trampling under-foot the eternal Laws of Righteousness, and
opposing himself to the known will of the Great Sovereign of the World, of him
in whom he lives, moves and has his being, to whom alone he is obliged for
all he is or has, and for the Capacity he is in of having any thing for the
future which for the present he is destitute of. A Body in which the Head and
Feet have exchanged places, is not more deformed and monstrous than is a
vicious Soul: For her Superior and Governing part is subjected to, and Lorded
over by her Inferior and that which was designed by Nature to be kept in
subjection and governed. Her (...) (as the Pythagoraeans Phrase it) or Holder
of the Reins, and Ruling Faculty, is become the (...) the Reined in and Ruled
Faculty.

I add moreover, that well may sin be said to spoil and mar men's souls, for
we read in the writings of the Apostles that it kills them. She that lives in
pleasures is dead, while she lives, 1 Timothy 5. 6. You has he quickened who
were dead in Trespasses and Sins, Ephesians. 2. 1. S. Jude speaking of certain
ungodly wretches, says, that they are twice dead, v. 12. And the very same
notion had diverse of the Heathens also. Pythagoras used to put a (...) or
empty coffin in the place of that Scholar that left his School, to betake
himself to a vicious and debauched life, as thereby signifying, that he was
dead, dead as to his nobler part. And his Followers tell us that the Souls of
men died, when they apostatized from God, and cast off the Divine Life. And
such a one, as in whom sin reigns, may be called a dead man, because
according to them, the Definition of a man belongs not to him, nor does he any
longer deserve the name of a Reasonable Creature. The Philosopher we have so
often quoted, (and shall have occasion to do it oftener) will have wickedness
to be (...) the death of the reasonable nature: And Simplicius doubts not to
assert, that a man that is drowned in sensuality, (...). Comment. in Epict.
page 4.
has no more of Reason in him, than a Brute creature.

To return to God and to a right mind, to be without God and without
understanding, were of one and the same signification with those excellent men.
And our Savior tells us that the Prodigal came to himself when he resolved
upon returning to his Father's house; as if that while he persisted in
disobedience, he was as very a Brute, as were those whose husks he fed on, and
had utterly lost his understanding faculty. Though that last saying of
Simplicius may seem somewhat hyperbolical, yet this following, one of Hierocles
has not the least tittle of a Figure in it, viz. That wicked men do render the
Reason that remains in them (...) more base and wretchedly contemptible than
the vilest slave. They use it altogether in matters of very bad, or (at best)
of most mean concern; and therefore as upon that account, it were better, so
upon this it would be even as well, if they had none at all: For the Sagacity
that is in Beasts is not less serviceable to them, than is the Reason of a
wicked man to him: Nay had he only that Sagacity that is observable in many
unreasonable Creatures, it might stand him in as much stead as his Reason does,
and perhaps more. So that from what has been discoursed it appears very
evidently that wickedness is the worst, incomparably the worst of Evils; that
it is so in its own nature, as well as in its consequences: And therefore to
deliver us from it, by purifying our lives and natures is to confer upon us the
greatest blessing, and consequently is an undertaking, of all others, the most
worthy of the Son of God.

CHAP. X.
The Second Argument, viz. That the Blessing of making men Holy is accompained
with all other that are most desirable, and which do best deserve to be so
called: Particularly with the Pardon of Sin, and God's special Love. And that
those things which Sensual Persons are most desirous of, are eminently to be
found in that blessing.

SEcondly, This is the Greatest Blessing, because it is accompanied with all
other that are most desirable, and which do best deserve to be so called.
Where sin is sincerely forsaken, it will certainly be Pardoned: The nature of
God is such as that he is ready to be reconciled to a true Convert. They are
our iniquities alone that make (or can make) a separation betwixt us and our
God, and our sins only that hide his face from us: But the cause being
removed, the effect cease. When the Divine grace that is offered to sinners,
becomes effectual to the turning any one from his evil ways, God's favor does
naturally return to him: even as naturally as does the Sun's light into those
places, where that which before intercepted between it and them, is taken away.
He is of so infinitely benign and Gracious a Nature, that no man can continue
an object of his displeasure one moment longer than while he is incapable of
his favor; and nothing, I say, but sin and wickedness (as he has often enough
assured us) can make men so. Nay a Holy Soul is ever the Object also of his
Dearest and most special love. He is not only friends with, but also takes
pleasure in those that fear him, Psalm 147. 11. He is said to make his
residence within such persons, so great is the delight that he takes in them.
Isaiah 66. 1, 2. Thus says the Lord, the Heaven is my Throne, and the Earth my
Footstool, where is the house that ye build unto me? and where is the place of
my Rest? For all those things have mine hand made, and all those things have
been, says the Lord: But to this man will I look, even to him that is poor and
of a contrite Spirit, and trembles at my word. John 14. 23. Jesus said unto
him, If any man love me, he will keep my words, and my Father will love him,
and we will come unto him, and make our abode with him. And it is said
particularly of him that dwells in love (which is the fulfilling of the Law)
that he dwells in God, and God in him. And I might show that the Heathens
themselves had this very notion. It was a saying (...)
used by the Pythagoraeans; that God has not in the whole earth a more
familiar place of Residence than a pure Soul.

And Apollo is brought in thus speaking,

(...). To dwell in Heaven does not more please me, then
Within the Souls of Pious Mortal men.
And Hierocles which recites that verse does himself assert, that God hates
no man; but as for the good man, he -- (...). page 70.
Embraces him with an extraordinary and surpassing affection. The Righteous
Lord loving righteousness, his countenance cannot but behold the upright.
Wheresoever he finds any impressions of True Goodness, as he cannot but highly
approve of them, so is it not possible but that they should attract his
singular love to those which are the subjects of them: According to that
measure and proportion that any one participates of his Goodness, he must needs
have a share in his Grace and kindness. A holy person is a man after God's own
heart, as his Servant David was said to be: He is a man that carries his
image, and bears a Resemblance to him, and upon that account he cannot fail to
be very dearly beloved by him. Now I need not go about to prove that there is
no blessing whatsoever but is employed in an interest in the Divine Love, and
especially in such a love as that which we have showed Good men are made the
objects of.

It might be here shown also that those things which sensual and carnal persons
are most desirous of, viz. Riches, Honors and Pleasures, are eminently to be
found in the Blessing we are now discoursing of, and indeed those which best
deserve to be so called and are in the properest sense so, no where else.
Nothing inricheth a Man like the Graces of God's Holy Spirit: What S. Peter
said of meekness, is true of all the virtues; 1 Pet. 3.
they are in the sight of God (and he judges of things as they are) of great
price. They are called Gold tried Nihil Neque meum est neque cujusquam, quod
auferri, quod eripi, quod amitti potest. Cicero in Paradoxis.
in the fire, Rev. 3. 18. The true and our own Riches, Luke 16. 12. Which is as
much as to say, that these only are ours, and all but these are false and
Counterfeit. These enrich our Souls, which alone (as was said) deserve to be
called our-selves, and will abide by us when all other have bid adieu to us.
These do as much excel in true value and worth all those things which the world
calls Riches, as do our Immortal Spirits transcend our frail and corruptible
Carcasses. It was one of the Maxims of the Stoics, (...) that the wise
(whereby they meant the truly virtuous) man is the only Rich man. And Tully
has this saying upon it. A man's Chest cannot properly be called Animus hominis
dives, non arca appellari potest. Quamvis illa sit plena, dum te inanem videbo,
divitem non putabo. In paradox.
Rich, but his Mind only: And though thy Coffer be full, so long as I see thee
Empty, I shall not think thee a Rich man. And says Hierocles, (...). All
things that are without a man's soul, are but little and insignificant trifles.
And the Righteous, says Solomon, is more excellent than his Neighbor; or he
is of greater worth than any other person that is not righteous, Prove. 12. 26.

Nothing, again, makes men so honorable as does Virtue and True Goodness, or
at all truly so. Seeing He and He alone that is endued with it, lives up to his
highest Principle, like a Creature possessed of a Mind and Reason; nay this man
is moreover (as was said) like to God himself, and imitates his Glorious
perfections. And therefore well might Wisdom say as she does, Prove. 8. 18.
Riches and Honor are with me. To overcome our unruly lusts, and keep in
subjection all impetuous desires and inordinate Appetites, makes us more
deservedly Glorious than was Alexander or Julius Caesar: For he that thus does,
has subdued those that mastered those mighty Conquerours. And such a one has
praise of God, of the holy Angels, and of all men that are not fools, and whose
judgments he has cause to value. He that is slow to anger, is better than the
Mighty; and he that rules his Spirit, than he that takes a City, Proverbs 16.
32.

And no Pleasures are comparable to those that immediately result from virtue
and holiness: for that man's Conscience is a very Heaven to him that busieth
himself in the exercise thereof. While we do thus, we act most agreably to the
right frame and constitution of our Souls, and consequently most naturally; and
all the actions of Nature are confessedly very sweet and pleasant. This also
very many of the Heathens had a great sense of; even those of them which much
doubted of another life wherein Virtue is rewarded, commended very highly the
Practice of it, for this reason, that it is sibi praemium a reward to it self.
Simplicius in his Comment upon Epictetus has this observable saying, that, The
observation of the Rules of Virtue in that Book prescribed will make men so
happy and blessed even in this life, that they shall not need (...), etc. to be
promised any Reward after death, though that also will be sure to follow.

These things, I say, might be insisted on in this place* but they are such
large and spacious fields of discourse, that should we make any considerable
entrance into them, we shall find it no easy matter to get out of them. I
therefore proceed.

CHAP. XI.
The Third Argument, viz. That whatsoever other Blessings a man may be supposed
to have that is utterly destitute of Holiness, they cannot stand him in so much
stead, as only to make him not miserable. And all Evil and Corrupt affections
showed to be greatly tormenting in their own nature, and innumerable sad
mischiefs to be the necessary Consequents of yielding obedience to them.

THirdly, whatsoever other Blessings a man may be supposed to have, that is
utterly destitute of this of Holiness, they cannot stand him in so much stead
as but to make him not miserable. We may by the first Particular, and what was
said upon it, be sufficiently convinced of the truth of this: But I rather add,
That sinful Lusts are extremely troublesome, disquieting, and painful. The
Wicked (says the Prophet Isaiah) is like the troubled Sea which cannot rest,
whose waters cast up mire and dirt. The Labyrinths that Sin involves men in,
are innumerable; its ways are so full of intricate turnings and windings, that
they sadly perplex those poor Creatures that walk in them, and it is impossible
but that they should do so. The greatest outward inconveniences and disastrous
misfortunes are very frequently (as might be largly shown) occasioned by them,
but vexations of mind, and troublesome thoughts are the constant and never
failing effects of them. Tully in the forementioned Book, says thus to the
vicious man, Thy lusts torment thee, all sorts Tuae libidines te torquent, te
arumnae premunt omnes, tu dies noctesque Cruciaris.
of cares oppress thee, and both day and night torture thee. And Hierocles
says that, It is necessary that -- (...).
the worst life should be most miserable, and the best most pleasant and
delightful. Covetousness and Ambition put men's minds upon the rack to contrive
ways of enriching and advancing themselves: And when they have attained to so
large a proportion of earthly profits, or so high a degree of honor as they at
first designed, they are so far from being at ease and rest (as they vainly
promised to themselves they should) that their cravings increase as do their
fortunes, and in the midst of their Abundance they continue in the same
streights that at first afflicted them. Nay so impetuous is the fury of those
lusts, that they drive them into still greater, and cause in their Souls that
are possessed by them a more pungent and a quicker sense of want than they felt
when their condition was most mean, and their estate at the lowest. Nor is this
mischief any other than a most natural and unavoidable consequent of forsaking
God (who is, as the Scriptures call him, the Rest, and (as Plato) the center of
Souls) and of seeking satisfaction in such things, as are infinitely too little
for their vast capacities: which the forementioned are, and all worldly
enjoyments.

What a multitude of Tormenting cares is Independency on God and Distrust of
his Providence perpetually attended with? How impossible is it to give a
comprehensive and just Catalogue of the many mischiefs and miseries that are
the necessary products and genuine offspring of Intemperance and
Lasciviousness? Solomon enumerates some of the evils that are the fruits of the
former of these, Prove. 23. 29 but to give a perfect account of them would be an
endless work. And as for the latter, besides the loathsome and painful disease
that is ordinarily the consequent of satisfying the cravings of that filthy
vice, the unclean person is continually in a restless Condition, and as it
were, in a constant fit of a burning fever; and the evil accidents that are
occasioned by it are so many, that they are not neither to be reckoned up. The
Epicuraeans, though they placed man's chief happiness in corporeal Pleasures,
did strictly notwithstanding forbid Adultery, for this reason because (as they
said) in stead of performing its promise of pleasure, it robs men of it.

He that is proud and highly conceited of himself, is disordered and
discomposed by the least sleighting word, or neglect of Respect, and (I had
almost said) by the smallest commendation of his Neighbor too: And it lies in
the power of any sorry Creature, when he list, to afflict him.

The Inward sad effects of Envy and Malice are sufficiently observable in the
dismal countenances of those that are under the power of them; and these
hateful and devilish lusts do eat into and prey upon the very hearts of those
in whose breasts they lodge, and are like Fire in their bosoms uncessantly
torturing them: Not to say any thing of the many Outward and ^st direful
mischiefs that are caused by a (...) satisfaction of them. In short, there is
not any one inordinate affection, but is so disturbing and disquieting a thing
in its own nature, that it cannot but make those who are in subjection to it,
though they should have never so many Qui Appetitus longius evagantur etc. et
non satis ratione ^etinentur, ^c. ab iis non modo animi perturbantur, sed etiam
Corpora: licet era ipsa cernere iratorum, aut little qui aus libidine aliqua aut
metu commoti sunt, aut voluptate nimia gestiunt: quorum omnium ^ultus, voces,
motus, statusque mutantur. Cicero lib de Officiis primo.
good things to set against it, exceeding miserable in this, as well as in the
other world. So that had our Savior come into the world, only upon such a
design as the carnal Jews expected their Messia would, viz. that of making us
partakers of a mere Temporal happiness, he must in order to the succeeding of
it chiefly have concerned himself to make us holy.

If it were possible (as it has been shown it is not) that a wicked man should
have God's Pardon, this would not make him cease to be Miserable; all it could
signify would be no more than an Exemption from being immediately by him
punished; But though the Divine Majesty should not in the least afflict him,
his very Lusts would be of themselves no light punishment, but such as under
which he could never enjoy himself in this life, but will be found to be
intolerable in the life to come: Seeing there will then be nothing to be met
with that can at all suite with his sensual inclinations, or that will have any
aptness in it to please and gratify them: whereas now all places abound with
such things as are fit for that purpose; as are able, I say, to gratify,
though not to satisfy such appetites. So that this man's condition in the
future state must needs be very exactly like to his, that is even parcht and
dried up with excessive thirst, but can by no means obtain wherewithal to
quench it; no nor yet so much as a little to slake it, and mitigate the pain of
it; as he in this state very frequently makes a shift to do.

Were it possible that Christ's Righteousness could be imputed to an
unrighteous man, I dare boldly affirm that it would signify as little to his
happiness, while he continues so as would a gorgeous and splendid garment to
one that is almost starved with hunger, or that lies rackt by the torturing
diseases of the Stone or Cholick.

And could we suppose such a man to be never so much an object of the Divine
Benevolence, nay and Complacency too (as there is nothing than this latter less
supposeable) this could not make him, he continuing wicked, so much as not
miserable: He being rendered by his wickedness utterly incapable of such
effects of the love of God, as could have upon him so good an influence.

Nay farther, were our Phansies so very powerful, as that they could place him
even in Heaven it self; so long as he continues unturned from his iniquities,
we could not imagine him happy there; nay he would carry a Hell to Heaven with
him and keep it there. It is not the being in a fine place, that can make any
one cease to be miserable; but the being in a good state; and the place Heaven
without the Heavenly state, will signify nothing. An unhealthful and diseased
body will have never the more ease for residing in a Princes Court, nor will a
sick and unfound soul have an end put to its unhappiness, though it should live
for ever in the presence of God himself. That saying to this purpose does well
deserve our repeating which I find in the excellent book called The Causes of
the Decay of Christian Piety; Alas, what delight would it be to the Swine to be
wrapped in fine linen, and laid in odours: his senses are not gratisied by any
such delicacies, nor would he feel any thing besides the torment, of being
withheld from the mire. And as little complacency would a brutish soul find in
those purer and refined pleasures, which can only upbraid, not satisfy him.

It is not to be doubted that such habits of soul as men carry hence with them,
they shall keep in the other state; and therefore if we leave this earth with
any unmortified and reigning lusts, they will not only make us incapable of the
happiness of Heaven, but also of any happiness. For there will be (as was but
now intimated) no satisfaction or so much as gratification of carnal and
brutish, and much Iess of devilish appetites in the celestial Mansions: and
therefore they cannot be otherwise than very grieviously painful to the person
that is fraught with them; though I say we could suppose him to be safely
possessed of those glorious habitations.

To sum up all I shall say on this argument, I fear not to assert, that
Omnipotency it self cannot make a wicked person happy, no not so much as
negatively so (except he should be annihilated) any otherwise than by first
giving him his Grace for the subduing and mortification of sin in him: And that
to deliver one from all misery while sin is vigorous in his soul, and bears the
sway there, is not an object of any power, and implies in it a palpable and
apparent contradiction. For misery is no less of the essence of sin and
wickedness, than is light of the Sun; so that it is impossible they should ever
be separated from one another, but that they must like the Twins of
Hippocrates, live and die together.

CHAP. XII.
The Fourth Argument, viz. That Holiness being perfected is Blessedness it
self; and the Glory of Heaven consists chiefly in it. This no new notion; some
observations by the way from it.

BUt in the last place, well may we call Holiness the greatest of Blessings,
for when it is perfected, it is Blessedness it self, and the Glory of Heaven is
not only entailed upon it, but does chiefly consist in it. Beloved (says S.
John) Now are we the Sons of God; but it does not appear what we shall be; but
this we know that when he appears, we shall be like him etc. As if he should
say, I cannot tell you particularly and distinctly what the bl^ness of the
other life will be but thi^ ^ am sure of, that like^ to God is the (...) notion
of it; and that it consists, for the substance thereof, in a perfect
resemblance of the Divine Nature. The happiness of Heaven does not lie in a
mere fixing of our eyes upon the Divine perfections, and in admiring of them,
but mainly in so beholding and contemplating them, as thereby to be changed
into the express and lively image of them: And in having so affecting a sense
of Gods infinite justice and goodness, purity and holiness,, as will make the
deepest impressions of those most amiable qualities in our own souls.

The Glory that Heaven conferreth upon its inhabitants, consists nothing so
much in an external view of God and Christ, as in a real and plentiful
participation of their glorious excellencies, whereby are chiefly to be
understood those, that are employed in that general word Holiness: For as for
their other attributes such as Knowledge, Power, etc. the devils themselves who
are most of all creatures unlike them, have a large measure of them.

This Blessedness principally implies a rapturous love of God, a feeling as
well as understanding the goodness that is in him; an inseparable conjunction
of all the faculties of our souls with him, and a perfect assimilation of our
natures to him. The felicity of Heaven is an operative thing, full of life and
energy, which advances all the power of men's souls into a sympathy with the
Divine Nature, and an absolute compliance with the will of God, and so makes
him to become all in all to them. So that the happiness of Heaven, and perfect
holiness, are by no means to be accounted things of a different nature, but two
several conceptions of one and the same thing, or rather two expressions of one
and the same conception. All that happiness (as said the Learned and Pious Mr.
John Smith) which good men shall be made partakers of, as it cannot be born up
upon any other foundation than true goodness, and a God-like nature within us,
so neither is it distinct from it.

Neither are we to look upon this as any upstart or late notion, for our
ancient Divines have long since taught it in this saying that was frequently
used by them, viz. Grace is Glory begun, and Glory is Grace perfected.

And I cannot but by the way observe that those which have considered this,
will need no other argument to satisfy and convince them, That that talk of
some [That it is mere servile obedience, and below the ingenuity and Generosity
of a Christian Spirit, to serve God for Heaven, as well as for the good things
of this life only] is very grossly ignorant, very childish prattle: For, to
serve God in hopes of Heaven according to its true notion, is to serve him for
himself, and to express the sincerest, and also the most ardent affection to
him, as well as concernment for our own souls. And therefore it could do no
other than infinitely become the Son of God himself to endure the Cross, and
despise the shame, for the joy that was set before him, taking that joy in no
other sense than has been generally understood, viz. for the happiness of
Heaven consisting in a full enjoyment and undisturbed possession of the Blessed
Deity: nor is there any reason why we should enquire after any other
signification of that word which may exclude this.

And on the other hand, to be diligent in the service of God for fear of hell,
understanding it as a state perfectly opposite to that which we have been
describing, is in a like manner from a principle of love to God and true
goodness, as well as self-love, and is no more unworthy of a Son of God, than
of a mere servant. And thus, the truth of this proposition, That to make men
Holy, is to confer upon them the greatest of blessings, by the little that has
been said is made plainly apparent.

CHAP. XIII.
The Second Account of our Savior's preferring the business of making men
holy, before any other, viz. That this is to do the best service to God. An
objection answered against the Author's Discourse of the Design of Christianity.

IT remains secondly to be shown, That to promote the business of Holiness in
the world, is to do God Almighty the best service: And this will be dispatched
in a very few words. For is it not without dispute, better service to a Prince
to reduce Rebels to their Allegiance, than to procure a pardon under his Seal
for them? This is so evidently true, that to do this latter, except it be in
order to the former business, is not at all to serve him, nay it is to do him
the greatest of disservices. I need not apply this to our present purpose. And
therefore to be sure the work of making men holy and bringing over sinners to
the obedience of his Father, must needs have been much more in the eye of our
Blessed Savior, than that of delivering them from their deserved punishments,
simply and in it self considered: For his love to him will be (I hope)
universally acknowledged to be incomparably greater than it is to us, as very
great as it is.

None can question, but that by our Apostasy from God, we have most highly
dishonored him, we have robbed him of a Right that he can never be willing to
let go, viz. The obedience that is indispensably due to him as he is our
Creator, continual Preserver, our infinitely bountiful Benefactor and absolute
Sovereign. And therefore it is as little to be doubted, that Christ would in
the first place concern himself for the Recovery of that Right. And but that
both works are carried on together, and inseparably involved in each other; he
must necessarily be very greatly and far more solicitous about the effecting of
this Design, than of that of delivering wicked Rebels from the mischiefs and
miseries they have made themselves liable to, by their disobedience.

So that laying all these considerations together, what in the world can be
more indisputable, than that our Savious chief and ultimate design in coming
from Heaven to us, and performing and suffering all he did for us, was to turn
us from our iniquities, to reduce us to entire and universal obedience, and to
make us partakers of inward, real righteousness and true holiness? And we
cannot from this last discourse but clearly understand, that it is most
infinitely reasonable, and absolutely necessary that it should be so.

But now if after all this it be objected, that I have defended a notion
concerning the Design of Christianity, different from that which has hitherto
been constantly received by all Christians, viz. That it is to display and
magnify the exceeding riches of God's Grace to fallen mankind in his Son
Jesus: I answer that he will be guilty of very great injustice toward me, that
shall censure me as laboring in this discourse to propagate any new notion:
For I have therein endeavored nothing else but a true explication of the old
one, it having been grossly misunderstood, and is still by very many to their
no small prejudice. Those therefore that say, that the Christian Religion
designeth to set forth and glorify the infinite Grace of God in Jesus Christ
to wretched sinners, and withal understand what they say; as they speak most
truly, so do they assert the very same thing that I have done. For (as has
been shown) not only the Grace of God is abundantly displaied and made manifest
in the Gospel to sinners for this end, that they ^ay thereby be effectually
moved and persuaded to forsake their sins: but also the principal Grace that is
there exhibited, does consist in delivering us from the power of them.
Whosoever will acknowledge sin to be (as we have proved it is) in its own
nature the greatest of all evils, and holiness the chiefest of all blessings,
will not find it easy to deny this. And besides (as we have likewise shown)
men are not capable of God's pardoning Grace, till they have truly repented
them of all their sins, that is, have in will and affection sincerely left
them: And also that if they were caPable of it, so long as they continue vile
slaves to their lusts, that Grace by being bestowed upon them cannot make them
happy, nor yet cause them to cease from being very miserable, in regard of
their disquieting and tormenting nature, in which is laid the foundation of
Hell it self. The free Grace of God is infinitely more magnified, in renewing
our Natures, than it could be in the bare justification of our persons: And to
justify a wicked man while he continues so, (if it were possible for God to
do it) would far more disparage his Justice and Holiness, than advance his
Grace and Kindness: Especially since his forgiving sin would signify so
little, if it be not accompanied with the destruction of it.

In short, then does God most signally glorify himself in the world, when he
most of all communicates himself, that is, his Glorious perfections, to the
souls of men: And then do they most Glorify God, when they most partake of
them, and are rendered most like unto him.

But because nothing is, I perceive, more generally mistaken, than the notion
of Gods Glorifying himself, I will add something more for the better
understanding of See his select discourses page 409.
this, and I am conscious to my self that I cannot do it so well, as in the
words of the Excellent man we a while since quoted, Mr. John Smith sometimes
Fellow of Queens College in Cambridge; When God seeks his own Glory, he does
not so much endeavor any thing without himself: He did not bring this stately
Fabric of the universe into being, that he might for such a monument of his
mighty Power, and Beneficence gain some Panegyricks or Applause from a little
of that fading breath which he had made. Neither was that Gracious Contrivance
of restoring lapsed men to himself a plot to get himself some External
Hallelujahs, as if he had so ardently thirsted after the Lauds of Glorified
Spirits, or desired a Quire of Souls to sing forth his Praises: Neither was it
to let the world see how magnificent he was. No, it is his own internal Glory
that he most loves, and the Communication thereof which he seeks: As Plato
sometimes speaks of the Divine Love, it arises not out of Indigency, as
created love does, but out of Fullness and Redundancy: It is an overflowing
fountain, and that love which descends upon created beings is a free efflux
from the Almighty source of love: And it is well-pleasing to him that those
creatures which he has made, should partake of it. Though God cannot seek his
own Glory so, as if he might acquire any addition to himself, yet Chap. 1. 5.
he may seek it so, as to communicate it out of himself. It was a good Maxim
of Plato, (...) There is no envy in God, which is better stated by St. James,
God gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth not. And by that Glory of his
which he loves to impart to his creatures, I understand those stamps and
impressions of Wisdom, Justice, Patience, Mercy, Love, Peace, Joy and other
Divine Gifts which he bestows freely upon the minds of men. And thus God
triumphs in his own Glory, and takes pleasure in the Communi^ion of it.

I proceed now to consider what Useful inferences may be gathered from our past
discourse.

SECT III. An Improvement of the whole Discourse in diverse Inferences.
CHAP. XIV. The First Inference.
That it appears from the past Discourse that our Savior has taken the most
effectual Course for the purpose of subduing Sin in us, and making us partakers
of his Holiness. Where it is particularly showed that the Gospel gives
advantages infinitely above any those the Heathens had, who were privileged
with extraordinary helps for the Improvement of themselves. And 1. That the
good Principles that were by natural Light dictated to them, and which reason
rightly improved persuaded them to entertain as undoubtedly true, or might have
done, are farther confirmed by Divine Revelation in the Gospel. 2. That those
principles which the Heathens by the highest improvement of their Reason could
at best conclude but very probable, the Gospel gives us an undoubted assurance
of. This showed in four instances. 3. Four Doctrines showed to be delivered in
the Gospel, which no man without the assistance of Divine Revelation could ever
once have thought of, that contain wonderful inducements, and helps to
Holiness. The First of which has Five more employed in it.

First, it appears from what has been said to demonstrate That our Savior's
Grand Design upon us in coming into the world was to subdue sin in us, and
restore the image of God, that consists in righteousness and true holiness,
to us; That he has taken the most effectual course imaginable for that
purpose; and that his Gospel is the most powerful Engine for the battering down
of all the strong holds that sin has raised to it self in the souls of men,
and the advancement of us to the highest pitch of Sanctity that is to be
arrived at by Humane nature. This (as has been shown) was the business that
the Philosophy of the Heathens designed to effect; but alas what a weak and
inefficacious thing was it, in comparison of Christ's Gospel: wherein we have
such excellent and soul-enobling Precepts most perspicuously delivered; and
moreover such mighty helps afforded to enable us, and such infinitely pressing
motives and arguments to excite us to the practice of them.

And it will not be amiss if we particularly show, what exceeding great
advantages Christians have for the attaining of true Virtue, and the sublimest
degrees of it too in this state attainable, above any that were ever vouchsafed
to the world by the Divine Providence, before our Savior's descent into it.
And (not to make a formal comparison between the Christian and best
Pagan-Philosophy, this not deserving upon innumerable accounts to be so much as
named with that, and much less to dishonor the Religion of our Savior so far
as at all to compare it with any of those which were professed by Heathenish
nations, or that of the impostor Mahomet, which as well as those, in not a few
particulars tends greatly even to corrupt and deprave men's natures) we will
discourse according to our accustomed brevity* First, what advantages the
Gospel gives us above those which such Heathens, as were privileged with
extraordinary helps for the improvement of their understandings, had; and
Secondly, above those which God's most peculiar people, the children of Israel,
were favored with.

First, as for those the Gospel contains above such as the best and most
refined Heathens enjoyed, it will be worth our while to consider

First, That the good principles that were by natural light dictated to them,
and which reason rightly improved did persuade them to entertain as undoubtedly
true, or might have done, are farther confirmed by Divine Revelation in the
Gospel to us.

As, That there is but one God, That he is an absolutely-perfect Being,
infinitely Powerful, Wise, Just, Merciful, etc. That we owe our lives and all
the comforts of them to him, That he is our Sovereign Lord, to whom absolute
subjection is indispensably due, That he is to be loved above all things; and
the main and most important particular duties which it becomes us to perform to
him, our neighbor and selves. We Christians have these things as plainly
declared from Heaven to us, and as often repeated and inculcated, as if there
were no other way to come to the Knowledge of them but that of Revelation. So
that (as has been shown in the Free Discourse, page 88.) what the Heathens
took pains for, and by the exercise of their Reason learnt, we have set before
our eyes, and need but read it in order to our knowledge of it. It is true, for
our satisfaction whether the Holy Scriptures are Divinely inspired, and have
God for their Author, it is necessary that we employ our Reason, except we can
be contented to be of so very hasty and easy a belief as to give credit to
things, and those of greatest concernment too, we know not why; or to pin our
faith on our Forefathers sleeves; and so to have no better bottom for our
belief of the Bible, than the Turks have for theirs of the Alcoran. But
although it is necessary that we should exercise here our Discursive Faculty,
if we will believe as becomes Creatures endued with Reason, yet this is no
tedious task, nor such as we need much belabour our brains about. An
unprejudiced person will soon be abundantly satisfied concerning the
Scripture's Divine Authority, when he does but consider how it is confirmed,
and how worthy the Doctrine contained in it is of him whose name it bears. Now,
I say, this little pains being taken for the establishment of our Faith in the
Holy Scripture, we cannot but be at the first sight assured of the truth of the
contents of it. For no man in his wits can in the least question the Veracity
of him, whom even natural light assures us can be no other than Truth it self.

Secondly, Those good Principles that the Heathens by the greatest improvement
of their Reason could at best conclude but very probable, are made undoubtedly
Certain to us Christians by Revelation; As,

First, That of the Immortality of our Souls. The vulgar sort of Heathens who
were apt to believe any thing that was by Tradition handed down to them, ('it is
confessed) did not seem to doubt of the truth of this Doctrine, but to take it
for granted; which (no question) is also to be imputed to the special
Providence of God, and not merely to their Credulity. But the more learned and
sagacious, that would not easily be imposed on, nor believe any farther than
they saw cause, though by Arguments drawn from the notions they had truly
conceived of the Nature of Humane Souls they have diverse of them undertaken to
prove them Immortal; yet could their Arguments raise the best of them no higher
than a great opinion of their Immortality* Cato read Plato of the Immortality
of the Soul, as he lay bleeding to death, with great delight; but that argues
not that he had any more than great hopes of the truth of it. Socrates did so
believe it, that he parted with this life in expectation of another; but yet he
plainly and ingenuously confessed to his friends, that it was not certain.
Cicero, that sometimes expresses great confidence concerning the truth of it,
does for the most part speak so of it, that any one may see that he thought the
Doctrine no better than probable. He discourses of it in his book de Senectute
as that which he rather could not endure to think might be false, than as that
which he had no doubt of the truth of. And after he had there instanced in
several Arguments which he thought had weight in them for the proof thereof,
and expressed a longing to see his Ancestors, and the brave men he had once
known, and which he had heard of, read and written of, he thus concludes that
whole Discourse, If I err in Quod si in hoc erro, quod animos hominum
immortales esse credam, libenter erro: nec mihi errorem, quo delector, dum v^o,
extorqueri volo. Sin mortuus, etc.
believing the Souls immortality, I err willingly; neither so long as I live
will I suffer this error which so much delights me, to be wrested from me. But
if when I am dead, I shall be void of all sense, as certain little Philosophers
think, I do not fear to have this error of mine laughed at by dead Philosophers.

But now the Gospel has given us the highest assurance possible of the truth
of this Doctrine; Life and immortality are said to be brought to light by it:
He who declared himself to be the Son of God with power, gave men a sensible
demonstration of it in his own person, by his Resurrection from the Dead, and
Ascension into Heaven: And both by himself, and his Apostles (who were also
endued with a power of working the greatest of Miracles for the confirmation of
the truth of what they said) did very frequently, and most plainly preach it.

Secondly, The Doctrine of Rewards and Punishments in the life to come (which
is for substance the same with the former) according to our behavior in this
life, the learned Heathens did generally declare their belief of; which they
grounded upon the Justice, Holiness and Goodness of the Divine Nature. They
considered that Good men were often exercised with great calamities, and that
bad men very frequently were greatly prosperous, and abounded with all earthly
felicities: And therefore thought it very reasonable to believe that God would
in another life show his hatred of Sin, and love of Goodness, by making a plain
discrimination between the conditions of virtuous and wicked persons, by
punishing these, and rewarding those without exception. But this, though it
was, in their opinion, a very probable argument, yet they looked not on it as
that which amounted to a Demonstration. For they could not but be aware, That
that Doctrine which was so generally received by them, viz. That Virtue is in
all conditions a Reward, and Vice a Punishment to it self, did very much blunt
the edge of it: And that other very harsh one, That all things besides Virtue
and Vice are (...) neither good nor evil, did render it (as the perfect Stoics
did seem too well to understand) too too insignificant. But I must confess that
Hierocles, who (as has been said) did not admit that notion, but in a very
qualified sense, says of those that think their Souls mortal (and consequently
that virtue will hereafter have no reward) that when they dispute in the behalf
of virtue, (...) they rather talk wittily, than truly and in good earnest. The
excellent Socrutes himself, when he was going to drink off the fatal drug, thus
said to those that were then present with him, I am now going to end my days,
whereas your lives will be prolonged; but whether you or I upon this account
are the more happy, is known to none but God only: intimating that he did not
look upon it as absolutely certain that he should have any Reward in another
world, for doing so heroically virtuous an act, as choosing Martyrdom for the
Doctrine of the Unity of the Godhead. But now, what is more frequently or
clearly declared in the Gospel, than that there will be Rewards and Punishments
in the world to come suitable to men's actions in this world? than, that Christ
will come a second time to judge the world in righteousness, and that all must
appear before his Iudgment-seat, to receive according to what they have done,
whether it be good, or whether it be evil, 2 Cor. 5. 10.

Thirdly, That men's sins shall be forgiven upon true Repentance, from the
consideration of the Goodness and Mercy of God, the Heathens were likewise
persuaded, or rather hoped: But we Christians have the strongest assurance
imaginable given us of it, by the most solemn and often reiterated promises of
God himself; and not only that some or most, but also that all without
exception, and the most heinous impieties upon condition of their being
sincerely forsaken, shall in and through Christ be freely forgiven to those
that have been guilty of them.

Fourthly, The Doctrine of God's readiness to assist men by his special grace
in their endeavors after Virtue, could be no more, at the best, than probable
in the judgment of the Heathens: but we have in the Gospel the most express
promises thereof made to us, for our infinitely great encouragement. Tully in
his Book de Natura Deorum says, that their City Rome, and Greece had brought
forth many singular men, of which it is to be believed none arrived to such a
height nisi Deo juvante, but by the help of God. And after he tells us, that
Nemo vir magnus sine aliquo afflatu Divino unquam fuit, No excellent man was
ever made so but by some Divine afflation. And Pythagoras in his golden verses
exhorts men to pray unto God for assistance in doing what becomes them.

-- (...). And Hierocles (with whom I confess my self so enamoured, that I can
scarcely ever forbear to present my Reader with his excellent sayings, when
there is occasion) He, I say, upon this clause of Pythagoras, has a discourse,
concerning the necessity, of our endeavors after Virtue on the one hand, and
of the divine blessing to make them successful on the other, which I have often
admired. And even Seneca himself, very unlike a Stoic, says, Bonus vir sine
Deo nemo est, etc. No man can be made good without God, for can any one raise
up himself without his help?

But none of these could have the least assurance, that God would not deny his
special assistance to any that seriously seek after it, especially since men
have brought themselves into a state of imbecility and great impotence through
their own default. But this, I say, the Gospel gives all men very serious
offers of, and assures them if they be not wanting to themselves, they shall
obtain. Hence our Savior says, Ask, and it shall be given unto you: seek and
you shall find: knock, and it shall be opened unto you. For every one that
asks, receives; and he that seeks, finds; and to him that knocks, it
shall be opened. If a son shall ask bread of any that is a father, will he give
him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he for a fish give him a Serpent? or if
he ask an egg, will he offer him a Scorpion? If ye then being evil, know how
to give good gifts unto your children; how much more shall your heavenly Father
give the holy Spirit unto them that ask him, Luke 11. 9, etc. And the same
thing is told us by S. James in these words chap. 1. 5. If any of you lack
wisdom, let him ask it of God, that gives to all men liberally, and upbraideth
not, and it shall be given him. Antoninus the Philosopher puts men upon praying
for a good mind above all things, but all the encouragement he could give was,
(...) and see Lib. 9. Sect. 4^.
what will come of it.

Thirdly, We have other Doctrines made known to us by the Gospel, which no man
could ever without Divine Revelation in the least have dreamed of. As,

First, That God has made miserable sinners the objects of such transcendent
kindness, as to give them his onely-begotten Son. And there are these five
Doctrines implied in this, which are each of them very strong motives and
incentives to Holiness, viz.

1. That God Almighty has made such account of us, and so concerned himself
for our recovery out of that most wretched condition we had by sinning against
him plunged our selves into, as to send his own Son from Heaven to us to show
us on what terms we may be recovered, and also in his name even to pray and
beseech us to comply with them. That he 2 Cor. 5. 20.
should send no meaner a person than one who was the Brightness of his Glory,
and the express image of his Person, by whom also he made the world, upon this
errand, is such a Heb. 1. 2, 3
motive to holiness as one would think no sinner could be able to stand out
against. That God should send an Ambassador from Heaven to us to assure us
that he is Reconcilable, and bears us good will, notwithstanding our high
provocations of him, and to lay before us all the parts of that holiness which
is necessary to restore our Natures to his own likeness, and so to make us
capable of enjoying Blessedness; and most pathetically moreover to entreat us
to do what lies in us to put them in practice, that so it may be to eternity
well with us; and that this Ambassador should be such a one also as we now
said, never was there so marvelous an expression of the Divine Love; and
therefore one would even conclude it perfectly irresistible by all persons that
have not extirpated out of their natures all ingenuity. 2. That this Son of God
conversed upon equal terms with men, and was incarnate for their sakes. Great
is the Mystery of 1 Timothy 3. 16.
Godliness, God manifested in the Flesh. That he should become the Son of Man,
submit to be born of a Woman, is a Demonstration that God is so far from having
cast off Humane Nature, that (as much as it is depraved) he bears a very
wonderful good will still to it, and has a real desire to readvance and
dignifie it: even this simply considered and without joining with it the
consideration of the Design of it, might make us conclude this; seeing that
Christ's taking our nature is the bringing of it so near to the Divine, as to
lodge it therewith in one and the self-same Person. And therefore, besides the
motive to holiness drawn from God's infinite love therein expressed, this
Doctrine contains another very powerful one, viz. That it must needs be a
most notoriously vile thing to dishonor our nature by sin and wickedness, and
far more so than it was before the Incarnation of Jesus Christ; in that it may
now by the means thereof be properly said, that it is in his person advanced
above even the Nature of Angels; for him who is invested with it do they
themselves worship. And how can any Christian while he considers this, be
able to forbear thus to reason with himself? Shall I by harboring filthy lusts
debase that nature in my own person, which God has to such an infinite height
exalted in his Son's? God forbid. What an additional motive is this, to do as
Pythagoras advised his Scholars, in these words, Above all things revere and
stand in awe of (...).
thy self. Do nothing that is disbecoming and unworthy of so excellent a
nature, as thine is. 3. That this Son of God taught men their duty by his own
example, and did himself perform among them what he required of them. Now that
he should tread before us every step of that way, which he he has told us
leads to eternal happiness, and commend those duties which are most
ungrateful to our corrupt inclinations, by his own practice; our having so
brave an example is no small encouragement to a cheerful performance of all
that is commanded. For how honorable a thing must it needs be to imitate the
only begotten Son of God, nay and one who is likewise God himself? How
glorious to follow such a pattern? Those which have any thing in their souls of
true generosity, cannot but find themselves by the consideration hereof, not a
little provoked to abandon all sin, and to set themselves very heartily to the
performance of whatsoever duties are imposed upon them. And as for those which
we are so apt to look upon as unworthy of us, and too low for us (such as meek
putting up of affronts, and condescending to the meanest offices for the
serving of our brethren) how can his spirit be too lofty for them, that
considers Christ's was not. Now these are all such motives and helps to
holiness, the like to which none but those who have the Gospel, ever had. 4.
That this Son of God was an expiaatory Sacrifice for us. We have already shown
what cogent Arguments to all holy obedience are herein contained. 5. That this
Son of God being raised from the Dead, and ascended into Heaven is our High
Priest there, and ever lives (as the Author to the * Hebrews says) to Chap. 7.
make intercession with his Father for us. The Heathens, it is confessed, had a
notion of Demons negotiating the affairs of men with the Supreme God; but they
could never have imagined in the least that they should be so highly
privileged, as to have one who is the Begotten Son of this God, and infinitely
above all persons dear to him, for their perpetual Mediator and Intercessor. I
need not say what an encouragement this is to an Holy Life.
And as the Doctrine of God's giving his Son, which contains the five
forementioned particulars, is such as the highest improvement of reason could
never have caused any thing like it to have entered our thoughts, or that is
comparable thereunto for the effectual provoking of men to the pursuance of all
Holiness of Heart and Life, so

Secondly, The Doctrine of his sending the Holy Ghost, to move and excite us to
our Duty, and to assist, cheer, and comfort us in the performance of it, may go
along with it. How could it have once been thought, without Divine Revelation,
that a person endued with the Divine Nature, and Infinite Power and Goodness
should take it upon him as his Office and peculiar Province to assist men's
weakness in the prosecution of virtue? But this does the Gospel assure us of;
as also that those which do not resist and repel his good motions shall be sure
to have always the superintendency of this Blessed Spirit, and that he will
never forsake them, but abide with them for ever, and carry them from one
degree of Grace to another, till at length it is consummate and made perfect in
Glory. And to this I add

Thirdly, The Doctrine of our Union with Christ through this Spirit: which
Union (to speak in the words of the Learned Dr. Patrick in his Mensa Mystica)
Is not only such a Moral one as is between Husband and Wife, which is made by
Love; or between King and Subjects, which is made by Laws; but such a Natural
Union as is between Head and Members, the Vine and Branches which is made by
one Spirit or Life dwelling in the whole. The Apostle says 1 Cor. 12. 12, 13.
As the body is one and has many members; and also the members of that one
body, being many, are one body, so also is Christ; for by one Spirit are we all
baptized into one body. Now see what use the Apostle makes of both these 1 Cor.
6. 15, 19, 20. Know you not that your bodies are the members of Christ? Shall I
then take the members of Christ, and make them the members of an Harlot? God
forbid. And then he thus proceeds in the 19 and 20 Verses, What, know you not
that your body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, which is in you, which ye have
of God, and ye are not your own, but ye are bought with a price: Therefore
glorify God in* your body and in your Spirit, which are God's. What helps and
incitements we have to the perfecting of Holiness in the fear of God, from
these two Doctrines, is inexpressible.

Lastly, The Doctrine of the unconceivably great Reward, that shall be
conserred upon all good and holy persons, which the Gospel has revealed, is
such as could not possibly by the mere help of Natural Light enter into the
thoughts of those that were strangers to it. We are therein assured not only of
another life, and that good men shall therein be rewarded, but likewise that
the reward that shall be conferred upon them, shall be no less than an
Hyperbolically Hyperbolical Weight of Glory: as are the words of S. Paul 2 Cor.
4. 1^. Those that overcome, are promised that they shall sit with Christ on his
Throne, even as he overcame and is set down with his Father on his Throne, Rev.
3. 21. In short, the happiness that our Savior will reward all his faithful
Disciples with, is so expressed, as that we are assured it is inexpressible,
and likewise far exceeding the short reach of our present conceptions: of which
their souls are not only to partake, but their bodies also, they being to (...)
^. (...).
be made (as vile as they are in this state) like the Glorious Body of Jesus
Christ, and though sown in Corruption and dishonor to be raised in ^lory, 1
Cor. 15.

Now though, as we said, the learned Heathens did many of them by the exercise
of their reason make it probable to themselves that their souls were immortal,
and that in another world virtuous persons shall be richly rewarded; yet no
reasoning of theirs could ever enable them so much as to conjecture that this
reward shall be such an immensely great one, as that the Gospel assures us of:
there being an infinite disproportion betwixt the best services that the most
virtuous persons are in a possibility of performing, and such a reward as this
is: and it being also impossible that so great a felicity as that of the Soul
only, should be a necessary and natural result from the highest degrees of
holiness that are attainable in this low and imperfect state. But yet it is too
well known to be concealed that the Pythagoraeans and Platonists do speak very
great things of the happiness of Heaven; and those of them that discourse
intelligibly concerning it, do give in the general the Gospel-notion of it. I
have found Simplicius somewhere in his Comment on Epictetus calling it an
eternal rest with God. And the Pythagoraean verses conclude with these two

(...)
(...)
When from this body you are set free,
Thou shall mount up toth' Sky:
And an immortal God shall be,
Nor any more shall die.
Where by [ Thou shall be an immortal God] the Commentator Hierocles
understands, thou shall be like to the immortal Gods, and by them he means,
as appears by his Comment upon the first verse, those excellent spirits that
are immediately subordinate to their Maker the supreme God, and the God of
Gods, as he calls him; by which he seems to understand the same with those
called in the Scripture Archangels; for I find that he gives the name Angels
to an order next below them. So that, according to him, it was the Pythagoraean
doctrine, That good men shall, when they go to Heaven, be made in state and
condition like to those that are likest to God Almighty. But how they should
learn this by mere natural Light, is unimaginable. That which is most probably
conjectured is, that they received these with several other notions from the
ancient traditions of the Hebrews. But as for their (...), and (...) the
splendid body, and spiritual vehicle they talk of, they mean not that Glorious
Celestial body, which the Apostle tells us this Terrestial one shall be
changed into, but, a thin subtle body, which they say the soul even while it
is in this gross one is immediately This notion of a fine body did Tertullian
retain his belief of, after he was converted to Christianity, and took it for
the inner man, spoken of in Scripture.
enclosed in: And which being in this life well purified from the pollution it
has contracted from its Case of flesh, the soul taking its flight from thence
with it, enjoys its happiness in it. But, I say, the change of this vile into
a Glorious body they were perfectly strangers to.

Now what an unspeakable encouragement to Holiness is the happiness which the
Gospel proposes to us, and gives us assurance of also, that the now mentioned
or any of the Philosophers could never by the best improvement of their
Intellectuals have conceived to be so much as likely to be attainable by
mankind? And who would still serve their filthy lusts, and in so doing be the
vilest of slaves here, that looks to reign with the King of the world for ever
hereafter? He that has this hope in him, says S. John, purisieth himself even
as he is pure. 1 John 3. 3.

And what has been spoken of the greatness of the Reward which is promised in
the Gospel to obedient persons, may be said also of the punishment it
threateneth to the disobedient. It would make (one would think) even an heart
of Oak, and the most hardened sinner to tremble and shake at the reading of
those expressions it is set forth by. Some of the Philosophers do speak very
dreadful things concerning the condition of wicked men in the other world; but
they fall extremely short of what the Gospel has declared. But I confess a
discourse on this head will not very properly come in here. For mere reason
might make it exceedingly probable that so highly aggravated sins as those
which are committed against the Gospel are, shall be punished as severely, if
impenitently persisted in, as is declared by our Savior and his Apostles they
shall be. But however it is no small awakening to us Christians, that we have
such an undoubted assurance from God himself, what we must expect, if we will
not be prevailed upon by all the means afforded us for our reformation, but
shall notwithstanding them persevere in the neglect of known duties, and in the
allowance of known wickedness.

CHAP. XV.
That the Gospel contains incomparably greater helps for the effecting of the
design of making men inwardly righteous and truly holy, than God's most
peculiar people, the Israelites, were favored with. Where it is showed. 1.
That the Gospel is infinitely more effectual for this purpose than the Mosaical
Law was. 2. And that upon no other accounts the Jews were in circumstances for
the obtaining of a through reformation of life and purification of nature,
comparable to those our Savior has blessed his Disciples with.

IN the second place, it is the clearest case That the Gospel of our Savior
contains incomparably greater helps and advantages for the effecting of the
great work of making men really righteous and truly holy, than God's most
peculiar people, the Israelites, whom he knew and favored above all the
nations of the earth, were partakers of.

First, Nothing is plainer than that the Gospel is infinitely more effectual
for this purpose, than the Mosaical Law was. For indeed that was directly
designed only to restrain those that were under the obligation of it from the
more notorious sins. It was added (says the Apostle) because of Transgression,
till the Seed should come etc. Gal. 3. 19. Justin Martyr says particularly of
the Sacrifices, that the end of them was to keep the Jews from worshipping
Idols, which Trypho also, though a Jew that greatly gloried in the Law,
acknowledged. They were an extremely carnal and vain people, exceedingly prone
to be bewitched with the Superstitions of the Gentiles; God gave them therefore
a pompous way of worship that might gratify their childish humor, and so keep
them from being drawn away with the vanities of the Heathens among whom they
dwelt: and he gave them, withal, such Precepts enforced with threatenings of
most severe and present punishments, as might by main force hold them in from
those vile disorders, immoralities and exorbitances that had then overspread
the face of the woefully depraved and corrupted world. It is certain that the
Law of Moses, strictly so called, did properly tend to make them no more than
externally righteous; and whosoever was so, and did those works it enjoined
(which they might do by their own natural strength) was esteemed according to
that Law and dealt with as just and blameless; and had a right to the
immunities and privileges therein promised. But much less was it accompanied
with grace to indue the observers of it with an inward principle of Holiness..

And the Apostle S. Paul expresses this as the great difference between that
Law and the Gospel, in calling this the Spirit, and that the Letter, as he
several times does. Not that God, who was ever of an infinitely benign nature,
and love it self (as S. John describes him) was wanting with his Grace to
well-minded men under the Old Testament; or that the Jews were all destitute of
an inward principle of Holiness; nothing less: But the Law which Moses was
peculiarly the promulger of, did not contain any promises of Grace, nor did the
obligation thereof extend any farther than to the outward man. But there ran
(as I may so express my self) a vein of Gospel all along with this Law, which
was contained in the Covenant made with Abraham and his Seed, by virtue of
which the good men among the Jews expected Justification and eternal Salvation,
and performed the substance of those Duties which the New Testament requires,
and which were both by Moses and the Prophets, at certain times, and upon
several occasions urged upon them.

But as for this Law of Moses considered according to its natural meaning, it
is called a Law of a carnal Commandment, Heb. 7. 16. And the services it
imposed, weak and beggarly Elements, Gal. 4. 9. And a Law which made no man
perfect, Heb. 7. 19. Its promises therefore were only temporal; upon which
account the Author to the Hebrews says, that the Gospel is established on
better promises. Nor was Justification before God obtainable by it, as S. Paul
frequently shows; and therefore did account the righteousness of it very mean
and vile in comparison of that which the Gospel endued men with. No man could
be acquitted by the severest observance of this Law from any other than Civil
punishments, nor were its Sacrifices able to make the offerers perfect as
pertaining to the conscience, Heb. 9. 9. And though it be true (as Mr.
Chillingworth observes in his Sermon on Gal. 5. 5.) That the legal Sacrifices
were very apt and commodious to shadow forth the oblation and satisfaction of
Christ; yet this use of them was so mystical and reserved, so impossible to be
collected out of the letter of the Law; that without a special Revelation from
God, the eyes of the Israelites were too weak to serve them to pierce through
those dark clouds and shadows, and to carry their observation to the substance.
So that (proceeds he) I conceive those Sacrifices of the Law in this respect
are a great deal more beneficial to us Christians: For there is a great
difference between Sacraments and Types: Types are only useful after the
Antitype is discovered, for the confirmation of their faith that follow. As for
Example, Abraham' s offering of Isaac by Faith did lively represent the real
oblation of Christ; but in that respect was of little or no use till Christ was
indeed Crucified; it being impossible to make that History a groundwork of
their Faith in Christ. The like may be said of the Legal Sacrifices.

And for a clear understanding of the direct use of this Law, I refer the
Reader to that Sermon: Where it is fully, and (in my opinion) as judiciously
discoursed as I have ever elsewhere met with it.

Secondly, Nor were these special Favorites of heaven upon any other accounts
in circumstances for the obtaining of a through reformation of life, renovation
and purification of nature, comparable to those which our Savior has blessed
his Disciples with. For though they had (as we said) for the substance the same
Spiritual Precepts which are enjoined in the Gospel over and above the Mosaical
Law; yet these were enforced by no express promises of eternal happiness, or
threatenings of eternal misery: Nor was so much as a life to come otherwise than
by Tradition, or by certam ambiguous expressions (for the most part) of their
inspired men, or by such sayings as only employed it, and from which it might
be rationally concluded, discovered to them: As for instance, in that place
particularly, where God by his representative, an Angel, declared himself to
his servant Moses to be the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Exodus 3. 6
Jacob; from whence our Savior inferred that Doctrine for this Reason, That
God is not the God of the dead, but of the living. Matthew. 22. 3^.
And that the notices they had hereof were not very plain and clear, is
apparent, in that there was a Sect among them, viz. the Sadduces, that
professed to disbelieve it; and yet, notwithstanding, were continued in the
body, and enjoyed the privileges of the Jewish Church. But that one forecited
Assertion of the Apostle, 2 Timothy 1. 10. puts this out of all question, viz.
That Christ has brought Life and Immortality to light through the Gospel. From
whence we may assuredly gather thus much at least, viz. That in the Gospel is
manifestly revealed Life and Immortality which was never before made known so
certainly.

I add moreover that the Israelites were required to keep at such a distance
from all other Nations, that they could not but be by that means greatly
inclined to morosity, self-conceitedness, and contempt of their
fellow creatures: And were ever and anon employed in such services as naturally
tended, through the weakness of their natures, to make their spirits too angry
and fierce, not to say cruel. As for instance, that of destroying God's and
their enemies, and sometimes their innocent children too, and the cattle that
belonged to them. And several connivances and Indulgences they had (as in the
Cases of Divorce and Polygamy and Revenge) which did not a little conduce to
the gratifying of Sensuality, and the Animal life in them: All which are taken
away by our Savior Christ. These things with diverse others, made it in an
ordinary way impossible for those people to arrive at that height of virtue and
true goodness, that the Gospel designeth to raise us to. And though we find
some of them very highly commended for their great Sanctity; we are to
understand those Encomiums for the most part, at least, with a reference to the
Dispensation under which they were; and as implying a consideration of the
Circumstances they were in, and the means they enjoyed.

And thus have we showed what a most admirably effectual course our Blessed
Savior has taken to purify us from all filthiness both of the flesh and
spirit, and to make us in all respects Righteous and Holy: And how much the
Christian Dispensation excels others as to its aptness for this purpose. And
from what has been said we may safely conclude, That neither the world, nor
any part of it was ever favored by God with means for the accomplishment of
this work, comparable to those which are contained in the Christian Religion.

So that, well might S. Paul call the Gospel of Christ the power of God to
Salvation, Romans 1. 16
that is, both from misery and the cause of it. Well may the weapons of the
Christian Warfare be said not to be carnal and weak, but mighty through God, to
the pulling down of strong holds, and casting 2 Cor. 10. 5.
down imaginations and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. Great reason had Clemens Alexandrinus to call our Savior (...), the
Instructor P^dag. page 120.
and Schoolmaster of Humane Nature; and to say (as he does in the following
words,) That he has endeavored to save us by using with all his might, all
the instruments of Wisdom, or all wise courses, and draws us back by many
bridles from gratifying unreasonable appetites. And Justin Martyr, speaking of
the Gospel, had cause pathetically to break out as he did, in these words,
(...), etc Oration ad Graeco^. page 40.
O thou expeller and chaser away of evil affections! O thou extinguisher of
burning lusts! This is that which makes us not Poets or Philosophers or
excellent Orators, but of poor mortal men makes us like so many Immortal Gods,
and translateth us from this low earth to those Regions that are above Olympus.
And well, again, might the same good Father, having thoroughly acquainted
himself with the Stoic and Platonic Philosophy, (by which latter he thought
himself to have gained much wisdom) and at last by the advice of an old man a
stranger, having studied the Gospel, thus express himself, (...), etc. I found
this alone to be the safe and profitable Philosophy, and Dialog. cum Tryph. p.
225.
thus and by this means became I a Philosopher.

Symplicius faith thus of Epictetus his Enchiridion, That it has (...) Page 2,
so much of powerfulness and pungency, that those which are not perfectly dead,
must needs come to understand thereby their own affections, and be effectually
excited to the rectifying of them. Could he give such a Character as this of
that little Book of his BrotherHeathen; what can be invented by us high enough
for the Gospel? That, as very fine a thing as it is, being most apparently
extremely weak and insufficient for the purpose upon the account of which he
praises it, if compared with this blessed Book.

CHAP. XVI.
An Objection against the Wonderful Efficacy of the Christian Religion for the
purpose of making men Holy, taken from the very little success it has herein,
together with the prodigious wickedness of Christendom. An Answer given to it
in three Particulars, viz. 1. That how ill soever its success is, it is evident
from the foregoing Discourse that it is not to be imputed to any weakness or
Inefficacy in that Religion. The true Causes thereof assigned. 2. That it is to
be expected that those should be the worse for the Gospel, that will not be
bettered by it. 3. That there was a time when the Gospel's success was greatly
answerable to what has been said of its Efficacy. And that the Primitive
Christians were people of most unblameable and Holy Lives. The Gnostiques
improperly called Christians in any sense. The Primitive Christians proved to
be men of excellent lives, by the Testimonies of Fathers contained in their
Apologies for them to their Enemies; and by the Acknowledgments of their
Enemies themselves. An Account given in particular of their meek and submissive
temper, out of Tertullian. The Admirable Story of the Thebaean Legion.

IF it be now objected against what we have said of the admirable efficacy of
the Christian Religion for the purpose of making men Holy, That there is but
very little sign of it in the lives of those that profess to believe it: For
who are more woefully lost as to all true goodness, who are more deeply sunk
into sensuality and brutishness, than are the Generality of Christians? Nay
among what sort of men are all manner of abominable wickednesses and villainies
to be found so rife, as among them? Upon which account the name of Christian
stinks in the nostrils of the very Jews, Turks and Pagans. Beastly intemperance
and uncleanness of all sorts, the most sordid covetousness, wretched
injustice, oppressions, and cruelties; the most Devilish malice, envy and
pride; the deadliest animosities, the most outrageous feuds, dissensions and
rebellions; the plainest and grossest Idolatry, highest Blasphemies and most
horrid Impieties of all kinds are in no part of the world more observable than
they are in Christendom; nor most of them any where so observable. And even in
those places where the Gospel is most truly and powerfully preached, and
particularly in this our nation, there is but little more to be taken notice of
in the far greater number, than the name of Christian; nor any more of
Religion, than insignificant complementings of God, and a mere bodily worship
of him. But what abominable vice is there, that does not here abound? Nay where
does the highest and most daring of Impieties, viz. Atheism it self, so boldly
show its head as it does here? And as for those among us that make the greatest
pretenses to Christianity, besides a higher profession, a more frequent
attendance on ordinances, and a mighty zeal for certain fruitless opinions they
have taken up, and little trifles which signify nothing to the bettering of
their souls and carrying on that which we have showed is the Design of
Christianity; there is little to be observed in very many, if not most, of
them, whereby they may be distinguished from other people. But as for the sins
of covetousness, pride and contempt of others, disobedience to authority,
sedition, unpeaceableness, wrath and fierceness against those that differ in
opinion from them, censoriousness and uncharitableness; it is too obvious how
much the greater part of the Sects we are divided into are guilty of most, if
not all of them. And that which is really the power of Godliness does appear in
the conversations of but very few.

God knows, the wickedness of those that enjoy and profess to believe the
Gospel, is an extremely fertile and copious Theme to dilate upon; and is fitter
to be the subject of a great volume (if any one can persuade himself so far to
rake into such a noisome Dunghill, as sure none can except enemies to
Christianity) than to be discoursed by the bie, as it is here. Nor can there be
an easier task undertaken than to show, that not a few mere Heathens have
behaved themselves incomparably better toward God, their Neighbor, and
themselves, than do the Generality of those that are called Christians. Nay I
fear it would not be over-difficult to make it appear, that the Generality of
those that never heard the Gospel, do behave themselves in several respects
better than they do.

But I have no list to entertain my self or Reader with such an unpleasant and
dismally melancholy Argument, but will betake my self to answer the sad
objection which is from thence taken against the truth of our last discourse.

1. And, in the first place, let the Gospel have never so little success in
promoting what is designed by it; whoever considers it, and what has been said
concerning it, cannot but acknowledge that it is in it self as fit as any thing
that can be imagined for the purpose of throughlyreforming the lives, and
purifying the natures of Mankind: And also incomparably more fit than any other
course that has ever been taken, or can be thought of. So that we may
certainly conclude, That the depravedness of Christendom is not to be ascribed
to the inefficacy of the Gospel, but to other causes; Namely, men's gross
unbelief of the Truth of it, as much as they profess Faith in it: their
inexcusable neglect of considering the infinitely-powerful motives to a holy
life contained in it; and of using the means conducing thereunto prescribed by
it. And these are inseparable concomitants, and most effectual promoters of
each other. Every man's Inconsideration is proportionable to his Incredulity,
and his Incredulity to his Inconsideration: And how much of carelessness is
visible in men's lives, so much of unbelief does possess their hearts; and so on
the contrary. Upon which account to believe and to be obedient and not to
believe and to be disobedient, are synonymous phrases and of the same
signification in the New and likewise in the Old Testament. Now it is a true
saying of somebodies, Contumaciae nullum posuit remedium Deus, God has
provided no remedy (that is, no ordinary one) against wilfulness. And though
the Gospel has such a tendency as has been shown, to work the most excellent
effects in men, yet it does not operate as Charms do, nor will it have success
upon any without their own concurrence and cooperation with it. The excellent
Rules of life laid down in the Gospel must necessarily signify nothing to
those that only hear or read them, but will not mind them. Its Promises or
Threatenings can be exciting to none that will not believe and consider them:
Nor can the Arguments it affords to provoke to assent, be convincing to any
but those that impartially weigh them; its Helps and Assistances will do no
good, where they are totally neglected. And though there be preventing as well
as assisting grace going along with the Gospel, for the effectual prevailing on
men's wills to use their utmost endeavor to subdue their lusts, and to acquire
virtuous habits; yet this grace is not such as that there is no possibility of
refusing or quenching it. Nor is it fit it should, seeing mankind is endued
with a principle of freedom, and that this principle is as Essential as any
other to the Humane Nature.

I will add, that this is one immediate cause of the unsuccessfulness of the
Gospel, to which it is very much to be attributed; Namely, men's strange and
unaccountable mistaking the Design of it. Multitudes of those that profess
Christianity are so grossly inconsiderate, not to say worse, as to conceive no
better of it than as a Science and a matter of Speculation: And take themselves
(though against the clearest evidences of the contrary imaginable) for true and
genuine Christians, either because they have a general belief of the truth of
the Christian Religion, and profess themselves the Disciples of Christ Jesus in
contradistinction from Jews, Mahometans and Pagans; and in and through him
alone expect salvation: Or because they have so far acquainted themselves with
the Doctrine of the Gospel, as to be able to talk and dispute, and to make
themselves pass for knowing People: Or because they have joined themselves to
that party of Christians which they presume are of the Purest and most Reformed
Model, and are zealous sticklers for their peculiar forms and discriminating
sentiments; and as stiff opposers of all other that are contrary to them. Now
the Gospel must necessarily be as ineffectual to the rectifying of such men's
minds, and Reformation of their Manners, while they have so wretchedly too low
an opinion of its Design, as if it really had no better: And so long as they
take it for granted that its main intention is (...) to make them Orthodox, not
Virtuous, it cannot be thought that they should be ever the more Holy, nay it is
a thousand to one but they will be in one kind or other the more unholy for
their Christianity.

And lastly, There are several untoward opinions very unhappily instilled into
professors of Christianity, which render the Truths of the Gospel they retain a
belief of, insignificant and unsuccessful as to the bettering either of their
hearts or lives, as infinitely apt and of as mighty efficacy as they are in
themselves for those great purposes.

2. Secondly, Whereas it was said also, that the Generality of Heathens live in
diverse respects better lives, than do multitudes, and even the Generality, of
those that profess Christianity; it is so far from being difficult to give a
satisfactory account how this may be without disparaging our excellent
Religion; that it is to be expected that those people should be even much the
worse for it, that refuse to be bettered by it. It is an old Maxim, that
Corruption optimi est pessima: The best things being spoiled do prove to be the
very worst: And according to this, nothing less is to be looked for, than that
degenerated Christians should be the vilest of all persons. And it is also
certain, that the best things, when abused, do ordinarily serve to the worst
purposes; of which there may be given innumerable Instances. And so it is, in
this present case. S. Paul told the Corinthians, that he 2 Cor. 2. 16.
and the other Apostles were a savor of death unto death, as well as of life
unto life. And our Savior gave the Pharisees to understand, That for judgment
he was come into the world; that those that see not, Joh. 9. 39.
might see; and that those that see, might be made blind: that is, That it
would be a certain consequent of his coming, not only that poor ignorant
Creatures should be turned from darkness to light, but also that those which
have the light, and shut their eyes against it, should be judicially blinded.
And the forementioned Apostle, in the first Chapter of his Epistle to the
Romans, says of those that held the truth in unrighteousness, that would not
suffer it to have any good effect upon them through their close adhering to
their filthy lusts, that God gave them up to the most unnatural villainies,
permitted them to commit them by withholding all restraints from them; and
likewise gave them over (...) to a reprobate mind. So that, from the just
judgment of God it is, I say, to be expected that depraved Christians should be
the most wicked of all people: And therefore it is so far from being matter of
wonder, that those that will not be converted by the Gospel, should be so many
of them very horribly profane; that it is rather so, that all those which,
having for any considerable time lived under the preaching of it, continue
disobedient to it, should not be such. In the purest ages of the Church, were
degenerated Christians made in this kind most fearful Examples of the Divine
Vengeance: And so utterly forsaken of God, that they became, (if we may believe
Irenaeus, Tertullian, and others of the Ancient Fathers) not one whit better
than Incarnate Devils. Nor were there to be found in the whole world in those
days, and but rarely since, such abominable and most execrable Caytiffs as they
were. I have sometimes admired that humane nature should be capable of such a
monstrous depravation, as several stories recorded of them do bespeak them to
have contracted: But,

3. Thirdly, If we must needs judge of the efficacy of the Gospel for the
making men Holy, by its success herein; Let us cast our eyes back upon the
First ages of Christianity, and then we shall find it an easy matter to
satisfy our selves concerning it, though we should understand no more of
Christianity, than the effects it produced in those days.

For though there were then a sort of people that sometimes called themselves
Christians, that were (as was now said) the most desperately wicked Creatures
that ever the earth bare; yet these were esteemed by all others that were known
by that name as no whit more of their number, than the Pagans and Jews that
defied Christ. And their Religion was a motly thing that consisted of
Christianity, Judaism and Paganism all blended together; and therefore in
regard of their mere profession they could be no more truly called Christians
than Jews or Pagans. Or rather (to speak properly) they were of no Religion at
all, but would sometimes comply with the Jews, and at other times with the
Heathens, and joined readily with both in persecuting the Christians: And, in
short, the Samaritans might with less impropriety be called Jews, than these
Gnostiques, Christians.

It Is also confessed that the orthodox Christians were calumniated by the
Heathens as flat Atheists, but their only pretense for so doing was their
refusing to worship their false Gods. And they likewise accused them of the
beastliest and most horrid practices; but it is sufficiently evident that they
were beholden to the Gnostiques for those accusations; who, being accounted
Christians, did by their being notoriously guilty of them give occasion to the
enemies of Christianity to reproach all the professors of it as most silthy and
impure creatures. I know it is commonly said, that those Calumnies proceeded
purely from the Heathens malicious invention, but it is apparent that those
vile Heretics gave occasion to them. But that the Christians were so far from
being guilty of such monstrous crimes, that they did lead most inoffensive and
good lives, does abundantly appear by the Apologies that diverse of the Fathers
made to the Heathen Emperors and people in their behalf. Justin Martyr in his
Apology to Antoninus Pius has this saying (...) etc. It is our interest that
all persons should make a narrow inquisition into our lives and doctrine, and
to expose them to the view of every one. And he afterward tells that Emperor,
That his people had nothing to lay to their charge truly, but their bare name,
Christians. And again, That they which in times past took pleasure in unclean
practices, do live now (that they are become converts to Christianity) pure and
chaste lives: They which used magical arts, do now consecrate and devote
themselves to the eternal and good God: They which preferred the incomes of
their money and possessions before all things else, do now cast them into the
common stock; and communicate them to any that stand in need: They which once
hated each other, and mutually engaged in bloody battles, and (according to the
custom) would not keep a common fire (...) with those that were not of the same
tribe, now live lovingly and familiarly together with them; That now they pray
for their very enemies; and those which persecute them with unjust hatred they
endeavor to win to them by persuasions, that they also, living according to
the honest precepts of Christ, may have the same hope, and gain the same reward
with themselves from the great Governor and Lord of the world.

Athenagoras in his Apology, says thus to the Emperors Aurelius Antoninus; and
Aurelius Commodus; As very gracious and benign as you are to all others, you
have no care of us who are called Christians; for ye suffer us who commit no
evil, nay, who (as shall hereafter appear) do behave our selves of all men most
piously and justly both toward God and your Government, to be vexed, to be put
to flight from place to place, and to be violently dealt with. And then he adds
some lines after; If any of you can convict us of any great or small crime, we
are ready to bear the most severe punishment, that can be inflicted upon us.
And speaking of the Calumnies that some had fastened upon them, he says; If
you can find that these things are true, spare no age, no sex; but utterly root
us up and destroy us with our wives and children, if you can prove that any of
us live like to beasts etc.

And there is very much to the same purpose in Tertullian's Apology: Where he
tells the Roman Governors, That they dealt otherwise with the Christians, than
with any other whom they accounted Malefactors; For whereas they tortured
others to make them confess the faults they were accused of, they tortured
these to make them deny themselves to be Christians: And that having no crime
besides to lay to their charge which carried the least show of truth, their
professing themselves to be no Christians would at at any time procure for them
their absolution. And to this objection, that there are some Christians that do
excedere a regula disciplnae, depart from the rules of their Religion, and live
disorderly; here turns this answer, Desinunt tamen Christiani haberi penes
nos, But those that do so, are no longer by us accounted Christians. And by the
way, let me recite Rigaltius his short note upon this passage, At perseverant
hodie in nomine et numero Christianorum, qui vitam omnem vivunt Antichristi;
But those now adays do retain the name and society of Christians, which live
altogether Antichristian lives. And (proceeds he) Toll publicanos etc. Take
away Publicans and a wretched rabble which he musters together, et frigebunt
hodiernorum Ecclesiae Christianorum, and our present Christian Churches will be
lamentably weak, small and insignificant things.

From these few citations out of the Apologies of the forementioned Fathers, to
which may be added abundance more of the same nature both out of them and
others, we may judge what rare success the Gospel had in the first ages, and
what a vast difference there is between the Christians of those, and of these
days; that is, between the Christians that were under persecution, and those
that since have lived in ease and prosperity. When the Christian Religion came
to be the Religion of Nations, and to be owned and encouraged by Emperors and
Rulers, then was the whole vast Roman Empire quickly persuaded to march under
its Banner; and the very worst of men for fashions sake, and in expectation of
Temporal Advantages, came flocking into the Church of Christ. Nay the worse men
were and the less of conscience they had, the more forward might they then be
so to do, the more haste they might make to renounce their former Religion and
take upon them the Profession of Christianity. And no sooner was the Church set
in the warm sunshine of worldly Riches and Honors, but it is apparent she was
insensibly overrun with those noisome vermin, which have bred and multiplied
ever since, even for many Centuries of years, in her.

If any shall doubt whether the forementioned Fathers might not give too good a
character of the Christians whose cause they pleaded; I desire them to consider
whether or no it be imaginable that they should so do, seeing their enemies, to
whom they wrote their defenses of them, could easily, they living among them,
have discovered the falsity of their commendations. And we find them frequently
appealing to the Heathens own Consciences whether they themselves did not
believe that to be no other than the truth which they said of them: And
moreover we have them ever and anon triumphing over them, and provoking them to
show such effects of their Philosophy and way of Religion, as they themselves
could witness were produced by the Gospel of Christ.

Nay, and we have their Adversaries themselves giving them a very high
Character. Tertullian in his forementioned Apology says, that Pliny the second
(who was a persecutor of Christians) wrote thus to the Emperor Trajan from the
Province where he ruled under him, viz. That, Besides their Resolute refusing
to offer Sacrifice, he could Praeter obstinationem ^on sacrificandi, nihil
aliud se d^ sacramentis eorum compe^isse, quam caetus antelu^anos ad canendum
Christo and Deo, and ad confoed^randam Disciplinam* homicidi^m, adulterium,
fraudem, per fid^am etc^etera scelera prohiben^es.
learn nothing concerning their Religion, but that they held Meetings before
day to sing praises to Christ and God, and to engage their Sect in solemn
Leagues; forbidding Murder, Adultery, Deceit, Disloyalty and all other
wickednesses.

And in a now extant Epistle of his to that Emperor, we find him giving him
this information, viz. That, Lib. 10. Epist. 9^. (...).
some that had renounced Christianity, and now worshipped his Image, and the
Statues of their Gods, and cursed Christ, did affirm, That this was the
Greatest fault or Error they were guilty of, Affirmabant autem, have fuisse
summam vel culpae suae, vel erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem
convenire* carmenque Christo, quasi Deo, dicere secum invicem, seque Sacramento
non in scelus aliquod obstringere, sed me furta, ne latro^inia, ne adulteria
committerent, ne fidem fallerent, ne depositum appellati abnegarent, etc.
that they were wont upon a set day to assemble together before it was light,
and to sing a Hymn to Christ as to a God; and to bind themselves by a
Sacrament, not to any wickedness, but that they would not commit Thefts,
Robberies, Adulteries; that they would not be worse than their words, that they
would not deny any thing instrusted in their hands when demanded of them: which
done, it was their custom to depart, and to meet again, ad capiendu^ cibu^
promiscuu^, tamen and innoxiu^, to eat a common but innocent and harmless meal:
which was doubtless the Agape or Feast of Charity, which was in the primitive
times in use among the Christians after the Celebration of the Lord's Supper.
This was an excellent account of them, and much too good to be expected from
wicked Apostates, such having been ordinarily observed to be of all others, the
most deadly enemies of Christianity and the professors of it.

But to return to our Author, he a few lines after adds, that he put two
Maidservants upon the Rack, to extort from them as full a discovery as he could
of the Christians Crimes; but he could not find any they were guilty of* except
-- Sed nihil aliud inveni, quam Superstitionem pravam and immodicam.
obstinate and excessive superstition: So he called their constant perseverance
and diligence in observing the Precepts of their most excellent Religion.

And the Emperor Antoninus Pius, as Justin. Martyr. Apolog. ad Antoninum Pium*
much an enemy of Christians as he was, writes thus in an Epistle to the People
of Asia (which is to be seen in Justin Martyr, and affixed to the Apology he
directed to him,) viz. That they could make no proof of the Crimes they laid to
the Christians charge, and that they overcame them by choosing to lay down their
lives rather than to do the things they required of them: And that he thought
it sit to advertise them, that the Christians, when Earthquakes happened, were
not under such dreadful fears as they were; and that they were (...) endued
with a firmer confidence and trust in God. And there next follows another
Epistle of the Emperor Antoninus Philosophus to the Senate and People of Rome;
wherein he gave them an account of an eminent danger that he and his Army were
in, in the Heart of Germany, by the sudden approach of nine hundred and seventy
thousand Barbarians and Enemies: And how that finding his strength to oppose
them very small, he commanded all those to appear before him who were called
Christians, (as suspecting, it is like, either their sidelity or courage) and
perceiving there were a great number of them, very sharply inveighed against
them: Which (says he) I ought not to have done in regard of the virtue which I
after found to be in them; whereby they beg^ the fight not with Darts and
Weapons and sound of Trumpets; which thing they approved not (...) out of
respect to God whom they bear in their conscience. Wherefore (proceeds he) it
is meet that we should know that those whom we suspect for Atheists, (...),
have God willingly enclosed, or of his own accord inhabiting, in their
Conscience: For laying themselves flat upon the earth, they prayed not only for
me, but also for my whole Army, which was then present, that they might be a
means of solace and comsort to us, in our present hunger and thirst, (for we
could not come by any water for five days together:) But as soon as they were
postrate upon the Ground, and prayed to a God whom I knew not, immediately
there fell Rain from Heaven, upon us, very cool and refreshing, but upon our
Adversaries (...) a fiery Hail-storm: And their prayer was instantly
accompanied with the presence of God, as of one invincible and insuperable.
Therefore let us permit these people to be Christians, lest they praying to
have the like weapons employed against us, they should obtain their desire. And
a few lines after, the Emperor declared it his Will and Pleasure, That
whosoever accuses a Christian as such, for the time to come, he shall be burnt
alive.

What better satisfaction can be desired by us, concerning the truth of the
forementioned Fathers account of the Christians that lived in their days, than
that which the Pens of these their enemies have given to us?

There is one thing more I will add concerning the primitive Christians, viz.
That the most calm, meek, peaceable, gentle and submissive temper recommended
in the Gospel did mightily discover its self in them: And thereby we may judge
what kind of people they were as to the other parts of Christianity; it being
impossible that such an excellent spirit should be alone, and unaccompanied
with the other Virtues. Though they were for the most part very sorely
persecuted, yet, as Tertullian says (in his Book ad Nationes) Nunquam
conjuratio erupit, there was never any uproar or hurly-burly among them. And
having, in his Apology, asked the two Emperors and the rest this Question, If
we are commanded to love our Enemies, whom have we then to hate? He thus
proceeds: How often do you your selves rage against the Christians who are
obedient unto you, and moreover suffer them to be stoned and burnt by the rout
of common people; but yet what Revenge did ye ever observe them repaying for
the injuries done unto them, as stout hearted as they are even to death it self?

If it be objected (as it is by some) that this might be attributed not to
their good temper, but to mere necessity, seeing they knew themselves too weak
to succeed in any rebellious or violent attempt: Let the same Tertullian give
an answer; and he does it in the very next words. In one night (says he) with
a few Firebands they could revenge themselves sufficiently upon you, if they
thought it lawful to render evil for evil. Nay, and not only so, but he tells
them plainly that they were in circumstances to manage the parts of hosts
exerti, open enemies against them, as well as of vindices occulti, ^ly and
secret revengers; and that they could raise an Army, if it pleased them,
numerous and powerful enough to cope with them: and withal he thus proceeds:
Hesterni sumus, and vestra omnia implevimus, etc. Though we are but as it were
of yesterday, yet you have no place but is full of us; your Cities, your
Islands, Castles, Towns, Council-houses; your fortresses, Tribes, Bands of
Soldiers, Palace, Senate, Court, Sola vobis relinquimus templa, Your Temples
only are empty of us. And he goes on Cui bello non idonei, etc. What battles
are not we able to wage with you, who are so willingly slain by you; but
according to the Laws of our Religion we esteem it better to be killed than to
kill. Nay, he next tells them, po^uimus inermes nec rebels, etc. We need not
take arms and rebel to revenge our selves upon you, for we are so great a part
of the Empire, that by but departing from you, we should utterly destroy it,
and affright you with your own Solitude, and leave you more enemies than loyal
Subjects. And so far were they from making use of the advantages they had to
deliver themselves by the way of violence, That (as not long after he says to
them) they prayed for the Emperors, and those in Authority under them, for
peace and a quiet state of affairs among them, and (as some where he adds) very
ready also to give them assistance against their enemies.

The story of the Thebaean Legion is wonderful to astonishment; it consisted of
just six thousand six hundred sixty and six men, and all Christian. These when
Maximianus Caesar went about to compel them to offer Sacrifice to the
heathenish Gods at a place called Octodurum, they fled to another called
Agaunum; and when he sent after them to require them to obey that his command,
they drew up together into a Body, and with one voice professed that they could
not do it. Maximianus thereupon commanded that every tenth man of them should
be slain upon the place; which accordingly was immediately done without the
least resistance. Mauritius, the General of this Legion, thus addressed himself
to the Soldiers: Quam timui ne quisquam, quod Armatis facile est, etc. How
fearful was I lest any of you, being in Arms, and therefore no hard matter to
do it, should attempt the defending of your selves, and by that means prevent a
happy and most glorious death. And so goes on most excellently, to encourage
them rather to submit to death, than resist their Emperor. When every tenth
man was slain, the Emperor repeated his command to the survivers, and they all
thus answered: Milites quidem, Caesar, tui sumus, etc. We are, it is confessed,
thy Soldiers, O Caesar, for the defense of the Roman Republique; nor have we
ever proved either traitors, or cowards; but this command of thine we cannot
obey; For know, we are all Christians; yet all our bodies shall be subject to
thee, etc. At last Exuperius their Ensign concludes thus, Non nos adversum Te,
Imperator, armavit ipsa, quae fortissima est in periculis, desperatio, etc.
Despair it self has not armed us against thee, O Emperor; behold we have all
our weapons in our hands, and yet resist not; because we had rather die
innocent than live nocent. And thereupon they were all put to the slaughter,
not a man of them once offering to defend himself. You may find the Relation of
this more at large, taken out of Fucherius by Grotius, and set down in his Book
De jure Belli and Pacis.

Origin also tells Celsus that he or any of Page 115.
his party were able to show (...) nothing of Sedition that the Christians were
ever guilty of: And yet, what Tertullian said of the Roman Empire in General,
this Father elsewhere in the same book speaks of Greece and Barbary, viz.
That the Gospel had subdued all that Country and the greater part of this, and
had brought over to Godliness souls innumerable.

Thus you see how far the Primitive Christians were from the tumultuous, fiery,
and boisterous Spirit, that Christendom above all other parts of the world has
been since infested with. And thus we have shown that there was once a time
(God grant that the like may be again) when the success of the Christian
Religion in conquering men's lusts and rectifying their Natures, was greatly
answerable to the efficacy that it has for this purpose. And so we pass to the
second Inference.

CHAP. XVII. The Second Inference.
That we understand from what has been said of the Design of Christianity, how
fearfully it is abused by those that call themselves the Roman Catholics.
That the Church of Rome has by several of her Doctrines enervated all the
Precepts and the Motives to Holiness contained in the Gospel. That she has
rendered the Means therein prescribed for the attainment thereof extremely
ineffectual. That she has also as greatly corrupted them. Diverse Instances of
the Papists Idolatry. Their Image worship one Instance. Their praying to Saints
departed another. Other Impieties accompanying it, mentioned* Some account of
their Blasphemies, particularly in their Prayers to the Blessed Virgin. Their
worshipping the Host the third and Grossest instance of their Idolatry. Some
other of their Wicked and most Antichristian Doctrines.

SEcondly, By what has been said concerning the Design of the Christian
Religion, we easily understand how fearfully it is abused by those that call
themselves the Roman Catholics. Nor need we any other Argument to prove
Popery to be nothing less than Christianity besides this, viz. That the Grand
Design of this is to make us holy; and also aims at the raising of us to the
most Elevated pitch of Holiness, and is admirably contrived for that purpose:
But the Religion of the Papists as such does most apparently tend to carry on a
Design that is diametrically opposite thereunto: To serve a most carnal and
corrupt interest; to give men security in a way of sinning; and pretends to
teach them a way to do, at one and the same time effectually, the most contrary
and inconsistent works: That is, to deprave their natures, and save their
Souls; and even in gratifying their wicked inclinations to lay a firm and safe
foundation for eternal happiness. So that, if this (as they pretend it alone
is) be the Christian Religion, we must needs ingenuously acknowledge, that what
we said in the Introduction was by Celsus and Julian charged upon it, is no
calumny, but an accusation most just and well deserved. For as the Church of
Rome has rendered diverse excellent Precepts of Holiness contained in the
Gospel very in-effectual, by making them Counsels only, not Commands: and also
not a few of its Prohibitions unnecessary by her Distinction of sins into
Mortal and Venial; understanding by Venial sins such as for the sake of which
no man can deserve to lose the Divine favor; and therefore making them really
no sins: So has she enervated all the Evangelical Commandments both Positive
and Negative, and made them sadly insignificant by a multitude of Doctrines
that are taught by her most Darling-sons, and decreed or allowed by her self.
That one Popish Doctrine of the Non-necessity of Repentance before the imminent
point of Death, and that (though the Church requires it upon Holy Days, yet)
no man is bound by the Divine Law to it until that time, is of it self, without
the help of any other, sufficient to take away the force of all the holy
Precepts of our Savior, and to make them utterly unsuccessful to the Embracers
of it: And this other goes beyond that in aptness for this purpose, viz. That
mere Attrition, or sorrow for sin for fear of Damnation, if it be accompanied
with Confession to the Priest, is sufficient for Salvation. For, as the former
makes a Deathbed-repentance only necessary; So this lar^er makes that
Repentance alone so, which is far from deserving to be so called, and which
wants the principal Ingredients of that Grace, viz. Hatred of sin, and Love to
God and goodness; and consequently works no change in the nature of the sinner,
nor makes him partaker in the least measure of true ho^iness.

The Threats of hell have they made a mere Bugbear, and Scarecrow by their
Doctrine of Purgatory; and the fear of this too have they taken a notable
course to secure men from by that of Penances, and the Indulgences granted by
their Popes very ordinarily for doing certain odd Trifles and idle things; but
which by money can never fail to be procured. Nor are the most horrid impieties
shut out from having their share in his Holiness his Indulgences; as more than
sufficiently appears by the Tax of the Apostical Chancery; where to those that
will pay the price, Absolutions are to be had for the most abominable and not
to be named villainies, nay and Licenses also, for not a few wickednesses.

I may add to the forementioned, their Doctrine of the Meritorious
Supererogations of the Saints, which, being applied to others; they teach to be
available for their pardon; which besides its most impious making many
Co-saviors with Jesus Christ, does infinitely encourage to carelessness and
loose living.

The Religion of the means prescribed in the Gospel, have they done what lay in
them to make both extremely ineffectual and highly irreligious. I say,

First, Most ineffectual: For they will have the bare saying of Prayers without
the least minding of what is said, to be acceptable to and prevalent with
Almighty God: And congruously to this fine Doctrine their Church enjoins them
to be said in a Tongue that is unknown to the generality of her children.
Though the Papists cannot for shame but acknowledge it a good thing to give
attention of mind to what is spoken in the worship of God, yet I say it is well
known that they deny it to be necessary so to do; and make the mere Opus
operatum the work done sufficient, and that in all Acts of Devotion whatsoever.
And besides their Divine Service is made by them an idle and vain piece of
Pageantry by the abundance of foppish Ceremonies it is burdened with. Nay,

Secondly, It is made as wicked as ineffectual: It being accompanied with so
great Immoralities as Gross Idolatries, together with other very impious
practices: whereof

First, Their worshipping of Images is a notorious Instance: They making
pictures of Christ and his Cross, and even of the holy Trinity, and giving (as
they themselves profess to do) Latria or Divine Honor to them. And as for what
they have, by stretching their wits upon the Tenters, invented to defend
themselves from the guilt of Idolatry in those actions, it will do the Heathens
as much service as themselves, and no less successfully clear and acquit them
from that soul imputation. Celsus in defense of their Idols says, That they
are not Gods, but (...) Gifts consecrated to them. And the Heathens in
Lactantius are brought in saying, Non ipsa timemus simulachra, etc. We fear, or
worship not the Images themselves, but those whose Representatives they are,
and to whose names they are consecrated. And several other citations might be
produced to show, that the Divine Honor that was by the Heathens bestowed on
their Images, was Relative only (as the Papists say theirs is, and think they
get a main matter by so saying) and not Absolute. But as for their worship of
the Image of the Cross, it is grosser Idolatry than I believe can be shown the
wiser sort of Pagans were ever guilty of. For the Cross it self is the Ultimate
Term of their Divine Adoration, and the Image is worshipped Relatively, as it
represents the Cross: In short, their Image Worship is as expressly forbidden by
the second Commandment as words can do it, and one may conclude that they
themselves are not a little conscious of it, in that That Commandment is left
out of their Offices of frequent use.

Secondly, Another plain Instance of their Idolatry is their Praying to Saints
Departed. And whereas they pretend that they confer not upon them any Divine
Honor, and that they only pray to the Saints to pray for them; this pretense
is but a pityfully thin Cob-web to hide the Idolatry of that their practice.
For besides that their Invocations of them and of the same Saints too in
innumerable places at vast distances each from other, do imply an opinion of
such an excellency in them, ( viz. such a knowledge as can hardly be at all
short of Omniscience) as we can no where find God Almighty has vouchsafed to
any Creature; they likewise make their prayers to them with professions of
considence in them, and with all the Rites of Invocation, in Sacred Offices,
and in places set apart for Divine Worship; and moreover they set particular
Saints over whole Cities and Countries (one single one over this and another
over that) and put up petitions to them for their help and succor. And the
Roman Catechism made by the Decree of the Council of Trent, and published by
the Popes command does give them encouragement so to do (as the late Bishop of
Down shows in the former part of his Dissuasive from Popery) in these words;
The Saints are therefore to be invocated, because they continually make prayers
for the Health of mankind, and God gives us many benefits by their merit and
favor: And it is lawful to have recourse to the favor or Grace of the Saints,
and to use their help; for they undertake the Patronage of us. And he adds that
the Council of Trent does not only say, It is good to fly to their prayers,
but also to their aid, and to their help. And he furthermore minds them of this
Distich in the Church of S. Laurence in Rome, ^ss. 9.


Continet hoc Templum Sanctoru^ corpora pura,
A quibus auxilium suppleri, poscere cura.
Within this Church Saints holy bodies ly,
Pray them, that they with help would thee supply.
So that over and above the Great Impiety of their praying to Saints,
discovered in making them in some kind equal with Christ, and in derogating
from the sufficiency of his merits, satisfaction and intercession; God being
prayed to with reliance on theirs as well as on his, and through them as well
as him; (as may be farther and largly shown in their prayers, and chiefly in
those to the Blessed Virgin;) I say besides this gross Impiety of that
practice, it can never be justified from the charge of Idolatry. And by
whatsoever Arguments they endeavor therein to prove themselves no Idolaters, it
will be no difficult matter by the same to vindicate the Heathens from that
abominable crime in worshipping their Demons, Heroes and Deified Emperors.
And for Hierocles his part, I cannot find that he allows of praying to any
one but him whom he calls the Supreme God: For, speaking of the honor that is
due to that order of spirits which is immediately subordinate to Him, and above
the Demons and Heroes, all he ^aith concerning it is, that it consists in
understanding the excellency of their natures, Page 22.
and in endeavoring after a likeness to them; where as he has afterward a
very excellent Discourse of tho necessary obligation men are under of praying
to God.

But I have not yet instanced in the worst part of the Popish prayers to
departed Saints, the blasphemies contained in those to the Virgin Mary are such
as I would not defile my pen with the recital of any of them, did I not know it
to be too needful so to do. She is styled in their public prayers, the
Savior of Desparing Souls, the bestower of Spiritual Grace and Dispenser of
the most Divine Gifts; One higher than the heavens, and deeper than the earth;
and many such compellations as are proper only to some one Person of the
glorious Trinity, are given in them to her. In her Anthem she is supplicated
for pardon of sin, for Grace and for Glory. And the forementioned Learned
Bishop observes that in the Mass Book penned One thousand five hundred thirty
eight, and used in the Polonian Churches, they call the Blessed Virgin viam ad
vitam, etc. the way to Life, the Governess of all the World, the Reconciler of
sinners with God, the Fountain of Remission of sins, Light of Light: And at
last she is there saluted with an Ave universae Trinitatis Matter, Hail thou
Mother of the Holy Trinity. And he adds that the Council of Constance in the
Hymn they call a Sequence, did invocate the Virgin in the same manner as
Councils did use to invocate the Holy Ghost: That they call her the Mother of
Grace, the Remedy of the Miserable, the Fountain of Mercy, and the Light of the
Church. And lastly his Lordship alleges a Psalter of our Lady, that has been
several times Printed at Venice, at Paris and Leipsich, the Title of which is,
The Psalter of the Blessed Virgin compiled by the Seraphical Doctor S.
Bonaventure, etc. Which consists of the Psalms of David, One hundred and
fifty in number: in which the name of Lord is left out, and that of Lady put
in, and altered where it was necessary they should, to make sense. Therein,
whatsoever David said, whether prayers or praises of God and Christ, they say
of the Blessed Virgin; and whether (says he) all that can be said without
intolerable Blasphemy, we suppose needs not much disputation. Who would not
readily conclude it altogether impossible for any men to invent, or approve,
nay or not to have indignation against such daring and most execrable
Impieties, that are not utterly beref^ of their senses, or are but one remove
from perfect Atheists? There are diverse other most prodigious sayings
concerning the Virgin Mary transcribed out of the approved Books of Great Sons
of the Roman Church, in the now cited Disswasive from Popery, to which I refer
the Reader. And to them I will add some which may doubtless vie with the worst
that we can well imagine were ever uttered, of one Johannes Argentus a Prime
Catholic youth, which he has exposed to the view of the world in a Right
worthy piece, treating of the seven Excellencies of the most Blessed Virgin.
Says he, Christus servit atque assidue ministrat Matri suae, Christ serves
and continually administreth to his Mother; and next thus vents himself in a
great fit of Devotion to her. O si liceret, quam libenter me illi socium
adjungerem, etc. If it might be lawful, Oh, how gladly would I join my self
with him as his Companion! How willingly would I learn of him the way of
perfectly serving thy self, and God! (the Reader will not anon judge his
placing the Virgin before God himself as proceeding from inadvertency,) How
willingly would I ease my most sweet Jesus of this his labor! O Lord Jesus my
most lovely Savior permit me to perform some service to thy Mother; but if
thou will not grant me this, yet at least give me leave, that whilst thou
servest thy Mother, I may serve thee. And he tells us afterward, that, God is
in other creatures after a threefold manner, by his Essence, by his Presence,
and by his Power; but in the most Blessed Virgin after a fourth manner, viz. by
Identity or being one and the self-same with her. Who could think that the
worst should be yet behind? Let the Reader judge whether it be or no. He
farther says, That her seventh degree of excellency consists in this, quod sit
Domina Dei, that she is the Mistress of God. And then a line or two after, as
if he had thought that he had not yet sufficiently performed the part of a most
impudent blasphemer, he adds that supra ipsum thronum Dei solium suum
collocavit, she has erected her seat above the very throne of God. This was a
Fellow that had improved to purpose the Prayers he had learned of his holy
Mother. Surely she could not find in her heart to deny so passionately devout a
worshipper of the Holy Virgin a very considerable share in the Merits of her
Supererogations: or rather may we not think that she would judge him so great a
Saint as to stand in no need of them; and to have of his own to spare,
wherewith to add to the riches of her treasury, for the relief of those who
being conscious to themselves of being too dry and cold devotionists can be
persuaded to go to the charge of them?

Have we not now infinite cause to wonder that the Papists should take it so
very heinou^ly at our hands, that we fasten upon them the imputation of
Idolatry! This very wretch would have been sensible of an unsufferable abuse,
should one have called him Idolater, as Blasphemous a one as he was, and
notwithstanding his having even more than Deified a mere Creature, and advanced
her Throne even above her Creator's. Lord! to what heights of Impiety will
Superstition lead men! and how thick is that darkness she blinds the eyes of
her captives with, that it will not suffer them to discern that guilt which is
no whit less apparent than is the Sun it self. But

Thirdly, The grossest Instance of the Church of Rome's Idolatry we have yet
omitted; and that is their worshipping the Consecrated Bread, not as God's
Representative, but (which is far worse) as God himself, in the Sacrament of
the Altar (as they call it) and on other occasions. This is no where to be
paralleled for the sottishness of it, no not among the most Barbarous and
Brutish Nations; it being founded upon the most absurd, contradictious,
portentous and monstrous conceit that ever entered the head of any mortal: as
they have had it unanswerably and to the confusion of their faces proved to
them by a multitude of Learned Persons of the Reformed Religion: who have also
so fully, and with such mighty and irresistible strength made good the
forementioned charge of Idolatry, and of other Impious Practices and Principles
against them, that it is unimaginable how it should be possible that any who
are not stark-blind, or resolved that they will not see, should not acknowledge
them. And as for the elaborate tricks whereby they endeavor to justify
themselves from those Accusations, and to persuade the World that they are
undeserved, they may doubtless, whenever they shall have a mind to it, devise
others no less plausible with as little pains, to make forcing of Virgins no
Rape, lying with other folks Wives no Adultery, cutting of Purses no Theft,
Robbing of Churches no Sacrilege; and in one word, they may with as little
exercise of their brains invent ways to do whatsoever is most flatly forbidden
in the ten Commandments, without being guilty of transgressing any one of them.

I might proceed to instance in very many other Doctrines of the Romish Church,
which by what we have said of the Christian Religion we may be perfectly
assured are Antichristian; but I will only add two or three more. As, their
asserting the Insufficiency of the holy Scriptures for men's salvation, and
denying them to be the Sole Rule of Faith, and joining with them their own
paltry Traditions as equally necessary to be believed; and this against the
express words of S. Paul to Timothy, 2 Epist. 3 Chap. where he tells him that
the holy Scriptures are able to make him wise unto Salvation, through faith
which is in Christ Jesus. And that All Scripture is given by inspiration of
God, and is profitable for Doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for
instruction in Righteousness; That the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good works. And their teaching that the Gospel is obscure,
and difficult to be understood even in things necessary to be believed and
practiced. Which, as it makes it greatly inefficacious for the purpose which we
have proved it is designed for, so does it open a gap for vile interpretations
of any part of it, and exposes it to the power of Heretics, and especially
of the Romish ones, to make it a mere Nose of Wax: Which none can doubt, that
consider also therewith their Doctrine of Implicit Faith; and that other upon
which it is grounded, viz. That of the Infallibility of their Church: which, as
the Jesuits define, is seated in the Pope's Chair. But whether it be asserted
that the Popes have an unerring faculty, or they and their General Councils
together, this Doctrine being received (as by them it is without the least
ground) for unquestionably true, does greatly hazard, nay and even necessitate
the betraying of men to the very worst both of opinions and practices,
whenever this pretended infallible guide shall be pleased to propose them to
them. And whosoever believes it, must (to use the words of Mr Chillingworth) be
prepared in mind to esteem virtue vice, and vice virtue, Christianity
Anti-christianism, and Antichristianism Christianity, if the Pope shall so
determine. And this Doctrine, without doubt, is that which causes those of the
Papists to stick so fast in silthy (...), and to persist so obstinately in
their foul errors, who are not detained therein by the love of gain (with
which their Popes, and other Ecclesiastics by the means of diverse of them are
mightily enriched) or by the dear affection they bear to their other lusts,
which they are so exactly fitte^ for the satisfaction of. Their Doctrines being
very many of them so ridiculously absurd, plainly false and of such dangerous
consequence; I say, nothing else, certainly, could hold the sincerer sort of
Papists in the belief of them, but this consideration, that any one of them
being let go, their great Dagon of the Churches Infallibility must necessarily
to the ground with it.

I might also instance in their Doctrine of the Dispensableness of the most
Solemn Oaths, which is no less destructive to Humane Society, than it is to
Piety. And in that of the Popes power to absolve Subjects from their Allegiance
to their lawful Sovereigns: And to them add a great number of Maxims of the
most famous order among them, the Jesuits, and Resolutions of Cases of
Conscience, which are as wicked and destructive of a holy Life, as the Devil
himself can well devise. But to be employed with Hercules in emptying the
Augean stable would be as acceptable a work as stirring so far in this nasty
Sink. Whosoever shall peruse the Mystery of Iesuitism, may find more than
enough there to turn his stomach, though it should be none of the most
squeamish and quezy, and to make him stand astonished, and bless him, that ever
such loathsome and abominable stuff should come from persons that derive their
name from the Holy Jesus.

But to hasten to the conclusion of this Chapter, the most pure and holy
Religion of our Savior has the Church of Rome defiled with as impure and
unholy opinions and practices; and has taken the most effectual course not
only to render it a feeble and insignificant thing for accomplishing the Design
for which it was intended by the Blessed Founder of it, but also to make it
unhappily successful in serving the directly contrary. The great Mystery of
Godliness has she transformed into a grand Mystery of Iniquity; and by that
means most excessively confirmed its professed enemies, the Jews and
Mahumetans, in their enmity against it. And for my own part I should not stick
to say, as did Averroes (when he observed that the Popish Christians adored
that they ate) Sit anima mea cum Philosophis, Let my soul take its fate with
the Philosophers in the other world, did I think Christianity to be such a
Religion as she makes it. As much as I admire it now, I should then prefer that
of Socrates, Plato, and Cicero very far before it. Though I abhor so far to
imitate the Papists in the Devilishly cruel uncharitableness, as to pronounce
them all in a state of damnation, yet I dare assert with the greatest and most
undoubted confidence* that all that continue in Communion with that degenerated
and Apostate Church, run infinite hazards: And moreover that it is impossible
that any sincere persons should give an explicit and understanding assent to
all her Doctrines: but that whosoever can find in his heart to practice upon
them, can be nothing better than a shamefully debauched and immoral wretch. Nor
is it conceivable what should induce any to exchange the Reformed for the
Popish Religion (as too many have of late done) that have but a competent
understanding of both, besides the desire of serving some corrupt interest. And
we plainly see, that the generality of those that turn Apostates from the
Church of England to that of Rome, are such people as were a Scandal to her,
while they continued in her: And that Atheism and Popery are the common
Sanctuaries to which the most abominably vicious and profane of this Age do
betake themselves.

CHAP. XVIII. The Third Inference.
That these two sorts of Persons are most extremely sottish. 1. Such as expect
to have their share in the Salvation of the Gospel without true Holiness* 2.
Such much more, as encourage themselves by the Grace of the Gospel in
Unholiness.

THirdly, There is nothing we are more assured of by what has been discoursed
of the Design of Christianity, than that these two sorts of persons are guilty
of extreme sottishness: Namely, Those that expect to have a share in the
Salvation of the Gospel without true Holiness: And much more, Those that
encourage themselves by the grace of the Gospel in their Unholiness.

First, Those that expect to have their share in the Salvation of the Gospel
without true Holiness. I fear me that such people are not consined within the
limits of the Romish Church; but that a vast number of Protestants also may be
deservedly accused upon this account. But by so much more sottish are these
than the Papists, by how much better things their Religion teaches them than
the Papists does. Though I must likewise with sadness acknowledge that too many
opinions have been unhappily foisted into it, that give too great encouragement
to a careless life. But that those which promise to themselves an interest in
the Salvation purchased by Jesus Christ, either from their Baptism, and
partaking of certain Christian priveleges, or from their being of such or such
a Sect and Mode of Professors, or from their supposed Orthodoxy and good
belief, and zeal against erroneous Doctrines, or from their imagining Christ's
Righteousness theirs and applying the Promises to themselves, or from their
abstaining from the grosser and more scandalous sins, or from their doing some
externally good actions, and have in the mean time no care to be universally
obedient, to mortify every lust, and to obtain an inward principle of
Holiness; that those, I say, which thus do, are guilty of most egregious and
stupid folly, is most manifest from what has been discoursed of the Design of
Christianity.

For we have shown not only that Reformation of Life from the practice, and
purification of heart from the liking of sin are as plainly as can be asserted
in the Gospel to be absolutely necessary to give men a right to the promises of
it; but also that its Great Salvation does even consist in it: that, Salvation
from sin is the grand Design of the Christian Religion, and that from wrath is
the Result of this. I will instance in two more Scriptures for the farther
proof of this. The Apostle S. Paul says, Ephesians. 2. 5, etc. Even when we were
dead in trespasses and sins has he quickened us together with Christ, (by
grace ye are saved) and has raised us up together, and made us sit together in
Heavenly places in Christ Jesus: That in the ages to come he might show the
exceeding Riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus.
For by Grace ye are saved, through faith, (or by the means of believing the
Gospel) and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God. Where, by the
Salvation which the Ephesian Christians are said to have obtained, and in the
bestowing of which upon them the exceeding Riches of God's Grace appeared, is
plainly to be understood their deliverance from their former Heathenish
Impieties and sinful Practices: And so is it interpreted by our best
Expositors. Again it is said, Titus 3. 5. Not by works of Righteousness which
we have done, but according to his mercy he saved us (how saved us? it follows)
by the washing of Regeneration, and Renewing of the holy Ghost. Our Savior
gives ^ase to our Sin-sick Souls by recovering them to health: And his
Salvation first consists in curing our wounds, and secondarily in freeing us
from the smart occasioned by them. S. Peter tells the Christians that by his
stripes they were healed, 1 Pet. 2. 24. It being a quotation out of Isaiah 53.
5. Clemens Alexandrinus in the second book of his Stromat. has this saying to
the same (...). (...).
purpose, (...), Pardon does not so much consist in Remission as in Healing;
That is, the pardon of the Gospel does chiefly discover it self in curing men
of their sins; in delivering sinners from the power of them, rather than from
the mere punishment due to them. By which words that learned Father declared
that he looked upon the subduing of sin as a more eminent act of grace, than
the bare forgiveness of it. Now, would that man be accounted any better than a
perfect Idiot, who being sorely hurt should expect from his Surgeon perfect
^ase, when he will not permit him to apply any plaster for the healing of his
wound? Or that being deadly sick should look that his Physician should deliver
him from his pain, when he will not take any course he prescribes for the
removal of the distemper that is the cause of it? But of far greater folly are
all those guilty, who will not be persuaded to part with their Sins, and yet
hope for the Salvation of their Souls. He that looks for this, expects that
which implies a most palpable contradiction, and is impossible in its own
nature to be effected. It has been fully enough shown that mere deliverance
from misery, cannot possibly be without deliverance from sin; and, much less
Eternal Blessedness in the Enjoyment of God.

Secondly, But how excessively mad then are those, which turn the grace of God
declared in the Gospel into wantonness, and take encouragement from the
abundant kindness and good will therein expressed to wretched sinners, with the
more security and boldness to commit sin? We read of such in the Epistle of S.
Jude; And God knows there are too many such in these our days. But seeing it is
so grossly foolish a thing for men to hope to be saved notwithstanding their
living in the allowance of known sins, what desperate Madness then is it to be
imboldened in ungodly practices, by the offers Christ makes of pardon and
salvation to them. These declare that they look upon the Design of Christianity
not only as different from what it has been demonstrated it is, but also as
directly opposite, and perfectly contrary thereunto. These do not only judge
their Savior to be no friend to holiness, but to be the greatest enemy
likewise to it; and a Minister of sin and wickedness. They make him to be the
very servant of the Devil, in stead of coming to destroy his 1 John 3. 8.
works. They make the Christian Religion more vile by ^ar than that of Mahomet;
and such a Religion, as those which have but the least spark of goodness must
needs abominate. Shall we Sin (says the Apostle) that Grace may abound? God
forbid! Romans 6.
Those that think they can magnify the free grace of God in Christ by thus
doing, or that they may take encouragement from it to continue in sin, do make
this grace unworthy of men's acceptance, and no grace at all. Nay they make
Almighty God the greatest enemy to Mankind in sending his Son Jesus and his
Gospel among us. For sin being so apparently the greatest of evils, it can be
no other than the highest and most significant expression of hatred to us, to
encourage us to the commission of it. It is so far from being part of our
Christian Liberty, to be delivered from our obligation to all or any of the
Laws of Righteousness, that such a deliverance would be the most Diabolical
yoke of Bondage. If any man can be so silly as to object that of the Apostle,
Romans 6. 14. Ye are not under the Law, but under Grace: Let him give himself an
answer by reading the whole verse; and then make ill use of that passage if he
can tell how. The words foregoing it in the same verse are these: Sin shall not
have dominion over you, and these words are a proof of that assertion: For ye
are not under the Law, but under Grace: That is, as if he should say, It is the
most inexcuseable thing for you to continue under the dominion and power of
sin, because ye are not under the weak and inefficacious Paedagogy of the Law
of Moses, but a Dispensation of Grace, wherein there is not only Forgiveness
assured to truly Repenting sinners, but strength afforded to enable to the
subduing and mortification of all sin. Our Savior has told us expressly that
he came Mat. ^.
not to destroy the Law, (that is the Moral Law) but to fulfill it: And that
Heaven and Earth shall soouer pass away, than that one jot or little thereof
shall sail. And it is absolutely impossible, that our obligation thereunto
should cease, while we continue Men. All the duties therein contained being
most necessary and natural results from the Relation we stand in to God and to
one another, and from the Original make and constitution of humane souls.

But it is too great an honor to the Doctrine of Libertinism to bestow two
words upon its confutation, it being so prodigiously monstrous, that it would
be almost a breach of Charity to judge that Professor of Christianity not to
have suffered the loss of his wits that has entertained it, or has the least
favor for it; supposing he has but the least smattering in the Christian
Religion. It is a most amazing thing, that such a thought should have any
admission into the mind of such a one, while he is compos mentis, and not
utterly deprived of his Intellectuals: Our Savior's Gospel being wholly
levelled at the mark of killing all sorts of sin in us, and rendering us
exactly obedient to the Divine Moral, and also all innocent humane Laws. Let me
speak to such as so shamefully abuse our incomparable Religion, as to take
liberty from thence to be in any kind immoral, in the words of S. Paul, Romans 2.
4, 5. Despisest thou the Riches of God's goodness and forbearance and
longsuffering, not knowing that his goodness leads thee (or designeth the
leading of thee) to Repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart
treasurest up to thy self wrath against the day of wrath, and Revelation of the
Righteous Judgment of God, etc.

CHAP. XIX. The Fourth Inference.
That a right understanding of the Design of Christianity will give
satisfaction concerning the true Notion, 1. Of Justifying Faith, 2. Of the
Imputation of Christ's Righteousness.

FOurthly, From what has been said of the Design of Christianity may be
clearly inferred the True notion of Justifying Faith, and of the Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness.

First, Of Justifying Faith. We thence learn, That it is such a belief of the
Truth of the Gospel, as includes a sincere resolution of Obedience unto all its
Precepts; or (which is the same thing) includes true Holiness in the nature of
it: And moreover that it justifies as it does so. For surely the Faith which
intitles a sinner to so high a privelege as that of justification, must needs
be such as complieth with all the purposes of Christ's coming into the world,
and especially with his grand purpose; and it is no less necessary that it
should justify as it does this; That is, as it receives Christ for a Lord, as
well as for a Savior. But I need not now distinguish between these two, there
being but a notional difference between them in this matter. For Christ (as was
shown) as he is a Savior, designeth our Holiness: his Salvation being chiefly
that from the worst of evils, sin; and principally consisting in deliverance
from the power of it.

I scarcely more admired at any thing in my whole life, than that any worthy
men especially should be so difficultly persuaded to embrace this account of
Justifying Faith; and should perplex and make intricate so very plain a
Doctrine. If this be not to seek knots in a Bulrush, I know not what is. I wish
there were nothing throughout the Bible less easily intelligible than this is,
and I should then dare to pronounce it one of the plainest of all books that
ever pen wrote. For seeing the great end of the Gospel is to make men good,
what pretense can there be for thinking, that Faith is the Condition (or I Will
use the word [ Instrument] as improper and obscure as it is) of Justification,
as it complieth with only the precept of relying on Christ's Merits for the
obtaining of it: especially when it is no less manifest than the Sun at
Noonday, that obedience to the other precepts must go before obedience to
this; and that a man may not rely on the merits of Christ for the forgiveness
of his sins, and he is most presumptuous in so doing, and puts an affront upon
his Savior too, till he be sincerely willing to be reformed from them: And
besides such a Relyance is ordinarily to be found among unregenerate, and even
the very worst of men. And therefore how can it be otherwise, than that that
act of faith must needs have a hand in justifying, and the special hand too,
which distinguishes it from that which is to be found in such persons. And I
add, what good ground can men have for this fancy, when as our Savior has
merited the pardon of sin, for this end, that it might be an effectual motive
to return from it. And can any thing in the world be more indisputably clear,
than, if the only direct scope that Christianity drives at be the subduing of
sin in us, and our freedom from its guilt or obligation to punishment be the
consequent of this (as I think has been demonstrated with abundant evidence;)
that faith invests us with a title to this deliverance no otherwise than as
dying to sin and so consequently living to God are the products and fruit of
it? And seeing that, one End, and the Ultimate End too of Christ's coming was
to turn us from our iniquities, if the nature of Faith considered as Justifying
must needs be made wholly to consist in Recumbence and Reliance on him, he
shall be my Apollo that can give me a sufficient reason why it ought only to
consist in Reliance on the Merits of Christ for the pardon of sin, and not also
in his power for the Mortification of it. In short, Is it possible that faith
in Christ's blood for the forgiveness of sin should be the only act which
justifies a sinner, when such a multitude of plain Texts assure us, that he
died also to make us holy, and that his death was designed to deliver us from
dying in order to a farther end, namely to this, that we should live unto him
who died for us.

I will never trust my discursive Faculty so long as I live, no not in the
plainest and most undoubted cases, if I am mistaken here. And will take the
boldness to tell those who are displeased with this account of Justifying
Faith, that (in my opinion) it is impossible they should once think of any
other, if they did as seriously weigh and thoroughly consider the Design of
Christianity as they ought to do. I the more insist upon this, because those
persons explication of this point has been greatly liable to be used to ill
purposes by insincere persons; and has given infinite advantage to the
dangerous error of Antinomianism. And for my part I must confess that I would
not willingly be he that should undertake to encounter one of the champions of
that foul cause, with the admission of this principle, That faith justifies,
only as it apprehends the merits and righteousness of Jesus Christ: I must
certainly have great luck, or my adversary but little cunning, if I were not
forced to repent me of such an Engagement.

Secondly, And as for the other Doctrine of the Imputation of Christ's
Righteousness; we learn from the Design of Christianity that this is the true
explication of it: Namely, That it consists in dealing with sincerely righteous
persons, as if they were perfectly so, for the sake and upon the account of
Christ's Righteousness. The grand intent of the Gospel being to make us
partakers of an Inward and Real Righteousness, and it being but a secondary one
that we should be accepted and rewarded as if we were completely righteous; it
is not possible that any other notion of this Doctrine should have truth in it.
For as from thence it appears, that there can be no such Imputation of
Christ's Righteousness offered in the Gospel, as serves to make men remiss in
their prosecution of an Inward Righteousness; So is it manifest likewise, That
that Doctrine is designed for a motive to quicken and excite men in their
endeavors after such a Righteousness as this is. So far is it, from tending to
cause in us an undervaluing and slight esteem of it, that, as sure as that the
Ultimate design of Christianity is to indue us with it, it must be intended for
no other purpose but to farther and promote that business: And it is effectual
thereunto in that manner, that we showed the exceeding great and precious
Promises of the Gospel are.

But because both these points are discussed in the Free Discourse, I have said
so little of the former, and will proceed no f^rther on this: but refer the
Reader thither, and to other much more elaborate Discourses for his fuller
satisfaction. And indeed it was enough for me in this place to show, That the
notion laid down in that Book of both these Doctrines, does evidently follow
from that Proposition which is the Subject of this Treatise.

CHAP. XX. The Fifth Inference.
That we Learn from the Design of Christianity the Great Measure and Standard
whereby we are to judge of Doctrines. How we are to judge of the Truth of
Doctrines.

FIfthly, we learn from what has been said of the Design of Christianity, what
is the Great measure and standard whereby we are to judge of Doctrines; both
whether they are true or false, and in what degree necessary to be received or
rejected.

First, we understand how to judge of the Truth of Doctrines. We may be certain
that, seeing the Design of Christianity is to make men holy, whatsoever
opinions do either directly or in their evident consequences obstruct the
promoting of it, are perfectly false; and with as great peremptoriness and
confidence as they may be by some that call themselves Christians obtruded upon
us, they are not of Christ, nor any part of his Religion. And those which do
appear to us to discourage from serious endeavors after piety and true virtue,
we ought for that reason, while we have such an opinion of them, most
vehemently to suspect them to be erroneous. For it being the business of our
Savior's coming into the world, and of his blessed Gospel, effectually to
persuade us to use our utmost diligence in subduing our lusts, and qualifying
our Souls by purity and holiness for the enjoyment of God, and to make our
endeavors successful for that purpose; we may be undoubtedly assured that he
has not either by himself immediately, or by his Apostles delivered any thing
that opposes this Design. If (says S. Paul) I build again the things that I
destroyed; ^al. 2.
I make my self a Transgressor: And no man that has in him the least of a
Christian, will once suspect, that the perfectly wise as well as holy Jesus
should so manage the business he has undertaken, as what he builds with one
hand, to pull down with the other; and frustrate that Design by some Doctrines
which he promoteth by others.

Those Doctrines on the other hand which in their own nature do evidently tend
to the serving of this Design of Christianity, we may conclude are most true
and genuine: And those which, upon our serious considering of them, we are
persuaded do so, we ought upon that account to have a kindness for them, and to
believe them of an higher than humane Original. And therefore those which give
the most honorable accounts of God, his nature, and dealing with the sons of
men; that most magnify his grace, and best vindicate his Holiness, Justice,
and Goodness; do commend themselves to our belief with infinite advantage:
Because the most worthy conceptions of the Deity are extremely helpful and
likewise necessary to the loving of God, and serving him as becomes us, and
have a mighty influence into the ordering and regulation of our whole man; as
might be largly shown.

Those Doctrines, again, that most discountenance all sins both against the
first and second Table, and best enable to answer all pleas and pretenses for
security and carelessness; that are most highly agreeable to the innate Dictates
of our minds, and least gratify and please our carnal part; we may from the
consideration of the Design of Christianity be greatly persuaded of the Truth
of them.

And on the Contrary, Those which are apt to instill into men's minds any
unlovely notions of the Divine Nature, that disparage his Holiness, or lessen
his kindness and good will to his Creation, and the obligations of the
generality of the world to him and his Son Jesus, and so make his grace a
narrow and scanty thing, or that naturally cast any dishonorable reflections on
any person of the most holy Trinity; must needs be false. As also those that
make Religion to be a mere Passive thing, wholly God's work, and not at all
ours; or that cramp men, and persuade them that they are utterly void of the
least ability to cooperate with the grace of God or to do any thing toward
their own salvation; or any way whatsoever discourage them from the diligent
prosecution of Holiness; or deprive us of any help afforded us toward our
gaining, and growth in grace, either by putting a slur upon the written word,
in advancing above it the light within men, and in Enthusiastical pretenses to
immediate Revelations, etc. Or else by teaching men to slight any one
Ordinance of the Gospel, etc. Or such Doctrines as tend to introduce confusion
into the Church of Christ, and to deprive it of all Government and Order, or in
short that give countenance to any Immorality whatsoever: I say, as sure as the
Christian Religion is true, and that what we have proved to be the Design
thereof, is so; such Doctrines as these must needs be false.

What our Savior says of false Prophets, is as true of most Doctrines, By
their fruits you shall know them: we may understand whether they have any
relation to Christianity or no, by the Design they drive at, and their evident
consequences.

And I may add, that we may make a shrewd guess what those particular ways
and modes of Religion are (which the various Sects we are cantonized into have
espoused to themselves, and are so fond of) by the proper and most
distinguishing effects of them. If we perceive that they make the great
sticklers for them, to differ from others chiefly in unconcernednes about the
most important and substantial duties of Morality, and in laying the greatest
weight upon certain little Trifles, and placing their Religion in mere
externals; or that the things whereby they are most peculiarly discriminated
from other folk are spiritual pride, and fond conceitedness of themselves, and
a scornful and fierce behavior toward those that approve not of their way;
uncharitableness, morosity, and peevishness; a seditious, ungovernable and
untameable spirit, etc. I say, if we observe such as these to be the most
distinguishing effects of their several Modes and Forms, we have sufficient
reason from thence alone greatly to presume that they have not the stamp of Ius
Christianum upon them, that they are not of Christ, but of their own invention.
The wisdom that is from above is quite another thing, and begets perfectly
other kind of effects; as shall be shown hereafter.

But to return, The Design of the Gospel is (as was said) the Great Standard by
which we are to judge of the Truth of Opinions: Those that seem to us to oppose
this Design, we are bound to suspect, because they do so; but those which
apparently do this, we must with heartiest indignation reject. And though we
should meet with some places of Scripture that at first sight may seem to
favor them, we may not be stumbled upon that account, but be confident that
whatsoever is their true meaning, as sure as they have God for their Author,
they cannot possibly patronize any such Doctrines.

And, lastly, in examining which of two opinions is true, that oppose each
other, and do seem to be much a like befriended by the holy Scriptures; it is
doubtless a very safe course to consider as impartially as we can, which does
tend most to serve the great End of Christianity, and to prefer that which we
are persuaded does so.

CHAP. XXI.
How we are to judge of the Necessity of Doctrines either to be embraced or
rejected. A brief discourse of the Nature of Points Fundamental. How we may
know whether we embrace all such, and whether we hold not any destructive and
damnable Errors.

SEcondly, The Design of Christianity is the great measure whereby we are to
judge as of the Truth, so also of the Necessity of Doctrines either to be
embraced or rejected.

First, We may thereby understand, in what degree we ought to esteem those
Necessary to be by all received, which we our selves are convinced of the Truth
of; or, which of such are Fundamental Points of the Christian Faith, and which
not.

First, It is plain, That in the general those and those only are primarily and
in their own nature Fundamentals, which are absolutely necessary to accomplish
in us that Design. Such, as without the knowledge and belief of which it is
impossible to acquire that Inward Righteousness and true Holiness which the
Christian Religion aims at the introduction of. It is in it self absolutely
necessary, not to be ignorant of or disbelieve any of those Points, upon which
the effecting of the great business of the Gospel in us does necessarily
depend. The particulars of these I shall not stand to enumerate, because (as
will appear from what will be said anon) it is not needful to have a just Table
of them: And besides, any one that understands wherein the nature of true
Holiness lies, may be able sufficiently to inform himself what they are.

Secondly, It is as evident, That those points of Faith are secondarily
Fundamental, the disbelief of which cannot consist with true Holiness, in those
to whom the Gospel is sufficiently made known; although they are not in their
own nature such, as that Holiness is not in some degree or other attainable
without the belief of them. And in the number of these are all such Doctrines
as are with indisputable clearness revealed to us. Now the belief of these,
though it is not in it self any more than in higher or lower degrees
profitable, yet is it even absolutely necessary from an external cause, though
not from the nature of the Points themselves, viz. In regard of their being
delivered with such abundant perspicuity, as that nothing can cause men to
refuse to admit them, but that which argues them to be stark naught, and to
have some unworthy and base end in so doing. But we must take notice here, that
all such Points as these are not of equal necessity to be received* by all
Christians; because that in regard of the diversity of their capacities,
educations, and other means and advantages, some of them may be most plainly
perceived by some to be delivered in the Scriptures, which cannot be so by
others with the like ease.

And in the second place, what has been said of Fundamental Truths, is
applicable by the Rule of Contraries to the opposite Errors, as I need not
show.

Now then, would we know whether we embrace all the Fundamentals of
Christianity, and are guilty of no damnable and destructive errors; among the
great diversity and contrariety of Opinions that this kingdom abounds with (I
think I may say) above all other parts of Christendom; our only way is to
examine our selves impartially after this manner.

Am I sincerely willing to obey my Creator and Redeemer in all things
commanded by them? Do I entertain and harbor no lust in my breast? Do I
heartily endeavor to have a right understanding of the holy Scriptures, and
chiefly of the Gospel, and to know what Doctrines are delivered there in order
to the bettering of my soul by them, and the direction of my life and actions
according to them?

If we can answer these Questions in the affirmative; whatsoever mistakes we
may labor under, they can be none of them such as will undo our souls; because
we shall have cause to conclude from thence, that the Design of Christianity is
in some good measure effected in us. And whatsoever Tenets may be accompanied
and consist with the true Love of God, and a solicitous care to keep a
conscience void of offense toward him and men, we may be certain from the past
Discourse of the Design of the Gospel, that they belong not to the Catalogue of
Fundamental Errors. This obedient temper is the most infallible mark (of any I
know) of an Orthodox man; He that is endued with it, though he may err, cannot
be an Heretic.

But there will be an occasion of speaking more anon to this purpose.

CHAP. XXII. The Sixth Inference.
That the Design of Christianity teaches us what Doctrines and Practices we
ought, as Christians, to be most Zealous for or against.

SIxthly, We consequently learn what Doctrines and Practices we ought, as
Christians, to be most zealous for or against. Those, surely, that are most
available to the begetting and increase of true holiness, it is our duty to
concern our selves most for the defense of: And those which have the greatest
tendency toward the endangering of it, to set our selves with the greatest
industry and vigor against. The reason is plain, because the former do most
promote the Design of the Gospel, and the latter do it most disservice. S. Jude
exhorts in the third verse of his Epistle, to contend earnestly for the Faith
which was once delivered to the Saints; that holy Doctrine which was first
delivered by our Savior, and unanimously by his Apostles after him; which is
perfectly contrary to the wicked and abominable Doctrines taught by the profane
crew he speaks of in the next verse (and were more than probably the Gnostics)
which were crept in unawares, who were before ordained to this condemnation (or
whose Impostures first, and then the vengeance which should be taken of them,
were formerly written of or foretold both by Christ and his Apostles) ungodly
men, turning the grace of God into lasciviousness, and denying the only Lord
God, and our Lord Jesus Christ. And we ought to contend against whatsoever is
designed to overthrow and make ineffectual that most blessed Doctrine, more or
less, according as it more or less tends so to do. Our zeal should be
altogether employed for the promoting of personal and real Holiness, and mostly
for the Essential parts of it, and the Necessary means and helps to it. But
doubtless it cannot be worth our while to lay out any considerable matter of
our heat, either for or against Doubtful Opinions, Alterable Modes, Rites and
Circumstances of Religion: They are not things on which much weight may be
warrantably laid; for they are too weak to bear it, in regard of their being so
little serviceable or disserviceable to the Design of Christianity, as it is
plain they are. I say, eager defending or opposing of such kind of things, is
(to use the similitude of an excellent person) like the Apes blowing at a
Glowworm which affords neither light nor warmth. Nay it is no less injurious
to the Design of Christianity, than unserviceable and useless, as we have been
effectually taught by very woeful experience. And nothing does more harden
Atheistically-disposed persons, than their observing the contention of
Christians about matters of that nature; for thereby do they take a measure of
our whole Religion. And besides an eager concernedness about them is too
ordinarily accompanied with a lukewarm or rather frozen indifference concerning
the most important Points and the Indispensables of Christianity. It is too
visibly apparent to be denied, That those which have such a sealding hot zeal
either for or against things of no certainty and no necessity, are many of them
(as their predecessors the Pharisees were) in the very other extreme as to not
a few of the weightyest matters of Religion.

CHAP. XXIII. The Seventh Inference.
That the Design of Christianity well considered will give us great light into
the just Bounds and Extent of Christian Liberty. Of complying with the Customs
of our Country, and the will of our Governors. The Great difference between
the Mosaical Law and the Gospel as to its Preceptive part.

SEventhly, we may be greatly satisfied by considering the Design of
Christianity concerning the Just bounds and extent of our Christian Liberty.
For that being to make men holy, it may safely be presumed that such things as
have neither directly nor consequentially any tendency to the depraving of our
Souls, are left free to us by our Savior, either to do them or not to do them,
as we shall see cause. Whatsoever does neither promote no^ hinder this Design,
we have reason to believe is neither enjoined upon us Christians, nor forbidden
to us.

Whatever things are any way necessary to the furtherance of it, must needs be
matter of strict duty; and what are so profitable thereunto, that the Omission
of them does make the effecting of this Design more difficult, cannot but be
ordinarily so also. Whatsoever is in its own nature, or by reason of some
Circumstance inseparably adhering to it, a necessary occasion of gratifying
some one or other corrupt affection, and that, by the doing of which we shall
certainly desile our own Souls or the Souls of others, either by drawing them
thereby to, or hardening and encourageing them in any wickedness (which is that
our Savior means by offending or scandalizing little ones, and is so severely
forbidden by him, and also by the Apostle in the eighth chapter of the first
epistle to the Corinthians) can be no other than absolutely unlawful: And
whatsoever is foreseen to be a probable occasion of any one of these mischiefs,
must also be carefully avoided by us. But those things which are none of all
these, cannot be otherwise than perfectly indifferent under the Gospel.

And therefore whatsoever of such are commended by the Custom of the places we
live in, or Commanded by Superiors, or made by any Circumstance convenient to
be done; our Christian liberty consists in this that we have leave to do them.
And, indeed, it is so far from being a sin to comply with our Countrymen and
Neighbors in their plainly innocent usages and harmless Customs, or with the
will of our Governors when they command us such things; that it would be so,
to refuse so to do. For our refusing to comply with either of these can hardly
proceed from any thing better than a proud affectation of singularity, or at
best from superstitious s^rupulosity; which, in calling it Superstitious, I
intimate to be very evil, as much of Conscience as there may be in it. For
Superstition implies a frightful and overtimorous apprehension of the Divine
Nature, and consequently a base and undervaluing conception of it, as the Greek
word that expresses it [(...)] signifies. That which makes men Superstitious,
is such an opinion of God as represents him a very Angry and Captious Being,
but yet such a one too as may be a^oned and pacified by a great care and
exactness in certain little matters, in performances and abstinences of an
insignificant and very trivial nature.

Now the Ancient Author of the Epistle to Diognetus therein acquaints him, that
the Primitive Christians were no such squeamish or conceited Creatures as to
live in a different way from the people among whom they inhabited; and says
that they distinguished themselves from their Neighbors and other folk (...)
neither by civil customs, nor a certain language, (or phrases or tone) proper
to themselves, (...), etc. nor that they affected to make themselves notifi^d
by any peculiarities (that is, in harmless matters) as a foolish Sect among our
selves, and some other fanciful people, now adays do.

I design not here so tedious a work as that of examining particulars by the
Rule we have given, but only to show in the general that we may be satisfied
concerning the Extent of our Christian ^berty by well weighing the Design of
Christianit^* and may understand what kind of things must needs be free to us
under the Gospeldispensation, and what not; leaving it to the Reader to make
application, and consider the nature of particulars by comparing them with this
Rule. But I presume I need not mind him, that I suppose all this while that
whatsoever is plainly commanded and forbidden in the Gospel, must be done and
forborne by him, though he should not be sagacious enough to discern how every
thing there commanded is serviceable, or forbidden is injurious, to the Design
of Holiness: For surely none can doubt but that they ought to understand me, in
what I have asserted, to have this meaning only, viz. That, as to those things
which the Gospel speaks nothing in particular and clearly concerning, the
best course we can take in order to our knowing to what Heads to refer them
(whether to that of things commanded, or to that of forbidden, or to that of
Indifferent things) is to examine them by this General Rule, viz. the Design of
Christianity.

But to conclude this, The great difference between the Mosaical Law, and the
Gospel, as to its preceptive part, is this, That by the former a vast multitude
of perfectly Indifferent things were imposed, and many such also prohibited:
But by the latter, only those things are enjoined that are in their own nature
of indispensable necessity, or such as are means and helps toward them: And
there is nothing thereby forbidden, but it is so, because it is evil; and is
not therefore evil only because forbidden. There is nothing either commanded
or forbidden in our Savior's Religion, but, as it is in order to our good, so
is it in order to such a good too as consists in the Reformation and Renovation
of our lives and natures.

So that, I say, our past Discourse concerning the Design of Christianity may
give us great light, as to the knowledge of what kind of things, we that are
under the Gospel Dispensation, must do, and are matter of necessary duty; must
not do, and are matter of sin; and may do or leave undone without sin.

CHAP. XXIV. The Eighth Inference.
That it is the most unaccountable thing to do that which is Essentially Evil,
in defense of the Christian Religion, or of any opinions presumed to be
Doctrines relating thereunto. The Pope and Church of Rome most prodigiously
guilty in this particular. And not a few of those that profess* Enmity against
Popery too liable also to the same charge.

EIghthly, It may be plainly inferred from what has been said of the Design of
Christianity, That it is the most strangely unaccountable thing for men in
defense or favor of that way of Religion, which they take to be most truly the
Christian, or of any opinions that are presumed by them to be Doctrines
thereunto belonging, to do that which is essentially and in its own nature
evil. For these act quite contrary to the Design of the Christian Religion, and
so consequently, do what lye^h in ther^ to spoil it, and render it a (...) and
insignificant thing by the co^ (...) take for the advancement of it. The Pope
and Church of Rome are most prodigiously guilty of this madness; they doing the
most plainly vicious and immoral actions imaginable to promote the Interest (as
they pretend) of that which they call the Catholic Faith. For, their imposing
of their own senses upon the Word of God, and then Persecuting, Burning and
Damning men for not subscribing to theirs as to God's words, can be no better
than an Act of Devilish pride and barbarous cruelty. It is so of the former, in
that it is a compelling men to acknowledge their wisdom to be such as that it
may not be suspected in the least measure, no not in the determination of
points that are the most doubtful and disputable: Nay neither in such Opinions
and Practices of theirs as most apparently contradict a multitude of Texts of
the holy Scriptures.

And moreover in endeavoring to force all men to act and think as they do in
matters of Religion, they with Luci^erian arrogance usurp the Empire of
Almighty God, and sway that Scepter over men's consciences which is his
peculiarly.

And I need not say that they are therein no whit less cruel than they are
proud* For what greater cruelty can there be, than to inflict upon people the
saddest of calamities and the horridest tortures (whereof the instances are
innumerable) for such things as they cannot have the least cause to think they
are able to help; and which they have also the greatest reason to conclude they
are not at all blame worthy for? I say what can be greater cruelty than this
is? except their designing thereby to terrify men to the owning of Doctrines
and doing actions perfectly against the clearest sense of their minds and
expres^est Dictates of their Consciences; which is an exercise of no less
cruelty toward their Souls, than the other is toward their Bodies.

And what Villainies are there which the Pope and his Proselytes have stuck at
committing for the Propagation of their Religion? Such as exciting subjects to
take arms against their lawful Sovereigns, to whom they are obliged in the
bonds of most Solemn Oaths; Poisoning and S^abbing of Princes, the most
barbarous Massacres that any History can give account of. In short, what Frauds
and Perfidiousness, what Treachery, what Impostures, what Pe^juries, what
Cruelties and horrid outrages have they thought too wicked to be undertaken
and persisted in for the sake of HOLY CHURCH?

But I would I could say that of all that are called Christians the Papists
only are liable to this charge; but, alas, it is too manifest to be denied or
yet dissembled, that not a few of those that profess enmity to Popery are sadly
guilty, though not equally with the Papists, in this particular. But there is
nothing more certain than that for any of us to be cruel and of a persecuting
spirit, to be wrathful and furious, to backbite and slander, to be false and
perfidious, to be ungovernable, rebellious, or seditious, to be uncharitable or
in any kind whatsoever unjust upon the account of Religion it self, is most
unsufferable and inexcuseable. For if it be lawful to behave our selves after
this manner upon any account whatever, Religion would be the most useless thing
in the whole world; and if this were lawful upon the account of Religion only,
I will not stick to say that it would not be more useless and unprofitable than
mischievous and hurtful. Nor would the Christian Religion it self be worthy
our profession, if it would give us leave, upon any design, to allow our selves
in the forementioned Immoralities or in any one whatsoever.

But there are none, it more absolutely or with greater severity forbids
than such as these. Who is a wise man and endued with knowledge among you
(says S. James) Let him show out of a good conversation his works with
meekness of wisdom; but if ye have bitter envyings and stri^e in your hearts,
glory not, and lie not against the truth, (that is, do not boast of your
Christian wisdom, nor play the Hypocrites in pretending to be Spiritual) this
wisdom des^endeth not from above (is not zeal kindled from heaven) but is
earthly, s^nsual, Devilish: For where envy and strife is, there is confusion
and every evil work. But the wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then
peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of merry and good fruits,
without Partiality, and without Hypocrisy: And the fruit of righteousness is
sown in peace, of them that make peace, James 3. 13. to the end.

And S. Paul tells the Galatians, Chap. 4. 22, 23. That the Fruit of the Spirit
is Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness,
Temperance. And he reckons among the works of the ^lesh, verse. 19, 20, 21.
not only Adlultery, Fornication, Uncle^nness, I asciviousness, Idolatry,
Wit^herast, Heresies, Mur^, Drunkenness, Revelling: but also Hatred, Variance,
Emulations, Wrath, Strife, Seditions, Envyings: and says, that they which do
such things (such as these as well as the ^ormer) shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. And adds verse. 24. that They which are Christ's, have (...) the flesh
with the af^ections and lusts, that is, all such as the foregoing.

And it appears from what has been discoursed concerning the Design of
Christianity, that the grati^ication of any of these affections is so far from
becoming lawful or more warrantable by being yielded to for the sake of it,
that it is rendered the more wretchedly foolish and unaccountable by this
means. For thus to do, is no other than to be irreligious to promote Religion,
to be Un-christian to do service to Christianity; and therefore to go the
directest way to destroy i^, by the means we use for its preservation: And we
do our particular Opinions and Forms of Religion more Mischief in alienating
the minds of others from them, than their most Professed Adversaries will be
able to do by all their Attempts against them, by such wild and wicked
expressions of zeal for them. And lastly, thus to do is to oppose the interest
of our Religion to that of our Souls, and to cast these away in the defense of
that: As appears from our Discourse in the second Section. But what Madness is
like to this?

CHAP. XXV. The Ninth Inference.
That it is a most unwarrantable thing for those that are the Ministers of
Christ to prefer any other Design before that of making men really Righteous
and Holy. That this ought to be the whole Design of their Preaching. That it is
of as great concernment that they promote the same Business by their
Conversations, as that they do it by their Doctrine. Infinite Mischiefs
occasioned by the loose Lives of Ministers. Several Instances of Practices
extremely blameworthy in Preachers of the Gospel. That they ought to have a
regard to the Weaknesses of Persons so far as lawfully they may. That the
Promoting of Holiness ought to be the only Design of Ecclesiastical Discipline.

NInthly, Seeing our Savior's grand and only direct Design was to make men
really Righteous and Holy, it must needs be a most unwarrantable thing for
those that are his Ministers and Representatives to prefer any other before
this; for those that are entrusted with the care of souls to concern themselves
about any thing so much as this.

It is plainly their Duty to subordinate every thing they do, by virtue of
their Sacred Function, hereunto; and to imitate their Great Master, all they
can, in the discharge of it; to promote Holiness, as much as lies in them,
both by their Doctrine and Conversations: with all perspicuity and plainness to
instruct their People in all the indisputable Doctrines of Christianity above
any other; and to have a special care to show them the aptness that is in them,
to the furtherance of Holiness of Heart and Life: And most to inculcate those
upon them which have the greatest and most manifest and immediate tendency
thereunto: to inform them of their whole duty relating to God, their Neighbor
and themselves impartially; to press them to the performance of them with the
greatest affection and fervency; and to back on their Exhortations with the
most prevalent and enforcing Motives; the most rational and convincing
Arguments; courageously, but with a discovery of tenderest compassion to
sinners, to reprove all sins without exception; and faithfully to show the
danger of living in any one whatsoever. And to do thus, not only in public,
but, as there is occasion, in private also, and readily to embrace all
opportunities for that purpose.

Thus (as has been shown) did our Blessed Savior spend his time, and that it
is the duty of his Ministers to come as near as they can, in their practice, to
him, is out of question: And thus also did his immediate Successors, the
Apostles employ themselves; as might be largly made to appear. They preached
the Word, were instant both in season and out of season, they reproved, rebuked
and exhorted with all long-suffering and Doctrine; according as S. Paul charged
Timothy to do, in the most solemn and severe manner: even before God, and the
Lord Jesus Christ who shall judge the quick and the d^ad, at his appearing and
his Kingdom. And that charge by parity of reason must concern the whole Clergy
as well as that Bishop.

And as Christ and his Apostles taught men by their Lives, as well as Doctrine,
and encouraged them to the performance of whatsoever duties they enjoined them,
by their own Example; so it cannot but be of infinite concernment that all that
have the conduct of Souls committed to them should do the like. S. Paul
exhorted Timothy first to take heed to himself, and ^ Tim. 4. 16.
then to the Doctrine; and the former advice was of no whit less necessity and
importance than was the latter. For (as woeful experience assures us) a
Minister of a careless and loose life, let his parts and ability in preaching
be never so great, nay though he should behave himself never so faithfully in
the Pulpit, and be zealous against the very vices he himself is guilty of
(which would be very strange if he should) must needs do more hurt
incomparably, than he can do good. And though (as some of them will tell them)
it is the Peoples duty to do as they say, and not as they do; yet is there
nothing more impossible than to teach them effectually that Lesson. Mankind (as
we had before occasion to show) is mightily addicted to imitation, and Examples
(especially those of Governors and Teachers) have a greater force upon people
ordinarily than have Instructions; but chiefly bad Examples (in regard of their
natural proneness to vice) than good Instructions. Had not the Apostles
expressed as great a care of what they did, as of what they said, how they
lived as how they preached, Christianity would (without doubt) have been so far
from prevailing and getting ground as it has done; that it could not have long
survived its Blessed Author, if it had not bid adiue to the world with him*
Most men, do what we can, will judge of our Sermons by our Conversations, and
if they see these bad, they will not think those good; nor the Doctrines
contained in them practicable, seeing they have no better effect upon those
that preach them. And besides no man will be thought to be serious and in good
earnest in pressing those duties upon others, which he makes no conscience of
performing himself.

Nay every man's judgment in Divine things may warrantably be suspected, that
is of a wicked and vicious Life. And those that are conscious to themselves
that they are not able to pass a judgment upon Doctrines, may not be blamed if
they question their Minister's Orthodoxy, while they observe in him any kind of
Immorality, and see that he lives to the satisfaction of any one Lust. For, the
promise of knowing the Truth is made only to such as continue in Christ's Joh.
8. (...)*
words, that is, that are obedient to his Precepts.

And I add, that such a one's talks of Heaven and Hell are like to prevail
very little upon his Auditors, or to be at all heeded by the greatest part of
them, while they consider that the Preacher has a soul to save as well as
they. And therefore the love that they bear to their lusts, with the Devil's
help, will easily persuade them, that either these things are but mere
sictions, or else that the one may be obtained, and the other escaped, upon far
easier terms than he talks of. But as for those few in whom the sense of true
Virtue and Piety have made so deep an impression, as that they have never the
slighter opinion of the necessity thereof, in regard of their Minister's wicked
Example; the prejudice that they cannot but conceive against him renders his
discourses insipid and unaffecting to them, and so they ordinarily take all
opportunities to turn their backs upon him, and at length quite forsake him.
And then, if they are not as understanding as well meaning people, are too
easily drawn away from all other Churches, when they have left their own, and
become a prey to some demure and fairly pretending Sectary. And I am very
certain from my own observation, that no one thing has so conduced to the
prejudice of our Church of England, and done the separating parties so much
service as the scandalous lives of some that exercise the Ministerial Function
in her. The late Excellent Bishop of Down and Connar has this memorable
passage in a Sermon he preached to the University at Dublin: If ye become
burning and shining Lights, if ye do not detain the Truth in unrighteousness,
if ye walk in light and live in the Spirit, your Doctrine will be true, and
that truth will prevail: But if you live wickedly and scandalously, every
little Schismalick will put you to shame, and draw Disciples after him, and
abuse your flocks, and feed them with Colo^ynths and Hemlock, and place Heresy
in the chair appointed for your Religion. But to hasten to the dispatch of this
unpleasant Topic: wicked ministers are of all other ill-livers the most
scandalous, for they lay the greatest stumbling block, of any whatsoever,
before men's souls; and what our Savior said of the Scribes and Pharisees, may
in an especial manner be applied to them, viz. that they will neither enter
into heaven themselves nor yet suffer them that are entering to go in: so far
are they from saving themselves and those that hear them. But I would to God,
such would well lay to heart those sad words of our Savior, Luke 17. 1, 2. It
is impossible but that offenses will come; but woe unto him through whom they
come: it were better for him that a Millstone were hanged about his neck, and he
cast into the Sea, etc. And those words are not more effectual to scare them,
than are these following of a Heathen, viz. Tully, concerning vicious
Philosophers to shame them into a better life: says he in his Tusculan
Questions, the second book, Quotusquisque Philosophorun^ invenitur, qui sit ita
moratus, etc. What one of many Philosophers is there who so behaves himself,
and is of such a mind and life, as Reason requires; which accounts his
Doctrine not a boast of Science but a law of life; which obeys himself, and
is governed by his own precepts? We may see some so light and vain, that it
would have been better for them to be wholly ignorant, and never to have
learn*d any thing: others so covetous of money, thirsty of praise, and honor,
and many such slaves to their lusts, ut cum eorum vita mirabiliter pugnet
oration, That their lives do marvellously contradict their Doctrine. Quod quidem
mihi videtur esse turpissimum, etc. Which to me seems the most filthy and
abominable of all things. For as he which professing himself a Grammarian
speaks barbarously, and who being desirous to be accounted a Musician sings
scurvily, is so much the more shame-worthy for his being defective in that the
knowledge and skill of which he arrogates to himself; so a Philosopher in
ratione vitae peccans, miscarrying in his manners, is in this respect the baser
and more wretched Creature, that in the office of which he will needs be a
Master, he does amiss; artemque vitae professus delinquit in vita, and
prosessing the art of well-living, or of teaching others to live well, is
faulty and miscarrieth in his own life. Could this excellent Heathen thus
inveigh against wicked Philosophers, what Satyr can be tart and severe enough
for ungodly Ministers of the Glorious and most Holy Gospel of the Blessed
Jesus? I will add one more saying of our Savior's, which he spoke to his
Disciples, whom he was training up for the Ministry, Matt. 5. 13. Ye are the
Salt of the earth; but if the Salt has lost its savor, wherewith shall it be
salted? It is thence-forth good for nothing, but to be cast out, and to be
trodden under foot of men.

Well, I say that the Design of our Savior and his Gospel being to make men
holy, those behave themselves infinitely disbecoming his Ministers and the
Preachers of the Gospel, that live unholily; and so do all such also (as was at
first intimated) as do not above all things endeavor the promoting and
furtherance of that Design. And of that number are those that are ever
affecting to make people stare at their high-flown and Bum-baste Language, or
to please their Phancies with foolish jingles and Pedantick and Boyish wit, or
to be admired for their ability in dividing a hair, their Metaphysical
acuteness and Scholastic subtilty; or for their doughty dexterity in
controversial squabble. And among such may those also, and those chiefly, be
reckoned, that seek to approve themselves to their Auditors to be men of
Mysteries, and endeavor to make the plain and easy Doctrines of the Gospel as
intricate and obscure as ever they are able: These are so far from endeavoring
above all things to advance the Design of the Gospel, that it has not any
greater enemies in the whole world than they are. And to them I may add such
as preach up Free Grace and Christian Privileges otherwise than as Motives to
excite to Obedience, and never scarcely insist upon any Duties except those of
believing, laying hold on Christ's Righteousness, applying the promises (which
are all really the same with them) and renouncing our own Righteousness, which
those that have none at all to renounce have a mighty kindness for. All which
rightly understood, may, I grant, and ought to be preached; but to make the
Christians duty to consist either wholly or mostly in those particulars, and
especially as they are explained by not a few, is the way, effectually to
harden Hypocrites, and increase their number, but to make no sincere converts.

Those again do nothing less than chiefly promote the business of Holiness,
that are never in their Element, but when they are talking of the
Irrespectiveness of God's Decrees, the Absoluteness of his Promises, the utter
disability and perfect impotence of Natural men to do any thing toward their
own conversion, etc. and insist with greatest Emphasis and Vehemence upon such
like false and dangerous opinions. And those may well accompany and be joined
with the foregoing, that are of such narrow, and therefore Unchristian Spirits
as to make it their Great business to advance the petty interest of any party
whatsoever, and concern themselves more about doing this, than about promoting
and carrying on that wherein consists the chief good of all Mankind: and are
more zealous to make Proselytes to their Particular Sects than Converts to a
Holy Life; and press more exact and rigid Conformity to their Modes and Forms
than to the Laws of God and the Essential Duties of the Christian Religion.

Such as all the forementioned have doubtless little cause to expect a [ well
done good and faithful servant] from the mouth of their Savior at the last
day; their practice being so very contrary to that of his (whose Ministers they
profess themselves to be) when he was in the world; and they making
Christianity so infinitely different a thing from what he made it.

And furthermore, it is unquestionably the Duty of all the Stewards of the
Mysteries of God to take special heed that they do not by over-severe insisting
on any little matters and unnecessary things, give their people a temptation to
conclude that they lay the greatest weight upon them; but so to behave
themselves toward them, as to give them assurance that there is no interest so
dear to them as is that of the Salvation of their Souls. And lastly, to be so
self-denying as to have a regard to the weaknesses of persons, so far as
lawfully, and without disobeying Authority they may, to prevent their departure
from Communion with the Church they belong to; and to use all fair and prudent
ways to persuade those back again thereunto, which there is any the least
reason to hope are not irrecoverably gone away. It being very much the interest
of their souls not to continue in separation: and not of theirs only but of
others too, in that strifes and contentions, envyings and animosities are like
to be kept alive, and greatly to increase, while men keep at a distance from
one another; and where these are (as it was said S. James has told us) there
must needs be confusion and every evil work.

And this is no other than what the great S. Paul thought it no disparagement
to him to be exemplary to us in. For says he, 1 Cor. 9. 19, etc. Though I be
free from all men, yet have I made my self a servant to all, that I might gain
the more: And unto the Jews I became as a Jew, that I might gain the Jews; to
them that are under the law as under the law, that I might gain them that are
under the law; to them that are without law (or observe not the law of Moses)
as without law, that I might gain them that are without law: To the weak became
I as weak, that I might gain the weak; I am made all things to all men, that I
might by all means save some. The sum of which words amount to this, That he
denied himself in the use of his liberty to gain those who were not acquainted
with the extent of it, and dealt with all sorts of men in that way which he
thought most probable to convert them to Christianity, and keep them in the
profession of it. Not that he sneaked and dissembled and made weak people think
that he was of their mind, and so confirmed them in their mistakes and follies;
or had any regard to the humors of unreasonable and merely captious people
that will be finding faults upon no ground at all: this must needs be unworthy
of an Apostle; for it is so of all Inferior Ministers and likewise of every
private Christian.

And our past discourse assures us also that the promoting of Holiness in men's
hearts and lives ought to be the only design of Ecclesiastical Discipline and
Church Censures: And it is easy to show that if the Laws of all Christian
Churches were framed and the execution of them directed only, or above any
other, to the service of this Design; or that no interest did sway so much with
their Chief Governors, as that which was (and still is) most dear to the Great
Founder and King of the Church whom they represent; and if they were willing to
lose in their little and petty concerns, that they might gain in this Grand
one, we should quickly see Christendom in most lovely and blessed
Circumstances. All people that have any thing of sincerity, would quickly unite
and agree together, and as for factious Hypocrites they would be with ease
suppressed, and put out of all capacity of doing mischief. This I say might be
easily shown, and plainly demonstrated; but it needs not, there being nothing
in the world more undeniably evident.

CHAP. XXVI. The Tenth Inference.
That an Obedient Temper of Mind is an excellent and necessary Qualification to
prepare men for a firm Belief and right understanding of the Gospel of Christ.
That it is so by virtue of Christ's promise. That it is so in its own Nature.
This showed in three Particulars, viz. in that, 1. It will help us to judge
without prejudice concerning the Doctrines contained in the Gospel. 2. It will
give satisfaction concerning the main Doctrines of Christianity far excelling
any that can arise from mere speculation. 3. It will secure from the Causes of
Error in those Points that are of weightiest importance. Six Causes of such
Errors laid down; and an Obedient Disposition of mind showed to secure from
each of them.

TEnthly, We learn what is the best Temper and Disposition of mind to bring to
the Study of Christ's Gospel, in order to our firm belief and right
understanding of it. Seeing its Design is to make men entirely obedient, and
truly holy, it is evident that a desire so to be is the most excellent and
necessary qualification for that purpose. Our Savior says, John 7. 17. If any
man will do his will (or is willing to do it) he shall know of the Doctrine
whether it be of God, or whether I speak of my self; That is, in the first
place, he shall be thoroughly satisfied concerning the truth of the Gospel,
shall be abundantly convinced that the Christian Religion is no Imposture, that
the Author of it came from Heaven, as he declared he did, and was sent by God
to reveal his Will. Such a one, when it comes to be sufficiently proposed to
him, shall heartily embrace the Gospel as containing the true, the only true
Religion. And therefore observe what he says, John 8. 47. He that is of God,
hears God's words; ye therefore hear them not, because ye are not of God:
That is, as if he should say, He that is of an obedient Temper, and ambitious
of doing the will of God, shall receive the Doctrine which in his name I preach
to him; and the reason why you Jews, for your parts refuse so to do, is because
you are insincere and hypocritical.

It is said Acts 13. 48. That as many of the Gentiles as were (...) (which is
doubtless in this place to be rendered) disposed, or in a ready preparedness,
for Eternal Life, believed; That is, Those which were Proselytes of the Gate,
who were admitted by the Jews to the Hope of Eternal Life, and to have their
portion in the Age to come, without submitting to their whole law, or any more
than owning the God of Israel, and observing the seven precepts of Noah (as
Master Mede has learnedly and with great conviction shown;) These being
desirous to live Godlily, and not prejudiced against the Christian Religion as
the Jews generally were, did then at Antioch receive the Gospel upon its first
being made known to them: And of this sort was Cornelius, whose conversion to
Christianity we read of before in the tenth Chapter.

Secondly, and consequently, this sense is also implied in the first cited
words of our Savior, viz. That, as he which is willing to do God's will, shall
know that Christ's Doctrine came from him, so he shall rightly understand that
Doctrine too. For it would be to no purpose for him to believe the Gospel to be
true, if his Faith be not accompanied with an ability to pass a right judgment
on the sense of it. And therefore he must needs be able to distinguish between
the Doctrine of Christ and that which is falsely imposed at any time upon the
world as his, and fathered upon him by ungodly Heretics; as well as satisfied
that what he delivered in the general is the Will of God. S. John to this same
purpose expresses himself, 1 Epistle 4. 6. He that knows God (that is,
practically, or is Obedient) hears us; he that is not of God (or is not
willing to obey him) hears not us; hereby know we the Spirit of Truth and the
spirit of error: That is, by this obedient temper we are capable of
distinguishing betwixt these two Spirits. And, I say, from the Design of the
Gospel, that being to make men Holy, it may be presumed, that whosoever
considers it with a desire of being so, must needs both believe it to have
come from God, and also be enlightened in the true knowledge of, at least, all
the necessary Points of it; and be enabled to give a particular, explicit and
understanding assent to them: So that it shall not lie in the power of any
subtle seducer to rob him of his Faith, or to infect him with any Principles
that are directly destructive to it, or are so plainly in their consequences
so, as that he shall see it, and make that ill use of them as to be persuaded
by them to let go his hold of any Fundamental Article of the Christian Religion.

For our Savior having so infinitely concerned himself for the destroying of
sin in us, and to make us partakers of his holiness, as to aim at this above
all things, in all he did and suffered in the world, and to make it the whole
business of his Gospel; we may be certain that those Honest Souls that come to
the study of it, with a desire of reaping this advantage by it, cannot be left
destitute of Christ's grace and blessing to make it successful to them for that
purpose; which it is impossible it should be without a thorow-belief of it, and
a right understanding of, at least, all its absolutely necessary and Essential
parts. This we might be assured of from that consideration, though there were
no Promise extant of that his grace to such well disposed people, as there are
diverse others besides that which we have produced.

But besides this, a sincere desire of being obedient and holy must needs of it
self very greatly dispose us for the belief and sufficient understanding of the
Gospel, and be very necessary in order thereunto also. For

First, It will help us to judge without prejudice and partiality concerning it
and the particular Doctrines therein contained. He whose hearty desire it is to
please God in doing his Will, will be unbyassed in his judgment in enquiries
after it. He knows that he cannot make that to be Truth by thinking one way or
other, which was not before so; and that truth will be truth whatsoever he
thinks on it: And therefore does not wish that this or that may be so, and then
endeavor to persuade himself that it is so; but will only examine what is so,
that he may not entertain an erroneous persuasion. He will bring his mind to
the Gospel, and not wrest the Gospel to his mind. But vice and sin, being
allowed and predominant in the soul, must needs warp the judgment and clap a
heavy bias on it* that will draw it to favor, as much as may be, their
interest in all matters it is concerned in. And therefore a man of wicked and
depraved Affections cannot but be exceeding unapt to study a Book whose Design
is such as the Gospel's is. But the obediently-disposed will bring free,
ingenuous and candid spirits to this work, and therefore are very fitly
prepared to do it with good success.

Secondly, This honest and sincere temper of mind will help a man to evidence
for his satisfaction concerning the main Doctrines of the Gospel, far excelling
any that can arise from mere speculation ^ namely that of sense and Experience*
The man that is endued with it, shall know of the Doctrine, that it is of God,
he shall not only believe it according to the strict notion of that Phrase.
There is an inward sweetness in Holy Truths that a Good soul will relish, and
savor, but the vitiated palates of those that are in love with any lust cannot
taste it. How sweet (said David) are thy words unto my taste, yea, sweeter than
Honey unto my mouth. Now naked demonstrations give but very poor and slight
satisfaction in comparison of that knowledge that arises from sense and
Experience; and this latter alone will remove from us all doubt and
uncertainty* Therefore that was so far from being a weak and foolish, that it
was a most worthy and laudable speech of the honest Martyr: Though I cannot
dispute, I can die for Christ* No one that has tasted honey, can at all doubt
of its sweetness, though he may want cunning enough to answer the Arguments
whereby a Sophister may attempt to prove it bitter. We say, seeing is
believing. And the great evidence that our Savior proved himself to be the
Messiah by, was that of sense. By this was Thomas his incredulity, as very
strong as it was, immediately overcome. And the Bodily senses are not more
infallible than is the purified sense of the Soul.

Thirdly, The aforesaid temper of mind will secure those in whom it is, from
the causes of error in those Points of the Gospel that are of weightiest
importance. It is undoubtedly certain that mistakes about these cannot possibly
arise from the obscurity of that Book, it being as plain as heart can wish in
all matters of absolute necessity; as has been shown in the Free Discourse.
Therefore errors that are of a damnable nature must necessarily proceed from
vicious causes, such as,

1. Gross Ignorance: But it is not possible to find this in any soul that is
sincerely desirous to obey God. 2. A too high opinion of our parts and Reason:
By which is often occasioned a rejection of whatsoever they are not able to
comprehend. But the honest soul can have no such conceits of his Reason; he
knows nothing more undoubtedly than that he is a weak and most shallow
Creature. He knows that the most contemptible Insect and common Weed are able
to pose and put him to a nonplus* and that it would therefore be the highest
of Arrogances in him to believe nothing revealed to him, but what is an
adequate object of his understanding. This man will submit his Reason to Divine
Revelation, and not Divine Revelation to his Reason. It Is true he cannot,
though he would never so fain, believe that which does manifestly contradict
the Reason of his mind, and the Innate sense of his soul; but therefore it is
certain that no such things are to be found in the Gospel, nor can be a matter
of Divine Revelation. 3. Proud Affectation of being thought wiser than other
folk. This was a great thing which made the first Heretics that the Church of
Christ ever knew, as appears by the Arrogant Title they assumed to
themselves, and distinguished their Sect by, viz. Gnostiques. But that temper
of mind that makes men unfeignedly desirous of Piety and true Virtue is
inconsistent with all such ambitious and aspiring thoughts. 4. Liquorish
curiosity and wantonness of spirit. When people are glutted with those
wholesome truths which they have for many years been entertained with, and will
be hunting after Novelties; when they grow weary of their honest Teachers, and
will be following every Upstart that sets himself in opposition to them; it can
hardly otherwise be but that they must fall into dangerous errors. The Apostle
says, 2 Timothy 4. 3. that, The time will come when they will not endure sound
Doctrine, but after their own lusts will they heap to themselves Teachers: (But
how comes it to pass that they will do thus? it follows) having itching Fars.
But the obedientlyinclined soul will be careful to keep in that good way, which
by experience he has found to be so, and to avoid all bye-paths. Nor will he
be running after Seducers, but shun them all he can, as being conscious of his
own weakness and his aptness without the Grace of God to be misled. 5. The love
of, and being wedded to any one lust whatsoever will certainly endanger men's
falling into the worst of Heresies. When men have some beloved sins or sin,
which they are resolved they will not part with, and are as a Right Eye or
M^tt. 5. 29, 30.
Right Hand to them, they are easily persuaded to entertain such Principles as
will allow them to live in them, and to abandon those that will not; and
therefore to wrest the Scriptures (as those the Apostle speaks of, 2 Pet. 3.
16.) to their own destruction, and put them upon the rack to make them speak
such things as may consist with the interest of their corrupt affections. Quod
volumus, facile credimus, that which we would have to be true, we easily
believe is so; and what we desire should be false, we are with little
difficulty persuaded to disbelieve. This therefore, has had such a very
fearful influence on not a few, as to cause them at length to throw away their
BIBLES, to deny the Immortality of their Souls, and disbelieve as much as they
can even the Being of a Deity, because they are sensible that while they
continue in their sins, it is infinitely their Interest that the holy
Scriptures should be false, that there should be no other life, and no God. But
I need not say, that the Honest, Obedient Person is one that is not devoted to
any Lust. 6. The just judgment of God upon these and the like accounts, is the
last cause I shall mention of men's disbelieving the Gospel, and renouncing any
of the Essentials of Christianity. Even as they did not like to retain God in
their knowledge, (that is to acknowledge him in their practice) God gave them
up to a Reprobate (or an adulterate, corrupted) mind* Romans 1. 28. Because they
received not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved; God shall send
them (...) strength of delusion, that they should believe a lie; that they all
might be damned who believed not the Truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians. 2* 10. The forementioned particulars do of themselves
lead to the most dangerous errors, how much more then must they needs so do,
when they are backed on with the Divine Vengeance. But if honesty and an
Obedient temper of Soul will secure from the other causes of error and
seduction, it will, in so doing, secure from this last.
So that it is manifest that a sincere desire of Righteousness and true
Holiness will not fail to help men to a thorow-belief and sufficient
understanding of that Book which is only designed to indue them with it: And
that nothing can occasion the contrary but a wilful adhering to some one or
other immorality; and that this has a very great aptness so to do. So that it
is not the least matter of wonder, to see men of excellent wits and brave
accomplishments, either fall into gross errors or even into a flat disbelief
of the Christian Religion. As strange as this may seem to some, it appears from
our past Discourse, that there is not any real cause of admiration in it. For
other endowments, of as excellent use as they may be when accompanied with that
of an obedient temper, must needs do more hurt than good to the Souls that are
adorned and graced with them, when separated from it, and occasion those vices
that may well make way for Heresies. And it is certain that an acute wit when
it has not a purified sense going along with it, is so far from being a
sufficient praerequisite to the right understanding of Evangelical truths, that
it is as notable an Engine as the Grand Deceiver can desire to make use of, in
order to the bringing about his mischievous designs upon the person that is
Master of it. So that indeed, it is on the contrary rather matter of wonder,
that any man that has a naughty Will, should have a good Judgment in
Gospel Truths, though both his natural and acquired parts should be never so
great. And again we may without the least breach of Charity presume, that
whosoever, to whom Christianity is sufficiently made known, does either
disbelieve it or any of the Fundamentals of it, his Heart is much more in fault
than is his Head, and that he has darkened his Discerning faculty and greatly
dimmed the Eye of his Soul, by entertaining some filthy lust that sends up a
thick sog and mist of vapors to it. If any man teach otherwise (says S. Paul,
1 Timothy 6. 3.) and consent not to wholesome words, even the words of our Lord
Jesus Christ, and to the Doctrine that is according to Godliness; he is proud,
etc. not he is weak and cannot, but he is wicked and will not understand the
Truth. And, by the way, this Discourse may conduce to the no small
encouragement of the weaker sort: Let such be but heartily solicitous about
doing God's Will and having the Design of the Gospel effected in them, and they
need fear that their weakness will betray them into the wrong way to
Blessedness.

CHAP. XXVII. The Last Inference.
That we are taught by the Design of Christianity, wherein the Essence, Power
and Life of it consists. Instances of what kind of things it does not consist
in. For what Ends the several Exercises of Piety and Devotion are enjoined. How
God is Glorified by men, and by what means. Whom it is our duty to esteem and
carry our selves toward as true Christians. That by following the Example of
Christ and making his Life our Pattern, we shall assure our selves that the
Design of Christianity is effected in us, and that we are endued with the Power
of it.

LAstly, We learn from the Doctrine of the Design of Christianity, wherein the
Essence, Power and Life of it consists, viz. In a good state and habit of
mind, in a holy frame and temper of Soul; whereby it esteems God as the
Chiefest good, prefers him and his Son Jesus before all the world, and
prizeth above all things an interest in the Divine Perfections; such as Justice
and Righteousness, universal Charity, Goodness, Mercy and Patience, and all
kinds of Purity. From whence does naturally proceed a hearty compliance with
all the Holy Precepts of the Gospel; and sincere endeavors to perform all
those actions which are agreeable to them, are necessary expressions of those
and the like virtues, and means for the obtaining and increase of them; and to
avoid the Contrary.

The Kingdom of God (or Christianity) is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; as Saint Paul tells us, Romans 14. 17. That is,
it does not consist in any merely external matters, or bodily exercises, which
(elsewhere he says) do profit but little. And 1 Timothy 4. 8
as not in such as he there means, viz. things of a perfectly indifferent
nature, and neither good nor evil; so neither in such as are very good and
laudable for the matter of them. It is only their flowing from an inward
Principle of Holiness, that denominateth any whatsoever Christian actions. But
such as are only occasioned by certain external inducements and motives, and
proceed not from any good temper and disposition of Soul, be they never so
commendable in themselves, bespeak not him that performs them to be a true
and sincere Christian. He is not a Jew, says the same Apostle, that is one
outwardly, neither is that Circumcision that is outward in the flesh: But he is
a Jew, that is one inwardly; and Circumcision is that of the heart, in the
Spirit, and not in the Letter, whose praise is not of men but of God, Romans 2.
28, 29. That is, he only is a true child of Abraham, who in the purity of the
heart obeys those substantial Laws that are imposed by God upon him. And if
no one that does not thus, might properly be called a Jew or child of Abraham,
much less can the name of a Christian and a Disciple of the Holy Jesus be due
to him. He (it is evident) is only so, in whom the Design of Christianity is
in some measure accomplished. And it appears from what has been said that its
Design is Primarily and immediately upon the Nature; which, being rectified and
renewed, will certainly discover it self so to be throughout the whole life.
For a good tree will not bring forth corrupt fruit, nor a corrupt Matt. 7.
tree good fruit, as our Savior has said. Were it possible (as it is not)
that we should forbear all outward acts of sin, and yet our Souls cleave to it,
we could not but be destitute of the Life and Power of Christianity. And should
we abound never so much in the exercise of good duties, if our design in so
doing be to gratify any lust, and serve some carnal interest, they will be so
far from Christian actions, that they may be most truly and properly called
sins. There is no one duty more affectionately recommended in the Gospel to us
than is Almsgiving; but to give alms to be seen and praised by men, is no
better than base Hypocrisy (as Christ has told us) so far is it from an
expression of Christian Charity. And whatsoever materially virtuous actions
proceed not from the principle of love to virtue, though I cannot say that all
such are hateful to God, yet they want that degree of perfection that is
requisite to make them truly Christian. And it is a plain case that he is not
the Christian, that is much employed in the Duties of Prayer, Hearing God's
Word, Reading the Bible and other good Books, etc. but he that discovers a
good mind in them, in whom the end of them is effected, and who is the better
for them. This is the business for the sake of which Prayer is enjoined. We are
therein to acknowledge God's Infinite Perfections, and our obligations to him,
that we may express our hearty sense of them, and in order to our being the
more affected with those, and our having the more grateful resentments of
these. We are in that duty to address our selves to the Divine Majesty, in the
name of Christ, for what we want; that we may by this means both express and
increase our dependence on him, and trust in him for the obtaining thereof. And
to confess and bewail our sins, to exercise Godly sorrow and contrition of
Soul; and that by so doing we may be so much the more deeply humbled for them,
and have the greater averseness in our wills against them. The communion which
we are to enjoy with God in Prayer is such as consists in being enamoured
with the Excellencies that are in him, and in receiving communications of his
Nature and Spirit from him.

Therefore also are we commanded to Hear and Read God's Word, that we may come
thereby to understand, and be put in mind of the several Duties he requires of
us, and be powerfully moved to the doing of them.

And the like may be said concerning all the other Exercises of Piety and
Devotion, the end of them is more and more to dispose our Hearts to the Love,
and our wills to the obedience of our Blessed Creator and Redeemer. And
busying our selves in any of them without this Design may well be counted in
the number of the fruitless and unaccountable actions of our lives. Thus to do
is prodigally to wast and mispend our time: as the Jews were upbraided by one
of their adversaries, with doing, upon the account of their Sabbath, saying,
That they lost one day in seven. And those that are most constant in their
Addresses to the Majesty of Heaven, both in the Public and Private worship of
him, if they go into his presence with the entertainment and allowance of any
sinful Affection, they have never the more of the Divine Approbation upon that
account. If I regard, says David, iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear
me. God esteems no better of such as do so, than as Hypocritical Fawners upon
him, and false-hearted Complementers of him; and has declared that their
Sacrifices are an Abomination to him. The Generality of the Jews were such a
people: God by his Prophet Isaiah speaks thus concerning them. They seek me
daily and delight to know my ways, as a Nation that did Righteousness, and
forsook not the Ordinance of their God. They ask of me the Ordinances of
Justice, they take delight in approaching to God. They were a people that loved
to fast and pray, and afflict their Souls, and to make their voice to be heard
on high: But giving liberty to themselves in plain immoralities, God declared
that all this was even hateful to him: As may be seen in the Fifty eighth of
Isaiah. And he there likewise tells them, that the Fast which he took
pleasure in, consists in loosing the bands of wickedness, in undoing the
heavy burdens; and letting the oppressed go free; in breaking every yoke; in
dealing their bread to the Hungry; and bringing the poor that are cast out, to
their houses; in covering the Naked; and the exercise of strict justice, mercy
and kindness. And in the first Chapter, he asks them, To what purpose the
multitude of their Sacrifices were (though they were no other than he himself
by the Law of Moses required) and charged them to bring no more vain oblations
to him; told them that their Incense was an Abomination to him, their New Mons
and Sabbaths and calling of Assemblyes he could not away with, that their
Solemn Assembly was iniquity, that their New Mons and appointed Feasts his
Soul hated, and that he was weary to bear them. And all this because these were
the only or main things they recommended themselves to him by; their Religion
chiefly consisted in them; and they gave themselves leave to be unrighteous,
cruel and unmerciful, as may there be seen.

God abhorrs to see men come cringing and crowching before him, bestowing a
great heap of the best words upon him, and the worst upon themselves, and with
dejected countenances bemoaning themselves and making lamentable complaints of
their wickedness to him, imploring mercy and favor from him, etc. when they
resolvedly persist in disobedience. So far are such things as these from being
able to make amends for any of their sins, that God accounts them no better
than Additions to their most heinous impieties; as by the Sixty sixth of
I^aiah, it further appears: It is said there, He that kills an Ox, is as if
he slew a man; he that sacrifices a Lamb, as if he cut off a Dog's neck; he
that offers an (...), as if he offered Swines blood; ^e that burns Incense,
as if he (...) (...) (...)* And how came this to pass? it follows* They have
chosen their own ways, and their Soul delights in their Abomination^* So that
if he had such an opinion of the goodliest and most acceptable Sacrifices when
offered by Disobedient and Immorall Persons, under the Law; it is impossible
that he should have one jot a better of the most affectionate Devotions of
those that take no care to be really and inwardly righteous and holy under the
Gospel. And in being so, consists (as was said) the Soul and Life of
Christianity.

Not that a true Christian can have undervaluing and slight thoughts of the
External worship and service of God; nor that he can contemn or neglect praying
to him, singing his Praises, Hearing or Reading his Word, etc. Nothing less:
For by the serious and diligent performance of these and the like Duties he
comes to acquire and increase that good temper of Soul that gives him the
denomination of such a one, through the assistance of the Divine Grace. He is
one, to speak in the words of Hierocles, as (...), joins Endeavors to (...),
and Prayers also (with the other parts of Divine Worship) to his other
Endeavors.

And besides the solemn acknowledgements of God, both in public and private,
are expressions of Natural Justice. Quid aliud est (...) (says Tully) quam
Iustitia adversus Deos? What is Piety or Devotion but Justice toward God? And
each of the significations of it, whether Natural or Positive, they are
Payments of a due to him; so that men cannot be so much as honest, and omit the
honoring of the Divine Majesty by them. But it is certain that these
Performances do him no honor at all, any otherwise than as they proceed from a
good and sincere Soul. And to this purpose our often cited Philosopher has
this other excellent saying, viz. The greatest abundance and profusest
costliness (...). Page 25.
of Oblations bring no Honor to God, except they are offered with a Divine
mind: For the Gifts and Sacrifices of fools are but food for the fire.
Sacrifices in Ancient times were called the Food of Almighty God, as being
provision made for his house; but (says this Philosopher) when they proceed
from fools (or wicked men) they are at best but the Fire's meat, They signify
nothing to God, and are merely thrown away.

And indeed the best intelligible and most significant honor that our
devoutest services bring to God, is by their being a means of making us more
like unto him. And as I showed, out of the Learned Master Smith's Treatise, how
God most glorifieth himself, so I think it not amiss to transcribe more lines
of that worthy person, wherein he excellently shows how we most glorify God;
and they immediately follow the former. Says he, page 409. As God's seeking
his own glory in respect of us is most properly the flowing forth of his
Goodness upon us; so our seeking the Glory of God is most properly our
endeavoring a participation of his goodness, and an earnest uncessant pursuing
after Divine perfection. When God becomes so Great in our eyes, and all created
things so l^ttle, that we reckon upon nothing as worthy of our aims or
amb^tions but a serious participation of the Divine Nature, and the exercise of
Divine Vert^^s, Love, Joy, Peace, Longsuffering, Kindness, Goodness and the
like* When the Soul beholding the Infinite Beauty and Loveliness of the
Divinity, and then looking down and beholding all created perfection mantled
over with darkness, is ravished into love and admiration of that never-setting
Brightness, and endeavors after the greatest res^^blance of God in Justice,
Love and (...): when conversing with him (...), by a secret feeling of the
(...), (...) and power of his Goodness, we endeavor to assimilate our selves
to him: Then we may be said to Glorify him indeed. God seeks ^o glory but his
own, and we have none of our own to give him. God in all things seeks himself
and his own Glory, as finding nothing Better than himself; and when we love him
above all things, and endeavor to be most like him, we declare plainly that we
count nothing Better than he is.

See more to the same purpose, Page 141, 142, 143. And this same Excellent
Notion the Pythagoraeans (however they came by it) did also teach. It was one
of their sayings, Thou will best glorify God, by assimilating (...).
and making thy mind like to God.

And I will trouble the Reader with one more of our Philosopher's sayings which
is no less (...). Comment. in Aur. Carm. Page 22.
worthy of his observation than any of the past recited ones, viz. Thou can
not honor God in giving ought to him, but by becoming a meet and worthy Person
to receive from him.

And the great and Infallible Oracle of Truth, our Blessed Savior, has
assured us, that, Herein is his Father Glorified, Joh. 5. 18.
that we bear much Fruit; that we are fruitful in all Holiness. And we learn
from S. Paul, Phil. 1. 11. That they are the Fruits of Righteousness, which are
by Jesus Christ (or the effects of his Grace and Holy Spirit) which redound to
the praise and glory of God. And then do we praise him most significantly and
effectually, when we are (...) (as there he prays that the Philippians may be)
with these Fruits: when Righteousness takes possession of our Souls, grows and
increases in them, and exerts it self in our Lives (as it must needs do
wheresoever it is) and our whole conversations shine with it.

In short; Circumcision is nothing, and Uncircumcision is nothing, (neither any
Opinions, nor Performances, nor Forbearances, that have no influence upon the
Soul and Spirit, are any thing;) but the keeping the Commandments of God: This
is all in all. In Christ Jesus nothing at all avails but such a Faith as
works by love ((...) or is perfected by Charity) and a Newcreature. And if any
man be in Christ, he is a New creature; and whosoever is a New creature, is in
Christ or a true Christian. All which S. Paul has plainly taught us, in 1 Cor.
7. 19. Gal. 5. 6. 2 Cor. 5. 17. Those in whom the Design of the Gospel has
taken good effect, are indeed Christians, and none but such: in the success of
that must needs lie the power of Christianity, and in nothing else. And
therefore whosoever they are in whom the Genuine effects of Righteousness and
true Holiness are conspicuous, we ought to look upon them as Living Members of
that Body whereof Christ is the Head. Whoever are ready to profess their Faith
in God and Christ and the Holy Spirit in all Scripture Phrases (without
perverting their manifest and apparent sense) and lead a life answerable, for
ought that we can discern, to the clear intimations of our Savior's will, and
all the Rules plainly laid down in his Holy Gospel, (though it should not be
their fortune to concur with us in all our sentiments) it is our duty to judge
them to be endued with all the Essentials and Integral parts of Christianity,
and accordingly to carry our selves toward them: Or we shall offer them too
great a temptation to suspect, that we our selves are ignorant wherein they
consist, and for all our great Profession are void of them.

There is one thing more which I cannot forbear to add concerning the weighty
and most important Point we are now discoursing, and which contains the sum of
all that need to be said about it, viz. That it is impossible we should not
have the Design of Christianity accomplished in us, and therefore that we
should be destitute of the Power of it, if we make our Savior's most Excellent
Life (a short account of which we have been in this Tractate presented with,)
the Pattern of our ^ves* if we write after that Fair Copy he has therein set
us, if we tread in his Blessed S^eps, and be such, according to (...) Measure
and Capacity, as we have understood he was in this World. Those that sincerely
and industriously endeavor to imitate the Holy Jesus in his Spirit and (...),
can never be ignorant what it is to be truly Christians; nor can they fail
(...) (...). And if the History of his Life were more perused and minded, and
that he designed to be therein our Example (as both he and his Apostles have
often enough assured us he did) were more seriously considered, it could not
possibly be that the Design of his Gospel, and that wherein consists the Power
of Godliness and Soul of Christianity, should be by so many so very miserably
mistaken, as we see it is.

The Conclusion.
WHat remains now but that we sedulously and with the greatest concernedness
betake our selves to find that, which has been proved to be the Design of
Christanity, accomplished in our Hearts and Lives.

That we endeavor above all things in the World to walk worthy of the Vocation
wherewith we are called; and that our Conversation be as it becomes the Gospel
of Christ: And by that means make it appear to our selves and others that we
are not in the number of those wretched Souls on whom the knowledge of the most
incomparable Religion is merely thrown away, and bestowed to very ill or to no
purpose.

That we place the Kingdom of God not in Word, but in Power; and our
Christianity not in letting our Tongues loose, but in bridling both them and
our exorbitant Affections.

That we make less Noise, be less Disputacious, and more Obedient; That we Talk
and Cavil less, and Be and Live better: As well knowing, that an Objecting,
quarrelsome and wrangling humor serves to no better end than eating out the
heart and life of all true Religion.

Let us Exercise our selves unto Real and Substantial Godliness, and in
keeping our Consciences void of offense both toward God and toward men; and
in Studying the Gospel to enable us not to Discourse, or only to Believe; but
also and above all things to Do well.

Let us esteem Christianity a Principle of such Vigor, Spriteliness and
Activity, as to be assured of nothing more than that it cannot possibly Be
where it does not Act; and that the lives of those that are endued with it
cannot but bear witness to the Force of it.

Let us do what lies in us to Convince our Atheists that the Religion of the
Blessed Jesus is no Trick or Device; and our Wanton and Loose Christians, that
it no Notional business or Speculative Science, by letting them see most
Excellent effects produced in our selves by it: By showing them how Sober and
Temperate, how Chaste, how severely Just, how Meek and Peaceable, how Humble,
how Patient and Submissive to the Will of God, how Loving and Charitable, what
Contemners of this World and Confiders in God we are enabled to be by the Power
of it.

Let us declare that we are not mere Professors of Faith in Christ Jesus, by
doing Acts worthy of such a Faith: That we are not barely Relyers on Christ's
Righteousness, by being Imitatours of it, by being righteous as he was
righteous: That we do truly believe the Christian Doctrine, by cheerfully
complying with the Christian Precepts. Hereby let us know that we do indeed
know him, that we keep 1 John 2. 3
his Commandments

By our care thus to do shall our minds (as has been shown) (...). Clem.
Alexandrin. Stromat. Lib. ^ Page 288.
be enlightened in all Necessary Truth. It was by their care to Do the Will of
God, that the Primitive Christians obtained the right Knowledge of it. And
there is no such Method for the acquiring of all useful knowledge as this is.

By this means shall we also be kept Constant in the True Profession of the
Faith. The Obedient is the only Christian that is out of danger even of a Total
Apostasy; nor can there be any sure hold of any one that is not Obedient. He
whose Great Design it is to keep the Commandments of God and his Son Jesus, is
the only Solid, Stable and Settled man. Our Savior has likened him unto a
Wise man which built his house upon a Rock, which, notwithstanding that the
rain descended, and floods came, and the winds blew and all beat upon it, fell
not, because it was founded upon a Mat. 7. 24.
Rock. And on the contrary he has compared those that hear, but do not his
sayings, to a Foolish man, which Verse. 26.
built his house upon the Sands; which, when assaulted by a Tempest, fell; and
great was the fall of it. It Is no strange thing to see a very highly
Professing, if he be not as conscienciously Living a Christian, tossed up and
down like a wave of the Sea, and carried away with every Wind of Doctrine: but
so will not the Obedient Person be. He may ('it is confessed) alter his opinion
in the less weighty and more obscurely delivered Points, but those which belong
to the main body and substance of Christianity, and are plainly revealed, as
all such are, he will inseparably adhere to.

By this means will our Knowledge be sanctisied and made useful, but without
the care of Obedience it will be utterly unprofitable, nay of very hurtful and
mischievous Consequence. Whatsoever Christian knowledge is not impregnated with
answerable Goodness, but is unaccompanied with Christian Practice, is not only
an insipid and jejune, but also a flatulent thing, that in stead of nourishing
is apt to swell and extremely puff up the Souls of men; I mean, to make them
proud and highly opinionated of their own worth, censorious and contemners of
other People, and of a conceited and pragmatical, a contentious and unpeaceable
behavior. And there i^no man but may observe too too many of our great
pretenders to Christianity unhappily Exemplifying and demonstrating by their
practices this sad truth.

By this means, shall we convince Gainsayers more than by any Arguments: But
they are never like to be persuaded that our Judgments are Orthodox, while
they perceive our Conversations to be Heretical. Wicked men are an infinite
discredit to any party they side with, and do it mighty disservice. I wish we
of the Church of England did not know this by very woeful Experience. And on the
other hand, a good life cannot but be of exceeding great force to draw
Dissenters to the embracing of our Religion. We see that mere Pretenses to
great Sanctity do strangely make Proselytes to several Forms, that have nothing
besides to set them of^ and commend them. And as for obstinate Persons who are
peremptorily resolved that they will by no means be prevailed with to come over
to us, they will however be greatly disabled from reproaching our Religion,
when they are convinced that it has excellent effects on the Professors of
it: Or at least, neither their Reproaches, nor any Attempts whatsoever against
it, could then ever have success, or be able to do any thing to its
considerable prejudice. Nor would that idle and senseless talk, whereby some
Hotheaded people endeavor to prove us an Antichristian Church, be by many,
if by any listened to, could they discern among us more Christian Lives: could
they be once satis^ied that we esteem it our Principal interest and concernment
to make our selves and others really and Substantially good. So is the Will of
God (says S. Peter) that with well-doing ye may put to Silence the 1 Pet. ^.
(...)
Ignorance of foolish men.

By this means shall we pass cheerfully through this sad world; and in the
midst of our thoughts within us will solid comforts delight our Souls. Little
do those think what Happiness they deprive themselves of even in this life,
that place their Religion in any thing more than an Universal respect to their
Savior's Precepts. There is no true Christian that (...) to be told, That the
more careful (...) is to obey God, the more sweetly h^ enjoys himself: Nor,
That a Virtuous and Holy Life does several ways bring in a constant Revenue of
Peace and Pleasure; even such as no Earthly thing can afford any that deserves
to be named on the same day with it. Every good man feels that Christ's yoke is
not less Pleasant than it is Easy, nor his Burden more Light than it is
Delightful: And that all his ways are, upon many accounts, ways of
Pleasantness, and all his Paths Peace. So that were there no other Reward to be
hoped for but what daily attends them, it would be most unquestionably our
Interest to walk in them, and to forsake all other for them: And there is no
one of Christ's Disciples that by Experience understands what his Blessed
Master's injunctions are, that would be content to be eased, though he might,
of them: Or that would accept of a Qui^tus est from performing the Duties
required by him, though he should have it offered him, even with the Broad Seal
of Heaven (which is impossible to be supposed) affixed to it.

But, lastly, by this means shall we obtain, when we depart hence, the End of
our Faith, even the Salvation of our Souls, and arrive at a most Happy and
Glorious Immortality. By the pursuance of real and Universal Righteousness
shall we certainly obtain the Crown of Righteousness, which our righteous
Redeemer has purchased for us, and God the 2 Timothy 4.
Righteous Judge will give unto us. An exceeding and Eternal weight of Glory we
shall assuredly reap, if we faint not and be not weary of Welldoing.

Glory, Honor and Peace is the undoubted Romans 2. 10
portion of every Soul that works good. And Blessed are they Rev. 22. 14
that do his Commandments, for they have right to the Tree of Life, and shall
enter through the Gates into the City.

But if, on the Contrary, we foolishly satisfy our selves with an ineffectual
Faith in Christ, a notional knowledge and empty Profession of his Religion, or
a merely external and Partial Righteousness; these will be so far from
intitling us to the exceeding great and precious Promises of the Gospel, that
they (at least the three former) will much heighten our misery in the world to
come, and excessively aggravate our Condemnation.

Let us hear the Conclusion of the whole matter; Fear God, and keep his
Commandments (from a Principle of Love to him and them;) for this is the whole
of (the Christian) Man.

The End.
Errata.
PAge 17. line 8. for practical read partial. p. 51. l. 3. r. world. p. 82. l.
7. r. poverty. p. 87. l. 1. r. for sin. and l. 9. r. Jealousy. p. 95. l. 12.
r. of sin. p. 115. l. 18. r. farther add. p. 155. l. 27. r look. p. 1^4. l. 7.
blot out too. p. 190. l. 23. r. Christians. p. 211. last line, for the r.
their. p. 224. l. 17. for in r. on. p. 280. l. 17. r. need not. p. 294. l. 13.
r. filled. p. ^00. l. 8. r. it is. In (...) p. 106. and in (...) p. 112. and in
(...) p. 187. for (...) should be (...).

Some Books Printed for R. Royston at the Angel in St Paul's Churchyard, since
the Fire.
A Paraphrase and Annotations upon all the Books of the New Testament. The
third Edition: by H. Hammond, D. D.

Ductor Dubitantium, Or the Rule of Conscience, in Four Books, Folio: The
second Edition: by Jer. Tailor, Chaplain in Ordinary to King Charles the First,
and late Lord Bishop of Down and Conner.

The Sinner Impleaded in his own Court: The third Edition: Whereunto is now
added, The love of Christ planted upon the very same Turf, on which it once had
been Supplanted by the extreme Love of Sin: in 4o.

A Collection of Sermons upon several occasions: by Tho. Pierce, D. D. and
President of S. Mary Magdalen-College in Oxon.

A correct Copy of some Notes concerning God's Decrees, enlarged: by the same
Author: in 4o.

A Discourse concerning the true Notion of the Lord's Supper, to which are
added two Sermon. by R. Cudworth, D. D. in 8o.

The Unreasonableness of the Romanists, requiring our Communion with the
present Romish-Church: in 8o.

Christian Consolation Derived from five heads in Religion. I. Faith, II. Hope,
III. The Holy Spirit, IV. Prayer, V. The Sacraments.
Written by the Right Reverend Father in God, John Hacket, late Lord Bishop of
Coventry and Lichfield, Chaplain to King Charles the I. and II. in 8o.

The Profitableness of Piety, an Assize Sermon Preached by Richard West, D. D.
in 4o.

West Barbary, or a Narrative of the Revolutions of the Kingdoms of Fez and
Morocco: with an account of the present Customs, Sacred, Civil and Domestic:
in 8o.

Printed at Oxon for John Willmot, and are to be sold, by Richard Royston.

The Christian Sacrifice. A Treatise showing the Necessity, End, and Manner of
Receiving the Holy Communion: Together with suitable Prayers and Meditations
for every Month in the Year; and the Principal Festivals in Memory of our
Blessed SAVIOR.

The End.

