A Second Defense OF THE Propositions, By which the DOCTRINE of the Holy
Trinity Is so Explained, according to the Ancient Fathers, As to speak it not
Contradictory to Natural Reason.

In ANSWER to A Socinian Manuscript, In a LETTER to a Friend.

Together, With a Third Defense of those Propositions, in Answer to the Newly
published Reflections, contained in a Pamphlet, Entitled, A Letter to the
Reverend Clergy of Both Universities.

Both by the Author of those Propositions.

London, Printed for B. Aylmer at the Three Pigeons in Cornhil, 1695

ERRATA.
PAge 16. Line 27. dele is. P. 20. l. 23. for does read do. P. 32. l. 22. for
that proceed from the Sun r. that proceeds, without the Sun. P. 33. l. 9. for
Pooceed r. Proceed. P. 37. l. 3. for Stages r. Stage). l. 5. for Soul) r.
Souls. P. 46. l. 17. for Incorporal r. Incorporeal. P. 49. l. 1. for does r. do.

THE PREFACE.
THE Propositions relating to the Doctrine of the H. Trinity, were but
Twenty-one when the Manuscript mentioned in the Title Page, was writ against
them: But all the Twenty-eight, which since came out, are employed in them. And
I acknowledge that those Written Papers occasioned my making them so many more,
to put the Explication more out of danger of Misconstruction.

There is likewise some difference in the Wording of those Twenty-one and the
Title, and two or three small Additions, but the Sense of both is Exactly the
same. Those I drew up in Compliance with a Gentleman of as great Worth as
Quality, who requested me to give him in Writing the Sense, he once heard me
Affirm to be the most Ancient, of this Grand Article of our Faith; and in my
Opinion incomparably Preferrable to the Later Hypotheses. And falling into this
Method, of Expressing, Clearing, and Confirming the Fathers Notion of the
Trinity, by Propositions, I delivered, when I had finished them, a fair Copy of
them to that Gentleman, and gave my foul one to a Friend, who needed
Satisfaction about this Great Point.

This Person, some time after, brought me from a Socinian Acquaintance of his,
an Answer to my Paper, Concealing his Name from me: and I sent him my Thoughts
of his Performance, as soon as my Occasions would permit me to Consider it;
which are contained in the next following Defense. Only in what I now Publish,
I abridge a little in a few places of what I writ, nor is there any other
Considerable Alteration.

And as I Printed not more than an Hundred Copies of the Propositions, till I
Replied to the Answer to them, a while since Published by Another Hand; So the
now Coming Abroad of This Answer, is Solely Occasioned by the New Reflections.

But if it be thought no fair dealing with my Adversary, that I do not Publish
also his Papers, I have this to Say, I have them not to Publish, but returned
them at His desire, who brought them to me, not thinking it worth the while to
take a Copy of them, since I had not then a Thought of ever Printing my Reply.

But if I have played any Tricks in Transcribing what I Animadvert upon (which
is the Substance of the Whole) both my Adversary and his Friend are able to let
the World be Acquainted with them. But I Abhor such Doings.

The Twenty Eight Propositions.
1. THE Name of God is used in more Senses than one in Holy Scripture.

2. The most Absolutely Perfect Being, is God in the highest Sense.

3. Self-Existence is a Perfection, and seems to be the Highest of all
Perfections.

4. God the Father alone, is in reference to His Manner of Existence an
Absolutely Perfect Being; because He alone is Self-existent.

5. He alone, consequently, is absolutely Perfect, in reference to those
Perfections, which do presuppose Self-Existence.

6. Those Perfections are Absolute Independence, and Being the First Original
of all other Beings: In which the Son and the Holy Ghost are comprehended.

7. All Trinitarians do acknowledge, That these Two Persons are from God the
Father. This is affirmed in that Creed which is called the Nicene, and in that
which falsely bears the Name of Athanasius: though with this difference, that the
Holy Ghost is asserted in them, to be from the Son as well as from the Father.
Wherein the Greek Church differs from the Latin.

8. It is therefore a flat Contradiction, to say that the Second and Third
Persons are Self Existent.

9. And therefore it is alike Contradictions, to affirm them to be Beings
Absolutely Perfect in reference to their Manner of Existence; and to say that
they have the Perfections of Absolute Independence, and of being the First
Originals of all things.

10. Since the Father alone is a Being of the most Absolute Perfection, He
having those Perfections which the other Two Persons are incapable of having;
He alone is God in the Absolute Highest Sense.

11. And therefore our blessed Savior calls Him, The Only True God, Joh. 17.
3. This is Life Eternal, to know Thee the only True God, and Jesus Christ,
whom Thou have sent. And it is most Absurd to think, That in these Words, and
the following Prayer, He did address himself to the Three Persons of the
Trinity conjunctly, since throughout the Prayer He calls this Only True God
his Father; and calls Himself twice His Son, before these Words. Not to mention
the Absurdity of making our Lord to pray to Himself, or of distinguishing
Himself from those Three, of which Himself was One. If such a Liberty as this,
in interpreting Scripture, be allowable, what Work may be made with Scripture!

12. Our Lord calls the Father, The Only True God, because He only is
Originally, and of Himself God, and the First Original of all Beings
whatsoever. As he calls him the Only Good, saying, There is none Good but God,
because He alone is Originally so, and the Spring of all that Good which is in
other Beings.

13. The God head, or God in this Highest Sense, can be but One Numerically. Of
which the best Philosophers were satisfied by their Reason; and therefore the
Oneness so frequently affirmed of Him in Scripture is a Numerical Oneness.

14. There seems to be neither Contradiction, nor Absurdity, in supposing the
First Original of all things, to be productive of other Beings so Perfect, as
to have all Perfections, but that of Self-Existence, and those which are
necessarily therein employed.

15. Supposing any such Beings to have immediately issued forth from that
infinite Fullness, and Foecundity of Being, which is in the Deity, each of them
must have a Right to the Name of God, in a Sense next to that in which it is
appropriated to the Father; since they have all the Perfections of the Godhead,
but those that must of Necessity be peculiar to Him.

16. It is evident from the Holy Scripture, That the Son and Holy Spirit are
such Beings, viz. That they have all Divine Perfections but the forementioned:
Such as Unlimited Power, Wisdom, Goodness, etc.

17. And they are always spoken of in Scripture, as Distinct Beings or Persons,
according to the Proper Signification of this Word, both from the Father and
from Each Other. Nor are so many Men or Angels more expressly distinguished as
different Persons or Substances, by our Savior or his Apostles, than the
Father, Son and Holy Ghost still are.

18. It is a very presumptuous Conceit, That there can be no way but that of
Creation, whereby any thing can be immediately and only from God, which has a
distinct Existence of its own. Or, That no Beings can have Existence from Him,
by way of Necessary Emanation: Of which we have a Clearer Idaea than of
Voluntary Creation. It is the Word of the Ancients both Fathers and
Philosophers; nor can a better be found to express what is intended by it, viz.
A more excellent way of existing, than that of Creation.

19. It is no less presumptuous to Affirm, That it is a Contradiction to
suppose, That a Being can be from Eternity from God the Father, if it is
possible it may be from Him, in a more Excellent Way than that of Creation. And
we have an Illustration of both these Propositions, by something in Nature.
For, according to our Vulgar Philosophy, Light does exist by necessary
Emanation from the Sun, and therefore the Sun was not before the Light which
proceeds from thence, in Order of Time, though it be in Order of Nature before
it. And the Distinction between these Two Priorities, is much Elder than Thomas
Aquinas, or Peter Lombard, or any School-man of them all, or Christian-man
either.

20. And if any thing can be from another thing by way of Necessary Emanation,
it is so far from a Contradiction to suppose, that it must only be in order of
nature before it; that it is most apparently a Contradiction to suppose the
contrary.

21. Our 18th. and 19th. Propositions do speak our Explication of the H.
Trinity, to be as contrary to Arianism as to Socinianism; since the Arians
assert, That there was at least a moment of time, when the Son was not; and
that He is a Creature.

22. Although we cannot understand, how it should be no Contradiction to affirm,
That the Three Persons are But One Numerical Being, or Substance; yet has it
not the least shadow of a Contradiction to suppose, That there is an
unconceivably close and inseparable Union both in Will and Nature between them.
And such a Union may be much more easily conceived between them, than can that
Union which is between our Souls and Bodies; since these are Substances which
are of the most unlike and even Contrary Natures.

23. Since we cannot conceive the First Original of All things, to be more than
One Numerically; and that we acknowledge the now mentioned Union between the
three Persons, according to the Scriptures, together with the entire dependence
of the two latter upon the First Person, The Unity of the Deity is, to all
intents and purposes, as fully asserted by us, as it is necessary or reasonable
it should be.

24. And no part of this Explication, do we think Repugnant to any Text of
Scripture; but it seems much the Easiest way of Reconciling those Texts which
according to the other Hypotheses, are not Reconcilable, but by offering
manifest violence to them.

25. The Socinians must needs Confess, that the Honor of the Father, for which
they express a very Zealous Concern, is as much as they can desire taken care
of by this Explication. Nor can the Honor of the Son and Holy Spirit be more
Consulted, than by ascribing to them all Perfections, but what they cannot
have, without the most apparent Contradiction ascribed to them.

26. And we would think it impossible, that any Christian should not be easily
persuaded, to think as honorably of his Redeemer and Sanctifier as he can,
while he Robs not God the Father for their Sake; and offers no Violence to the
Sense and Meaning of Divine Revelations, nor to the Reason of his Mind.

27. There are many things in the Notion of One God, which all Hearty Theists
will acknowledge necessary to be conceived of Him, that are as much above the
Reach and Comprehension of humane Understandings, as is any part of this
Explication of the H. Trinity. Nay, this may be affirmed, even of the Notion of
Self-Existence; but yet there cannot be an Atheist so silly as to question it:
Since it is not more Evident, that One and Two do make Three, than that there
could never have been any thing, if there were not Something which was always,
and never began to be.

28. Lest Novelty should be Objected against this Explication, and therefore
such should be prejudiced against it, as have a Veneration for Antiquity, we
add, that it well agrees with the Account which several of the Nicene Fathers,
even Athanasius himself, and others of the Ancients who treat of this Subject,
do in diverse places of their Works give of the Trinity: as is largely showed by
two very Learned Divines of our Church. And had it not been for the Dr.
Cudworth, and Dr. Bull.
Schoolmen, to whom Christianity is little beholden, as much as some Admire
them, we have reason to believe that the World would not have been troubled
since the fall of Arianism, with such Controversies about this great point, as
it has been and continues to be.

This Explication of the B. Trinity perfectly agrees with the Nicene Creed, as
it stands in our Liturgy, without offering the least Violence to any one Word
in it. Which makes our Lord Jesus Christ to be from God the Father by way of
Emanation; affirming Him to be God of God, very God of very God, and
Metaphorically expressing it by Light of Light; answerably to what the Author
to the Hebrews says of Him, Chapter 1. 3. viz. That He is (...), The Effulgency of
his Glory, and (...), The Character of his Substance: And so is as much Of one
Substance with the Father, as the Beams of the Sun are with the Body of it.

And since there have been of late so many Explications or Accounts Published
of this most Adorable Mystery, which have had little better Success than making
Sport for the Socinians, I thought it very Seasonable now to Revive That, which
I affirm with great Assurance to be the most Ancient one of all; much Elder
than the Council of Nice; and to have much the fewest Difficulties in it, and
to be incomparably most agreeable to H. Scripture.

The Defense, etc.
SIR,
I Have perused your Friends Answer to the Paper I put into your hand, and here
hope to give you a satisfactory Reply to it.

I shall dispatch his Preface in a few Words.

He says, that The Trinitarians have in Vain tried their Strength against
their Adversaries. And there is no doubt of it, if their Adversaries may be
Judges.

As to his saying, that The Vanquished Victors are (viz. among the
Trinitarians) for each buys his Victory with the loss of his own Explanatory
Hypothesis; I confess I have that soft place in my Head, which in his great
Modesty he says our Education has given us, that disables me to understand the
Sense of that saying: And am inclined to think, that the inversion thereof
would have been better Sense, how true soever it would have been, viz. The
Victors vanquished are; since it follows, for each buys his Victory, etc. And
whereas he says, That in their Unitarian Tracts, they have thrown a stone of
Contention among the Trinitarians, and this stone has committed them among
themselves: To pass by the Conceitedness of this latter Phrase, and the
Paedantry of affecting to speak English in Latin Phrases, sound they never so
untowardly, I may I hope without Offense tell him, that neither are the
Socinians at a perfect Agreement in their Notions: As particularly in that
Question relating to the H. Ghost, viz. Whether He be a Person or no; or a mere
Divine Vis or Energy: The Followers of Mr Biddle asserting Him to be a Person,
viz. an Angel. Nor need I tell him what a Controversy has been among them,
about the Adorability of our B. Savior; wherein they are not of a mind yet,
and I doubt never will be. And many more disagreements in their Opinions, may
be instanced in, if I cared to go on upon this Topic. But what though the
Trinitarians differ in some Particulars, in their Explication of the Trinity,
so long as they agree in the main Substance? I mean, what if they differ in
Certain Notions relating to this Doctrine, wherein the H. Scriptures are
Silent, so long as they are agreed in what the Scriptures Expressly say of it,
or of any One of the Persons of which the Trinity consists? And they All
agree in giving Divine Perfections to each of them; which the Scriptures most
expressly do. And in affirming them consequently to be each of them God, which
also they believe the Scriptures affirm them expressly to be. And farther they
agree in believing them to be one God; though they are not all agreed in what
sense they are one; nor in the Notion of the Word Person, as relating to them;
nor in their Opinion about using that Word. But if any of them have such a
Value for their own Explications, as to be severe upon such as dissent from
them in any of the less certain Parts of them, I will not, I cannot, Apologize
for this.

And now, Sir, I follow your Friend from his own Preface, to my Papers Title,
which is this: An Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity in Certain
Propositions, which speak it to be Agreeable with Natural Reason, and therefore
intelligible, though not Comprehensible by our shallow Capacities.

And here he is pleased to exclaim somewhat Tragically, against my
distinguishing between Intelligible, and Comprehensible. I am, says he,
perfectly Amazed at this his Distinction. I will not say, that I am Amazed at
his Amazement, but it seems somewhat strange to me, that First, He should call
this my Distinction, when I should think he has heard and read it a thousand
times; Since there is no Distinction more common. And therefore, Secondly, That
he should be Amazed, nay perfectly Amazed at it. And Thirdly, That he should be
so, for such a Reason as this that follows, viz. That which makes a Doctrine
unintelligible, is its disagreeableness to Reason; therefore if the Doctrine of
the Trinity be not disagreeable to Reason, neither is it unintelligible; and if
it be not unintelligible, neither is it incomprehensible.

I Answer, That I think the Obscure Expressing a Doctrine may also make it
Unintelligible: But this his Reason may be Expressed in these fewer words, I am
perfectly Amazed at this Man's distinction between Intelligible and
Comprehensible, because they ought not to be distinguished: Or, as he adds,
because they are Synonimous, and signify one as much as the other.

But sure your Friend cannot think, I should have such an Opinion of a Perfect
Stranger, as to be Satisfied with his bare Word for this. He is Perfectly
Amazed at my distinguishing betwixt Intelligible and Comprehensible: I ask Why?
He Answers, because they Ought not to be distinguished. But I am so Impertinent
as to ask again, Why they ought not? And he so Magisterial, as to let me have
no other Answer than, I say they ought not.

But he needs not be told, That though these two words are sometimes used in the
same sense, yet not always; but have most frequently different Significations.
Comprehensible always implies Intelligible; but Intelligible is found
Innumerable times, not to imply Comprehensible. And therefore Comprehensible is
taken either in a Larger, or a Stricter Sense: And in my Distinction, as he
calls it, it is taken in the Stricter, as for the most Part it is. Even his
Dictionary will tell him, that Comprehendere signifies something, that
Intelligere does not. And according to the most Proper Acceptance of the word,
there is as much difference between these two, as there is, between Seeing a
thing and looking through it; or Understanding it, and Completely Understanding
it, and having an Adoequate Preception of it. And indeed, if your Friend had
Learnt Socrates his first Lesson, he would acknowledge himself so short-fighted
a Mortal, as, though he Understands many things, not to be able to Comprehend the
most Obvious ones. He would acknowledge that in this State, things are only to
be Understood by their Properties, and certain Modes, and that the Naked
Essence neither of a Spirit nor of a Body is known to us. In short, had I
distinguished between Intelligible and Apprehensible, your Friend might have
had more Cause for Amazement.

Next he says, That the Incomprehensibility of God Himself implies no more,
than what the Apostle Expresses, when he says, His ways are past finding out;
we cannot understand them, that signifies as much as, we cannot Comprehend
them. Now it is my turn to be Amazed; at least this Sentence must be greatly
Surprising to more Heads, than those that have (like Trinitarians) a soft place
in them. For,

First, Who has so hard, or so large a Head, as to find only the Ways of God
incomprehensible to him? As to be able to Comprehend Gods Nature and Glorious
Attributes?

Second, If Comprehending must needs be no more than Understanding, there
cannot be a Proposition less true than this, That we cannot Comprehend Gods
Ways; for Mankind is Capable of Understanding them, Or GOD Almighty would never
have appealed to the Jews as He did, about the Equity of His Ways. And
therefore when the Apostle says, His ways are past finding out, his meaning
must be, they are not to be Comprehended by us, in our sense of the word: We
cannot Grasp, or Fathom them; they are of too great a Depth for us to dive to
the Bottom of them.

And now, Sir, I believe you are sufficiently Prepared to Wonder, if not to be
Amazed at this following Saying of your Friend, viz. It were a very hard thing,
that a Law should be passed, postnate to a Crime, on purpose for the taking off
one particular Offender; and it is as Unreasonable, that a Distinction should be
Coined (viz. this between Intelligible and Comprehensible) purely for the
service of a particular Mystery; and when that is done, can be of no further
use, unless new Mysteries were to be Created. And I Appeal to your self, as
much as you may be biased by Affection to your Friend, not only whether All he
has said about this Distinction, be not unaccountably strange, but likewise,
whether I have not given a more than sufficient Answer to the Request he makes
me in these words: Ignorant, or Unthinking People, may be Cheated with an Empty
verbal distinction, but since A. T. (by which Letters he all along decyphereth
me, and I understand he means by them the Anonymous Trinitarian) offers his
Explanation to satisfy men that are Knowing, as well as Religious, Scholars as
well as Christians, I must beg him to assign the difference between these two
words, Intelligible and Comprehensible. And he guesseth what Answer I will
make, in these words; I am apt to think that he will tell me, we can well
understand that this Proposition is true, Three are One; but we cannot
understand the Manner how Three should be One: And then makes this Reply upon
me, Now he might as well say, we comprehend the Truth of this Proposition, but
we do not understand the manner; but then what becomes of his Distinction? But
he might have saved himself the pains of putting words into my Mouth, and then
Replying upon them: For you have seen he is much out in his Guess what I would
Answer; and if he were not, I should be content to be told that I have more
than One soft place in my Head. For what should ayl me to offer at an
Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity, agreeable with Natural Reason, if I
did Think what he would have me Say, That it is impossible to understand the
Manner how Three should be One?

And now he says, He will take his leave of my Title, with these two
Propositions.

1. Three are One, is not true in a sense that is disagreeable to Reason; and
the sense of a Proposition that is not disagreeable to Reason is Intelligible
and Comprehensible.

To which he must needs, by this time, expect this Reply, It is Intelligible,
but it is not therefore Comprehensible.

2. He that understands the Truth of a Proposition, understands the manner in
which it is true; and he which does not understand the manner in which a
Proposition is true, does not understand the Truth of a Proposition, but takes
it on Authority. This Proposition of his is worded very oddly, I cannot make
better sense of it, than by thus expressing it: He who assents to the Truth of
a Proposition, understands the sense in which it is true; but he that does not
understand the sense, does not assent to a Proposition, but assents to it upon
Authority. Now the former part of this Proposition is sense, but nothing to the
present purpose; but the latter is neither to the purpose nor sense; as I need
not inform you. And now, Sir, your Friend is at length come to my Propositions.
As

Prop. 1. God is a Being Absolutely Perfect. To this he says All Theists agree
it.

Prop. 2. That Being which wants any one Perfection, cannot be Absolutely
Perfect. That is, in the strictest sense of that Phrase, as I afterward
explained my self. And he says, that this Proposition is self-evident; as who
sees not that so it is? But his Consequence is so far from being so, that it is
a false one, viz. Therefore our B. Savior is not God, but in a Metaphorical
sense, etc. But had he had but a little Patience, he might quickly have seen,
that notwithstanding Our Lord is not Self-Existent, there is no necessity of
his being God only in a Metaphorical Sense.

Prop. 3. Self-Existence is a Perfection, and seems to be the Highest; it being
an Abatement of any other Perfections Greatness and Excellency, though in it self
Boundless, not to be Originally in Him who has it, but derivatively.

To this he says, That Self-Existence does not only seem, but is the Highest
Perfection. This he might perceive I could have told him, as well as he me; but
it is no fault to express our selves a little Modestly, though he all along seems
to be of another mind. But whereas he here says, that Creatures Perfections
are improperly so Called, with respect to the Creatures; as he afterward
found, I by no means acknowledge, either the Son, or. H. Ghost to be Creatures,
so we have only his word for it, that the Perfections of Creatures are
improperly so called with respect to them.

Prop. 4. God th Father alone (strictly speaking) is a Being Absolutely
Perfect, because he alone is Self Existent; and all other Beings, even the Son
and Holy Ghost are from Him. This All Trinitarians do acknowledge, and is
Asserted both in the Nicene Creed, and that which bears the Name of Athanasius.

This Proposition too must needs down with your Friend, but he likes not the
Parenthesis, Strictly Speaking, and says he is very suspicious of it, not that
he thinks A. T. inserted it to help a Cause off the Weakness, whereof he was
Jealous, but yet to make his Scheme the more Accountable.

I thank the Gentleman for being so Modest in this Wipe; but he could not
wonder, had he read to the end of my Propositions before he Entered on his
Animadversions, that I should here insert the foresaid Parenthesis. For I do
affirm the Son and H. Ghost to be Absolutely Perfectly Beings, in reverence to
the Perfections of their Nature; that is, that they are all Boundless and
Infinite; and that they have All perfections they Can have, without a
Contradiction; and those are all but Self Existence, and what necessarily
follows upon it, viz. Being the First Original of All things; and I add too
Absolute independence. But more of this anon.

The Four next Propositions, he has no Controversy with me about.

But now, Sir, Comes a Proposition that makes your Friend tearingly Angry, viz.

Prop. 9. A Being which has all the Divine Perfections, that are Capable of
being Communicated, may be properly said to be Essentially God, upon the
account of those Perfections; or to be endued with the Divine Nature.

This he calls a Gross Proposition, because it Contradicts, not only Common
Sense and Reason, but even all that A. T. has Advanced. This is, Sir, a Heavy
Charge, but we must wait a while before he makes it out, that This Proposition
is Contradictory to Common Sense and Reason; for he thus goes on: He had
advanced, that God is a Being Absolutely Perfect: That a Being which wants any
one Perfection, can not be Absolutely Perfect: That Self-Existence is the
Highest Perfection: That Jesus Christ and the H. Ghost are not Self - Existent:
That they depend on God the Father: That God the Father is the Original (he
should have said the First Original) of all things: And that He can be but one
Numerically. He should have said, that God, in this Highest of Senses, can be
but one Numerically. And now he says, that Point Blank against all this, A. T.
affirms that a Being which is not Absolutely Perfect, which wants Self
Existence, which wants the Highest Perfection, which derives it self from God,
which depends on God the Original of all things, who is but one Numerically,
may be Properly said to be Essentially God, upon the account of some
Perfections (for two it seems are not Communicated) or to be induced with the
Divine Nature.

Now, Sir, what a Multiplying of words is here! Which wants Self-Existence,
Which wants the Highest Perfection, Which derives it self from God; as if these
Three were more than One thing: Tho I had no such Expression neither as,
derives it self from God. And he is a little Injurious to me too, in
representing me as Saying, that the Son and Holy Ghost have only some
Perfections, notwithstanding the following Parenthesis; whereas he knows he
ought to have represented me as saying, That they have all that are Capable of
being Communicated; which are all but Self-Existence, and what is necessarily
therein Employed. And I say, that this is not Capable of being Communicated,
because there is not a more Gross Contradiction, than to say it is.

But how is this Proposition Point Blank Contrary to my foregoing ones? This
Question he Answers by Askking Questions. For he next says, he must make bold
to ask me these following Questions: And I will answer them, as well as I can,
as he asks them.

Quest. 1. Does the Divine Nature Comprehend all Perfections; or can it want
one or two of the Chiefest, and be still the same Divine Nature?
I Answer, that the Divine Nature does Comprehend all Perfections; but Self
Existence is a Perfection relating immediately to the Fathers Existence; not to
His Nature or Essence; it speaking the most Excellent Manner of Existing
peculiar to Himself. Even as Adam's Coming into Being by Gods immediate
Creation, speaks not the Humane Nature in him, a different Nature from that of
his Posterity, tho it spakes his Person to have an Excellency above all that
have come into the World by Ordinary Generation: And as the Humane Nature of
our B. Savior is not of a different kind from other Men's, because he came by
it in a Supernatural way, so, I say, God the Father's Existence being without a
Cause, does not make him to have another sort of Nature, from that of the Son
and H Ghost; Which may be a Necessary Nature, and Uncreated, and be Constituted
of all the Boundless Perfections, of which the Nature of the Father Consists
abstracted from the Consideration of the manner of His Existence,
notwithstanding whatsoever your Friend can Object against the Possibility
thereof: And notwithstanding any thing I have said in my first 8. Propositions,
this may be asserted, without danger of being caught at Contradicting my self;
as I hope you will be Convinced anon.

And now for his next Question.

Quest. 2. Can the Divine Nature be Communicated to a Being, when less than all
Perfections are Communicated to it?
I Answer, that if you will read again what I have said to the Former Question,
you will find there needs no other Answer to this. But I must blame the wording
of this Question, because it seems to suppose Prae Existent Beings to which the
Divine Nature is Communicated. Whereas the possibility of the Existence of
other Beings from God the Father, which have the Perfections of his own Nature,
is that which is to be understood by the Communicableness of those Perfections.

Quest. 3. Can a Being that depends on God, be properly said to be Essentially
that God, on whom it depends?
I Answer, that such a Being can be properly said to be Essentially that God in
one sense, but cannot in another. i. e. It can have an Essence of the same
kind, though not the same Numerical one.

Quest. 4. Can a Being that distinguishes it self from the Only True God, be
properly said to be Essentially that God, who is the Only True God, and but
one Numerically?
I Answer, that because he loves needlessly to Multiply Questions, I am not
obliged so to Multiply Answers. And this being the self-same with the other
Question, I have given my Answer to it. And now I hope the Gentleman may be
satisfied of the true reason of my Parenthesis in the 4th. Proposition; Namely,
because the Son and H. Ghost may be Absolutely Perfect as to their Nature,
abstracted as I said from the Consideration of the manner of their Existence;
wherein yet they may be said infinitely to Excel even Archangels: These
Existing by voluntary Creation, but those by Necessary Emanation: Which is the
Word of the Ancients, and I cannot find a better, to Express what is intended
by it, viz. a more Excellent manner of Existence, than that of Creation. Which
Thousands of Persons, no whit inferior to the greatest Masters of Reason, the
Socinians can bost of (both Ancient and Modern, Divines and Philosophers) have
not thought deserves to be Scoffed at, as Nonsense and a Contradiction to
Natural Reason, as much as it is above the Comprehension thereof; and is every
whit as intelligible as are many Notions relating to the DEITT, in which all
true Theists as well as Christians are agreed; and also as are not a few
relating to our own Souls, their Powers and Faculties, and their Union with,
and influence upon, our Bodies; and as are innumerable Notions too relating to
Material things, which an Experimental Philosopher cannot doubt the truth of.

In the next place, Sir, your Friend says, he despairs of hearing a wise Word
answered to these Questions, viz. the forementioned. But I will not say, where
was his Wisdom then, when he asked them; because you will Reply, they are
however wise Questions, if they serve to Expose the Trinitarian to whom they
are put, and to make his Explication of the Doctrine of the Trinity down right
Nonsense. But I Reply, let the Unbyassed Readers judge of this; and Sir I
heartily wish, that your Self may be one of them.

And whereas he says, that he will do what he can, to prevent troubling (that
is my troubling) the Questions, with Confused Empty Jargon: My Answer is, That
I think I have not at all troubled the Questions, whether I shall trouble him
or no, by my Answering them. But I expect he will tell you, that my Answers are
Confused Empty Jargon, and if he will please to tell me so, I shall give him no
Rougher Reply than this, Sir, This is a rare demonstration, that your self is
one of those Anti-Trinitarians, whom you Extol in the beginning of your Answer
to my Propositions, as having Modestly, as well as Learnedly and Piously, and
Strongly Impugned, the Commonly received Doctrine of the Trinity.

But how does he Endeavor to prevent my troubling his Questions, with Confused
Empty Jargon? He does it thus: By Essence, I suppose he means Nature. I Answer,
I am willing to do so too. And, says he, in that respect perhaps 3. Men who
have the same Nature, may be properly said to be Essentially one, but not
Essentially one Person. I Answer, this may be more than a Perhaps; but he may
perceive by my 15th. Proposition (now the 22.) that I am far from thinking the
3. Persons in the H. Trinity to be in so low a sense one as 3. Men are. But,
proceeds he The Nature of the Self-Existent God, is above the Nature of all
Beings which proceed from Him; and it can not be Communicated. I Answer, that
the individual Nature of the Father, is not a Divine Nature more truly than
that of the Two other Persons: But how does he prove that His Nature cannot be
Communicated? Why, says he, we have no other Notion of the word Communicate,
but to Impart or Give; and what one Person does Impart or Give, of any
Essential and Singular thing, that himself has not, but he has it to whom it
is given. It may be some will say, Thus it is among Finite Creatures, but the
Essence of God is not of the same Condition, etc. But as God said to Job, Who
is this that darkneth Council by words without knowledge? It may be replied to
this Man, Who is he that multiplyeth words without knowledge? For it is not
thus, as he positively asserts, Even among Creatures. For there is not a
Creature that Generates another of the same kind, but may be properly said to
Communicate its own Nature, and yet notwithstanding it foregoes not its own
individual Nature, nor any part thereof. What a Boldness then is it to Affirm,
that the Infinite Creator Cannot do the like! He that Planted the Ear shall He
not hear? And He that formed the Eye shall not he see? He that has gigiven a
Generative Power to the Meanest of Creatures, or Creatures that have the lowest
degree of Life, shall not He have the Same Power Himself? I mean A Power of
doing that which may be called Generating His own Essential Likeness, in an
inconceivably Infinitely more Excellent manner. I wish, Sir, your Friend would
well lay to heart that Old Maxim, Temere Affirmare, vel Negare de Deo
Periculosum est. Which I will English to you, who I doubt are no great
Latinist, It Is a dangerous thing to affirm or deny any thing rashly of God,

As to the little that remains upon this Proposition, it consists of a
Repetition of what I have Answered, and of what he repeats upon the next
Proposition, which I will Answer. And indeed, Sir, your Friend is Excellently
good, next to Dareing Assertions, at Repetitions, and saying things, that are
nothing, or very little, to the purpose. But you will find Every thing, to have
more or less spoken to it, that is but one remove from what is nothing but mere
Words. And now to what he Animadverts on the 10th. Proposition.

Prop. 10. There seems to be no Contradiction, nor the least Absurdity in
asserting, that God is able to Communicate Every one of His Perfections, Except
those of Self-Existence, and Being the First Original of all things. By the
way, my meaning in these words, appears plainly by other following
Propositions, to be this. That there is no Contradiction or Absurdity in
asserting, That such Beings may have their Original from God the Father, as
have all Perfections but those two; and which indeed (as I have said) do amount
to but one.

Now what faith your Friend to this? He tells us in the first place. That for
the same reason that these two are Incommunicable, all the Other Divine
Perfections are likewise so. And whereas he assigns two Reasons, why God cannot
Communicate these two, he says for the same Reasons, he cannot Communicate any
of His other Perfections. But how Egregiously Absurd is it, to go about to give
Reasons, why God cannot Communicate His Self-Existence, and His being the First
Original of all things? Since that He cannot Communicate these, is a First and
Self-Evident Principle: And therefore is Incapable, as all such Principles are,
of being demonstrated; as Every Body knows that understands, What a First and
Self-Evident Principle is; which Every one must understand, that can understand
any thing. Whatsoever is Capable of being proved, must be less clear, than is
the Argument by which it is proved; and whatsoever Proposition is so, cannot
possibly be a First or self-Evident Principle; as no man in his Wits does need
to be informed. And therefore no such one will go about to prove this
Proposition, The same thing can be, and not be, in the same Moment. And the
foresaid Proposition is Every whit as self-Evident as this: and the denial
thereof as Manifest a Contradiction. There cannot be a greater, or clearer,
Contradiction than to say, That God can Communicate Self-Existence; it being to
say in other words, That God can be the cause of that which has no cause. Nor
than to say, That God can make a First Original of All things; since this is to
say, that He can make a thing to be before Himself, and to be the Original of
Himself; For what is not so, cannot be the First Original of All things. And
therefore, whereas his First, Reason, why God cannot Communicate these
Perfections is, Because it is a Contradiction so to do; he might as well have
said, It Is a Contradiction to say that God can do a Contradiction. That He can
Communicate them is Contradictio in Terminis; and therefore it is absurd to give
it as a Reason why He cannot do it, that it is a Contradiction. For you may as
well ask, why God cannot do a Contradiction? And if a Reason can be given for
this, you may ask a Reason for that Reason; and so in infinitum. But if it were
only Contradictio in Adjecto, I acknowledge, that because such Contradictions
are not manifest at first hearing, at least to Every Body, it is proper to give
Reasons to show that there are Contradictions employed in such Propositions. But
if, any man should ask me a Reason, why Two and two do not make Twenty, I would
bid him Go look, instead of telling him, that it is a Contradiction that they
should; since I had as good tell him, he has a Nose in his Face, and better
too. But that God can make a Self-Existent Thing, or a First Original of All
things, are Every jot as Evident Contradictions, as that Two and two do make
Twenty.

But, Sir, your Friend says, that, It Is Equally Absurd and Contradictions, to
suppose more than one infinitely powerful, wise and Good Being. If he means by
Equally Absurd and Contradictions as Evidently so, sure he is the only Man
that will say so, nor can he think so, say he what he will. But how does he
prove this? This is the argument by which he does it, viz. infinite Power,
infnite Wisdom and infinite Goodness go together, and may all of them, as well
as either of them, be in all Beings whatsoever, as well as in more Beings than
one. But what if I say That this is as much needs to be proved, as that which
it is brought to prove? His only Answer is like to be, you must take this upon
the Authority of my Lord of Canterbury. For he only goes about to Confirm it
by a passage in His Sermon on 1 Timothy 2. 5. p. 13. But I not having that Sermon
by me, and he making no Marks to distinguish between, what is his Graces and
what is his own, it is Enough to give him that for an Answer.

His second Argument, whereby he Endeavors to prove the forementioned
Self-Evident Proposition, is, That Self-Existence is indivisible, and Gods
Self-Existence is necessary; and therefore if he should Communicate His
Self-Existence to Another, He Himself should remain not self-Existent, which is
a gross Absurdity, and a manifest Contradiction. O Wonderful! is it so indeed?
I marvel who told him so; it may be he takes this too on the Authority of some
Great Man, since he troubles not himself to make it out. But there is as great
a necessity of proving this also, as of proving that of which it is a Proof.
And he makes this brave Argument to prove too, That Infinite power is as
incommunicable as self-Existence, and Infinite Wisdom and Goodness, because
these are also indivisible. But the Trinitarian is not so knocked down by this
Unmerciful Argument (to use a phrase of his own) but that he may soon rise
again. Nay, as Goodluck would have it, it is so weak a Blow, that he has not
felt it. And 'twill be found weaker than a Puff of Breath, by that time I have
asked him this one Question, viz. Is not also the individual Nature of Every
living Creature indivisible? But, as was before said, Even the lowest Sort of
them can propagate their own Nature, which is the same thing with Communicating
it; and therefore methinks it should not be so great a Contradiction to say,
that He who gave Being to those Creatures can do the like. Or if you please,
thus: It Is therefore no Contradiction to say, That God the Father may be the
Original of a Being, which has power to do all things possible to be done, and
has unlimited Wisdom and Goodness. As to the rest of this Animadversion, I
will not spend one Minute so vainly as to take notice of it; for half an Eye
must see it to be nothing better than (to give it his own word) mere Jargon.

Prop. 11. It seems Evident from the H. Scriptures, That the Son and H. Spirit
have all Divine Perfections but those two, such as Unlimited Power, Wisdom and
Goodness, and Unspotted Purity.

As to Unspotted Purity he grants, that the Scriptures do plainly assert it of
our Savior, but faith, that that is but the Perfection of a Man or Angel, not
an infinite Perfection of a God. I Answer, that this he only with his usual
Confidence says, but tells us not how he comes by this Confidence. But suppole
he could demonstrate this, yet the Unspotted Purity of the H. Ghost one would
think to be the Purity of a God, since we are so assured from Scripture, that
He is the Author of all that Purity and Holiness, which Is or Ever shall be
found in Men. And he must have a large stock of Confidence, who dares say. that
the Purity which Excells not that of a Man or Angel, is sussicient to qualify a
Person to be the Sanctisier, of all that are or shall be Sanctified. And if the
Purity of the H. Ghost be the Purity of a God, I hope the Son's Purity may be
acknowledged so to be too: Surely those Socinians who believe the H. Ghost to
be a Person, will not make him to Excel the Son in Holiness.

Next he Cavils at my saying, that this 11th. Proposition Seems Evident to me,
and says that Seems and Evident, are two words very ill put together; because
that which does but seem Evident is not really so; and that which is Evident
does more than seem so. I see, Sir, I must not hope to Please this Friend of
yours, I verily thought he was about to Praise me for my it Seems Evident: For
he says upon it, That [Seems] is a word that Speaks the Modesty of an
ingenuous Enquirer after truth; and on the Contrary, That Evident fills the
mouth of a man of Confidence; as by the way I must tell him he knows by
Experience. Yet for all this, the good Man designed to Expose me for my it
Seems Evident; and those two Sentences are Fleering ones, and were intended for
Scoffs. But I pray him to Mock on after I have told him that, First, He knows I
did not say, it but Seems Evident. And that, Secondly, It Is utterly false, that
that which is Evident does more than seem so to all Persons. There are many
Evident Truths, that to those who Shut their Eyes against the Light, may not so
much as seem so; and there are those who being sensible of the weakness of
their understandings, may say of Very Evident Truths, this or that seems or
appears Evident to them. But we shall not in haste, Sir, Catch your Friend at
the Extreme of Modesty. For whatsoever seems not agreeable with his Reason
(which we have found to be a Clear and Strong Reason indeed) must be
immediately Contrary to Natural Reason. And he is only puzzled at Comprehending
Gods ways, not God Himself and his Glorious Attributes. And he can Comprehend
whatsoever he Understands. And now follows Another of his Modest Sayings, viz.
That this Proposition we are now upon, does not so much as seem Evident from
Scripture. And he wishes I had Cited some of the plainest Texts to my Purpose.
But he has had Enough of those Cited by other Trinitarians; many of which the
Socinians so play the Critics upon, that should the same liberty be taken as
to all other Texts, which are Capable of having the same work made with them,
the Scriptures would be made a mere Nose of Wax.

But however, methinks, the Apostle's so Expressly applying those words of the
Psalmist to the Son of God, viz. Thou Lord in the Beginning have laid the
Foundations of the Earth, and the Heavens are the work of Thine Hands, etc.
does at least seem to Speak Him infinitely Powerful. And the same thing does
seem at least, to be affirmed in those words, Coloss. 1. 16. etc. By Him were
all things Created, that are in Heaven and that are in Earth etc. For He is
before all things, and by Him all things Consist. And St Peter's Saying to Him,
Lord, Thou that know all things, know that I love Thee, does at least
seem to Speak his believing him to be infinitely Wise, and a Searcher of the
very Hearts of men: which is also Expressly affirmed of Him by St Paul, Romans 2.
16. and 1 Cor. 4. 5. And by our Savior Himself too, Rev. 2. 23. I am He which
Searcheh the Reins and Hearts. And the Apostles saying, that in Christ are hid
all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, does sure seem at least to Speak His
Wisdom and Knowledge boundless or infinite. And those words Romans 9. 5. -- of
whom as Concerning the Flesh Christ came, who is God over All Blessed for
Evermore, do at least seem to Speak Him to have the Divine added to the Humane
Nature. And those words, Coloss. 2. 9. In Him dwells all the Fullness of the
Godhead bodily: And Christ's giving Himself the Title that is Proper to God,
in his Saying, I am Alpha and Omega, the First and the Last, does likewise seem
at least to assert the same thing. And so does God the Father's saying of His
Son, Let All the Angels of God worship Him; Especially since it is said, Thou
shall worship the Lord thy God, and Him only shall thou serve. And the same
thing seems at least to be employed too, in that Saying of Christ, That all men
should Honor the Son, as they Honor the Father; which is, I think, with
Divine Honor; and must at least seem to this man himself so to be. And what
think you of those words which begin St John's Gospel? In the Beginning was the
Word, and the word was with God, and the word was God, etc. All things were
made by Him, etc. Compared with V. 14. And the Word was made Flesh, etc. Do not
these words at least seem to speak the same thing? And Socinus his Exposition
of them, would at least seem to be no true one (though there were no such gross
Absurditys as the Arch Bishop, among others, has shown it to be guilty of)
since he himself does acknowledge, that he was the First Inventer thereof, and
therefore not known till above Fifteen Hundred Years after the Coming of our
Savior.

And those words, Isa. 9. 6, 7. do seem at least to be a Prophecy of Christ,
viz. To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given. He shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the Prince of
Peace, etc. Nor is it so much as a Seeming Objection, which the Socinians urge
against these words being a Prophecy, that the first do run in the Present
Tense, viz. To us a Child is born, a Son is given, since in that Unquestionable
Prophecy of Christ, Isa. 53. Several of the Praedictions run in both the
Present and Praeterperfect Tense: As He is despised and rejected of Men. He
has born our Griefs. He was wounded for our Transgressions: And the like
almost in every Verse throughout the Chapter. Nor is any thing more Common than
this Enallage of Tenses in the Hebrew Language. And their rendering the words
next following, so as to adapt them to K. Hezekiah instead of our Savior, is a
wonderful instance of their offering violence to Texts of Scripture; for thus
they read them, The Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, shall name him (viz. Hezekiah) the Peaceable Prince. And whereas it
follows, Of the Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no End;
they make this to be fulfilled in Hezekiah, because he reigned no less than
Nine and Twenty Years. See this in the Brief History of the Unitarians so much
magnified by them, P. 20. of the 2d. Edition.

I have, Sir, now given your Friend a Taste, and a mere Taste of the plainest
Texts to my purpose, in Compliance with his Wish; and notwithstanding my seems,
which he makes such a do with, I am as Certain as I can be of any thing of this
nature, that these Sriptures and Abundance more, do much more than seem to
Confirm the truth of this Proposition.

And as to the H. Ghost, I need give no other Proof, of His having all the
Perfections of the Divine Nature, than what has bin already said of His being
the Sanctifier; for since this speaks Him Infinitely Pure and Holy, and I may
add too, Omnipresent, he must needs have all the other, according to your
Friends Assertion, viz. That they cannot be some in one, and some in another,
but must be inseparate, and go together.

And he now betakes himself to Cite Texts against Christ's having Unlimited
Perfections, but he gives us only two; one to prove His Power, and the other
His Wisdom to be Limited. That for the Limitedness of His Power, is that saying
of our Lord to Peter, when he was Apprehended in the Garden, Mat. 26. 52. Put
up again thy Sword, etc. Think thou that I cannot now Pray unto my Father,
and He shall presently give me more than Twelve Legions of Angels? But 1. There
is no necessity, that it should be employed in these words, that Christ had not
power to deliver Himself without Praying to His Father for the Help of Angels,
or any other help, since Unspeakably Greater Works are Recorded of Him, without
any mention of His Praying for Ability to do them: And since he had twice
before done this very work, when he was as much as now in the hands of His
Adversaries; as may be seen Luke 4. 30. and John 10. 39. 2. Our Lord's whole
Power being Originally from the Father, he, we find, took all opportunities of
giving Him the Glory of whatsoever he did. 3. He now thought fit to declare in
the Ears of His Enemies, how Dear He was to God, as much as they Hated Him. And
therefore, whereas One Legion of Angels could have delivered Him, as well as
Twelve; nay, one Angel, as well as so many Legions; yet He says His Father
would send Him Twelve Legions, upon His Praying to Him; i. e. supposing He
could stand in need of them. 4. Our Lord did Industriously Conceal the Highest
sense in which He was the Son of God, from those who were so far from being
Capable of then receiving that Doctrine, that He knew they would make Him so
much the greater Blasphemer upon that account. Nor would it have been so
Congruous to His State of Humiliation, for Himself then to have Proclaimed His
Divinity; but after His Glorious Ascension, and sending the H. Ghost, according
to His Promise, was the Season for the doing hereof by the Apostles: As
particularly St Chrysostom has showed, in more than one of his Homelys.

Again, Sir, your Friend Attacques Christ's Infinite Wisdom, from its being said
of the Child Jesus, That He grew in Wisdom. But does he think us to have so
Soft a Place in our Heads, as to believe the Humane Nature of Christ capable of
all the Wisdom of the Divinity thereto United? No he does not, for foreseeing
what Answer was ready for him, he says, If it be Replied that His Wisdom as
God was Infinite, the Scripture does not so much as seem to tell us any thing
of Christ, with distinguishing respect to a Supposed Divine Nature, in
opposition to an acknowledged Humane. To pass over the Odd Phrase [with
distinguishing respect] what if the Scripture says nothing of Christ's having a
Divine Nature in Opposition to His Humane, does it not therefore so much as
seem to tell us any thing of His having a Divine Nature distinct from His
Humane? That Text, God was manifested in the Flesh, does seem so to do, but I
will despair of understanding much of Scripture, if several of the forecited
Texts do not much more than seem to do it.

But I have slipped one Passage, which it is Convenient to take some notice of,
viz. But it may be said, that all Power in Heaven and Earth, is Committed to
Christ. And he answers, Tes, to fit Him to be the Great Minister by whom God
will Judge the World. I will interrupt him but while I tell him, I wonder it
should not seem to him and Every Man, not only strange but impossible, that a
mere Man (though in an Extraordinary manner Conceived) should be a subject
Capable of Receiving all Power in Heaven and Earth, and of Judging the World,
both Men and Angels. But he thus Proceeds, But when that Great Day shall be
over, that Power, that Fullness of Power, shall be given up to the Great God
again. And I Answer, To what purpose should a Power (or Authority) be longer
retained, than while there is any occasion for the Exercise thereof? The
Authority relating to Christ's Mediatory Kingdom must Cease, with the Ceasing of
that Kingdom it self. I did not Cite that Text among those I instanced in to
prove the Infinite Power of the Son of God, and industriously declined it upon
Considering, That Christ speaks in those words of a Power Committed to Him, and
therefore not Essentially in Him; and that by Power here is to be understood
Authority, and a New Authority relating to a New Kingdom. And now what has he
to say to my 12th. Proposition?

Prop. 12. It is intolerable presumption to Conclude, that there can be no way
besides that of Creation, whereby any thing can be immediately and only from
God, which has a distinct Existence of its own: Or that no Beings can have
their Existence from Him, by way of Necessary Emanation; since there is a
Resemblance of such a thing in Nature, viz, The issuing forth of Rays from the
Sun. And now see a Rare, and as Charitable a Remarque upon the first words, It
is intolerable Presumption. There is, says he, the very Spirit of the Church
in it. Well, what means he by the very Spirit of the Church? it follows, The
Spirit of Degrading and Scourging; the Spirit of Jayling a man, and Ruining his
Business; the Spirit of Fining him, and starving his wife and Children: the
Spirit of Burning him, and (if anger could do it) Sending him to the Devil. And
instead of sending me to the Devil, he makes a very Devil of me (which is the
worse Punishment of the two) as mighty Good as he has thought me sometimes,
when he and I have had the good luck to jump in our Notions. But why must I be
such a Devilish Persecutor merely for one word? cannot this [Intolerable] bear
a more merciful interpretation? I was very unlucky in lighting upon this
Epithet, if it cannot; for time has bin, when I could have bin a Persecutor but
would not (and that is more than the Socinians can say) nor have I since Ever
Changed my mind. But I am old Enough to be assured from my own observation,
That there is no being secure of any party, that they will never persecute till
they have been Tried. And there is no party (the Papists themselves not
Excepted) but has decryed Persecution, while it has had no Power, to
Persecute. But, Sir, I will take leave to tell your Friend, that, as great an
Enemy of Persecution as he professes himself to be, he is himself a
Persecutor, and a pretty Fierce one too. There are more ways of Persecuting
than One, and a man may Persecute with his Tongue and Pen; and whosoever can do
so with either of these, I will not be bound for him, that he will not do it with
his Hand too, when he has an opportunity. Now he Persecutes with his Pen, who
Employs it in heavily Censuring his Brother without just cause, but so has he
Employed it now against me. For I meant no more by intolerable, than a most
high Presumption; nor did you, Sir, I dare say, understand it otherwise; I will
not descant upon his very Spirit of the Church, I am sure it shows his Spirit
sufficiently. But, Sir, I thank your Friend for the Charity he next expresses
toward his Persecutor. Let us try, says he,, whether we can restore him to
himself, and the Spirit of Meekness. But if I am restored to that Spirit, which
he cannot say I ever lost, it must be by one, to whom I cannot reply, Physician
heal thy Self. And do you judge, Sir, whether there is more Heat in my
Propositions, or his Animadversions. But how will he allay the Fury I have
Expressed in those words, or rather in that one word? He attempts it by Saying,
That the Socinians know of no otherway but that of Creation, whereby any thing
can be immediately and only from God. But I did not say, that it is intolerable
Presumption not to know any other way, but to Conclude there can be no other.
And I still say, it is a wonderful Boldness (to wave intolerable because it is so
intolerable to him) so to Conclude, though no other way should be known to us.

As to the way of necessary Emanation, he says it is the Supposal of a thing,
where of we have no Idea. Well, suppose this, is it impossible for a thing to
be, of which we sorry Mortals have no Idea? Is God Almighty bound to give us
Ideas of the way and manner how any thing can be Produced by him? Or how what
we know does Exist is Produced? Or to give us Ideas of Every thing that he can
Produce? Or of Every thing that He has Produced? Sure your Friend will not
dare to answer yes to the two latter of these Questions, and much less (then)
to the two former. And if he be not So daring, with what face could he object
against the possibility of a Necessary Emanation from God, because we have no
Idea thereof? But I tell him, we have Every whit as much an Idea of Necessary
Emanation, as of voluntary Creation, understanding thereby the making of
Something out of Nothing. Which Aristotle and his Followers thought an
impossibility, Ex Nihilo nihil fit; or Nothing is made out of Nothing, being a
Maxim of theirs. And therefore they held both the Eternity and Self Existence
of the Matter of the World. And the Platonists thought the Idea of Necessary
Emanation, at least as Clear as that of Creation; and the Younger Platonists
for the most part held Humane Souls to be by Such an Emanation from the Deity,
and therefore to be Eternal, though not Self-Existent. But he says, That
something should come from God which wants some Perfection that God has, is
AT's (that is my) Prodigious Supposition, under the name of Necessary Emanation.

And I say, it would be a Prodigious Supposition indeed, that any thing should
come from God, that has the Perfection of His manner of Existence; or that any
thing can have it is Existence from God, and be Self-Existent.

And now, he will display, he says, the Absurdity and impossibility of this
Necessary Emanation, in two or three Questions; and, I thank him, in
Consideration of my Soft place, he himself answers them for me. Q. 1. Was God
Conscious to the Emanation? Yes says he, Else His understanding is not
infinite. Q 2. Was He sensible of the Necessity? Yes again, for the same
reason. And I answer yes, yes too, though he has Excused me. But now, when I
have most need of his help, he leaves me to answer for my Self, to a stabbing
Consequence from those Concessions, viz. But then it follows, that he was
determined to one thing, and sensible that He was so. I will here too adventure
to give him two more Yesses. Then, proceeds he, there is some Power above Him,
or such a determination is the Law of His Nature; the former, he says, cannot
be, because God is the Supreme Being. And he would have done like himself, had
he given us a reason, why nothing can be above the Supreme Being. Nor, says
he, can the latter, because neither Reason, nor Scripture, describes God by any
such Law. But, being aware that this is too difficult for my Brains, he tells
me, he will make the matter Plain by a Question. I see he is Excellent at
Questions, and his Question is this, By what Evident Principle of Reason, or
what Text of Scripture, does it appear to be the Law of an Infinite Nature, to
beget Infinite Power, Wisdom, Goodness; and that in a Being that must want
Self-Existence, and being the Maker of all things? I answer, That if he has
any Idea of the thing called Nonsense, and any true mark to find it by, he
cannot miss of it in this Question. But who Ever talked of the Fathers
Begetting infinite Power, Wisdom and Goodness in any Being; or otherwise than
of His Begetting an infinitely Powerful, Wise and Good Being? And now comes a
Third Question, Does the Idea of an infinitely Perfect Being, Evidently imply
the Necessary Emanation of another Being? This Question, sure, he asked for
askings sake; For he knows I desired to have no more granted me, than that it
is not impossible, or there is no Absurdity in it, That Beings may have
Exstence from God by way of Necessary Emanation. And now for the 13.
Proposition.

Prop. 13. It is no less Presumption to Affirm, That it is a Contradiction to
say, that a BEING can be from all ETERNITY from God the Father, supposing it
Possible that it may be from Him, in an higher and more Excellent way, than
that of Creation; since the Sun, though it is the Cause of Light, is only in
order of Nature before it. To this he says, First, That for one Being to be
from all Eternity from the Eternal Father, is a Contradiction one degree more
Absurd, than barely two Eternals. Not to tell him, that I have hitherto
thought, that all Contradictions are alike Absurd; how does he Prove this to be
in any degree an Absurd Contradiction? He says, that it is so, is the most
manifest thing in the World. If I demand a Proof now hereof, I should affront
him, had I not already Caught him at proving (after his manner) the most
manifest thing in the World. But I need not demand a proof hereof, for he
presently sets about it. And the Argument whereby he proves this most manifest
thing in the World is this, We neither have, nor can have, any notion of
Proceeding, or Being from Another, but what implies the Proceeder who derives
his Being, to be inferior (he should have said Posteriour) to that other
Being, in order of Time. In truth, it is a pleasant thing to see Men all of a
Piece. This is perfectly like his Arguing; that is, Proving the most Manifest
thing, by what is less manifest; nay, this is proving it by what is very false.
He says, we have no Notion of such a thing, and I have already told him, that
a thing may nevertheless be, for our having no Notion of it. But he also says,
we can have none; here is Confidence too like his own, but let him speak for
himself, and not say We; for I both can have, and have some Notion of such a
thing, and so may any one that pleases; for such a thing is a daily Object of
our Sight? Of which anon, after I have Considered 2. more of his Wise sayings.
The Absurdity and impossibility, says he, of deriving Existence from God, by a
more Excellent way than that of Creation, I have already made manifest. But if
any Man of sense be found to be herein of his mind, I will never trust my sense
more, in the most Manifest matters. And then he says, I therefore Conclude,
that Eternal Generation cannot be proved by it, unless it can be made to
appear, that a true Notion is a necessary Consequence of a false. But, Sir, Can
you think it possible, that your Friend should do such mighty Feats as he makes
his Brags of, since he cannot distinguish between, Denying a thing to be
Contradictions and Impossible, and Asserting the truth of it. And if he knows
not, that the Proof of such a thing as Eternal Generation, was now none of my
business; and much more, if he needs to be told, that I only affirmed that
there is no Contradiction therein to Natural Reason, it is hard to say, whether
he was more weak in offering to Animadvert on my Propositions, or I in
troubling my self with taking any notice of his Animadversions.

And now we come to the Instance I give in this Proposition, of an Effect every
whit as Old as the Cause of it; and your Friend being come to it too, asks me
How I know, that the Sun is the cause of Light? And adds, by the Revelation of
School-Divines perhaps, not by the History of the Bible; for, if the Account of
the Creation in Genesis, be to be taken in a litteral sense, that will Convince
me of a Philosophical Error; for there it is said, That God made the Light the
first day, the Sun not till the fourth. But, Sir, did you ever meet with such
Triflng? First, He says, perhaps I have learnt that the Sun is the cause of
Light, from the Revelation of School-Divines. How well was this Flurt bestowed
on me, since he knew what a Veneration I Expressed for those Divines, in my last
Proposition? Secondly, He says, I could not have this rare Notion, from the
History of the Bible; because the Book of Genesis says, that Light was made
the first day, and the Sun the fourth. Admirable I profess! Sure this Man has
himself been dabling with the Schoolmen, he is so Subtle. But what if I grant
him, that that Light which was Created before the Sun, the Sun was not the
cause of? Does it follow thence, that the Sun is the cause of no Light? My
Candle is the cause of the Light I now write by, therefore the Sun is not the
cause of any Light. But whereas I humbly Conceive (after all) that the Sun is
the Cause of Light, I owe this my Opinion neither to the History of the Bible,
nor to the Schools, but to a certain thing called Eyesight; and for this
Satisfaction he owes me thanks. But Thirdly, says he, The Sun is the Cause of
Light! He may as well say, The Sun is the Cause of the Sun; and the Light of
Light; or any thing whatsoever is the Cause of its own Nature. But why so I
beseech him? Are the Sun and Light the self-same thing? Then a Glowworm has
the Sun in the Tail of it. And then, the Light was not made 3. days before the
Sun, for all the Book of Genesis. But if he please to give any Credit to his
own Eyes, he will be tempted to think, that the Body of the Sun, and the Light
which comes in at his Windows are two things. But at last we find him in a good
humor; for, well then, says he, be it granted him, that the Sun and the Light
which proceeds from it did begin to Co-Exist in the same moment of time, but
then they cannot be the cause of one another. But I must be still a little
Cross, and say, First, That I will not have it granted me, that they did begin
to Co-Exist in the same moment, for I am satisfied to have them begin only to
Exist in the same moment. Secondly, Neither shall he grant it to me, that
therefore they are the Cause of One another; for I was so reasonable as to be
Content to have but one of them the Cause of the other. But now he is Cross
again, and says, That thing which is the Cause of another, must be in respect
of Time before the other thing, whereof it is the Cause.

In sober Sadness, my Friend, he might have spared all his other Wise talk, and
only have told me this and he had done his Business. For it is as much as if he
had said, Let the Sun be the Cause of Light, with all my heart, and let them
begin to Exist together too, yet notwithstanding I would have you know, that
whatsoever thing is the Cause of another thing must be in order of Time before
it: And for once take my word for it.

And now, to my Comfort, we are Come to the Conclusion of this Ammadversion,
viz. What A. T. means by Order of Nature, I am not sure that I can guess, for I
am not much Versed in School-Jargon; yet guessing at his meaning, I tell him,
That I can no more Conceive the Sun without the Light which proceeds from it,
than the Light that proceeds from the Sun, from whence it does proceed. This
Sentence is long Enough too, to be taken to pieces.

1. He says, he is not sure that he can guess, and yet does guess. But my
School-learning tells me, that if he is sure he does guess, he is sure he can
guess.

2. He says, he is not much Versed in School-Jargon, that is to say, he is
Verst in Jargon, but not in School-Jargon. And, because we will part fairly I
am willing he should know, that I believe both these Propositions.

3. He says, he is not sure that he can guess, what A. T. means by Order of
Nature. As if Priority in order of Nature, and in Order of Time were a
Distinction of my Coining, like that of Intelligible, and Incomprehensible. I
perceive he is as great a Philosopher, as School-Divine if he never before met
with that Distinction, which is much more Ancient than the most Ancient of the
Schoolmen, or than Christianity it self. But if he has Ever met with that
Distinction before, he might have Presumed, that what I mean by it, is but what
other Folk have Ever meant.

4. He says, I can no more Conceive the Sun without the Light that Pooceeds
from it, than this Light without the Sun. No nor can I neither, for I can
Perfectly well Conceive them both. I can Conceive the Sun abstractly from any
other Light, than what is in the Body of it; and I can Conceive too Every jot
as well of the Light in my House at Noonday, abstracted from the Sun: And so
can he too, if his great Modesty would but let him think so. But we must not
forget the last words of this his Conclusion, viz. Thus I reckon to have done
Justice to A. T's. 13th. Proposition, not forgetting the Appendent Similitude.

And I reckon I have done no injustice to his Animadversions, on this or any
other of my Propositions; and whether he be out in his Reckoning, or 1 in mine,
let any man of his own Choosing be judge, that has but Common-sense.

Prop. 14. Those two Propositions do Speak our Explication of the H. Trinity,
to be as Contrary to Arianism as to Socinianism; since the Arians assert, that
there was at least a Moment of time, when the Son was not, and that He is a
Creature.

On this he says nothing, that I can be Concerned to reply too, unless I
delighted in Exposing him, for Exposings sake.

Prop. 15. Though we cannot understand, how it should be no Contradiction to
affirm, that the three Persons are but one numerical Being, yet has it no
Appearance of a Contradiction to say, That there is an Unconceivably Close and
inseparable Union, both in Will and Nature between them. And here too is very
little to draw a Reply from me, Except I delighted in Repetitions as much as he
does; but two or three Passages I cannot well let go. He says, It is a very
Stange Boldness for men to determine, that such or such a Notion is true, which
they cannot Conceive is true. But I. How comes Boldness all oth' sudden to be
such a Crime with this Gentleman? 2. How comes that Proposition by such a
Remarque as this? since it Speaks nothing of the Truth of any Notion, but
affirms one Notion, to have no Appearance of a Contradiction in it. Nor does he
offer a word to show that there is any Contradiction therein, or any Appearance
thereof; which a Wise man would believe to be his only Business, could such a
one undertake Confuting of this Proposition. 3. Who are they that determine any
Notion to be true, while they cannot Conceive it to be so?

And another Saying he has here, which further demonstrates what a deadly
Enemy he is to the Crime Boldness, viz. A Close and inseparable Union between
God and Christ, there cannot be; unless he means such a Union as is between
different Natures; but that will not content him, yet it is all that can be
granted. But I much doubt, that this is much more than he will grant; I fear he
will not grant, That God the Father and his Begotten Son, are as Closely United
as are his Soul and Body, the Natures of which are as different, as the Natures
of any two Created things can be; and their Union with Each other so Close
(though not inseparable) that he is as unable to give an account of this Union as
of that which Trinitarians do believe to be between God the Father, the Son and
the H. Ghost.

But he says, The Nature of God the Father includes Perfections, which are not
in the Nature of Jesus Christ; and from thence Concludes that such a Union as
the forementioned cannot be between them. To which, I am loath to repeat what I
have so often said, That the Fathers Self-Existence, with what is there in
employed, is a Perfection immediately relating to His manner of Existence But
however, are there not many Perfections, or Excellent Powers and Properties in
Souls, which are not in Bodies? And yet the Union between them (as was said) is
too Close for us to give an Account thereof.

Prop. 16. Such an Union as this between them, being acknowleg'd by us,
together with the forementioned entire Dependence of the Son and H. Spirit upon
the Faher; the Unity of the Deity is as fully, to all intents and purposes,
asserted by us, as it is necessary or desirable it should be. But to this, Sir,
as he says very little, so not a line that I can reply a new word to; nor a
Syllable is here of Confutation.

Prop. 17. And no part of this Explication, do we think Repugnant to any Text
of Scripture, but it seems to be the best and Easiest way of Reconciling those
Texts, which according to the other Hypotheses, are not Reconcilable, but by
offering Extreme Violence to them.

Now to this he says, That he is infinitely certain, that this Explication is
in a great part Repugnant to many Texts of Scripture, and to many Self-Evident
Principles of Reason. But not one of those many Texts of Scripture, does he
instance in, and we have seen what work he makes with Self-Evident Principles.
Nor is here any Offer at a Confutation, Except his calling me an Ishmalite
Trinitarian be so, whose hand is against all the Heads of the
Trinitarian-Expositors, and all their hands against me; and a scareing Threat,
how Merciless -- would Expose me, and that he would do it at another kind of
rate than he has done. But I say, should he Expose me at the Same rate, he
would be merciless to himself only. But since he says, that my hand is
against all the Heads of Trinitarian Expositors, it is Enough to tell him that
it is false.

Prop. 18. The Socinians must Confess, that the Honor of the Father, is as
much as they can desire taken Care of by this Explication; nor can the Honor
of the Son and H. Ghost be more Consulted in any Explication of the H. Trinity,
than it is in this? It ascribing to them all Perfections, but what they cannot
have, without the most Manifest Contradiction. Now the first thing he here
says, that I ought to take notice of, is, That he who gives more to an
Excellent Person, than of Right belongs to him, may perhaps be in a great part
Excused for the sake of his good intention, but must nevertheless always be
chid for the injury he offers to him, because by giving too much to him, he
brings the just measures of his real Excellency into Question. Now instead of
an Answer, I would ask him one Question more, who has asked me so many, viz.
which is the Safer of the Two Extremes, To think of the Son and H. Ghost more
or less honorably than we ought, Provided that God the Fathers Honor be not
in the least entrenched upon? Sure, it is impossible for any sincere Christian
not to Choose to Err on the Right Hand, if he must Err on One. On that Hand we
choose to Err in our Opinion of whomsoever we have a Respect and value for. Now
if the Honor of the Father be as much as can be taken care of in this our
Explication; and we believe it is, since he is made the Original of all the
Excellencies and Perfections, that are in the other Persons, and of their
Existence. And since there are so great a Number of Texts, which have more than
seemed to the Generality of Christians (and to all but a small handful since
Arianism went off the Stages to give the Perfections of the Divine Nature to
these Persons, surely the Love and Esteem which all good Soul) must necessarily
have for them, must needs bias them toward the Understanding of Scripture in
that sense, which makes most for their Honor, provided it be not Forced and
too Artificial; and Provided, I say again, the Father loses no Honor thereby.

Again he says, That, to his knowledge, the Socinians are not willing to
Confess that the Honor of the Father is as much taken care of in this
Explicaiion, as they do wish it were. But he offers not at any reason, why they
are not willing to Confess this. But sure they will not say, that their own
Hypothesis does give more Honor to the Father, than that which speaks him the
Author of all that the other Persons either have or are.

Lastly, he says, That the Scripture no where tells us, that Jesus Christ, or
the Holy Ghost desired to be accounted God: That Jesus Christ did not command
nor desire Divine Honors to be paid Him is plain, in that when he taught His
Disciples to Pray, He did not propound Himself as the Object of Prayer, but
directed them to Address themselves to the Father. To this I Reply,

First, That suppose neither of these Persons is said in Scripture to desire to
be accounted God, are there there fore no Texts which speak of either of them
as God? I have I think sufficiently minded him of the Contrary.

Secondly, How can he say that Jesus Christ desired not Divine Honors to be
paid to Him? (Except he means, that he desired none to be paid him while He was
on Earth) when He has told us John 5. 23. that The Father has Committed all
Judgment to the Son; That all Men should Honor the Son, even as they Honor
the Father. And are not all the Glorious Angels Commanded by the Father to
Worship His Son? Heb. 1. 6. And is not Eternal Glory given to Him, Apocal. 1.
5, 6. Now to Him that loved us, and washed us from our Sins in His own Blood,
and has made us Kings and Priests unto God, and His Father: To Him be Glory
and Dominion for ever and ever? And will not all such Texts speak Him an Object
of Divine Worship, because that in the Days of His Humiliation, He expressed no
desire of being so; but still gave all the Honor of whatsoever He did to His
Father?

Thirdly, I doubt from this Passage, that your Friend is gone beyond his Master
Socinus, and denies the Adorability of the Son of God, for which he was a
Zealous Champion. I am heartily Sorry for him, if it be so; this being (to
speak modestly) to make a very large Step toward being no Christian.

Prop. 19. And one would think it impossible, that any Christian should not be
easily persuaded, to think as Honorably of his Redeemer and Sanctifier, as
ever he is able, while he Robs not God the Father for their Sake; and does not
offer any violence either to the sense and meaning of Divine Revelations, or to
the Reason of his Mind. To this he Replys,

I. That Saving the Honor of the Father Entire and Uninjured, the Socinians
think as Honorably of the Son, as any Men whatsoever. I Answer, Surely the
Arians Opinion of Him is far more Honorable than the Socinians, who will not
allow Him to be other than a mere Man, nor to have had a Being before He was in
the Womb of the Virgin; whereas the Arians Doctrine is, that He has a
Super-Angelical Nature, and that He was before all Worlds, and that the Father
Created them by Him; and yet they Consult the Honor of the Father, as much as
the Socinians can no; they making all that belongs to the Son to be from Him.

II. He says, that some of the Socinians think as Honorably too of the H.
Ghost; though it is to be Confessed, that others do think the H. Ghost to be a
Divine Energy or Virtue, and not a Person; whether of the two is not plainly
revealed, and my Antagonist does not tempt me to dispute the Question. Not to
Reflect upon your Friends wisely calling me his Antagonist, who had nothing
then to do with him, don't those Socinians that believe the H. Ghost to be a
Person, make Him no better than an Angel, how then do they think as Honorably
of Him, as those that believe Him to be God, and yet Rob the Father of no
Honor? And whereas he says, It is not Plainly revealed whether the H. Ghost
be a Person or no? I say, it is as plainly revealed, as that the Father himself
is a Person; nor can any one be more plainly spoken of as a Person, than the H.
Ghost still is by our B. Lord. But some Men will dispute any thing; and some
too, who little understand the Knack of disputing.

III. He says, That to think as Honorably as possibly we can, of any Person,
besides God the Father Almighty, is not our duty. But I hope I need not tell
him, that Id Solum Possumus, quod Jure Possumus. We can only do that, which we
can lawfully do. And he knew I could mean no other by Possibly can, than
Lawfully can.

IV. He says, We are to think but just so Honorably of Jesus Christ, as God
directs us in the New Testament. And I say, what ever directions we have what
to think of Him in the Old Testament too, are also to govern our thoughts
concerning Him. And we are wholly led by the H. Scripture to think so much more
Honorably both of Christ and the H. Ghost, than he and his Friends do.

V. He says, That we must leave it to God, who will be Honored above all
things He has made, and will not Communicate His Honor to Another, to appoint
what Honor shall be done to His Son. And we say so too; and therefore wholly
take our direction in this Point from Divine Revelation. And that saying of God
Almighty's, that He will not give His Glory to another; or to any one of His
Creatures, Confirms us in our Belief, that the Son of God is not a Creature;
since He will have us to Honor Him, Even as we Honor Himself. And whereas the
Socinians say, that God will have Him so Honored, as He is His Ambassador, and
Representative, I Answer, that so Angels have often been too, and yet (as I
need not tell them) it was ever Idolatry to pay Religious Honor to them, upon
any account. An Angel that was sent on an Embassy to St John, said to him, upon
his falling down before him, See thou do it not, for I am thy Fellow Servants,
etc. Worship God.

And thus have I replied to every thing in this Animadversion too, that I have
not already spoken, more than once, to.

Prop. 20. There are many things in the Notion of One God, which all hearty
Theists will own are Necessary to be Conceived of Him, that are every whit as
much above the reach and Comprehension of Humane Understandings, as is any part
of this Explication of the Trinity. Nay this may be affirmed, Even of the
Notion of Self-Existence: But yet there is not an Atheist so silly as to call
it in question; since it is not more Evident that One and Two do make Three,
than that there could never have been any thing, if there were not something in
Being, which was always, and never began to be.

To this he only replys, That there are many things directly contrary, to
Self-Evident Principles in this Explication; and he trusts he has Plainly
proved it. And, Sir, do you judge, as much as he is your Friend, how he has
Proved it.

Prop. 21. Lest Novelty should be Objected against this Explication, and so
such as have a veneration for Antiquity (as it becomes all to have) should be
prejudiced against it, we can make it Evident, that it very well agrees with
the Account, which the Nicene Fathers (even Athanasius himself) and others of
the Ancients who have treated of this Subject, do in diverse Places of their
Works, give of the Trinity. And had it not bin sor the Subtle Schoolmen (to
whom CHRISTIANITY is little beholden) we have reason to believe, that the
World, since the Fall of Arianism, would never have been troubled with such
Controversies about this great Point, as it has bin and Continues to be.

Now to this your Friend says,

1. Novelty is the least Objection I have against his Explication, but it is a
good Exception, which he will never be able to answer.

But this Proposition tells him, I am prepared to show, that this Explication
agrees very well with the Account that the Ancients do give of the Trinity.
And therefore he might have had the Patience to have seen whether 'twas a Vain
Boast or no, before he had so Confidently Pronounced me forever unable to
answer the Objection of Novelty.

2. He says, I can hardly think that his Hypothesis, take it altogether, will
down with any Trinitarian. But I Phansy that if he did not Mistrust it would
down with many, he would not be so Angry, as he is, with it. And now,

3. He gives me his Parting Blow, and it is a Stunner, viz. And as for Ancient
Fathers, how weak a thing is it, to seek Credit to An Hypothesis, upon the
account of their Concurring!

But, but now, Novelty he acknowledged to be a good Exception, though the least
Objection, of which Distinction between Objection and Exception, himself must
have the Honor, and it is as Wise a one, as mine between Intelligible and
Comprehensible is a Weak one; but how is Novelty any Exception against an
Hypothesis, if the Concurrence of the Judgments of Ancient Fathers can give no
Credit to it? But whereas I called this Blow a Stunner, I was in too good
Earnest,; for these his last Words do as Perfectly Amaze me, as my now
mentioned Distinction did him. And since Stunned People are not good at
Talking, I have no more to say, but that I know not, whether there be more of
Arrogance than Ignorance, or of Ignorance than Arrogance in these words.

And now, Sir, if you shall think that I have Treated your Friend with too much
Freedom, and have given him too Course a Farewell, the only Apology I can make
for it, is, That I find him such a sort of Adversary, as would not Permit me to
Treat him otherwise.

However, the Liberty he has taken with me, has not the least Influence upon
my Spleen, and I wish him as well as you know I do your self. And particularly,
that he may learn to be more Modest, and think it Possible that those Opinions
which he takes for most Evident and most Necessary Truths, may be as Gross and
Dangerous Errors; and that his Understanding is not so much above the Pitch os
other fallible Mortals, but that he may be mightily Mistaken when he is most
Confident. And I heartily Pray, that you both may with all Sincerity and
Impartiality Consider what is here offered to you, and that God would give us
all a right Understanding in all Divine Truths. These things I say, are
heartily Prayed for, by

Your Affectionate Friend, E. G.

The Latter Defense.
THERE are other Trinitarians Concerned with me, in this Gentleman's Book of
Reflections mentioned in the Title Page. His 7th. Chapter Conteins those he has
made upon the 28. Propositions, which consists of 15. Sections, that begin with
Numb. 56. The First is no more than a Recital of 3. or 4. of my Propositions.
The Writer says upon them,

Sect. 57. 1. That two Infinite Substances should Emane from one Infinite
Substance, is so gross a Notion, that I wonder any Man of Sense should be
guilty of it: And my Reason is, because all Infinites, of what sort or nature
soever, are equal; for if one Infinite be less than another, there must be some
Terminus Bound or End of it, and Consequently it cannot be Infinite, of which
there can be no Bound or End; or if one Infinite were any ways more than
another, there would be somewhat more than Infinite; which is Evidently Absurd:
Therefore to suppose two Infinites to Emane from one, is to suppose two to
Emane from one, when each is equal to the one from which it Emanes.

Here, and in the remaining part of this Section, is Demonstration with a
Witness against the Ancient Fathers Hypothesis, of the Sons and H. Spirits
being from the Deity by Emanation; and against my Hypothesis, of the
Possibility hereof. I will take a little more Liberty with this Subtle
Gentleman, when I am better acquainted with him (as I shall be quickly) than I
will at present. For he may think it no good Breeding to tell him homely all my
mind, at our very first Meeting. But now a Complement is more Civil, as I thank
him, he begins with too great a one to me. And my Complement is, Sir, I Commend
your Wisdom in Changing all along my Phrases, viz. Beings whose Perfections are
unlimited, and who have all they can have without a most manifest
Contradiction, for a Phrase I not once use in my Propositions, viz. Infinite
Substances; because I understand it nothing so well as those Phrases. And I say
he did Wisely herein, Since had he used my Phrases, this Section would not have
looked quite so scaringly. But let the Reader still put one of my Phrases in
the place of Infinite Substances, and then Consider whether Contradictions
would so Immediately and at first Sight seem to appear in this Hypothesis.

But I shall deliver my mind a little more freely to him, relating to the
matter of this Section when I come to his 63d.

But I have not so done with this, but shall farther Consider what it says.
And be he pleased to take notice, that there is nothing in this Acute Arguing,
except he means by Infinite Substances, Substances of an Infinite Quantity, or
Bigness. But I hope he will be so far from attributing Quantity or Bigness to
the Substance of the Deity, that he will not do it to the Substance of an Angel
or Humane Soul. 2. It next follows, To suppose one Infinite Substance to Emane
from another, is to suppose the whole entire Substance to Emane from it self.
But this I deny, and do Acknowledge that if I granted it, I must without any
farther troubling either him or any of his Brethren, bid adieu to the Fathers
Hypothesis they are so displeased with, as a plainly Contradictions one: Seeing
it asserts a real Distinction of the Divine Substances, though no Difference in
them. It follows 3. And what makes it stranger, is, that the two Infinite
Substances Emaned from the Fathers single Substance, yet there was no
diminution in the Substance of the Father; it is as Infinite as it was at
first. But how should this make the Hypothesis Stranger, when it would be the
Strangest thing in the World, if the Divine Substance were Capable of the least
Diminution, since those that believe Spiritual Substances, know that none of
them are: But anon a little more of this. But it may be said, says he, 4. Why
may not one Infinite, as well as one Finite, proceed from another? And then he
thus answers himself, But nothing can be more absurd, than to suppose one
Finite (much more two) to Proceed from one but of the same Bigness. Yes, I Will
tell him what is more Absurd, viz. To suppose one or more Infinite Substances,
to Proceed from another Infinite Substance of the same Bigness. This is more
Absurd, because there is one more Contradiction in this Supposition than in
that, viz. That Bigness belongs to a Spiritual Substance; which kind of
Substance, I hope he will acknowledge to be alone Capable of Infinity.

But as notable Work as our Author makes, at demonstrating the Absurdity of two
infinite Substances Emaning from one, I fancy I know those who may almost as
much put him to it, to defend the Non-Absurdity of a Sparks being kindled by
(or Emaning from) a Spark (both being of the same bigness) as a Trinitarian
shall need to be by his Arguments (I will not be so rude as to Call them
Cavils) against the Possibility of the Other Emanation.

But to use his own Phrase infinite Substance, it is so far from being
impossible, that an infinite Substance, should Emane from an infinite
Substance, or (to use the Scripture Phrase) be begotten by it, that if any
Being can Emane or be begotten by an infinite Substance, it must be infinite
too. For, as Athanasius says, Orat. ^.
It is impossible that that which is begotten, should be a different Essence
from that which Begat. The Reader may see what is farther said of Emanations,
in 2d Defense p. 26. I have abundantly too much business lying now upon my
hands, to find Leisure for so Close a Consideration of all that this Gentleman
has reflected on the 28. Propositions, as possibly I might apply my self to,
had I time to Spare. But the Truth is, I find his Arguing to be such, as if
well followed upon Other Arguments, it might make those, who are willing to be
so, down right Scepticks, as to almost Every thing.

He needs not to be informed, what doughty Dexterity a Sophister might show in
making it out, that Creation is a Perfect Impossibility: That Eternity in both
the Notions thereof, is a Monstrous Contradiction to the Reason of our Minds.
And that so is also the Notion of an Incorporal Substance. And of Liberty, nay
even in God Himself: And of the Divine Omnipresence: And that both parts of a
Contradiction may possibly be true. And perhaps a thousand other things, for
which we have the highest Rational Evidence, may be Exposed to Ridicule, by a
Man who loves to Chop Logic. And likewise a many other things, the Contrarys
to which, we have even Ocular and the most Sensible demonstrations of, may one
make such a show of demonstrating, as to Baffle most men. As that there is no
such thing as Motion: That a Body can have no influence upon a Spirit, nor a
Spirit upon a Body: and much less can they be vitally United: That it is
impossible that Will and Thought should Stir a Finger: That all Bodies are
alike Big, etc. I say most, if not all, these Strange Propositions, are Capable
of being with as Plausible a show of reason defended by a Subtle Sophister, as
the Emanation of the Son and Holy Ghost from the Father has bin now Confuted
by this Gentleman. So that I cannot but apply those words of the Apostle to
such Disputers, They have turned aside unto vain jangling, understanding
neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm. But I have said Enough to this
Section: Each of the following, I shall (I think) dispatch as Easily.

Sect. 58. He says, that whatsoever Emanes, or any way proceeds, from a
Self-Existent Substance (except it were Created and then joined to it) is as
Self-Existent as that Substance. But I say with as great assurance, that
whatsoever Substance Emanes from another, must Owe its Existence to that other;
and the Contrary is a manifest Contradiction. As to his Reason for thus
asserting, viz. Because before its Emanation, it was a Part of the
Self-Existent Substance, it is taken from Material Substances, which do Consist
of Parts; but this cannot be said of Spiritual ones, because they are not
divisible, and therefore have no Parts. And it is Observable too, how well this
Reason Suits to Eternal Emanations.

Sect. 59. This Section has several very Surprising things in it. As 1. Our
Author cannot see, since the Son and Spirit are necessary Emanations, how they
owe their Origin more to the Father, than the Father Owes His to them. Which is
as much as to say, since the Tree necessarily issues forth from the Root, and
the Rays from the Sun, therefore the Root owes its Origin no less to the Tree,
and the Sun to its Rays, than the Tree to the Root, and the Rays to the Sun. 2.
His Reason for that Assertion is, that the Father Son and Spirit are all three
of a Substance, that is Self-Existent. But I say only the two latter are so,
for the First (as he needs not to be told) is the Self Existent Substance; not
of or from such a substance. But if he asks me How they Emane from the Father,
I know not which of us would be the more Presumptuous, he for Asking, and for
Endeavoring to Answer thatQuestion. But (on second thoughts) I will undertake
to Answer it, when he shall be pleased to Answer me this, How did your self
come into Being? Or, What is the Modus how any thing comes to be what it is, or
to be at all? 3. He adds, Nor could the Father more than They, be the cause of
the Separation, since They necessarily Separated from one another. But can I
need to mind him, that our Hypothesis will not bear a Separation between the
Divine Persons, and only asserts a Distinction between them? And sure I need not
tell him, that he is not over-fit to Write Books, who knows not that
Distinction, and Separation, and Difference too, are Several things. But 4.
Whereas he says that, no one of these Persons can be the cause of their
Separation, because they Necessarily Separated, does he think that God can be
the Necessary Cause of nothing? Or that He is in His own nature Indifferent to
every thing? If he believes (for Instance) that the Perfection of His Nature
does not Necessarily determine Him, to what is best; or to do whatsoever He in
His Infinite Wisdom knows fit to be done, I hope there are not many of his
mind. He says, 5. That it is another Contradiction to Affirm, that an Infinite
Substance is divided into Three Infinite Parts. How does our Author already run
Taplash! But I will not therefore forbear Replying, and I Answer, No doubt it
is a Horrid Contradiction so to Affirm. But how rank does this smell of the
Gross thing called Body! His mind runs altogether upon Material Substances,
which alone I say have Parts to be divided into. And if a Spiritual Substance
cannot be divided into spiritual Parts, much less can an Insinite Spiritual
Substance be divided into Infinite Spiritual Parts. And he who thinks that a
Spirit can be divided into parts, had as good never take that word into his
Mouth, and much less can he Pretend to believe it a thing of an Immortal
nature, which whosoever does not, whatever Theologers they may be, I cannot
admire them for Philosophers. 6. He makes it in what follows an Absurdity to
deny that whatsoever proceeds from another thing, must be in Order of Time
after it. These are his words, Whatsoever Proceeds from a thing must first be
in it, Except it can be in it and Proceed from it, at the same time. But as we
never thought of such a thing, as the Two Persons so Proceeding, as to be
Separated from the First; nor of any more than their having their Origin from
Him, so this they may have and yet still be in Him, and might ever have been in
Him. Can our Author think (not to trouble him too often with the Rays being
from the Sun, and yet as Old as it) that all Thoughts must be Younger than
Minds, because they have their Original from them. This can be denied by none,
that make Minds to be Thinking Beings: I mean, that do acknowledge Thinking to
be Essential to Minds. But this I have spoken to in the Preceding Defense. p.
29, 30, etc.

Sect. 60. He says, That it had bin Intolerable in the Pagans, to believe
those Rays that come from the Sun, to be the Sun it self. And I need say no
more, than that it is as Intolerable to believe the Son and Spirit, who have
their Existence from the Father, to be the Father Himself. But I desire him to
think sedately with himself, whether Gods Decrees could none of them be
Eternal, I Phansy he is not so much a School-man as to answer, Gods Decrees are
God Himself.

Sect. 61. He says, what I further add are direct Contradictions, reciting
several more things Contained in my Propositions; and this is the whole of this
Section. Here is not one word of Proof, that any one of them is a
Contradiction; and therefore I have nothing to add here.

Sect. 62. He affirms, 1. That Necessary Existence from Eternity is as great a
Perfection, as Self-Existence. But not to tell him, that whatsoever does
necessarily Exist, must have bin from Eternity, and therefore such an Existence
is never attributed to a Creature; I do absolutely deny, that necessary
Existence from Another, is as great a Perfection as necessary Existence from
Ones self. Can our Author in his Cool thoughts imagine it is? He says 2. If
the Father has given Existence to any Being, which he cannot take away, He
would Cease to be Almighty. But I conceive, that to suppose that the Father can
make a Being to Cease, which has a Necessary Existence from Him, would be a
Contradictions supposal; and that Contradictions being Objects of no Power,
cannot be Objects of Divine Power; and that therefore the Almightiness thereof
Consists in an Ability to do whatsoever Implies not a Contradiction, or that
Power can do: And so does our Author conceive too. He says, 3. That Self.
Existence Separate from those Powers, which can only belong to a Self-Existent
Being, is no Perfection. But I ask him, how Self-Existence can be Separated
from those Powers? and if it cannot, What does this saying Signify? And it is
certain it cannot. But if he means Abstracted by Separate, as he used a very
Improper word to express his thoughts by, I deny that the Notion of
Self-Existence abstracted from all other Considerations whatsoever, Implies no
Persection. And I have as much Liberty to Contradict him without giving my
Reason, as he has to Affirm this without giving his. But indeed this denial of
mine needs no Reason, for that Self-Existence is as Such a Perfection is
Self-Evident, or I know not what is so. But were it not that I find him in one
of these Sections, asserting Creation out of nothing, this Passage would lead
me to a very shrewd Suspicion, that he is of Wolzogenius his Mind, and some
others of his Brethren, That God is not the only Self-Existent Being, but that
the Rude Chaos was, and therefore all Matter now is, Self-Existent too. And if
they could demonstrate this to me, I Confess I should do what lies in me, to
think Self-Existence to be no Perfection at all, in spite of its being
Self-Evident that it is a great Perfection, if not the greatest. 4. He says,
That if the Persons have the some Unlimited Perfections, but their Manner of
getting them was different, that would not cause any Inequality between them.
But I say it would; that is in reference to their Manner of Existence, though not
in reference to their mere Essence.

What follows, is but dilating on the same thing, and repeating what has been
already Considered.

Sect. 63. He asks, 1. How the Father can be greater than the Son and H.
Spirit, and be the only Good, when they have the same Unlimited Power and
Goodness? I Answer, They have an Unlimited Power, but not the Same Unlimited
Power with the Father. Ad Extra, or in relation to the Creation, their Power is
Unlimited; but no body will say, that ad Intra, it is the same with the
Fathers, Except he can believe, that the Son could Beget the Father, as the
Father has Begot the Son. And as to the Fathers being called by our Savior
the Only Good, in that he says There is none Good but God, I have said in my
Propositions (with Grotius and others) that that Phrase must needs signify the
Only Original Good, or the Only Fountain of Goodness; which the Father may be,
and yet not the only Perfectly Good. And I think that the Perfection of
Self-Existence belonging to the Father alone, and therefore those Perfections
too, which do necessarily suppose Self-Existence, the Father may most truly be
said to be greater than the Son and H. Spirit, although all the Perfections of
these Persons are Unlimited. 2. He asks, What greater Absurdity there can be,
than that Beings which have Infinite Unlimited Perfections, should want some
Perfections? I Answer, that indeed there cannot be a greater Absurdity than to
say, that a Being which has an Infinite Number of Unlimited Perfections, can
want some; this would be an Ab'urdity with a Vengeance: But I doubt I am not
Capable of understanding where lies the Absurdity of asserting, That a Being
which has not the Perfection of Self-Existence, and those that suppose it, may
notwithstanding have in as high a degree as can be those Perfections which they
have. 3. He says, That a Being cannot be partly Infinite and partly Finite.
And so he runs on upon Infinite, Infinite, which he all along does; and the
reason of it is obvious enough, viz. because it is a rare Amusing Confounding
Word, for my Brains, and the Brains of his Readers; there is not such another
to be met with for the purpose. But Infinity is not a thing to be made so bold
with, or talked of with such freedom and Confidence, as he still does, as if it
were a very familiar matter. But I say again, it is no such Monstrous business
to Imagine, that a Being which has not Every Perfection, may have those it is
possessed of, in the Highest degree. If I cared to talk things which I
understand nothing of, I could talk too of Infinity; and say, that there are
several sorts of Infinity: That there is Infinity of Substance: And Infinity of
Quantity: And Infinity of Duration: And Infinity of Space; and God knows how
many more Infinities: And could show that there is no Absurdity in saying, that
all these Infinities do not necessarily belong to every one of these, and I
should get great Reputation among Wise men for my pains, should they Catch me
thus Employing my Tongue or Pen.

But now I think better of it, I find I am not quite so Ignorant, as I thought
I was; for I can tell this Gentleman, that a Being Can be partly infinite and
partly not; since I have learned that Angels and Humane Souls are so: That is,
with respect to the Infinity of Duration they are infinite a Part Post, though
not a Part ante. And what a rare Notion is this!

Sect. 64. As to the little that is here said, viz. Upon the Odious Topic of
Tritheism, I referr him to my Reply to the Considerator, my much more Ingenuous
Adversary, which I presume he has read, though he takes no notice of it.

Sect. 65. Here is nothing to be spoken to without Repetitions; and I want time
to make them, and he is not in such want of Sense as to need them.

Sect. 66. Here he Misrepresents me, and argues upon his Misrepresentation. See
Prop. 13th.

Sect. 67. Considering what I have said to the Considerator, and already to
this Person, relating to the matter of this Section, I shall only observe upon
it, 1. That I wonder how any man that has a due Awe of the Infinite Majesty of
God upon his Mind, can give himself leave to use such an Expression, as Tacking
two Persons to God the Father. I scrupled a while, whether I might foul my Pen
with Transcribing it. 2. He tells us that Nothing can be more Absurd than to
say, that the 3. Persons are One God by Union, and yet are distinct from One
Another. But is there no difference betwixt Union and Identity or self
samenefs? Is there not a real distinction between our Souls and Bodies, though
United so closely as that he cannot conceive how closely, nor any Man else? If
he shall say, that Union is but another word for Composition, I shall say he is
Extremely out. Composition being a blending or mixing of the Parts of distinct
things. The word is Commonly used only of Heterogeneous things: Spiritual
Substances therefore having no parts, are incapable of being Compounded. And,
in my poor Opinion, though a Man Consists of a Soul and Body, he cannot be said
to be Compounded of them, because only one of these has parts. Our Author
it is like will Cry Mystery! Mystery! to this Talk; as he despises Trinitarians
for calling the Union of the three Divine Persons a Mystery: But if even to the
Union of the two Created Beings himself Consists of, he cannot Seriously Cry
Mystery, I know what I know of him. I will not say Every Witty Man, but I am
sure Every Wise Man will cry Mystery! to Every thing, as ill as some can bear
that word. I confess no Man shall persuade me any more than him and his
Friends, to swallow a Palpable Contradiction by calling it a Mystery, till he
can persuade me too that God Almighty endued me with false Faculties; and then,
do what I can, I am like to believe but few things more than Cogito ergo Sum.
But I am as certain as I can be of any thing but what I see or feel, that it is
not more difficult to understand this Union, than Abundance of other things
Relating to the Deity, and innumerable things which our Author must believe in
spite of Fate, if he will be a Christian, or a Theist, or but a Man.

Sest. 68. He here Banters the real Trinitarians, as doing very Wisely in
supposing their three infinite Substances, to be as close together as can be,
lest there should not be room enough for them, in but one infinite Space, etc.
And then he Enquires, if the Substance of the Father be Every where, how the
Substance of the Son can be every where too? I shall be a little closer upon
this Gentleman for the strange liberty he takes in talking of Infinite
Substances, as soon as I have done with his Sections, than I have bin yet or
will now be. In the mean time, I will be satisfied to Reply thus to this
Section, viz. Does not this kind of Talk Suppose, that he takes the three
Divine Persons (if he thinks two of them are any thing) to be Corporeal
Substances? which is so gross a Conceit, and speaks such beastly Stupidity,
that I would charge no Man therewith, who does not Expressly own it. But, hoping
he doubts not of the Being of Spiritual substances, nor of the Divine
Omnipresence, I ask him how the Substance of God the Father can be in those
spaces which are filled with Bodies? Or how can his Soul and Body, or that part
of his Body which his Soul possesses (if his Philosophy will permit him to
think it does not pervade the whole of his Body) how can they be, I say, in the
Self-same place or Ubi, call it which he pleases? Surely, one would think, that
several Spirits may be together in the same individual space, seeing the
Penetrability of Spirits must be acknowledged by all that believe there are
such Substances (except they have no manner of Notion of what they believe) as
well as that a Spirit and an Impenetrable Body may be together in the same
space. As to his adding [and after the same manner] to [at the same time] this
can be only for a Blind. But we may talk Endlesly upon this Subject, and
little understand one another or Our selves; for this, for certain, is one of
those things, which our minds were never made for any thing like a clear
perception of; at least in these gross Bodies. And much more then (as he will
be showed anon) is the infinity of the Divine Substance to be reckoned of that
number. And he is an intolerably Conceited Fop, who will not Confess so much
Ignorance, as to have no other Idea of Gods Infinity, than that He has all
Possible Perfections, and that all His Perfections are Unlimited. And we are at
a perfect loss what to say or think further about the Divine Essence. Nay, we
have now no Cognizance of more than the Modes and Properties of Bodily
Substance, we have none at all of its Naked Essence. All we can say of Body as
Body, is, that it is Extended Penetrable Bulk.

Sect. 69. He says, 1. That the Trinitarians say, the Persons are one God, as
the Soul and Body are one Man: And then he Exposes the folly of that Simile.
But he might have saved himself this little labor; for as I never said so, so
neither know I of any other Trinitarian that has. The Creed indeed which is
called the Athenasian, says, That as the Soul and Body are one Man, so God and
Man are one Christ; but what is this to his Purpose? But what I have said, is,
That the Union between the three Divine Persons, is not more Unaccountable,
than is the Union between the Soul and Body; and that in one respect it is less
Unaccountable than this Union, viz. because this is between Beings of perfectly
Unlike Natures; whereas that is between Persons of the same Nature. And why
distinct intelligent substances, which is the only definition I can give of
Persons, may not be as closely United because they are all intelligent, as one
intelligent Substance and a Body, is above the little Philosophy that I can
pretend to be Master of, to understand. 2. Upon the Simile, of the Close Union
of the Sun with its Light and Heat, as he words it; he says, There are no such
Perceptions as those we call Light and Heat, in any Beings, but those that are
Capable of seeing and feeling; And that this every Common Systeme demonstrates:
And that this is Obvious to all but Children and Metaphysicians. What a
Wonderful Piece of Learning is here! 1. Light and Heat Perceptions! I have
heard of Perceptions and Sensations of Light and Heat, but that they are
Perceptions and Sensations themselves, I have hitherto bin to learn. 2. But
they are not (though) Perceptions in any Beings, but such as have faculties
Capable of Seeing and Feeling. And 'twould be some what Extraordinary, if any
thing could perceive Light and Heat, that can neither see nor feel. Yet I am a
little mistaken, if Heat, and Light too, cannot have some Operation on Bodies,
which have never a One of the Five Senses. 3. He says, that every Common
Systeme demonstrates, that there are no such Perceptions as Light and Heat, but
in things that are Capable of seeing and feeling. A goodly Demonstration! But
the Commonness of it may make it the less Observable. But it is pretty much it
should be demonstrated in Every Common Systeme, and I should never Light on it
in any one Systeme. But it is no matter, since I am a little too Old to be a
Child (unless twice one) and then to be a Metaphysician too; for I am told to
my Comfort, 4. That this Notion is Obvious to all but Children and
Metaphysicians. Yet it is Obvious to this Gentleman, though a Metaphysician; as I
dare warrant him he is (whether he knows it or no, as it is like he does not
since he so despising them) or he could never be so Notable at infinity, and
other most Sublime and Abstruse Matters. 5. But in good Earnest, I am so dull
as to be utterly unable to imagine, but that Light would be Light (whatsoever
is to be thought of Colors) though there were no Eyes to Perceive it: And such a
Heretic in Philosophy (whether I am in Divinity or no) as to think, that it is
an Aggregation of a certain sort of Particles, as much as Air is. And therefore
I am not like in haste to be shamed out of the Fathers Simile, of Emanations of
Light from the Sun. Nor do I think that our Author himself, will ever be able
to demonstrate any Absurdity in conceiving, that Heat differs only gradually
from Fire, and Light from both: And that Fire is a fluid Constituted of an
Excessively small sort of Particles, and therefore very Active, Subtle and
Piercing; and that a Collection of these Minute bodies in such a quantity, and
so closely as to become an Object of Sight, is that which we Express by the
words Fire and Flame; and a less close Collection is what we call Heat. And
that Flame differs from Fire, as it is a more dispersed Collection of these
Particles, than Fire; and Light from both, as it is a thinner Collection of
them than either of the other: I say, I do not think that our Author, as
Skilled as he is content to be thought to be in Physics (though not in
Metaphysics) can demonstrate that these are Absurd Notions.

Sect. 70. There is nothing to be taken notice of in this very small Section,
But our being Charged with Terminating our Devotions in Each of the three
Persons in our Praying to Each of them. But I say, this is a very false Charge;
for we as heartily acknowledge that all the Honor we pay to the Son, and H.
Spirit, ought to be Ultimately terminated in God the Father, though we believe
they are not Creatures, as those Socinians do who are for giving Divine Honor
to the Son, believing Him to be a Creature and a mere Man. And I am sure he
cannot think otherwise, of those whom he calls the Real Trinitarians, because
their Hypothesis necessarily obliges them so to believe, what ever the
Hypothesis of the Other does. But the H. Scripture is so Express upon this
point, that I should think no Christian should find it hard to believe it: No,
though there were no Other Text but this for it, viz. -- That at the Name of
Jesus, every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, and things on Earth, and
things under the Earth: And that Every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ
is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father.

Having now done with my Adversarie's Reflections upon the 28. Propositions, I
will make bold to Argue a while with himself; and to give him a Sample of his
Reasoning.

With as Infallible Assurance, Sir, as you Talk of Infinite Substances, and
Reason against the Possibility of the Sons and H. Spirits being Infinite
Substances from the Nature of such Substances; I never yet met with your
Fellow, if you will pretend to have a distinct and Explicit Idea of the thing
called Substance; but I know not what Epithet to give you, if you can take the
Liberty to tell me, that you have any such Idea of Infinity, as it relates
immediately to a Substance.

You have indeed told us, that an Infinite Substance is that which has no
Bounds or Limits; but did you think you then gave us a Definition of an
infinite Substance? No, you are a Wiser Man than so; or than to hope that the
Construing of a Word, would pass with any but Children and Fools for a
Definition of a thing. But suppose, Sir, that I were so Easy, as to accept of
Boundlesness and Unlimitedness for a Definition, or Description of Infinity,
yet I should (Ten to One) put this Question (whether an Easy one or no) What is
the Infinity of a Substance? You will not say, this is an Easy Question because
Answered already, viz. That the Infinity of a Substance, is the Boundlesness
thereof; for you know you must tell us what a Substance is, before you can make
us the Wiser, by discoursing upon Infinite Substances, Or the Infinity of a
Substance. If you will now be defining this Thing Called Substance, by certain
of its Properties, I cannot for bear Proceeding to ask, What is the Subject of
these Properties? Or, What is Substance Considered abstractedly from all
Accidents? If you tell me, it is something that does Substare Accidentibus, and
needs no Support it self, I must be Satisfied with this Answer, since I know
you will not Attempt to give a better. But however I will not be discouraged,
from Asking on a while longer, though you should give me the Proverb for my
Pains: And this Question next Occurrs, viz. Since an Insinite Substance is
something that has no Bounds, must it not reach to all the dimensions of
Infinite Space, which you were up with in your 68th. Section? One might be
tempted to think, that after you had said absolutely, as you did Sect. 57.
There can be no Bound or End of what is Infinite, you will grant this; for if
it were Extended through the length and breadth of a Million of Worlds, if
there be so many, this would not speak it to have no Bound or End; since all
these Worlds put together will not fill a Boundless Space. But then I ask what
is Space? Or (to speak a little Learnedly) What is the Ratio formalis of Space?
And you have a ready Answer for me, viz. It Is Vacuity or Emptiness. Then demand
I, What kind of thing is Emptiness? And you have an Answer at hand to this too,
viz. It Is an Imaginary thing. And when I have asked, What is a mere Imaginary
thing? I am much mistaken, if a Man of your Headpiece will in the least
hesitate at Replying, A mere Imaginary thing, is a real Nothing. And then, Sir,
This is your Disinition of an Infinite Substance, It is a thing that is of
Equal Extent with an Infinite Nothing. But hold! Cry you, Who gave you leave
thus to ask me Questions, and then to answer them as you list for me? I would
have told you, that my Phrase without Bounds or Limits, is not to be taken so
Strictly, as to surpass the Space which holds All Worlds. But, Sir, will this
Answer do? Is, after all your Arguing from the Infinity of the Divine
Substance, your Notion of it only this, that it is as much without Bounds as
Gods Creature the Universe? And can this Consist with your having Asserted,
that it is a Contradiction to say, that there can be more than One Infinite
Being? But I foresee you will go near to Reply, My Notion thereof is far from
being so scanty a one as you Imagine; for I hold, that the Infinity of the
Divine Substance, Consists in its Power to Extend its Presence through all the
parts of New Worlds, as they are Created; which God Almighty can if he pleases
Create to All Eternity. But then say I, will you pretend, Sir, to have any the
least Idea, How the Divine Substance can do this? And is not this Dilatation
and farther Expansion thereof, think you, Capable of being made as Ridiculous
and Contradictory a thing, by such a Wit as yours, as you think you have made
Emanations from thence to be? I know you cannot but be Aware, that it is
certainly so.

And therefore let the Reader judge, what Prodigious Monstrous Presumption it
is, Excuse me if I am now a little warm, to draw most Confident Conclusions
from Premises, which are Unspeakably above the reach of Humane Understandings;
as the Gentleman I have now bin Socratically talking with, must Confess the
Premises are, from which he has Argued against me. Nay, they must be above the
Comprehension of all Finite, as well as Humane Understandings; Or Nothing is
so. For my part, I dare not trust my Shallowness with two Thoughts upon such a
Subject as this of Infinite Substances, nor of an infinite Substance neither. I
have a distinct Notion of a Being Absolutely Perfect, and Beings of Unlimited
Perfections, though infinitely Short of a Comprehensive One, and therefore I
chose to use only such Expressions in my Propositions. And because these are
in some measure adapted to Humane Capacities, the Deity is Every where
described in H. Scripture, by its Glorious Perfections of Wisdom, Power,
Goodness, Mercy, Righteousness and Purity; and by its most Wonderful Exertions
and Displayings of them in the Creation: And by these are the Son and H. Spirit
described there as well as God the Father. Wherefore I could not without mighty
Regret Critizare Cum Cr^tensi (taking the Phrase, for paying our Author in his
own Coin) as I now did, had I not so good a design therein, as to Expose the
Folly and Madness of the Liberty which he and others take, with the most
Profoundly Adorable Deity.

Can such Persons read those Questions of Zophar, without Astonishment, which
he put to Job, Chapter 11. 7, etc. Can thou by Searching find out God? Can thou
find out The Almighty to Perfection? It is as High as Heaven, what Can thou
do? Deeper than Hell, what Can thou know? The Measure thereof is longer than
the Earth, and Broader than the Sea.

And now I have done with this Author, as well as with his Reflections; who must
not take it unkindly, that I have been so plain with him; there being not the
least of Ill Will in it, but the greatest Good Will I am sure. And
notwithstanding we differ so mightily in our Sentiments, I wish him as well as
I do my self.

If any do expect that I will be still Replying on, as I am farther Attackt,
they will find themselves disappointed, Unless such Objections shall happen to be
offered, against the Hypothesis of the Fathers, the Non-Absurdity of which I
Endeavor to desend, as have not yet appeared. And if such hereafter appear, as
upon Impartial Consideration I shall think Convictive, I will not (by God's
Grace) be ashamed to Confess that I have bin in an Error. But rather shall
think, I cannot do my self a greater Honor, as I cannot do a greater Right to
Truth, than by publishing a Recantation.

But I will not be so Idle, as to Contend for the Last Word with such Men as I
know will never yield it me; I mean those who will not distinguish between
dicibile and dicendum, what it is possible to say and what ought to be said;
but will adventure to say any thing, and turn Every Stone, and put their Wits
to their utmost Stretch, to invent Replys and Rejoynders, rather than let their
Pens rest; and much more, rather than they will own the least Mistake.

And wherever I find a deal of Art and Subtilty, and mightily Labored
Oppositions, Defenses or Provings, I cannot but Suspect, that the desire of
Victory, and the Increasing or Upholding of a Party, or Men's great Opinion of
their own Understandings, have very much the Ascendent of the Love of Truth.

But how may the Learned Socrates shame the Self-conceited Dogmatizers? Who
would not acknowledge that the Oracle could have any other Reason to Pronounce
himself The Wisest of all Men, but Because he knew how ignorant he was; and did
not think he knew, what indeed he did not. (...)


And how may those words of S Paul, lay the Plumes of these Gnostics, viz. If
any man thinks he knows any thing, (or Prideth himself in an Opinion of his
being a Knowing Person) he knows nothing yet, as he ought to know.

And it is certain, that the more Sincerely and Impartially Inquisitive any Man
is after Truth, the less Stiff, Opiniative and Pertinacious he will be; and the
less Confident of those Notions which are very disputable: Because such a man
is no less acquainted, with the Strongest Objections against them, than with
the best Arguments for them.

And the more Extensive Knowledge any one has acquired, the more vigorously
sensible will he be, that he knows but very little. Nor is any Man in a
Capacity of Perceiving such Shallowness and Emptiness in his Mind, as he who is
surnished with the Largest Stock of the most Useful Knowledge.

The more we know of the Deity, and the Stupendous works of Creation and
Providence, with the greater Amazement shall we Cry out with Holy Job, How
little a Portion is heard of Him! How little am I Capable of understanding,
either of Him or them! And the more a Man has enquired into the Works of
Nature, the more Conscious will he be to himself, how Extremely little he has
bin able to discover, even of the most despised things; and such as the Vulgar
take for granted, to have nothing belonging to them, that will afford any
Matter for Enquiry.

There is no such Antidote therefore against Pride, as the most Substantial and
Comprehensive Knowledge, whereas nothing makes a Man so Conceited and
Self-assuming, as a small Smattering of Learning.

And there are no such Masters of Reason (in their own Opinion) as such Men.
The most Ancient Fathers, when they have not the good Luck to be of these Men's
mind, are Old Dunces; and as nothing is the truer for their saying it, so
neither is it one jot the more like to be true. Nor is Novelty and Objection to
them, against the Probability of any darling Opinion.

How much rather would I be Modest Socrates, than a Christian who so leans to
his own (or his Parties) Understanding. In what I have now bin saying, I cannot
for bear thinking, of more Denominations than One of Professors of
Christianity. But yet I have bin far from Reflecting upon all of any
Denomination. I am not such a Censurer.

God give us All more Humility.
THE END.

