A Declaration to the JEWS For them to READ OVER, IN WHICH They may see that
the Messiah is come, according to their own Prophets, and Gabriel the Angel.

And according their own number of time and years, out of Daniel 9.

By George Fox:

LONDON. Printed for John White, at the backside of the old Exchange, 1661.

A Declaration to the Jews for them to Read over, in which they may see that
the Messiah is come, according to their own Prophets, and Gabriel the Angel,
And according to their own number of time and years, out of Dan. 9.
FRom the Building of the Temple at Jerusalem spoken of by Daniel in the ninth
chapter, was seven weeks, or forty nine years, in which the Temple was built,
from the finishing of which there was sixty two weeks, which is four hundred
thirty and four years, until the Baptism of Christ, And after the sixty two
weeks There was one week in the which the Messiah should be slain, but not for
himself; And the People of the Prince that should come should destroy the City,
and the Sanctuary that was builded, and the end thereof should be with a flood,
and unto the end of the battle it should be destroyed with desolation, and he
shall confirm the Covenant with many, for in one week, in the midst of the week
he shall cause the daily sacrifice to cease, which Death was about three years
and a half after Christ was baptized; For says the Angel Gabriel, in the last
verse of that ninth chapter, And in the midst of the week, that is three days
and an half, he shall cause the Jews Sacrifice and the Oblation to cease, etc.
which Sacrifice ends all other Sacrifices, and the Covenant being confirmed
with many of his Disciples, they preached it up and down in the Synagogues and
Temples, and among the Heathen; And Christ Preached of the destruction of the
Temple after it was built, which was builded unto him, the Prince, the Messiah,
he preached the destruction of the Temple, that it should be thrown down, and
not one stone left upon another, and it was thrown down [according to his
Prophecy] by the Heathen, And he said Jerusalem should be compassed about with
armies, and trodden under foot, and they scattered abroad over all Nations,
which thing came to pass (according to his prophecy) and never had ye a
prophecy that you should be gathered again to outward Jerusalem, and that your
walls should be built again.

And now if you do believe Moses, Jeremiah, Samuel, Isaiah, Ezekiel, Zechariah,
Daniel and the rest of the Prophets, and Gabriel that spoke unto Daniel, ye
must believe that Christ is come in the flesh; They prophesied of him and set
the time, and set the year that he should come, which time and year is over and
come, and past, according to the prophets and Angels words, as you may read
what Gabriel said to Daniel, who numbered the time of your captivity, as
Jeremiah and numbered the time of building of the Temple, and numbered the time
in which the Messiah should come the Prince.

And now if Gabriel spoke truth, and Daniel and the Prophets spoke truth, then
you must believe that the Messiah is come according to their words.

And whether or nay one did not come in that year according to Gabriel, and
Daniel and the Prophets, that was called a Messiah and a Prince? whether the
City was not built and the people were not gathered before he came, and after
he was come, whether such an one was not cut off according to the week, and
after your City destroyed, and Temple, and you scattered over all Nations,
according to the Messiah Prophecy?

And whether or nay his Covenant was not confirmed with many that were his
Disciples that preached up and down the one Offering after he was cut off?

And whether or nay God did not prepare him a Body, according to David's
Prophecy to do his will, which God accepted more than burnt-offerings, and
sacrifices and oblations, who put an end to them, for the over-spreading of the
abomination that made the desolation, until your offerings were consumed, and
the place where you offered?

And whether or nay he did not come poor, Riding upon an Ass, the foal of an
Ass, according to Zechariahs Prophecy, Zachariah the ninth chapter, Riding
into Jerusalem, who should let the Prisoners out of the Pit where there was no
water, who should give the water to the thirsty, and bread to the hungry?

And whether or nay you did not hide your faces from him, he being a man of
sorrow, and acquainted with griefs, according to Isaiahs prophesies? Isa. 53.

And whether or no you did not stop your ears, and blind your eyes, that you
heard not, nor see not when he came, and so you have lost the number of time?

And whether or no David's prophecy is not fulfilled upon you, who said, let
their eyes be blinded, and their Table be made a snare and a trap, and they bow
down their backs always, as you have done under every Government?

That when he did come who was David's son, that David called Lord the King of
Glory, your gates were not set open to let him in, but his place amongst you
was a Manger.

And did not Malachi prophecy of him, and was one of the last Prophets amongst
you?

And did not John come to prepare the way before him, who baptized multitudes
of the Jews, who was the Son of Zachary, who was put to death by Herod at the
pleasing of his Daughters dancing he beheaded in prison on his birthday?

And did not you persecute many of his Disciples, and cast in prison for
witnessing Christ the Messiah the Prince among you, who was come according to
Moses and the Prophets, Gabriel and Daniel?

Did not they often tell your Fathers that their eyes were blinded, and their
ears dull that they heard nor see not?

And did not the Messiah the Prince tell you, in the days amongst your
Fathers, that your house should be left desolate, so are not all your Temples,
Sanctuaries, and chief places of Offerings, have they not all been desolate,
and have been ever since?

And did not he say unto you that you should see his face no more, until you
said Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord? therefore if your
houses be left desolate, there was never no promise of the Lord that they
should be built again; but happy is any of you who can say, Blessed is he that
comes in the Name of the Lord, who receive him receive the end of Offerings
and Sacrifices.

And did not Moses say like unto him would God raise up a Prophet, him should
they hear in all things; and he would raise up a Prophet of their Brethren?

And the Prophets and David witness that the Messiah should come of the seed
of David and Abraham according to the flesh.

And was not Joseph and Mary of the household of David, and was not his name
called Immanuel according to Isaiahs prophecy? Isa. 7.14.

And born in the year according to Daniel and Gabriel, Daniel 9.

And did not David say he would not suffer his Holy One to see corruption, nor
leave his soul in Hell? he saw the travail of his soul, and therefore was
satisfied, according to Isaiahs prophecy.

Therefore after you had killed him by a shameful death upon the Cross, and
buried him, did not he rise again and saw no corruption, whom neither death,
bonds, nor grave could contain nor hold? though the Priests gave the Soldiers
money to say that his Disciples stole him away by night, who now remains in the
Heavens at the right hand of God until the restitution of all things, who after
his Resurrection was seen of many Brethren, and many Witnesses, who were the
Witnesses of his Resurrection amongst your Forefathers, and amongst whom (your
Fathers) he wrought many Miracles, and did many Wonders, to the astonishment of
the very Heathen, and of many of your Forefathers, yet their hearts being
hardened, and their eyes being blinded, and could not nor would not neither see
nor believe, therefore did he pronounce the woes against you which is come upon
you; and he does enlighten every man that comes into the world, and is that
which checks you for sin and evil, which if you believe in the Light you come
to receive him that all the Prophets Moses and Gabriel spoke of, who is the
Prophet that is to be heard, and King that Daniel prophesied of, whose Kingdom
is an everlasting Kingdom, and Dominion an everlasting Dominion that has no
end, who is the stone cut out of the Mountain, and the seed without hands that
dasheth all that is contrary to it, and becomes a great Mountain, for you are
hewing and cutting, and all other Heathen upon the earth, and making Mountains
with hands, and so Nations or Kingdoms; this stone without hands that is cut
out of the Mountain without sword and spear, breaks all to pieces, and it
becomes an everlasting Mountain and an everlasting Kingdom and Dominion,
whereby swords and spears are broken in plowshares and pruning hooks, whereby
that Nation shall not lift up sword against Nation, neither shall they learn
war any more, Micha 4.

And Jeremiah prophesied of your captivity seventy years, and he said when you
were brought into the Land, and all Nations should be gathered to it in
Jerusalem, and when ye increased and multiplied in the Land, in those days
says the Lord they shall say no more the Ark of the Covenant of God, for it
shall come no more to be minded, neither shall they remember it, neither shall
they visit it, for that shall be done no more, Jer. 3.

And Jeremiah says in the 31. Chapter, Behold says the Lord the day comes
that I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and the house of
Judah, not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers when I took
them out of the land of Egypt, which Covenant they brake; But this shall be my
Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days of their
Captivity and return, I will write my Law in their hearts, and I will be their
God, and they shall be my people; and they shall not teach every man his
Neighbor, and every man his Brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all
know me from the least to the greatest of them, says the Lord, for I will
forgive their iniquities, and remember their sins no more; Now this is the
Messiah, and this was promised and prophesied how after he should come into the
Land which came into the Land of Jerusalem, according to Jeremiah, and Daniel,
and Gabriel, and Ezekiel their words and prophesies.

And Jeremiah says in the ^3. Chapter, after they were carried away captive
that they should be brought again into the land, and the Lord promised that
good thing, he would cause his branch of Righteousness to grow unto David, and
he should execute judgment and Righteousness in the land, and in those days
Judah shall be saved and Jerusalem shall dwell safely, and he should call and
say here is the Lord our Righteousness (Mark) that calls Judah and calls
Jerusalem, that makes them to dwell safely. And thus says the Lord, David
shall never want a man to sit upon the Throne, upon the house of Israel;
neither shall the Priests and Levites want a man for me to offer up the
burnt-offerings, and the meat offerings, and to do Sacrifice continually; Now
this was after their coming into the Land, and after the Messiah was born, and
the branch of Righteousness sprung, and he should sit upon the Throne of
David, and execute Judgment and Righteousness in the land, then the Priests
and Levites should have their men to offer meat offerings, and burnt-offerings,
and sacrifices continually, and this was after Christ was come; but when he was
offered up, and sacrificed up that one offering once for all, who judge and
executed judgment amongst you before he was offered up both among the Jews and
at Jerusalem, when he I say was offered up, he caused those things (the
offerings) to cease, and fulfilled them according to Gabriels words and Daniels
prophecy, and ends the Priesthood, the Levitical Priesthood, who came not of
the Tribe of Levi nor Aaron, but of Judah that Lion; so in one week in the
midst of the week he should cause the daily Sacrifice and Oblation to cease,
and so this was the Covenant prophesied of by Jeremiah, and this was he that
Moses prophesied of, like unto him would God raise up a Prophet which the
People should hear.

And Stephen witnessed him before the Council in the days of Herod whom your
Fathers caused to be stoned to death.

And after this Covenant was come, you should say no more the Ark of God, nor
mention it, nor let it come into your minds, this was after ye were come into
the Land, and Zachariahs Prophesies, who prophesied of the destruction of
Jerusalem, who prophesied again, that Jerusalem should be safely inhabited, and
they that fought against Jerusalem, should come up to worship year by year, and
keep the feasts of Tabernacles; and the Lord would smite the Heathen and
Egyptians that came not unto Jerusalem, that came not up to keep the feast of
Tabernacles; and the Pots in the Lords House should be like the Bowls before
the Altar, and every pot should be holy, and all they that sacrificed should
come and take of them, after the people were come to worship at Jerusalem, and
the Mountain which was the place of worship; when Christ said to the woman of
Samaria, the time was come and now is, that neither at Jerusalem, nor at this
Mountain; But they that worship the Father, shall worship him in spirit and
truth, for such the Father seeks to worship him.

Now this was before Christ was offered up that ends the Offerings, Altars,
Sacrifices, Feast of Tabernacles, for the Lord should come, my God and all his
Saints, and the Lord should be King over all the Earth. And when Jerusalem was
safe, and Nations came up to it, there was the Feast of Tabernacles to be kept,
but after Christ was offered up though those things were practiced in the days
of his flesh, while he was upon the Earth, and did not cause them to cease
until he was offered up, and then he ended them; And then he prophesied of the
destruction of Jerusalem and the Walls, and your scattering over all Nations,
and did not prophecy of your bringing back again to offer, and to sacrifice
and keep the feast of Tabernacles again at Jerusalem, and did not say that your
outward worship should be set up again at Jerusalem.

But the scattering was for the bringing in of the Gentiles, according to the
promise of God by his Prophets; I will give him for a Covenant and a Light to
the Gentiles, and he shall be my Salvation to the ends of the Earth, which many
of the Gentiles now have received and believed the Covenant of Light promised
to the Prophets, though many of them do not live the life, through whose lives
and fruits the name of the Messiah is dishonored, and the unbelievers in him
hardened through them that profess him in words, and deny him in life;
Nevertheless, the Foundation of God and the New Covenant stands sure, and
his promise agreeable to all his Prophets, and Gabriels words, as you may
number Daniel the ninth your selves, that in such a time the Messiah was to
come.

And whether or no such an one was not born in the same year, when all
Jerusalem was in an uproar at his birth; Herod gathered all the chief Priests
together, and demanded of them where Christ should be born, and they said in
Bethlehem of Judah, for thus it is written by the Prophet; So whether or no
such an one did not come according to the Prophets words, and suffered
according to his words, and his Garment parted, and cast lots for according to
the Prophets words, and one of his own Disciples betrayed him for thirty pieces
of Silver, according to David's words.

And as it is written, blindness happened unto Israel until the fullness of
the Gentiles be come in, and so all Israel shall be saved, as it is written,
the Deliverer shall come unto Zion, and shall turn away ungodliness from
Jacob, and this is my Covenant with them, when I shall take away their sins;
For that is it which blinds, and that Light which is the Covenant, is that
which opens the eye, in which the Jews and Gentiles is one.

So the Lord will save now through the Blood of his Covenant, and the offering
the Sacrifice Christ Jesus, who destroys the Devil the old liar, and the
author of sin, who has imprisoned his people, and brought them into the Pit,
where they have wanted the water; And he the Covenant and Messiah brings the
Prisoner out of the Pit, and gives the water, and returns the Prisoner of hope,
and renders double to him that has prisoned; and he is called the Savior, and
he is Isreal's Savior, and the Gentiles Leader and Covenant, yea the Salvation
to the ends of the Earth, whom the Isles wait for; And the Prophet said, Kings
shall be nursing Fathers, and Queens nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.23. and they
shall worship with their faces downward, and lick the dust of the Earth, for
the Lord had said, he would lift up his hand to the Gentiles, and Standard to
the people, and they should bring their sons the Jews in their arms, and thy
Daughters should be carried upon their shoulders, the Gentiles; the Gentiles
that had carried them away Captive, and the Lord would make them bring them
back again, that had scourged them, and nurse them, and carry the Jews with
their faces downward and ^ick the dust, and so you were brought again to your
own land; and did not Cyrus and Darius and others aid you, and has not the
Lord lift up his Hand and his Standard to the Gentiles, which many have
received?

Isaiah was the son of Amos, and prophesied about seven hundred seventy eight
years before the Messiah was born; And he prophesied of the Jews to be carried
away Captive by the Heathen; and how that the Gentiles should be nursing
Fathers, and Kings should stoop down, and bend down, and be made to carry them
again and be Nurse to them, and that the Jews should get a top of that which
Captivated them, and this was the carrying away from Jerusalem, and the
carrying again to Jerusalem; Who also prophesied of the Messiah that should
come amongst them, to whom they should hide their faces, amongst whom the Jews,
Isaiah was a Sign and a Wonder to both the Houses of Israel and Judah, which
was before they were carried away Captive, who were degenerated from the Lord
by their Idolatry, their Sacrifices, their Offerings, and their Temples that he
turned them from, And said, the most High dwelt not in Temples made with hands;
and he that offered Sacrifice, was as if he blessed an Idol; he prophesied in
the days of Hezekiah King of Judah, Isa. 37.1, 2. 2 Kings 19.

Jer. 1, 2, 3. Jeremiah prophesied in the days of Josiah, and in the days of
Amon, Zedekiah, Zachariah and Haggai prophesied in the second year of Darius,
five hundred ninteen years before Christ.

And Christ came not according to your minds, in Pomp and Glory as the Kings of
the Kingdoms of this World does and did, but he came meek, poor and
dispiseable, and having no beauty to be desired, and a man of sorrows and
griefs, from whom you hid your faces, and crying away with him, he should not
reign over us; you would have no King but Caesar, and desired a murderer, and
crucified him; and when Pilate said to you behold your King, and washed his
hands from his Blood, you cried let his Blood be upon us and our children; who
has been, and brought the misery upon your selves and your children; and
David's words are come upon you, who said, let their Children be Vagabonds,
which has so been to this day, both from your God, and your own Nation.

Friends, in the 22. Psalm, did not the saying of David come to pass by you
upon Christ when he was upon the Cross, did not you say, he trusted in the
Lord, let him deliver him?

Secondly, did not you part his Garment, and afterward cast lots for his
Vesture (according to David's prophecy) when you put him to death?

Thirdly, Did not you pierce his feet and hands when you nailed him to the
Cross, according to David's prophecy in the 22. Psalm, did not you fulfill his
saying?

Fourthly, Did not you give him vinegar and gall to drink, when he was upon the
Cross, according to David's prophecy in the 69. Psalm; and did not you stick
in your outward things as a snare and gin, and did not God pour forth his anger
wrath and displeasure upon you, according to the prophecy of David, who called
Christ Lord?

And the prophecy of Jacob to his Sons, and to Judah, who said the Scepter
should not depart from Judah, nor the Lawgiver from between his feet, until
Shilo come, and the people should be gathered unto him, unto Shilo; And is not
the Law departed from Judah, and the Government and Scepter? where is his Rule,
if you say it is not departed? And did not Shilo come according to Jacobs and
Daniels prophecy? And Gabriels words in the days of Herod, before the Scepter
and the Law was departed from Judah, and so Shilo being come, to him are the
people gathered and gathering, according to Jacobs prophecy, and the Scepter is
departed from Judah this 1660. years.

Whether did ever the Prophets say, that you should be brought again into your
own Land, to your outward worship, sacrifices, and the rest of your Ceremonies,
after Jerusalem was destroyed, and the Messiah offered up according to Daniel,
Gabriel, and the rest of the Prophets?

Did not all the Prophets prophecy of the New Covenant to you before, and in
your Captivity, and that your gathering should be unto him, and that he should
come when you were out of Captivity in your own Land?

Now if you can believe Moses, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and Daniel, Gabriel, and
Ezekiel their Prophesies, you must believe that the Messiah is come, and
receive the New Covenant.

And the Lord said, he would gather his people from the mouth of the shepherds,
and teach them himself, and set one King over them, which Teacher and King,
many do witness.

From a Lover of all Souls, and of the whole Creation of God, risen up for the
Salvation of all men, who seeks that.

THE END.
Page 3. l. 23. for days r. years, ibid put out Jews.


