Concerning Sons and Daughters, and Prophetesses speaking and Prophesying, in
the Law and in the Gospel
And concerning Women's learning in silence, 1 Cor 34.3^ 1 Ti^ 12.1^
and also concerning women's not speaking in the Church, as the Apostle said I
permit not a woman to speak in the Church, and what state they be in, etc.
MIriam was a Prophetess the sister of Aron, and Moses a Magistrate, and Aron
the Priest did not judge this Prophetess nor other Women for they came forth
praising God together. And Miriam answered the men, sing ye unto the Lord for
he has triumphed gloriously, now are not Christian Priests, Rulers and
Magistrates worse then Moses and Aron which would stop a prophetess from
prophesying? Yea worse then those that were under the Law, who now profess
themselves to be Christians, for the Lord overthrew the horse and his rider in
the sea, says the Prophetess; And Moses had been singing a little before, and
Miriam the woman (fell a singing) and speaking, the Prophetess, as you may read
Exodus 15. and Moses did not reprove her, and the King Josiah commanded Hilkiah
the Priest and others, Go a^^ ^nquire of the Lord for me concerning the words
of the Book of the Law, 2 King. 22.12. and Hilkiah the priest and others, went
unto Huldah the prophetess (a woman teacher) the wife of Shallum, and she dwelt
in Jerusalem in the house of Doctrine, and they communed with her, and she
answ^^^ them, thus says the Lord God of Israel, tell the man that sent y^^
(...) me, behold I will bring evil upon this place, and there you may read in
the Chapter what a great speech she made unto them, how she was a teacher both
unto the King, and the Priest and many others, and how the King did give regard
to her words, and sent to gather together all the Elders of Judah, and the
Priests and Prophets, and declared unto them, of the abomination that had been
set up which she had witnessed against as before; and so here the King and the
Priests did not despise this woman teacher; the Prophetss in the time of the
Law, which may condemn Christians, which say they are come to the end of the
Law, they that are led by the spirit are not under the Law but are come to a
further state.

And in Isa. 8. Chap. 1. He went to the Prophetess who conceived and bare a Son
and then said the Lord call his name Maher-shalal hash-baz, and here you may
see here was a Prophetess not despised by Esai nor the Lord, Judges 4.4. there
Deborah a Prophetess the wife of Lapidoth judged Israel, and she dwelt under a
Palm Tree, and the Children of Israel came up to her for Judgment and she
prophesied (how the Children of Israel should overcome their Enemies) from the
Lord, here again you may see a woman Prophetess and Teacher, to whom all Israel
was to give Ear who saw the overthrowing of their Enemies, then you may read
in the 5. of Judges, how Deborah praised the Lord, and how she called Kings and
Princes to hearken, and said she would sing unto the Lord, and praise the God
of Israel. Therefore ye Children of darkness, limmit not the holy one, despise
not Prophesying nor the Prophetesses, who professes your selves to be
Christians, but shows your selves to be ignorant both of Law and Scriptures; and
out of the Spirit which gave them forth.

LEt your women learn in silence with all subjection 1 Timothy 2. here is a silent
Learning; a Learning in silence; 1 Cor. 14.34.35. I suffer not a woman to teach
nor to usurp Authority over the man, but to be silent, there she is to learn in
silence and not to usurp Authority over the man, but to ask her Husband at
home: that which usurps authority the (...) takes hold on, but if you be led of
the Spirit then you are not under (...) Law, Gal. 5. so I permit not a woman to
speak in the Church as says the Law; so let the woman learn in silence with
all subjection, but I suffer not a woman to usurp Authority over the man but to
be in all silence; for Adam was formed, then Eve, and Adam was not deceived but
the woman was in the transgression, read 1 Timothy 2. nevertheless she shall be
saved in Childbearing, if she continue in Faith and Charity and holiness with
sobriety etc.

And so by the leading of the spirit ye come to Christ, another Husband, of
whom you are to learn as people were to learn of the Law; and such as are led
by the Spirit are the sons of God, and so do prophecy according to Joel and
Peter, Joel 2. Act. 2. and they come from the state that the Law limmits, and
these did pray and prophecy as instance, 1. Cor. 11. women praying and
prophesying who was a Church, and the Apostle says despise not prophesying.

Now here is the state of Eve and the state of Iesabel; and Eve's state is not
Iesabels, which are both called women; for Eve was first deceived; but
daughters prophesying is above Iesabels, and if Eve had been in the prophecy
she would have foreseen what she fell into, and prophecy by the Spirit is above
the state of the woman, for prophecy does let see the deceiver and what he
leads into, which though the state of Eve must be kept under the Law, yet
daughters prophesying is in the end of the Law; for Eve got over her husband:
so the Apostle speaks of Adam and Eve and does not speak of quenching Daughters
prophesying, not that Christ in the Male or in the Female should be stopped from
speaking which is above Eve or Iesabel, read 1 Timothy 2. And so forbidding a
Iesabels speaking, or forbidding a woman in the state of Eves speaking is
nothing to the purpose, for the forbidding of Daughters, or Prophetesses
prophesying in the Church, who are led by the Spirit of God or Christ in the
Females speaking.

Let your women keep silence in the Church, for it is not permited for them to
speak, but they are commanded to be under obedience as also says the Law, the
women which are to be under obedience and to be silent and not to speak in the
Church as also says the Law which does not permit; but Christ in the Male and
in the Female is one which may speak, which makes free from the Law I will
pour out my Spirit upon Sons and Daughters and they shall Prophecy.

And as touching women's learning of their Husbands at home, many were Virgins
and many Widows, and many had unbelieving Husbands; and therefore it must
either be the Law they were to learn of, or Christ; for the Law keeps down that
which is to the shame, and that which has usurped Authority, and the Spirit of
God leads from that which is a shame, and that which has usurped Authority, and
from being deceived. And the Apostles which witnessed Christ the end of the Law
for righteousness sake, did allow and own Sons and Daughters prophesying, and
women laborers in the Gospel, which they that are now doctors, Teachers and
professors, are against; which you never read Timothy, Titus, or the Apostles
did forbid Daughters or women prophesying; and they are ignorant that forbid
women or Daughters prophesying; and women laboring in the Gospel (which is the
power of God) and their compairing them to Iesabel shows their ignorance Rev.
2.10.

And it is a shame for a woman to speak in the Church 1 Cor. 14.34. that which
the Law forbids, and commands silence it is a shame to suffer them to speak in
the Church. What? Came the word of God out from you or came it unto you only?
Paul according to the measure given to him in all his Epistles 2 Pet. 3.
speaking in them of things which some are hard to be understood, which they
that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to
their own destruction; you therefore beloved seeing you know these things,
bewar least you also be led away with the error of the wicked and fall from
your own steadfastness; 2. Pet. 3. but grow in grace and in the knowledge of
our Lord Jesus Christ who is the end of the Law for Righteousness sake. Romans 8.
Act. 4. Peter which was unlearned in the Letter (yet learned of Christ) says
such as are unlearned wrest the Scriptures and the Epistles (being unlearned.)
The Scribes, Pharisees, great Rabbis and Doctors, knew not the Scripture being
not learned of Christ, him who was the life of the Prophets and the end of the
Law whom Peter was learned in: knew and preached whom they knew not, so here
the unlearned who was in the life, confounded all the learned out of the life
who learned of him by whom the world was made, who comprehended all the world's
learning, so the unlearned wrest, they are to learn in silence and not to speak
as says the Law, but learn of their Husbands at home, Christ who makes free
from the Law; nevertheless she shall be saved by Child bearing, Christ in the
Male, and Christ in the Female. Husbands love your wives and be not bitter
against them: Wives submit your selves first to your Husbands as unto the Lord;
the Husband is the head of the Wife even as Christ is the head of the Church,
Ephe. 5. and is the savior of the body, therefore as the Church is subject to
Christ so let the Wives be subject to their own Husbands in every thing, Ephe.
5. Husbands love your Wives even as Christ loved the Church and gave himself
for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it by the washing of water by the
word: that he might present it a glorious Church without spot or wrinckle, or
any such thing that it should be holy and without blemish, so ought men to love
their wives as their own bodies, he that loves his wife loves himself; for no
man ever hates his own flesh, but nourished it, and cherished it, even as the
Lord the Church; for we are Members of his body of his flesh and of his bones;
for this cause shall a man leave his Father and Mother and be joined to his
wife and they twain shall be one flesh: This is a great mystery, I speak
concerning Christ and the Church; he that has an ear, let him hear this great
mystery; now the unlearned men wrest it, and the unstablished who know not this
great mystery; you that are ignorant of the Lords work, and the voice of his
Prophets who are wondering at the Prophesying of the Daughters who make your
selves ignorant of the Scriptures, and are wondering at the Lords Prophetesses,
or his Daughters contrary to Joel the Lords Prophet, which spoke from the Lord;
and says the Lord to him, I am the Lord your God and none else; and my people
shall never be ashamed, it shall come to pass after those days when Christ
came, which was the end of the Law, I will pour forth my Spirit upon all
flesh, and your Sons and your Daughters shall Prophecy, and your old men shall
dream dreams, and young men shall see visions, and also upon the servants and
upon the handmaids, in those days will I pour out my spirit says the Lord,
Here all may see the Spirit of the Lord not limited, but upon the Handmaids and
the Servants is the Lords Spirit poured and to be poured; and many thousands of
Servants and Handmaids do witness the Spirit of the Lord poured upon them the
word of the Lord fulfilled, and upon the Sons and Daughters will the Lord pour
out his spirit, and they shall prophecy: and many Daughters and sons and young
and old men witness the spirit of the Lord upon them poured out that visions
are seen, old men dream dreams, and young men see visions, and their Sons and
their Daughters do prophecy, Joel 2.28. and in Act. 2. The Apostles did there
gather together waiting upon the Lord, upon whom the holy Ghost fell among them
that waited for the Spirit, this prophecy of Joel, they saw the fulfilling of,
which to the world they were as men drunk, and so here the Apostles witnessed
the fulfilling of the Prophet, who were witnesses of Christ, whom the Apostles
did give testimony of, and did speak of the Daughters prophesying, and Phillip
had four daughters that did prophecy which the Apostle did not forbid, and
says the Apostle, 1 These. 5. despise not prophesying etc.

And when the Apostles said the Sons and Daughters should prophecy, they were
looked upon by the world, (as men do now) to be drunk.

And whereas Moses said I would all the Lords people were Prophets, and there
were women that were the Lords people as well as men and women Prophetesses in
his days and in the time of the Law. Therefore you who are called Christians
have a mind unlike Moses; and do show that you have not the Spirit of the Lord
poured upon you (according to Joel 2.) to prophecy withal who appear to be
such as vex and grieve it, and then envy such as prophecy with it and persecute
them. And you do not read that the Jews were offended at old Hannah the
Prophetess, who prophesied in the Temple, which if an old woman should come and
prophecy in your Synagogs or Temples, you would cry to the Stocks with her; or
to Prison with her, and hail and persecute her, though you be called
Christians and so do show your selves worse then the Jews. And says the Lord,
1 Cron. 16.22. Touch not mine Anointed and do my Prophets no harm. So you that
persecute the Daughters on whom the spirit of the Lord is poured, and believe
them not; you are them that despise the Prophets, and Prophetesses, and despise
Prophesying, and so have broken the Apostles command, who says despise not
prophesying, and shows that you are out of the Prophet's doctrine and the
Apostles doctrine, and against the promises of God do stand withal your might,
who says, he would pour forth his Spirit upon all flesh, and his Daughters
should prophecy: And how can you be established and believe not the Prophets;
for beleiving the Prophets they came to be established, as you may read 2 Cron.
20. So how ignorant of the Prophets and promises of God do the called Teachers
of the world make themselves manifest, and how in darkness they appear to the
children of Light, 1 These. 5.20. So you that despise prophesying, and cast the
sons and daughters, servants and handmaids into prisons, who witness the spirit
of the Lord God poured forth upon them, you show that you be out of the
Apostles Doctrine, and to be strangers to the spirit, the Scriptures were given
forth from, and are ignorant of the Church the Apostle speaks of, who says,
let the Prophets speak two or three, and let the other judge; if any thing be
revealed to one that sits by, let the first hold his peace, for you may all
prophesy one by one, that all may learn, and all may be comforted; and the
spirit of the Prophets is subject to the prophets, for God is not the author of
confusion but of peace, as in all the Churches of the Saints, this order was in
the Church of the Saints, the Prophets to speak two or three, and the other to
judge; and if any thing be revealed to another that fits by, the first held his
peace, 1 Cor. 14.30. they might prophecy, all one by one, that all may learn
and be comforted, and the spirit of the prophets was subject to the Prophets,
and this was order and not confusion in all the Churches of the Saints which is
disorder and confusion in the Churches of the world, who cannot endure a
daughter to prophecy, for a daughter might prophecy, a daughter being a
prophetess, where the spirit of the Lord is poured forth upon her, for you
never read that any of the Prophets or Apostles were against a daughters
prophesying (which had the spirit of the Lord poured forth upon them) a
daughter might prophecy in the Church, for let your Prophets speak two or
three; and I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh and your daughters shall
prophecy, for you that despise prophecing despises Gods command and are out of
Moses Light and life who said, would all the Lord's people were Prophets, Number.
11.26, 27, 28. and daughters are the Lords people; and when they were
prophesying in the Camp, there ran a young man and told Moses, and Joshua the
Son of Nun the servant of Moses, one of his young men answered and said, my
Lord forbid them (like the Priest now) And Moses said unto him envyest thou for
my sake? Would God all the Lord's people were Prophets, and that the Lord would
put his Spirit upon them: Now mark Moses answer how backward Moses was from
limmitting the Spirit that he would have the Lords spirit put upon them all,
and said would that the Lords people were all Prophets, some of which were
women. Now hear you Magistrates, Priests and people, which do put into Prison
Sons and Daughters for prophesying; and the Lords people: you show a contrary
spirit, you show a spirit that has erred from Moses spirit, who cannot endure
the spirit of the Lord should be poured upon them, that they should Prophecy
but would limmit it to Learned men: old Books and Authors. And Hannah the
Prophetess the Daughter of Phanuel, which was about fourscore and four years
of age, came into the Temple, who served God with fasting and praying night and
day, she spoke of Christ to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem.

Here was a large Testimony born of Jesus by Hannah the Prophetess. Luke 2.36,
37, 38. here you may see a daughter which did give Testimony of Jesus, which
would be as a wonder in this our age to see a woman of four score years of age
to speak of Jesus, to all them that looked for redemption in Jerusalem, as she
did: put her into Prison would the wicked ones say; into Prison with her would
the Priests say, and Paul the Minister of God in Phil. 4, There he entreats his
true yoak-fellow to help those women which labored with him in the Gospel, as
you may there read the women were joined with the other fellow laborers, and
the Apostles whose names were written in the Book of life. And in Romans 16.
there you may see Pricilla and Aquilla Paul's helpers in Christ Jesus, who for
his life laid down their necks. Here the wife Pricilla was an Instructor and
was one of them that laid down their necks, and a helper in Christ Jesus Act.
18.24, 25, 26. She and Aquilla took Appollo and expounded to him the way of God
more perfectly; one who taught in the Synagogue was instructed by her, and him,
in the way of God more perfectly, at such your Synagogue Teachers scoff, to be
instructed by a woman: and you that forbid a Woman's speaking that has the
spirit of the Lord; you forbid Scripture, 1 Cor. 16, 19. for Aquilla and
Pricilla had a Church in their house; and the Church in Pricilla and Aquilla's
house was to be Greeted who were instructors, and in the aforesaid Chap. Act.
18. he that was speaking bouldly in the Synagogue witnessing John, to him
Pricilla expounded the way of God more perfectly; and the Apostle Paul a
Minister of the Lord, who witnessed the daughters prophesying, I commend unto
you Phebe our Sister which is a servant of the Church which is at Cenchrea;
that you receive her in the Lord as becomes Saints, that you assist her in
what business she has need of, for she has been a succorour of many, and of
my self also. This was Phebe the sister the servant of the Church, which was to
be received in the Lord, and assist her in whatsoever business she has need.
And says the Apostles; as touching Pricilla and Aquilla his fellow laborers
in Christ Jesus, who laid down their necks for his life, unto whom he gave
thanks and not only to them but also all the Churches of the Gentiles; here
you may see the account Aquilla and Pricilla were in, who laid down their necks
for the Apostles how thanks-worthy they were; and Mary in ver. 6. was to be
greeted, who bestowed much labor on the Apostles you that cannot own the
prophesying of the daughters; the women laborers in the Gospel, you are such
as the Apostle speaks of in the same Chapter, Romans 16. Which serve not the Lord
Jesus Christ but your own Bellys, and by the good words and fair speeches
deceive the hearts of the simple. For the obedience of these was gone abroad
which the Apostle speaks of, and your disobedience is gone abroad to the
Apostle's Doctrine's. Who cannot endure the prophecy of the sons and daughters,
where the spirit of the Lord is poured upon them.

And Mary Magdalen saw Jesus after his Resurection which on the first day of
the week, came to the Sepulcher, and when she saw Jesus, she knew not that it
was him, and said unto him Master? Jesus says unto her touch me not for I am
not yet ascended to my Father, but go unto my brethren and say unto them, I
ascend unto your Father, and my Father; unto your God and my God, Mary Magdalen
came and told the Disciples that she had seen the Lord, and he had spoken these
things unto her; the same day at evening, being the first day of the week the
Disciples were asembled; Jesus came and stood in the midst and said peace be
among you; Mat 28. Mar. 16. Now here all may see that it was Mary Magdalen that
was sent to declare his resurrection, and she was to tell the brethren, the
Disciples whether Christ was to go to his Father and our Father, his God and
our God, where her Testimony was received. Now you that make a scoff and a
wonder at a woman's declaring; you may see that it was Mary that first declared
Christ, after he was risen, so be ashamed and confounded for ever, and let all
your mouths be stopped for ever, that despise the spirit of prophecy in the
daughters, and do cast them into Prison, and do hinder the women laborers in
the Gospel, and says the Apostles Christ in the Male, and in the Female; and
if Christ be in the Female as well as in the Male is not he the same? and may
not the spirit of Christ speak in the Female as well as in the Male? is he
there to be limited? who is it that dare limit the holy one of Israel, for the
light is the same in the Male, and in the Female which comes from Christ, him
by whom the world was made, and so Christ is one in all and not divided; and
who is it that dares stop Christ's mouth, that now is come to Reign in his sons
and daughters, Christ in the Male, and Christ in the Female; and you that will
not have him to Reign in the Female as well as in the male, you are against
Scriptures and will not have him to Reign over you; for in that male where
Christ does Reign, rule and speak 2. Cor. 13. he will own Christ in the Female
there to Reign, Rule and speak, and come to see the Apostles doctrine; a
Minister of Christ and of God, and not made by the will of man, who said that
Christ was in the male and in the Female; Christ all in all, and Christ in you,
Except you be Reprobates; know you that be Reprobates in whom Christ does not
Reign, nor Rule, you cannot endure that Christ should be in the Female, nor in
the Male; but him you will hayle into Prison, and yet profess the words as the
Pharisees did to whom Christ said I was sick and in Prison, and you visited me
not, and I was naked and hungry and ye clothed me not nor fed me, now them
which had Scripture; and would not have Christ to Reign, said when saw we thee
in Prison, or naked, and hungry and we Clothed thee not? or visited thee not,
in as much as you did it not to the least of these, you did it not unto me said
Christ, So if they who visited him not in Prison, who had the Scriptures to
talk on of Christ that was to come; as you have of one which is come; and would
not have him Reign, as you will not now, such were to go into punishment,
prepared for the Devil and his Angles; if such punishment come upon them that
visited him not, when he was cast into Prison; what will come upon you that do
him cast into Prison? but Christ is come to Reign; him by whom the world was
made, who now Reigns in his sons and daughters; and in the male and in the
female.

That the glory is seen; that the Son had with the father before the world
began, which Glory those males and females that receive Christ, do see that the
spirits of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, whether it be son or
daughter, that prophecies; and the Prophets may speak one by one in the true
Church, and a daughter is a Prophetess and may prophecy as well as a son, 1
Cor. 14.31, 32, 33. Now every one having a light from Christ Jesus the son of
God; him by whom the world was made, being turned to the light, turned to
Christ, I say him by whom the world was made, and see him the Prophet whom God
had raised up, which Moses spoke of who is the end of the Prophets, and with
the light see Christ the Gift of God, the promise of the father, and receive
him you will see with the light, such as act contrary to the light which they
are lighted withal, what due and portion is to them who contrary to the light
do act, which comes from Jesus Christ, and with the light you will see the
promise to them of life, that walk in the light that comes from Jesus, and
every one receiving the light that comes from Christ, you shall receive the
spirit of prophecy, whether you be male or female, and the spirit of prophecy
is the Testimony (...) Jesus, if male or female have received the Testimony of
Jesus, they have received the spirit of prophecy, Rev. 19.10.

And many women are helping laborers in the Gospel now, which lay down their
necks, whose names are written in the book of life; in this time the Gospel is
preached again according to John in the Revelation, Rev. 14.6. but in the time
of the beast, false Church and Antichrist they have bin forbidden by them, and
Phebe was a Minister or servant or Pastor (as some Translations has it) of the
Church at Cencrea. Here Paul who forbad women's speaking in the Church, did
encourage these laboring women in the Gospel: Though the Apostle who see such
women as were buisy bodies, tatlers, and run up and down, he rebukes them and
brings them under the Law, which were gone into the deceived state as Eve was;
and he said it was a shame for such women to speak in the Church, for such were
in that nature that would usurp authority over the man; and such were to be
limmitted according to the Law, for they ran into that which brought the shame
which the Apostle Judged; but he sets forth the comeliness in 1 Cor. 11. how
women ought to pray and prophecy, and recorded it as a commendation, the women's
laboring in the Gospel and Phillips daughters prophesying, and Pricilla and
Phebe, and did commend such; so he made distinction here, and preached Christ
in the male and female, who is above Iesabel, who is above Eve, and the state
of a woman's not speaking; and he in the females may speak, or the Prophetesses
of him by the spirit of God, and this the Apostle holds forth, who was not made
a Minister by the will of man; which they that are made by the will of man
denies. And the Apostles did not judge Mary Magdalen for declaring to them the
Resurrection of Jesus, nor tell her they did not suffer a woman to speak, but
we say all the women in Christendom that know the death of Jesus; and his
Resurrection, and are dead with him and risen with him (that know his
Resurrection) may freely declare it, and they that are in the spirit of Christ
as the Apostles were, would not Judge them.

And we say they that are like Hannah the prophetess that see Christ Jesus the
Savior and does confess him to all that look for Redemption in Christendom,
both of the Christians and Jews, we are not against such Prophetesses though
many of the pevish Priests are.

And Simeon the just man did not find fault with Hannah for preaching Christ,
to all them that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem, nor Zachary the Priest,
neither did they tell her that a woman must not speak, and John in the
Revelation, said the Testimony of Jesus is the spirit o^ prophecy by which they
overcame, now if all women have the Testimony of Jesus, have not they then the
spirit of prophecy? and if all be led by the spirit of God are they not then
from under the Law? and then may they not prophecy? for there is none that will
find fault with the daughters prophesying; and women laborers in the Gospel,
but such as do not live in the Testimony of Jesus, which is the spirit of
prophecy; and such do not understand the condition that these women were in,
that Paul does not suffer nor permit to speak in the Church, but to be in
silence as also says the Law, and are not led by the spirit of God, nor do
live in it, nor in the Testimony of Jesus, but are in the disobedience as Eve
was, and so goes into tatlings and goes out of truth as Iesabel did; for in the
disobedience comes the shame and usurping, upon which goes the Law, and the not
permitting to speak, for the speaking as moved of the Lord, is in the obedience
to the power and spirit which does not bring to usurp over the man, as the
disobedience does, which the man Christ comes over, which he in the ^^le and in
the female may speak, which is one, which ends the Law, and ^^rowes down that
which usurped Authority that brought and brings the shame, and there the seed
of God is over all set, and the top stone laid; and so farewell Sons and
Daughters.

F. G.
For Sons and daughters fellowship is in the (...) of prophecy the Testimony of
Jesus. And also David speaks of young men and (...) praising the Lord Psalm.
148.1^. and do not your women speak in the Church when they sing in your
Steeple houses called Churches? And must any sing without the spirit, and if
they sing with the spirit may they not prophecy and pray with the same spirit*
where does the Apostles limmit them to one service, and not to the other.



London Printed for M. W.


