FOR THE KING, AND BOTH HOUSES OF Parliament, Sitting At WESTMINSTER, And for
every MEMBER thereof to READ.

LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson in Martins Le-Grand, near Aldersgate.

FRiends! O Friends, in the power of God dwell, that lasts for Ever, which
does Remain and Abide; And mind the Higher Power, which God has Ordained,
which (...) over all Transgressors, Sinners, and Evildoers; which Law, and
Higher Power, was not made for the Righteous, but Sinners and Transgressors, to
be a Terror to them, and for the punishment of them, and for the Praise of them
that Do well. Now them that Do Well, the Righteous, this Law and Higher Power
was not made for, and does not take hold upon them; to which Higher Power ever
Soul must be subject: the Higher Power, I say, that is Higher than all
Transgressors, Evildoers, and the Devil, who went out of the Truth, that led
into Sin and Transgression: Therefore to Sin and Evil people are not to yield
themselves; but their Souls unto the Higher Power, as I said before, that goes
over Sin and the Devil, the Author of it, to this Power must the Soul be
subject. Therefore you Rulers and Magistrates are to put a difference between
the Precious and the Vile, the Righteous and the Wicked, such as the Law was
made for, Sinners and Transgressors (for which cause it was added) and the
Righteous which it was not made for; for this Higher Power that goes over all
Sinners and Transgressors, was not made for the Righteous, which the Immortal
Soul must be subject to; this Immortal Higher Power, that Higher Power
answers, and is one with the Spirit and Witness of God, that witnesses for
him, against Sin and Transgression, of the Law and Power of God in every One.

Secondly, Keep all in the Fear of God, departing from Sin and Evil, that ye
may receive Gods Wisdom from Above, that is Pure and Gentle, and easy to be
Entreated, and is full of Mercy and Goodness, which is not Earthly, Sensual,
nor Divellish; but keeps from Hard-heartedness; and that with that Wisdom you
may be Ruled, and Order, and Govern with, and by all things under your Hands to
Gods Glory, by which Wisdom all things were Made and Created, that to the Lord
you may be a Blessing, and a Sweet savor in your Generation, and in the Hearts
of all People, answering the Witness of God in them all, that you may be Eyes to
the Blind, Legs to the Lame, taking away every Weight, and Heavy burden, and
breaking the Jaws of the Wicked, that would Rend and Tear the Innocent to
pieces, that in that you may be a Mouth to the Dumb, and a Strength to them who
cannot Help themselves; in that you will get the Honor of God, and bow the
Hearts of the people.

Again, Let Wickedness and Violence be stopped, Swearing, Oaths, Drunkenness and
Profaneness, of which much abounds in the Land, that Truth and Righteousness may
be set Up and Established, and run down the streets; for that is it which
establishes the Kingdom; for the Higher Power is that goes over all, the
Devil, and all the powers of Darkness, and over Sinners and Transgressors,
which answers that which all men do Transgress.

And let no one be Persecuted and Imprisoned for Worshipping of God in Spirit
and Truth, which the Devil is out of; seeing Christ and the Apostles did not
give any Command or Example that they should be Imprisoned, Persecuted and
Banished, though there has been much Persecution about the Church-Ministry and
Worship, and Ceremonies, since the days of the Apostles, and Christ in the
Flesh; though, as I said before, from them they have had no Example, nor
Command from the Apostles and the Church in the primitive times to do so; such
as will Grieve the Spirit, Quench the Spirit, Despise the Prophecy, were
forbidden by the Apostles.

And let there be no Persecution nor Imprisonment of them that be in
differences in their Opinions in Religion, which all Professing the Name of
Christ, whose Command is, to all them who Follow Him, and Own Him, that they
should love Enemies: Let this command be Obeyed and Minded, and not Trodden
under Foot; for that is it which overcomes Enemies.

And again, Do to all men as you would have them do unto you, for this is the
Law and the Prophets: And if this had been minded in the whole Christendom;
that is to say, the Law and the Prophets, and Practiced and Obeyed, and not
trodden under foot the Life of it, by them who have Professed the Words, there
would have been better Order in the whole Christendom and Creation; for this we
say, and know, He that is born of the Flesh, will Persecute him that is born of
the Spirit. Let not this Birth be found amongst them that profess themselves
Christians and Profess Christ Jesus, and own the Church in the primitive time,
which was among the Apostles: Now the fruit of the birth born of the flesh, is
Persecution, etc. the fruit of the birth, born of the Spirit, is Love, Peace,
Gentleness, Righteousness, Goodness, and Temperance, etc.

Let there be no compelling about Worship, about Days, Meats, and Religion,
nor forcing of a Maintenance for a Ministry; for so doing there is no example
among the Apostles, nor command neither from Christ nor them; but on the
contrary all things must be done in Love and Bounty as amongst the Apostles,
and in the Church in the Primitive times, For freely they had received, and
freely they were to give: This was the command of Christ Jesus, who is the same
to day, yesterday, and for ever. Christ Jesus, who is the Head of the Church,
and Chief Bishop, who did not give forth any Law or Command, or Example to his
Ambassadors, Apostles, and Friends, for them to force, or compel any about
worship, or Religion, or Maintenance, or about Days, or Meats, or Drinks; from
the chief Shepherd, the great Bishop, there was no Command nor Example for so
doing, nor from his Disciples, nor Apostles, nor the Church in the Primitive
Times; but they brought people off the Figures, Tipes, and Shadows, and from
their affections on things below, to Christ Jesus the substance; and moreover
said, That the body which is the Church, was to edify it self in love, of
which Church Christ Jesus is the Head, who is the Bishop, Prophet, Priest, and
King, to Rule, to Teach, and to Offer; and Christ Jesus is the End of the first
Covenant, the first Priesthood, which had the Tithes, and the Offerings: For
there was the Tithe which was the Heave Offering, which Christ ended, and the
Priesthood, and the Law, and the Commandment that gave them, Heb. 7.

So the Church of Christ stands in the end of the Law, first Covenant, and
Priesthood, as is said, Christ is the end of the Law for Righteousness Sake, to
them that believe; and his Church is made up of Believers, which passes from
Death to Life. So all the Ministers, and Teachers in the whole Christendom
that will not preach without a Bag, and without a Magistrates Staff to Punish,
and a Bag to relieve them, and will fill their Bag of such they do no work for,
and of such you have experience, and do, and may know, that they are not like
unto the Disciples, which Christ sent forth without Bag or Staff, and such as
was amongst the Apostle^, whom they said must not be Strikers, nor Persecutous,
nor Covetous, nor greedy of filthy lucre, and they must be proved, before they
must Teach. So (...) Scriptures of Christ and the Apostles, and there you may
see the Life, Doctrine and Commands, by which you may measure the Ministers and
Teachers of Christendom; and though in the Law among the Jews, by the Law
they were to put to death the Blasphemers, false Prophets, and the like; which
Law Christ ended, and came to save men's Lives, and to destroy the Devil and
his works, for this purpose was he made manifest; for the Devil was the
Author of Blasphemy, and false Prophets, whom Christ destroys; Blasphemy, and
false Prophets are the Diverse works; yet Christ saved men's Lives, and rebuked
the Zeall of his Disciples, that would have men's lives destroyed; And the
Apostles, which were the Ministers, and Teachers, and Ambassadors of the Lord
Jesus Christ, their Weapons were Spiritual, and not Carnal, and they did not
wrestle with Flesh and Blood, but with spiritual wickedness, and the powers of
darkness; so the men being spiritual, and their weapons spiritual, wrestling
not with flesh and blood, their hands were kept clean, and fists not wicked,
who could pray to God, listing up Holy Hands: these were no complainers about
Church-Maintenance, Worship, and Religion; neither were they Strikers: but all
in the whole Christendom, since the Apostles days and the Church in the
Primitive Times, that have killed, persecuted, forced, imprisoned about
Church-worship, and Religion, Maintenance, and have wrestled with flesh and
blood, and distroyed creatures, which have been the Work-manship of God,
instead of wrestling with the powers of darkness, and spiritual wickednesses;
these have not been spiritual men, neither have they had spiritual weapons;
neither have their hands, nor fists been holy and clean; and so they have not
been agreeable, nor according to the Apostles, nor Christ Jesus, and his Church
in the Primitive Times; but contrary to his Mind, Doctrine, and Commands, and
his Church, of whom he is Head.

The Law that was among the Jews, commanded them to worship at Jerusalem, and
come up to the Temple, or at the Mountain of Samaria; but Christ Jesus, who
ends that Law which brought people up to worship; then he says, That the Hour
is come, and then was that they that worship the Father, must worship him in
the Spirit and in the Truth; For such were they the Father seeks to worship
him. Now every one that worships the Father in Spirit and Truth, must come to
the Spirit their own particulars, that mortifies sin and evil, and into the
Truth in their own inward parts, and this ^i^^el^ them from the
Will-Worshippers, and from the worship of the Devil, that is out of Truth,
where all the compelling worship is.

And concerning our Meetings, Christ and his Disciples they met in Houses, yea,
the Wise Men Ministered to Christ, and his Mother in the Stable; and Christ and
his Disciples met in the Wildernesses, and in the Mountains, and he bids them
go into the Highways, and the Hedges, and (...) the House tops, and to the
Markets; and the Apostle in the midst of Mars- Hill, and sometimes in the
Temple, and in the Synagogues, and amongst the Heathens, to bring them off
Tipes; Figures and Shadows, and their own inventions, to Christ the Substance:
Therefore now, that Christians should hinder (...) that profess and own the
Name of Christ, for Meeting together and Edifying and ^^^^ding upon another,
(though they all profess the Name of Christ) this is to quench the Spirit, and
limit the Holy One, and is against the edifying of the body itself in Love, and
the building up one another in the Holy Faith, in Love* who are not to forsake
the Assembling together, nor the Edifying of one another, by how much (...) day
does appeal: Now they that be against this, be not in the day, (...) in the
night, and are contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, and the Practice of the
Church in the Primitive Times: Theyrefore though there be Diversities of Gifts,
and diverse Opperations, and several Gifts, and several Opinions, and
Judgments, who with spiritual weapons with spiritual men, are these to be
ordered, and (...) with Carnal, with Clubs, and Seaves, and Prisons; for these
Weapons are of the Heathens, Jews; Judases, and of Cain, who was the first that
killed and perfecuted about Religion and Worship upon the earth, whom God said,
was A Vagabond; and the Apostle Paul said, Woe be to them that go in his way,
who said his Weapons were spiritual, and so not like Cains, who slew his
Brother contenning his Faith and Doctrine: Therefore consider, who are of
Faith, and have the Faith, they have the Shield, the spiritual Weapons; and
who have the Word of God, they have the Sword of the Spirit, and the Hammer,
and the Fire, that which is to cut down, and Hammer down, and bar up that which
is contrary to the word, which makes separation from God; and these are the
spiritual Weaponed men.

And Christ Jesus said, who has all power in Heaven and Earth given to him,
who is the end of the Prophets, Law, First Covenant, and First-Priesthood: It
has been said of them of the Old time, Thou shall not Forswear thy self, but
shall perform thy Oath to the Lord: But I say unto you, Swear not at all, by
Heaven nor Earth, nor any other Oath; but in all your Communication, let your
Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay; for whatsoever is more comes of Evil. And
likewise the Apostle James, who followed Christ's Command, and obeyed Christ's
Doctrine, says, Above all things, my brethren, Swear not, neither by Heaven,
nor by any other Oath. Therefore we and they, that keep out of Evil and
Condemnation, cannot Swear, but rather Obey the Doctrine of our Savior Christ
Jesus, and the Apostle, who is the Son of God: and if the Angels command us to
Swear, we cannot; for the Son of God commands us the contrary, and to Him the
Angels must bow. If Solomon, who was a King, and David, and Moses, or Abraham,
commands us to Swear, we cannot; for the Son of God commands the contrary, who
was before Abraham was, and is a greater than Solomon, whom David called Lord,
even CHRIST JESUS, who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: And if the Jews
Laws commands us to Swear, we cannot; for Christ Jesus, who ends the Jews Law,
and the Oath, and redeems to God, commands us we should not Swear: so our
Redeemer and Savior, who is our Life and Truth, our Way, our Rock and
Salvation, his commands we cannot Transgress: And if they that be Christians,
and do profess the Name of Christ, do persecute us for Obeying of Christ Jesus
his Command, and because we will not Transgresss his Command, and the Apostles,
we say, The will of the Lord be done. And we do say, it is not well for
Christians to Persecute, or Imprison such as Obey the Command of Christ, who in
their communications use Yea and Nay, according to his Doctrine; and if their
Yea be not Yea, and their Nay, Nay; and if we break our Yea, and break our Nay,
then let us suffer as much for breaking of That, as others for breaking their
Oath: This Imprisoning and Fining us, because we cannot Swear, to the breaking
of the Command of Christ, has got up since the Apostles days; for which doing
so, and practice, among the Apostles and Church in the Primitive Times, there
is no Command nor Example.

And we desire to have, (who pay their Taxes and Assessments) as much Liberty
as Stage Players, and Mountebanks, and Ballad-Singers, who meet together in
hundreds, to the Dis-honour of God, and likewise all other Plays which we do
not hear are called Tumultuous Meetings, as ours are who meet together to
Edify one another in that which is good, to worship God; And this is allowed
in the Scripture, They that feared the Lord, spoke often together, whom the
Lord heard, and these were cast out and hated in the days of Isaiah; for they
were such as trembled at Gods Word, but Sports and Plays, the Scripture does
not allow of; but the Lord by his Servants Rebuked such.

Let no one be put to Death for Cattle, or Money; but let them Restore; and if
they have not wherewith, let them Labor till they have, in the thing that is
good, and so that they may have space to Repent; and this is agreeable to the
Scriptures.

Let all Writs and Indictments, Subpaena's, Warrants, have no more put in them,
then the things that are truly charged against him; and all Laws drawn in a
short Volume, that all may know them, that all things may be kept wholesome and
sweet, that to the Lord God you may be a good Savor; and let all Prisoners
that have layen four or five years in Goales, Prisons, and Houses of
Correction, be brought out to a Trial, before their Accusers, and see who there
is that Accuses them, and let them not lie to perish in Goales, and Prisons,
that mercy and Tenderness, Justice and Truth may flow among all people, that to
the Lord you may be a good Savor and in your Generations, and a Praise to God.

And again concerning Religion, and several Opinions, and Judgments in the
Worship of God; let every (...) speak his Judgment, speak his Opinion.

Let all Magistrates keep peace with his Magistrates Sword, and keep down the
Hand and Fist of People, that they shall not strike with their Fists, Clubs,
Swords and Staves; for Envious Persons, Strikers, and Man-Slayers, the Law is
against: and let the Magistrates be like Gameliel; who said, If it was of God,
it would stand; if it was not, it would fall; who said to others, They should
take heed, lest they were found fighters against God; so let the patience of an
Heathen be an Example to Christians, which indeed them that profess the Name
of Christ, should be beyond Gamaliels; so whatsoever Opinions, Judgments, that
are not of God will fall; but take heed, do not fight against it, lest you be
found fighters against God; and consider Christ's mind, who said, Let the Tares
and the Wheat grow together till the Harvest: Therefore you may see he stopped
his Disciples from pulling up, lest they should pull up the Tares and Wheat
together, and so prevented that danger; therefore mind that Caution: And Saul,
before he was converted, in his first birth was a Persecutor, running up and
down from the Chief Priests, with his Packet of Letters, to hale and persecute
from City to City, such as lived in the Life of Christ Jesus; but of this
Action he Repented, when he was converted; and the Apostle had no such Agents
as the Jews Chief Priests had, with packets of Letters to persecute and hale
them from City to City; and they that have done so since the days of the
Apostles, gone up and down with their packets of Letters haling, and
persecuting such as have been in the Life of Christ Jesus, have been like the
unconverted Jews, and Priests, and Saul; but not like the Church in the
Primitive Times, and converted Paul. So here you may see the converted, and the
unconverted; he that is in the birth born of the Spirit, and he that is in the
birth born of the Flesh.

And concerning of what Sort of People the Lord made use of, and spoke to in
the Old Testament; and concerning also what sort his Son CHRIST JESUS made use
of, and spoke to in the New Testament; in the Old, such as were Herds-men,
Plow-men, Keepers of Cattle, Gatherers of Fruit, Threshers of Corn, Keepers of
Sheep: and these were hated of the World; as Abel, a Keeper of Sheep; and
Moses, a Keeper of Sheep; and Jacob, a Keeper of Sheep; an^ ^he Prophet David,
a Keeper of Sheep; and these confounded the World, and such like as these speak
forth the Scriptures. And Christ chose Fishermen for Soul Gatherers; Paul, a
Tent-Maker, etc. And these had not been at Universities, and Schools of
Learning to Train them up in; but Christ Jesus was their Teacher, who did not
call many of the great Doctors, and Learned men, who is the same to day,
yesterday, and for ever, both God and Christ. And if he make use of the same,
and such like now, be not offended; if he fill the earth with his Knowledge,
and cover it with the same as the water the Sea, let none be Troubled and
Offended: For all the Children of the Lord shall be taught of Him, and in
Righteousness shall they be established, and great shall be their Peace,
according to Esaiahs Prophecy, Esaias 54. Which Prophecy many of Us do witness:
And likewise we do witness the Promise of God, who said, he would make A New
Covenant, not according to the Old; For he said, I will put my Law in their
Minds, and put them in their Hearts; whereby they shall not have need to say to
one another, Know the Lord; for all shall know Him, from the Greatest to the
Least; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be me to a People, etc. And
this we Witness. And so we need not to have Teachers, saying, Know the Lord.
So therefore we need not be compelled to such Teachers, who would keep us
always in Teaching, that we might be always paying of them, who keeps us
always Learning; under whose Teaching we were never able to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth; under whose Teaching we were kept in Reprobation from
Faith, which Christ is the Author of now, unto whom we look, and need not say
to one another, Know the Lord. And Christ is the Head of every Man, who is Our
Head, who is Our Leader, who is Our Way, and we need not another. For God now
speaks unto us by his Son, who is the Heir of all things; upholding all things
by his Word and Power; of whose Grace have we received, who is Our Covenant
with God and Our Life; of whose Kingdom we are Heirs, that is Everlasting
without End; and in whose Dominion is Our Life, that is an Everlasting
Dominion, which has no End; which is over all that has an End. And Our Cross
of Christ is the Power of God, that crucifieth us from the World, and keeps us
over and from the power of Ungodliness that is therein; and for this Cross sake
are we Persecuted; in which Cross is Our Fellowship; and Our Gospel it is the
Power of God, which is the Everlasting Gospel, which lasts for Ever, in which
we are Shod; and Our Helmet is Salvation, and Our Fellowship is in the Spirit,
which Baptiseth into One Body, which plunges down the Corruption that is got up
since the Transgression, which separates from God; in which Spirit is our
Fellowship, in which we are made all to Drink; And into this we would have all
People to come, that they might have Fellowship and Union, and Drink; And the
Head of Our Church is CHRIST JESUS, who has all Power in Heaven and in Earth
given unto him: Christ, who is Gods Wisdom to Govern it, who is the Rock to
Uphold it above all Storms and Tempests: And our Religion is Pure, from Above,
and we cannot Own that which is Below, amongst whom the Profession lies in
Lips and Mouth, and Tongues at Liberty, and Hearts afar Off from God; Tongues
at liberty, and not Bridled: And our Manners lies in the Power of God, and
Spirit, and the Light of Christ Jesus, that keeps us from Evil words, that
corrupts Good Manners. So where the Good Manners are not, the Tongue is not
Bridled.

And again, let no one be Persecuted, nor Imprisoned, nor Fined, for not
putting off his Hat or Cap, which satisfies the Lust of the Eye, and the Lust
of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which is of the World, and not of the
Father: So we cannot seek Honor one of another, as the Pharisees did, to whom
Christ said, How can you Believe, who seek Honor one of another, and not the
Honor which comes from Above only? Therefore who Believe, and are the
Believers, and seek the Honor which comes from God only, which is from Above,
Such seek not the Honor that is Below, as the Pharisees did one of another. So
the Believer is the Converted, born of God, and will not Persecute, for not
having that Honor that is Below given to him; neither will he seek it, as the
Unconverted Pharisees did John. 5.

And again, for we to Honor all men, is to have all men in Esteem: Therefore
we Esteeming all men, do Love them, and not Hurt them, and so are come into the
mind of CHRIST JESUS, who commands TO LOVE ENEMIES, who is the SAVIOR of all
men, but especially those that believe: And the mind of God is, That all men
should come to Repentance, and to the Knowledge of the Truth; but all
Christendom have professed that Scripture, and said, Honor all men etc. Which
has been Hat, Lip and Foot, but have Hurt, Murdered, Killed One another,
their Heads, and Princes; and these have been with the Honor below, which God
has, and will lay in the dust; for to Honor all Men, is to have all Men in
Esteem, and to have all Men in Esteem, is to hurt no Man: and if this had been
so in the whole Christendom practiced, then would never a man in the whole
Cristendome have been hurt by one another; but every man in the whole
Christendom would have Loved one another as himself; and they that Rule well,
such are worthy of Double Esteem, more than they that are Ruled, which all are
to be had in Esteem which are honored: and if this practice had been followed
in the whole Christendom, there had been more Love, and Unity, which has been
lost since the Apostles days, which practice was amongst them, which the
Honor of a Magistrate lies in the Higher Power, and likewise the Honor of all
men, which every soul must be subject to the Higher Power; and in that power
they honored all Men, and in that power they give them that rule Well Double
Honor, which before this Honor is the Humility; so he that will have the
Honor, must have the Humility, for it goes before the Honor, which Higher
Power brings him to be humble, in which Higher Power he has the Honor, and
this is from above, higher honor, in the higher power higher, I say, and above
the devil, and all his works, and workers and his transgressors, a higher power
is higher then them all, is over and above them all, and it is above the Honor
which is below, which God will stain; and in this power we do Esteem all men,
and give Double Esteem to them that Rule Well; and so Honor them not with that
Honor which the World Honors them withal, which is Below; and the same that
will Honor them with Hat, and with Knee, will Dishonor them and God both;
which they with that Honor in the Power of God, which is from Above, which
Honor they Honor withal, will not Dishonor God nor Man.

Now you have Tried us, by Long and Cruel Imprisonments, in Dungeons, and
Holes, and Vaults, and Cellars, and Stables, and Houses of Correction, where we
have been thrust upon heaps, and have not had so much Liberty in many places as
Fellons; Nor have not had so much Room in many places, as to lie down one by
another. Through which Cruel Suffering and hard Usage, twenty one have died,
and besides many more are weak; and not suffered to have necessaries to come
in; and many Tradesmen, and Seamen, Merchants, and Husbandmen, their Callings
and Families have been Neglected, and Wasted. So you have not acted toward us
as Christians, nor minded Solomon's Council, who says, A Kingdom is Maintained
by Husbandry.

So these twenty one which are dead, their Innocent blood, through cruel
Sufferings, we leave to the Lord to require; and can say, The Lord forgive you,
and lay nor these things to your Charge: but that ye may do so no more, and not
bring Innocent blood upon your selves and the Land. For the Lord will make
Inquisition for blood; For Precious are the Death of his Saints in his Eyes.
Though we are killed all the day long, and are as the Sheep for the Slaughter;
and by these Long, and Cruel and Hard Sufferings, of above five Thousand, since
the Kings Arrival; From whom we did not look for such Measure of Sufferings:
and three Thousand of us have Suffered by the Powers before him; which many of
them yet lie in Prison, and have lain this four or five years, in the Names of
the Protectors, and Commonwealths, for Conscience sake, and yet by you have
not been set at Liberty, though they do not lie in your Names, in your Goales.

And notwithstanding, all this Trial of us, by which ye have Tried us under
cruel Sufferings, and have not found us Guilty of Plots, Insurrections, Tumults
against the King, or the Peace of the Nation, or any Man's Person or Estate, Our
Liberty is not Restored to us, as to meet together to Worship God according to
the Kings Word and Declaration, which is but a Just thing: We not being found
to be such (as his Proclamation Limits) who have made ill use of his
Indulgence, neither have we Forfeited our Liberty: Therefore it is not Equity
to Number us amongst such who have Forfeited their Liberty. Now therefore, our
defire is, That a Proclamation may be set forth that we may have our Liberty,
seeing we have not Forfeited it according to the Kings Word, and that men may
not run upon us with Arms, Clubs, and Staves, which are not Christians Weapons,
to run upon people who are met together to Worship God: which is the Spiritual
men's place to meddle with Spiritual Things. And it is the Son of Perdition that
sits in the Temple of God, which Exalts himself above all that is called God,
who must be destroyed by the Brightness of his coming, and by the Breath of his
Mouth: And have cried the Ministers, we cannot serve our bellies of the people,
if we have not the Magistrates Swords to compel and forbid people not to meet
together to Worship God and pray together, and declare his Goodness, and
confess his Name; for with the mouth confession is made to Salvation; You may
as well bid us deny GOD our SALVATION, and not confess our selves to be
Christians, and to live without the fear of God; for they that feared God, met
often together, as in Malachy, whom the Lord heard: And is not the Scripture
full of these sayings, that the Saints should tell of the Wonders of God, and
declare what God had done for their Souls? And what! Christians limit us from
this. And must we be limited from confessing Christ before men? Is not Christ
ashamed of them before his Father, that be ashamed of him before men? And must
Sons and Daughters be limited from Prophesying, upon whom the Lord has poured
his Spirit? And does not the Apostle say, Quench not the Spirit? And is not
this his Doctrine? And does not God say, Limit not the Holy One, and Despise
not Prophesy? And does not the Apostle say, God is not Worshipped by the
Handy-works of Men, by that which men's hands have wrought, and set up for
Worship? That is a large word but God is worshipped in Spirit and Truth; This
is Christ, Doctrine: And let none be compelled to the public Worship, nor
Fined, nor Imprisoned; for that was never the Practice nor Doctrine of Christ,
nor the Apostles, to compel any against their own Consciences, who were not
first persuaded by the Spirit of God.

This is from the People of God, called Quakers, and Subscribed by Us, this
13th day of the 3d Month, 1661. G. Fox. J. Stubbs. F. Howgil. H. Fell. R.
Hubberthorn. R. Scostrop.


POSTSCRIPT.
LEt no one be Persecuted about Religion, Worship, Ministers-Maintenance; let
all be done freely in Bounty and Love, as it was among the true Churches in the
Primitive Times; for Cain killed his Brother about Worship, Religion and
Sacrifice, which Cain built a City; by that you may see he was a Ruler; for
which Fact, Killing his Brother, God said, He was a Fugitive, a Vagabond in the
earth, for Murdering and Killing his Brother.

The Jews by the Law of God, were for to kill Heretics and False Prophets that
were setters forth of strange Gods; and this they were to do by the Law of God,
which Law of God Christ ended, who has all Power in Heaven, and in earth given
unto him; who was the chief Magistrate upon the earth: And the Jews in a
pretense of killing the False Prophets, they killed the True Prophets, and
stoned them to death, before Christ the great Prophet came in the Flesh, and
they crucified him, and caused many of the Apostles to be Persecuted and
Killed, and they thought they did God good service, having Gods Law to kill
such that set forth strange Gods, or another way: therefore they thought they
did God good service in killing the Prophets, killing the Son, killing the
Saints; and so do all Religions else, as do the Antichrists and Papists, that
have killed and put to death so many hundreds, that were contrary minded, in
Religions, which with them was Vagabonded from God, by which the earth has
been stained with the blood of the Innocent, in Killing, Persecuting, and
putting to Death about Religion since the Apostles days; And the Church went
into the Wilderness, Rev. 12. Yea, the very earth has not yielded her
increase, but it has brought a Curse upon it; though they have been
Sacrificers and Killers, as Cain, which Sacrifice God has no respect to; but
to such as are of Abels Faith, that do not kill, but have the spiritual
Weapons: Therefore let there be an Universal Liberty about Religion, and let
no Christian persecute a Christian, seeing all profess Christ in words; but
let them be ruled with Spiritual Weapons, and their Religion defended with
spiritual Weaponed Men, else they are but like Cain, the Jews, Judas, and the
Papists, and not like the Apostles in the Primitive Times; who said, Their
Weapons were not Carnal but spiritual.

And if you say, how should we know the true Disciples of Christ Jesus? here is
their Mark, they are such that love one another; hereby they are known to be
Disciples: and if you do say, How shall we know the true Believers in Christ
Jesus? these are they that are passed from Death to Life, and such love both
Brethren and Enemies.

Now though there were Haters, and Persecutors, denyers of the Resurrection,
Blasphemers of God and Christ, who had all power in Heaven and in Earth, given
unto him, the Chief Ruler upon the earth, which ended the Law, did not
Persecute any, nor cause any to be put Death, to be Persecuted or Banished by
the Jews Law, but he said, Love Enemies: here they differed from the Pharisees,
here was their mark of being Children of the most high God. And the Apostle
says, He that is born of the Flesh, will persecute him that is born of the
Spirit: So here is each birth, (and they which are the Children of the Flesh,
these are not the Children of God,) the one will persecute, and the other is
the persecuted, and the Apostle bids Overcome Evil with Good.

So all the true Worshippers that Worship God in the Spirit, in the Truth,
which the Devil is out of, these cannot persecute any about Religion, Church
and Worship; but are the spiritual Men, and have the spiritual Weapons, and
these are like unto the Apostles in the Primitive Times: Therefore as the
Papists have persecuted about their Church, Religion and Sacrifice; for which
example they have had none from the Apostles in the Primitive Times: Let none
follow their Examples, but Christ, who said, Love Enemies, and wrestle not with
Flesh and Blood; but Christ said to the Disciples, who would have had Fire come
down from Heaven, to consume them who were contrary minded, he reproved them,
and tells them they knew not what Spirit they were of.

Wherefore they that do destroy men's lives about Worship, Church and Religion,
do not know what Spirit they are of; wherefore how can we trust our Bodies,
Souls and Spirits into the Hands of such as know not what Spirit they are of
themselves?

Let there be no forced Maintenance to the Ministers that profess the Gospel,
but let all be done by Freeness and Bounty, as it was in the Apostles days; for
the Papists that set up Tithes, and pretend the Law of God has been since the
Apostles days; which Law of God Christ ended, and Tithes both, as in Heb. 7.

Let no one be put to Death for Cattle, or Money, or such things as many be;
but let them Live to restore Four Fold, or be Sold for their Theft, and to work
with their Hands in the thing that is Good, according to the Apostles Doctrine
and Command of God; for the Law of God is Just and Equal, and Perfect, going
over all Transgression, answering the Transgressed Principle in all, and to all
men to do as they would be done by.

And many say the Lords Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive them
that Trespass against us, then fall a Persecuting and Revenging, although with
their Lips they say these words; for if they had forgiven, there had never been
Persecution in the whole Christendom since the Apostles days.

Wherefore they that say these words, Forgive us our Trespasses, as we forgive
them that Trespass against us, and do not the things, are the Sayers, and not
Doers, like the Pharisees.

Wherefore consider, for CHRIST JESUS, the Lord of Life, the King of Glory,
Lord of Heaven and Earth, is come to Reign, to reward every one according to
their Works, and give every one a Reward for his Doings. Wherefore Fear, and
Dread the Lord God of Hosts, of Heaven and Earth: For now you have time Prize
it, spend it not as a Tale, or as one that dreameth, pass it not away; for man
must perish, or will perish, living in the Earth, out of the Life, being in the
Separation from God. Wherefore Fear and Tremble before the Living Mighty God of
Heaven and Earth, The Lord of Hosts is his Name.

Now whereas there is a great Noise of Stopping and Imprisoning the Leaders,
and the Heads of the Quakers. Thus Christ is their Head, And the Head of every
man (as in Corinthians) and Christ in the Female, and he is the Head there, who
is their Leader to God, who destroys the Devil, and his Works, and all the
Powers of the world cannot limit him. Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and
in Earth given unto him, and He in the Male and Female, is King, is Head, is
the Leader, is their Commander, is their Wisdom, Justification and
Sanctification, is their Redemption, and the Resurrection, bringing them to
God, into a Life that is Everlasting, without End. So Christ is the Prophet,
and King, a King to Rule, a Prophet to Teach, an everlasting Priesthood, that
offers up the Spiritual Sacrifice to God; He is in Man, in the Male, in the
Female: So Christ is in all except they be Reprobates; and if he be within, he
is the Leader to the Father, he is the Teacher, he is the Head, he is the
Elder, he is the First, he is the Last. So here is no such thing among the
Quakers, which know their Election before the World began, whose Salvation is
wrought out with Fear and Trembling, that are Redeemed from all them that have
cast the Fear of God behind them, and live without it, without God in the
world, and no Assurance of Election, who Hire men to Lead them and Teach them,
where there is Exalting, and Heads many over them, whom Christ is the Head, to
Condemnation that hate the Light: Among them are the several Masters like
Pharisees; but to the Disciples he said, It shall not be so among you, who is
the Head of his Disciples, their Teacher and Leader, so they have but one Head,
if they be Ten Thousand times Ten Thousand, Christ is the Head in the Male and
Female; and here is no Exercising Lordship among them over one another, as
among the Gentiles; and the Apostate Christians are got into the Lordship, and
are Offended if they will not give them Earthly Honor: And the Lord says, His
Children shall be taught of him, and they shall be Established in
Righteonsness: And these are them which the Teachers and Professors of the
world persecute. And the Lord says, Every one that has heard, and learned of
the Father, comes to the Son: And the Apostle says, They have the Anointing
within them to teach them; and they need not man to Teach them, but as the same
Anointing did Teach them. And this he Wrote to the Saints concerning them that
did seduce them: And he told them many Antichrists and False Prophets were gone
out into the World, and those be them that be always Teaching them, that they
may be always paying them: but the True Apostles brought people to the
Anointing within them; and told them, That the Grace of God, which brought
Salvation, did Teach them. And God had put his Law in their Minds, and writ it
in their Hearts, whereby they they need not say one to another, Know the Lord,
for they all know him, from the least to the greatest: And the Apostle said to
the Hebrews, how that God had spoke to our Fathers by the Prophets at sundry
times; but now has spoke unto us, by, or in his Son, which is the Teacher,
whom we witness (thousands) to be our Teacher, and Head, and Leader, Why
persecutes thou me, says Christ; It is hard for ye to kick against that which
pricks you in your own Consciences, says Christ, in the Male, in the Female;
you cast into Prison, you do not Visit Christ there, you do not Cloth him, you
do not Feed him, nor give him Drink: Oh! where will you appear? where will your
end be, that do not justly? did not Christ lay these plainly down, saying they
cast him in Prison, and did not Visit him, nor Relieve him when he was Sick?
and yet now you in Christendom, do not see, and are so ignorant of him, where
he is made manifest in his Members in the Male and Female, who is their Head,
and Teacher, and Leader into the Righteousness and Truth, whom you should Love;
and you cast them into Prison for meeting together, having nothing against them
to ensnare them, and yet you profess the Name of Christ: now if you did profess
the Name of Christ in Truth, you would love Enemies, [if they were your
Enemies,] and not persecute them that are taught of God, and Christ is their
Head; for God let Cain have the liberty of the earth, though he was a Fugitive
it it, for murdering his Brother: And God let the Heretic Nimrod, that began
to build Babel, have liberty in the earth; and Scoffing Ismael have liberty in
the Earth, in the Wilderness.

And because the Jews had the Law of God, who had the Signs, Types, Figures
and Shadows, by which they were to kill Blasphemers, and false Prophets, that
drew away from God; which Law and outward Carnal Weapons was a figure of the
true Spiritual Weapons, and of the Word of God, Christ Jesus that destroys the
Devil, and Blasphemers, and false Prophets, which were gone out from God; and
this was done by the Spiritual Weapons; yea by the Sword, that proceeds out of
his mouth: therefore the Christians are to love Enemies.

For they that go about to take away the Heads and Leaders of the QUAKERS, as
they think, they go about to take away CHRIST, for he is the Head, not many
Heads, but their Head and Leader; for the many Heads is the Beast, and is in
the World, and is in the Fall from God; for Christ is their Head and Leader and
Way (in the Male and Female,) and Life, and Truth; who is the way to God the
Father; who is the only King, Omnipotent, Immortal and Everlasting, Glory be
to him for evermore; who has sent his Son to be our Teacher, Savior,
Redeemer, and our Way, and Truth, and Life, and our Resurrection, and our
Offering, and great Sacrifice, by which we are Sanctified and Perfected for
ever; who is also our Prophet, Priest and King, and his Command we cannot deny,
but must confess him before Men, even Christ Jesus, who has spoken to us in
these last days, who ends the Law, and Priests, Temples, Tithes, Offerings,
Sacrifices, first Covenant, and Ceremonies, and Shadows, and the Carnal
Weapons, which do kill about Religion; and the Son of God bids us Love Enemies:
Gods Son bids us Love Enemies, and Swear not at all. And this is the Son of God
that speaks from Heaven; they that speak from Earth, Kill and Persecute one
another, and say, We must Swear, and brings it from the Jews Law, which Christ
ends, or from the Heathens below. But we must confess Christ before men, For he
has poured out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and Daughters, and
they shall and do Prophecy; and the Testimony of Jesus is the Spirit of
Prophecy; and this is our Testimony of Jesus, Even the Spirit of Prophecy;
and God has given to us of his Spirit, by which we know his Things; and the
manifestation of his Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; and they
that grieve and quench the Spirit, do not profit by the Spirit, but to their
Condemnation; and if any one have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his.

THE END.

