An Epistle to all PLANTERS And such who are Transporting Themselves INTO
Foreign Plantations IN AMERICA. etc.
MY FRIENDS,
That are gone and are going over to Plant, and make outward Plantations in
America, keep your own Plantations in your Hearts, with the Spirit and Power of
God, that your own Vines and Lillies be not hurt. And in all places where you
do outwardly live and settle, invite all the Indians and their Kings; and have
Meetings with them, or they with you, so that you may make inward Plantations
with the Light and Power of God, the Gospel; and the Grace, and Truth, and
Spirit of Christ; and with it you may answer the Light, Truth, and Spirit of
God in the Indians, their Kings and People, and so by it you may make Heavenly
Plantations in their Hearts for the Lord, and so beget them to God, that they
may serve and Worship him, and spread his Truth abroad; and so that you may all
be kept warm in God's Love, Power, and Zeal for the Glory of His great Name,
That his Name may be great among the Heathen or Gentiles; and ye may see over,
or be Overseers with the Holy Ghost, which was before the unclean Ghost got
into Man and Woman. So with this Holy Ghost you may see and Over-see that the
unclean Ghost and his Works may be kept out of the Camp of God: so that his
Camp may be Holy, and all the Holy may come into it; and he who is Holy, may
walk in the midst of you his Camp, and be glorified in and among you all, who
is over all, and worthy of all Glory from everlasting to everlasting, blessed
and praised for evermore.

London, 22. 9th Month, 1681. G. Fox.

FRom the Rising of the Sun, even to the Going down of the same, My Name shall
be great among the Gentiles: and in every place Incense shall be offered unto
my Name, and a pure Offering: for my Name shall be great among the Heathen,
says the Lord of Hosts,

Mal. 1.11. The Lord Reigns, let the Earth rejoice, let the multitude of the
Isles be glad; Let every thing that has Breath praise the Lord, for the Lord
takes pleasure in his People; He will beautify the Meek with Salvation,

Psalm. 97, and 98. and Psalm. 149, and 150.
London, Printed for Ben. Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, 1682.


