A DECLARATION FROM THE HARMLESS and INNOCENT People of God, called, QUAKERS
Against ALL SEDITION Plotters and Fighters In the WORLD.
For the removing of the Ground of Jealousy and Suspicion from both
Magistrates and People in the Kingdom, concerning Wars and Fightings.
Presented unto the King upon the 21 th day of the 11 th month, 1660.
OUR Principle is, and our Practices have always been to seek peace, and ensue
it, and to follow after Righteousness, and the Knowledge of God, seeking the
Good and Welfare, and doing that which tends to the peace of All. We know that
Wars and Fightings proceed from the Lusts of Men, as Jam. 4.1, 2, 3. out of
which Lusts the Lord has redeemed us; and so out of the Occasion of War; the
occasion of which War, and the War it self (wherein envious Men, who are lovers
of themselves more then lovers of God, Lust, Kill, and desire to have Men's
Lives or Estates) arises from the Lust. All Bloody Principles and Practices we
(as to our own particular) do utterly deny, with all outward Wars and Strife,
and Fightings with Outward Weapons, for any end, or under any pretense
whatsoever; and this is our Testimony to the whole World.

And whereas it is Objected; That you cannot Fight, nor take up Arms at all;
yet if the Spirit do move you, then you will change your Principle, and then
you will sell your Coat, and buy a Sword, and Fight for the Kingdom of Christ.

Answ. As for this, we say to you, that Christ said to Peter, Put ^p thy Sword
in his place; though he had said before, he that had no Sword might sell his
Coat and buy one (to the fulfilling of the Law and Scripture) yet after when he
had bid him put it up, he said, He that takes the Sword, shall perish with the
Sword; and further, Christ said to Pilate, Think thou that I cannot now Pray
to my Father, and he shall presently give me more then twelve Legions of
Angels? and this might satisfy Peter, Luke 22.36. after he had put up his
Sword, when he said to him, He that took it, should perish by it, which
satisfies us, Mat. 26.51, 52, 53. and in the Revelations it is said, He that
kills with the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, and here is the Faith and
the Patience of the Saints; and so Christ's Kingdom is not of this World,
therefore do not his Servants Fight, as he told Pilate the Magistrate, who
crucified him: and did they not look upon Christ as a raiser of Sedition? and
did not he say, Forgive them? But thus it is, that we are numbered amongst
Transgressors, and numbered amongst Fighters, that the Scriptures might be
fulfilled.

That Spirit of Christ by which we are guided, is not changeable, so as once to
command us from a thing as Evil, and again to move unto it; and we do certainly
know, and so testify to the World, that the Spirit of Christ, which leads us
into all Truth, will never move us to Fight and War against any Man with
outward Weapons, neither for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms of
this World.

First, Because the Kingdom of Christ, God will exalt according to his promise,
and cause it to grow and flourish in Righteousness; Not by Might, nor by Power
(of outward Sword) but by my Spirit says the Lord, Zech. 4.6. So those that
use any Weapon to Fight for Christ, or for the establishing of his Kingdom or
Government, both the Spirit, Principle and Practice in that, we deny.

Secondly, We do earnestly desire and wait, That (by the Word of God's Power,
and its effectual Operation in the Hearts of Men) the Kingdoms of this World
may become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ, that he might Rule and
Reign in Men, by his Spirit and Truth; that thereby all People out of all
different Judgments and Professions, might be brought into Love and Unity with
God, and one with another; and that they might all come to witness the Prophets
words, who said, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more, Isa. 2.4. Mich. 4.3.

So we, whom the Lord has called into the obedience of his Truth, have denied
Wars and Fightings, and cannot again any more learn it. And this is a certain
Testimony unto all the World, of the Truth of our Hearts in this particular,
that as God persuades every Man's Heart to believe, so they may receive it; for
we have not (as some others) gone about cunningly with devised Fables: Nor have
we ever denied in Practice, what we have professed in Principle, but in
Sincerity and Truth, and by the Word of God have we labored to be made
manifest unto all Men, that both we and our ways might be witnessed in the
Hearts of all People: And whereas all manner of Evil has been falsely spoken of
us, we hereby speak forth the pl^in Truth of our hearts, to take away the
occasion of that offense, that so we being Innocent, may not suffer for other
Men's Offenses, nor be made a Prey upon by the wills of men, for that of which
we were never Guilty; but in the uprightness of our hearts we may, under the
Power ordained of God, for the punishment of Evil doers, and for the praise of
them that do well, live a peaceable and godly Life, in all Godliness and
Honesty; for although we have always suffered, and do now more abundantly
suffer; yet we know that it is for Righteousness sake; For our rejoicing is
this, the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity,
not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God, we have had our Conversation
in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. Which for us is a Witness, for the convincing of our
Enemies. For this we can say to all the World, we have wronged no Man's Persons
or Possessions; we have used no Force nor Violence against any Man; we have
been sound in no Plots, nor guilty of Sedition; when we have been wronged, we
have not sought to revenge our selves; we have not made resistance against
Authority; but wherein we could not obey for Conscience sake, we have suffered
even the most of any People in the Nation; we have been counted as Sheep for
the Slaughter, Persecuted and Despised, Beaten, Stoned, Wounded, Stocked,
Whipped, Imprisoned, Haled out of Synagogues, cast into Dungeons and Noisome
Vaults, where many have died in Bonds, shut up from our Friends, denied needful
Sustenance for many days together, with other the like Cruelties* and the cause
of all this our Sufferings, is not for any Evil, but for things relating to the
Worship of our God, and in obedience to his requirings of us* For which Cause
we shall freely give up our Bodies a Sacrifice, rather then disobey the Lord:
For we know, as the Lord has kept us Innocent, so he will plead our Cause,
when there is none in the Earth to plead it; So we, in obedience unto his
Truth, do not love our Lives unto the Death, that we may do his will; and wrong
no Man in our Generation, but seek the Good and Peace of all Men: And he that
has commanded us, That we shall not Swear at all, Mat. 5.34. has also
commanded us, That we shall not kill, Mat, 5. So that we can neither kill Men,
nor swear for nor against them. And this is both our Principl^ and Practice,
and has been from the Beginning; so that if we suffer, as suspected to take up
Arms, or make War against any, it is without any ground from us; for it neither
is, nor ever was in our Hearts since we owned the Truth of God, neither shall
we ever do it, because it is contrary to the Spirit of Christ, his Doctrine,
and the Practices of his Apostles, even contrary to him for whom we suffer all
things, and endure all things.

And whereas Men come against us with Clubs, Staves, Drawn Swords, Pistols
cock't, and do beat, cut and abuse us; yet we never resisted them, but to them
our Hair, Backs, and Cheeks have been ready; but it is not an honor to Manhood
nor Nobility, to run upon harmless People, who lift not up a Hand against them,
with Arms and Weapons.

Therefore consider these things ye Men of Understanding: For Plotters, Raisers
of Insurrections, Tumultuous Ones, and Fighters, running with Swords, Clubs,
Staves and Pistols one against another; we say, these are of the World, and
have their foundation from this Unrighteous World; from the foundation of
which, the Lamb has been slain, which Lamb has redeemed us from this
unrighteous World, and we are not of it, out are Heirs of a World in which
there is no End, and of a Kingdom where no corruptible thing enters: And our
Weapons are Spiritual, and not Carnal, yet Mighty through God, to the pulling
down of the Strong Holds of Sin and Satan, who is Author of Wars, Fighting,
Murder, and Plots; and our Swords are broken into Plow-shares, and Spears into
Pruning hooks, as Prophesied of in Micah 4. Therefore we cannot learn War any
more, neither rise up against Nation or Kingdom with outward Weapons, though
you have numbered us amongst the Transgressors and Plotters; the Lord knows our
Innocence herein, and will plead our Cause with all Men and People upon Earth,
at the day of their ^udgment, when all Men shall have a reward according to
their Works.

Therefore in love we warn you for your Souls good, not to wrong the Innocent,
nor the Babes of Christ, which he has in his Hand, which he tenders as the
Apple of his Eye; neither seek to destroy the Heritage of God, neither turn
your Swords backward, upon such as the Law was not made for, i. e. the
Righteous, but for the Sinners and Transgressors, to keep them down. For those
are not the Peacemakers, neither the Lovers of Enemies; neither can they
overcome Evil with Good, who wrong them that be Friends to You and All Men, and
wish Your Good, and the good of all People on the Earth. If you Oppress us, as
they did the Children of Israel in Egypt; and if you Oppress us as they did
when Christ was Born, and as they did the Christians in the Primitive Times, we
can say, The Lord forgive You; and leave the Lord to deal with you, and not
revenge our selves: And if you say, as the Council said to Peter and John, You
must speak no more in that Name; and if you serve us as they served the Three
Children spoken of in Daniel; God is the same as ever he was, that lives for
Ever and Ever, who has the Innocent in his Arms.

Oh Friends! offend not the Lord and his Little Ones; neither afflict his
People; but consider, and be moderate, and do not run hastily into things; but
mind, and consider Mercy, Justice and Judgment; that is the way for you to
prosper, and get the Favor of the Lord. Our Meetings were stopped and broken
up in the days of Oliver, in pretense of Plotting against him; and in the days
of the Committee of Safety, we were looked upon as Plotters to bring in KING
CHARLES; and now our Peaceable Meetings are termed Seditious. Oh that men
should lose their Reason, and go contrary to their own conscience, knowing that
we have suffered all things, and have been accounted Plotters all along, though
we have declared against them both by word of mouth and Printing, and are clear
from any such thing, though we have suffered all along because we would not
take up carnal weapons to fight withal against any; and are thus made a prey
upon, because we are the innocent Lambs of Christ, and cannot avenge our
selves. These things are left upon your hearts to consider: But we are out of
all those things, in the patience of the Saints; and we know, that as Christ
said, He that takes the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Mat. 26.52. Rev.
13.10.

This is given forth from the People called Quakers, to satisfy the King and
his Council, and all those that have any jealousy cencerning Us, that all
occasion of suspicion may be taken away, and our Innocence cleared.

Given forth on the behalf of the whole Body of the Elect People of God, who
are called Quakers, in the Year 1660.
POSTSCRIPT.
THough we are numbered amongst Transgressors, and so have been given up to all
Rude Merciless Men, by which our Meetings are broken up, in which we Edified
one another in our holy Faith, and pra^ed together to the Lord that lives
forever, yet he is our pleader for us in this Day; the Lord says, They that
feared his Name, spoke often together, as in Malachy, which were as his Jewels:
And for this Cause, and no Evil-doing, are we cast into Holes, Dungeons, Houses
of Correction, Prisons; they sparing neither Old nor Young, Men nor Women; and
made a Prey on in the Sight of all Nations, under pretense of being Seditious,
etc. so that all rude People run upon us to take Possession; for which we say,
The Lord forgive them that have thus done to us, who does, and will enable us
to suffer; and never shall we lift up a Hand against any Man that does thus use
us: But that the Lord may have Mercy upon them, that they may consider what
they have done: For how is it possible for them to requite us, for the wrong
they have done to us? Who to all Nations have sounded us abroad as Seditious,
or Plotters, who were never found Plotters against any Power or Man upon the
Earth, since we knew the Life and Power of Jesus Christ manifested in us, who
has redeemed us from the World, and all works of Darkness and Plotters that be
in it, by which we know our Election before the World began. So we say, The
Lord have Mercy upon our Enemies, and forgive them, for that they have done
unto us.

Oh! do as you would be done by; and do unto all Men as you would have them do
unto you; for this is but the Law and the Prophets.

And all Plots, Insurrections and Riotous Meetings we do deny, knowing them to
be of the Devil, the Murderer, which we in Christ (who was before they were)
triumph over them, and all Wars and Fightings with Carnal Weapons we do deny,
who have the Sword of the Spirit, and all that wrong us, we leave them to the
Lord; and this is to clear our Innocence from that Aspersion cast upon us, That
we are Seditious or Plotters.

Added in the Reprinting.
Courteous Reader.
THis was our Testimony above Twenty Years ago, and since then we have not been
found Acting contrary to it, nor ever shall; for the Truth that is our Guide is
unchangeable; and this is now Reprinted to the Men of this Age, many of whom
were then Children, and does stand as our certain Testimony against all
Plotting and Fighting with Carnal Weapons; and if any by departing from the
Truth should do so, this is our Testimony in the Truth against them, and will
stand over them, and the Truth will be clear of them.


