THE CAUSE WHY Adam and Eve Were driven out of PARADISE, AND THE JEWS Out of
their own Land of Canaan,

By GEORGE FOX.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark, in George-Yard in Lombard Street. 1683.

The cause why Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise, and the Jews out of
their own Land of Canaan.
1. Here you may see the Cause of Adam and Eve being drove out of Paradise.

2. And the Cause of the destruction of the Old World.

3. And the Cause of confounding Nimrod and his Company.

4. And the Cause of the Jews going so often into Captivity.

And the destructions that came so often upon them.

And the confusion that is and has been among the Christians, where all may
Read, Hear and Fear, that they take warning and turn from such evils, lest the
Judgments of God come upon you that came upon Adam and Eve, and the Old World,
and the Jews, and their Forefathers that disobeyed God and Christ, and the good
Spirit that he gave them: for no unclean thing shall enter into the Paradise
and Kingdom of God, not into the holy City new Jerusalem, though the unclean do
enter into the great City of the Whore of Babylon.

Adam and Eve were driven out of Paradise for their disobedience.

And for disobedience Cains stock, and the Old World were destroyed.

For disobedience Nimrod and his Company were confounded and Scattered.

And for disobedience the Jews were drove and carried Captive out of their own
Land of Canaan.

And for disobedience to the same Light, Power and Holy Ghost, that the
Apostles and the Church were in in the Apostles days, the Christians in name
and not in power and nature, are without the heavenly holy City New Jerusalem:
An unjust man is an abomination to the Just, and he that is upright in the way,
is an abomination to the wicked, Prove. 29.27. In God I will praise his Word, in
God will I put my trust: I will not fear what flesh can do unto me, Psalm. 56.4.
Thus says the Lord, I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh,
and they shall be drunk with their own blood as with sweet Wine, and all shall
know that I am the Lord, Isa. 49.26.

THe Lord God is holy and pure, therefore he would have all his people to be
holy and pure, and therefore consider what the Lord in the Old and New
Testament Commands you to forsake, and commanded that you shall not do. In
Exodus the Lord says, Thou shall not Kill. Thou shall not Steal. Thou shall
not bear false witness against thy Neighbor. Thou shall not commit Adultery.
Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors House, thou shall not covet thy Neighbors
Wife, nor his Manservant, nor his Maid servant, nor his Ox, nor his Ass, nor
any thing that is thy Neighbors; these things are forbidden in Exodus 20. in
the Old Testament, and much more in the New, for Christ says, You have heard
that it has been said of old time (to wit) in the Old Testament, Thou shall
not commit Adultery, but I say, whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her,
has committed Adultery with her already in his heart; and here you may see the
Law took hold of the outward act, and the Gospel took hold of the inward act;
For out of the heart proceeds the Evil thoughts, Murders, Adulteries,
Fornications, Thefts, false Witnesses, Blasphemies, these are the things which
defile a man, Mat. 5. and Mat. 15.

And these evil things are in Man and woman, yea, done or committed before they
be acted outwardly: And therefore the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 5. Every one
shall give an account of things done in the body, for, says he, we must all
appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive the
things done in his body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or
bad. Knowing therefore the Terror of the Lord, we persuade men, etc. To shun
that which is bad and evil, and cleave to that which is good, and lust not
after Beauty in thy Heart, but keep thee from the evil woman; from the flattery
of the Tongue of a stranger; neither let her take thee with her Eyelids. For
by means of a whorish woman, a man is brought to a piece of Bread: and the
Adulteress will hunt for thy precious life. But whosoever commits Adultery with
a woman, lacks understanding: he that does it, destroys his own soul, and a
wound and dishonor shall he get, and his reproach shall not be wiped away,
Prove. 6. and you may see in Prove. 2. This strange woman which flatters with her
words, who forsakes the guide of her youth the Spirit of God, and forgets
the Covenant of her God. For her house enclineth to death, and her paths unto
the dead. None that goes unto her returns again, neither take they hold of
the paths of life. And therefore that thou may walk in the way of good men,
and keep in the paths of life, Prove. 2. This is the Exhortation of the wisdom
of God to follow; For the mouth of the strange woman is a deep pit, and he that
is abhorred of the Lord, shall fall therein, Prove. 22. And you may see in Prove.
5. how Solomon exhorts to the study of Wisdom, and shows the mischief of Riot
and Whoredom; and Prove. 7. how the filly young man, void of understanding, in
the twilight in the evening, in the black and dark night how he was deceived by
the speeches and attire of the Harlot, whose House is the way to Hell, going
down to the Chambers of Death: And this wellfavoured Harlot deceived the young
man under pretense of Religion; for she pretended, she had Peace Offerings, and
she had paid her Vows, and the good man was gone from home; and this Whore
abides not in her house, but is without in the streets, and lies in wait at
every corner; she is out of her house from the spirit of God, whored from that;
and so Christ the good man is not within, and so that whorish spirits
habitation is in the twilight and darkness, and would beget others either to
spiritual Adultery, or carnal Adultery; one while this whorish spirit is loud
and stubborn, and another while with flattering Speeches, all that keeps with
the spirit of God, and the light of Christ in their Hearts will keep out of her
way that leads to Hell, and the Chambers of death.

In Jer. 3. how Jeremiah complains against Judahs vile whoredom and committing
Adultery, and Judah was worse than backsliding Israel, who said, She is gone
upon every high Mountain, and under every green tree, and there has played the
Harlot. And thou have polluted the Land with thy whoredoms and thy wickedness,
and thou have a where is forehead, thou refusest to be ashamed. Here you may see
what a sad condition the Jews came into, when they forsook the Lord; and
therefore let Christians beware that they be not found in the same practice,
and so come under the same Judgment, as you may read in Jer. 3. and 5. you may
see the Judgments of God upon the Jews for perverseness and Adultery, for the
Lord says, How shall I pardon for this, my Children have forsaken me, and
sworn by them that are no Gods; for when I had fed them to the full, then they
committed Adultery, and assembled themselves by Troops into the Harlots Houses.
They were as fed Horses in the morning, every one neighing after his Neighbors
Wife: Shall not I visit for these things, says the Lord? Shall not my soul be
avenged on such a Nation as this? and the Prophets shall become wind; and the
Word is not in them. Now let them that are called Christians in Christendom
look to themselves, and see if they be not found in this spiritual and natural
whoredom that the Jews were found in, though they made a profession of the
Scriptures of the Old Testament; and they that go under the name of Christians,
may make a profession of the New Testament in words; but Jeremiah says the
Word was not in those Jews that run into these wickednesses, neither is it in
those called Christians that runs into spiritual or carnal whoredom, For the
Word of God is a fire, and hammer, and a Sword to beat and cut down, and burn
up the evil matter and its fruits.

And in Jer. 29.23. speaking to the Jews, Because they have committed Villainy
in Israel, and have committed Adultery with their Neighbors Wives, and have
spoken lying words in my Name, which I have not commanded them, even I know and
am a witness, says the lord; therefore is their destruction foretold.

And Jeremiah says in Chap. 9. O that I had in the Wilderness a lodging place
of away faring men, that I might leave my people, and go from them: for they be
all Adulterers, an assembly of treacherous men. Their tongue is as an arrow
shot out, it speaks deceit: one speaks peaceably to his Neighbor with his
mouth, but in his heart he lays wait for him. Shall not I visit for these
things? says the Lord. And therefore says the Lord, I will make Jerusalem
heaps, a den of Dragons; which was the chief City of worship amongst the Jews;
and did not the Lord bring his Judgments upon it?

And Jeremiah says, My heart is broken because of the Prophets; and all my
bones shake, and I am like a drunkenman, and like a man whom wine has
overcome, because of the Lord, and because of the Word of his holiness, for the
land is full of Adulteries: for because of Swearing the land mourns, etc. Their
course is evil, and their forces not right. I have seen also in the Prophets of
Jerusalem a horrible thing, they commit Adultery, and walk in lies; they
strengthen also the hands of evil doers, that none does return from their
wickedness: they are all of them unto me as Sodom (to wit) the Lord, and the
Inhabitants thereof as Gomorrah, Jer. 23. And Jeremiah says, I have seen thine
Adulteries, and thy neighings; the lewdeness of thy Whoredoms, and thine
abominations on the hills in the fields. Woe be unto thee, O Jerusalem, wilt not
thou be made clean? Jer. 13. And again he says, Thou have polluted the Land
with thy Whoredoms, and with thy wickedness; and through the lightness of her
whoredoms, to wit, the Jews, and committest Adultery with Stocks and Stones.
Here you may see the carnal and spiritual Whoredom among the Jews, who were the
greatest Professors of the Old Testament in their day, and yet the greatest
disobeyers of God; let them that calls themselves Christians, be warned of
their sins, and of their Judgments. And the Lord says, Will you steal and
murder, and commit Adultery, etc. and come and stand before me in this horse,
which is called by my name; and saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, and say we are delivered to do all these abominations, this House
which is called by my name is become a den of Robbers; so God rejected the vain
confidence of the Jews, and the sacrifice of the disobedient, Jer. 7.9.

And Job speaks against the Murderers and Adulterers, he says, They are of
those that rebel against the light; they know not the ways thereof, nor abide
in the paths thereof, the murderer rises with the light, kills the poor and
needy, and in the night is as a Thief; The eyes of the Adulterer waits for
the twilight, saying no eye shall see me, and disguises his face in the dark.
They dig through houses which they had marked for themselves in the day time;
they know not the light, for the morning is to them as a shadow of death; then
here was some terror upon the Adulterers, if they were known; but as drought
and heat consumes the Snow waters, so does the Grave those that have sinned,
etc. The womb forgets him, the worms shall sweetly feed upon him, he shall be
no more remembered, and wickedness shall be broaken as a tree, Job 24.15, etc.
See how loathsome wickedness and adultery was in days past. And Solomon says in
Prove. 23. For an Whore is a deep ditch, she lays in wait as for a prey, and
increases the transgressors among men; and this by experience is seen.

And Hosea shows Gods Judgments upon the Jews for their spiritual and carnal
whoredom in the first Chapter; and further says, By swearing and lying, and
killing and stealing, and committing adultery, they break out, and blood
touches blood: therefore shall the Land mourn, for wheredoms have caused them
to err; they have gone a whoring from under their God, they have committed
whoredom continually; read the Chapter throughout, and there you may see the
abominations and wickedness of the Jews, and of their spiritual and carnal
whoredom, whom God threatens with his Judgments; and in Hosea 2. he says, Let
her therefore put away her whoredoms out of her sight, and her Adulteries
between her breasts, lest I strip her naked, and set her as in the day she was
born; and make her as a wilderness, and set her like a dry Land, and slay her
with thirst; for the Lord says, I will not have mercy upon her Children, for
they be the Children of whoredoms. They are all Adulterers, as an Oven heated
by the Baker, who cease from raising after he has kneded the dough, until it
be leavened, etc. Hos. 7. where you may see Gods reproof and wrath against the
manifold sins of the Jews, throughout the whole Book; and therefore let all
that goes under the name of Christians, beware of these sins of the Jews, lest
the wrath of God comes upon you. And the Lord sent Isaiah to reproove and
declare against the Jews and their whorish Idolatry, and says, The righteous
perishes, and no man lays it to heart, and merciful men are taken away; none
considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come. But draw
near hither ye Sons of the Sorceress, the seed of the Adulterer, and the Whore,
against whom do ye sport your selves; against whom make ye a wide mouth, and
draw out the tongue; are ye not Children of transgression a seed of Falsehood,
Isa. 5.7.

And David says, Seeing thou hate instruction, and casts my words behind
thee. When thou saw a thief, then thou consentest with him, and have been
partaker with Adulterers; thou give thy mouth to evil, and thy tongue foameth
deceit. Unto such wicked ones God says, What have thou to do to declare my
Statutes, or that thou should take my Covenant in thy mouth, etc Psalm. 50.
so every one that names God and Christ, must depart from iniquity. And in Mal.
3. the Lord says, I will come near to you to Judgment, and I will be a swift
witness against the Sorcerer, and against the Adulterer, and false Swearer, and
against those that oppress the Hireling in his wages, and the Widow and the
Fatherless, and that turn aside a stranger from his right, and fear not me,
says the Lord of Host. Here you may see God is both Witness against
Wickedness, and the Judge of it.

And Ezekiel the Lord sent to pour out Judgments upon the Jews for their
Adultery, and said, That they were old in Adulteries; and they went a whoring
after the Heathen, and were polluted with their Idols, and had forgotten the
Lord, and cast him behind their backs; Through their lewdness and whoredoms
they have committed Adultery, and blood is in their hands. And you may see the
23 Chapter throughout, They have committed whoredoms in Egypt: they have
committed whoredoms in their youth: there were their breasts pressed, and there
they bruised the teats of their Virginity. O let all that are called by the
name of Christians have a care of this spiritual and carnal whoredom, and Ezekiel.
6. I am broken, says the Lord, with their whorish heart which has departed
from me, therefore the Lord threatens his Judgments upon them. And again, the
Lord declares against the Jews monstrous whoredom and adultery, as you may see
in the 16 Chapter throughout, they are compared through their lewdness and
whoredom, and wickedness to Sodom. And in Ezekiel. 43. they are exhorted to put
away their whoredoms and abominations which had defiled God's holy Name; so
ought all that are called Christians to put away such things that defile God's
Name. You may see how the Lord forbids Adultery in Levit. 20. and you may see
what Judgments came upon Israel, who committed Adultery with the Children of
Moab; and how the Lord brought his Judgments upon Israel, and them that they
committed Adultery withal, as in Numb. 25. for the Lord said and commanded,
That there should be no whore of the daughters of Israel, nor a Sodomite of the
Sons of Israel, Deuteronomy. 23. Then surely there ought not to be a whore, nor a
Sodomite amongst them that are called Christians; but when either Jews,
Christians, or others, rebels against God's good Spirit he has given to
instruct them, then they run into whoredoms and adultery, and are as bad as the
Sodomites, and profane the Name of God and his Son Christ Jesus.

And what became of Jezabel, and all her Priests, who was called, The Mother of
Whoredoms and Witchcraft, as in 2 Kings 9.22. Did not her whoredoms, and her
bloody Spirit, act together in wickedness and bloodshedding.

And the Lord sent Nahum to declare against Nineveh, and the misery and ruin
thereof, and says, Woe to the bloody City, it is full of lies and Robbery, and
therefore because of the multitude of the whoredoms of the well-favoured
Harlot, the Mistress of Witchcraft, that sells Nations through her whoredom,
and Families through her Witchcraft. Behold, I am against thee, says the Lord
of Host, and I will discover thy Skirts upon thy face. I will show the Nations
thy nakedness, and the Kingdoms thy shame, and I will cast abominable filth
upon thee, and make thee vile; and will set thee as a gazing stock, and all
they that look upon thee shall fly from thee, and say, Nineveh is laid waste,
Nahum. 3. Now Nineveh had repented at Jonahs Preaching; but see what whoredoms
and wickedness she was run into, which brought her destruction; and therefore
let all that go under the name of Christians, take heed of such evils, lest
they bring Judgments and destruction, and ruin upon themselves.

And Jacob's sons were not able to bear nor endure that Shechem should ravish
or defile their sister Dinah, Genesis 34 that they should deal with their Sister
as with a Harlot; and it grived them, and they were wroth, because he had
wrought folly in Israel, and therefore that folly is to be kept out of
Christendom.

And Joseph who was tempted by his Mistress the Egyptian Woman, though he was
her bought Slave and her Captive, yet Joseph said unto her, How then can I do
this great wickedness, and sin against my God, Genesis 39. But as David said God
ordained in Joseph a Testimony against such wicked things; when Joseph was in
Egypt, and God established a Testimony in Jacob, and Joseph succeeded him in
the Testimony of God, Psalm. 78. and 5.81. and 5. for David says, He
established a Testimony in Jacob, and appointed a Law in Israel. (Mark) In
which he commanded their Fathers that they should make them known to their
Children, that the Generation to come might know them, even the Children which
should be born, who should rise and declare them to their Children, that they
might set their hopes upon God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his
Commandments: so all that keeps this Law and Testimony of God in their hearts
will testify against all such evils before mentioned, and judge them.

And the Scribes and Pharisees said unto Christ, in Mat. 12. We would see a
sign of thee; and Christ said unto them, An evil and adulterous Generation
seeks after a Sign, but thereshall be no Sign given to it but the sign of the
Prophet Jonas. For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the Whales
belly: so shall the son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of
the Earth. Here is a sign for the evil and adulterons Generation, who rebels
against the good Spirit that God has given to instruct them, that with his
Spirit they might see Christ the substance of all Signs; and Christ said,
Whosoever therefore shall be ashamed of me, and of my words, in this adulterous
and sinful Generation; of him also shall the Son of man be ashamed when he
comes in the Glory of his Father, with his holy Angels, Mark 8. and 38. So we
must not be ashamed to confess the truth before an adulterous Generation that
are adulterated from the Truth; Know ye not, says the Apostle, That the
unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. Be not deceived, neither
Fornicators, nor Idolaters, nor Adulterers, nor abusers of themselves with
mankind, nor Thieves, nor Covetous, nor Drunkards, nor Revilers, nor
Extortioners, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, 1 Cor. 6. Now they that do
think that such as lives in these Evils, shall inherit the Kingdom of God, they
are deceived. And again, the Apostle says to the Galatians, Now, says he, the
works of the flesh are manifest, which are these, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Wrath,
Strife, Sedition, Heresy, Envyings, Murders, Drunkenness, Revilings, etc. of
which I tell you before, as I have also told you in times past, that they which
do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God, Gal. 5. Therefore they
are deceived that live in such things, and thinks they shall inherit the
Kingdom of God; and the Apostle says, Your bodies are the members of Christ,
speaking to the Corinthians, and he bids them Fly Fornication; Every sin that a
man does, is without the body: but he that commits Fornication, sins against
his own body, as well as against the Lord's Law and Gospel, and therefore ye
are bought with a price: glorify God in your bodies, and in your Spirits,
which are Gods, 1 Cor. 6.

And the Apostle tells the Ephesians in the 5.3. But Fornication and all
uncleannoss; or coveteousness, let it not be named amongst you, as becomes
Saints: neither filthiness; nor foolish talking, nor jesting, which are not
convenient: but rather giving of thanks. For this ye know, that no whoremonger,
nor unclean person, nor coveteous man who is an Idolater, has any inheritance
in the Kingdom of Christ, and of God; Let no man deceive you with vain words:
for because of these things comes the wrath of God upon the disobedient; be
not ye therefore partakers, to wit, in such things before mentioned, for they
that live in and practice such abominable things, before mentioned, and to
think to have an inheritance in the Kingdom of Christ and of God, where no
unclean thing enters, they deceive themselves, Therefore let us cast off the
works of darkness, and put on the armor of light, let us all walk honestly (to
wit) true Christians) as in the day; not in rioting and drunkenness, not in
chambering and wantonness, not in strife and envy; but put ye on the Lord Jesus
Christ, and make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill the lusts thereof, Romans
13.

James says in Chap. 4. Ye lust, and have not: ye kill and desire to have, and
cannot obtain: ye fight and war, yet ye have not, ye ask and receive not,
because ye ask amiss, that ye may consume it upon your own Lusts. Ye
adulterers, and adulteresses, know ye not that the friendship of this world is
enmity with God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of this world, is the
enemy of God; and therefore all you that go under the name of Christians;
consider to whom ye are enemies, and with whom ye have friendship.

And in 2 Pet. 2. he shows how God spared not the Angels that sinned, nor he
spared not the old World that sinned, but brought a flood upon the World of
ungodly, and saved Noah, etc. the Preacher of Righteousness; and God turned the
Cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, and condemned and overthrew them for
their sin, wickedness and ungodliness, making them an example unto all those
that after should live ungodly, and delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy
conversation of the wicked, for that righteous man dwelling amongst them, in
seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful
deeds.

And now is not spiritual Sodom, which makes a great profession of the Old and
New Testament, as great a grief to the righteous souls, who hears and sees
their unlawful deeds? And the Apostle saw in this day such as had forsaken the
right way, which were as natural bruit Beasts, and should perish in their own
corruption, and shall receive the reward of unrighteousness, as they which
count it pleasure to riot in the day time, spots they are and blemishes,
sporting themselves with their own deceivings, while they feast with you; so
the Apostle has marked them to be known by their spots and blemishes, having
eyes full of adultery, that cannot cease from sin, beguiling unstable souls, a
heart they have exercised with coveteous practices. Cursed Children; so their
hearts were not only full of Adultery, but the Apostle could see that their
very eyes were full of Adultery; and so is it with the same spirit now. Such
who have forsaken Christ the right way; these are Wells which have no water in
them, and Clouds which are carried about with a Tempest, to whom the mist of
darkness is reserved for ever: so Clouds ye know are high, and ye know what the
Tempest is; so they are known by the Tempest, that is, in their Spirit, and
their Clouds and their great swelling words of vanity, etc. These are they that
promise liberty, and themselves servants of corruption, and they that are
overcome by them are brought into bondage, and it is better for such never to
have known the way of righteousness, then after they have known, to turn from
the holy Commandment; but it is happened unto them the Dog is turned to his
vomit, and the Sow to the wallowing in the mire. And are not the days of
Scoffers come, which walk after their own ungodly lusts, and not after Christ.
You may see how the Apostles especially Paul, Peter, James, John and Jude bore
a Testimony against all manner of looseness, and such who had known the Truth,
and run into evil, that their latter end would be worse than their beginning.

And you may see in Rev. 17. the mother of all abomination, A woman arrayed in
purple and Scarlet, with a golden Cup in her hand, sitting upon the Beast,
which is great Babylon, the mother of Harlots, who harloted from God's good
Spirit; this mother of Harlots is the abomination of the Earth, which is drunk
with the blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus. This woman the false Church,
who is whored from the Spirit of God, which is drunk with the blood of the
Martyrs and Saints. He does say, She is drunk with Wine, only this drunken
Whore is mad and in a rage and fury for the blood of the Saints. But what
becomes of her in the end, is not she burnt in the fire? and the Beast, false
Prophets and the Devil? and the Lamb and the Saints will have the victory over
them; and this great Whore or false Church, who is whored from the Spirit of
God, is the Spirit of all them that be harloted from the Spirit of God into the
evil destroying. And all those that are led by the Spirit of God, they are of
the woman the true Church that is in God, and are of the Church of the
Firstborn, which are written in heaven and heavenly Jerusalem that is above,
is their mother, and they sing Hallelujah, and Glory, and Honor, and Praises
to the Lord God, for true righteousness are his Judgments; for he Judges the
great whore which corrupted the earth with her Fornication, and has avenged
the blood of his Servants at her hand, Hallelujah, Rev. 19. And in Rev. 18. you
may see what great lamentations are from the high and low (to wit) the harlots
which see the downfall of their Mother the whore, who is whored and harloted
from the Spirit of God, what crying and saying, Alas, alas, there is; and what
rejoicing of the Apostles and the Prophets, yea, the very Heaven rejoices at
the down-fal of this whore, yea whorish Spirit, and false Church, for in her
was found the blood of the Prophets and Saints, and all that were slain upon
the earth, has been found in this whorish spirit, who have whored from the
Spirit of God and the Lamb.

And in Rev. 21. he says, He that overcomes shall inherit all things, and I
will be his God, and he shall be my son. But the fearful and unbelieving, and
the abominable, and murderers, and whoremongers, and sorcerers, and Idolaters,
and all liars shall have their part in the Lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death. Whosoever is not found written in the
book of Life, is to be cast into the Lake of Fire; and therefore what good will
all your profession do in Christendom, if ye be found in these sins and evils
before mentioned, and your names not written in the Lambs Book of Life before
the foundation of the World; for they that have right to the tree of Life, walk
in the light of the Lamb, and believe in it; such are they that enters in
through the Gate into the heavenly City New Jerusalem, and have their fathers
name written in their fore heads, For without this holy City new Jerusalem are
Dogs, biters of the Lambs of Christ, and Sorcerers, and whoremongers, and
murderers, idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a lie; all such
deceivers, and defilers, and corrupters of themselves and others, are without
the holy City of God new Jerusalem, Rev. 22. For whoremongers and Idolaters God
will judge, Heb. 13 4. And therefore all that love God and his Son, is to judge
such evils, and turn from them (before mentioned) if you will come into favor
with God; and here you may see what wickedness has been all along, and in all
Ages since man and woman fell from the Image of God; and amongst such that
rebel against God's good Spirit which he has given them in the time of the
Law. And God pours out of his Spirit upon all flesh in this Gospel-day; and all
such as rebel against this good Spirit of God, what Idolatry and other evils,
whoredoms, Adulteries and Fornications are amongst them, who, as I said before,
do rebel against God's good Spirit, which grieves the Lord and his righteous
People, for which God will Judge. And such as acts such things before
mentioned, and lives in them, the Lord tells them, They shall not enter into
his Kingdom, nor into his holy City New Jerusalem, for no unclean thing comes
into his holy City, or holy Kingdom, for they that come into this holy City or
Kingdom, must be made clean with the blood of the Lamb.

And what became of Adam and Eve who disobeyed the Lord, were they not turned
out of Paradise, the Garden of God, the Garden of pleasures, into the earth.

And what became of the Old World, who disobeyed and grieved the Lord's Spirit?
did not the Lord bring a Flood upon them, and destroy them all? who saved
righteous Noah and his Family.

And what became of Nimrod, that mighty hunter before the Lord, and them that
followed him; did not the Lord say, Nothing will be restrained from them which
they imagined to do; and so the Lord confounded them, and scattered them abroad
from Babel, upon the face of all the Earth, Genesis 11. This was the fruits of
them that followed their imaginations, and not the Lord and his Spirit.

And what became of Sodom and Gemorrah for their wickedness and filthiness? did
not the Lord destroy them and their Cities by fire, and saved just Lot? Genesis 19.

And what became of the Jews, to wit, the house of Israel? and the House of
Judah? who rebelled against God's good Spirit, who disobeyed the Lord, and
persecuted his Prophets, who went early and late to warn them of the Judgments
that would come upon them, but they neither regarded the Lord nor his Prophets?
Did not the Lord bring the Heathen upon them, which carried them out of their
own Land which flowed with Milk and Honey, into Captivity under the Heathen, in
which nature they were gone into, who rebelled against God and his Spirit. And
what became of the Jews after they came again into their land, who rebelled
against Christ and cried up Caesar, and Crucified Christ, and persecuted his
Apostles; and did not Christ say, That their Temple should be thrown down, and
the City compassed about with Armies, and the Jews scattered over all Nations?
And did not this come to pass after Christ was risen? And did not the Jews also
rebel against Titus, when he came to besiege Jerusalem? so they did not only
rebel against Christ, but rebelled against the Heathen at last; and what became
of them but destruction and calamity, who under a pretense of worshipping God
and crying up the Temple, and outward Jerusalem, and making an outward
profession of the Old Testament, but resisted the Holy Ghost, and rebelled
against God's good Spirit, and his Son Christ Jesus, in their deceitful
hypocritical profession, and living in Idolatry, and Spiritual, and carnal
whoredom and Adultery.

And what becomes of the false Prophets, and Beast of the Whore, and all her
Harlots that is whored and harlo^ed from the Spirit of God, must not they all
have their end in the Lake of fire that burns with brimstone with the Devil,
the God of the world, and the Prince of the Air, who rules in the hearts of the
Children of disobedience, that disobeys God and his good Spirit.

And the Prince of the Air makes many Fowls of the Air with his soul airy
spirit, by his ^oul air in whom he rules, and he is the Ruler in all the
Children of the disobedient, which disobey God's good Spirit, he rules in them
with his a^ry unclean spirit, who blinds the disobedient with his dust and air;
for dust is his meat, who is out of the Truth, and abode not in it, in whom
there is no Truth; and all that disobey the holy Spirit of the Lamb, are his
followers and subjects; and he in whom there is no truth, rules in them, who is
the author of all sin, corruption and darkness, whose end is in the Lake of
fire that burns with Brimstone, and his Followers; but the chaste Virgins follow
the Lamb, and they that are led by the Spirit of God, are the sons of God, and
walk in the truth, and worship God in Spirit and Truth; his truth is over the
head of the Devil, and he is out of it, and cannot get into it, for there is no
truth in him, and therefore he and his Followers are not like to get into the
Truth, that Gods Children worship God in.

THE END

