AN EPISTLE To all PROFESSORS IN New England, Germany, and other Parts of the
called Christian World.

Also To the JEWS and TURKS throughout the WORLD.

That they may see who are the true Worshippers of God, that he seeks, and in
what he is worshipped.

An Exhortation to them to read it over, that they may see what they have all
grieved, vexed and quenched, and what they have walked despightfully, and
rebelled, and kicked, and stopped their Ears, and closed their Eyes to; so that
they may all return again, and turn within, and see what they have professed, and
not possessed; so that they may come to be the tr^^ Possessors of the Truth, and
true Worshippers in the Spirit of the True and Living God, who is a Spirit,
which is the perfect Worship, which Christ the Truth and perfect One set up
above 1600 Years since.

George Fox.

Printed in the Year 1673.

AN EPISTLE To all Professors in New England, Germany, and other Parts of the
called CHRISTIAN WORLD. Concerning the Worship of God, which Christ set up
above 1600 Years since, as in John 4.
WHen the Woman of Samaria said unto Christ, Our Fathers worshipped God in this
Mountain, which was the Mountain where Jacob's Well was; and said she again,
you say that at Jerusalem is the Place where Men ought to worship; but Jesus
said unto her, Woman, believe me, the Hour comes when ye shall neither at this
Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem worship the Father; Ye worship ye know not what,
we know what we worship, for Salvation is of the Jews; but the Hour comes and
now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the Father in Spirit and Truth,
for the Father seeks such to worship him; God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in the Spirit and the Truth. Now mark this all Men
and Women that are called Christians, or Jews, or Turks, or others, and see if
you know what you worship, for there are many Worships in the World made and
set up by Men, and so Men and Women worship they don't know what, that do not
worship God in Spirit and Truth, as Christ says; Now you may see there was a
Worship at the Mountain where Jacob's Well was, and also there was a Worship at
Jerusalem at the Temple, set up many Years after Jacob dyed in Egypt, by the
Jews his Children, by the Command of God, and the Plague and the Punishment
that was to come upon them that would not go up to Jerusalem, and keep the
Feast of Tabernacles, and to worship there from Year to Year, you may read
Zechariah the 14th. And in the Acts it is said, there was in Jerusalem out of
every Nation under Heaven, Acts 2.
which worshipped at Jerusalem in the time of Penticost, many of many strange
Languages and Tongues, and were amazed at the Apostles that preached Christ: Now
in John the 4th, there you may see how that Jesus Christ put down the Worship
at the Mountain where Jacob's Well was, where the Forefathers worshipped, and
also put down the Worship at Jerusalem, where the Jews, the latter Fathers
worshipped, and where they came out of other Parts to worship, and if they did
not, the Lord poured his Plagues and Judgments upon them, as in Zechariah the
14th; now when Christ put down these two Worships, at the Mountain where
Jacob's Well was, and at Jerusalem, he set up another Worship in the Spirit and
in the Truth, and said, such the Father seeks to worship him; and that Hour
that he put down these two Worships at the Mountain and Jerusalem, the same
Hour he set up a Worship; for his Words are, not at Jerusalem, nor at this
Mountain shall ye worship the Father, believe me, says Christ: So they that
hold up a Worship at that Mountain or at Jerusalem, or a Worship of their own
making, worship they don't know what, and do not believe in Christ; for
Christ's Words are, Woman, believe me, mark, the Hour comes, when ye shall
neither in this Mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father, for ye
worship ye know not what. So here it is clear, neither at the Mountain nor at
Jerusalem is the Father worshipped; for Christ Jesus has put down those
Worships, yea, at Jerusalem, which was once commanded of God, and therefore
those that God never commanded cannot stand; and Christ's Words are, But the
Hour comes and now is, mark (now is) then it began, that Hour when he put down
the Worship at Jerusalem, and the Mountain, and such Worshippers that did not
know what they worshipped; But the Hour comes and now is (says he) when the
true Worshippers shall worship the Father in the Spirit and in the Truth, for
the Father seeks such to worship him; for God is a Spirit, and they that
worship him must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: now mark, all People upon
the Earth, Worshippers of all Sorts, who worship you don't know what, that be
out of this true Worship; here you may see that Christ set up a Worship, and
its above 1600 Years since it began; and here you may see who the true
Worshippers are, that worship the Father in the Spirit and in the Truth; and
here you may see who they are the Father seeks to worship him, such as be in
the Spirit and such as be in the Truth. So its clear that none are the true
Worshippers of the Father, but who be in the Truth that the Devil is out of,
for the Devil abode not in it. 2ly. None are the true Worshippers of the Father
but such as are in the Spirit; yea, in that Spirit that mortifies Sin, and that
Spirit by which the Body of Death and the Sins of the Flesh are put of; so its
clear all that be out of the Spirit and out of the Truth are the false
Worshippers, and not the true, and such the Father seeks not to worship him;
for God is a Spirit, and they that worship him must (mark) worship him in the
Spirit, and in the Truth; for God is a Spirit, and he is the God of Truth that
changes not; and therefore every Man and every Woman must come to Truth in
their Inward Parts, and come to the Spirit of God in their own particulars, and
not grieve it, nor quench it, nor vex it; for in the Spirit and in the Truth
they must worship the God of Truth, and God who is a Spirit: and mark, all Men
and Women must be in the Spirit and in the Truth, if they worship the God of
Truth in the Spirit and in the Truth; and this Worship that Christ Jesus set up
above 1600 Years since, breaks down all the Worships in the whole World that
Men have set up; and the Jew's, and the Beast's, and the Dragon's that are out
of Truth and the Spirit of God; so every Man and Woman in the whole World
must come to Truth in their Inward Parts, by which Truth they received from
Christ the Truth, in which Truth they must worship the God of Truth; and every
Man and Woman in the World must come to the Spirit of God in their Hearts, by
which Spirit they must have an Understanding to know God, who is a Spirit, and
so to worship him in the Spirit: now there is the worshipping of Angels, the
will worship, the Worship that was at Jerusalem, and the Worship in the
Mountain, the Worship of the Beast and the Dragon, the Worships that Men and
all Nations have invented; but the Worship in the Spirit and the Truth, which
Christ set up above 1600 Years since, is the true Worship which the Father
seeks. So I say, this Worship that Christ set up in the Spirit and in the
Truth, and the true Worshippers that worship in it, that the Father seeks, are
set above all the VVill-worshippers, the Worshippers of Angels, and the
Worshippers of the Beast and of the Dragon, and above the Worship at the
Mountain, and Jacob's Well, and Jerusalem Worship, and all the Worships that
Men or Nations have invented; so every Man or Woman in the whole World must
come to the Spirit of God and to the Truth, which comes from Christ in their
Inward Parts, if they be the true Worshippers that worship God in the Spirit
and Truth, or to be such as he seeks to worship him; for God is a Spirit, and
he is the God of Truth, and therefore they must be all in the Spirit and in the
Truth, if they be the true Worshippers, and do worship God, the God of Truth,
who is a Spirit, for such he seeks; and all that be out of the Spirit they
worship they don't know what, and he seeks not such, and they are not the true
Worshippers; and there are all the Sects, and such as grieves and quenches the
Spirit, and comes not to the Truth in their Inward Parts, and such as stop
their Ears, and close their Eyes to that of God in them, like the Jews and
Pharisees, and kicks against that which pricks them, like Saul, and such as
hates the true Light that enlightens every one that comes into the World, and
walks despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, and such as rebels against
God's Spirit that is given unto them to instruct them, and to profit withal,
Neh. 9. all such worship not God in the Spirit and Truth, but they worship they
know not what, as Christ says; therefore must every Man and Woman in the whole
World come to the True Light of Christ, and the Spirit, and the Grace in
themselves, if they be the true Worshippers of God in Spirit and Truth.

And the Worship that Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man, the second Adam, the Lord
from Heaven, the Spiritual Man, set up above 1600 Years since in the Spirit and
in the Truth, for the true Worshippers to worship in, in whom God seeks this
Worship; I say, it is an Infallible Worship, or an Eternal Worship, for the
Truth is Infallible, and the Spirit of God is Infallible and Eternal, in which
they worship the Eternal God and Truth, and the Spirit of God changes not,
though Men may change from it; for the Truth makes no Sects nor Schisms, for
all Sests and Schisms be out of it; and the Spirit of God makes no Sects nor
Schisms, for all Sects are out of the Spirit of God and out of Truth; for the
Dragon, and the Devil, and the Destroyer, and the Beast are out of Truth, and
his Worshippers, and the VVill-worshippers; for the Devil abode not in the
Truth, and all they that worship they don't know what, be out of the Truth and
the Spirit of God: So had all Christendom kept to the Spirit and the Truth,
that the Apostles and primitive Church was in, they would have kept up Christ's
Worship, (and in it, as the Apostles did) that he set up above 1600 Years
since, and there would have been no Sect among them, but they would have kept
in the substantial Worship; for Truth is substantial, and Truth does not
change, and the Spirit of God does not change, but brings People to be
Substantial in the Substantial Worship, and in the Spirit they would have had a
Fellowship and a Unity. Therefore for all People to come out of the Sectary
Worships, and Will-Worships, and worshipping of Angels, worshipping they don't
know what; and to be the and true Worshippers whom God seeks, they must all
every Man and Woman come to Truth and the Spirit of God in their own Hearts, by
which they may worship God in the Spirit and Truth, which the Devil is out of,
and to be the substantial Worshippers that Christ set up above 1600 Years
since; for all that do not worship God in the Spirit and Truth, be in the false
Spirit, and all that do not worship God in the Truth, they be out of the Truth,
and of him that is out of the Truth; for Christ Jesus, that signifies a Savior
and anointed of God, who came to redeem man from Iniquity, and save Man from
Sin, and finishes Transgression, and to be Man and Woman's Mediator, and to
purchase man from Transgression; and shed his Blood, and dyed for Man, who
bruises the serpents Head that has kept man in Captivity, and leads him
Captive, and sets man free from his Prison, Death, Darkness and Bondage, who is
out of Truth; and so Christ the Truth sets up a Worship for Man and Woman in
the Truth and in the Spirit that the Devil is out of; and this, I say, is the
substantial Worship, where the Devil cannot come with his false, lying,
murdering Spirit of Error, he cannot come into the Truth, nor into the Spirit
of God. In which Truth and Spirit the true Worshipers worship the God of all
Truth in, who is a Spirit; and this I say is the true, and safe, and
substantial, and infallible Worship that Christ set up, who is the Truth and a
Quickening Spirit above 1600 Years since, and in which Worship there is neither
Sect nor Schism nor Discord, for all that is out of Truth; for Concord is in
the Spirit and in the Truth, for the Unity and the Fellowship is in the Spirit,
and its called the Bond of Peace, and in this Spirit and Truth they must
worship the God of Truth, who is a Spirit; so the blind Jews with the Scribes,
Priests and Pharisees that think to go to worship at Jerusalem, Christ tells
your Forefathers above 1600 Years since, that God was not worshipped there, nor
at the Mountain; and therefore you are to believe in him your Savior, and own
his Worship in the Spirit and Truth: Now if all Christendom have the Scriptures
of the New Testament, as the Jews had the Old, and do not worship God in the
Spirit and in the Truth, which the Devil is out of, but make Worships of their
own, and force men to them, they worship they do not know what; for it was the
Dragon and the Beast that persecuted about Worship, both in the Jews in the
Days of Christ in the Flesh, and since in the Days of his Spiritual
Appearance by the Holy Ghost, such as were out of the Spirit of Moses and the
Prophets, and Christ, and his Apostles: So as the outward Jews were to go to
outward Jerusalem to worship yearly, or else their Eyes were to rot in their
Heads, and their Tongues in their Mouths, and God's Plagues and Judgments were
to come upon them; so all they that are not in the Spirit, and are not in the
Truth, by which they must worship the God of Truth, who is a Spirit, and so
come to Heavenly Jerusalem that is from above, the Mother of all true
Christians: I say, that Eye that is out of the Truth, and out of the Spirit, is
under a Plague, and shall rot in their Heads and their Mouths; for all the
Jews in the Spirit and Truth in their Inward Parts, that worship God in the
Spirit and Truth, that are the true Worshippers that God does seek to worship
him, and now God has found many, praised be his Name forever; I say, they do
come to Jerusalem that is above, the Mother of us all that are the true
Worshippers, and do see Jerusalem that is below in Bondage with her Children.
Now all People being dead in Adam, and gone astray, Jew and Gentile; and Christ
the Seeds-Man being come, which sows his seed upon all Grounds, and is come to
make them to see, that did not see; and to make them blind that said they saw,
and saw not, as there is too many now a days; and his Grace has appeared unto
all Men, and has enlightened all, and tasted Death for all, and the
Manifestation of his Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; so here
Christ has made no Sects, but they are the Sect-makers that goes from his true
Light; and goes from his Word and Seed, and goes from the Manifestation of his
Spirit that is given to every man to profit withal; and Christ has given to
every man a Measure according to his Ability, and so they that go from their
Measure that Christ has given unto them, are the Sect-makers, and are in the
Schisms, then they may say that they have not Ability; but they have Ability
to do Evil, it seems, and therefore these are they that turn against the true
Worshippers; therefore every Man and Woman that are the true Believers in
Christ Jesus the Savior, they come to their measure that Christ has given
them, the Light and Seed that Christ has sown in their Field, their Hearts, and
to the Holy Ghost that does reprove them, and the Manifestation of the Spirit
of God given to them to profit withal, which if they be the true Worshippers
in the Spirit and Truth, and comes out of the Sects, and give over making
Sects. Then there would be no Sect in Christendom, nor in the World, nor among
the Jews, if they all would come to the Truth in their Inward Parts, to the
Spirit of God within, and in that Spirit and Truth to worship God, who is a
Spirit, and who is the Truth, then they would worship in that which the Devil
cannot come, for he is out of the Truth; so I say, if all People in the whole
World would come into the Spirit, and come into the Truth, in which they are to
worship the God of Truth, they would be all in Unity in the Truth and in the
Spirit; so as all People have been in the Deceit and Falsehood, out of the
Truth, and in the False Spirit, out of the true; so must all People Men and
Women come into the true, out of the false Spirit, and come into Truth out of
the false and Deceit, if they be the true Worshippers that worship God in the
Spirit and in the Truth, for such he seeks to worship him; for this, as I said
before, is the substantial Worship, that Christ set up for his redeemed ones,
and saved ones that had been under the Power of Satan, and his false Spirit,
who had been deceived by him who abode not in the Truth; therefore Christ the
Savior and Redeemer, who is the Truth, that bruises the Head of the Serpent,
sets up a Worship in the Spirit and Truth, which the Devil is out of; and this
is the Perfect and Substantial Worship; for Truth is Perfect, and will stand,
and the Spirit of God, which the true Worshippers in the Spirit and the Truth
worship in; I say, this Worship in the Spirit and the Truth will stand, when
all the Worships out of the Spirit and Truth are gone, which Christ the Son of
God, the Truth which came from God, set up above 1600 Years since. Blessed and
praised be God through him for ever, Amen.

Kingston, the 9th of the 8th Month 1673. G. F.

ALL the Worships that have been made by man, and set up by man, and compelled
thereto by man in the world since Christ has set up his Worship in the Spirit
and in the Truth, above 1600 years since, to worship God who is a Spirit, to
worship him in the Spirit and Truth, which he seeks and who are the true
Worshippers, they are like, and from the same Spirit that set up Worships
before Christ came in the Flesh, who had not the Spirit of Moses and the
Prophets, as these now say they have, nor the Spirit and Power the Apostles
had, and yet they persecute them that are in the Spirit of Moses and the
Prophets; and all these say now that have made Worships, and set them up, and
compelled and persecuted others for not conforming, and put them to Death: I
say, they say and confess they have not the same Power and Spirit the Apostles
had; therefore they be in another Power, and another Spirit, and an unclean
Ghost, and compel people to it; for there is but one holy Ghost that leads into
all Truth, and one Spirit that Baptiseth into one Body, and the Power of God,
and the power of Satan, and one Truth, which the Devil is out of; so all that
worship the God of Truth, must be in the Spirit of God, and be in the Truth the
Devil is out of; and these be the true Worshippers of the God of Truth, who is
a Spirit, and this Truth and Spirit is within them, and they in it; and they
are all false Worshippers that be out of Truth, and out of Gods Spirit, and
they worship the Works of their own hands, and they don't know what; and all
that have not, and are not in the same Power, Spirit and holy Ghost that the
Apostles were in, and the same Truth, you are not the true Worshippers, though
you may talk of all the words of the Scriptures of Truth, and give your
meanings, and sell them for so much a year, and make Sermons of them, and
Prayers of them, and Songs of them; yet, I say, if you be not in the same
Spirit and Power that they were in, the Prophets and Apostles that gave them
forth, and have not the Spirit of Christ in you, you are none of Christ's, nor
none of his true Worshippers, that worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth,
as the Apostles did, but you are like unto all other national worships, and the
Jews that opposed Christ the Truth and Spirit, and the spiritual Man, and so
his spiritual worship in Truth, and his true Worshippers, as sufficiently has
been seen; and so all the Worshippers that be out of the Spirit of God and his
Truth, are as I said before, like unto those Worshippers before Christ came in
the Flesh, that persecuted the Prophets, and persecuted Christ in the Flesh
above 1600 years since, and his Apostles, and now he persecutes in the Spirit;
and such may pretend to worship God like the Jews, but grieve, and quench, and
vex the Spirit of God, and walk contrary to the Truth in themselves, and such
will never come to be the true Worshippers that Christ the Truth set up, in the
Spirit and in the Truth that the Devil is out of, that God who is a Spirit
seeks to worship him, until they come to the Spirit and Truth, and walk in it
in their own particulars; and so all the true Worshippers, that come out of the
false Worships, that worship they don't know what, they must be in the Power,
and the Spirit, and the holy Ghost that the Apostles were in, who worship God
in the Spirit and in the Truth that does not change, for Truth does not change,
though men have changed from it, and the Worship that Christ has set up in it;
and the Spirit of God does not Change, though men and women have changed, and
erred from it, and gone into so many Sects and Worships, and persecute one
another about them; and God does not change, nor his Worship in the Spirit and
Truth which the Devil is out of; God's worship which Christ set up does not
change, nor Christ does not change, nor God does not change, who is to be
worshipped in Spirit and Truth that does not change, and this is the Safe,
Perfect and Infallible, Catholic or Universal Worship; for Truth and the
Spirit of God is perfect; so men and women must worship in that which is
perfect: God who is perfect, and Christ who is perfect set up this his perfect
Worship above 1600 years since; and men are gone out of his Worship, and gone
into imperfect Worships; so every man and woman must come to the Measure of the
perfect Spirit and Truth in their own hearts, if they be the true Worshippers
of God in the Spirit and Truth, and with the Spirit, and with the Truth within
they must feel the God of Truth who is a Spirit, at hand, with them, and Christ
the Truth, that set up this Worship, as I said before, above sixteen hundred
years since in the Spirit and in the Truth, and they that be in the Spirit and
in the Truth are the true Worshippers, and can say, the Lord has sought them,
and the Lord has found them to worship him in his Spirit, and in the Truth,
that the Devil is out of, and can praise God through Jesus Christ, whom God
sent above 1600 Years since, to set them up this Worship; for Christ, that is
the Savior and Redeemer from Sin and Iniquity, set up an established Worship
in the Spirit and in the Truth, which the Devil is out of, by which Truth, Men
and Women are made free, they are God's Freemen and Free-women, that are made
free by the Truth, and serves and worships God in the Spirit and in the Truth,
that makes them free, which is our established Worship, which is set over the
Head of the Serpent, and the Heads of the Beast, and the Whore that abides not
in her house, and the Head of the Serpent, which is out of Truth, and over his
Power, is the Truth, in which Spirit and Truth all the true Worshippers worship
God; so as Christ says, If the Truth has made you free, then are you free
indeed; for all Captivity, Thraldom, Bondage and Slavery is out of Truth, and
under the Head of the Serpent, whose Head Christ the Truth bruises; so the true
Worshippers worship God in the Spirit and in the Truth, which makes them free,
and can praise God through Jesus Christ for his Worship, and for their Freedom
through him, Amen.

G. F.

THE END.

