A few plain words by way of Querie, and Information to the TEACHERS and
PEOPLE of the Nation.
Friend!
WHo art called a Teacher of these people of the ways of God, How many have
thou brought into it? or art thou thy self in it? How many have thou brought
out of evil ways? Or art thou thy self out of the evil ^ys? Will thou not
preach peace to them that Curse, Swear; that are Drunkards, ^lterers,
Idolaters, envious, strikers and covetous, mockers, such as follow pleasures,
and ^s wantonly upon earth, and Liers, Cozeners and Cheaters, while they put
into thy ^aith? wilt not thou preach peace to such as these are
beforementioned? ^d will not these serve to put into thy mouth? And did not
the Prophets and ^ostles cry against such who taught the people for
covetousness, and made mer^andise of them through it, and fained words and
speeches deceived the hearts (...) the simple? That such serve not the Lord
Jesus Christ, but their own bellies; ^o mind earthly things. Did the people do
well or ill in holding up these Tea^ers which the Prophet reproves? And might
not the Teachers say (who taught (...) filthy lucre) it was sad times when the
Apostle was come to draw the people from (...), and to reprove them who taught
for filthy lucre? as now the cry is a^ngst you, who have taught for filthy
lucre, that have preached peace to people ^ile they put into your mouths, but
now they do not put into your mouths, ^inst whom ye prepare War, not peace, and
cry, sad times, Mic. 3. Where is (...) man that Divines for money now? Where is
the man that prophecies for money (...)? And did not Micah cry against such? Is
there none of Micahs spirit, ^nkst thou, to bear testimony against such as
preach for hire, and Divine for mo^, and preach peace to people, while they put
into their mouths? Is there none of this ^rit, think thou, to cry against
these things? Where is the man now that ^acheth for hire, that seeks for his
gain from his quarter; That Is a greedy dumb dog, who (...) never have enough?
Did Isaiah well in crying against such? Isaiah 56. Did the ^ople do well in
spending their money for that which was not bread, and their labor for that
^ch does not satisfy? And did they do well that took their money for that
which ^s not bread, and made people run after that which did not satisfy? Did
Isaiah do (...) in reproving such, or ill? And is there none in our Age that
are greedy dumb (...), who seeks for their gain from their quarter, that makes
the people spend their money (...) that which is not bread, and their labor
for that which does not satisfy? And is there ^ne our Age of Isaiah's spirit,
raised up to cry against such, think ye? And ^ere is the Priest that rules by
his means, and the People love to have it so? Which is a ^orrible thing
committed in the Land, for which cause will Gods soul be aveng^ on such a
Nation: And think ye not that Gods soul is avenged on this Nati^n in such a
horrible filthy thing as this is committed in the Land? Did (and ^oth) the
Priests do well in bearing rule by their means? Did (and does) the people do
well in loving to have it so? Did Jeremiah do well in crying against those
things? Or those that be in Jeremiah's spirit, against them where these things
are ^ound? Did the Shepherds do well that taught for the Fleece, from whose
mouth ^he Lord said he would gather them that have been made a prey upon in the
^loudy and dark day? And is it not the cloudy and dark day now, that the
Shepherds make a prey upon the people, from whose mouths the Lord will gather
his people? Will not these Shepherds be offended then, and say its a bad time,
that now ^hey cannot get the fleece? Is this the time that the Clouds and
darkness is going away? Did Ezekiel do well in declaring against such that made
a prey upon the sheep in ^he cloudy and dark day, when they wandered from
Mountain to Mountain? And do ^hey ill who be in Ezekiels spirit now, that cry
against such that make a prey upon the sheep for the fleece in the cloudy and
dark day, where the sheep are wander^ng from Mountain to Mountain, and thinks
that some Mountains are greener then others, and fresher, on which is better
feeding, that ^ean the sheep are grown on the barren Mountains? Therefore must
not the promise of God be fulfilled, That he will seek his sheep, and gather
them where they have been scattered, and feed them himself Ezekiel 34. Therefore
now is the cry and the call, To come off from the barren Moun^ns, and to feed
not among the Thorns. Did the Pharisees do well in loving to be cal^ of men
Masters, in getting the chiefest Rooms at Feasts, and greetings in the Markets?
and do not thou do ill in following the Pharisees in these steps, seeing
Christ ^orbad these things? And if it be well, do not thou do ill in not
saying, Mr. Paul, Mr. Peter, Mr. John, Mr. Mark, Mr. Timothy, Mr. Titus, Mr.
Matthew, etc? Did the Common-Prayer-men do well in putting the Papists out of
the Mass-House, and so call it their Church? Did the Presbyterians do ill in
putting the Common-Prayer-men out of the same Mass-house, and call it their
Church? And so likewise the Independents? And did not the Papists say, The
Gates of Hell should not prevail against it? And have not ye all done ill in
telling the people the old mass-house is the Church; when as the Apostle said,
The Church was in God, These. 1.1. Did the Papists do ill in selling their mass
by the Hourglass? Do ye do well that sells your Prayers and Preachings by the
Hourglass, and when Glass is run, the time is spent Neighbors? as much to
say, Ye have your measure and bargain, give me my due that the Pope my Father
gave me; for Christ and his Apostles made no such provision for me, but sent
his without bagg, and would not suffer them to preach for filthy lucre; Surely
is not this he hard Master? But is not this the man that hid his talent, that
said so; that must be bound hand and foot, and cast into utter darkness, and
his talent taken from him. Was Tithes, Midsomer-dues, Easter-reckonings,
Gleb-lands, Peter Pence, Clerks-wages, Preaching over the dead for money,
marrying people, Christning children for money, the Popes provision he made for
ye, and his dregs you drink, that lay in the bottom of his old bottle; And are
not ye Popishly minded, and Jesuitically affected who uphold these things? And
was not all these times, as Christ-mass, Michael-mass, Lamb-mass, Candle-mass,
and all these days named by the Saints names, and all these naming of the
Steeple Houses, the old Mass-houses and Colleges the Popes doing? Did he well
in doing this, or ill? If well, Then why cry ye against him who is your
Teacher, and call him the Whore; Is not this ill-breeding? Or did the Apostles
give all these names to them beforementioned? If so, show us the Scripture;
was the Scripture given forth for men to make a trade of them, or for men to
believe them, and read them, and come into the thing they speak of? Have ye
the same spirit and power the Prophets and Apostles had, who call your selves
Teachers? If not, how can ye sow spiritual things? How can ye plant
Vineyards? How can ye get flocks? How can ye (thresh in hope, and plough in
hope) but plough in vain, and thresh in vain, and make wildernesses, and but
turn against the flock that gives the milk, not being in the power and the
spirit the Prophets and Apostles were in? Had the Beast, Dragon, False-prophet,
Antichrist, mystery-Babylon, the false Church, the Tongues they sat upon, the
same spirit and power which has kill, the Prophets, Martyrs and Saints, and
them which has kept the testimony of Jesus since the Apostles days, unto this
day? Have these been in the same spirit and power the Apostles was in? And
again, Have these had the same spirit and power the Apostles had, that have
their Goals, Houses of Correction, Inquisitions, to hold up their Church,
Worship, Religion, Ministry, and Maintenance? Seeing the Apostle said, Their
Weapons were not carnal, but spiritual, and they wrestled not with flesh and
blond; therefore are not the other things beforementioned, the dregs that came
out of the Popes old bottle, like unto that which came out of the Jews old
bottle, against Christ and his Disciples, and John Baptist and rather worse?
For did they ever put any to Death for not putting into the priest's mouth? Did
they fine or imprison any for not putting off the hat? Did they plunder or
rifle the Houses of people for not mending their Temple, and paying the Clark
for saying Amen, and bringing a Cushion, and hanging a prophet's or priest's
pulpit; as ye have done now, for not mending the old mass-House, not paying the
Clark that turns the Glass, and says Amen, and lays the Cushion, and hangs
the Priest's Pulpit? Was this the Dregs of the Popes old Bottle, or from the
Spirit of glory that rested on the Apostles? Did the Prophet do well that
prophesied to the people for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread? Were the
people wise that gave it them? Did Ezekiel do ill in crying against such? Was
it not a bad time, they might say when Ezekiel cried against them that
prophesied for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread? Ezekiel. 14. And will the
Priests prophecy now without shocks and cocks of Barley, Wheat, Pease, and
Beans, Midsummer-dues, Glebe-lands, Easter-Reckonings, Augmentation, etc. Is
not this more oppressive then for handfulls of Barley, or pieces of Bread? And
do not they now cry bad times, because the spirit of Ezekiel is raised to bear
testimony against these things? And might not the Jews say it was a bad time
when that the Apostles went to bring the people off from the Priest, off the
Tithe, off the Temple, and that Stephen said, The most High dwells not there?
Did the Apostle do well in doing so? If so, then have ye not done ill, that
have set up Temples, Tithes, and Priests, since the Apostles days, which God
never commanded, which ye have invented, that cry, Now is bad times, because
people are brought off your inventions by the power of God? Did the Apostle do
ill in bringing the Gentiles off their Temples which they had invented? Might
not the Gentiles cry then, It was a bad time, as ye do now? And as the Jews
called the Apostle a pestilent fellow, a sower of Sedition: Do ye think the
Jews would not say it was a bad time, as ye do now that stick in your popish
inventions which have got up since the Apostles days, for which ye have no
Scripture, that now these come to be cried against by them that comes into the
power of God. Did the Prophets, Christ, and Apostles, do well in saying, The
Children of the Lord should be taught of the Lord; and the Kingdom of Heaven
was within people; and the Word was within them, and the anointing was within
them, to teach them; and the Law was to be put into their hearts, and their
minds, that they need not say one to another, Know the Lord: And the Light that
shined in their hearts, was to give them the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ; and they that had not the spirit of Christ, were none of
his. And have not ye done ill who have denied this, that says that ye nor no
one else has the same spirit and power as the Prophets and Apostles had,
neither shall the things before mentioned be looked for in our days? And have
not ye done ill in keeping people always teaching, that they may be always
paying, and has brought none to the condition the Apostles did, That they need
none to teach them to know the Lord, Heb, 8. 1 John 7. Isa. 54. Luke 17. Romans 8.

Are ye innocent? are ye innocent, Oye Teachers, (before the Lord) of all the
prisoning, and persecuting, and shedding of the blood of the innocent, which is
shed in this your day?

Oh all ye Gentry (so called) of all sorts, does not all your Manners and
Breeding stand in Capping, doffing Hats, and Scraping, Bowing, and Courching,
and speaking the improper Language You to a single person, as All honor, all
praise, all reverence, all holiness, all Majesty, all dominion, is due, and
peculiarly ascribed, and ought to be given to God alone, who is God over all,
the Unbelievers, who give and receive honor one of another; for how can ye
believe, who receive honor one another?
Your Worship, Your Majesty, Your Lordship, Your Honor, Your Highness, Your
Grace, Your Holiness, Reverend Brother; And such like blasphemous titles.

Rejoice ye Inhabitants of the Earth. G. F.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at he Black-spread-Eagle and Windmill, in
Martins le Grand, 1660.


