CONCERNING PERSECUTION IN ALL AGES To this Day.

And he that was Born after the Flesh, Persecuted him that was Born of the
Spirit; and even so it is now: yea, and all that will live Godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer Persecution. Mark, all them that will live Godly; not them
that will live Ungodly, out of Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy 3.12. For unto you it is
given in the Behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer
for his sake.

To the Elect of God; and how that Christ has sown his Seed upon all Grounds:
and now their Grounds will be tried.

The Children of God, their Heavenly Shield, Buckler, Arms, Armor and Defense,
which they had from God and Christ.

G. FOX.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BRINGHVRST, at the Sign of the BOOK in
Grace Church Street, 1682.

CONCERNING PERSECUTION.
THE Spirit it self bears witness with our spirits, that we are the Children
of God; if Children, then Heirs of God, and Joint Heirs with Christ: and if so
be that we suffer with Christ, that we may be also glorified together; for I
reckon, that the present Sufferings of this time, are not worthy to be compared
with the Glory which shall be revealed in us. Who shall separate us from the
Love of Christ? shall Tribulation, or Distress, or Persecution, or Famine, or
Nakedness, or Peril, or Sword, as it is written? For Christ's sake we are
killed all the day long, we are accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter; nay in
all these things we are more than Conquerors, through Christ that loved us: for
I am persuaded, that neither Death, nor Life, nor Angels, nor Principalities,
nor Powers, nor Things present, nor Things to come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor
any other Creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is
in Christ Jesus our Lord. Here is and ought to be the Noble Resolution of the
true and faithful Christians in Christ Jesus; and as the Apostle said to the
Corinthians, We are made a spectacle unto the world, and Angels, and men, etc.
And we are counted fools for Christ's sake, and we are buffetted, and have no
certain dwelling place; and being reviled, we bless; and being persecuted, we
suffer it; being defamed, we Entreat; we are made as the filth of the world,
and as the offscouring of all things; but the Lord comforts us in all our
Tribulations; for as the Sufferings of Christ abounds in us, so our Consolation
also abounds with Christ.

And so it is no new thing for the Christians now to be troubled on every side,
yet not distressed; perplexed, but not in despair; for our light afflictions
which is but for a moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal
weight of glory, etc. and though our outward man perish, yet our inward man is
renewed day by day; blessed be the Lord forever.

And as the Apostle says, I take pleasure in Infirmities, in Reproaches, in
Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses, for Christ's sake. And here the
Apostle triumphed over all, which should be every true Christians practice.

And you may read how Paul said, how that beyond measure he persecuted the
Church of God, and wasted it; but when he was converted and became a member of
Christ's Church, then he preached that faith which he sought to destroy; so you
may see, as it is written, He that is born after the flesh, persecute him that
is born after the spirit, even so it is now; therefore what ever Christendom
does profess and talk, the Birth must be minded, of what Birth you are; if it
be the birth of the flesh, he will persecute him that is born after the spirit,
the true believers in Christ; for unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ,
not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake: so this gift is
not only to believe, but also to suffer for his sake, and so count all things
but loss for the excellency of the Knowledge of the Lord Jesus, for whom I
suffer the Loss of all things, and count them but dung that I may winn Christ,
and be found in him, that I may know him, and the power of his Resurrection,
and the Fellowship of his Sufferings, being made conformable unto his d ath. To
this all should mind to be conformable, and know the fellowship in his
sufferings.

And the Apostle encourages the Thessalonians, who says, that we our selves
glory in you, etc. for your patience, and faith in all your persecutions, and
tribulations, that ye endure, which is a manifest token of the righteous
Judgments of God, that ye may be worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which ye
also suffer, seeing it is righteous with God to recompense to them that trouble
you; and so you that are troubled, rest with us (says the Apostle) therefore
brethren we are comforted over you in all your afflictions, and distresses for
your faith; stand fast in the Lord, that no man should be moved by these
afflictions, for your selves know that we are appointed thereunto (says the
Apostle,) for we told you before that we should suffer tribulations, even as it
is come to pass. For Christ has suffered; and being tempted, he is able to
Succor them that are tempted in all their sufferings, and though Christ he
where a Son, yet learned he Obedience by the things which he suffered, and
being made perfect he became the Author of eternal Salvation, to all them which
obey him; and so if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him: and Remember
them that are in bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer Adversity, as
being your selves also in the body, in bonds. Here is a sensible feeling of one
another that are born of the spirit, and a Fellowship in sufferings, who are
persecuted by that spirit born of the Flesh.

And the Apostle says to the Hebrews, call to remembrance the former days, in
which after ye were Illuminated, ye endured a great Fight of Afflictions,
partly while you were Gazing-stocks, both by Reproaches and Afflictions, and
partly while you became Companions of them that were so used; for ye had
Compassion of me in my bonds, and took joyfully the spoiling of your Goods,
knowing in your selves that you have in Heaven a better and enduring Substance:
cast not away your Confidence, which has great Recompense of Reward for ye
have need of Patience, that after you have done the will of God, you may
receive the Promise; but if any draw back (to wit, in the time of Sufferings)
the Lords soul has no pleasure in them.

Moses by Faith choosing rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God,
then to enjoy the Pleasures of sin for a season, esteeming the reproaches of
Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt, for he had respect unto the
recompense of reward, and by faith forsook Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the
King, for he endured as seeing him who is invisible: and ye may see what cruel
trials of mockings, scourges, bonds, and Imprisonments, and afflictions, and
torments, the saints went through, in the 11th of Hebrews.

And says Peter, if when you do well, and suffer for it, ye take it patiently;
this is acceptable with God, for even hereunto were ye called: if a man for
Conscience sake toward God suffer grief; this is thank-worthy, because Christ
also suffered for us, leaving us an Example, that we should follow his steps,
who when he was reviled, he reviled not again; when he suffered, he threatened
not, but committed himself to God who judges righteously; for Christ has once
suffered for sin, the Just for the Unjust, that he might bring us to God:
forasmuch then as Christ has suffered for us in the Flesh, arm your selves
likewise with the same mind; for he that has suffered in the Flesh has ceased
from sin; but the God of all grace who has called us into his eternal glory,
(says the Apostle) by Christ Jesus, after that you have suffered a while, make
you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you; cast all your care upon God,
for he cares for you, and Rejoice, inasmuch as you are made pertakers of
Christ's Sufferings, etc. and think it not strange concerning the fiery trials,
which are to try you, as though some strange thing had happened unto you; for
if ye be Reproacht and suffer for the name of Christ, happly are ye, for the
Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you: on their part, he is evil Spoken
of; but on your part, he is Glorified: if any man Suffer as a Christian, let
him not be ashamed, but let him gloryfie God on this behalf, wherefore let them
that Suffer according to the Will of God, commit the keeping of their Souls to
him in well-doing, as to a Faithful Creator; and if ye suffer for Righteousness
sake, happy are ye; and be not afraid of their Terror, neither be troubled,
having a good conscience, that whereas they speak evil of you, as evil doers,
they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good Conversation: for it is better
if the will of God so be, that ye suffer for Well doing, than for Evil-doing;
for we both labor and suffer Reproach because we trust in the living God, who
is the Savior of all men, especially of them that believe.

And the Apostle said, He was appointed a Teacher of the Gentiles, for the
which Cause he also suffered, etc. but he was not ashamed; for he knew in whom
he believed; and said, Though he suffered as an Evil-doer, even unto Bonds; but
the Word of God is not bound; nay the eternal word of God that lives, and
abides and endures forever, by which all things were made and created, this
word of God cannot be bound by that which was created by it, and does not live
and endure forever; therefore says the Apostle, I endure all things for the
Elects sake, that they may also obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus,
with eternal Glory; it is a faithful saying, if we be dead with Christ, we
shall also live with him; and if we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign
with him; and if we deny him, he also will deny us, etc.

And you may see what Persecutions and Afflictions came upon the Apostle at
Antioch, and at Iconium, and at Listra, what Persecutions he endured; but out
of them all the Lord delivered him: yea and all that will Live godly in Christ
Jesus, shall suffer Persecution (Mark shall) if they live Godly; but evil men
and Seducers shall wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, therefore
he exhorts Timothy, to watch in all things, and endure Afflictions, etc. for he
was ready to be offered up, for the time of his departure was at hand, and he
had fought the good fight, and finished his course, and kept the faith, and
there was a Crown of Righteousness laid up for him, which the Lord the
Righteous Judge will give him at the Last Day, and not to him only, but unto
all them also that Love his appearing, for God has not given to us a Spirit of
Fear, but of Power, of Love; and of a sound mind; therefore the Apostle says
unto Timothy, Be not thou therefore ashamed of our Lord, nor of me his
prisoner, but be thou a pertaker of the affliction for the Gospel, according
to the Power of God, who has saved us, and called us by a holy calling, etc.
And John says, I know thy works, Tribulations, and poverty; but thou art rich;
fear none of those things, which thou shall suffer: behold the Devil shall
cast some of you into prison, that you may be tried, and ye shall have
Tribulation Ten days; but be thou faithful to death, and I will give thee a
Crown of life: this was spoken to the Church in Smyrna. And you may see in the
11th Chap. how the witnesses of Christ suffered, and when they had taken away
their Lives, and the dead Bodies lay in the Streets of the great City, which is
spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; so not naturally called so, where Christ
our Lord and Savior was crucified; that was through the great Letter
Professors, the Jews, before the Witness was slain; but after three days and a
half, the Spirit of Life from God entered into the Witnesses, and they stood
upon their Feet, which frightened their Enemies; and the Witnesses were called
up to heaven, and the same hour there was a great Earthquake, and the tenth
part of the City fell, and was shaken down: so here was the reward upon the
City and the Persecuting Citizens.

And again, you may see how the Dragon persecuted the Woman, the True Church,
which brought forth the Man Child, after he was cast out of Heaven by Michael
and his Angels; but the Woman (or True Church) was nourished for a Time, and
Times, and Half a Time, in the Wilderness; and the Earth helped the Woman; and
the Earth opened her Mouth, and swallowed up the Flood, which the Dragon cast
out of his Mouth after her; and the Dragon was wroth with the Woman, and went
to make war with the Remnant of her Seed, which kept the Commands of God, and
have the Testimony of Jesus.

Now you may see what the Devil, the Dragon, and all his Followers persecute,
and what his Wrath is against, the true Church, the Woman, that brought forth
the Man Child, and they that kept the Commands of God, and have the Testimony
of Jesus Christ: and then the Dragon he gave his wicked persecuting Power to
the Beast, and he also was to continue Forty Two Months; and he got up in such
a Rage in the Devil's power, that he opened his Mouth in Blasphemy against God,
to blaspheme his Name, and his Tabernacle, and [mark] them that dwell in
Heaven; not them that dwell upon the Earth, for all that dwell in the Earth
worship him, but those whose Names are written in the Book of Life of the Lamb,
slain from the Foundation of the World, to wit, they do not worship him. He
that has an Ear to hear, let him hear.

But what became of the great City, and the whore, or the false Church, and the
Beast, and the Dragon, with all his false Prophets? are not they at the end
burned, and cast into the Lake of Fire, and the lamb and the saints have the
victory?

And David declares, how he was Persecuted, and said, Let them be confounded,
and put to shame that seek after my Soul; let them be as Chaff before the Wind,
etc. Let their Way be Darkness, and Slippery, etc. False Witnesses rise up, and
lay to my Charge things that I Knew not; they rewarded him Evil for good, to
the spoiling of his Soul, and his Adversaries gathered themselves together
against him, with hypocritical Mockery in feasts; they gnash upon me with
their Teeth, yea they open their mouths wide against me, and Say, Aha, Aha,
etc. but God will save his afflicted people, and bring down the high looks of
of them that afflict them.

And David mourned by reason of Affliction, and said, I am afflicted, and ready
to dye from my youth upward, etc. and said, Lord remember David in all his
Afflictions; and he said, The wicked in his pride persecuted the poor; My times
are in thy hand; O Lord deliver me from the hand of my Enemies, and them that
persecute me; And also David cried to the Lord, and said, How many are the days
of thy Servant? will thou execute Judgment on them that persecute me? They
persecute me wrongfully; help thou me; the proud have dug a pit for me,
which are not after thy Law; (and they that do so now are not after thy Gospel)
And David said; O Lord my God, in thee I put my trust; save me and deliver me
from all them that persecute me; for the Lord hears the poor, and despises
not the prisoners; let the Heaven and Earth praise him, the Sea, and every
thing that moves therein. And David says, they that sat in the Gate spoke
against me, and I was the Song of the Drunkards: and do not the Drunkards make
Songs of God's people now?

And you may see the sufferings and afflictions of Job by the Caldeans: and
Sabeans, and the Trials and Temptations of his Wife, and his pretended Friends;
and also he says in his afflictions, they that are younger than I, have me in
derision, whose Fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my
flocks, the Children of Fools, Children of base men, now am I their Song, yea I
am their by word, they abhor me, etc. and spare not to spit in my face; upon my
right hand rises the youth, they put away my feet, they rise up against me,
etc. they mar my path, set forward my Calamity, etc. But you may see how the
Lord delivered Job out of all his afflictions and miseries; for it was always
the wicked that abused the righteous, in their sufferings, and afflictions.

And Jeremiah said, O Lord my strength, and my fortress, and my refuge in the
day of affliction! The Lord is the fortress, and refuge, and strength of all
his people in the day of their afflictions, and persecutions; and did not the
Lord confound all Jeremiah's persecutors? did not Jeremiah tell his
persecutors, the Lord is with me as a terrible one, therefore my persecutors
shall stumble; and they shall not prevail they shall be greatly ashamed, for
they shall not prosper; and their everlasting confusion shall never be
forgotten? And did not this come upon the persecutors that put Jeremiah in
Prison, and Dungeon? was not Jeremiah delivered, and his persecutors went into
Captivity, and he set at Liberty from his Prison? Jer. 52. you may see what
became of his persecutors, whether they did not go into Captivity and into
Prison.

And Isaiah, speaking by Prophecy of Christ, how he was oppressed and
afflicted; yet he opened not his Mouth, and was not he brought as a Lamb to
Pilate's, and to the Jews Slaughter, and as a Sheep before the Shearers; and he
was taken from Prison, and from Judgment; who shall declare the Generation of
the suffering-Lamb, slain from the foundation of the World; for the
Transgression of his people was he stricken: the Smiters and the Afflictors,
and the Opposers, and Imprisoners, Despisers, and Rejectors, cannot declare the
Generation of Christ the Lamb of God. And Isaiah says, If thou loose the Bonds
of wickedness, to undo the heavy burden, and let the oppressed go free, etc.
if thou draw out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul, then
shall thy Light rise in obscurity. But what will become of such that do oppress
and lay their burdens, and afflict the Just? Their Light will be darkness. And
the Lord says (speaking of the Children of Israel) In all their afflictions,
he was afflicted; and the Angel of his presence saved them; in his Love, and in
his pity he redeemed them; and he bore them, and carried them all the days of
old; and God said, I sent my Angel before thee to keep thee in the way, etc.
And when the Children of Israel cried unto the Lord, he heard their voice, and
delivered them from their persecutors, and afflictions. And the Lord said, I
have surely seen the afflictions of my people, which are in Egypt, and have
heard their Cry, by reason of their Taskmasters; for I know their sorrows: So
here you may see the Lord does hear their Cries, and is sensible of the
afflictions and Sorrows of his People, therefore commands his people, Not to
afflict the widow, nor the Fatherless, nor the stranger; for if they did, they
would cry unto the Lord, and he would make their Wives Widows, and their
Children Fatherless.

And Amos Cried, Woe unto such that Chant to the sound of the Violl, and Invent
to themselves Instruments of Music like unto David, that Drink Wine in Bowls,
and anoint themselves with Chief Ointments; but they are not grieved for the
Afflictions of Joseph; for I know your manifold Transgressions, and your mighty
Sins, they afflict the Just; and that is it that afflicts the Just in our Age,
and are not sensible of the afflictions of Joseph, nor of the Afflictions of
the righteous in our age. And Christ says, And shall not God avenge his own
Elect, with Cries day and night unto him? And did not Christ tell the Jews, how
they had slain and persecuted the Prophets? And he said, how that they should
Persecute his Apostles and Prophets? And what are become of those persecuting
Jews? And Christ said, to his Disciples, They shall lay hands on you, and
persecute you, delivering you up to the Councils, and Scourge you in the
Synagogues, and cast you into Prison, being brought before Kings and Rulers for
my name sake; and it shall turn to you for a Testimony; settle it therefore in
your hearts, not to meditate before what ye shall answer, for I will give you a
mouth and Wisdom (says Christ) which all your Adversaries shall not be able to
gainsay, nor resist. Therefore it is good for all to look unto Jesus, both for
Wisdom and for strength in all their Trials, and Sufferings, and Persecutions;
for without him they can do nothing.

And Christ says, Blessed are they which are persecuted for righteousness
sake, for their's is the Kingdom of Heaven, Blessed are ye when men shall
revile you and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you falsely for
my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad; for great is your reward in Heaven; for
so persecuted they the Prophets which were before you; But I say unto you, love
your Enemies; Bless them that Curse you; do good to them that hate you; and
pray for them that dispightfully use you, and persecute you. And Christ says
to his Disciples, You shall be hated of all men for my Name sake; But he that
endures to the End shall be saved; but when they persecute you in this City fly
you to another; for verily I say unto you, ye shall not have gone over all the
Cities of Israel till the Son of Man come; but when they deliver you up, Take
no thought, how or what you shall speak; for it shall be given you in that same
hour, what you shall speak; for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of the
Father that speaks in you: And further, Christ says to the Jews, Behold I
send unto you Prophets and wisemen, and some of them ye shall kill, and
Crucify; and some of them ye shall scourge in your Synagogues, and persecute
from City to City, that upon you may come all the righteous blood shed upon the
Earth, etc.

And also, you may see how John Baptist was cast in Prison, for reproving of
Herod; and his Wife's Daughter pleased Herod with her DANCING, and Herod
promised with an OATH, to give her whatsoever she would ask, and her Mother
advised her to ask JOHN BAPTST'S HEAD, and she had it given her; now this was
the fruits of Transgressing the Law of God, and of her DANCING, and OATHS and
SWEARING, Contrary to the Command of Christ, who says, SWEAR NOT AT ALL.

And also, Christ says, I was hungry, and ye gav^ me no Meat; I was thirsty,
and ye gave me no Drink; I was naked, and ye Clothed me not; in Prison, and ye
came not unto me; I was a stranger, and ye took me not in; and sick, and ye
visited me not, etc. And Christ says, in as much as ye did it not to one of
the least of these, you did it not unto me: And such shall go into everlasting
punishment; and the righteous into life eternal.

Is it not the Practice of the Professors now adays, instead of Clothing the
naked, to take away their Clothes? And take away their Meat and Drink instead
of giving them Meat and Drink? and Cast into Prison, instead of Visiting them
in Prison? yea such as pretend to be Preachers of the Gospel, though they do
not hear them; but such are Transgressors of his Command, who says, Freely you
have Received, Freely give.

And Ahab the King said, Take Micah the Prophet, and put this fellow in the
Prison, and feed him with Bread of Afflictions until I come in Peace: And Micah
said unto Ahab, If thou return at all in Peace the Lord has not spoken by me;
so Ahab was slain according to Micah's Prophecy.

And did not the Prophet Hanana reprove Asa the King? And the King was in a
great Rage, and put the Prophet in Prison, because he reproved the King who,
relied on the King of Assyria, and not on the Lord God?

And you may see in the Acts, how the Priests and the Rulers cast the Apostles
into Prison, and Charged, them That they should Preach no more in the name of
Jesus. And Stephen said to the Chief Priest and the Rulers, Which of the
Prophets have not your forefathers persecuted, and slain them which showed
before the coming of the Just One, of whom ye have been now the Betrayers and
Murderers, who received the Law, etc. and have not kept it? When they heard
these things, they were cut to the Hear, and gnashed on him with their Teeth,
and stoned Steven to death, Calling upon God, saying, Lord Jesus receive my
Spirit.

And Paul said, I have persecuted this way (which was the way of True
Christianity) unto death, binding and delivering into Prison both men and
women; the high Priest both bear me witness, and all the state of the Elders
from whom also I received Letters, and went unto Damascus to bring them which
were there, bound unto Jerusalem, for to be punished: This was Paul's
Confession when he was converted, and persecuted for Christ's sake by old
persecuting professing Jews.

And Herod persecuted the Christians, and killed James, and imprisoned Peter,
whom an Angel delivered through the Prayers of the Saints, and the Angel of God
struck Herod that he dyed miserably.

And you may see in the 16th of Acts, how Paul and Silas were cast into Prison,
and how the Lord wrought a wonderful Deliverance to his Glory to them; and how
often you see the Jews sought the life of Paul, after he was converted; and the
Heathen Romans had more tenderness, who let him have liberty, and to dwell two
full years in his own hired house, and received all that came in unto him,
Preaching the Kingdom of God, and teaching those things which concerned the
Lord Jesus; and no man forbad him.

And the Jews persecuted Jesus, because he had done Good on the Saboth day, who
was Lord of the Saboth: And Christ said to his Disciples, Remember the word
that I said unto you (To wit, his Disciples) the Servant is not greater than
his Lord; if they have persecuted Me, they will also persecute you, etc. All
these things will they do unto you for my name sake. And this Persecution and
Imprisonment the Apostles and the Saints came to witness after Christ was
risen; and therefore you may see in his Epistles he Salutes his
Fellow Prisoners, and the Apostle says, he that is Born of the Flesh
persecutes him that is Born of the Spirit; even so it is now, each Birth
manifests both their works and Fruits.

And the Apostle says to the Corinthians, give no offense in any ihing, that
the Ministry be not blamed, but in all things approving your selves as the
Ministers of God, in much Patience, in Afflictions, in Necessities, in
Distress, in Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Tumuls, in Labors, in Wantings, in
Fastings, by Pureness, by Knowledge, by Long-suffering, by Kindness, by the
holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the Word of Truth, by the Power of God, by
the Armor of Righteousness, on the Right hand and on the Left, by Honor and
Dishonor, by Evil Report, and Good Report, as deceivers, and yet true; as
unknown, and yet well known; as dying, and behold we Live; as Chastized, and
not killed; as Sorrowful, yet always rejoicing; as poor, yet making many
rich; as having nothing, yet possessing all things. These are good Examples for
the true Christians to follow.

And do not you read what became of Iezabel, that persecutor of the Lords
Prophets? And what is become of all the persecutors of Gods people since the
beginning? that Birth Born after the Flesh, will it not have the same portion
to the end of the World? is it not recorded to be the Birth of the Flesh; and
is not to Inherit with the Heir of the Promise; but is shut out from that
Inheritance?

London, the 8th Month, 1682. G. F.

To all the ELECT of GOD, Chosen and Faithful, who have known the Work of the
Lord, and his Dealings, and his Eternal Hand, his Spirit and Power, in
preserving of you to this day, and in this Glorious Gospel Day of Christ Jesus,
who are built upon him, the Holy Rock and Foundation of God, that stands
sure, and are fed with the Heavenly Bread, and feel the Springs of Living
Water, and enjoy the Presence of the Lord, who daily gives the Increase.
AND now Friends, with the Eternal Power and Heavenly Light of Christ, with it
you have seen, and do see, and will see that which Christ has spoken in the
23d of Matthew, and 8th of Luke, which he taught to the great Multitude in
Parables, when he sat in a Ship; Behold (says Christ) a Sower went out to sow
his Seed, and as he sowed, some fell by the High Ways side, and it was trodden
down, and the Fowls of the Air devoured it; and some fell upon the Rocks or
Stony Places, where they had not much Earth; and as soon as it was sprung up,
it withered away. So he that receives the Seed into rocky or stony Places, the
same is he that receives the Word with Joy, yet has he not Root in himself,
but dureth for a while, or for a while believes, and in Temptations falls
away; for when Tribulations or Persecutions arise because of the Word, by and
by he is Offended; and upon too many such have we seen this Parable fulfilled
in Times of Persecutions, and Tribulations, and Sufferings; the Persecuting
Sun, when it is up, they are scorch't, and withered away, and so come to
nothing. And some fell among Thorns, and the Thorns sprung up and choked it:
And they also that received Seed among the Thorns, are they that hear the Word,
and when they have heard, go forth, and are choked with the Cares of this
World, and Deceitfulness of Riches, and Pleasures of this Life, and become
Unfruitful, and bring no Fruit to perfection: and this is seen to be the
Condition of too many. But the other fell into Good Ground, and brought forth
Fruit, some Thirty, some Sixty, and some an Hundred fold: So they that received
the Seed into the Good Ground, are they which in an honest and a good Heart
have heard the Word, and understand it, and keep it, and bring forth fruit with
patience, some an hundred fould, some sixty, some thirty, as was said before;
these are the honest and good hearts, upon whom Christ the Son of Righteousness
shines, that nourishes his good seed, who brings forth fruit unto perfection,
who lives over the Deceitful Riches and Cares of the World, and the Pleasures
of this Life, that pass away, who are not offended nor moved at Tribulations
and Persecutions, but patiently do endure them; such do bring forth Fruit unto
Perfection, yea an 100.60. and 30. fould, in Christ Jesus, who bruses the
Serpents head, who makes men and women's hearts like the high way, thorny rocky
and stony ground; for men and women, whose hearts are like unto the High Ways,
stony, rockey and thorny ground, the seed has fallen into these grounds as
before, and these grounds all can talk of the Seed, and of the Word, but bring
forth no fruit unto perfection. And therefore let all consider what ground you
are, and Fruit you bring forth; and when you hear the Word of the Kingdom, that
ye understand it, which none can without the Light and Spirit of Christ (and
walk in it) but he that shall endure to the end in the light, in the grace,
truth, and spirit, and in Christ, from whom you do receive these, shall be
saved.

For the Apostle says, the Just shall live by faith; and this is not by any
faith which men make, but by the faith which Jesus Christ is both the Author
and Finisher of in your Hearts and Consciences? and in this faith ye have
access to God, and do please him; but if any man draw back (to wit, by not
living by this Faith, does not the Lord say) my soul shall have no pleasure in
him? but we are not of them who draw back unto perdition, that is a sad
drawing-back; but of them that believe to the saving of our souls.

From Kingston upon Thames, the 2d of the 9th Month, 1682. G. F.

THE END.
BOOKS Printed and Sold by John Bringhurst at the Sign of the Book in
Grace Church Street, near Cornhil.
1. A General Epistle given forth in Obedience to the God of Peace, for the
Preservation and Increase of Charity and Unity amongst the Professors of Christ
Jesus, and the Teachings of his Divine Light Within. By William Gibson. Price 1
s. 2. The Life of Christ magnified in his Minister: Being Seventeen Friends
Testimonies concerning Giles Barnardiston. Price 3 d. 3. A Way to Prevent the
Indignation and Judgments of the Lord from coming on a Nation or Family. By G.
F. Price 1 d. 4. The Devil was and is the Old Informer against the Righteous.
By G. F. Price 1 d. 5. An Epistle to the Household of the Seed of Ahraham, etc.
By G. F. Price a Halfpenny. 6. An Epistle to all Christians, Jews and
Gentiles. By G. F. Price a Halfpenny. 7. Concerning the Upright and Good
Conversation of the Saints in Christ and in Heaven. By G. F. Price a Halfpenny
8. A farther Account from several Letters of the Continuation of the Cruel
Persecution of the People called Quakers, without regard to Age or Sex: with
Copies of several Mittimusses, by which some of them were committed. Price 1 d.
9. Something concerning Agbarus Prince of the Aedesseans: also Paul's Epistle
to the Laodiceans. Price 1 d. 10. A Salutation and seasonable Exhortation to
Children. By D. Dole. Price 1. d.

