THE GREAT MYSTERY OF THE GREAT WHORE UNFOLDED: AND ANTICHRISTS KINGDOM
Revealed unto DESTRVCTION.

In Answer to many False Doctrines and Principles which Babylons Merchants have
traded with, being held forth by the professed Ministers, and Teachers, and
Professors in England, Ireland, and Scotland, taken under their own Hands, and
from their own Mouths, sent forth by Them from time to time, against the
despised People of the LORD called QVAKERS, who are of the Seed of that Woman,
who has been long fled into the WILDERNESS.

ALSO An Invasion upon the great City BABYLON, with the spoling of Her golden
Cup, and delicate Merchandise, whereby She has deceived the World and Nations:
And herein is declared the spoiling of her prey, in this Answer to the
multitude of Doctrines held forth by the many false SECTS, which have lost the
key of Knowledge, and been on foot since the Apostles days, called
Anabaptists, Independents, Presbyters, Ranters, and many others; who out of
their own Mouths have manifested themselves not to be of a true descent from
the true Christian Churches: But it is discovered that they have been all made
drunk with the Wine of Fornication received from the Whore which has sitten
upon the Beast, after whom the World has wondered.

By GEORGE FOX.

And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep and mourn over her, for no man
buyeth their merchandise any more, Rev. 18.18. And they cried when they saw the
smoke of her burning, saying, what City is like unto this great City: And they
cast dust on their heads, and cried weeping and wailing, saying, Alas, alas,
that great City, wherein were made rich all that had Ships in the Sea, by
reason of her costliness, for in one hour is she made desolate, Rev. 18, 18,
19. LONDON, Printed for Tho: Simmons, at the Ball and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1659.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
TO all the world to whom this may come to be Read, that they read with a good
understanding, and hereby they may come to the perfect knowledge of the ground
of difference between the Priests, and Professors, and all Sects in these
Nations; and Us, who are in scorn called Quakers, showing that the conversie on
our pa^^ is just, and equal, against them all, and t^^^ we have sufficient
cause to cry against them, and to deny their M^^^stry, their Church, their
worship, and their whole Religion, as being not in the Power and by the Spirit
(...) ^^^ng God, as commanded of him or ever practiced by his Saint (...) ^ut
(...) ^^clareth the g^^und, and foundation thereof to be another ^^^^g, a^^ ^ot
the same, on which the true Church, and Ministry, an^ ^^actice (...) worship,
and true Religion was builded in the daye^ (...) Apo^^^es; And also this is an
Invitation to all Sects, and profession of People to come forth, and try if
what they hold, and profess be according ^o the Scriptures of truth; and to do
this in trial, by evident, and sound Arguments, and by the best spiritual
weapons they have, and to la^^ ^^e all this persecution and unrighteous
dealing, and stocking, and w^^pping, and imprisoning of us for speaking against
their Religion, and that they come forth in fair dispute, to contend in the
Spirit of meekness, for what they profess, and practice, and to prove
according to the Scriptures, their Ministry, Church, and whole Religion, that
it is in, and by the spirit and power of God, or otherwise to renounce, and
deny all their Religion, and the profession, and practices thereof, that every
man may be satisfied who it is that are in the true and right way, and of the
true worship, and true Religion, and who it is that are not, and this is
desired by us who are called Quakers, and also a true account, of our first
beginning and coming forth in the world; and of that great sufferings we have
sustained, and how we have been carried on and are preserved to this day.

The Lord God everlasting, who is true, and faithful, has fulfilled his
promise in us, and unto us, and we are gathered from the mouths of all dumb
Shepherds, and out of the mouths of all Hirelings, who have made a prey upon
us, and fed themselves with the fat, and devoured souls for dishonest gain; And
we are come to the fould of Eternal rest, where Christ Jesus is the chief
Shepherd, and he is the Shepherd, and Bishop of our souls, that feeds his
Flock with living bread that nourishes us unto life eternal; he has called us
by his Name, and put us forth, and he feeds us in green pastures, and we are
fed with hidden Manna, and lies down at Noon with his gathered Flock; and out
of Nations, kindreds, multitudes, and peoples are we Redeemed to God, and are
come out of the world, and out of great Babylon, and out of spiritual Sodom,
and Egypt, where the Lord Christ was, and is crucified, and lies slain to this
day, and a top of the world has the Lord set us, on the mountain of his o^n
house, and dwelling; where we behold, and feel the life, and glory, and Crown
of the world that has no end; and the world that has an end is seen over, and
its Crown and glory is his footstool that Reigns among us, And as for all that
which this perishing world brings forth, which men seek after only, Its
reckoned our temptation, though all the sons of Adam are seeking its glory, its
Riches, its Crowns, its contentments, But of that birth are we which has no
Crown, no glory, nor rest under the Sun, and a birth is brought forth amongst
us which is heir of another Kingdom, and possessor of ano^^er Crown, whose
glorying is in the Lord, all the day long, and he is ou^ Refuge, our Rock, and
our fortress against all our Enemies, and what though the wicked arm
themselves, and the ungodly bend their b^w, what though all sorts of people
from the Prince upon his T^^^ (...) ^he Beggar upon the dunghill, exalt
themselves against the d^^pise^ ^^ople of Lords inheritance, who for his Names
sake are ki^^^d all the ^ay long; what though the wisemen bring forth their
A^^^^^nts, an^ what though the Rulers bring forth unrighteous Judgeme^^s again
(...) ^eed that God has blessed; what though the revilers, and scorners open
their mouths; and reproachers, and revilers cast out their bitter words as a
flood against the remnant of the woman's seed, that has long been fled into the
wilderness; and what then, if the Teachers, the Prophets, and the Elders, and
the heads, and wise men of the world set themselves to pray, and Preach, and
Print against the chosen seed of Jacob; yet notwithstanding all this, though
this is come to pass, and hell open her mouth, and her floods break forth to
overflow, and be much more increased; yet shall the King of righteousness rule
among his people, and his presence will not forsake his chosen ones; But the
Lord is with us, a mighty, and terrible one, and the shout of a King is amongst
us, and the dread, and terror of the Almighty covers us, and it goes before
us, and compasses us about; and the Lord is working a work in the Earth
mighty, and wonderful, he is gathering the scattered, and binding up the broken
hearted, and his people shall dwell in safety, and none shall make them afraid,
and no weapon that is formed against them shall prosper, nor no hand that is
lifted up shall prevail; For Sion shall arise out of the dust, her beautiful
garments shall be put on, and mourning, and sorrow shall flee away, and her
light is risen that is everlasting, and the Sun shall never go down, but his
day shall remain for ever, and the night shall not again cover her brightness,
nor the Sun set upon her habitations, the City that has long laid waste, shall
again be builded; and the dwelling that has long been without inhabitant, shall
be replenished; for the numberles seed of Jacob is coming out of Egypt, that
will replenish the whole Earth, and the seed of Esau shall become bondmen, and
wherefore are you gathered together? and to what purpose have the wicked spent
their strength to oppose what the Lord is bringing to pass? shall not all our
Enemies be broken to pieces, and will not the Lord grind them to powder? will
he not mar their beauty, and stain their pride? will he not bring down their
crowns, and corrupt their glory, and stain it with his fire of wrath, and make
them ashamed of their ways, and Doctrines? Hear this ye Priests, and howl, and
lament for the misery that is coming upon you, the Lord has laid you naked,
and made you bare, and you are seen as you are, and the Elect is risen amongst
us which ye cannot deceive; but alas, woe is me, how have you caused the people
to err, and how have you led the blind out of the way, and how is truth fallen
in your streets, and you have daubed falsely with untempered mortar, and have
cried peace to the wicked, and condemned the righteous, and all this has vexed
the righteous soul, and the Lord will now arise, and is risen, and you shall
not resist, and escape the stroke of his hand, which will come upon you, and
bruise you as a millstone, for you have caused the wicked to rejoice and the
righteous to mourn, and you have made sad his heart, whom God has not made
sad, have not you fed your selves with the fat, and clothed with the wool, and
has not the peoples souls been starved, and leanness been upon them all, your
plants a^^ dry, and barren trees that brings forth no good fruit, and your
p^^ple are like a wilderness that is untilled and unploughed and undressed, and
your flocks are like wild asses upon the mountains that is untamed, as rude as
the Horse, and mule, that knows no bridle and now it is seen what the end of
your Ministry is, and what fruit it has brought sorth, the Lord has taken
notice, and he has beheld, how you have loytered, and laid idle, and the
Nations lies yet like fallow ground, that bears no fruit, and men's hearts are
untouched with absence of Gods word, and there is no sound, true, and perfect
sense amongst your people of the dealings of the Lord, nor of the operation of
his spirit, but they remain in great blindness and ignorance, void of the
knowledge of God, for ye have not caused them to hear his word, but you have
told your dreams, and your false visions, and you have spoken imaginations of
your hearts, and not from the mouth of the Lord, neither have you stood in his
Counsel, nor hearkened to his voice, and therefore people remains unprofited;
but what they and you know, its naturally, and not by the spirit of the Father,
but as dry trees you are, not taught of the Father, and as rough goats in the
nature of swine that is polluted in the filth of the world, and in the nature
of dogs and Lions, devouring another, and biting one another, and killing one
another, which things were not in the Churches of Christ, and we have a great
controversy with you, and that from the Lord; we have tried you, searched you,
and disovered your foundation, and its not found, nor will not stand in the
trial; we have fetched your Line from the first original, and we have found out
your beginning, and we find yours of that Race, which Christ prophesied of that
should come, which should deceive many, having the sheeps clothing, but
inwardly ravening, and which John saw was come, and went out from the Apostles,
and true Churches, which went from the truth, and went into the world, and had
the form of godliness without the power; here began the Race in the Apostacy
of the Churches, and when they Apostatized from the true faith, then came your
original up, and the world went after them, and all that dwelt upon the earth
worshipped the beast, that has reigned through all this time of Apostacy,
which has been since the days of the Apostles; and we find your original go
no further then to the false brethren, and false Apostles, which went out from
the true Apostles, and run for gifts and rewards, and preached for filthy
lucre, and through covetousness made merchandise of souls, seeking money and
gain to themselves; I say we find your Original begins there, and your Line
goes no further, and never came your first rise so far as the true Apostles,
you were not in your beginning of their life nor birth, nor cannot be reckoned
from their Original, for you succeed not them; but you truly succeed the false
Apostles, and falls brethren, which Christ prophesied should come after his
days, and John saw was come, and coming in his days; and we find you of this
stock and generation, and now you are discovered to be contrary to the true
Apostles, and agreeing with the false Apostles, in call, in practice, in
maintenance, and in all things; and the Line of true judgment is laid upon you
all, and you are measured, and found too short, and weighed and found too
light, and we will deal truly with you in judgment; first we do hold
controversy with you as concerning your call, your Ministry, it agrees not
with, but is contrary to what the Apostles call was; they were called by power
from on high, and were made Ministers by the gift of the holy spirit received
from God, and their Ministry was an absolute gift from God, and not to be
bought and sold for money, and they were anointed of the Father, by his spirit
of promise, and to preach the Gospel; but your call is at schools, and
Colleges, in such, and such orders, which are attained through natural
industerie, such, and such arts, and sciences, and degrees, having been so many
years brought up in studying natural arts and natural Languages, this is your
ordination and your call, having no respect to receive, or to wait for the gift
of the holy spirit to be made Ministers thereby, and this is different from the
Apostles and true ministers, and equal and according to the false prophets and
deceivers.

Secondly, Again you are not according, but contrary to the true ministry and
Ministers of Christ in practice; for they were led by the spirit of the Father
which dwelt in them, and they preached the Gospel by the spirit, and spoke as
the spirit gave them utterance, and went up and down the world through Nations,
converting people to the knowledge of the truth, and what they had handled,
tasted, seen, and felt of the word of life in them, that they declared to
others, and preached the Gospel, which they had not received from man, nor by
man, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ in them; But your practice is not
such, but contrary, for the spirit of this world leads you, and it you follow
in all your works, in your preaching, praying, and in your whole worship, in
form and tradition, what you have studied for, out of books and old Authors,
you preach to people, and what ye have noted in a book, that you preach by an
hour-glasse, and not as the spirit of God gives you utterance; and you seek out
and enquire after great benefits, and much money by the year, and where there
is much Tithes and Gleab-lands, and such like, thither and to such a place you
go, and seek after, to be Ministers there, and there you remain 20. 40. more
or fewer years as you can agree with the people, and while they will give you
so much as will content you, and maintain you, your wives, and families as you
say, and respect not whether any be converted to God by your preaching, but
people remains always in blindness and ignorance generally, and without the
knowledge of God; for you preach other men's words, and what you have collected
in your imaginations from the Saints words an hour by a glass, leaning upon a
soft cushion, and for money and and hire, preaching to the people, and this is
your manner of practice, and Ministry, in these Nations, but thus did not the
Apostles, nor Christ's Ministers; but the contrary; and by your fruits and works
it appears that you are not followers of that spirit that Christ and his
Ministers were guided by, neither are lawful successors of the Apostles, but
by your fruits and practice you manifest that the Lord never sent you, nor
Christ never called you into his service to be his Ministers, for in all your
practices and in your whole performances of worship you differ, and does not
agree, but are contrary to what the practice and worship of Christ's Ministers,
and Churches were in the days of the Apostles; this I charge upon you, in the
Name, and by the Authority of the Lord God, and am able to prove it against
you, face to face, or otherwise to show that you are not of the same spirit,
but contrary to the Saints and Apostles of old, and so not true succeeders of
them, nor lawful Ministers of Christ, as to all people it is, and shall be
made manifest.

Thirdly, You disagree and are contrary altogether to the true ministry, and
to the Apostles, in respect of your maintenance and wages, for the wages which
Christ allowed his Ministers, was, into whatsoever house they entered, that was
worthy, they might eat such things as are set before them, for the workman
(says he) is worthy of his hire, and the Apostles eat only of the fruit of
the vineyard that they had planted, and of the milk of the flock which they
kept; by a free gift of the people, which they had begotten to the faith, and
to whom they sowed spiritual things; it was but as a small matter if they
reaped their carnal things, yet as a free gift they would do it, and the
Apostle said he would not make the Gospel of Christ chargeable; And in this
manner were Christ's Ministers and Ministry in wages and gifts, upheld and
maintained outwardly in the world.

But your practice and maintenance is not such, but contrary, as is fully made
manifest, for you will have so much by the Year promised to you in Tithes,
money, or Gleab-lands, or stipends, and of drunkards, and swearers, and
profane wordly people, who are not sheep of Christ's flock, nor plants of his
vineyard, you will have so much of each of them, and of every man, in such a
compass as you call your parish, and if any either out of covetousness or
good conscience, cannot pay you, you sue at Law, and cast into prison, for
wages, and spoil their goods, and take treble, nay some times 5. double
damage, and through violence and injustice, and cruelty are you maintained in
such a manner, and not as the true Ministers and Apostles of Christ were, but
in a way and manner quite contrary as it is manifest, and so herein it is
proved, that you are not lawful successors of the Apostles and Ministers of
Christ.

Fourthly, Again you follow not the Apostles, and true Ministers of Christ,
but are contrary to them in doctrine, as this following vollume will clearly
manifest, which for this very end is collected from your own mouths and pens,
that all men may see what you are, and what you hold and profess, and being
truly laid down, and answered, let your selves, and all sober men compare your
doctrines and sayings with the doctrines of the Apostles, and they may see you
agree not with them, but are contrary to them; and now friends to all you that
profess your selves to be Ministers of the Gospel, I do hereby declare unto
you, in the name and authority of the Lord, that we have controversy with you,
and a great charge against you in all these things, in your call, in your
practice, and in your maintenance, and in your doctrines, and our mouths has
the Lord opened, and they cannot be shut, from declaring and crying against
you, as such whom the Lord never sent, but are contrary to Christ, his
prophets, and Apostles in all your ways, and practices, and the hand of the
Lord is certainly against you, and his power and dread will come over you, and
lie upon your consciences.

Now Reader, whosoever thou art that reads this following volume if thy mind
be sober, and thy heart right toward God, thou may come to a good
understanding of the ground and cause of this great controversy, between the
Priests and the professors of this Nation, and us, who are in scorn called
Quakers, for it is not unknown to Nations, of this great debate and battle, now
for some years of continuance in this Nation, no man can be ignorant, what
putting in prisons, and what persecuting, and what preaching, and printing
against us, and what reports and same has been through this Nation for some
years past; and the Quakers so called, have written, and spoken, and printed,
against the Priests and their worships, and ways, and doctrines, and declared
against them, as deceivers and false prophets, and such as never were sent of
God; and on the other hand, thus have the Priests, and more abundantly cried
out against, and printed against the Quakers as heretics, and deceivers, and
witches, and all what they could say that's evil, and these things being not
unknown, but publicly brought to pass; therefore it will be good to discover
unto every man, the first ground and cause of this great strife, and the matter
of it, and its beginning, so that all may know the certainty of these things,
and know they are not without good ground, and sufficient reason on our part,
to wit, that we have just cause to do, and strive against that generation of
Priests and Teachers, and that we do nothing rashly, and without sufficient
reason. It is now about seven years since the Lord raised us up in the North
of England and opened our mouths in this his spirit; and what we were before
in our Religion, profession, and practices is well known to that part of the
country, how generalie we were men of the strictest sect, and of the greatest
zeal in the performance of outward righteousness, and went through and tried
all sorts, of Teachers, and run from mountain to mountain, and from man to
man, and from one form to an other, as do many to this very day, who yet
remains ungathered to the Lord, and such we were, (to say no more of us) that
sought the Lord, and desired the knowledge of his ways more then any thing
beside, and for one I may speak, who from a child, even a few years old, he
set his face to seek and find the Savior, and more then Life and treasure, or
any mortal Crown sought after with all his heart, the one thing that is
needful, to wit, the knowledge of God: And after our long seeking, the Lord
appeared to us, and revealed his glory in us, and gave us of his spirit from
heaven, and poured it upon us, and gave us of his wisdom to guide us, whereby
we saw all the world, and the true state of all things and the true condition
of the Church in her present estate; first the Lord brought us by his power,
and wisdom, and the word by which all things were made to know and understand,
and see perfectly that God had given to us, every one of us in particular, a
Light from himself shining in our hearts and consciences, which Light, Christ
his Son, the Savior, of the world had lighted every man, and all mankind
withal; which Light in us we found sufficient to reprove us, and convince us
of every evil deed, word and thought, and by it, in us, we come to know good
from evil, right from wrong, and whatsoever is of God, and according to him,
from what is of the Devil, and what is contrary to God in motion, word and
work; and this Light gave us to discern between truth and error, between every
false and right way, and it perfectly discovered to us the true state of all
things, and we thereby came to know man, what he was in his creation before
transgression, and how he was deceived and overcome by the devil; and his
estate in transgression, and in disobedience, and how he is drove and banished
from the presence of the Lord, and the sorrow and anguish which he is in, and
to undergo; and also by the Light in us, we perfectly came to know the way of
Restoration, and the means to be restored; and the state of man being come
out of transgression and restored, these things to us were revealed by the
Light within us, which Christ had given us, and lightened us withal, what man
was before transgression, and what he is in transgression, and what he is being
redeemed out of transgression, and also the Light which shined in every one of
us, as to it our minds became turned, and our hearts inclined, the perfect
estate of the Church we came to know; her estate before the Apostles days, and
in the Apostles days, and since the days of the Apostles, and her persent
estate we found to be as a woman who had once been clothed with the Sun, and
the Moon under her feet, who brought forth him that was to Rule the Nations;
but she was fled in the Wilderness, and there sitting desolate, in her place,
that was prepared of God for such a season, which season in the very end
thereof, when the time of her sojorning, was toward a full end, then were we
brought forth, if any have an ear they may hear, so that all these things
concerning man, and concerning the times and seasons, and the changing and
renewing of times, and all things that pertaines to salvation, and Redemption
and eternal Life, needful for man to know, all this was revealed, discovered,
and made known to us, by the Light which was in us, which Christ had lighted
us withal.

And we found this Light to be a sufficient teacher, to lead us to Christ, from
whence this Light came, and thereby it gave us to receive Christ, and to
witness him to dwell in us, and through it the new covenant we came to enter
into, to be made heirs of life and salvation, and in all things we found the
Light which we were enlightened withal, and all mankind (which is Christ) to be
alone and only sufficient to bring to Life and eternal salvation, and that
all who did own the Light in them which Christ has enlightened every man
withal, they needed no man to teach them, but the Lord was their Teacher, by
his Light in their own consciences, and they received the holy anointing.

And so we ceased from the teachings of all men, and their words, and their
worships, and their Temples, and all their baptismes, and Churches, and we
ceased from our own words, and professions, and practices in Religion, in times
before zealously performed by us, through diverse forms, and we became fools
for Christ's sake, that we might become truly wise; and by this Light of
Christ in us were we led out of all false ways and false preachings, and false
Ministers, and we met together often, and waited upon the Lord in pure silence,
from our own words, and all men's words, and hearkened to the voice of the Lord,
and felt his word in our hearts, to burn up and beat down all that was contrary
to God, and we obeyed the Light of Christ in us, and followed the motions of
the Lords pure spirit, and took up the Cross to all earthly glories, Crowns,
and ways, and denied our selves, our relations, and all that stood in the way
betwixt us and the Lord, and we chose to suffer with and for the Name of
Christ, rather then all the pleasures upon earth, or all our former zealous
professions and practices in Religion without the power and spirit of God,
which the world yet lives in. And while waiting upon the Lord in silence, as
often we did for many hours together, with our minds and hearts toward him,
being stayed in the Light of Christ within us, from all thoughts, fleshly
motions, and desires, in our diligent waiting and fear of his Name, and
harkening to his word, we received often the pouring down of the spirit upon
us, and the gift of Gods holy eternal Spirit as in the days of old, and our
hearts were made glad, and our tongues loosed, and our mouths opened, and we
spoke with new tongues, as the Lord gave us utterance, and as his spirit led
us, which was poured down upon us, on Sons and Daughters, and to us hereby was
the deep things of God revealed, and things unutterable was known and made
manifest; and the glory of the Father was revealed, and then began we to sing
praises to the Lord God Almighty, and to the Lamb for ever, who had redeemed us
to God; and brought us out of the captivity and bondage of the world, and put
an end to sin and death, and all this was by and through, and in the light of
Christ within us, and much more might be declared hereof, that which could not
be believed if it were spoken, of the several and particular operations, and
manifestations of the everlasting spirit that was given us, and revealed in us;
but this is the sum; life and immortality was brought to light, power from on
high and wisdom was made manifest, and the day everlasting appeared unto us,
and the joyful Sun of Righteousness did arise and shine forth unto us and in
us; and the holy annoynting, the everlasting Comforter, we received; and the
Babe of glory was born; and the heir of the promise brought forth, to Reign
over the earth, and over Hell and death, whereby we entered into everlasting
union, and fellowship and Covenant with the Lord God, whose mercies are sure
and infinite, and his promise never fales; and much might be spoken, but this
is the sum, we were raised from death to life, and are changed from Satan's
power to God, and gathered from all the dumb Shepherds, and off all the barren
mountains, into the fold of Eternal Peace and rest, and mighty and wonderful
things has the Lord wrought for us, and by us, by his own outstretched Army.

And thus we became followers of the Lamb whither soever he goes, and he has
called us to make War in righteousness for his names sake against Hell and
death, and all the powers of darkness; and against the beast and false Prophet,
which has deceived the Nations; and we are of the Royal seed elect, chosen and
faithful, and we War in truth, and just judgment, not with weapons that are
carnal; but by the sword that goes out of his mouth, which shall slay the
wicked, and cut them them to pieces; and after this manner was our birth, and
bringing forth, and thus has the Lord chosen us and made us as an Army
dreadful and terrible before whom the wicked do fear and tremble; and our
standard is truth, justice, righteousness, and equity; and all that comes unto
us, must cleave thereunto, and fight under that banner without fear, and
without doubting, and they shall never be ashamed nor put to flight, neither
shall ever they be conquered by Hell or death or by the powers of darkness; but
the Lord shall be their armor, weapon and defense for evermore, and they that
follow the Lamb shall overcome, and get the victory over the beast, and over
the Dragon, and over the gates of Hell; for the Lord is with us, and who shall
be able to make us afraid?

Then having thus armed us with power, strength and wisdom, and Dominion,
according to his mind, and we having learned of him, and being taught of him in
all things, and he having chosen us into his work, and put his sword into our
hand, and given us perfect Commission to go forth in his Name and Authority,
having the word from his mouth what to cut down and what to preserve, and
having the everlasting Gospel to Preach to the inhabitants of the earth, and
being commanded in spirit to leave all, and follow him, and go forth in his
work, yea an absolute necessity was laid upon us, and woe unto us if we Preached
not the Gospel, for when we looked abroad and beheld the world, behold it was
altogether darkness, and even as a wilderness, and desolate, and barren of good
fruit; and death reigned over men, and no good fruit was brought forth to God,
but leaves we beheld upon every soul; and all men and peoples were made drunk
with the wine of whoredoms, and the Whores cup they had drunk, and was
committing fornication with the great Whore, and she reigned over the Kings and
peoples of the earth; and the Antichrist was set up in the Temple of God,
ruling over all, and having brought Nations under his power, and set up his
Government over all for many ages, even since the days of the Apostles and
true Churches has he reigned, while the woman has been fled into the
wilderness, and the man child caught up to God; Christ said Antichrist should
come, and put on the sheep clothing, and be inwardly a ravening Wolf, and
John saw that Antichrist was come in his days, and he went forth then from the
true Church, and went into the world, and deceived the world; and ever since
his Kingdom has reigned over Nations, for then he begun to exalt himself, and
it is sixteen hundred years since; all which time Antichrist that has had the
sheep clothing, but inwardly a ravener, and has ruled and reigned; and this
we saw and perceived, in the very time of our birth and bringing forth; and we
beheld Nations as a wilderness untilled, and men's hearts as the fallow ground
unbroken up, and not plowed nor sown with the good seed of Gods Kingdom; so
that we saw all states and orders of men corrupted and degenerated from what
they ought to be, and from what God had once ordained them: As for the Ministry
first, we looking upon it with a single eye, in the light of the Spirit of God
which had anointed us, we beheld it clearly (which formerly we had been
stumbling at and much doubting of, that it was not the perfect Ministry of
Christ for many years before) not to be of Christ nor sent of him, nor having
the Commission power and Authority of Christ as his Ministry had in the days
of the true Churches, but in all things, as in Call, practice, maintenance, and
in every thing else in fruits and effects, we found it disagree, and be wholly
contrary to the true Minstry of Christ in the days of the Apostles, and
likewise we truly beheld it to be in Call, practice, and maintenance, and all
things the very same in fruits and effects; with the false Ministry and false
Prophets, and false Apostles, and deceivers of old; and this I do testify, and
am able to prove in the spirit and Authority of the Lord, that the public
Ministry as now it stands generally, is wholly degenerated from what the true
Ministry of Christ once was, and differs and is contrary in all things to
what Christ's Ministers were, and agrees, and is equal in all things with what
the false prophets and deceivers were throughout all ages; and this I charge
upon it, in the face and view of all men to whom this may come; for this we saw
concerning it, in the beginning, and our first assurance. And as for other
places and orders of men and callings we saw them also corrupted and
degenerated, and evil and iniquity abounding among all sorts of people, and
blindness and darkness covered the face of the earth and of the world, and all
people were in their transgressions, and making void the Law of God, and that
it was time for the Lord to work, and to arise to ease himself of his
adversaries; and as for all Churches (so called) and professions and gatherings
of people, we beheld you as all in the Apostasy and degeneration from the true
Church, nor being gathered by the spirit of the Lord, nor anointed thereby, as
the true members of Christ ever were, but to be in a form, and in forms of
righteousness without the power, and in Immitations without life, and perfect
knowledge; so that all the practices of Religion we beheld without power, and
life, though some had a sencerity in them, and a zeal and a desire toward the
Lord, yet all people erred in Judgment and none were guided in Judgment by
the Eternal spirit, and because of the error in Judgment that made their zeal
blind, and their performances of righteousness not accepted, though acted in
some sincerity and zeal, because they were not guided in practice, and led in
Judgment by the spirit of the Lord, which only leads into all truth, and none
are in the truth but are who led only thereby, so that we beheld all
profession, but as coverings with figg leaves, while the nature of
transgression stood uncondemned, and not crucified. Also then we saw not only
the performance and practice in Church state, and in Religious orders were
corrupted, but also Government, and Magistracy, and all things in civil state
were not aright in the sight of the Lord, nor as the Lord required, neither as
he had ordained in the beginning; for Government we know as ordained of God, is
to punish, and limit and terifie, all evil doers, and to preserve and defend
all that do well; and that men's consciences are to be left free, to be ruled by
the Lord alone, and guided by his spirit, and that outward power and civil
Magistrates and Laws (so called) ought not to be Lord or Ruler in men's
consciences, nor over them; but we beheld how unrighteousness and iniquity, and
sin and wickedness was strengthened, and encouraged in the Government, and by
such as were in Authority; and how the fear of God and the exercise of a good
conscience was abused; so that it was turned backward from what it ought to be;
them that did well were punished, and limited as transgressors, and the evil
doers were set free, and not made afraid, so, that we could truly cry, truth
was fallen in the streets, and justice and true Judgment turned backward, and
equity had no place to enter, and the innocent was devoured through want of
true and just Judgment, and the needy was spoiled and made a prey, and thus it
was framed, for no sooner had we opened our mouths, but the Magistrates begun
to put us in prison, and execute great injustice upon us, and became oppressors
of the innocent, and laid grievous unjust burdens upon us, grievous to be born,
and true justice and judgment was neglected, and wrong judgment brought
forth, and good Government abused, and men in authority not ruled by the Lord,
neither ruling for the Lord among men, and thus it came to pass upon us,
through the corruption and degeneration in Government and Magistrates, which we
saw to be, as it was fulfilled by them, to wit, not as the Lord required, nor
as he in the beginning ordained it, but quite the contrary, and this we saw in
the beginning, when the spirit of the Lord was poured down upon us, and power
from on high was revealed to declare against all the the abominations of the
Earth, and to make war against all corruption, in all orders, and places, and
men.

Then being prepared of the Lord, and having received power from on high, we
went forth as commanded of the Lord, leaving all relations and all things of
the wo^ld behind us, that we might fufill the work of the Lord into which he
called us, and with flesh and blood, nor any creature, we consulted not, nor
took council of men, but of the Lord alone, who lifted up our heads above the
world, and all fears and doubtings, and was with us in power and dominion, over
all that which opposed us, which was great and mighty, and gave us power over
it all, and to bind Kings in chains, and Nobles in fetters of Iron, and this is
the saints honor, and the word of the Lord we sounded, and did not spare, and
caused the deaf to hear, the blind to see and the heart that was hardened to be
a wakened, and the dread of the Lord went before us, and behind us, and terror
took hold upon our enemies; And first of all our mouths were opened, and our
spirit filled with indignation against the Priests and teachers, and with them
and against them first we began to war, as being the causers of the people to
err, and the blind leaders that carried the blind into the ditch, and against
them, as the fountain of all wickedness abounding in the Nations, and as being
the issue of prophanes, for from them has profaneness gone forth in all
nations, and against them we cried a loud, as being redeemed from their mouths
who had made a prey upon us, as they do upon all that follow their ways, and
in steeple houses we did visit them often, and in markets and other places, as
the Lord moved and made way for us, showing unto all them and all their people,
that they were not Lawful Ministers of Christ, sent of him, but were deceivers
and Antichrists, and such whom the Lord never sent, and we spared not
publicly and at all seasons to utter forth the Judgments of the Lord, against
them and their ways, and against their Churches, and worships, and practices,
as not being of God, nor commanded by him, by which they deceived the world,
and this was our first work which we entered upon, to thresh down the deceivers,
and lay them open, that all people might see their shame, and come to turn
from them, and receive the knowledge of the truth, that they might be saved, and
this we did with no small opposition nor danger, yea often times we were in
danger of our lives, through beating, abusing punishing, haling, casting over
walls, striking with staves, and cudgel^, and knocking down to the ground,
besides reproaching, Scorning, revilings, and houtings at, and scoffings, and
slanderings, and all abuses that could be thought or acted by evil hands and
tongues, and often carried before Magistrates, with grievous threats, and some
times put in the Stocks, and whipped, and often imprisoned, and many hard
dealings against us, the worst of tongues or hands could execute, sparing life;
of this all the North countries may witness, and all these things are
sustained and suffered from people and Rulers, because of our faithfulness to
the Lord, and for declaring against the false deceivers; for nothing save only
the hand of the Lord, and his power could have preserved us, and carried us
through all this, neither for any reward outward whatsoever, or advantage to
our selves, would we have exposed our selves to that sufferings and violence,
and dangers, which befell us daily, but the Lord was our exceeding great reward
through all these things, and kept us in the hollow of his hand, and under the
shadow of his wings, and gave us dominion in spirit over all our enemies, and
subdued them before us, and though Rulers and people were combined against us,
and executed their injustice and violence upon us, yet the Lord made us to
prosper, and grow exceedingly in strength, wisdom and number, and the hearts of
the people inclined unto us, and the witness of God in many stired for us, for
to that in all consciences in our words and sufferings, and ways, we did
commend our selves to be known and approved.

And in the beginning we were but few in number, only a few that thus were
carried on and dealt with all and that had received the power from on high in
such a measure, and for such a work; and no sooner did the Lord appear to us,
and with us, but the Devil and his power rose up against us to destroy us, and
it wrought in Rulers, Priests, and people, and all the ways and means
invented by the Devil that could be executed by his servants were brought
forth, to quench the work of the Lord, and to stop our passage in what we were
called to; did ye but perfectly know, as we perfectly found the craftiness and
policy, and wickedness of the Devil, how to overcome this newborn babe? and
how to root out for ever this plant, that was newly sprang forth? it would make
you admire and wonder with admiration; all the priests and Rulers were in an
uproar, the Priests they petitioned to the Magistrates, and run up and down
from one sessions and Judicatory to another, and took wicked oaths and
slandered the just with lies and reproaches, on purpose to incense all people
against us, and the Magistrates gave forth warrants for the apprehending of
some, and made their orders to break our meetings, and that we should not meet
in the night season, and such men might not pass abroad, and such stir and
opposition was made against us, it can hardly be expressed or declared, there
was uproars in steeple houses, and uproars in markets, and often haling before
Magistrates, and abused, and threatened, and slandred, and all manner of evil
done, and spoken against us, and great injustice, cruelty and oppression acted
against us, where ever we came, and all through the means of the Priests, who
spared not to enact and conceive mischief against us, and sought daily to the
Magistrates for persecution, preaching in their Pulpits, and praying against
us, and setting days apart to seek their God against us, crying with out
ceasing in public and private, heresy, heresy, Error and blasphemy, and that
we were deceivers witches, and seducers, and such like the worst they could say
and Imagine to stir up the hearts of people against us, and running often to
the Assize and Sessions, and Counts to complain, and in form upon false oaths
against us, and through them were the whole countries in a rage and madness,
Rulers and people often imprisoning and abusing and resisting us with violence
banishing us out of towns, and putting of us out of our Innes, and often
threatening to burn the houses over our heads, the whole company of rude people
in a town, often gathering and besetting a house or Inn about where we were
entered to lodge, in our travels; we were often exposed to dificult and hard
travels and journies, giving our selves to the Cross, to take it up against
all earthly, often drinking water, and lying in straw in barnes, after a hard
days journey, and yet for all these things, the power and presence of the Lord
was with us, and we were carried on in much boldness, and faithfulness in
courage, and without fear or doubtings, through the often hazard of our lives
many ways in uproars by evil men, and in markets, and Steeple Houses, and also
in travels by robbers, and every way were we exposed to dangers, and perrils,
but through all and over all were we carried, and are preserved to this day.

And after this manner it came to pass concerning us, and much more might be
said, but this is in short declared how we were entreated, and dealt withal by
Priests, Rulers, and People, through all the Northern counties of England in
our first going forth, through which counties we first Journied out of
Westmerland, through Cumberland, Northumberland and into some parts of
Scotland, and Durham, Yorkshire, Lancashire, Chesshire etc. and in all these
counties much opposition we had, and exceeing sufferings, and cruel dealings
from men of all sorts, every Goal may witness, in every county, how any of
them seldom were without some of us, or our friends imprisoned in them this
six years, and scarce one steeple-house or market in all these counties, but
may witness what beating, what bruisings, strikings and halings, and abusings,
and perils we have suffered and sustained, and not one priest in all those
counties can clear himself from hatred and malice, and from envying of us,
and doing mischief in words, and works, or thoughts, or desires against us,
nor scarce one Justice nor any officer of the peace, can be excused in all them
counties from plotting and acting injustice upon us, and threating and enacting
cruelty against us; And I call Heaven and Earth to record, and the Light in
every man's conscience, and do appeal to that in all sorts and places of people,
that by all sorts of people we suffered evil, and unjust works and actions and
words from them, and let the witness of God in all men's consciences in all the
North, give testimony what dealings and cruelty we suffered, and how we have
been dealt withal, and also of our patience, and Innocence under all what they
have done to us.

But notwithstanding, all what was acted against us, and spoken, ma^^ hundreds
of the honest and sober people owned us, and also many rude and ungodly persons
were converted to the truth, I say many hundreds in all these counties in two
years time, were brought to the knowledge of the Lord, and to own us, all
which time we labored, and traveled in patience, giving up our selves to live
or to die, and to all manner of sufferings and reproaches, and hard trials,
that we might fulfill faithfully what we were called unto; sufferings without,
from open enemies, and from our own kindred and relations, and sufferings
within, for the seeds sake, and we are well acquainted with griefs, yet in all
our trials and afflictions, the Lord never forsook us, but his wisdom, love,
and life, and presence increased in us, and with us.

Then in the year 1654 as moved of the Lord, we spread our selves Southward,
and entered into these South parts, and came the first of us into this City of
London, in the fifth Month that year, and labored in the work of the Gospel,
in continual sufferings and oppressions diverse ways, and were oppressed and
gainsaid by the wisemen, and by the learned, and had in reproach and contempt
by all the high and lofty and proud professors, and we were set at naught and
rejected by the fat beasts of the South, and it is well known to thousands in
this City and South country, what opposition we have had from all sorts of
people, opposed in our own meetings, and scorned, and slandered by envious and
reproachful tongues, publicly and privately encountered withal by the wisest
of the City, and country challenged, invited, and engaged to disputes by the
high Priests and Church Members (so called) and written against, and printed
against, by the chiefest of men, accounted wise and religious, which of any
sect, and who of all the wisest in profession, and the most zealous in
practices of Religion, (so called) have not at some time or other beset us, and
encountered with us in high disputes and controversy, opposing of us to our
faces, and gainsaying our doctrines, and practices, and denying of us, and
resisting of us wholly, and crying against us to be deceivers, deluders and
heretics, and blasphemers, and such like, and that our doctrines were
deceivable, and error, and factious, and what not, and that our practices were
destructive to men, Laws, and Government? these things in the worst nature
have been spoken against us without ceasing, by the wisest and men of greatest
parts and most Religious (falsely so accounted) for this certain years in the
South, as well as in the North, besides what loss have we sustained other ways
in the South, by beatings, and strikings, and abuses, and slanders, and false
reproaches, and halings before Magistrates, and imprisoning, and all the like
dealing from Priests, Rulers and people, as we did in the North, yea, the same
hard dealing and cruelty from all sorts of people we have suffered, and do
daily, as we did in the North; Insomuch we are now accustomed to the yoke, and
well acquainted with sorrows and griefs from all sorts of people, and were
not the Lord on our side our enemies would swallow us up quick, and we had been
long since devoured by the teeth of the ungodly, so that I may now call to
witness all the Goales and prisons in the South, as in the North, and all the
Magistrates and Judges, and Rulers, and all officers of the Law, what
suff^rings we have sustained, and what cruel and heard dealing we have
undergone, and what injustice, and unequal and false judgment has been
executed upon us in this five years time, which of the Goals may appear free,
where some of us have not suffered the loss of our liberties unjustly? and who
of any Justice of the peace, or any other officer, from the Judge to the
Constable, that can clear themselves from guilt in this matter, and that they
have not had a hand in our unjust sufferings? and to the witness of God, in
all people of all sorts, through this whole Nation, and some other, I do appeal
concerning this matter, how we have been dealt withal, and what we have
sustained in our persons, and in our names, and how many acts and words of
cruelty and in justice we have borne and suffered, and these Priests been as
the fountain and cause of all this, and the foremost in all this iniquity and
injustice by all what they could do to incense the Rulers and people against
us, by Preaching, and praying, and writing, and printing, for the space of this
seven years, yet notwithstanding all this, the mighty power and presence of
the Lord have been with us, and preserved us from dangers great and many, and
carried us through trials and perplexities, and sufferings, and not only so,
but he has increased us in number; so that thousands and ten thousands have
and may own us, and the truth which we give witness of, and live therein? for
the eyes of all people are beginning to be opened, and the deaf ear is
unstopped, and the way of life eternal is made manifest, and the Lord is
gathering his flock, which has been scattered in the cloudy and dark day,
whilst these false idle shepherds, (these Priests and Teachers I mean) have
fed themselves with the fat, and clothed themselves with the wool, and laid
down in slumber, and not gathered the flock, nor fed them, but scattered them,
and driven them away; and with force and with cruelty have they ruled over the
heritage of the Lord; woe, woe, unto these sheepherds, says the Lord God, they
shall be confounded and put to shame perpetually, and they shall be broken down
and never builded any more, and the Lord will pluck them up by the roots, and
they shall never again be planted.

And besides all there Petitioning the Magistrates against us, and Preaching
and praying against us, and all the evil and wickedness, in work, word, and
desire brought forth against us from time to time; yet here (sober Reader) thou
have a Catalogue and whole number of books Printed and written against us, and
abundance of their Doctrines uttered against us, and in opposition to us,
gathered up in this volume in a sum, with our answers to them; and if thy heart
and mind be single, thou may hereby understand, in measure, the difference
in Doctrine between them and us, and compare each of them with the Scriptures,
and see whether their Doctrines and Principles laid down as the subject of
their books, or our Doctrines and Principles laid down in answer to theirs, be
according, and agree with the Scriptures, and if thou be impartial in this
business, and single in this search and Judgment, I doubt not, but thou will
in a great measure satisfy thy self, and be resolved concerning their Priests,
and Professors of England, and us who are called Quakers, and then when thou
thus have done, own and deny ^^^ther them or us, as the Lord shall persuade
thee; for thou may fully perceive we differ in Doctrines and Principles, and
the one thou must justify, and the other thou must condemn, as being one clean
contrary to the other in our Principles; And I wish also, thou would measure
us, and compare us in lives and conversations, and truly Judge whom of us,
whether they, or we do the more follow Christ and his Apostles in practice and
conversation; And in all things lay us and them to the line of true Judgment,
and with an upright heart, Judge accordingly; for know this, there is not any
Principle we hold, nor any work which we practice in our Religion and worship,
but we are willing, and fully desires we might be brought to the Bar of true
Justice together, and in every particular, of Principles and practices,
examined and tried to the full, and each of us judged in truth and equity,
whither it be they or us that are of the true Religion, and true faith, and
true worship of God that the Apostles were in, and which of us it is that are
in a wrong way, and in a false Religion, and false faith and worship, and in
this we will join issue with them, in the sight of the whole Nation, if they
will come forth to trial; if what already is brought forth by them against us,
and by us against them, for this seven years in disputes, and in printing, and
otherwise, be not sufficient for all people to try us in, and judge us by,
whether they, or we be in the right, and whether in the wrong. And now to all
people in the Nation, I do appeal to that of God in all their consciences, to
judge between the Priests and Professors, and all the Sects, and us, ye have
heard their Doctrines, and ye have heard something of ours, ye have seen their
conversation; and ye have seen something of ours, ye have heard them long, and
something of us ye have heard for a little season, and now give your evidence,
is it not with them as we have said? are not your Priests in the steps of the
false prophets and of the deceivers, and do not they seek for their gain from
their quarter, as they did that Isaiah cried against? do not they Preach for
hire and Divine for money, as they did which Micah cried against? are not they
such by whom you have not been profited, as Jeremiah cried against? let that of
God in you answer to these things; and are they not proud men, and covetous
men, and envious men, and heady high-minded men, and given to filthy lucre? and
are they not such as through covetousness makes merchandise of souls, and that
by good words and fair speeches deceives the hearts of the simple, such as Paul
and Peter declares against? And are they not such as the true Prophets, Christ
and his Apostles cried against? and do they not bring forth the same fruits as
did the false Prophets, and f^lse Apostles? I leave it to your consciences to
be the judge; compare them, and lay them to the line of true judgment, if you
shut not your eyes, you may see it is thus; and have we charged them falsely, or
have not we spoken the truth concerning them? we have said they are false
ministers and deceivers, and not true Ministers of Christ, and is it not so?
let the light in your consciences answer; we have said they have run, and never
was sent, and that they have not profited the people at all; and is it not so?
to the witness of God in you I do appeal, and let that justify that we have
spoken nothing but the truth; examine and try in all things that we have
charged them with, and are they not guilty in all things that we have charged
upon them? let the witness of God in you testify to this; and what do you
judge of them, are they not of that stock which Christ said should come, and
should be wolves in sheep clothing, and should deceive many, and which John
saw was come in his days, and which the world went after, and the whole world
run after them; are not they in the nature of wolves? devouring and tearing the
Lambs of Christ? and do they not tear people by causing their bodies to be
imprisoned and their goods to be spoiled? and do they not deceive many? and yet
they have the sheep clothing, the Saints words and their practices but
inwardly are they not ravening? and does not the world go after them, and has
not the world run after them for many ages; and is it not thus with them? And
have they received the gift of the holy Ghost, or are they not made Ministers
by the will of man, and not by the will of God? do they not differ and are
contrary in call, in practice, in maintenance, and in fruits and effects to the
true Ministers and true Apostles? and do they not agree, and are they not
according to the false Prophets, and false Ministers, and deceivers in their
call, practice, maintenance, fruits and effects? search the Scriptures, and lay
them to that line and then let the witness in your consciences judge and
answer, and do not they prepare War against such as does not put into their
mouths? and do not they feed with the fat, and cloth with the wool? do not
they oppress the Nation, and the Creation? and are not they such whose Call,
and practices and maintenance, and whole Ministry? has a dependence upon
Popery and does it not all savor of Popery, and in the main and Principal
parts thereof, were ordained by the Pope? this may be fully made manifest; And
are not all Professors, and Sects of people such as have the form but are
without the power of godliness? are not people still covetous, and earthly
minded, and given to the world, and proud and vain, even such as profess
Religion, and to a separated people? is not Professors as covetous, and proud,
as such as does not profess? and are not they given to the world, and does it
not show that they are unchanged nor translated, but death Reigns among them?
and is it not manifest that they have taken up the form, of the Apostles and
Christ's words and practices, and are without the life, and not guided by the
spirit of Christ and the Apostles in their praying and Preaching? and are not
your souls lean and starved; to the witness of God in you all I speak; which
may testify that many people have a show of Religion without life, and
therefore have not we spoken the truth of them, in what we have said? in the
day of Judgment you shall answer it.

And as concerning the Quakers, what do you say of them? you have seen their
conversation; few Towns but some of them have been and are amongst you; do not
they fear God? and do not they walk justly and truly among their neighbors,
and speaks the truth, and does the truth in all things, doing to all no
otherwise then they would be done unto? and are they not meek, and humble, and
sober? and do not they take much wrong, rather then give wrong to any? and are
they not such as delights in the ways of the Lord, and do not they deny the
world, and its pleasures, and forsakes all iniquity more then your selves? and
do not they take up the daily Cross of Christ to all its ways and earthly
glories? and do not they Preach in the power of God and reaches to your
consciences, when you hear them? and does not the light in you answer that they
speak the truth? and is not their Call and practice and maintenance the same as
was the Apostles and faithful Ministers? compare them with the Scripture, and
then Judge in your consciences; and do not they suffer many hard and cruel
things, even all manner of evil spoken and done against them falsely for the
Name of Christ? are you ignorant of their great sufferings through this Nation?
and what do you think, is their suffering for evil doing, or is it not for
righteousness sake? what harm do they do, to any, by work or word? why are they
reproached and mocked and scorned? and why are they put in prisons, and whipped
and thus sorely abused? is it for any evil doing, or is it not because they are
the servants of the Lord? compare their fruits with the Priests fruits, their
conversation with the Priests conversation, and see whether be liker the
Apostles; and these things I leave to you that you may come to consider and
judge justly of all things, for the Lord God is risen and his light in peoples
consciences is shining forth, and it shall answer to what I say, in this world
or in the day of Judgment, when we, and all mankind shall appear and come
forth to trial, and every man's work shall be tried, and all shall receive
according to their deeds.

And so gladly would we be made manifest to all the world; if that after the
reading of this book any be unsatisfied still in this matter, And if any,
especially of the heads and Rulers have doubts or Jealousies raised in them,
concerning us, and the Priests, and that they further would be satisfied and
resolved; for that end let any wise men propound for full satisfaction of all
sorts of people, that we (with the consent of the chief in Authority that have
power in this Nation who may preserve peace and safety among people, and
thereby to stop all Jealousies) may freely and cheerfully, four, ten, twenty,
thirty, more or fewer of us; give as many of the wisest and ablest of the
Priests and Professors a meeting for dispute, at any place in England, at what
place, time, and for what continuance, as they shall ascribe and consent unto,
and to dispute, and controvert betwixt us and them any such thing, and every
such particular as shall or may be objected, by any of the heads and Rulers, or
other grave understanding men, wherein they are doubful betwixt us, and would
thereof be satisfied, that by such dispute and opening of such causes,
objected, full, and real, and total satisfaction may be given to the whole
Nation, and every particular man and member therein.

Otherwise, Let the Priests or professors or any of them object what they can
against us, in our principles, profession, faith, and practice, and our whole
Religion; And if they shall affirm and allege any one or more things against
us, that any principle we hold, or practice we profess in any part throughout
all our Religion, are false Principles and false practices, and not according
to truth, nor the scriptures, but shall affirm that our Religion is not the
true Religion, nor we of the true Church of of Christ, and they shall have free
liberty, to give their best proof and reason for what they affirm, and
allege; yet by the strength of Christ, and in the power and authority of God,
and according to the scriptures we shall confute all their proofs and
strongest reasons; and on the contrary we shall join our Principles,
doctrines, and practices, and all our Religion, and every part and particular
thereof, to be the very truth, and agreeing with the scriptures, and according
to that shall maintain by lawful arguments, and plea, that our Religion and
worship, and all that we profess and Practice is according to the mind of the
Lord, and justified of him, and that whatsoever is and may be spoken against us
upon that account is utterly false, and to be condemned, and upon this we will
engage with them, and with any of our enemies, of what sect and profession
soever, to the intent only that truth may be manifest and embraced, and deceit
and Error discovered and denied.

And also, upon such an engagement we should agree to have the liberty, freely,
and soberly to object against the Priests, concerning their Ministry, their
call, their practice, their maintenance, and their fruits and effects, and
concerning their Church, and principles, and worship, and whole Religion, and
shall hear patiently all that can be said in defense thereof by any or all of
them, and shall prove by the spirit of the Lord, and according to the
scriptures, that their ministry is not the true Ministry of Christ, nor they
true and lawful Ministers of the Gospel, but shall manifest by evident
arguments, that their call, practice, maintenance, fruits and effects, are not
according nor agreeing, but contrary and differing, to what the true Ministry
was, and its call, practice, maintenance, fruits and effects were in the true
Apostles, and among the true Churches, and furthermore by the Grace of God we
shall prove their Church, their worship, and their whole Religion, in all parts
thereof, to be degenerated from what the true Church was, and the true worship,
and true Religion, in the days of the Apostles, and true Churches of old, and
these things shall we make manifest by faithful and sound arguments according
to the scriptures, that all the earth may know, and all people perceive who is
in the truth, and of the true worship and Religion, and who are in the
contrary, and whether the Priests, and that which they profess and practice
for Religion, or the Quakers, and that which they profess and practice for
Religion, be of God and according to him, and whether are contrary; that the
end of this long travel, and war and controvercy may be desided and justly
ended between us, and all people may be resolved, and satisfied concerning us,
and them that do oppose us.

And let all the Priests and professors lay aside and give over their houses of
correction, and imprisoning people, and whipping of them, and stocking of us,
and dealing in this manner of violence and cruelty, as for years bypast they
have done in defense of their Religion, and resisting of ours, and let them lay
aside their carnal weapons, and fighting against our persons, and imprisoning
of us about our Religion, and let them come forth in sound arguments, the best
they have, and let us see what spiritual weapons they have to resist us, and
defend themselves, and let us try, whether their spiritual weapons or ours be
the strongest, and the most powerful, and mighty, and let theirs that are so,
prevail against the other, be it ours, or theirs, and this is the way to try
the truth, and to make all things manifest, and to deside and end all the whole
controversies between us and them, which has been great this many years, and
let the truth be set up and exalted, where ever it is, and all deceit thrown
down to the ground, and let us war with the weapons of the spirit, against
error and false religion, one in the other, but lets not hurt creatures, nor
imprison persons, nor stock and whip creatures, and make them to suffer, but
let us thresh deceit, and whip and beat that, and all false opinions, let us
throw them down, where they are found, whether in them or in us, and let us
fight with the weapons of the spirit, that are spiritual, and let them sight no
longer with such cruel carnal weapons, and then let such as get the victory,
and overcomes, appear to be in the truth of the Church, and such as falls and
is overcome, be manifest to be in the error, and of the false Church and
Religion, and let us love one another persons, and let them act no otherwise
toward our persons, then we do upon theirs, and toward them, and let them
take the liberty to deal with us, and our persons, as we deal with them, and
their persons, and no otherwise.

And let such, whether them or us, that cannot prove ourselves to be the true
Church of Christ, nor of the true worship, and true Religion, nor in the truth,
but is found to be in the error, and out of the truth, let such deny their
worship and Church, and renounce all their Religion, and confess to all the
world, under their hands, that they are and have been deceived, and for ever
hereafter stop their mouths, and never profess nor practice any more what
they have done in such Religion; And freely upon these Issues and conditions we
will join trial with them, let them appoint time, place, and profer terms at
their own pleasure, and then to all the world it shall be manifest, and to all
people discovered, whether we have not good ground and sufficient reason, to
war against these Priests, and it may perfectly appear that what we have said
and written against them these diverse years, have been upon a good foundation,
and we have had sufficient cause to speak and write against them, as we have
done, and none thenceforth shall have cause to say, or doubt, that what we have
spoken and written against them has been out of malice or envy, and without
cause and good reason; but on the contrary all shall know the ground of quarrel
is sufficient and full of equity on our part.

And upon these or any equal terms and conditions, would we, and are we
willing to engage with these Priests, and all, or any one of these Sects, in a
lawful trial, in disputes, or writings, for the trial and searching out of the
truth, and the true Religion; And were it not equal and reasonable, that we had
the same liberty among all these Priests, and in their Church and Assemblies
freely to declare our minds, and to let forth our selves in what we hold and
profess, without being violently haled, and beat, and whipped, and sent to
prison, as we have been this many years; which liberty we do freely grant and
allow among us to all, to query, or declare what is upon them, without such
violent dealing, or whipping, or sending them to prisons and houses of
correction; and the same and no other do we desire of others in this particular
of freedom to declare the truth, and what we hold, then what we do and would
allow to others; and that no weapon be used by them against us, nor dealing
toward us, but the weapons of the spirit, the best they have, or can bring
forth against us, and let them let creatures alone, and not hurt nor do
violence to them, and no other weapons shall we use against them, nor deal with
them by any other thing, but the weapons of the Spirit of God, which is
powerful, and will bring down strong holds; and as for creatures, we shall not
hurt, nor do violence, nor imprison them, and whose weapons are the strongest,
let such overcome.

And such as are overcome, is not the true Church; for the true Church of
Christ which is builded upon the Rock, the gates of hell cannot prevail
against, and who does overcome, with such let it be manifest that God of a
truth is with them; and let them all cease to defend their Church and Ministry,
and Religion with prisons, and whips, and houses of correction, for by such
things was never the true Church, Ministry and Religion defended, but only the
power and Authority of God preserved them, and resisted all their enemies; and
so it is at this day; and let all cease to cry deceivers, and being afraid to
be deceived; for if they be the true Church, all, or any of these Sects and
Professions of Religions, then if we be deceivers, and come among them, they
cannot be deceived, if they be in the election; for no deceivers, nor the gates
of hell cannot prevail against the true Church of Christ, nor against them that
are elect, which the Devil has nothing in; And if we be the true Church of
Christ, and in the election, then if all the deceivers upon earth come among
us, they cannot prevail against us, nor deceive us; for the elect cannot be
deceived; and upon these terms, we may engage with any people and Sect upon
earth, therefore come to this, and join with us, take you the liberty to
declare in soberness what you own and profess, and you shall not be persecuted,
nor your bodies nor persons harmed by violence; and let us have that liberty to
deelare in meekness and soberness, and in Gods Authority, amongst you what we
hold and profess, and let us not be persecuted, and dealt violently withal;
and then let it appear whether we or our enemies has a greater testimony, and
more powerful in the hearts of people. And were not this a way full of equity
for the trial of all things? But doing contrary as you have done these many
years against us, by violence and whipping, and persecuting, it shows you have
not the spiritual weapons, nor the Authority of God with you, nor among you,
and that is the cause of running to Magistrates, and putting in Goals, and
whippings, and all violence, because the Authority of Gods spirit is wanting
amongst you, which all the false Sects and false Churches, since the days of
the Apostles, have wanted, to defend themselves and resist their enemies; and
so all sects have been fighting one with another, and killing persons and
creatures, and defended themselves, by prisons, and inquisitions, and
destroying of lives; and all this have been out of the power of God, and not in
it, but by the power of the Dragon, and of the Beast, who has caused all to
worship, and them that would not, he has had power to kill, and has killed
them, by fires, and tortures, and cruel deaths, and all these have lost the
spiritual weapons, and been without the power and Spirit of God; And what a
Church is this of yours which has need to be defended by Goals, and prisons,
and whips and stocks, and violent dealing? this Church is not the Church of
Christ, for the power and Spirit of God defends her always, and not
inquisitions, and prisons and whips, these are Cains weapons, and not the
weapons of the Spirit of God, whereby his true Church was ever defended; for
because Cains sacrifice was not accepted, therefore he slew his Brother, and
persecuted him; and thus you that are of Cains seed do the same, upon the same
ground, because your works are rejected and theirs accepted, with which you
deal thus; in this violent way of persecution and wickedness.

And this is the protestant Church (so called) and her Ministers, with whom I
am now dealing, which seems to be the true Church, and more then the Church of
Rome; for you Protestant Ministers do deny and cry against the Church of Rome
as a false Church, and her Ministers to be deceivers (which in it self is very
true) But yet your hypocrisy in this does appear, and your double-mindednesse;
for let me tell you while you cry against the Church of Rome as a false
Idolater, and a persecutor of the true Church, and against her Ministers to be
deceivers, and contrary to the Apostles, are not your spirits the same, and
your works the same in nature (though not in measure) and in particular, this
work of yours to imprison people, and whip them, and put them in the stocks,
and beat them, and abuse their persons and bodies, who does but speak against
you and your Religion? is not this work of the very same nature as the work of
the Romish Church? she to defend her Church has Inquisitions, and banishment,
and many cruel tortures, and with these things her Church she defends, killing
and afflicting of peoples bodies, that does oppose her Church and deny their
Religion, and you have stocks, and whips, and houses of correction, and putting
great fines and taskes upon people, and banishing people out of towns, and
spoiling their goods and casting men into Prison who does oppose your Church,
and deny your Religion, and is not this equal and justly according (in Nature)
to the persecution that is in the Romish Church? and what difference between
the defense of the Church of Rome and your Church of Protestants? they have
their inquisitions, and you have your houses of correction; they have their
slavery in the galleys, and you have whips, and stocks; they have their diverse
torments, and cruel dealings toward persons that oppose them, and upon their
bodies in one manner, and you have your torments and cruel dealings toward us
in an other manner, though not in the same measure, yet in the same nature; and
what difference between you and them? And herein does the hypocrisy of the
Protestant Church and their Ministers appear, in that they cry against and
denies the Church of Rome and their persecution and cruelty acted against
others, and yet in nature and manner does practice the very same upon us, as in
England this day is witnessed; And not only in this particular may the Church,
and Ministers of the Protestants be condemned for hypocrisy, but also in many
other things, even the most of their practices in their worship is of the same
nature, and by the same spirit, which the practices of the Church of Rome is
practiced by and in; and not only so, but it may be truly proved and made
manifest, that the original and institution of many of your Church practices
proceeded from the Church of Rome, and the Church and Pope of Rome did ordain
and institute many of your practices, and great a part of your worship, which
is performed in the church and by the Ministry of the Protestants (so called)
and this in its time and season I may make fully appear, and discover to the
Nations, and I may show in the particulars, what particulars of the worship and
practice in the Protestants Church had their first rice and beginning and
original in the Church of Rome, though they are minced and degressed with
diminishings and addings, according as their imaginations have guided them, yet
still they retain the strongest taste and savor of the Church of Rome, and
had their rice and original there, though in the performing thereof, they may
be altered and changed in appearance and form, but are perfectly the same in
ground and Nature, as springing from the Church of Rome, and she the mother of
the Protestant Church, and of the practices of the most of her performances in
worship, and this may be proved, as God willing upon occasion, as the Lord
moves, I may let forth my mind, and what I know in these things, and may show
though that the Church of the Protestants have disserted the Church of Rome,
yet their Ministry, its Call, and ordination, and its practice, and
maintenance, has a dependancy upon the Church of Rome, as being the original
of that which is by them therein practiced, though in some things deviated from
the perfect form and practice thereof; And also the whole worship of all the
particulars in relation to the Protestant Church, and Ministry, and worship,
has a dependence upon the Church of Rome, as being the first original thereof,
and though they cry against her and her Ministers, and have denied her, yet is
she the mother and womb in which was bred, and out of whom proceeded the
Protestant Church, Ministry, and worship, and practices, and this may be
manifest at full that the Protestants Church, Ministry, and worship, chiefly
tastes and savoureth of the Church and worship of Rome, and had their original
out of her; And also further may be showed, that the Protestant Church, and
worships and Ministry, are not an other in nature and being, then the Romish
Church, Ministry, and worship, but is sprung out thereof as a branch out of the
same root, the ground being one and the same though differing in appearance;
for in her beginning and first dissenting from the Romish Church, she did not
deny her in ground and being, as not being at all the Church of Christ, but
only in some particulars dessented always then, and to this day retayning
diverse of their practices in worship and Church government, which does show,
that the Protestant Church is not perfectly another, nor her Ministry, and
Government, and worship another then is the Romish Church; but is the same in
ground and being, only digressed and deviated in particulars; and this may be
fully manifest in season, that the protestant Church, and worship, and
Ministry, is of the Romish Church sprung as a branch out of her, not contrary
to her, and against her; and all these things is the Lord discovering and
laying open that Nations and peoples may come to behold the mother, of harlots,
that mystery of Iniquity, and all her children, and may see the state and
turning of times, and things, ever since the days of the Apostles, and true
Churches, and how that all these diverse sects, and all these Churches, falsely
so called, are risen up and sprung out one of another, and coming from one seed
and womb, and though diverse in appearances, and sundry in practices, and
professions, yet are they all one in the ground and nature, sprung from the
mother of harlots, all of them, and being her children, and she has corrupted
the Earth with her Fornications and Whoredoms, and made Nations and Kingdoms
drunk with her cup of idolatry; But the Lord God is risen and will plead with
her, and give her double, and the holy Prophets and Apostles shall rejoice over
her, and this is coming to pass, and this have I seen from the Lord, and
received it from him, and thus it came upon me to write.

THe waters have I seen dried up; the seat of that great Whore,
Who has made all Nations drunk, through her enticing power;
And caused the whole earth, she has, her fornication cup to take,
Whereby Nations have long time erred, on whom she long has sat;
But Peoples many are and shall, and multitudes all may,
And Nations be converted all, unto another way;
And tongues they are confounded now, and kindreds they must mourn,
And when this is all finished, her whole seat then is torn;
For these all be the great waters, on whom her seat has been,
And over whom she has governd', like as a stately Queen;
For ages many bypast gone, she has her Whoredoms played,
And Kingdoms has bewitched, and her power have obeyed,
But now her miseries are seen, her witchcrafts are discovered,
And she no more shall men deceive; for day light is appeared:
And the Bed woeful I have seen, of torments great prepared,
Whereon she must be cast, and plagues must not be spared,
But woe to her, the cup of wrath, is filled her to receive,
And as to others she has done, the same she shall now have:
And drink she must of that full cup of Gods fierce indignation,
And then shall all her lovers mourn, and make great lamentation,
And I have seen that City great, once populous, rich, and fair,
Laid waste, and all destroyed, and her Merchants despair,
Who through her have gotten gain, themselves for to exalt,
And from far come to traffic, but now they must lament,
For fire in her is kindled, which must her all consume,
Behold her smoke ascends, day and night, up to Heaven.
The Antichrist who has put on, and covered with sheep clothing,
And long ruled King, on Nations, Inwardly ravening;
Who has devoured Gods heritage, and had a Kingdom great,
I have seen him made war against, and truth give him defeat;
Behold, the Whore, her flesh is burnt, her beauty does now fall,
She that is all Harlots great Mother, whose daughters are Whores all,
Behold the City great, who once made Nations rich and high,
she is fallen to the ground and burnt, and none more profit her by,
Behold the Antichrist once great, his Kingdom is subduing,
The Lord alone for ever will rule, his Sons Kingdom is coming;
And the woman that long has fled, into that place of mourning,
And rested in the wilderness, she is again returning,
And her seed is again springing, and shall replenish Nations,
And the man-child must come to rule, for ever throw gen'rations;
And when this is all come to pass, O then rejoice and sing,
Ye Prophets and Apostles all, and heavenly children,
When God has you avenged, upon your enemies all,
Then is the day of praises, for Saints both great and small.
London the 9. Mo. 1658. By a Servant of Christ Edward Borough.

HEar are the Principles of Priests and Professors and Pastors in the Apostasy,
which have got up since the days of the Apostles, that in this day are risen
against the Lamb, and against the Saints, which since the days of the
Apostles, the Beast has had power, the false prophet and Mother of Harlots,
which inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, which has had the sheep
cloathings, and by that men's has deceived the Nations, and got in the Kings of
the earth, and clothed them with the outside, whereby the Kings of the Earth,
and the Beast and false Prophet, Dragon, Devil, Mother of Harlots, and the
great Whore has joined in one, together against the Saints, then overcame
them, and cast them into prison, and drunk the blood of the Saints and Prophets
and martyrs, but now shall the Saints and the Lamb have the victory, who kills
and slayes with the sword, which are the words of his mouth, agreeble to the
Apostles doctrine who wrestle not with flesh and blood; now the Beast, false
prophet and Mother of Harlots, Devil and Antichrist, that drunk the blood of
the Saints, that have the sheeps clothing, these are the killers with the
sword, the slayers with the sword, the imprisoners and persecutors, which was
not the work of the true Apostles, true Ministers that kept the faith and
patience of Jesus, the Martyrs suffered, the Saints suffered, the Prophets
suffered, now these was in the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, now the
others got the Scriptures, Antichrists, false prophets, Mother of Harlots, the
Devil, the beast and all his names, which killed and slew with the sword, these
are inwardly ravening from the Spirit of God, the spirit of the Lamb, the
spirit of the Apostle, who killed and slew with the sword, which are the words
of his mouth; so all these names in the whole Christendom amongst all that are
called Christians are got up amongst them since the days of the Apostles,
which be gone out of the life, and faith, and spirit they were in which they
had unity in, which was the bond of peace, which have had the words but ravened
from the life, and so are all on heaps about the words, and giving one another
names, so look in whole Christendom and see what abundance of names there be,
which should be one family, and all these names, Horns and Crowns, and building
up and throwing down, which is all a mark among them that have had the words
but out of the life, which now the life is risen which the Apostles lived in,
which they since the days of the Apostles have been out of, in many names, and
heaps in the Apostasy, now with the life is all this fathomed and comprehended,
in which is the unity, which life brings people to know God, and unity with him
and with Scriptures, and one with another, and all are one here, if there be
ten thousand times ten thousand; And who reads over this book you may read
things, and see things, which you never read nor saw Printed; did ever the
Lambs worry the wolves? and did not the wolves get the sheeps clothing and
ravened after the sheep and Lambs, that they might get among them? pride and
wildeness and pleasure has swallowed up people, teachers and Minsters, that if
any be sober, and still, presently he is a Quaker; and thus modesty is eaten up.

A TABLE Showing in what page the several principles and answers begins.
SAmuel Eaton his book called the Quakers confuted. Page. 1. John Bunyan,
Rich. Spenceley, John Burton, John Child their book book called, A vindication
of a book, called some Gospel truths opened. pa. 8. Doctor Glissons paper
concerning James Parnels death. pa. 13. Georg Emmot who calls himself a
spiritual Quaker converted. pa. 14. Henoch Howet his book called the quaking
principles dashed to pieces. p. 14. John Timpsons book called the Quakers
Apostasy, from the perfect rule of the Scriptures discovered. p. 15. Richard
Baxters book called the Quakers Catechism. pa. 27. A book called the Quaking
mountebanck, etc. pa. 31. Elis Bradshawes book called the Quakers whitest
devil. pa. 32. Francis Blakes book called choice collections of Scripture
against the practice of the Quakers, etc. pa. 33 Luke Fawn, Samuel Gellibrand,
Joshua Kirton, John Rothwel, Thomas Underhil, Nathaniel Web, their book called
a second Beacon fiered. pa. 33. John Toldervies book called the foot out of the
snare. p. 34. Thomas Colliers book called the looking-glass for Quakers. pa.
36. John Deacons book called a public discovery of a secret deceit, pa. 39.
George Willington, his book called the Gadding Tribe reproved. p. 43. Joshua
Millers book called Antichrist in man the greatest Idol. p. 45. Ralph Halls
book called the Quakers principles quaking. p. 49. Richard Baxters book called
a second sheet to the Ministry, justifying our call against the Quakers etc. p.
52 Thomas Higginson his book called the Testimony of the true Jesus. p, 55
Jeremiah Ives his book called Innocence above impudency, etc. p. 61. Francis
Harris his book called, queries to the Quakers, etc. p. 65. Francis Higginson
his book caled, a brief relation of the Religion of the Northern Quakers. p.
66. Francis Fulwood his book called a true relation of a dispute. p. 72. Thomas
Weld, Rich. Prideaux, Samuel Hammond, William Cole, Will. Durant, Ministers of
New Castle, their book called the perfect Pharisee. p. 74. Thomas Pollard a
member of the Church about Lichfield, his book called the holy Scripture
clearing it self from scandals. p. 78. Ralph Farmers book called Satan
enthroned in his Cheer, etc. p. 82 Magnus Bine his book called the scornful
Quakers answered. p. 83. Robert Simpson, Robert Purnil, John Andrews, Thomas
Ewen, Brian Hanson, Richard Moon, their book called the Church of Christ in
Bristol recovering her vail. p. 92. Jonathan Clapham and William Jenkin their
book called a discovery of the Quakers doctrine to the Protector. p. 95.
William Thomas of Ubly his book called a vindication of the scriptures and
Ministers. p. 104. Jeremiah Ives his book called the Quakers quaking. p. 110.
William Dells book called a stumbling-stone. p. 113. Giles Firmin his book
called stablishing against shaking. p. 154. Thomas Collier his book called a
Dialogue between a minister of the Gospel and an inquiring Christian. p. 120.
John Billingsly his book called strong comforts for weak Christians. p. 123.
Immanuel Bourn his book called a defense of the scriptures, and the holy spirit
speaking in them. p. 127. Priest Gifford of Bedford his principle answered. p.
129. Tho. More his book called A defense against the poison of Satan's design. p
129 Thomas Mores book called an Antedote, etc. p. 132. Matthew Caffin his book
called the deceiving Quaker discovered. p. 139. William Jefferies his book
called Antichrist made known. p. 144. The agreement of 58. Ministers of Christ
(as they call them selves) in the county of Worcester and parts adjacent. p.
146. John Stalham his book called the Reviler rebuked. p. 150. Ralph Farmers
book called the Great Mystery of godliness and ungodliness. p. 172. Edward
Boules his book called the duty and danger of swearing opened. p. 178. Samuel
Hamond his book called the quakers house built on the sands. p. 182. Priest
Bennets Looking-glass. p. 187. Thomas Tillam his book called the seventh day
Sabbath. p. 190. John Burton, and John Bunion their book called some Gospel
truths. opened. p. 205. W. P. His book entitled, according to truth, that
Quakes not, trembles not nor quails. p. 212. The Elders and Messengers of
several Churches in Wales their book called an Antedote against the infection
of the times. p. 214. A book entitled the Quakers cause, p. 216. John Jacksons
paper entitled strength in weakness. p. 217. A book entitled Hosana to the
Son of David. p. 219. Ellis Bradshaw his book called the Quakers quaking. p.
223. Thomas Weld, Richard Prideaux, Samuel Hamond, Will. Coals, William Durant
their book called a discovery of a generation of men called Quakers. p. 227.
Worcester-shiers petition to the Parliament, said to be six thousand. p. 223.
William Thomas of Ubly his book called railing rebuked, or a defense of the
Ministers. p. 237. R. Sherloch his principles. p. 242. John Wallace Priest of
Kendal, William More Priest of Kellet, and Priest Walker their principles. p.
244. Gawen Eglesfield, and Ambros Dickinson their principles answered. p. 245.
Christopher Wade his book called Quaking slain. p. 246 Henry Haggers book
called the holy scripture clearing it self. p. 251. Thomas Leadger his book
called a discourse. p. 254. Thomas Leadgers Antiquakers assertions answered. p.
257. A book called a serious reveiw of some principles of the Quakers. p. 257.
James Brown his book called Antichrist in spirit. p. 259. Philip Bennet Priest
of Cartmel his principles answered. p. 260. Adam Sands, Roger Atkinson, R.
Stoakes, their principles answered. p. 261. G. Johnson, James Morrison, G.
Larcum their principles answered. p. 262. John Owen's Catechism. p. 263. S.
Palmer and R. Hook their book called the form of sound words. p. 264. Richard
Baxters one sheet for the Ministers. p. 266. John Cole his book answered. p.
272. Alexander Rosse his book called a view of all Religions, p. 272. Richard
Mayo Priest of Kingston his Doctrine. p. 274. Seth Bushel Priest of Whitley
answered. p. 279. Edward Price and Philip Langford their Principles. p. 279.
Enoch Howet and Thomas Hodges their Principles. p. 280. Richard Heath and
Daniel Gaudry their Principles. p. 281. Philip Taverner his book called the
Quakers Rounds. p. 283. The Brownists Principles. p. 284. John Turners
Principles. p. 285. The Ranters Principles answered. p. 286. Francis Duke his
book called, the fullness and freeness of Gods grace. p. 286. Enoch Howet his
book called the Doctrine of the light within. p. 290. Priest Fergison his
Principles. p. 292. Priest Jacus and Edward Briggs their Principles. p. 294.
Ellet and Crab and Priest Fowler their Principles. p. 295. Lamb the Baptists
teacher and some of his company their Principles. p. 296. William Greenhill
Priest of Stepny his principles. p. 297. John Gilpin, Thomas Craster, Thomas
Sands, John Archer, Edward Turner, Priest Walker, their book called a relation
of the Quakers shaking. 297 Thomas Collier, Nathaniel Strange, Thomas Glasseys
their paper to all the Churches, etc. p. 299 Richard Baxter, etc. a paper
called the judgment and advice of the Assembly. of the Associated Ministers.
p. 301. The agreement and resolution of several of the Associated Ministers in
the County of Cork. p. 303. John Stillams book called margent notes. p. 306.
P. Taverner of West Drayton his book in reply to Edward Borough. p. 308.
Edward Skip his book called the worlds wonder. p. 311. Priest, Baptist, Tombs
of Lemster his principles. p. 317. A book called a form of sound, etc. p. 319.
Some of the Principles of the Priests of Bishopric. p. 321. Daniel Roberts
teacher to the baptists in Reading his principles. p. 323. Timothy Trevers his
Principles. p. 324. The Doctrines and Principles of the Priests of Scotland. p.
327. The Principles of 15. Priests of the Isle of Weight. p. 361. W. S. his
book called the Parsons guide. p. 369. Thomas Hodges of Soldren in Oxfordshire
his book called a Scripture Catechism. p. 369. Several Scriptures Corrupted by
the Translators. p. 373.
An ANSWER to many Principles held forth by some of those called Ministers,
Teachers and Professors in England, taken out of their several Books, with
their names at them: And also several other Sayings and Writings of the Priests
and Professors of this Nation, gathered up together, and Answered.
Samuel Eaton (who calls himself a Teacher of the Church of Christ at
Stockeport in Cheshire) In his Book called, THE QVAKERS Confuted, sent to the
Parliament,
SAYS in his Epistle to the Parliament, then sitting at Westminster, That they
are not to judge of Saintship according to the large charity of some who are
truly good, etc.

Ans. So here is another Doctrine then Christ's was, who said, The tree is known
by its fruits, and by their fruits ye shall know them. And the fruits of the
Spirit is known from the fruits of the flesh.

Again, in the conclusion of his aforesaid Epistle he begs a pardon of the
Parliament, for the thoughts of his heart that he has spread before them, and
so puts them in the Popes place.

Likewise in his Epistle to the Reader, because Richard Waller witnesses his
Teacher within, and bids others to mind the Light within them; and that he was
come off of all other Teachers, etc. he judges this to be delusion; Contrary
to John the Apostle, who says, Ye need no man to teach you, but as the same
anointing does teach you, which is truth, and is no lie, John 2.27. And again
in Heb. 8. Ye shall not teach every man his neighbor, and every man his
brother, saying, Know the Lord, for they shall all know him from the least to
the greatest: for the Lord will write his law in their hearts, and put his
spirit within them, etc.

Prin. He says, he does not believe that there is any substantial,
essential, or personal union betwixt the eternal Spirit and believers?

Answ. Although the Scripture says, the spirit dwells in the Saints, 1 Cor. 6.
and he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit, 1 John 1. As though the Saints
had not union with God, which the scriptures says they have.

Prin. He says, It is palpably false, and blasphemy to say, that Saints know
all things, and have power to work miracles to the glory of God.

Answ. Contrary to the Minister of Christ, John, who says, But ye have
anointing from the holy one, and know all things, 1 John 2.20. And Christ said,
Greater things then these shall ye do that believe in me.

Prin. He says, Though we believe that the spirit of Christ dwells in the
Saints, yet we assert the spirit of Christ to be distinct from the Saints, etc.

Answ. How are they led by the spirit, how are they led into all truth? And how
are they sanctified by the spirit, and their unity in the spirit? by which
spirit they have unity with God; by which spirit the Saints worship him; And he
that is joined to the Lord is one spirit; He that has not the spirit of Christ
is none of his. And so they are distinct from it; but they are not so that have
it, and be in unity with it, and one with another with God.

Prin. He says, Although there be the same spirit in all the Saints that gave
forth the Scriptures, yet all Saints have not the same inspiration of the
spirit, that the Prophets and Apostles had, so as that they should be able to
give forth infallible truths, and immediately discover the pure and clear will
of God, as the Prophets and Apostles did.

Answ. In this his Ignorance of the spirit, he has showed, and of the holy
Ghost: And himself is the false spirit gone out into the world: For the spirit
of truth shall lead into all truth, and bring to memory Christ's words, and does
inspire into them the things of God, and does reveal to every one according to
their measure.

Pr. The Spirit does not communicate according to the capacity in the creature.

Ans. Then there is none can divide the word aright; and God gives to every man
as he will, and reproves the world, and leads the Saints into all truth.

Prin. He says, they had not known the signification of the words of Christ,
but by the Evangelists, etc.

Ans. I say, he, nor none knows the signification of Christ's words, by the
Evangelists words, but by the Evangelists spirit, and the same inspiration
which thou say, thou looks not for.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures do give their own sense, and is a standing Rule,
etc. And yet thou said a little before in page 4. They are dark, and are left
to you to give a sense.

Ans. Here then thou confoundest thy self; and the spirit of God is the
standing rule which leads them to speak forth scripture, and not others words,
and the Prophets and Apostles words, did not lead to speak forth scripture, but
the spirit.

Pr. He says, They that have the anointing within them, had not an infallible
judgment, etc?

Ans. And John says, They know all things; and bid them try the spirits,
whether they were of God: And said, they had the spirit of God, which spirit is
infallible, and gives an infallible judgment, which spirit was to try the
false Prophets that was gone out into the world.

Pr In some places thou said, the Scriptures were dark, and hard to be
understood;

Ans. And here thou says, it is plain, and easily to be understood, page 8.
Mark thy confusion, for the Scripture is not understood without the spirit.

Pr. He says, there is an infallible judgment, which may be made from the
Scriptures without the spirit, page 9.

Ans. Who can judge infallibly without the spirit? Christ told the Pharisees
(who had the Scriptures) They were of the Devil, and judgment they had
neglected, and he did not own their judgment to be infallible. And the Apostle
says, what they knew who are separate from the spirit, they knew naturally as
bruit beasts, Jude 10. and 19. though they may speak high words in hypocrisy.
And there art thou with thy infallible judgment as thou said, without the
spirit (which is proved fallible) and there is no infallible judgment to be
given that stands without the spirit; they that judges without the spirit, will
judge amiss, and not infallible, as the Jews did of Christ, and as the
natural bruit beasts did which Jude speaks of, there art thou.

Pr. And he further says there in the same page, That the Scripture is to be
judge of the spirit, and a light sufficient to judge of Doctrine and manners,
etc.

Ans. The Jews had not infallible judgment that had Scriptures, but stood
against Christ the Light, and judged him to be a Devil, that judgment was not
infallible, and that doctrine and manners of theirs was not right; which stood
against Christ the light.

Pr. He says, the conclusion is, that the Scriptures is the foundation of an
infallible judgment concerning things contained in them, and not the spirit,
page 10.

Ans. So he has thrown out God and Christ, and the spiritual man who was
before the Scripture was, who was the cause of the giving them forth, and the
inspiring them through the Saints, which the Scripture says, shall judge the
world, yea Angels. And he may say upon this conclusion, that the world and the
Devil has the Judge, for they will get Scripture.

Pr. He says, He that can bridle his tongue is not a perfect man.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Apostle James, who says he is, and so thou art
out of James doctrine.

Pr. But the Saints have not Christ in the flesh, page 12.

Ans. Contrary to Christ and the Apostles Doctrine, who said, they were of his
flesh and of his bone, and should eat his flesh, and they that eat his flesh
have it in them.

Pr. He says, Christ within sufficient for all things to teach them, and to
make them perfect as he is, and as God is. Now says he, such an having of
Christ as this is, we assume not, nor dare not assume: And we declare against
it as a Satanicall delusion, and the Quakers are the poor creatures that
confesses this in them, page 13.

Ans. And you that are not made perfect by Christ the truth, you remain out of
truth, in the delusion, and so you be out of the Apostles doctrine.

Pr. The Pastor says, That such a voice as comes immediately from God we have
not heard, and such an immediate inspiration as this from God we have not
received, nor do we wait for it, page 13.

Ans. So showing himself to be of them that God never sent: So you are as the
Jews that could say, Moses heard the voice of God, and the Prophets heard the
Lords voice. But their own ears stopped to the voice. For Christ said, Ye have
not heard the voice of God at any time. And ye say ye look not for it: and you
that deny immediate inspiration, have denied the powers and the spirit, for
that is immediate, and the Ministers of Christ witness it.

Pr. All that prays by the spirit, and speaks by the spirit, and does not show
a miracle, these the Pastor says are Impostors, page 14.

Ans. Which many prayed by the spirit, and spoke by the spirit, did not show
miracles at the Tempters command, though among believers there be miracles in
the spirit, which be signs and wonders to the world, as Isa says. But these
are the Impostors that prays, and speaks, but not by the spirit of God.

Pr. Because the Quakers say, that such as preach and speak, but not by the
Spirit of God, are the false Prophets which the Lord never sent, this the
Priest says is an evil design, wherein lies venom and poison.

Ans. Which they were and are in the evil design, that spoke not, nor preached
not from the spirit of God, and lies in the venom and poison.

Pr. He says, though Christ was then in heaven, and spoke not, page 15.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, who said, he had spoken to him, and has spoken
to us by his Son, as Acts and Hebrews.

Pr. He says, all that are brought to the faith of Christ, are not built upon
an immediate voice that comes from God to themselves, nor to any others who are
their Teachers. See page 15.

Ans. Who shows he never received faith from God, which from him is given,
which faith is immediate: through which faith they have access to God who is
immediate, and he goes about to overthrow all Teachers made by the will of God,
and by Christ, and the Revelation of Jesus; for how can they be Ministers, if
they have not the Ministry revealed to them? So, he does not know the Son that
denies revelation, nor the Father, and denies themselves to be any true
Ministers but by man's will, which is not immediate, which is the spirit, which
ministers of the spirit, and are immediate in the spirit, which thou art no.

P. He says, That there may be much fallacy and delusion in Revelation.

The Pastor says, That God did not intend immediate teaching, nor to give out
an immediate voice in after ages, which should direct and guide men in the ways
of salvation, page 16.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scripture, which says, All the people of the
Lord shall be taught of the Lord; and he that is of God hears Gods word; and
that is immediate, and lives, and does endure for ever. And there is no fallacy
nor delusion in the Rev^lation of God, but all fallacy and delusion is out of
it.

Pr. And he says, Timothy had not his knowledge immediately, and yet he was in
the faith. And he says there again, the faith which was once delivered
immediately from heaven to the Saints, cuts off all from having any faith more
delivered from heaven, and of all other immediate voices from thence.

Ans. So he has shut out Christ who is the Author of every man's faith, which
every one is to look at Christ which was before Scripture was: That which was
once delivered to the Saints, and given to the Saints, the Saints now must know
their giver, and deliverer, and must know from whence the faith comes in this
age, as well as in the other age. For if they have but words that speaks of the
Saints faith, how they had their faith delivered from God; If that the Saints
now have not their faith delivered to them from God, as they in ages past, they
have but words: And as the Devil had, and stood against the author of the
faith, Christ the light and the truth, as the Jews had of the Saints, but out
of their faith, and stands against them that be in it. And Timothy had
immediate teaching, for he had the testimony of the Lord, 1 Timothy and thou say
he had not immediate teaching.

Pr. He says, there must not be waiting for an immediate word, but that word
which has been already to the Prophets and Apostles, which none have the word
spoken as it was to the Prophets and Apostles, they must have it immediately,
etc. page 17.

Answ. The word that was spoken to Isaiah, the Apostle felt immediately, which
the Pastor says he did not; for there was no Scripture but came by immediate
inspiration. And the Word is immediate, and all the Ministers of Christ preach
the immediate word, and wait for it, and the outward written words with ink
and paper are mediate.

Pr. He says, but an overcoming of the body of sin, such as delivers from all
sin in this world is expressly against the Scriptures, and made free from sin,
etc. page 18.

Ans. Contrary to Romans 6. Contrary to the Apostle to the Colossians, where he
had put off the body of sin. And contrary to Christ, who saves and cleanses
from all sin by his blood, blots out all sin: And if Christ be in you, the body
is dead because of sin.

Pr. He says, that Christ is in heaven in his humanity, therefore not to be
seen, not to be heard, not to be handled by us or any others that live upon
earth, and they cannot give their own assurance, etc. page 19.

Ans. So shows that they were never made Ministers by him, who never saw him,
nor heard him, so never handled the word of life from the Father nor the Son,
nor saw it, nor heard it, so are the Pastors that spoil the flock. And he is
the earthly Adam and humanity, but Christ the second Adam is the Lord from
heaven.

Pr: He says, that Timothy was commanded to preach, and yet had not heard, nor
seen, nor handled any thing of Christ, etc. page 20.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, who bid him to stir up the gift in him, and told
Timothy he was in the faith, and he was to be strong in the grace of Christ:
And whosoever has faith, knows Christ to be the Author of it, and knows
something from Christ, and so thou thy self have confuted.

Pr. He says, that the Saints does not see Christ, for the heavens contain
him, page 20.

Ans. And the Apostle says, they sat with Christ in heavenly places, so he is
contrary to the Apostle: And Christ was in them, and walked in them, and God
dwelt in them, and Christ in you, except ye be reprobates?

Pr. He says, the whole mind and will of Christ and God is left them in
letters, page 21.

Ans. And the Apostle says, it is past finding out; the unsearchable wisdom,
and the secret things belongs to God, and are revealed by the spirit, and no
man knows them but by the spirit.

Pr. And he says, the Gospel is the Letter, etc.

Ans. And the Apostle says, It is the power of God; and the letter kills, and
many may have the form, and deny the power, and so stand against the Gospel,
which is the power of God.

Pr. And he says, the Devil shows his spite and spleen in them who say they
have the word, as it was in the beginning against the Scriptures, etc. page 22.

Answ. That is not so; for they that have the word as was in the beginning, own
the Scriptures, and are not against them, but are in that which fulfils them.

Pr. He says, that all the Saints receive the spirit of Christ, yet never
heard his voice.

Ans. This is confusion, for who are the sheep of Christ know his voice.

Pr. He says, they are uncovered, when commonly they have two caps on their
heads: and the people are covered when they have a hat on their heads, etc.
page 29.

Ans. This is according to thy deceitful teaching and learning.

Pr. He says, the Scriptures is the voice of Christ to them, etc.

Ans. And Christ said to them that had the Scriptures, They never heard the
voice of God at any time, to the Pharisees, John 5. For there thou art un-put
forth amongst the sheep, and they heard the voice that gave forth the
Scripture, and came to the life, and Christ at the end of them.

Pr. And he says, there is an immediate voice which speaks within, which we
have never heard, nor do we know it within our selves experimentally, and we
believe and hope that we never shall know it, etc. page 30.

Ans. And so shows that they never knew the spirit of the Father speaking
within them, but follows their own dreams and spirits, and stops their ear
against that of God in them; and they bless themselves from that immediate
voice within, and calls it the voice of the Devil, which is the spirit of
inspiration, and the word of God in their hearts, which men must obey and do.

Pr. And he says, to say Christ is within them, doing all immediately and
infallibly within them, and so do say it is Christ and the spirit within them,
and not they.

Ans. Now this he calls a spirit of Delusion: And the Apostle says, I live,
yet not I, but Christ in me. And he works all in us, and for us, after his own
good pleasure. And this was not a spirit of delusion in them. And this thou art
reprobated from, and found in thy own works.

Pr. And he says, That which is within them is not eternal and infallible,
when the Quakers asked him whether it was or no, and he says nay; that which
judges in them is not eternal, and infallible. He says, they assert no such
things as that concerning themselves, And he says, though all the Saints have
the spirit of Christ dwelling in them, which is eternal and infallible; yet
that this spirit should do all that Saints do, and should say all that Saints
say, and should judge for them both for persons and of things after an
infallible manner; and that they should neither say, nor do, nor judge any
thing by any understanding of their own, but the spirit, all this we deny.
These are his words, page 31.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Apostle, who says, As many as are the sons of
God, are led by the spirit of God. And Christ acts all in them, and for them;
and the fruits of the spirit, etc. and the spiritual man judges all things.
And that is it which leads the Saints to devide and discern all things both
temporal and spiritual, the spiritual wisdom of God which gives them a
spiritual understanding, which men must rule withal, but not with their own,
that comes to naught; and you that have not that which is infallible to judge
in you, know not the spirit of Christ, neither can you judge of persons or
things that have not the infallible judgment, nor have the spiritual man.
Neither have you the word of God in your hearts, nor Christ which is eternal
and infallible, all which the Quakers have to judge persons and things.

Pr. He says, that children are of the seed as to the Church privileges, and
external Ordinances of a spiritual nature.

Ans. (Mark his confusion) But Christ says, ye must be born again, or else ye
cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven, and such be of the Church.

Pr. He says, If they can but destroy all forms, the power will fall with it;
for the form preserves the power, page 37.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, many have the form, but deny the power. The
power preserves the form, sees the end of forms, and destroys them, and brings
to see before forms was, where forms is not. For the Apostles who lived in the
power, denied the Jews forms, and Gentiles both, as we do now deny the Popish
forms, and yours which you have invented and set up.

Pr. And an immediate teaching (he says) of the spirit, and to wait for secret
inspiration of God, is to subject men to satannicall delusions, etc. page 40.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, who said, holy men of God spoke as they were
moved by the holy Ghost, and they were to wait for the revelation, as in Peter,
and all be in the Satanical delusion that be not in the immediate teachings
from the spirit: And every one that has this spirit, and the leading of the
spirit has that which is immediate.

Pr. He says, the Prophets and Apostles drew people to an outward word, etc.

Ans. Now is that which lives and endures for ever, outward? and did not they
bring them to Christ the power of God, which is the end of words, which is
immediate?

Pr. He says, Is not the Gospel an external way, etc?

Answ. No, the Gospel is a living way which is revealed within, and is the
power of God to salvation.

Pr. Are not they seduced (says he) who are drawn off from the external means
by which the spirit is given, and faith wrought, to wait for the receiving of
the spirit without any word to convey it to them? which spirit when they have
it, is not the spirit of truth, but of delusion, etc. page 41.

Ans. The spirit and faith is not conveyed to any man, without the word, and
they are seduced that rests in the external from the eternal, and the spirit
is not given by external means, neither is faith wrought.

Pr. And he says, They need not any man's teaching them, but as the spirit in
the Scriptures teaches, and they need not that any teachings of man should be
added.

Ans. And so by this he has thrown out himself from being a Pastor, and all
other Pastors and Teachers; and the spirit is not in the Scriptures, but in
them that gave it forth. And the spirit which gave forth the Scriptures, which
was in the Saints, opens the Scriptures again, and leads into all truth.

Pr. And he says, there is an excess in that Scripture which says, Ye need
no man teach you, but as the anointing teaches you.

Ans. And here he makes as if John did not mean as he spoke, and would make
John as false as himself (who spoke truth.)

Pr. And he says, the Apostles sayings to the Saints, And ye know all things,
he calls it an excessive speech, for no one knows all things but God, page 42.

Ans. So contrary to John, and would make him a liar, the Minister of God. So
he is in the false spirit gone out into the world. Contrary to 1 John 2. who
knew all things.

Pr. He says, Outward teaching is the way and means whereby the deep, and
profound, and necessary truths of Scripture come to be understood, but not
immediate, page 44.

Ans. So he has denied the spirit to open the Scriptures, immediate
inspiration by the spirit, and its teaching; and set up an outward in the room
of it. Here his spirit is tried again, gone out into the world. For salvation
is immediate, and the means that brings to it, and none knows the Scriptures by
outward teaching, but immediately by the Lord God.

Pr. And he says, Ministerial gifts are not now to be found in the world,
such as the Mininisters of the Gospel had in the Primitive time.

Ans. Therefore no such work ministerial now as was then, nor any such officers
as P^stors, Teachers, etc. as was then.

Ans. He has preached himself to be one of the false spirits which went forth
from the Apostles into the world: And yet he says, Christ is with them to the
end of the world. And yet says, no hearing of his voice, nor seeing him, nor
handling of him; so he has confuted himself, and has showed you he has
quenched the spirit among you all.

Pr. He says, that the Apostle was silent in that point, that men must be
endued with extraordinary gifts.

Ans. Which the Apostles Epistles prove to the contrary, who says, without
faith ye cannot please God; which is a gift, and an extraordinary gift, and
says, He that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his, which is an
extraordinary gift. So you are another Ministry, and other Pastors and
Teachers, and that which is another gift then the Apostle, is not the gift of
God.

Pr. He says, How comes the Apostle to raise up a living to some persons for
preaching, when he says, That they that preach the Gospel, must live of the
Gospel? etc. page 48.

Ans. It was contrary to the Apostle to preach to raise up a living for
preaching; but says, they were not to preach for filthy lucres sake. But they
that preach the Gospel, live of the Gospel, that is not as you raising Livings,
making a trade of the form, and denying the power, which is the Gospel.

Pr. Here he cries out against gifted men's preaching, and says, Paul
prophesied against them, page 49. and names them to be such as have itching
ears.

Ans. As he is gone out from the Apostles, and so cries up his imagined gifts
his own gifts, which the Apostles did not cry against, but said, every one must
minister that had received a gift, and thou art one of the itching ears gone
out from the Apostles.

Pr. He says, that their Synagogues (commonly called Churches) were not
ordained for any spiritual uses, as for serving God in them, etc. pa. 51.

Ans. Which is contrary to all the professed Teachers in the Nations, who say
they are ordained for the use and service of God, and calls them Churches; but
to this I believe he will call his words back again.

Pr. And to break Christ's command, be not of men called Master.

Ans. He calls it a civil honor, Pharisee-like, a teacher of the Pharisees.
And here he has proved himself not to be a guide of the way, and the governor
of a man's life, for that title, Master, belongs to Christ, and not to any man.
These are his words, and the signification which he gives of that title there.
See page 52. And yet he dare presumptuously take it, and plead for it (which
Christ denied in the Pharisees) and so impudently break Christ's command, and so
has showed that he walks out of his Doctrine, and is a transgressor, and no
Minister, but an Antichrist.

Pr. He says, the Apostle never bred up any that they needed no man to teach
them, page 53.

Ans. And so gives John the lie, who says, Ye need no man to teach you, but
as the same anointing teaches you. And the Apostle, who says, ye need not say
every man to his neighbor, know the Lord, etc. and denies the effectual work
of the new Covenant. But all shall know him from the least to the greatest,
Hebr.

Pr. He says, Paul denies perfection to himself.

Ans. Paul did not deny perfection to himself nor others; but his work was to
the perfecting of the Saints, but your work is to keep men from perfection, and
that has been the Ministers work since they apostatized from the Apostles. And
yet Paul judges him again, and says, as many as are perfect are thus minded.

Pr. He says, there is a contradiction in the Letter, speaking of the
Scripture, page 60.

Ans. Showing that he does not know to what condition i^ was spoken, for there
is no contradiction in it: but in them that be out of the spirit, that gave it
forth is the contradiction.

Pr. And he says, there is a Perfection that respects Justification and not
Sanctification, see page 61.

Ans. Now there is no Perfection, but where there is Sanctification.

Pr. And he perverteth the Scripture of John, that says, If we say we have no
sin, etc. And he says, Whosoever says he has no sin, deceives himself. See
page 62.

Ans. So he wrongs John's words, and puts he for we, and is charging sin upon
the Elect, and so himself is found a Liar. For there is a time for men to see
they have sinned, and a time to confess and forsake sin, and a time to
witness the blood of Christ cleansing from all sin, and he that is born of God
does not commit sin: And here the children of God are manifest from the
children of the Devil.

And Eaton, have thou been preaching and praying all this while and never yet
heard the voice of God? The night is upon thee, thou have no answer from God.

And as for the rest of Eatons lies, we let them rest upon his own head, not
being worth mentioning; the witness of God in his conscience shall answer in
the day of his Judgment.

John Bunyan, Richard Spenceley, John Burton, and John Child in their Book
that they call, A vindication of a Book called Some Gospel TRUTHS opened. These
Principles follows. And as for his Lies and Slanders, they will come upon
himself, they are his own Garments. And for the Scriptures which he quotes,
they are owned, but not to cover the WOLF withal.
IN his Epistle to the Reader he says, The Quakers will own that salvation was
obtained by Christ (this is truth says he) And but a little before he says,
They do deny that salvation that was obtained by him, etc. And thus he has
shamed his Father of confusion that taught him, the father of lies, who says
and unsays, for salvation is owned by Christ and God, and no other.

Pr. Again in the same Epistle he denies Salvation is obtained by Christ
within, and says, the Scriptures does not prove it, and calls it fighting
against the Truth, etc.

Ans. When as the Apostle says, work out your salvation with fear and
trembling, and that is within. And the ingrafted word is able to save souls,
and that is within. And the Apostle says, If Christ be not in you ye are
reprobates: And that is not opposite to Christ without them, nor contrary to
the Scriptures; And no one knows salvation, but who knows this Christ in you
who is the salvation, and where he is within there is salvation, and so thou
art one of the Reprobates, that can talk of Christ without, and denies him the
salvation within.

Pr. He says, the Quakers own Christ Jesus revealed to them in spirit, (and
calls it) Delusion.

Ans. And yet he says, others are carried away with error for not receiving
Christ revealed in the spirit, and this is his patched up stuff, comprehended
with the spirit, and with it is judged, who finds fault with them that have it,
and is against them that have it not.

Pr. He tells people of the history of the Word; As he says, some have no
other witness nor knowledge but the history of the Word, and the relation of
others, etc.

Ans. And yet he is against the Revelation of the spirit in the Quakers. But he
is one of the Beasts officers to fight against the Lamb, but it is to no
purpose, who thus builds up and throws down.

Pr. Again, Bunyan is railing against the Priests, and runs up into the Pulpit
himself.

Ans. And so the Wolf has got the Sheeps clothing, and they can speak of
Christ without, who be reprobates, who have him not within.

Pr. He says, The Lord Jesus Christ is afar off in his bodily presence.

Ans. And yet he says, the Lord is at hand. And the Apostle says, he was in
them. And Christ said, he would dwell with them.

Pr. He says, They were sealed by Christ's death at his offering upon the
Cross.

Ans. And yet Christ must come to save them at the last day: And the Saints
witnessed their salvation while they were upon earth, and said Christ was in
them except they were reprobates. And the Son of God was come, and gave them an
understanding.

Pr. He says, the Quakers witness the teaching within, which he says, the
Apostles witnesses the contrary, etc. page 4.

Ans. Why do thou wrong the Apostle, and put thy lies abroad, when as the
Apostle said, and Christ said, the spirit of the Father spoke in them. And the
Apostle said, the Law and the Covenant of God was in their hearts, and the
anointing was within them, to teach them. But why fightest thou against the
Apostles teaching, the Apostles doctrine, and Christ's doctrine? Do thou not
see thy weapon now fails thee? Thou have cast thy self without, and has not
the Apostle and Christ corrected thee here now?

Pr. And to prove that the blood of Christ was shed before the world was, he
brings a Scripture, which says, the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, etc.

An. Here all may see, whether this be a fit man to teach, or whether or no he
be not one of the Novices, I leave it to all to judge his measure, who have a
just measure; for the Scripture says, since the world, and thou say, before
the world was.

Pr. He says, That the son of Mary, God man is absent from his Church.

Ans. Contrary to Christ's words, I in them, and they in me: And, I will be with
you to the end; so one of the blind Prophets contrary to John, who says, we
are in him, and that is true; and thou say he is absent from his Church: And
the Apostle said he was the head of the Church: but of your Church we believe
he is not the head, but will grind you to powder: And thy words and thy
doctrine are corrected by Christ and the Scriptures. And Christ said, where two
or three meet together in my name, I will be amongst them, and the Saints were
flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone.

Pr. He says, To be justified by Christ is not to be justified by the spirit
within, and that Christ within does not work out justification for the soul,
but must look out for salvation unto that man, that is now absent from his
Saints on earth, these are his words.

Ans. Corrected by the Apostle, who says, he works all in us, and for us, and
yet thou says that Christ is absent from his Saints on earth, who is corrected
again by the Apostle, who says, Christ is in you, and contrary to Christ, who
is the Savior of the soul; and men are justified through faith, and that is
within in the heart, which is held in a pure conscience; and Christ is in the
Saints, who is their justification, and the Apostle preached Christ in them,
and where he is, there is justification; and who has his light and receive him
not, there is condemnation.

Pr. And he says, The Quakers are deceived because they say, Christ is within
them, kept down by something within them.

Ans. Corrected by the Apostle, who says to the Saints Christ is in you the
hope of glory; and he was pressed down as a Cart with sheaves; and Christ was in
prison, and they visited him not, and hungry, and ye fed him not, and thou
never knew Christ formed in thee, nor the reigning of the seed, which is the
Heir of the promise of God: How was the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world bu^ among such as thou art? And reprobates may talk of justification, in
whom Christ is not, who witness him not within, he is not your justification.

Pr. And his principle is, that the place where Christ shall come to judgment,
is at the mount of Olives, on the East side of Jerusalem.

Ans. Thou have put him far enough off from thee, and have not yet judged thy
self (and Christ is come to judgment) and so art one of the false Prophets, who
bids people look for him beyond the Sea, lo here, be there: But who are come
to Christ the light, the life, they need not go forth; who abide here are
sealed by the spirit, puts not off the good and evil day.

Pr. He says, It is a delusion of the Devil, and a dangerous doctrine to bid
people follow the light within them.

Ans. And they be in the dangerous doctrine, and the delusions of the Devil
that draws people from the Light within, and thus he does oppose the foundation
of God, the light, which lights every man that comes into the world. And the
doctrine of the Apostle, who says, the light that shines in their hearts, must
give them the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus. So he is one
of the Devils ministers, opposing the foundation of God, drawing people from
that the Apostles drew them too; for no one comes to the Kingdom, but who comes
to the light within them.

Pr. He says, That every man has not the spirit of Christ within him.

Answ And John said, Every man that comes into the world is enlightened. And
Christ said, I will send you the comforter, the spirit of truth, which shall
lead you into all truth, and he shall take of mine and give it unto you, and he
shall reprove the world of sin, the spirit shall. (Mark) all people, here is
Saints, here is Disciples, here is the world, get from under this how thou
can, for under reproof thou art come, and that which does reprove the world
is manifest to them; and the wicked quenches the spirit, but the Saints are
led by it, and here are all men.

Pr. And again thou say, That it is a filthy error to say, that that light
which lights every man that comes into the world, will lead man to the
Kingdom of righteousness and peace.

Ans. Thus he is splitting himself against the Rock, and striking against the
foundation, which every man that comes into the world being enlightened, that
through it he might believe; and believing in the light, he might not abide in
darkness; and this he makes insufficient, which he that does not believe in
the light is condemned: And thus the spiritual Sodomite and Egyptian is
blind, raging about the door, and no man comes to the Kingdom of
Righteousness^ and peace but by the light within, and so he is in the filthy
error himself, denying the light, and hating it.

Pr. Thou say, Christ is the light of the world, and yet not in every one
that comes into the world.

Ans. So corrected by John, who says, he does enlighten every man that comes
into the world. And the light shines in darkness, and the darkness cannot
comprehend ^t, and he that hates the light is enlightened, and will not come to
it because it will reprove him; that which does manifest to man an
understanding of reproof is within him, and that condemns him, hating it, and
the Saints believed in the light, and they abode not in darkness which the
unbelievers do, and stumbles, which the others do not.

Pr. And he says, Christ was not in his Disciples when he s^id, I am the light
of the world.

Ans. And so is corrected by Christ, who says, I in you, and you in me.

Pr. He says, They that will come to justification they must go to Christ's
grave without, and to Mount Calvery (page 9.)

Answ. And the Scripture says, ye need not go up to heaven, nor to say, who
shall go over the sea for us, and bring unto us that we may hear it, and do it,
but the word is nigh, in thy heart, Deuteronomy. 30. so corrected by the Scriptures.
And the Angel said unto them that went to the grave without, Why seek ye the
living among the dead, he is risen; and the Saints sits with him in heavenly
places, and need not go to Mount Calvary for him.

Pr. H^ says, The light wherewith Christ does enlighten every one that comes
into the world is but a creature, and is not a spirit (p^ge 10.)

Ans. And John says, all things was made by him (made by the light) in him was
life, and the life was the light of men: And this shines in darkness, and the
darkness cannot comprehend it, but all stumbling at the foundation of God,
which was before any creature was made, who is the power of God, Christ Jesus
the light, and the Prophets and John's doctrine they stumbled at, who saith^ the
light is a creature, by which all things are made and created, and so art
corrected by the Scripture.

Pr. He calls the light conscience, and a poor dunghill creature that will
convince of sin.

Ans. Which light was before conscience was, or creature was, or created or
made light was: He made the Sun, the Moon, etc. and the light was before these
were made, and he is both life and spirit too; for that which convinces of sin
is above the creature which checks him, and reproves him, and lets him see when
he goes astray from the Creator, and that is the light of Christ, with which
all men may see their salvation, with that which lets them see their sin.

Pr. He says, The law does not lead men to Christ, but under the curse (page
17)

Answ. That is to them that transgress it. Solomon said, the law was light.
And David said, the Law was a light unto his feet, and a Lamp unto his paths,
and so led him from the curse them that do it, which Christ is the end of, and
redeems from under it.

Pr. He says, It is not faith and works together that justifies in the sight
of God, but it is faith and good works that justifies in the sight of men
only, and says, Works will not justify in the sight of God. And he says,
that works is only but to justify their faith to be true before men.

Answer. Abraham was not justified to men only by his obedience, but to God,
and where there is faith, there is justification, which works by l^^^: And the
Saints faith and works was not only to justify them in the sight of men, for
the work of God is to do what he says; and his will, which who does not are
not justified in so doing: but to be beaten with stripes, who seeks to be
justified by their faith and works in the sight of men, are dead faith and
works both.

Pr. He says, They are no Christians that does not hold Christ absent from his
Church, but Antichrists.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, which say, they are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone, and they are as nigh together as husband and wife.
And thus he is ignorant of the great mystery, Christ and the Church, which
Christ is the head of.

Pr. He says, That the light wherewith Christ (as he is God) has enlightened
every man that comes into the world, is not the spirit of Christ, (page 19.)

Ans. And so makes that which comes from God and Christ not spirit (as he is
God) and thus the man is beating the air: He says, Christ was God that
lights every man, etc. And yet (says he) not with the spirit; how then
comes men to be condemned, not believing it, and so thou have reproved thy
self, and art blind, and into the Ditch fallen.

Pr. And again thou say, Though Christ as he is God does give every man a
light (which is conscience) otherwise called nature.

Ans. A d so thou have given those new names to the light of Christ, contrary
to the Apostles, as thou may read, John 1.2. John does not tell us, that is
conscience or natural light, as thou does; and the light which every man that
comes into the world is enlightened withal, which was before all things, and
by it all things was made. So it was before any Naturals was, and is that which
gives all men the wisdom of God to order the Naturalls, so by the Scriptures
thou art reproved.

Pr. And he says, Christ will not give his spirit to the world.

Answ. And Christ said, he will send his spirit to reprove the world, and that
is sent to them; and that which does reprove them i^ manifest to them in the
world to their own understanding, and in them, which spirit leads the Saints
into all truth: There is no man reproved, but it is within him manifest to his
understanding; And if he quenches the spirit that reproves him, he is not
lead by it, and that is the condemnation of the world, that light is come into
the world, and men love darkness, etc. And this thou calls not spirit. Now
this is the condemnation of them whose consciences are seared, and of them who
have the created and made, and natural lights, the Sun, the Moon, and Stars,
which light was before they was.

Pr. And thou says, The Scripture plainly denies that conscience can justify,
though it may condemn. See page 23.

Ans. Which is contrary to plain Scripture, where the Apostle says, Romans 2.15.
Their consciences either accusing or excusing. And again says he, Herein do I
exercise my self to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men: And the light condemns which you call conscience.

Pr. He says, that the Gospel is called the ministration of life, but not of
condemnation. Same page.

Ans. But they are condemned that obey not the Gospel of Christ: And the
Scripture speaks of a savor of death unto death, and a savor of life unto
life, and the Gospel is so, the power of God.

Pr. He denies that Paul bid the Saints listen within, etc. see page 25.

Ans. When as Paul said, that the light which shined in their hearts to give
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And it was the
treasure in the earthen vessel; and Christ was within them. And the ingrafted
word that was able to save their souls. And the hidden man of the heart. And he
had revealed his Son in them, and many other Scriptures. And he says, he
served the law of God with his mind. And yet thou says, he did not bid any
listen within. And he says, the word was in their hearts to obey it, and in
their mouths: And can they obey that, and not listen within, and do that, and
not have their minds stayed upon the Lord?

Pr. He says, the light does not shine in the consciences of them that be
lost. See page 26:

Ans. But John says, the light shines in darkness, but darkness cannot
comprehend it, and there is that of God in the children of disobedience, and
reprobates, as in Romans 1. and 2 Chap.

Pr. And he denies that every man has the light.

Ans. Contrary to John, who says, that is the true light which inlightneth
every man that comes into the world, John 1.

Pr. He says, It is a counterfeiting of the new birth for men to follow the
light, wherewith men coming into the world are enlightened withal, etc.

Answ. Which none comes to the new birth, but who comes to the light which
every man that comes into the world is lighted withal; which believing in, is
a child of the light: Believing and receiving comes to receive power to become
the Sons of God.

Pr. He says, To say that Christ is risen within, there is no Scripture to
prove it. See page 28.

Ans. Does not the Apostle say, Christ formed in you? And Christ in you the
hope of glory? which hope purifies as God is pure. And Christ within, does he
not arise there before all waves be still? and shall he not arise with healing
under his wings? How ignorant of the Letter are the Priests grown, much more of
the mystery? Gal. 4. and Malachy.

Pr. And whereas thou says, thou art confident, that while some would persuade
others that they have no sin, their consciences will tell them they lie, see
page 41.

Ans. The Apostle told the Romans that they were made free from sin; and the
Romans did not tell the Apostle, that their consciences told them he lied, as
thou says.

Pr. He says, the body of Christ is out of the sight of all his Saints, etc.
see page 47.

Ans. And the Apostle says, They sat with Christ in heavenly places: and the
Saints are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone, and the Church which he is
head of is his body. And every one that eats his flesh, knows his body given
for the life of the world; and the body of Christ is not out of the sight of
the Saints that are in the Church: Therefore you Ministers and Teachers that
say Christ's body is out of your sights, are not Saints, neither are you of his
Church which is his body; neither have you eaten his flesh, nor know that which
is given for the life of the world, but are out of the sight of the Church
which is his body.

Pr. And thou says, they shall have a greater judgment without them, then
they shall have within them, etc. see page 48.

Ans. And the Scripture says, If ye judge your selves, ye shall not be judged
of the Lord.

Pr. And that place in Jude he brings, to prove that all men have not the
Spirit, etc. See page 49. Where he says, They walk after their own ungodly
lusts, these be they who separate themselves, being sensual, and have not the
spirit, who went in Balaams way.

Ans. Who shows that they went forth from the spirit, and turned the grace of
God into wantonness. And this does not make for thee to thy purpose, but
rather against thee, and the same spirit that reproves the world leads the
Saints into all truth.

Pr. He says, That God did not give the Law that people should live in it,
etc. See page 49.

Answ. And the Scripture says, that they that did the Law had life, and were
justified by it: For do this and live (says God to Moses) and therefore thou
would make God a liar, who cannot lie; who says, that God did not give forth
his Law that men should have life: Is not the Curse and the Death in the
transgression of it? Christ is the end of the righteous Law, who is the light
that does enlighten every man that does come into the world, which believing in
it, he comes to be a child of Light: Which light thou blasphemously calls
conscience or Natural, which is Christ the Light, the foundation of God, which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that with the light they
might see Christ who has enlightened them, the foundation of God from whence
light comes. And the Apostle says, the law is spiritual, and just, and good;
and he it was that was the carnal, and so thou art the carnal, not yet come
to the Law which is spiritual.

Pr. He says, He that will but observe the motions of that light which every
man has within him (say they) so as to obey and close in with it, to follow
it, shall undoubtedly save himself from the wrath to come: Now this is clearly
a great error as thou say. See page 50.

Ans. Contrary to John's doctrine and Christ's, who says, the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, is the true light, that men
through the light might believe. Therefore be they enlightened; and he that
believes in the light shall not abide in darkness, nor in error, nor in
condemnation, but shall have the light of life. Says Christ, I am the light of
the world; And says moreover, believe in the light before they be children;
believe in the light, that ye may be children of the light: So every man is
enlightened with a light before they be children, with the true light. He that
believes in the light is a child of the light: he that does not believe in the
light, the light condemns him.

Pr. And whereas thou says, The Law gives not life, nor justifies. See page 50.

Ans. It is false, thou art mistaken in the Scriptures, and rebuked with them.
The Law gives life to him that obeys it, and lives in it: and he that does it
lives, and is justified, the doer of the Law, and not the hearer only; and it
is righteous, and just, and good. But Christ Jesus the Law, and the spirit of
life, which is the end of Gods righteous Law, is the justification to life;
Gods righteousness, who is the end of the other law. And the Apostle Paul
says, The law of the spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the
law of sin and death.

Pr. And thou would make it an error to say, the Saints are saviors of the
world: See page 50.

Ans. The Apostle said, when he writ to the Saints he should save himself and
others, and this was by the power of Christ: And Jude says, others saving with
fear, but hating the garments spotted with the flesh. Now thou art a deceiver,
and not a Savior both of thy self and others, and ignorant of the power and
the spirit.

Pr. He says, there is no such Scripture as says, the light within the
conscience. See page 52.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, the light shines in their hearts, and
is not there the conscience? 2 Cor. 4. And Christ says, they will not come to
the light lest their deeds should be by it manifested, and they by it reproved,
and this is not conscience nor nature. And the Apostle Paul says, Our
rejoicing is the testimony of our conscience, that in simplicity and godly
sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom, but in the grace of God, we have had our
conversation in the world.

Pr. The new Covenant which God promised to write in their hearts, he calls
that the law by nature, see page 52.

Ans. And thus he is stumbling at the corner stone, and errs in his judgment;
for that which orders nature is above nature, and all naturallists and
transgressors do call it natural.

Doctor Glisson's Paper concerning James Parnels death in prison, which the
Lies that are in it are not worth mentioning, but upon themselves will fall;
but here is one of their lying slanders taken off as follows, who strikes at
the Rock, splits themselves, and the blood of that Innocent lies upon their
heads.
Pr. IN the Preface he says, That the most knowing part of these Quakers have
received their principles from Rome, etc.

Ans. It is false, for the Instructions which they have received is from
Christ, who was glorified with the father before the world began, and before
Rome was, or revilers either, which makes the world to rage. The cornerstone,
the light, which lightens every man that comes into the world before it was,
which makes the Beast, and the false Prophet, and the Pope, and you to arm
themselves against the Lamb and his light, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world withal: And the Priests Instructions have been from Rome,
to set up their Schools, to make Miinsters, and Temples East and West, with a
Cross at the end of them, and the Tenth which they imprison men to death for,
and their preaching by the hour-glasse, and naming their Colleges and
Masse-houses by the Saints names. Your Instructions have been from Rome to do
these things; but the Lamb shall have the victory, glory to the Lord in the
highest for ever.

George Emmot who calls himself a spiritual Quaker converted. Who is turned
with the Dog to the vomit, and gone in the way of Core, exalting himself, and
gainsaying Truth, and gone in the way of Cain, into his first birth, and
turned against the second.
DId God smite thee for thy pride? Did God let thee see the false worships in
the Steeple Houses in the sheeps clothing? Did God let thee see the deceit of
the tithes in the Priests? Did God let thee see the vanity of respecting of
persons, and honoring of the creatures? was thou turning from these things (as
thou confesses?) And art thou now turned to them again? By whom the way of
truth comes to be evil spoken of. Is thy latter end worse then the beginning?
will not all thy words be thy burden, and fall heavy upon thee? thy time is not
past George Emmot.

And as for all the reviles, scoffs, and mocks in thy Book, they are not worth
mentioning, and raking in the dust for among sober people. Have thou turned the
grace of God into wantonness, which had taught thee to deny the ungodly lusts
of the world? and would have brought thee to salvation, and so forsaken the
Covenant of the Lord God, the law in thy mind, and in thy heart, whereby thou
might have been taught to know the Lord: But now thou art run out to Teachers
that may be removed into a corner, that will poison thee. And do put some into
co^ners and Priso^s, because they will not give them maintenance, and then they
are them that put into prisons and corners.

That which brought thee to leave off thy ribbons and vanities, and lusts of
the world, wa^ the grace of God which thou have turned into wantonness, and
published it to the Nation, see page 6. And thou art turned in to that the
grace taught thee to deny.

Pr. He says, The Steeple-house is a holy place more holy then a house, see
page 8.

Ans. The Pope has taught thee this, and his Teachers and thou art gotten into
the holy place like the Pharisees, and says the Apostle defiled it: and thus
you and your Popes doctrine is got up since you have apostatized from the
Apostles, which Apostles brought the Jews off the holy places thou speaks of;
and while you and them have been in these holy places, you have been in the
unholiness.

Henoch Howet his Book titled, The Quaking Principles dashed to pieces by the
standing and unshaken TRVTH. He has dashed himself to pieces upon the Rock, as
his torn Language in his Book discovers: And his Principles are here as
follows, which a great part of his Book is not worth mentioning, but turned
back upon himself, who must bear his own burden in the day, that burns as an
oven, that his works are tried, he shall remember, to the witness in him I
speak.
Pr. HE makes the Scripture to be the only weapon whereby Christ overthrow the
Devil, see page 3.

Answ. Who bruiseth his head, and was before Scripture was: Yet the Scriptures
is for correction and doctrine, furnishing the man of God in his place, and
Christ the seed was before Scripture was: And all them that has Scripture, and
not Christ, cannot overcome the Devil, you and the Papists doing his work; for
they that overcome him, it is with the power, and those have the Scriptures of
truth which the Devil is out of.

P^. Here he says, the Scriptures is the hope. See page 4.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures which says, Christ is the hope; and
they that had the Scripture, stood against the hope Christ.

Pr. He says, there is nothing in man to be spoken to, but man. See page 5.

Ans. How then ministered the Apostle to the spirit: And Christ spoke to the
spirits in prison; and Timothy was to stir up the gift that was in him: and the
spirit of the Father speaks within them, and the light it shines in the heart,
which God has commanded to shine out of darkness. And the Son of God is
revealed in me says the Apostle. Here the Scriptures are for correction of
thee, and reproof of thee, who said, there is nothing to speak too ^n man, but
man; when the Apostle says, that which may be known of God is manifest in man,
for God has showed it unto them, Romans 1. And the Apostle was manifest to every
ones conscience in the sight of God, and that was of God which the children
disobeyed.

Pr. He calls that a dark delusive light.

Ans. Which John calls Christ the light, that lights every man that comes
into the world, which we speak of, so he is fighting against the foundation of
God that stands sure. And thus the man is striking at the Rock, and splitting
himself, and is not come to John, but is as dark as the Pharisees and Heathen,
whose darkness cannot comprehend the light that John says lights every man
that comes into the world, that shines in the darkness, that is the true
light, John 1. chap. So you that deny the light which Christ has enlightened
every man that comes into the world withal; be the enemies of Christ, that
will not that he should reign over you, who are by him to be slain, and so that
Scripture which he mentions there in page 10. stands for himself who gets his
words, and calls him Lord, but does not do as he says, and ye all that be in
darkness stumble at the Scriptures, which see not the light that lights
every one that comes into the world.

Pr. H^ says, They that deny the honor of men are Witches, and Wizards, page
14.

Ans. Will thou say that Mordecai was a wizard, and had a familiar spirit, that
would not bow to Haman? And the Apostle found fault with them that worshipped
the creature more then the Creator, who is God blessed for ever. And all the
familiar spirits and wizards fell down and worshipped Nebuchadnezars Image,
which Daniel could not bend to their Image nor inventions.

Pr. And again thou says, They that love God and love Christ keeps his
commandments, see page 14.

Ans. And thou art bringing many Scriptures to oppose the commands of Christ,
who says, Be not ye of men called Master: So thou art seen not to be of the
spirit of Christ, but the spirit that is gone out into the world, that is
Antichrist, and opposes his Doctrine, who is the end of the Prophets, and was
before Abraham was, and so has given judgment of thy self, thou neither
loves God nor Christ.

Pr. And here he accuses Paul, and says, Paul says, he is not perfect.

Answ. When Paul says, As many of us as are perfect are thus minded, and
brings himself in the number, and speaks wisdom among them that are perfect,
page 15.

John Timpsons Book, called, The Quakers Apostasy from the perfect Rule of the
SCRIPTVRES discovered.
A True title to his Book concerning his own condition, as his Book does
witness himself in the Apostasy, whose work is to oppose the light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world that John bore witness of. So
opposing the Covenant of God, of life and peace, and the foundation of God
which stands sure, Christ Jesus, which he may as well say nothing, or do
nothing. But the stone is set upon his head, and the foundation of God is laid,
witnessed by the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, and the Scriptures are
owned (by them in scorn called Quakers) (and the light it speaks of) who out of
the apostasy are come, and so from among the apostates. And as for the lies and
slanders in his Book, that are not worth mentioning, but they shall turn upon
his own head, whose immodesty has discovered them.

Pr. In his Preface to the Reader He says, It is an expression of a dark
deluded mind, to say that God is not distinguished from the Saints.

Ans. But God and Christ is in the Saints, and dwell in them, and walk in them;
and he is a Reprobate, and out of the Apostles doctrine.

Pr He says, We have broken the everlasting Covenant of God.

Answ. Because we own the teaching of God by his spirit. and the light which
does enlighten every one that that comes into the world, which is the covenant
of God.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures is the rule of life. See page 4.

Answ. Contrary to Christ, who said, the spirit should lead them into all
truth. And they that are the sons of God, are led by the spirit of God. And the
Churches was to hear what the spirit says, for the spirit led them to speak
forth Scripture.

Pr. Again he says, It is a contradiction, and a confused senseless thing to
preach the word of faith in the mouth, and in the heart, see page 6.

Again he says, Most senseless is this profession of Christ in the mouth, and
believing in him with the heart, God that made all things. These are his words,
page 8.

Ans. It is not a senseless profession to preach the word of Faith in the
heart, and in the mouth; and to say, God will dwell in you, and the word is in
the heart, and in the mouth. The word is God, and thou art senseless and
fallen in confusion in the contradiction, out of the Apostles doctrine; and the
Apostle says, Christ in you, and with the mouth confession is made to
salvation.

Pr. And he calls it a Notion, to say that Christ lights all, and therefore
the light is Christ.

Ans. So here he is kicking and spurning against the light Christ, that
lights every man that comes into the world, which is the Rock, the
foundation of God, the cornerstone, which is fallen upon thy head, and all be
in the notion that be out of it.

Pr. He scoffs at the Quakers, because they say they have the word of God in
them.

Ans. Christ his name is called the word of God.

Pr. He says, God blessing, or blasting his own Word to some according to the
different ends intended by himself, see page 9.

Ans. Now the Word of God is not blasted: God never blasts his own Word, but it
is they that are blasted that disobey the Word. For the Word of God does its
service, and accomplisheth the end which it goes forth for, and does not
return in vain: And it is the sword of the spirit, and that is not blasted. It
is a hammer and a fire, and it lives, and does endure for ever: So thou art
blasted, who says, the Word of God he blasts: and art to be cut down by the
word of God for thy blasphemy.

Pr. He says, the Quakers are deceivers, because we say that Christ is not in
outward observations and forms. And John Bunyan says, that he is distinct
from the Saints, and would have him in the forms, etc. see page 13.

Ans. And we say he has triumphed over the Ordinances, and blotted them out,
and they are not to be touched; and the Saints have Christ in them, who is the
end of outward forms, and thou art deceived, who thinks to find the living
among the dead; and Bunyan is deceived, who said, he is distinct from the
Saints; and so you are a company of pitiful Teachers.

Pr. He says, Every true Christian does believe that the holy Scriptures alone
is to be the object of faith, etc. page 17.

Ans. So he has thrown out God the giver of it, and Christ the Author of it;
for many have the Scriptures, and deny Christ the Author of faith, and object.

Pr. He asks, Did you ever read of law and testimony in the heart, etc? see
page 18.

Ans. Yea, God says, I will write my law in their hearts. The law was in
David's heart; the law was in the Apostles heart. The testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophecy, and that is in the heart. See Heb. 8. Rev.

Pr. He says, The covenant of God is not to all in the Church of Christ, see
page 19.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, for where the Church is, there is
the Covenant, the head Christ Jesus: And God says, I will give him for a
covenant to the Gentiles, those are the heathen: And I will make a new covenant
with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah, and these are called the
people of God. And therefore thou art in the fall in ignorance, and a man
without understanding, and affirms thou do not know what; and silence would
become thee better then to publish thy shame in print, for they are not in the
Church of God, that be not in the covenant of God.

Pr. And he says, The Scriptures is the sure and perfect rule, page 20.

Ans. And the Scripture says, Christ is the Bishop of the soul; and God has
all souls in his hand: And many have Scriptures, but their souls the Bishop of
them they know not, but they remain in death, and the life they want that gave
it forth, and so are all on heaps about the Scripture one with another, and
calling them the rule and the spirit; And the spirit of God that led them forth
to speak forth the Scripture, was the rule to the Saints and holy men of God:
but they that be in the transgression will kill one another about their words,
and the spirit leads to see them again, and brings them into unity with them
and God.

Pr. He says, It is blasphemy to say that Christ is in them as God and man,
etc. see page 23.

Ans. How are they of his flesh and bone? And does not the Scripture say,
Christ in you, and God will dwell in you, and walk in you? And are not the
Saints of his flesh and of his bone? And are they not partakers of the divine
nature?

Pr. He says, It is a fancy to say the eternal word of God is in them, see
page 26.

Ans. Thou art in the fancy that the eternal word is not in, and witnessed, and
under the fire and sword, and hammer to be hammered down. And so art corrected
by the Apostle, who says, Let the word of God dwell in you richly, The
ingrafted word which is able to save your souls, and immortal word, which is
immortal.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures is the only rule of knowing God, etc. See page 26.

Ans. Christ says, none knows the father but the Son, who spoke among them
that had the Scripture; and so he has thrown out the Son, the rule of knowing
the Father who reveals him. For many had Scriptures who knew not the Father,
nor knew the Son, nor heard his voice, as in John 5.

Pr. He says, All those that be without the Scriptures, are without all
comfort, and hope, and God. See page 26.

Answ. Here then is thy Doctrine, that none have comfort, none hope, none have
God, but who have Scriptures. Abraham will tell thee otherwise, and Enoch, for
those knew God, and walked with him, and knew hope and comfort: and Joseph and
Jacob, and God was with them before the Scriptures was written: And Christ was
promised before the Scriptures was written, and many have the Scriptures, and
not the comfort, nor the hope, but stand against him as the Jews did against
Christ. And many may have the comfort, and not read Scriptures.

Pr. He says, The only judge of all error is the Scriptures, etc. see page
37.

Ans. So he has thrown out Christ, and thrown out the spirit, and the
spiritual man, and the Saints, and God the judge of all who was the Author of
the Scripture.

Pr. He says, The Apostle does not say that God in these last days does
speak, or will speak unto us by his Son; but God has already in time past
spoke by his Son, and that speaking is to these last days, and we are not to
look for any other speaking, or revelation, etc. page 39.

Ans. And so by this thou have denied the scriptures, and the authority of
them, which is Christ Jesus, and denied the Apostles doctrine, and the new
covenant where the law is writ in the heart and mind, and all taught of God.
Thou have thrown down and laid waste Christ's commands, who says, Learn of me.
And the command of God, who says, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him: And so
art ignorant of the scriptures and the power of God.

Pr. He says, It is abhorred dotage they are bewitched with to say, they
witness forgiveness within, etc. See page 41.

Answ. Thou shows thou never knew a Saints life, and that which cleanses from
all sin, and the testimony within of forgiveness of sin; for where it is
forgiven it is within. The Apostle says, If Christ be in you, the body is dead
because of sin. And many may speak of Christ without them, and the body of sin
not dead: And so the Wolf may get the form of godliness, and the Devil may
confess the son of God in words.

Pr. He says, It matters not much if the sense be in the Scriptures, where the
words be there or no See page 47.

Ans. And yet he says, the Scriptures is the rule, and it is the word; and so
by that means have all men run into their senses, into confusion from the words
of the Scriptures, which is not to be added to, nor taken from, nor can it be
broken, nor is it of any private interpretation; and the Scriptures are the
words of God, and Christ is the word, and in him they end, and the spirit is
the rule.

Pr. He says, Does not Christ approve of the Jews opinion, in thinking that
in the Scripture they should have eternal life: And he says, Christ refers
them to the Scriptures to find life. See page 48.

Answ. When as Christ said, They would not come unto him that that they might
have life; and bid them believe in him whom God had sent, who was the end of
the Scriptures: And Christ did not approve of them that thought to have
eternal life in the Scriptures.

Pr. He says, to say that the light of Christ is not received from the
Scriptures, it is an abominable thing to be asserted.

Ans. But the light is received from Christ; and many had the Scriptures as the
Jews, but stood against the Light as you do now, and did not receive it, that
had the Scriptures which testified of it: And the Light cannot be blotted out,
but it does condemn, and it leads to the knowledge of God, and to eternal life.

Pr. He calls it a fancy of an idle brain, to witness the law of God written
in the heart, that is different from the moral law, etc. see page 61.

Ans. The Scripture says, I will write my law in their hearts, and put it in
their inward parts, and I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel,
not according to the old; And this is the Covenant with Israel, not according
to the old, and so they be in the fancy, and idle brain that be out of the new
Covenant of light, Christ, both Jews and Gentiles, and all false Christians.

Pr. He says, This I do deny, that the perfection of the whole law of God is
writ in man's heart, so as to know it, and do it, as it is written in the
Prophets and Apostles, etc. See page 64.

Answ. Here thou have discovered thy self to be in the unbelief, and limits
the Holy One, that God is not the same, Christ is not the same yesterday, to
day, and for ever: And none knows the Prophets and Apostles, but who have the
same covenant as they had; and the same law and same spirit. And whereas thou
art opposing those as say the Word is within them, and the Light is within
them, and the Spirit is within: And because they say those be in unity, and be
one, which makes thee appear one offended, who must be ignorant still. He that
is ignorant, let him be ignorant still; but the light in thee shall see they
are one.

Pr. He says, That none have ever had such seize of Christ a Redeemer,
without the help of the Scriptures, etc. see page 65.

Answ. Now Abraham, and Enoch, and Noah, and Adam, had the promise of Christ
before Scripture was written: And the Gospel is the power of God; and many may
have the form, and not the power, and eternal life is not in them, nor the
power of God: For Christ is the power of God, who says, Ye will not come to
me that ye may have life, who was before Scripture was, and all the Seize
is in him the Scripture speaks of, and he is not attained to without life.

Pr. He says, Where did ever any say that they went through the Law to Christ:
This he judges, and says, that they be strangers to the life of God that say
so, etc. See page 71.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, I through the law am dead to the law,
but alive unto God. And the law was our Schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. And
again he says, The righteousness of the law is fulfilled in us.

Pr. He says, All notionall light is from Christ whatsoever, etc. see page 72.

Ans. Now notional is imaginations, and that is not properly called light, and
therefore thou mistakest, for light is not notion, but is the thing it self
that is from Christ.

Pr. Here again he denies, that Christ has enlightened every man that comes
into the world, with light sufficient if they obey it, to lead them to eternal
life, etc. See page 73.

Ans. Yet thou says, every one has so much light as shall leave all men
without excuse before the great tribunal of Jesus Christ. And yet thou says,
that which leaves them without excuse is not sufficient, and so would make God
unjust and unrighteous; and the light is sufficient, which does enlighten every
man in the world to lead them to eternal life, believing in it, and receiving
it, which not believing is sufficient to condemn them, who all believing in it
shall see and receive their salvation.

Pr. He says, It is a contradiction in it self, and a speaking lies in
hypocrisy, to deny swearing, and calling of men Master, and to witness the
teaching of the Lord, and the spirit to guide into all truth, and to say the
spirit is the rule.

Ans. They be in the lies and hypocrisy, and transgressors of Christ's
commands, that are swearers, and called of men Masters, and the spirit of truth
which leads into all truth, is the rule and guide of men into truth, as Matthew.
5. and 23 Chap. and these be the Antichrists, contrary to him, that swear and
are called of men Masters; which Christ says, swear not at all, nor be called
of men Master.

Pr. He says, Christ was in the world, and the world was made by him, and yet
Christ was not in all parts of the world, etc. see page 76.

Answ. And he is the light to the Gentiles and Jews, and salvation to the ends
of the earth: and yet he says, that Christ is not in all parts of the world.

Pr. The light wherewith Christ has enlighten every one that comes into the
world, he calls a little spark of reason, subject to error and vanity.

Ans. Which is Christ the light, the foundation of God which stands sure, that
which makes manifest all error, and his flesh saw no corruption. The greatest
part of his work in his Book is to strike at the Rock and foundation of God;
and there is no error in the light, which enlightneth every man that comes
into the world, neither is it subject to it, but condemns it, and thee that
says it.

Pr. He says, page 79. All the light is to be understood in words, and an
outward dispensation, etc.

Ans. The Jews had outward words and a dispensation, and yet knew not the
Light Christ, by the words without life. Neither did they understand the
dispensation of God.

Pr. He speaks of an external Ministry, etc. See page 80.

Ans. That which led them to minister was not external, and the external
reaches no further then the external, and that is of men, and by men; but the
eternal reaches to the eternal, which reaches beyond external.

Pr. John says, This is the true light that lights every man that comes
into the world: and he says, this is to be understood with limitation: and
says, Christ was not in all ages and places of the world. See page 81.

Ans. How was he the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world? And how did
he minister to the spirits in prison? and how speaks he in the Law? and how is
he the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever: and that is the Devil in thee
that would have a hold for thee to dwell in, that would limit Christ the light
not to be in every man. That which darkens every man is the Devil, and that
which lightens every man is Christ, without limitation, and he limits that
which would limit him, and that understanding.

Pr. He says, He knows not what the true light is, and eternal life, nor the
eternal word, the everlasting Gospel, the light which gave forth the
Scriptures, and the Judge of the world, and the kingdom of heaven within, and
the law of the new covenant, and Christ within, these he says, he knows not,
etc.

Ans. We do believe thee. And yet he goes about to oppose them, and knows not
what they are, and so he fights like a blind man, who knows not the eternal
word within, nor the Light, nor the everlasting Gospel which the Saints did,
and does know within.

Pr. He says, That infants and fools, and such as are borne blind, were never
enlightened with the light of Christ, which he calls the light of nature, etc.
See page 85.

Ans. Which is contrary to John's words, 1 John 9. who came for a witness, to
bear witness of the true light which lights every man that comes into the
world, which light is above nature, and contrary to Isaiah, who said, Fools
shall not err in the way. And a blind man and an infant is enlightened with
the light of Christ, for that is the Light in the blind man that reproves his
thoughts and words that be evil; which believing in it, he shall not be
condemned, but has the light of life, and becomes a child of Light: And in
Christ is light, and that is the life of men; and where there is life in an
Infant, there is light.

Pr. He calls it a fancy and a pernicious error to say Christ has enlightened
every man that comes into the world, etc. see page 88.

Ans. And thus he opposes John's doctrine: They be in the pernicious error
that deny that light that lights every man, according to John's doctrine, John
1. who says, this is the true light that enlightneth every man that comes
into the world, and the Pharisees stumbled as much at this true light as you do
now, though it shined in their, and your darkness, yet your darkness cannot
comprehend it, but it shall be all your condemnation that hate it.

Pr. He says, The commands of Christ within (Christ and the light) is
inconsistent with the Scriptures, etc. see page 89.

Ans. Which is contrary, for the light within owns the Scriptures without: and
yet he said it was the gift of God, and the gift of God does own the Scriptures
in their place as they were spoken; and none knows the commands, and
Scriptures, but with the light within, and they be in unity, and the light
within gives the knowledge of them, 2 Cor. 4.

Pr. He says, It is a fancy to say the Covenant of God is to all men in the
world, and the grace of God has appeared unto all men, etc. See page 89.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, The grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared unto all men. And contrary to the Prophet, who says, I
will give him for a covenant to the Gentiles, a light unto the people,
salvation to the ends of the earth, and a new covenant to the house of Israel
and Judah; And they that do not believe this are condemned.

Pr. He says, It is most desperate and diabolical to talk of a sufficient
light and grace in all to be saved, etc.

Ans. And yet thou says in page 73. of thy book, That every man has so much
light that shall leave all men without excuse before the great tribunal of
Jesus Christ, and men shall only be condemned for not doing things which they
had power and light to do. And so thou confoundest thy self, these are thy
words: And here thou says, he has not light sufficient to save. Thou cal^s
this a fancy, and prodigious blasphemy, page 92. and no man comes to salvation
but who owneth the light, which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, Christ Jesus the salvation. No man owneth his own salvation, but who
owneth the grace of God that brings salvation to them all if that they will
receive it, to teach them to live soberly, righteous, and godly, and deny the
contrary: And this grace and light is sufficient, for it brings salvation; for
that which brings salvation is sufficient, and thou art in the diabolical
doctrine that art out of this, and contrary to what the Apostle says, and
Christ, which enlightens all men, which says, believe in the light and ye shall
not abide in darkness, but have the Light of life, and become children of
Light, and so is sufficient; if not, they are condemned by it, and hear his Law.

Pr. He says, The light of Christ we have made it the corrupt spark of
reason. See page 92.

Ans. But it is he that calls it the corrupt spark of reason, contrary to
John, who says, It is the true light which lights every man that comes into
the world: And we do not make it the corrupt spark of reason; for there is no
corruption in it, but it leads to true reason, and there is no true reason but
in it; and thy corrupt spark of reason is out of it, and to be condemned with
it.

Pr. He calls it an intoxicated notion and bewitching to say that Christ has
enlightened every one that comes into the world immediately, etc. see page 93.

Ans. So he would make the Light which John bore witness of (to the chief
Priests and Levites) which does enlighten every man, etc. not immediate, and
gives these ill-favored names to them that do bear their testimony to it: But
let him split himself against the Rock, and thou art in the intoxicated
notions, and in the witchcraft that does not own the light that enlightneth
every man that comes into the world, and art not a witness of Christ,
contrary to the Prophets and John, who said, This was the true light which
lights every man that comes into the world, to which Light the Apostle bore
witness to Jews and Gentiles, which thou a reprobate bears witness against.

Pr. And to bring all people to the light wherewith Christ has enlightened them
withal. Such he calls seducing, and sending men to hell, and damnable heresies.

Ans. They bring men to hell, and are the seducers, and in the damnable
heresy, and corrupts the reason, that does not bring men to the light that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, and so to Christ, but denies
it, and such denies life and salvation.

Pr. He says, That none can be saved by following the light of Christ Jesus,
which he calls corrupt.

Ans. The light of Christ Jesus is not corrupt, who does enlighten every man
that comes into the world; that light which they are enlightened withal does
not corrupt, but lets all men see their corruption, which they are condemned
not believing, in which believing in, they are saved; and no man sees
salvation, or has salvation, but with the light which comes from Christ Jesus
the salvation: And all that hate the light are corrupt in their Doctrines and
Principles, ways and words, and such be the Antichrists.

Joseph Kellet, John Pomroy, Paul Glisson, Christopher Feak, John Simpson,
George Cocken, and Lawrence Wise, Their Principles laid open, in a Book put
forth by them, called, A faithful Discovery of a Treacherous design of
Mystical Antichrist displaying CHRIST'S Banners. But ye may own the sin of
your weakness who have published forth this BOOK.
Pr. YE say, God who commanded light to shine out of darkness, etc. page 1.

Ans. But ye do not say that the light has shined in your hearts, to give the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. And those were the
false Apostles, and D^vills ministers and messengers of Satan, transforming
himself into an Angel of Light, that drew people from the light within, which
gave them the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ, from whom it
came, which was the work of the true Apostles to bring people to the light
within, that shined in their hearts, to give them the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; and told them there was the
treasure in the earthen vessel. So in the false spirits that are gone out into
the world are ye reproved, ye seven Priests.

Pr. Here they call it wine mingled with water, to say the light does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, which is Christ, which brings men off of
their Teachers, and makes manifest sin. This ye say makes the Scriptures
unnecessary.

Answ. Which none knows the necessariness of the Scriptures but with light, nor
salvati-vation, nor wine from water.

Pr. And they say, Does not the light bring men off the glorious mystery of the
Scriptures? etc. page 3.

Ans. We say nay, it brings them to it, the mystery Christ Jesus from whom
light comes, it brings men off of the heathen to God.

Pr. And they say, that the light does bring men off of the foundation of the
Prophets and Apostles, etc. page 4.

Answ. Which light is Christ, who is the promise to the Gentiles, the
foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world. And none comes to the foundation, but such as come to
the light Christ, that has enlightened him.

Pr. They say, They be all alienated and enemies unto God until faith, etc. see
page 4.

Answ. So they have denied their Schoolmaster, which is until faith, which
will keep them out of the alienation, which is the Law.

Pr. And ye call the light Christ, who has enlightened every man that comes
into the world, a natural light, etc. see page 5.

Answ. Contrary to John, who says, it is Christ by whom all things was made
before Naturals was, Sun, Moon, and Stars.

Pr. To hold forth Christ the light, who lights every man that comes into
the world, they say is to hinder the Gospel, pervert the faith, and at once
destroy all good that ever was done, etc. see page 6.

Ans. That is unlike that it should do so, that Christ the covenant of God, who
came to save, which light does lighten every one that comes into the world, in
which believing are saved, in not believing are damned; and none comes in to
God, but who comes to the Light, nor to the Gospel, and all men's works acted
without the Light, are to be condemned and destroyed.

Pr. To bring people to the Light, Christ, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, is to bring them from the Mediator, and to draw men from
eying his death, resurrection, and intercession, etc. as these men say, see
page 7.

Ans. Here they are corrected, for none knows these things but who come to the
light Christ, who has enlightened them; for with the light they see their
Mediator, and see his death and resurrection: And they that come not to the
light which lights every man that comes into the world, may speak of these
things, but cannot know them, the witness in the conscience shall answer in
all men; for the light that shines in the heart gives them the knowledge of
them (of the Mediator) death and resurrection of Christ. And they say, not
every man in the world is enlightened, and John says every man is, and so here
their spirits are corrected again: And I will give him for a covenant to the
Gentiles, and for a new covenant to the house of Israel, and to the house of
Judah: And they bring these words, Christ in you the hope of glory, to oppose
John's words.

Pr. You say none comes to God but by Christ, and yet does not own him that
does enlighten every one that comes into the world.

Ans. And so are not like ever to come to him, though you may talk of him in
words, as the Pharisees and Devils did, as all the apostate Christians does
now, and yet not own his light, with it you are all to be condemned, Ministers
of Satan which are out of the light.

Pr. And you say, Far be it from you to say that Christ is equally God, etc.
See page 8.

Ans. And the Scriptures says, He is the everlasting Father, and his name is
called the Emanuel, God with us: and his name is called the word, which is God,
John 1.

Pr. And ye say, Whereby man sees the Godhead of God, but nothing of the
mystery of the Father, and Christ as Mediator. See page 9.

Ans. Can man see the godhead of God, and nothing of the mystery of the
Father, and Christ the Mediator? Does not he that knows the Son know the Father
also? And has not he that has seen God, seen the Son? Is not the Son in the
Father? Here your spirits are corrected: For the light that enlightens every
man that comes into the world lets see the one, lets see the other.

Pr. You say, For a man to say the light Christ which does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, is pure, and justifies them that obey it, he
justifies that which God condemns, etc. See page 9.

Ans. As you say who are with it condemned; for the light is that which does
condemn and justify both, and God does not condemn it; for it brings into
unity with him and peace, and all be condemned that be out of it, and none be
justified but them that be in it, Christ, that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, which is the justification of life to every one that
believes in it; and every man receiving the light, receives his justification,
and hating of it, receives his condemnation to death.

Pr. Again, Ye conclude the light of Christ is not pure before faith. See page
9.

Ans. So have concluded you seven, Joseph Kellet, John Pomroy, Paul Glisson,
Christopher Feak, John Simpson, George Cocken, Lawrence Wise, that ye never
knew Law nor Gospel, nor Faith from Christ, nor God: For the law is light,
says Solomon, Prove. 6. and that is the Schoolmaster until faith: And the Law
of God is pure, and the Law is just, holy, and good, and perfect; and what is
just, holy, and good, is pure. And this ye seven have concluded not pure, the
light in the conscience before faith; And the Law is the Light and Schoolmaster
until faith: And the Light is given to every man to believe, and while ye have
the light believe in it: And so men have this light before they believe in it,
and are children: And this ye conclude is not pure, so goes about to take away
that men should believe in, they having the Light, and then afterward to
believe in it, and with that they see the Author of their faith, Christ Jesus
from whence it comes, and so would destroy the foundation of God, the Prophets
and Apostles which stands sure; and so are ye found in the spirit of error,
and corrected, knowing neither law nor faith.

Pr. Again they say the Light (which is Christ) with which every man is
enlightened that comes into the world withal, they say does not discover the
sin of unbelief. See page 10.

Ans. And did not Christ marvel at their unbelief, and see, and discovered the
unbelief of the Jews, of whose Father are ye; And does not Christ the Light
which does enlighten every man withal, discover unbelief? And does not the
unbelievers hate the light, and know the light will reprove them which they
should believe in, that manifests their sin? and yet you say, does not discover
unbelief, which is their condemnation, not believing in it, because their deeds
be evil, hating it.

Pr. And further ye say, That the light that lights every man that comes
into the world brings in a legal righteousness, etc.

Ans. Does not the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, bring in the righteousness of God? and is it not the righteousness of
God? So it corrects you that be in the legal righteousness, and out of Christ,
which enlightneth nevery man that comes into the world.

Pr. Again you say, The righteousness performed by the grace of Christ, the
Gospel, teaches to deny it. See page 10.

Ans. Now is there any righteousness wrought by the grace of Christ, but what
is by Christ who is the covenant of grace? and the power of God which is the
Gospel, which lights every man that comes into the world?

Pr. They call it conscience, or a natural light, etc. page 11.

Answ. Which light was before the word conscience was; or a natural light, the
Sun, Moon, and Stars either; for all things that was made, was made by it. The
natural light, or made light, are created lights. He made the Sun, the Moon,
and the Stars, they were made: And here is the natural lights to the natural
eye. And the light that every man is enlightened with that comes into the word,
was before these were made, glorified with the Father before the world began,
and before the name Conscience was, or things was made, and then they was
named, and the light does exercise the conscience toward God and toward man;
which light comes from Christ the Author of faith, which is held in the pure
conscience, who before the world began was glorified with the Father.

Pr. Again, the light which comes from Christ does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, which discovers the evil, which will give thee power
against it, man walking in it and yet brings to the rest, to the Father, this
they call free will, etc. see page 12.

Ans. Which light brings out of the will of man into the will of God, to him
that is not born by the will of man from whence it comes, in which light men do
his will, and know his doctrine. So here they are corrected again; for the
free will and will worship, is out of the light which is Christ, which John
speaks of: And they that hate the light are out of Christ, and are not made
free from the wrath to come; but they that be in the light are made free from
the wrath to come, in covenant with God. So you that would set up another light
then Christ, are Antichrist, in your own wills; for all will worship, and fained
humility is out of the light in the transgression.

Pr. Here they say, that God made a difference where there was none, see page
13.

Ans. And the Apostle said, they were all gone astray. And God puts a
difference between the precious and the vile, judges righteously, and respects
no man's person, and makes a difference in judgment. And they say, God checks
and chides the wanderings of his people; and yet they say, God makes a
difference where there is none, and you are to be checked and chidden.

Pr. Again they say, The children of God are all their lifetime found groaning
under sin, etc. page 14.

Ans. The Apostle tells you plainly, He that is borne of God does not commit
sin, neither can he, because the seed of God remains in him: and he keeps
himself, that the wicked one touches him not; and they are made free from
sin: And here the Apostle corrects ye again; for those are not groaning under,
when the wicked one touches them not, but these reigns over it.

Pr. Here they say, Who puts men to the light of the eternal word with which
they are enlightened withal, puts men besides the way of life, and puts men
besides the way of salvation. See page 16.

Ans. None knows salvation but by the light which comes from the eternal Word,
nor the way of life, which is Christ, which every man that comes into the
world is enlightened withal, and so the salvation to the ends of the earth.

Pr. Here again they say, That the light that lights every man that comes
into the world shuts up the Kingdom of heaven against men, and takes away the
ministration of the Gospel, and d^stroys the ministries of man, etc. See page
17.

Ans. None comes into the Kingdom of heaven, but who comes into the light which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world; It opens the Kingdom of
heaven, but it destroys man's ministration, and brings in the ministration of
God and the Gospel: And this light ye call law, or works, that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, which he that believes in it has ceased
from his own works, as God did from his, and comes to the end of the Law.

Pr. Again they say, the Scriptures are the means of faith.

Answ. And so have thrown out Christ the author of it, and God the giver; and
the Scripture is but the declaration of the Saints faith, and it says men had
faith before Scripture was, as instance Abraham and Enoch.

Pr. Again they say, As for the expected dictating the Scriptures by the spirit
to us as to the writers thereof, it is groundless, etc. see page 18.

Answ. So showing of what spirit you are, who with the true spirit are
corrected, that have the Scriptures dictated to you, but not by the same spirit
as the Prophets and Apostles had.

Pr. They say, Instruction in the Scriptures is the way of sowing the seed in
Children, etc.

Ans. And the Scripture says, the seed is the Word, and Christ is the
seeds-man, which was before Scripture was; and yet it does no good except they
eat the book, and so confute themselves. And many had the Scriptures, which
stood against the seeds-man as you do now, and the Devil out of the truth
makes a cloak of those things, who will not feed upon the Word.

Pr. So the light which lights every man that comes into the world, which we
say is the Covenant of God, they say that is to break down the enclosed Garden.
see page 20.

Ans. This is that which confounds Babylon the great, and brings it into
remembrance with God, and brings the great Whore into judgment. The Light
which is the way into the garden of God, breaks down their enclosed garden,
that from the Apostles have apostatized.

Pr. They say, that the power to justle out the form is an error, etc. see
page 24.

Answ. Which was the Apostles work to bring off the form into the power, the
substance Christ, which was not an error. But you being in the error, keep
people into forms out of the power, and so not in the Apostles work.

Pr. Again they here say, It is blasphemy to say God is in all, etc. See page
30.

Ans. And the Apostle says, God over all, and in you all, blessed for ever,
and through all, Ephesians. 4.

Pr. They say, It is not a transgression though men pray not, nor preach not
for many days, weeks, and months together, though necessity is laid upon
them, etc. page 32.

Answ. Contrary to Christ's command, who bid them watch and pray; And contrary
to the Apostles doctrine, who said, woe be unto him if he did not preach the
Gospel. So where there comes a woe there is a transgression: so likewise where
Christ's doctrine is denied, and the Apostle, which said, pray always, but
without wrath and doubtings; and lifting up holy hands, and pray for enemies.
But you pray in the wrath, and hands full of blood, and persecute friends, as
your Gaols may witness; so as Pastor Eaton says, you never heard the voice of
God: And Micah said, Night is upon Priest and Prophets, that divine for money,
and preach peace to the people, if they put into their mouths, if not, they
prepare war against them. Such have no answer from God.

Pr. They say, That apparel is for distinction of qualities of persons, etc.
See page 36.

Ans. That is but in the world; for that which distinguishes persons is the
Word, the person of Christ from the persons of Adam in the fall, and who be in
the transgression, and who be out of it; and who be vessels of honor and
dishonor; and your wearing of gold and costly apparel, it distinguishes you
from the Apostles doctrine. And the holy women of old which was honorable, it
was not the apparel that made them so to be, but the hidden man of the heart
which was of great price to the Lord, which were brought to do the command of
God: That honor which is in the world for clothes and respect, God will stain,
which stands in the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, and the lust of the
flesh, and there stands the worlds honor in transgression.

Pr. They say, It is most true, the Jew inward desires not the praise of men,
etc. see page 38.

Ans. Then all that desires the praise of men, and respect to persons, are not
the Jews inward by their own conclusion, but the Jew outward; And so Priest
judge your work and fruit, how many Jews outwardly you have begotten; for that
which begets the Jew outward, which has the praise of men, and respecting of
persons is the outward Jew, and that which begets the inward Jew, is the Jew
within who has his praise of God, and Christ who was the King of the Jews, was
not the respecter of persons.

Pr. Again they say, It was not Christ's command to give your Coats to the next
beggar that asks them. See page 42.

Ans. Which the Scriptures say, he that has two coats let him give to him that
has none; and the rich will give to the rich, and thus they affront the
Scriptures: And God does give wisdom how to distribute, and to whom to
distribute, and how to honor the Lord with the substance; and so shows your
selves ignorant of Christ's doctrine, in letting so many poor beg at your
doors and in the streets, and yet you will have boot-hose-tops, and double
cuffs, and ribbons about you, who are more like Stage Players then Ministers,
that are not like to give your Coat to the next beggar; which double cuffs and
boot-hose-tops and ribbons you have got for tithes of poor people that have
hardly a coat to put on; but they that obey Christ's command, that have two
coats gives to him that has none:

Pr. Again they sa^, The Son of man is not come; and these are false Prophets
and false Christ's who say he is co^^ at page 43.

Ans. And so they ^^ll John a false Prophet, who tells that the Son of God was
come, 1 John 5. For we know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding: And you are the false Prophets and Antichrists in the world that
deny Christ come in the flesh.

Again we say, you are them that come not in by the door, and draw people from
the teachings of God, who draw people from the light that does enlighten every
man that comes into the world.

Pr. And you tell them it is natural. See page 43.

Ans. The light is the door which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, but ye blind Sodomites are groping for the door, but cannot find it,
raging without, and would kill the just; but these keeps you that be in the
Light, which is the door, and all be blind; and they be made blind though they
say they see that does not see the light which lightneth every man that comes
into the world, by whom the world was made.

Pr. Ye say, The Apostles went out of their own Nation without money or two
coats without a bag either, etc. see Page 44.

Ans. Which of all you in your own Nation goes without your Stipends, or
Augmentations, Tithes, or Gleab-lands? which of all you will go into your own
Nation without this? So not going, have ye not all judged your selves by the
Apostles practice which ye speak of? and with your own words?

Pr. And ye say, that the greatest part of the persecution in the Nation is
ceased, etc.

Ans. Ye say so, that to persecution are turned, whose fruits and persecution
has more been seen within these late years, then it has been for several
scores, nay this hundred years past; and you are turned the persecutors of them
that will not put into your mouths that you do no work for, and for speaking to
you, as your Gaols bears witness.

Pr. Again they say, To be called of men Master, and so to transgress Christ's
command, is but a civil respect to their public employment.

Ans. Pharisee-like has he showed that he condemns Christ's commands, and
unlike Ministers of him, but Antichrists, that condemns Christ's command, and
calls it a civil respect in their employments. For you do not read of Mr.
Paul, and Mr. Peter, etc.

Pr. Again they say, That is it which makes many ears to tingle, and is a
desolation to say God is coming to teach his people himself, and to redeem
them from all their Teachers, etc. see page 47.

Ans. Now is the Prophets fulfilling, They shall not need every man to teach
his neighbor or his brother. Now is people coming to hear the Son, who is the
salvation to the ends of the earth, Gods covenant. Now is that coming which
shall make your ears tingle; and now is people come to the anointing, that they
need not any man to teach them: Now is people ceasing from men whose breath is
in their nostrils, and looking to Christ and the Lord, the salvation to the
ends of the earth.

Pr. Again they say, That Satan transformed into an Angel of light, is helping
on good motions and fair complyances with rules of right, to an ill end. See p.
49.

Ans. That is like your doctrine, that Satan should make use of good motions,
and fair complyances, with rules of right: Now the rule of right and the good
is out of his power.

Prin. Again they say, Why may not Satan help on Mortification, etc. See page
53.

Ans. Nay, that which mortifies is out of the power of Satan; that goes against
his power, and that brings down the death of Christ and his resurrection, which
they that be out of mortification knows not.

Pr. And the persecutors when they have persecuted the children of Light, which
light does enlighten every man that comes into the world, they say, they expose
themselves to suffering.

Ans. And this light is it which torments them: So striking at the Light, they
strike at the foundation, which we find these seven men's work is to strike at
the Light, the foundation, Christ Jesus, so Satan's Ministers. And abundance of
lies is their Book stuffed with, which is not worth mentioning, which will turn
upon themselves, in the day of fire and judgments they shall feel their works:
In their conscience the witness shall answer, and they that prison the just in
their own particular, turns against them that be in the covenant of Light,
where the Prisoner shows himself forth; for there is no persecution in the
general: but first men have stopped their ears against that of God within
them, and gone from the Truth in their own particulars, then they turn against
them that be in the general, and such were always called to be of the Devil,
doing his work out of the Truth.

Richard Baxters Book, called, The Quakers Catechism. His PRINCIPLES
follows. And his Works which are to the Fire to be condemned: And as for his
Lies, and Railings, and Brawlings, and Revilings, we turn them back to
himself; which for them, the greatest will be his own sorrow.
Pr. HE says in a Letter (at the beginning of his Book) to a friend, etc. To
say that any is perfect, and without sin, is the Devil speaking in man, etc.

Ans. Contrary to the language of the Apostle and Christ, who bid them be
perfect, and the Apostle spoke wisdom among them that are perfect, and said,
they were made free from sin. And it is the Devil speaking in man that speaks
for sin, while men are upon earth, and speaks; for the Devil holds up him who
makes men not perfect, which Truth makes men free again from the Devil, and
speaks in man, and says, be perfect.

Pr. He says, Christ does not condemn men for being called of men Master, and
it is not the title, but, etc.

Ans. Contrary to Christ's words, who says, be ye not of men called Master, for
ye have a Master in heaven even Christ, and ye are all brethren. And thus he
tramples upon the commands, and makes the commands of Christ of none effect,
which is one of the marks that Christ gives to the multitudes to know the
hypocrites by; and so does not only deny Christ's commands, but teaches men to
break them: so crucifies Christ, and says they are his Ministers, but that is
the Antichrist that abides not in his doctrine, as in 2 John.

Pr. And he says, people are tossed up and down like a bundle of feathers,
and Novices, etc.

Answ. How should they be otherwise but be tossed up and down by you, when ye
deny perfection, of being perfect, and calls it the voice of the Devil
speaking, that speaks of perfection, and overcoming sin? How should you but be
the men that tosseth people up and down with every slight, and blown up and
down with your windy doctrine that is not perfect, and so bring the Nations and
people like unto waters? For all the unperfection is out of Christ in the first
Adam in sin and transgression, and the Devil which is out of the truth; and
all the perfection is in Christ the second Adam, the covenant of God, out of
sin and transgression, and so who are in Christ are new creatures; and old
things passes away, and all things become new. So in the second Adam, in the
Lord from heaven, above the earthly the first man, in the perfection out of the
tossing; that is your imitated Church got up since the days of the Apostles,
not the true Church:

Pr. He says, a true Church is guilty of injury, etc. See page 4.

Ans. Contrary to the Scriptures, where the Apostle says, the Church is the
pillar and ground of truth, without spot or wrinkle, or blemish, or any such
thing.

Pr. He says, God has commanded a sufficient maintenance in general for
Ministers, and left it to humane prudence to judge what is sufficient, etc. see
page 7.

Ans. By this he has left the spirit to judge, and the wisdom of God which
acts by his commands, and so runs into earthly humane prudence. Therefore is
there so much oppression for Tythe^ and maintenance for Ministers, and so much
making havoc, and prisoning and persecuting for the same: And the power denied
which the Apostles had to eat and to drink, which Christ gave them; and so
you run into the lust for the money of whom you do no work for, and the earth;
and whilst they coveted after that, they lost the faith; and that is the cause
that people have lost the unity, and run all upon heaps. Their Teachers have
lost the faith (through coveting and love of money) in which they should have
had unity with God, and one with another, and have pleased him, and had access
to him, and have given them victory over the world, the Devil, enmity, and
corruption.

Pr. He says, all that come into the world are lighted with the light of
nature. See page 7.

Ans. For so he calls the light, which John calls the true light (which is
Christ) that lights every man that comes into the world, so is ignorant of
John's doctrine, and the Scriptures; a man not fit to teach, but is gotten up by
an usurped authority, and is not able to divide the word aright, but with the
Scriptures thou art corrected, and the light that lights every man that
comes into the world; the natural lights were made by it, the Sun and Moon,
and so forth: And men that are born blind, are enlightened with that Light
which was before the Sun was, before all things was made, which came a light
into the world to enlighten every man, that all men through it might believe.
Now all men may see how all men are mad against John, Christ, and the Apostles
doctrine, that bore witness to the true light, and Christ bid believe in it.

Pr. He talks of, and preaches up an external word. See page 8.

Answ. Which the Scripture speaks not^ing of, nor the Prophets, nor Chrrst, but
says, the word that lives, abides, and endures for ever: and of the Scriptures
of truth that cannot be broken. And of Gods words, and Christ's words, and that
is not external, this is not agreeable to sound words that cannot be condemned,
but that is like his doctrine that knows not the eternal; but the Ministers of
Christ did not tell people of an external word, but an eternal word; but you
being made by the will of man, speak to the people of an external.

Pr. He says, He has not seen God in glory, nor any man, etc. See page 9.

Ans. We do believe thee and the Priests have not seen him: but the Saints saw
him, and Job saw him, and Isaiah saw him the Lord of hosts, and Steven saw him,
and Abraham saw his glory, and the Apostle saw him, and beheld his glory, the
glory of God. And you are as the Pharisees that stand against Christ, that
enlightneth every man that comes into the world, that Christ said never saw
the shape of God.

Pr. He says, The word infallible, is the pillar of the Popish Kingdom, and
the master-point of new Religion, etc. see page 9.

Ans. Now thou that calls infallibility a Popish point, a new Religion: Thy
Religion thou have manifested, and thy points that are not infallible; contrary
to the Apostle who had many infallible proofs of the spirit of Jesus Christ,
and they who have not are none of his; and who have the spirit of Christ, have
that which is infallible, and lets them see infallible proofs, as thou may
read in Scripture. And who have the spirit of God, have that which is
infallible: And the Religion which is out of the fallibility, and out of the
spirit of God is vain, and there is thine, and the Popes, as your fruits have
declared, got up since the days of the Apostles in the apostasy fallible, but
that which is in the spirit of God is infallible.

Pr. And thou says, Thou have no such revelation as the Apostles had as thou
know of, and the Apostles were brought to speak infallibly to the Church by
an infallible spirit, and thou nor the Pope has no such infallibility as the
Apostles had, etc. see page 10.

Answ. We do believe you, for you are the false spirit, you and the Pope that
went forth from the Apostles into the world, that Christ said should come, that
inwardly ravened from the spirit, and went forth from the Apostles, and only
have had the sheeps clothing, and so are the spirits which the Apostles bids
the Saints try (which went forth into the world) that had the true spirit, the
record, the spirit of God; and they that have found the record, the spirit of
God tries all your spirits, and finds you fallible, ravened from the spirit of
God inwardly, only having the sheeps clothing that has covered the wolf in
you all, the devourer. And so we do believe neither yo^ ^or the Pope has the
infallible spirit, being the false spirits that went forth into the world, and
led the world after you. That Nations are come to be like waters, so are you
broken all into heaps, and sects, and wants the infallible spirit in which you
should have unity: And so has not the Son of God revealed among you who have
not revelation as the Apostles had, which we witness, who are come to that the
Apostles were in, and so the Son of God reigns.

Pr. He says, The holy Scriptures are the temporal word, etc. see page 11.

Answ. Now see if this be not an undervaluing the Scriptures of truth, and the
words of God and Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles, which cannot be broken,
he calls it a Temporal word, which the Scripture teaches no such doctrine,
but thy lying spirit.

Pr. He says, The Gospel or Word is the external light flowing out unto us
from the Son, etc. See page 12.

Ans. Contrary to the Scripture, which says, the Gospel is the power of God
unto salvation to every one that believes, so not temporal, not a temporal
light. And the light which comes from the Son of God, that lights every man
that comes into the world, that shines in peoples hearts, that gives the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus is not temporal,
thou that says so art in the delusion.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures are able to make men wise unto salvation without
any more additions, and there is no more to be expected, etc. see page 12.

Answ. Contrary to the Scripture it self, and the Apostles doctrine, who
says, through faith they are able to make wise unto salvation. So there is an
addition which the Apostles adds, and all the Saints and true believers, which
is the faith which thou art reprobated from, and so no Minister of Christ, in
the un-victory, so in the worlds lusts.

Pr. He says, The soul of man is a spiritual substance, etc. And Magnus Byne
says, the soul is not infinite in it self, but it is a creature: And Richard
Baxter says, it is a spirtuall substance. etc. See page 13.

Answ. Now consider what a condition these called Ministers are in: They say,
that which is a spiritual substance, is not infinite in it self, but a
creature; that which came out from the Creator, and is in the hand of the
Creator, which brings it up, and to the Creator again, that is infinite it
self; which the hand goes against him that does evil, in which hand the soul
is, which is immortal and infinite; which hand is infinite, which brings it up
to God is infinite.

Pr. He says, Do not they blasphemously make Christ an Idol, that call our
Temples, Idols Temples, etc? See page 15.

Ans. Christ's body was and is the Temple of God, who ended all outward Temples
made with hands, and so that is no Idol, but others are Idols, held up by you
and the Pope, Jews and Gentiles, that prison the seed of God in your selves.
And Stephen was stoned to death for denying the Temple, and for witnessing the
substance: so have you almost stoned many to death for denying your Idols
Temples.

Pr. He calls that most ignorant and sottish dealing to own Christ's commands
that bids be not called of men Master, etc. page 18.

Answ. And thus he shows his ignorance and sottishness, and does not read Mr.
Paul, Mr. Peter, and they transgress the doctrine of Christ; and he has not
the spirit of Christ, but is gone out into the world, where all the false
spirits are opposing Christ's commands, and the Spirits commands, and so no
Minister of Christ.

Pr. He says, All the Ministers since the days of the Apostles was to be
ordained and called, which the Apostles were not, etc. See page 21.

Answ. Does not the Apostle speak of them that usurped the authority? Yes, we
say that all of you and the Pope since the days of the Apostles are called by
men, and made by men, who are the false spirit that went forth into the world,
that ravened from the true, so have not heard the voice of God at any time: So
he has not sent you, but you have usurped the authority being made by man: And
as no prophecy of Scripture came by the will of man, therefore all as do get
the Scripture in their own wills out of the holy Ghost, are made by man, such
are out of unity with God, with Scriptures, with one another, and all upon
heaps about words, and such men make and sets up.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures is Gods law, and a sufficient rule for doctrine
and worship it self, etc. See page 22.

Ans. Now many may have the Scriptures; and if they have not the spirit that
gave them forth, they do not worship God in the spirit; And they that have the
Scriptures, and do not do the will of Christ, they know not his Doctrine: And
the Law is light.

Pr. He says, But I must tell you, that our Bells are not carnal, if they
were, they would scarce sound so well, or last so long, etc. See page 23.

Ans. If they be not carnal, then they are spiritual, and in that all the world
will judge thee, that they are things seen, and so they are temporal and
carnal; and what is temporal is not eternal, nor spirit. The Apostle speaks of
carnal weapons, 2 Cor. 10.4. and carnal ordinances, Heb. 9.10.

And whereas thou speaks of baptizing your Bells, etc? Have not many Bells in
England been baptized? And was not the Pope the first Autho^ of it? And we do
say that they are carnal and not spiritual, let them sound never so well, and
last never so long, though in many Towns you have made them to tune Psalms; yet
we cannot say that these are spiritual that can tune Psalms, neither dare we,
but do judge them that do say they are so. For the Scripture calls those
Ordinances, which were Ordinances of God once, worldly and carnal, and the
Sanctuary is called a worldly S^nctuary when the substance was come: And so we
see, and say all your sorts of Bells, though they may be tunes of Psalms, yet
they are carnal, and not spiritual, that is our conclusion; though indeed
poor people being ignorant, may well, when such as thou says they are not
carnal, when they be, yet they stir up the fl shly nature in people.

Pr. He says, To say a man is freed from the body of sin while on earth, is
part of the Papists dung which they have taught you to feed upon, etc. page 24.

Ans. Contrary to the Scriptures and the Apostles words, who says, they were
made free from sin, which was before you or the Papists was. And contrary to
John, who bids them try the spirits (who says, the false spirits gone out into
the world which are you and the Papists) he says, he that is borne of God does
not commit sin, neither can he, because the seed of God remains in him, 1
John. And you are in the P^pists dung spoken of, who pleads for sin; and thou
art contrary to the Apostles and Christ, who preached perfection and freedom
from sin.

Pr. Again he says, Christ's Kingdom is an Hospital, and has no subjects in
it but diseased ones, etc. see page 24.

Ans. We read of no such thing in Scripture, that Christ's Kingdom is an
Hospital, and his subjects are diseased ones. But they that follow the Lamb,
in their mouth is no guile, nor spot, nor fault before the Throne of God, and
are the elect which God lays no sin too; and they are the faithful, and
called, and chosen that overcome the world, and his kingdom stands in power,
and in righteousness, and joy in the holy Ghost, and is not an Hospital, nor
his subjects diseased ones, for he heals them, and converts them, and washes
them, and therefore thou art a Liar, and a man that does not divide the word
aright. The diseased, or such as come unto Christ to be healed, them who comes
to him he heales them of what infirmity soever it be, and cures them and
clothes them in the right mind. Therefore thou art co^rected, and worthy of
correction, and all the diseased ones are in your Kingdom, physicians of no
value.

Pr. What can keep the soul from the enjoyment of God but sin, etc. See page
25.

Answ. It is the unbelief in Christ the Light, and the offering, and in his
blood that keeps from the enjoyment of God, who is the way to God, which the
Light lets see that.

The Author of the Book called, The Quaking Mountebanke, etc. His PRINCIPLES
follows. His words are seen in the Light, and are condemned for the Fire: The
day is coming that thou (whosoever thou art) wilt suffer, and the witness in
thy Conscience shall answer.
Pr. HE says, the Quakers are no Conjurers, and yet he calls them Mountebanks,
in his Libell called The Quaking Mountebank, etc. see page 5.

Answ. They have discovered his works and fruits, and the Fire is over his
head, and proves that he has the Language of a Mountebank, by his revilings
and raylings, which among sober people is not worth mentioning. And the Quakers
mountain is the house of the Lord, established upon the top of all the
mountains in the earth: And their Rock is Christ, which will split all
Mountebanks that make war against him in pieces: And now it is seen what is
risen against the Lamb and the Saints; and the mouths of the false Prophets are
opened, and the Inhabitans of the Earth are drunk, and the Beast does make War
against the Lamb and the Saints, but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the
victory. And Quakers are not Mountebanks, but the Lords children.

Pr. And this Mountebank calls the Quakers beasts, that have the spirit of God
in them feeling it, etc. See page 7.

Ans. So that it has discovered his spirit whether he is gone; and his words
shall be his burden, and the Lord will find him out, though he have not put
forth his name: And those that know the mind of Christ, such he calls Beasts
that do know the mind of Christ, and so has discovered himself that he knows
it not; but the Saints knows the mind of Christ, and spirit of Christ, and are
the sons and daughters of God.

Pr. Here he makes the Steeple-house the Arc, and calls it the house of God,
etc. See page 9.

Ans. A place which Papists set up for Mass; so he shows his ignorance and
profaneness against the Saints whose bodies are the Temples of God.

Pr. And the Mountebank says, that the Quakers are not a kin to the
Egyptians, but yet he says, they love darkness rather then light, etc. page
12.

Answ. And thus his spirit is rebuked, and they that be in Egypt love not the
Light.

Pr. Again he says, That Learning is the prime ornament of the soul. See page
13.

Ans. And so has thrown away the power, and Christ the Bishop of the soul,
who is its ornament, in which it has its joy; and men with their Learning
prison the soul which is immortal.

Pr. And he says, The Quakers are no Pharisees, etc. see page 16.

Ans. And the Priests of Newcastle calls them Pharisees. Here is Gog and Magog
in battle together against the Lamb, and the royal seed called Quakers:
Witness that which cannot be shaken, and the royal seed is a-top of their
head.

Pr. He says, The Quakers scorn to creep into houses, etc. See page 19.

Ans. Which does not agree with the rest of his company, who say they do creep
into houses. The Quakers are in the power of God, and in the authority of the
Lamb, above all houses, and into houses creep not, but are upon the Throne: but
you that be in the form that deny the power, creeps into houses.

Ellis Bradshaw's Book called, The Quakers Whitest Devil. His PRINCIPLES as
follows. And has unvailed himself in what spirit he is, and how he has
gone from the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles, fighting against the
Rock. But the stone is fallen upon his head, which will grind him to powder,
whose words shall be his burden.
Pr. HEre he says, We do utterly deny all their ways and doctrines who exclude
all teachings of men. See page 5.

Ans. Contrary to the Prophets, who bid people to cease from men whose breath
was in their nostrils, therefore there is a teaching beyond it: And who comes
to that, shall come to hear the Son: And the Apostles went to bring people off,
to the end of the Prophets, and off of the Priests, and off the ordinances
which the Prophets had established in their place, and the Lord is come to
teach his people himself, where they need not say, know the Lord in the new
covenant.

Pr. He says, The Quakers spirit does teach them to honor no man, etc. see
page 6.

Ans. That is a lie, for it teaches them to have all men in esteem, and to
honor all men in the Lord: Yet they are convinced by the Law to be
transgressors, if they respect men's persons; and they are not to hold the faith
of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons as you do.

And whereas thou says, The spirit of God does not teach to judge before the
time, etc. See page 6. And others say, the Saints shall not judge while they be
upon the earth.

Answ. But the spirit did teach the Apostle to judge, and his time was come:
And he tells some, that they were of old ordained for condemnation, and their
damnation slumbred not, and they went on to eternal judgment, and it is high
time not to judge.

Pr. And this he calls a mistake, to deny all those that say they have faith in
Christ, and yet their righteousness is not perfect, as the righteousness of
Christ is perfect.

Ans. Who has faith in Christ is in the perfect Righteousness, and so you are
in the mistake that have a faith and a righteousness that is not perfect; for
righteousness and faith which is the gift of God is perfect.

Pr. For to say, that he that says he has hope in himself, and yet is not
purified even as he is pure, is the hope of the hypocrite, etc. This he calls a
mistake, see page 8.

Answ. And here he is corrected, and his spirit is corrected, being in the
world, for the hope purifies as God is pure, but the hope of the hypocrite does
not.

Pr. He calls it a subtle delusion that owns not the Law without in Tables and
Books to try the spirits within, etc. See page 8.

Ans. And the spirit of Christ within is the end of the Tables, Law, and Works,
and Books: Therefore in this is discovered his own White Devil, and corrected
by the spirit as he speaks of; and the Law is now in the heart, the new
Covenant is witnessed and the Pharisees had the Law in Tables, as thou have
Scriptures, and stood against the life, and in the sub^le delusion as thou
does, who brings the external to try the eternal, which it is the eternal that
tries the external, as Christ did the Pharisees, who told them when they
wronged it; And so are you the wrongers of it, who has not the eternal to try
withal, so as the Devil who is fallen out of the power: And it was the
eternal that led forth the Saints to speak forth Scripture, and with that they
are tried and seen w^o wrongs them, and wrest them to their own destruction;
and Peter was one of those tryers who was in the Spirit of God, and could not
read letters; and the Pharisees they had the letter without the life, and could
not try.

Francis Blake's Book called, Choice Collections of Scriptures against the
practice of the QUAKERS, etc. His Principles follow.
Pr. HE says, Repent and become sinners, because the Quakers say, they are
made free from sin by Christ, see page 6.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, repent, and forsake sin,
that they might receive the remission of sins, etc. And contrary to the
Apostles doctrine to Simon Magus.

Pr. Francis Blake has printed a Letter, which shows, that those that are in
scorn called Quakers ownes the blood of Christ. And John Bunyan says, they
deny it.

Ans. And thus they are in confusion; but the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of
God we own, but their Lies we disown, and we witness the repentance which
cannot be repented of; but we say to you, Repent and turn from your sins: And
they that bid people repent and become sinners, are Satan's messengers.

Luke Fawnes, Samuel Gellibrand, Joshua Kirton, John Rothwel, Thomas Underhil,
and Nathaniel Webbs, in a Book called, The Second BEACON Fired. Sent to the
Protector. Their thirst is after blood and persecution; over all such spirits
we see, there is that in them shall Answer it.
Pr. THey say, The Quakers Principles are Blasphemous, Paganish, Antichristian,
Anti-scripturall.

Ans. Because we hold out the foundation of God, Christ Jesus, who does
enlighten every man that comes into the world.

Pr. He calls this loathsome, poisonous, and blasphemous error, etc. See page
3.

Answ. You are poisoning the people, and are of the Whores stock, who would
have blood to drink, which drunk of the blood of the Prophets and Martyrs, and
Saints, and so lies provoking the zeal of the Magistrate against them, as the
Pharisees and Priests did in ages past; but that was the blind zeal that
persecuted in all Ages, and they are Anti-scripturall, Antichristian, and
Anti-ministeriall that deny the light that lights every man that comes into
the world, which is the end and substance of the Scriptures; and who is in
that, owns the Scriptures, and is not against them, and are the true Manisters
and Christians; and so you are the Pagans and Heathens that deny the light that
all men are enlightened withal.

Pr. They say that the Quakers are in an error, to say, that none are the
Ministers of God, and called of him, who are sent forth by the authority of
man, etc. page 7.

Answ. So shows their ignorance of the Apostles doctrine and words; Not of man
nor by man he says he had received it, but by the revelation of Jesus Christ,
and so you that are made by men deny this.

Pr. They say, That is another error of the Quakers, that say, he who is not
infallible in his judgment, when he gives counsel and advice, is no Minister
of Christ. See page 7.

Answ. Now he that is not infallible in his counsel, and judgment, and
advice, is not he in error? And are not the Ministers of Christ the Ministers
of the spirit? And is not that out of the error which is infallible in
counsel and judgment? And are they Ministers of Christ that are fallable? and
is not the power, the Gospel infallible? You may well creep and go to the
Magistrates for help, who denies infallibility, and so natural men knows not
the things of God with the earthly spirit of the world. I say that is
infallible which must order all the Creation to the glory of God, by which they
were made and created.

Pr. You say again, You are laying and spreading their errors and blasphemies
before the Magistrates, that they may stop their mouths. See page 9.

Ans. Now you show that you have not the spirit of Stephen, nor the Apostles
(whom their enemies could not resist) but the spirit of them that was against
Stephen, etc. persuading the Magistrate, and so your weapons ye show are
carnal, not the mighty weapons to pluck down the strong hold, and spiritual
wickednesses, which weapons are spiritual. Ye are fain to fly to the mountains
to cover you, to hide you from the presence of the Lamb which is now risen: And
where did ever the Apostles go to the Magistrates for help, and complain
against Errors and Blasphemy; and such as did so, judged Truth to be blasphemy,
running to the Magistrates as you do now, who are apostatized from the
Apostles; but many of the Magistrates are come to see you, and will not be your
pack-horses nor Executioners any longer. And your whole intent is to brand the
light of Christ Jesus, with the same expressions of Error and Blasphemy, as
the Jews did in Ages past, who are begging to the Magistrates with Petitions,
provoking, stirring up the blind zeal where it is, against Christ, where he
is in his Saints, such as keeps his Testimony, whose thirst is after blood
and persecution, who would stop the Press that Truth should not be published
to the Nation: Showing ye have not the spirit that is able to gainsay, nor
able to contradict the spirit that is in the Quakers. Therefore do you beg with
your Petitions and feigned humility, for the powers of the Earth them to stop:
But where the spirit of wisdom, and of God, and of a sound mind is ruling,
the intents of your minds are seen, such as was then in all ages that brought
upon heaps, and stirred up tumults, and made Insurrections among people, and
casting mists before Magistrates eyes, whereby they might be blinded, and
turned against the just: For which cause brought Gods judgments upon such as
you, and Magistrates both, and rebuked KINGS for his Anointeds sake.

John Toldervyes Book called, The Foot out of the Snare. His Principles: And
these whose names were subscribed to the Book, viz. Thomas Brooks, Thomas
Jacomb, George Cockayn, William Adderley, John Goodwin, John Tombs, William
Jenkins, and Matthew Poole, Priests.
WHom the Priests, and his intent is to father the work of the imagination that
was in John Toldervy, upon the spirit of the living God, and of Christ that is
in the Quakers. But all their work and imaginations is with the Light, and the
spirit of Truth judged, and him, and his Priests, and all them their feet fast
in the snare. And all that is in this Book which is contrary to the truth, and
the Scriptures is judged; but all that is truth is owned: And here is some of
their Principles as follows. John Toldervy, and the rest in the Book
entitled, The foot out of the snare, he and they would lay all his actions upon
the Light, but they split themselves against the Rock, and he himself has
split himself upon the Rock, which made him recant again, and deny all his
foolish actions, and so these great high Priests come off with shame.

Pr. He says, the declaring against all sin is nothing of the mystery of the
Gospel of Christ. See page 3.

Ans. Ignorant are you; for that which makes manifest sin, is the light of the
glorious Gospel of Christ the mystery, all his will-worships, and his
will-actings, his self-righteousnesse, and obediences, and motions, and fancies
which he followed, the Priests would lay it upon the Covenant in the heart, and
Christ within, and does not clear the Covenant and Christ within from all those
actions which was destructive to the creature; which Christ the Covenant
preserves, and the creation, and brings the creature into the liberty of the
sons of God; and here your madness and blindness appears without distinction.

Pr. He says, Not to call any one Master, nor to pull off the hat to any one,
not to you any one, but to use the word thee and thou to a single person, not
to use any Complements or greetings to any, not to bow to any man, to honor
the Creature, not drinking to any: and to pull off the points and ribbons from
his knees, band-strings and hat-hand, and buttons that was unnecessary on his
Coat, and other things, and burned diverse books, etc. And call this that put
off all these things which were unnecessary, they calls it seduced persuasions,
etc. See page 15.

Ans. Now all these that have born record with thee, under the life are ye
come, and judged, which abides and remains, and for ever with it judged: For to
instance, as for not calling men Master, that is the command of Christ. As for
the not fashioning your selves according to the world in your former lusts of
ignorance, that is the command of the Apostle: And as for the forsaking of
gorgeous apparel, naughtiness, and superfluity; they are corrected by the
Scriptures, and judged by the spirit: And as for drinking to one another, and
tempting one another with Beer, and bowing the Hat, and respecting and
honoring the Creature, which is earthly Adams honor in the Fall, which Christ
receives it not, the second Adam. And as for respecting of persons, they that
do so commit sin, and are convinced of the Law as transgressors. And now see
where thou wast, and all the Priests in your seduced persuasions, and judges
good of evil, and evil good: And thou and the Priests may see that all this
that which thou did from thy own persuasions, is thy own will: But that which
led thee from sin, and from the world, to righteousness, was owned, that shall
be recorded for ever against thee and all the Priests, and stand a witness
against you, though now thou art in the flower of thy age. And it will be hard
for thee John, and the Priests, to get in that which ye have spread abroad; and
the weight and the feeling the burden of all thy words, and your words ye are
not yet come to feel: But when the fire and the heat enters into your flesh,
that ye are scorched with the vehement heat, then remember every word that ye
have given forth, comes pat upon you a burden: From a lover of your souls,
and a cherisher of truth.

And John and the Priests, all the Actions which was done in thy will, and set
forth in the same to the view of the world by the Priest which abused the
power, and that which was of God rising in thee to the sight of the world,
crucifying afresh the Son of God, and so puts him to open shame: Thou will
suffer, and the Priests, and that which was done in thy presumption which
abused the power of the Lord God, that was never accepted of the Lord God, nor
never owned by the men of God. But there is a thousand I do believe in the
Nation that can see, and do see what thou and the Priests have recorded to the
world, and are able to judge when the power moved thee, and when there was
imaginations; and see that the Priests took thy part, and are one with that
nature in thee which betrayed the just, even Judas like, and mind and take
notice those that Judas betrayed Christ to, as thou betrayed the just too. See
what friends they were to Judas? and what friends they will be to thee after
that Judas has done, and after that thou have done? now come to the just
principle in thee. John, thy flight was in the winter.

And as for the word Thee and Thou spoken to a particular, shows they have
forgotten the Latin books, that which they call their Learning; for is it
righteous to call one many, or many one? That is a sound speech which cannot be
condemned.

And all people upon the earth that have run out in their imaginations, whereby
truth comes to be hurt; if they have done it willingly, the greater shall be
their punishment, they shall be whipped however. But all you that have bent your
wills, and given your strength to the adversary of God, whereby the way of
truth comes to be reproached: You are such as turn his grace into wantonness,
as cause the way of truth to be evil spoken of, and such shall have a reward
according to their works, thee and you all.

Pr. They say, The fashions of the world, and the Complements are not sin to
use them, etc. See page 45.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, which the Ceremonies commanded of
God, to use them after the substance was come was sin, much more the fashions
and customs of the world: Yea, but says they, this brings us in our living,
and by the other we lose our livelihood, so ye may see what mind is up in
choosing. And all the zeal in the wills which runs out before the Light guide,
that is that which the Priests catch at to make their defense withal against
the truth. But the Lord will reward them according to their works, who has
showed mercy to Toldervy, and made him confess in another Book that which
formerly the Priests and he had set forth, and vilified the truth, and so is
published to the Nation, after the Answer to this Book called, The foot out of
the Snare.

Such as deny the fashions of the world, which the Priests are in, points and
ribbons, double cuffs, and boot-hose-tops, and the honor of men which God will
stain, and be called of men Master; Such things as these 8 great Priests
justifies and insnares people under them; and if any forsake them, they will
say they are snared and deluded; and it is manifest who is their Master, and
whom they serve, that the keeping Christ's command is a snare to them; and
because we cannot call them Master, and keep Christ's commands, therefore they
rage, who transgresses his command, and then say they are Ministers of him,
but your fruits are seen, and works, praised be the Lord, you eight Priests
have discovered your selves who are the false spirits gone out into the world
from the Apostles, and out of Christ's command, Matthew. 23. Where do you read Mr.
Paul, Mr. Peter, and, etc. And where do you read that Paul and the messengers
of Christ were hung about with points and double cuffs, and boot-hose-tops, and
ribbons, and made such a stir about doffing of hats, and thee and thou, as the
novice Teachers do now, that are found in the lusts and fashions of the world,
which the Apostle declares against, and brought to sound words which could not
be condemned, and to obey the doctrine of Christ, not to be called of men
Master: But you are the transgressors that abide not in Christ's Doctrine, but
are the Antichrists, 2 John, which the Apostle speaks of, that has reigned
from their days, but now discovered by the spirit, praised be the Lord God;
and they know in their Latin original, it is not proper to say you to a
single person, and they know to be called of men Master, is against the command
of Christ's in the transgression, and so usurping that authority which Christ
forbids.

Thomas Collier his Book called, The Looking-glass for Quakers. His
PRINCIPLES follows. And as for all his Lies, they will be heaped upon his own
head, and to his own sorrow.
Pr. HE calls James Nayler a liar, because he said, That by which the just
lives, is that by which the creature is justified. See page 2. And he says, It
is another righteousness, because we witness the righteousness of faith
which is in the heart, which God is the Author of, etc. page 3.

Answ. Now that which we say God and Christ is not the Author of (but gathered
from the letter) is a dead faith and righteousness, and there is your
justification that stands in the unbelieving state and is condemned: only
speaking of the Letter as the Jews did, of a Christ that is come, as they did
of a Christ that was to come: and have not heard his voice, nor received faith
from him: who is the author of it through which men is justified and comes to
have peace with God, and this faith is in their hearts.

Pr. He calls it a harkening to the voice of Satan, to hearken to the voice
within, and says, they cry the light within, the voice of Christ the true
word, which he says, is but their own lying fancies at the best etc. See page
4.

Ans. Now to call the light within, the word within, Christ within, the word of
faith within, which is to be obeyed and done, lying fancies at the best; here
thou may see Collier, how thou divides the word not aright, and art ignorant of
the Scriptures. And Christ says the Spirit of the Father speaks in you, is not
this all Scripture, and if they hearken to this, do they not hearken to
Scripture? and is not the Scripture fulfilled in this? And is thy voice all
without thee only in the letter? And judges all delusion that has any
speaking within them, and so has judged thy self from the holy men of God one
of the dumb Prophets, and so contrary to the true Prophets and Apostles.

Pr. He says, If the very Christ, of God be within those that are called
Quakers, he cannot come down from Heaven, etc. See same page.

Ans. Here he stands against the promise of Christ that he shall come and dwell
in you and walk in you, I will come again unto you. And he has revealed his
Son in me says the Apostle. And this thou Thomas Collier, and John Bunyan is
ignorant of plain Scripture; the Scripture it declares it, and the Apostle said
know ye not that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates, and the Spirit of
the Father speaks in you, and see how contrary thou art to the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles.

Pr. He says, The Heavenly bodies spoken of in Cor. 15. are the Sun, Moon and
Stars, etc. See page 6.

Answ. Let all people read that Scripture and see if it hold forth that.

Pr. Again he says, They abuse the Scriptures, because they say he that is
born of God does not commit sin, etc. page 6.

Answ. When the Scripture is witnessed, as it relates, and speaks. And he
abuses it, when he gives private interpretations to it, and owns it not as it
speaks.

Pr. Again he says, He that says he has no sin deceives himself, etc. page
6.

Ans. But the Scripture says, If we say we have no sin, etc. So he perverts
the Scripture, for it is not he, for if he say (he) he may put it upon Christ,
who is without sin: and upon this account, he may charge the Elect, whom God
lays no sin too: and sees no iniquity in Jacob, nor transgression in Israel.
And it is Colliers wicked eye that sees sin, in the Elect, they that are born
of God: and thus he abuses the Scriptures, and is not able to divide the word
aright; and therefore such Spirits is to be kept out of Scriptures, with the
Spirit that gave forth Scripture: For he that is born of God does not commit
sin, and there is a time for men to see they have sin, and sinned, and a time
to confess it and forsake it, and their is a time to witness the blood of
Christ cleansing from all sin, and then a time to witness the birth born of God
which does not commit sin, 1 John 4. Chap.

Pr. He says, Here is a strange conceit of a person that fills heaven and
earth with his presence, and dwells in the Saints blindness with a witness,
etc. See page 8.

Ans. Here thy ignorance has appeared again: for all power in heaven and earth
is given to him Christ Jesus who is in them, at the right hand of God, who is
in the Saints dwelling; and does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, but this to thee is a strange conceit, and blindness with a witness. Thy
witness is blinded with thy conceit, which shows thy ignorance of Scripture,
and thy unskilfulness in the word, and doctrine; that all things is upheld by
his word, and his power: and that there is no creature but is manifest in his
sight: For all things that was made was made by him, that he might have a name
above every name: and that to his name should every knee bow, and every tongue
confess to the glory of God, and God will dwell in man, and it is he that sees
the heart.

Pr. He says, Sin is in the Saints, etc. See page 10.

Ans. Sin is not in the sanctified, but in the unsanctified. And he that says
sin is in the Saints, he is blinded, he is of the Serpent, and he and they be
in the po^lution themselves which the Saints have escaped, and are washed and
cleansed, and so far as any one is sanctified, it is from the sin.

Pr. He says, That we will not enter into the Kingdom by the Blood of the
Covenant, that has been often proved, etc. See page 10.

Ans. And Francis Blake did publish it in Print, that the Quakers did witness
the blood of Christ that cleanses from all sin, and so thou Prints against us,
and he prints for us, thou Prints that we deny the blood of Jesus, and he
Prints that we own the blood of Jesus; and so ye are devouring the innocent
betwixt you; and the blood of the seed we own, which cleanses from all sin,
which does not you, which say sin must be in the Saints, but make his blood of
none effect which cleanses from all sin.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures shall be our judge one day, which we call the
letter, etc. See page 11.

Answ. And the Scripture says all judgment is committed to the Son, and God
will judge the world, and the Saints, and the spiritual man judges all things,
and thus thou art ignorant of the letter, and this shall judge thee at the last.

Pr. He says, That the Kingdom is not come, nor refreshing from the presence
of the Lord, etc.

Answ. Which shows they are like unto the Pharisees unconverted, gazing here,
and there, and Christ told them the Kingdom was in them; And they that are not
turned to the light which comes from Christ the refresher, whereby refreshing
might come; so are not come to repentance yet.

Pr. He says, They that say they have no sin makes God a liar, See page 12.

Ans. Which the Scripture says no such thing, but says on the contrary the
Scripture says many were made free from sin: And if Christ be in you the body
is dead because of sin; and they that are Christ's have crucified the lusts, and
all things are become new, and they that sin and lie, are not in Christ the
truth.

Pr. He says, All that have been, are, or shall be converted since the Gospel
ministration are converted by the Apostles words, etc. See page 13.

Ans. So he has thrown out the spirit that does regenerate, and Christ the way
to the Father, the word that sanctifies, and Christ the power of God to
salvation. Who said they would not come to him that they might be converted; so
if they get all the Apostles words and come not to Christ, they are not
converted, and none are converted by the Apostles words, but who comes to the
Life that the words come from.

Pr. And he opposes and says, It will be the Quakers fall, because they say
there is no other way to bring people to God, but by the light in them, etc.
See page 14.

Ans. Which is Christ the way to God from whence it comes, which is man's
condemnation not believing in it, and so a saving light. For says God I will
give him for a Covenant, for a lgiht to the Gentiles that he may be my
salvation to the ends of the earth, the light shall, and all that be not in the
light are in the fall out of the Covenant, in the unsaved state, and knows not
their salvation, but as the Scripture declares, and so there is death and
destruction talking of the same of wisdom, and keeping people out of the light.

Pr. And he says. That Christ is not so the light of the World as he is the
light of believers, See page 14.

Ans. Christ is the light to the World, as to believers, and he that believes
in it shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life: he that
follows the light and believes in it shall have the light of life, and shall
not abide in darkness. He that follows not the light, but hates it, he abides
in the darkness, and the light condemns him, which the believer walks in, and
believes in, and has the light of life, which light is one and the same, which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, believers and unbelievers.

Pr. He says, That the Scriptures is the rule of the Saints; and he says, the
spirit is the guide to that rule, etc. see page 15.

Ans. And so would have the Scripture to be before the spirit. Now the spirit
was the Saints rule that led them to speak forth Scriptures, and to let them to
see to what condition they were spoken too, and so by that they came to the law
of Faith; and they was not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit: So in
this ye have proved your selves not to be Ministers of the Spirit, but of the
Letter, which the Spirit was before the Letter was.

Pr. He says, That the time of perfection will be when Christ comes from
heaven, and not before, till then the Saints must be warring, waiting,
groaning, and mourning, etc. See page 20.

Ans. And David says, he had seen an end of all perfection (contrary to
Collier) And the Apostle says, they should hunger no more, nor thirst no more.
And Christ says, He that eats his flesh, and drinks his blood, shall
hunger no more, and thirst no more. He that believes is entered into his rest,
shall hunger no more and thirst no more. And the Apostles and Saints witnessed
Christ in them, and the Kingdom while they were upon earth, and the end of
groaning and gruling which thou art in, that art out of this, and keeps people
which are apostatized from the Apostle, from the Light which is the Truth.

John Deacon's Book, called, A Public Discovery of a secret Deceit. His
Principles follow. And as for the rest of his Lies and Slanders in his Book,
which are heaped up, they will fall upon his own head, and be his sorrow. And
all Liars upon the earth, that are given up to believe and tell lies, are
comprehended with the innocence and truth, by which innocence is preserved, and
men and people shall heap to themselves sorrow by their own lies and
inventions. Nevertheless the Scriptures of Truth are owned in their place to
the condition that they were spoken to.
Pr. HE says, That the light wherewith every one that comes into the world is
enlightened withal, is the light of nature, and reason, and sense, etc. See
page 5.

Ans. Which is contrary to John 1.9. who says, it was the true light by which
all things were made; which as many as received him, he gave them power to
become the sons of God, which is beyond natural sense and reason.

Pr. He says, That the work of faith, and the growth of faith is by the
natural use of Ordinances, and calls it deceitful sophistry which denies it,
etc. page 7.

Answ. Faith is the gift of God, and Christ is the Author of it. It comes not
by the natural use of Ordinances: The natural man receives not the things
that be of God, which faith is the gift of God: And thou art in the sophistry
and in the poison, that says, faith the work and growth of it, is by the
natural use of ordinances.

Pr. And he speaks of a temporal expressive word of God, etc. see page 8.

Answ. But the Scripture tells us of no such thing as temporal word, but speaks
of the Word of God that lives and endures for ever, and so the other is but his
own imagination:

Pr. He says, The Quakers go about to pick forth the right eye of
Christianity.

Ans. Because they hold forth the light that lights every man that comes into
the world, Christ Jesus the Covenant of God which makes all the apostate
Christians blind: And your right eye must be plucked out that offends; and this
the Christians shall witness when their eyes are open that sees the light,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, the covenant of God.

Prin. He says, The Quakers were never heard of till of late years, etc. See
page 12.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, which speaks of them before Moses,
by Moses, by the Prophets and Apostles, and he bids them to work out their
salvation with fear and trembling: And now the great Earthquake is coming
amongst you false Prophets and Antichrists John speaks of, and Harlots, and
Apostates from the Apostle, compellers to your worship: And now are you
comprehended, with the spirit of God are you judged, who are ignorant of the
salvation wrought out with fear and trembling.

Pr. He calls them subtle deceivers and heretics that questions the word
Trinity, and says it came from Rome, etc. see page 13.

Ans. Which he is justifying, and so he is turning to his Teacher the Pope, and
Common Prayer Book, of whom he has learned it; For the Scriptures have not
taught it him: And the Son and the Father is in unity, and this we own that are
called Quakers, and deny you and your Pope, and your Common Prayer Book, and
your false Teachers got up since the days of the Apostles.

Pr. Again he says, O incomparable hypocritical liars! Is not this the
character Paul gives of a false prophet to speak lies in hypocrisy? because we
preach Perfection, etc. See page 16.

Answ. It is agreeable to Scripture, Christ's doctrine, and the Apostles
doctrine, and the life of Christ: And we are made free from sin, says the
Apostle: And again, As he is, so are we in this present world. And as many as
are perfect are thus minded, etc. But this thou calls hypocrisy and lies; and
thus thou art out of the Apostles and Christ's doctrine and life, and like a mad
man rages against them that be in it, and has denied thy own work, the work
of the Ministry, which was for the perfecting, and so art a Physician of no
value.

Pr. He says, The enjoyment of immortality is not till they have put off the
body, etc. See page 17.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostles doctrine, who says, Immortality was brought to
light through the Gospel, this was when they were upon earth, and the word of
God was in them, and Christ was in them which was immortal.

Pr. Again he says, They shall not have power over death and the grave until
the natural death, etc. See page 17.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, Oh death where is thy sting! O Grave
where is thy victory! And they were passed from death to life; And he that
believes shall never dye, and such has power over death and the grave: And he
that believes shall never dye, they have passed from death to life.

Pr. He calls them secret deceivers to grant perfect purity and perfection,
etc. See page 18.

Answ. Which is contrary to to the Apostles doctrine, who brought people to
perfection and purity, and holiness, without which none shall see the Lord:
And they were to stir up their pure minds.

Pr. He says, To witness perfect purity is an alluding to an enjoyment of
heaven upon earth, and says, this is as the world, etc. See page 19.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, who witnessed the Kingdom of heaven
in the Saints, and their conversation in heaven; and thou that brings to the
contrary, art a deceiver, and grants not that other.

Pr. He says, He dare boldly assert, that the Gospel is not first made known
by the seeing within, but by hearing tidings without, etc.

Ans. Contrary to that which they call their Original, which says, the Gospel
is preached in every creature: And there is none comes to hearing and seeing
of the Gospel, but it is with the eye within, that which is oppressed: For the
Jews that heard not, and saw not within, they stood against the Gospel: And
Christ said, their ears were stopped, and their eyes were closed; and so they
heard words, but the Gospel, the power of God they could not hear, but stood
against Christ; and so none hear but they that hear within; and he is not a
Preacher of the Gospel, which is the power of God, but he that preaches to the
inward eye.

Pr. He confesses, That none of the Saints had ever a particular command; and
then again he confesses they had, and so he is in confusion, page 26. He
says, It is a lie to preach the Kingdom of heaven within unbelievers.

Answ. Contrary to Christ's words, who told the Pharisees the Kingdom of God
was within them, Luke 17. So in confusion in Babylon, the smoke of the
bottomless pit has blinded his eye, which is got up since the days of the
Apostles, the foundation has been lost among them inwardly raveners, which is
the light Christ Jesus, which enlightneth every man that comes into the world,
the rock of Ages.

Pr. He says again, It is a lie to say that any come to the knowledge of the
light of God by the light that shines in their hearts, etc. See page 28.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, 2 Cor. 4. who said, the light that shined in
their hearts should give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ Jesus, and so a messenger of Satan, the Devils Minister, one
that draws from the light that must give people the knowledge, the witness in
thy conscience shall answer.

Pr. And again he says, It is a notorious lie to say that Christ preached the
Kingdom of heaven in unbelievers.

Ans. Contrary to Christ, and contrary to Luke 17. who said, the Kingdom of
heaven was in the Pharisees, and so thou art an unlike man to be a Minister of
Christ who art of the Letter ignorant, that knows not the kingdom in thy
self, that knows it not in the unbelieving Pharisees.

Pr. He says, The greatest of the Apostles were never exempted from the
remnants of sin, and the Saints pilgrimage is a continual warfare to heaven
while they be on this side the grave, etc.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Apostle, who said, they were made free from sin;
and said, how could they live any longer therein? And said, their conversation
was in heaven, and they sat in heavenly places, and they witnessed the
Kingdom wherein was joy in the holy Ghost: So this was the end of their
pilgrimage then as he speaks of, who shows he is ignorant of the Scriptures,
and of the Apostles doctrine: And it is not a strange thing that the Teachers
of the world should cry up imperfection and the body of sin, who are ravened
inwardly from the spirit of God that put it off, and gone forth from the
Apostles and Christ's doctine; but who are come to the spirit of God which they
ravened from, puts off the body of imperfection and sin, and so you have
corrupted the earth with your windy doctrine; for what good has their doctrine
done, that teaches people they must be in imperfection and in sin while they
be upon earth; they can but be so if they never come to them, and they are
apostatiz^d from the Ministers of Christ, whose work was to the perfecting of
the Saints, until they came to the perfect man, which these apostates work is
to deny.

Pr. He is judging the Apostle, and saying, The prick in the flesh which the
Apostle received, was neither through the want or disability of faith, etc.
page 34.

Ans. Why then did the Apostle cry out? answer me that. And the Lord said, His
grace should be sufficient for him; and his strength should be made perfect in
his weakness: and is not weakness disability?

Pr. He says, That no man by that native light inherent in him had power to
believe, etc. See page 26.

Ans. The light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, he
calls it native, and inherent: He gives these names to it, which is the light
which does enlighten every man, etc. there is power in the light given to
believe: But now he that hates the light, hates the power, and so the light
is his condemnation; The names he gives, as native and inherent, are his own
out of the truth.

Pr. He says, The Scripture does not set forth a certain allowance for
Ministers, but it is left to humane prudence, etc. See page 12.

Ans. So he is flown from Christ's words and the Apostles, who with the wisdom
of God set down the Ministers allowance, and did not leave it to humane policy
in after ages for maintenance for Ministers: For the humane policy will feed
the false Prophets, as the Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles declare of in
Scripture, whose spirits is seen with the spirit that gave forth Scripture,
gone out into the earth, who were covetous, and so idolaters, ordering with the
earthly policy, which is humane and earthly.

Pr. He says, Abraham's obedience was not an act of the body, etc.

Ans. Which any may read the Scripture and see, and judge thee whose body is
out of the action of God, serving him who is not of God.

Pr. He says, God does not work immediately now, etc. See page 43.

Answ. So all the works of God are mediate now by his principle; Then none have
the spirit of Christ by his conclusion, which is immediate, to work
immediately; and none hears Gods voice, and none sent from God, and Christ is
with none of them then. For who are sent from God hears his voice; and who have
Christ in them, they have that which is immediate.

Pr. He says, He utterly declares (as others have done) against not praying or
preaching, etc. unless the spirit move, etc. See page 44.

Answ. So here then, thou prays and the Spirit moves not, and preaches, and
the Spirit moves not: So then the spirit of error is it that moves thee: And
contrary to all them that gave forth the Scriptures, the Prophets and Ministers
of God, who spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. And thou art never
likely to read the Scripture, but by the same that gave them forth, nor know
them, nor none upon the earth, nor know God of whom they learned that gave them
forth, and was taught of him, and so art no Minister of the spirit.

Pr. He says, Not to preach, nor to pray but as the spirit moves; This he
says, in a sort is to shut up the Kingdom of God from the sons of men, and
brings men to neglect their duty, and is the gap where the delusion of Satan
comes in, and draws men to sluggishness. And how can glad tidings be known,
unless they be told, etc.

Answ. Now they are all in the sluggishness, shutting up the Kingdom of heaven
against men, under the delusion of Satan, and none can bring the glad tidings,
but as the spirit moves them: And they who go when the Spirit does not move
them, they are they that run and the Lord never sent them; who pray, or speak
without the moving of the spirit, they are out of the path of all the holy men
of God.

Pr. He says, It is the privilege of the Bereans that is to try an Apostle,
etc. Again he says, They are to put up their supplications when the spirit
does not move them, etc. See page 45.

Answ. Now see if God ever accepted that which was not moved from the Spirit:
God who is a spirit never accepted that; and that which tries the Apostles is
the light, and gives the Bereans to believe the Scriptures which the Apostle
speaks of.

Pr. And he says, Far be it from me to imagine that the spirit of God moved
the Apostles to preach when they did only, and not at other times, and that
they always waited in silence till then, etc. See same page.

Answ. So he would make it that the Apostles preached when the spirit moved
them not, and run without the moving of the spirit, and so would make them like
himself: And Peter said, they spoke as they were moved by the holy Ghost. And
they that are the sons of God, are led by the spirit of God. And the spirit
shall lead them into all truth: And the spirit should tell them what they
should speak, and show them things to come, and that was their guide and rule;
and thou who speaks, and not the spirit moves thee, art no Minister of the
spirit, and says, far be it from thee to imagine the Apostles preached only
when they were moved, and so does not own the Apostles were the Ministers of
the spirit, with thy imaginations.

Pr. And the singing of the Saints in the spirit and grace, is not like the
ungodly singing without the spirit.

Ans. And saying, the grace of God has not appeared unto all men; and all have
not the spirit, which is contrary to Scripture. It says, the grace has
appeared unto all men; and i will power out my spirit upon all flesh. And the
spirit that reproves the world, leads the Saints; and you that sing David's
quakings and prayers, is not in the understanding nor grace, but distinct from
the Saints, which must be turned into howling. How can ye give them the Psalms
to sing then that have no grace?

Pr. And the Priests of Scotland say, Cursed is he that says grace is free.
These are the Scottish principles, etc.

Answ. And yet ye give the Psalms to all to sing, and yet ye say all have not
grace, and all have not the spirit of God, and then can they not sing in the
grace, and sing in the spirit. Is there any prudent reason or good
understanding without the spirit?

Pr. He says, We deny the Scripture to be the Word of God.

Answ. The Scriptures are the words of God, and Christ is the word in which the
words end.

Pr. And he speaks these detestable words, and says, Is not our tongues oyled
with a spirit of confused delusion, which is his own, etc. See page 5.

Ans. Because we say such as pray or preach, it must be by the moving of the
spirit of God; which they be not in, that are in the spirit of delusion.

Pr. And he is opposing the commands of Christ, who said, be not of men called
Master, for ye have one Master, even Christ (who conquers death and hell) And
he says, Why may they not be called Master?

Ans. It is his Master that teaches him to be called of men Master, that is
gone out of the truth; but Christ said, be not of men called Master; and woe be
to them that are, Matthew. 23. And you are them that are made by the will of man
that breaks his commands.

George Willington's Book called, The Gadding Tribe Reproved. A right Title to
his condition in his Book, who like a wild Beast is gadding up and down; but
the Lord rebuke such spirits. His PRINCIPLES follow, etc.
Pr. HE himself falls a judging others, and then he cries, Oh man! who art
thou that judges another, etc. page 9.

Answ. And does not see the work that he is doing himself: But bids others
they should not judge, and falls a judging himself, which is like all the rest
of his gadding Tribe, and how they run with their horns at the righteous, and
push at the upright in heart: But the Lamb is above them all, and the wrath of
the Lamb is kindled; therefore the Beasts rage, who against the Lamb makes war;
And where judgment is come through into victory, he may judge, and the hidden
things of darkness is brought to light, and the counsel of the heart made
manifest; and the Lord is come, and the spiritual man judges all things,
which shows the counsel of his heart is not made manifest, nor his hidden
things of darkness brought to light, and the Lord is not come to him, and so
cannot judge. And George Willington has judged before his time, with which he
is charging others, therefore his words shall be his burden.

Pr. And his principle is, That he is justified by faith alone without good
works, etc. See page 10.

Answ. What, without the faith that works by love? have thou concluded those
works the works of Popery, which are the works of faith that works by love that
gives the victory? How do thou gad now? whether art thou gadding now? Know,
faith that works by love is owned, and he that believes is ceased from his
works, as God did from his, and has entered into his rest: And faith gives
victory overall the Popish murdering spirits and thine both and your works;
which gives to have access to God, and their works is wrought in him.

Pr. He says, Whilst the upstart sect of Quakers do look after the light
within, he says, we have a more sure word of prophecy, etc. and so would make
the sure word of prophecy not the lihgt within. See page 12.

Answ. Whose spirit he has made manifest where it is amongst them that are
gone from the Apostle, who stands against the light within. For they that draw
from the anointing within are the seducers, and they went forth from the
Apostles that went from the anointing within. Art not thou and you all gadded,
and the world from the anointing within you, and so seducing one another,
therefore have you so many heaps of Teachers, and arming your selves, and
making lies your refuge against them that are come to the anointing, which you
are all gadded from, given judgment against your selves, who will not have
people to own the light Christ Jesus, who does enlighten every man that comes
into the world; and none owns the anointing within, who owns not the light
which you deny, which have apostatized from the Apostles; and the Quakers are
risen up in the night of apostasy, and discovers you all what you are in, and
what you went from, and what has been lost since the days of the Apostles;
and an Earthquake is coming upon you that has not been since the foundation
of the world, out of which Earthquake we are come into that which cannot be
shaken. As the Quakers are not the Gadding tribe, but they have the anointing
in them, and as it shall teach them, they shall abide in the Son of God and the
Father.

But it is manifest that thou and the whole world is gadded from the anointing
within you which should teach you, and so are turned against the Saints and the
Lamb: And have been the Harlots and the mouths of the false Prophets,
blaspheming God in his Tabernacle, and drunk the blood of the Saints and the
Martyrs, and the Prophets, and made war against the Saints to overcome them,
and have overcome them; but the Lamb and the Saints shall get the victory.

Pr. And thou tells us of a Creed and Catholic Faith, commonly called the
Apostles Creed, which except a man believe this Creed and Catholic Faith he
cannot be saved, etc. See page 16.

Ans. Who taught thee all this language? Where did the Apostles teach thee any
such things as the Catholic Creed? The Apostle teaches us no such things as
a Catholic Creed, did thou not learn this of the Pope who apostatized from
the Apostles?

And the twelve Apostles taught thee no such Doctrine as the Catholic Creed,
and thou says, they signed it. Nay, the Pope signs thee that Creed and the
Sacraments, the Pope signs thee that: And we are come to the foundation of
God, which was before the Pope was, and we gad not. Thou should not tell
lies, to say they gad that come unto God, the Elect of God; Gods Elect and
Christ the light is the salvation before thee and the Pope was.

Pr. And thou says, Does any forsake the Ministry to follow a new light, etc?
See page 17.

Ans. That Ministry that does deny the Light that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world (as this gadding Tribe of Ministers, and Professors, have
done since the days of the Apostle, and do) so by denying the Light, they deny
the foundation of God. The Light we own which every man that comes into the
world is enlightened withal, which is the foundation of God: and them deny to
be any Ministers of Christ, that denies the Light, that enlighteneth every man
that comes into the world, and his Ministers we own.

Pr. And thou says do not forsake the Temple, and truth of God to follow the
bleating of Jeroboams calves in Dan and Bethel, etc.

Ans. Now whither art thou gadded? Art not thou gadded in this from the
Apostles Doctrine, to the Temple, which the Apostles brought the people off
from, where is thy light now? How ownes thou Christ, who keeps people to the
Temple? and tells them of Jeroboams Calves in Dan, and Bethel? where is there
any people gadding thither? whether have thou not lost thy reason, and
sobriety to publish thy madness to the Nation? And did not Christ say the
Temple should be thrown down, Mat. 24. And Stephen witnessed against it, and
was stoned to death: and thou art calling people to it; and your Popish Mass
house which you call your Temple, you have set up since the days of the
Apostles, is like unto the Idol set up at Dan and Bethel.

Pr. And he says your Ancient Divines are them that have entered in at the
door. etc. See page 20.

Ans. How can you, and your Ancient Divines enter in at the door, when you deny
the Light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which is
Christ the Door? Therefore it makes you to gad up and down without light in the
dark. Now is the stone fallen upon you, and the rock you are splitting your
selves against it. Now shall the Saints know the Song of the Lamb, rejoicing
over the Beast, and the false Prophets.

Pr. He says the written word the ingrafted is able to save the soul, etc. See
page 21.

Ans. The Ingrafted word is able to save the soul, but the letter the written
words are not: The Pharisees had the written words, but stood against the
Savior of the Soul. And how art thou gadded here in thy Judgment? how art
thou like to own the word that saves the Soul, when thou denies the Light?

Pr. He is stirring up the Magistrate to persecute, his own mouth condemns him,
who pretends love: etc.

Ans. And thou that gads abroad in thy mind to stir up the Magistrate to
prosecute, art not in the life of the Apostles nor Christ, but in the Spirit of
the false Prophets, and Antichrists, and one in that which all persecutors come
from out of the truth.

Pr. Again thou says we ought not to Judge, etc. See page 23.

Ans. Let all people that read thy Gadding tribe, see if thou does not Judge,
and so comes under Judgment, by thy own words. And the time was come to the
Apostles when they went on to the eternal Judgment which we own, But this is
not for such as are crying up Temples and Persecutors, nor stumbling at the
Light: your measures are all too short of your whole gadding tribe that be from
the light that every man is enlightened withal that comes into the world.

Pr. Again thou says the Apostles was to call the Ministers of Christ
mediately, and the Immediate call from God is not enough, etc. See page 24.

Ans. So thou has set up the Mediate, before the immediate, and judges the
immediate and not sufficient; But thou art corrected by the Scriptures, and the
Apostle corrects thee who says, I have not received it of man, nor by man: and
bad others look at Jesus the Author of their faith: And the Apostle does not
say that they was to call men mediately, he does not teach such Doctrine that
their Ministers was called mediatly, nor send them forth so, but it is thou
that art gaded from the Counsel of God: and the Apostle confutes thee, who said
he was not of men, nor by men, and all that went forth from the Apostles, went
forth by the immediate power of God, who was the Church of God, and by the
power of that; But you are the mediate fallen from the Apostle, and made by the
will of men; But now with the immediate you are all comprehended.

Pr. And thou brings many Scriptures to oppose Christ's commands, and the
Apostles Doctrine, which says be ye not of men called master, etc. See page
28. For th^^^ says Christ does not mean as he speaks: for thou says the
meaning is not that it is unlawful to be called master.

Ans. Here thou shows whither thou art gadded; one that teaches to break
Christ's commands. But the woe that is denounced in the same Chapter where the
command is, belonges to thee. So an Antichrist that teaches to deny Christ's
commands and dispiseth his Authority. And one that calls him Lord, but does not
the thing that he commands: but it is not such that enters into the Kingdom of
God: and this thou shall witness at last when thy words falls heavy upon thee.

Joshua Millers Book called, Antichrist in man the greatest Idol. Which is a
fit Title for himself; who calls that Antichrist, and Mystery of Babylon that
justifies within; Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine who says we are Justified
by faith in Christ Jesus, which is in the heart. As for the rest of his
slanders and Lies in his book they are not worth mentioning, but these that
follows.
Pr. ANd he calls them devout men that denied the light that has enlightened
every man that comes into the word, etc.

He says the Quakers are the most saddest and deplorable Spectacles of
revolted Professors that ever I heard, or read of, since my knowledge of them,
etc. See Page 2.

Ans. The Quakers are revolted from you Apostates, that are inwardly ravened as
the converted Jews did that were turned to Christ; for the Jews revolted from
the Temple and the Priests, and turned to Christ, from the other Jews, and
owned the Light which lights every man that comes into the world, which you
Revolters deny, that have reigned since the days of the Apostles, and so are
ignorant what we are come to, and the Apostles were in, and that which was
before you and they was.

Pr. He says the Angels of Light which are holy, and without sin, may be
devils, etc. See page 3.

Ans. Which the devil fell from the Light, from the holiness, and so he cannot
tansform into that. And all holiness intended which is not in the light; is as
the Pharisees was in, and the whole world, and is condemned with the Light.

He says salvation by the Light within is cursed, etc. See page 6.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle who says, the light that shines in the heart
gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ
Jesus. And contrary to John who says, every man that comes into the world is
enlightened; And as many as received him, to them he gave power to become the
Sons of God. and the power of God is the Gospel of salvation to every one that
believes in the light; And he that believes in the Light has the witness in
himself: and the Apostle turned them from the Darknss to the Light. And the
word was in their hearts of Faith that saves the soul: and there was the glad
tiding^ the Gospel. And Priest Shaw says the Gospel is the four books of
Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John. And the Apostle says it is the power of God:
and says many have the form, but deny the power. So now here himself he has
cursed; So this same man is a curser, as the Papists are. Both he and them are
found out of the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, who says, bless and
curse not: And the Scotch Priests likewise are cursers, as in the Scotch
Principles ye may see; and no one knows salvation but by the Light within,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, who is the salvation
to the ends of the earth.

Pr. And he calls his Steeple-house St. Andrews. See page 7.

Answ. Which never did Prophets nor Apostles give such names to houses, but the
Pope who is his teacher.

Pr. He says, It is an error to say, that the light which every one has that
comes into the world, is sufficient to salvation, without the help of any
other means or discovery, etc. See page 9.

Answ. Contrary to Christ, who brought the Jews off of all others helps to
himself, who said, Believe in the light while ye have the light; and they that
believed in the light should not abide in darkness, And no man comes to the
Father but by me, says Christ. For he was the way, the truth, the light in
men, and the life, and there is no salvation by any other name but by him: And
there is none knows the blood of Christ which cleanses, and the offering for
the sins of the whole world, but with the light which comes from Christ Jesus,
who is sufficient, who is the salvation to the ends of the earth; so he is the
only means without any other help: And as the anointing in people does teach
people, they shall continue in Christ: and as they walk in the light as he is
in the light, they shall have fellowship with the Father, from whence all helps
comes; and Christ will dwell in man, and walk in man, and what need they have
any more helps?

Pr. He says, It is an error to say, we are justified by that which Christ
does in us, etc. See page 9.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, we are justified by faith in his
blood; and the faith is in the heart, and the blood is in the heart that
purifies it, and held in a pure conscience: And the word of faith is within,
Romans 10. And faith gives victory over the world, and that which gives victory
justifies; and Christ is within, who is justifi-fication, and sanctification,
and condemnation, either of them is found within, and thou art in the error,
and not fit to talk of these things which thou understands not.

Pr. Again he says, It is an error (if not damnable) to say Christ is the
means, and that there is no other means of salvation, etc. see page 13.

Ans. And Christ says, No man comes unto the Father but by me: and he is able
to the utmost to save. And he shall be my salvation to the ends of the earth,
says the Lord. And says the Apostle, God is in Christ reconciling the world
unto himself. And he that has the Son of God has life, and the Father and the
Son are one, and there is no salvation in any other.

Pr. He says, That Christ gives light to no man under that name but believers,
etc. See page 13.

Ans. Contrary to John, who says, he does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, that all might believe through the light: And contrary to Christ's
own words, such as hated it, and would not come to it, and bids them believe in
the light while they had it; and he that did not believe, was condemned
already; and he that did believe, had the witness in himself.

Pr. He says, It flatly contradicts the whole Scripture, to say, that the
light wherewith Christ has enlightened every man, etc. will save, etc. See page
14.

Answ. Which God says, I will give him for a covenant, for a light to the
Gentiles, and new covenant to the house of Israel and Judah; and he shall be my
salvation to the ends of the earth; and believing in it are saved, and not
believing are condemned.

Pr. The wise heathen Philosophers had a greater measure of light in them
(which is the first Adam) then I can think any men have now, etc. See page 15.

Answ. Which shows that he knows none of Christ the second Adam, the quickening
spirit. And he knows no new creature; For who are in Christ are new creatures.
Nor none of Christ the Covenant of God, of light, of life, of peace, who was
glorified with the Father before the world began, which is beyond the first
Adam, and has shut himself forth not to be as high as his Heathen
Philosophers: and many witness Christ in them in this age, as in the days of
the Apostles, which is above the Heathen Philosophers.

Pr. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened withal
is Christ, he says, this is the light of nature, and of reason. And says, It
is a damnable doctrine to deny all external means of salvation, etc. See page
16.

Ans. When as the Apostle says, We look not at things which are seen, but at
things which are not seen. For the things that are seen are temporal, but the
things that are not seen are eternal; and that which is to savation is
eternal, and is not external.

Pr. He says, Wh^t word did Paul and Barnabas preach in the synagogues, but
the Prophets, etc? See page 19.

Ans. Nay, they preached Christ the end of the Prophets.

Pr. He calls that a monstrous opinion for to compare them to the Heathen, who
had not known there had been a God but by the Scriptures, and have no more
knowledge but by it, etc. page 20.

Ans. For the Pharisees had Scriptures (and here heathen men may get
Scriptures) but know not the true God; for none knows the true God, but by the
spirit of God, (and the Son of God reveals the Father) though they may have all
the Scriptures: and the light that shines in the heart gives the knowledge of
him; and this the Apostle spoke to them that had the Scriptures; and who are of
faith, are of Abraham, and in the knowledge of him that knew God before the
Scripture was written.

Pr. And he says, That the Law and the Testimony is Moses and the Prophets,
etc. See page 21.

Ans. Contrary to the rest of the Priests, which say, it is the Old and New
Testament; and he and the rest of the Priests are contrary to the Apostle,
which says, The law and testimony is the light, and spirit of prophecy; which
many may have the Old and New Testament, yet deny the light and spirit of
prophecy, as Priests and professors do now, who say prophecy is ceased. There
they deny the practice of the Church, where edification, learning, and
comforting is, prophesying all one by one, such they prison and persecute; and
they are not like to own prophecy, when they deny the light, which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, who is the end of prophecy; and
none owns Christ, who owns not prophecy: A Prophet is a Seer, and them that
deny Prophets are all blind, and in the dark, and are such as have ravened
from the spirit of God, and have killed the Prophets.

Prin. He says, The Prophets are more certain then any other Revelation. See
page 21.

Answ. Was not the Son of God revealed the end of the Prophets? Did not God
reveal him which came in the volume of the Book to do the will of God? And so
the Prophets and the Law, and types and shadows, which they that had the
Prophets and the Law, and types and shadows, knew not the Son of God that was
revealed, that was their end spoken of in the Prophets and Epistles, who is now
revealed.

Pr. He says, The Patriarks and Prophets were justified by conceiving Christ
without, etc. See page 24.

Ans. Now the Patriarks and Prophets had the spirit that did give them an
evidence of him, and by faith they saw him, which is beyond a conceiving, by
which they were justified.

Pr. He says, Justification by works, and inherent grace we call Christ, etc.
See page 25.

Ans. We say Christ is the end, the substance, and who believes in him has
ceased from his own works, he is the end of gifts and graces; and man's own
inherenting, and no one knows justification, but who receives the grace that
brings salvation.

Pr. He says, This justification by a righteousness within us, is man's grand
Idol, and Christ's arch enemy, etc. See page 25.

Ans. We are justified by faith in Christ Jesus, and that is in us, in the
heart, this he calls an Idol, and Christ's enemy, which he is the author of. So
what doctrine this man teaches contrary to the Apostle, erred from the
Apostles; and faith it is that purifies the heart, by which we are justified by
faith, and not by works, which throws down all Idols, and the enemies of
Christ, which thou art one; and none owneth justification but who witnesses
justification within, faith in the heart, and Christ being within, there is
justification.

Pr. He says, We miserably wrest the Scripture, because we say, he that
respects persons commits sin, etc.

Ans. Now let all read that in James the Apostle, how that he that respects
persons commits sin, and is convinced by the Law as a transgressor; so teaching
men to transgress the commands of God, contrary to the Apostles, who teach men
to keep them.

Pr. He says, Popery and vain philosophy is the foundation of the Quakers
Religion, etc. See page 30.

Ans. Whose foundation is the light of Christ, which lights every man that
comes into the world, which was before Popery or Philosophy was, which you are
in, as your books, naming of days, and Colleges, and Steeple Houses, makes it
appear.

Pr. He says And to believe, or think our Justification is by something
wrought in us, is that Antichrist whose name is mystery, Babylon the great, the
mother of Harlots, etc. See page 32.

Ans. And the Apostle says, we are justified by the faith of Christ Jesus,
Gal. 2. And faith purifies the heart, and is a mystery held in a pure
conscience. This Justification is by the faith of Christ within, and this thou
calls Antichrist, and the mystery of Babylon, who art there thy self, that be
out of this faith that purifies the heart: For all the holy men of God were
justified by their faith, and the faith is in the heart: And thy belief that is
without thee, and faith in Christ, is like unto the Jews, who stood against
him when he was come. True faith gives victory over Mystical Babylon and the
world, in which men please God, in which is unity.

Ralph Halls Book, called, The Quakers Principles Quaking. In it his
Principles follows, and lies upon himself turned, whose works are for the
Fire, and to be burned.
Pr. HE says, It is delusion to give up to the light within to be the Judge,
etc. (which is Christ) and calls it an obscure kind of chemistry, etc.

Answ. Which the Apostle commands to judge themselves; which they cannot judge
themselves but with the Light, by which they may see themselves.

Pr. He says does the Light of nature (as he calls it) give liberty to women
to teach? And so that he concludes, and calls gross and palpable darkness, etc.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, and the mind of God, and the Prophets,
who said God will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh: and his sons and
daughters should prophecy. So he is a limitter of the holy one; and a quencher
of the Spirit, and in the darkness, and this is above the Light of nature.

Pr. He says the Quakers blame every thing; and convinces of nothing, etc.

Ans. Are ye not all convinced of your hirelings, of your covetousness? of your
respecting men's persons for advantage; and your teaching for filthy Lucre: and
your gain from your quarters, and your love of money? Are not ye all convinced?
Have not the Quakers convinced you all of those things and of your pride, and
ambition, and been corrected by, and reproved for this by Quakers and
Scriptures?

Pr. He says the Spirit of Light will be Judged by the Scripture, keeping to
the Scriptures, etc.

Ans. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, and the Apostles Doctrine. But he is
there like to the Jews who had the Scriptures; yet they Judged the spirit of
Light; But the spirit of Light ownes Scriptures, and the Scripture does not
Judge spiritual Light, and are not one against the other, but are in unity.

Pr. And whereas he says Noah's Ark was a true figure of the Church of God, so
Noah's Dove is a clear Emblem of such as through affection of new and unknown
paths do stray from the Church of God, etc. See page 1.

Ans. Now you having strayed from the Church of God which Christ said are the
false Prophets that should come, Matthew. 24. and John saw was come; and the
whole world are gone after you. And ye have brought the Nation to be water, and
your tongues are waters, and your multitudes waters, and your peoples waters;
upon this occation is the Doves flying abroad, and has found the Ark of the
Testimony, and the Quakers has found no rest for the souls of their foot
amongst you waters, and the opening of the Seals, and the Tabernacle in heaven;
For there is nothing but waters among you, the Doves finds ye all waters, not
to set the soles of their feet. But according to the eternal Counsel and
promise of God, how that the waters should be abated and dried up, and the
people of God begins to inhabit: and the Kings of the earth should not pass;
and that which you call your Church has been waters.

Pr. And whereas he brings the sayings of Scripture that speaks of Prophets,
and pastors, etc. and names places of Scripture to oppose Christ's Command,
which says be ye not of men called master, etc. See page 7.

Ans. Which is to no purpose but to manifest himself a transgressor that abides
not in the Doctrine of Christ, that has not the Father, and the Son.

Pr. And he says the Prophecy of Malachy is upon us, who says, cursed be the
deceiver who do not bring in his Tithes, and offerings, etc. See page 9.

Ans. Which we say the Priesthood is changed, and the offerings is denied, and
he that holds them up is under the curse.

Pr. He says to take the Scriptures as ye speak, brings in all absurdity, as
when the Apostle says the priesthood is changed, the commandment is disanulled
that took tithes; Then he says he would prove that none had Faith to take the
Scripture as it is spoken: for if they had it (says he) as a grain of
musterd-seed, then they should remove mountains, and heal the sick, etc. See
page 10.

Ans. Now by this he has showed his Ignorance; for Christ's words and the
Prophets are true as they speak, and the things they speak of the fruits of the
Faith as they speak of is known, and the fulfilling of the promise; And that
which the Apostle speaks of Hebr. 7. the Priesthood is changed, and the Law
disanulled also, and another Priesthood is come in, not after the order of
Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedeck; without Father, without Mother,
without beginning of days, or end of life. You run into all absurdities, that
gives your meaning to Scriptures, and private Interpretations have brought the
world on heaps about the Scriptures; And who are in the Faith, are in the
healing of the sick, and removing mountains; and you who be out of the faith
have brought whole Nations into sicknesses, and mountains and rough places.

Pr. He says the priests work is changed in point of Administration only; but
in respect of the order, the priesthood is not changed, etc. See page 11.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle who said Christ came after another order, and not
after the order of Aaron: but came after the order of Melchisedeck. So the
order, and all things pertaining to it falls, which Ralph Hall says does not.

Pr. He says the matter is not changed in any one of the Ceremonies, only the
manner of Administration, etc. See page 11.

Ans. The first Covenant could make nothing perfect, says the Apostle. The
matter and t^^ manner changed of all that pertained to the first Priesthood:
the matter and the manner fell down when the life came in, the second Covenant
where through the new, and living way was felt, whereby we enter in unto God,
by the blood, and life of Jesus Christ and the offering; And not by the first
Priesthood, first Covenant, Tithes, off^rings and sacrifices; so matter, and
manner fell all; and Christ came out of another Tribe; that is of Judah: And
not after the order of Aaron, but after the order of Melchisedeck, and so after
another matter.

Pr. And thou brings that concerning Jacobs paying a Tenth to the service of
the house of God: and why may not ye have Tenthes for the maintenance of the
house of God (which is called the Steeple house) which was the Papists
Masse-house. Now see what a suitable measure thou have, etc. See page 16.

Ans. There was a time when the Ark was maintained, and the Tabernacle, and the
Temple, and the storehouse and Tithes; And there was a time when all these
things are utterly denied. So thou art a man that does not divide thy work
aright, but a workman that may be ashamed of thy work. Look on thy book who art
crying up Tithes and Priests, and thou says the order is not changed of Aaron
in the substance, contrary to the Apostle, and yet pleads the order of
Melchisedeck, and so art in confusion. And as for the order of Melchisedeck ye
are as short of that, as of Christ in whom Melchisedeck ends.

Pr. H^ (...) the best of Gods people have sin enough to be repented of, and to
be humbled for, etc. See page 19.

Ans. Con^^ary to John who says he that is born of God does not commit sin:
neither can be, because the seed of God remains in him; and he keeps
himself that the evil one touchet^ him not, and they was not to lay again the
foundation of repentance from dead works; and says the Apostle how can we that
are dead unto sin, live any long^r ^^erein? and so ^hou art ignorant of the
Saints state; for sin exalts and does not humbl^, for that which brings down
sin humbles.

Pr. He says he knows not one in the Nation that sues men at the Law, those
that will not put into their mouths, etc. And again he says if they should
not sue at the Law such as do not give them maintenance, they would sin in
doing so: for it were to uphold coveteous minds etc. See p. 19.

Ans. Now this is to prove your coveteous desires; And the Courts throughout
the Nation will witness against thee: and the most suites that be in the Nation
for one particular thing is the Priests, and the Parishioners, because for
conscience sake they cannot put in their mouths. Therefore are they worrying
of them like Wolves, and destroying of them for their dishonest gain which they
do no work for. And do not the Ministers of God the Apostles rebuke such as
went to law before the unjust, one among another? and bids them set up the
least in the Church to Judge such things, and told them they should Judge the
world, yea Angels; and not to go to Law one among another about such things.
Then where art thou, and thy generation that says it is a sin if they do not
go to Law? if the Ministers do not sue for outward things: let the least in the
Church Judge thee. How unlike the Apostles you are who kept the Gospel without
charge, and coveted no man's silver nor gold, who Preached the Gospel, the end
of the Law, and brought people from under it? And you bring people into it, and
your inventions, but the day is come that you are seen, and the night is past
to many, and none can you deceive, but who be in the night, but the Judgment
is gone over your heads, the Judge of the world is come.

Pr. He says it was imputed to Abraham for righteousness his Faith: and
doubtless Job was a perfect man in Gods account, and Christ's righteousness is
imputed to us, etc.

Ans. Yet thou s^it^ none ^oth good no not one, and brings that Scripture in
the Romans comparing them that were in the Faith withal them that were gone
astray both Jews and Gentiles, See page 21. Now let all try, and Judge thee
here and see thy false measure, art thou a man fit to speak of the Saints and
their Faith, who puts them that be a stray, Jews and Gentiles, Amongst them
that believe, putting no difference betwixt the precious and the vile, and so
art not a man capable of true reason.

Pr. He says Gods furnace is the grave, where all the remainder of corruption
shall be consumed, etc. See page 22.

Ans. Now what differs this from the Papists who hold a Purgatory? And the
Saints witnessed, and said, Now they were washed, now they were cleansed, etc.
while they were upon earth; and they were sanctified through the obe^ience of
the spirit, and they were justified, and sat in heavenly places, on this side
the grave, whiles they were upon earth, and were made free from sin, and was
perfect.

Pr. He says, That Paul disclaimed perfection in himself, etc. page 23.

Ans. Who said, as many of us as are perfect be thus minded (which wrongs Paul's
words) And again he says, We speak wisdom among them that are perfect.

Pr. He says, If a man were free from sin, he would be free from temporal
punishment, and afflictions, etc. see page 23.

Ans. Christ was free from sin, and the Saints, and yet he was not free from
temporal punishment and affliction: And so here he does not divide the word
aright neither.

Pr. He says, If we attain to perfection here, we should attain to a rest
here, and brings the Apostles words, who says, doubtless there remains a rest
to the people of God, etc. See page 24.

Ans. And the Apostle says there, He that does believe has entered into his
rest; and so he does not divide the word aright, to know what state and
condition it was spoken to: And the Apostle said, they were perfect (the
Ministers of Christ) and he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified;
and so thou art not a sanctified one, and has denied the offering that has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, and so has denied the Covenant
that blots out sin and transgression; and the blood of Christ cleanses from
all sin.

Pr. But he says, That does not follow, that he that is dead to sin, is freed
from sin. See page 24.

Ans. So he is contrary to the Apostle, who says so, He that is dead to sin,
is freed from sin, and can live no longer therein.

Pr. He says, The law of God is a standing rule to the worlds end, etc. And
thou that says the Law is a standing rule, has denied Christ the end of it.
See page 25.

Answ. But the Scripture and Christ says, the Law must be fulfilled, who is
the everlasting covenant in the heart, Christ, and in the mind the end of the
Law, which was before the Scripture was written, glorified with the Father
before the world began; which many have the Scriptures, and yet from the Law of
God written in the heart, and neglect that which brings into Covenant with God,
by which the Scriptures is fulfilled; and so here again thou do not divide
the word aright, and brings not people into that which does fulfill Scripture.

Pr. He says, Because this light does not lead us to close with Gods
Ordinances the Sacraments, he looks upon it as a delusion of Satan, page 26.

Answ. The Scriptures mentions no such word; and the light was before your
invented Sacraments was, and cannot join with them, but condemns them, but it
owns the Scripture and the Ordinances of God.

Richard Baxter's Book called, A Second Sheet to the Ministry, justifying our
Call against the QUAKERS, etc. His Principles follow. Because the Children of
God cannot satisfy his ungodly lusts, therefore he is complaining to the
Magistrates. So he is one of the Complainers and Murmurers.
Pr. HE says, That Timothy was not to hold fast that which he had immediately
received from God, but that which he had received from Paul, etc. See page 5.

Answ. In this thou art contrary to the Apostle, who bid stir up the gift that
was in him, and keep the faith (which Christ was the author of) and that would
not contradict the Apostles words that was in the faith; and that which Timothy
received from God, he was to hold fast, in which he had unity with the Apostle.

Pr. He says, The holy Ghost is to help us in keeping that which is committed
to us, and not to reveal more. See page 4.

Answ. Timothy could not know doctrine but by revelation, and doing the will of
Christ. How art thou exalted, and would put lies upon the Apostle, and limit
the holy one, and set bounds to the Just, and be a Teacher of the holy Ghost,
what it must not reveal? How art thou exalted in this above all that is called
God, and sits in the Temple of God blasphemously? who would be a teacher of the
holy Ghost, who must be the Teacher, and who tells what it must reveal, and
what it must not reveal? Thou must be stopped for thy presumption. If ye have
nothing but what the holy Ghost has given forth, the form of words, the Church
of Rome has the same, and all the false Prophets upon the earth, and
Antichrists, and Seducers, and the Devils, they get the Scriptures given forth
from the holy Ghost, and holds these words in the unrighteousness, and stop,
and resist the holy Ghost, and say it must reveal no more: These comes under
the judgments of the Almighty, Gods decree is against them, and the Spirit,
the holy Ghost does lead into all truth, and does reveal; and the Apostle bids
the Saints wait for the revelation of Jesus: And the grace was brought by the
revelation of Jesus, and the secrets are revealed to them that fear God, and
the spirit reveals the things of God, and thou says it reveals no more; which
shows thou does not know Scriptures, nor God, nor spirit.

Pr. Whereas thou says, Ye have the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles,
and Christ's words, and so are not to look for new Prophets, and that would be a
question to the Church, and that would show mutability in Christ. See page 6.

A. In this thou have showed thy self of what generation thou art; For there
has been the Mother, and the Harlot, that has drunk the blood of the
Prophets, and the Martyrs, and the Saints; and such as drink the blood have the
form, and get the sheeps clothing, but cries prophecy is ceased, and
revelation from heaven is ceased, only they have a standing rule, the
Scriptures without; and so there they have their clothing, the sheeps
clothing, but ravened from the spirit, and so has denied the Church in which
there is prophecy, and the spirit of God; for where that is, there is prophecy
amongst sons and daughters, but not amongst you apostates.

Pr. He finds fault with a man that will not believe except he see, as
instance, a man will not believe they are Ministers of Christ, except they
work miracles, etc. And a man will not believe there is a Parliament, or
Holland, or France, or Spain, except he have been in them, etc. See page 6. and
7.

Answ. Thou and thy wits are compassed, for Revelations and Prophecies are now
spoken forth and witnessed, and thou cannot believe, because thou do not see;
and thou art finding fault with others that do not believe, because they do not
see. Thou art seen and disapproved, and so now in that thou judges others, thou
art judged thy self, who art blind and out of the life; and many may see
there is a Holland, and other Countries, though they have not seen them with an
outward eye: And we believe the Ministers of Christ, though they do not work
miracles; but from them are you apostatized we do believe and see.

Pr. He says, The Saints were not to forsake the assembling of themselves
together as the manner of some was, etc. See page 8.

Answ. That was in the time of the Apostles before the apos^^cy: But since the
apostasy, the Beast, and the false Prophets, and the murderers of the Saints
are got up, which assemble themselves together, and deceive the Nations, and
are breaking the Saints meetings which gather ^ther, that keep the testimony of
Jesus, and the spirit of prophecy, and overcome by the blood of the Lamb, and
the testimony of Jesus. And Christ who is the Rock, and his Church does
continue: but that which Christ said should come is come, the false Prophets
that should get the sheep^ clothing, and John saw was come, which went forth
from them, which made war against the Saints and the Lamb; but the Saints and
the Lamb shall get the victory: And we are come to the assembly of the Saints
before you were apostatized; for your assemblies has forsaken the Saints, your
fruits declare it.

Pr. He says, Because they have the peoples consent, and the Magistrates
allowance, therefore that is true ordination, etc. See page 11.

Ans. Balaam he had the peoples consent, and the Heathenish Magistrates
allowance, when he should have cursed the children of Israel, and so this is no
proof of ordination: And the chief Priests had the peoples consent; and the
Magistrates many of them which turned against Christ, this is no ordination to
be Ministers of Christ. And the Beast and the false Prophet shall rise against
the Lamb and the Saints, and yet they shall have sheeps clothing, this is no
proof of their ordination from God, but all this proves it from man: But all
who have their ordination from God, are not owned neither by people nor
Magistrates in their wills; but who fear God, and are come to the spirit of
God by that, to which they minister, and never went to the Magistrates for
their allowance; and here again you are apostates from the Apostles, and in the
steps of the false Prophets, whose ordination is by the consent of the people,
and your allowance from the Magistrates, who are from the allowance of Christ
that he gives to his Ministers, and the ordination of the Apostles, that was
not from man, nor by man.

Pr. Thou bids us mark the Canon of the Holy Ghost in Timothy. See page 11.

Ans. And there is no such word as Canon in Timothy; and thou tells us of a
Catholic Church, and we cannot find any such word in Scripture, that it
speaks of any such word; but we perceive whom thou have learned these words of,
what center and stock thou come of, from the Pope, and not from the Apostles.

Pr. He says, They have an un-interrupted succession drawn from the Apostles,
etc. See page 13.

Answ. For your succession is from the Pope, apostatized from the Apostles, ye
are out of the Apostles Doctrine, in all your whole worship corrected, and
reproved by Scripture. Did the Apostle set up a Temple, set up tithes, set up
your Schools and Colleges? Is not the Pope the Author of all this? Are not ye
his Successors?

Pr. Thou says, Ye are the Ministers of Christ, because ye have the Scriptures
and books, and such like, and you are not usurpers of the authority, etc. See
page 16.

A. Now there is never a one of you all that ever durst say, ye have heard Gods
voice immediately from heaven, or Christ's voice, or have the same spirit as the
Prophets and Apostles, and Christ had, or immediate revelations from heaven as
they had: So then you be in another ordination then they was in, and usurpers
of authority into your ministry, and intruders into those things you never saw:
And cannot any one be as good a Pastor or Minister as you, seeing all your
teaching is but from books and other men's writings? Why may not others learn
the same books, and writings, and so come to be Teachers and Pastors as well as
you, seeing you have nothing but from Books and Writings, and old Authors? Why
may not all that read those be Pastors and Teachers, and so then where be the
hearers? and so with the life are you all judged. The spirit of God which gave
forth Scriptures, which was before your old Books and Authors were.

Thomas Higginson, his Book called, The Testimony of the True JESUS. His
PRINCIPLES follow, etc.
Pr. HE says, The Word is not righteousness without the flesh, etc. See page
3.

Ans. The Word is righteous it self, and the flesh righteous as it became.

Pr. He says, Men are presented perfect to God, and without spot, before any
work done, or good whatsoever, etc. page 3.

Ans. There is none does the work of God but who believes; and he that believes
overcomes the world, and his works are wrought in God, and he has the word o^
reconciliation in him: And by this means of thine all the world is presented
perfect to God; for he is the offering for the whole world. But them that
believe are partakers, and them that do not believe are condemned. Yet I say
the Lord helps the unbelief of many, who is the Savior of all men, especially
of them that believe; and men are not presented to God while they do evil, and
before they are sanctified and holy.

Pr. He says, The invisible things of God, and the eternal power and glory of
God may be known by that of God in every man, but not his good pleasure or
purpose of grace, etc. See page 4.

Ans. Is the glory seen, and that known, the Godhead known? the invisible
things of God, and the eternal power, and not the good pleasure of God, nor
his purpose of grace? Does not the Godhead dwell in Christ and his fullness
bodily? And is not Christ the power of God? And he that knows God and his
glory, and eternal power and Godhead, Does not he know the Son? Consider
that; For he that has known the Son has known the Father also, and grace and
the purpose of God.

Pr. He says, Man may know God, and his eternal power, and Godhead, and
glory, and yet know nothing of the mystery of Christ, nor can that (which thou
says shows these things) lead unto the mystery of the knowledge of Christ,
etc. See page 4.

Answ. Where the eternal power and Godhead is known, his power, his glory,
and the invisible things of God, there is something of Christ known, the
mystery. For, there is none knows the Father but the Son, and he to whom the
Son reveals him: And he that knows the Father knows the Son.

Pr. He says, To say that Christ is within man, is to worship Angels, and not
to hold the head Christ, etc. See page 5.

Answ. Which none comes to witness Christ the head, but who witness him in
them, that the Angels must worship, that dyed, and suffered at Jerusalem; and
they that worship him in them, worships not the Angels; and they that are not
worshipping him in them, are worshipping Men, Devils, or Angels.

Pr. He says, It is a bewitching of the minds, to preach Christ within the
Saints, etc.

Answ. Did not the Apostle say to the same Colossians, of worshipping of
Angels, not holding the head? Did not he preach Christ in them, the same
Colossians? And he told them of intruding into things they never saw. Did not
he say, Christ in you the hope of glory whom we preach? warning every man, that
we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. How do thou devide the word
contrary to the Apostles and Christ Jesus? and calls this Doctrine bewitching;
and thou that preaches another doctrine contrary to his, art accursed.

Pr. He says, To say (the light in every one wherewith Christ Jesus has
enlightened them withal that comes into the world) is the way to Christ and the
Father, and is the sure word of prophecy which people are to take heed unto.
He says, this is to deny the person of Christ, as the object of faith, and the
Scriptures as the rule of faith, and faith it self, etc. See page 8.

Answ. In this thou have showed thy ignorance; for none knows the person of
Christ but with the light that comes from him: None knows the Mediator, none
knows the Author of their faith, but with the light that comes from Christ: And
none knows the Scriptures of truth but with the light: And Christ is the rule
of faith, and author of it, and giver; And many may have Scriptures and not
says; so in this thou devides not the word aright, incapable of dividing the
word; and that is the sure word of prophecy that shines in a dark place, which
people are to take heed unto, till the day dawn, and the day star arise in
their hearts.

Pr. He says, To say that redemption and righteousness is wrought within, is
to bring Christ down from above out of heaven, or raise him from the dead, and
to make the blood of Christ as another man's, etc. See page 9.

Answ. Now Christ is not known to be the justification, but as he is known
within, and redemption out of Adams state in the fall. For he that believes
has the witness in himself, and cease from his own works, and enters into
his rest, as God did from his: For the world may profess Christ without them;
but if he be not within them, they are reprobates, and shall fall short of the
justification and redemption if he be not within them: And if they have not the
Son of God, they have not life; and many will say, Lord, but does not the thing
that he commands. And one of thy generation of Professors that writ against the
Quakers, and said, That the blood of Christ was corruptible (and so it was like
the blood of another man) and thou says it is not. Now we say, that blood
which cleanses from all sin is incorruptible; and they that witness Christ in
them, and justification and redemption, and need not say, who shall raise
Christ from the dead, or fetch him from above, as thou says.

Pr. He says, Obedience to the spirit within, and Christ a worker and a
Lawgiver in their conscience, and a worker of it in their persons but not as a
Savior: and what of God is felt or wrought in them, that they believe. While
the unspeakable righteousness, opperation of life in Christ reserved, with
faith, liberty, joy and peace, etc. is hid from their eyes, etc. See page 10.

Ans. Now can any be obedient to the spirit within, and to Christ a worker, and
a Lawgiver, and feel the work of God in themselves, and believe it; and yet
the unspeakable righteousness and the operation of life hid in Christ, and
faith, and liberty, joy, and peace to be hid from their eyes? Can a man know
all these things, and yet not know Christ to be a Savior? here thou art
judged, and thy knowledge; for he that knows these things, knows a Savior; and
let the righteous judge, whose eyes are open, how thou divides the word.

Pr. He says, Faith holds things as true in Christ, though hid from sense and
feeling, etc. See page 11.

Answ How comes the just to live then if there be not a feeling in his faith?
And how comes he to have the victory then over the world? And how does faith
purify if there be not a feeling? And how is it holden then in a pure
conscience if there be not a feeling? And how comes he to have access to God
through faith? And does not the Scripture speak of them that was in the faith,
felt and handled the word of life? And was this without the faith of Gods
elect, or sense? Therefore in this thou may see in this how incapable thou art
to divide the word.

Pr. He says, They that put spiritual working for the grace of Christ, they
destroy Christ Jesus. See page 11.

Ans. They do not destroy Christ Jesus, that put spiritual working for the
grace of Christ, for the works of the spirit does not destroy Christ; for where
the works of the spirit are, there is the grace of Christ Jesus; and none owns
Christ, but who be in the works of the spirit, and his graces; and they
destroyed Christ, and deny him that be out of the works of the spirit, and his
graces are spiritual workings.

Pr. He says, The sight of the Godhead without faith in Christ is the
foundation of all false worships, etc. See same page.

Ans. Can any see the Godhead? have a sight of the Godhead? and not see
Christ, and have faith in Christ? And who have faith in Christ, do they not see
the fullness of the Godhead dwells in him Christ. And was not their minds
turned from that of God in them (which declared the invisible things of him
from the Creation, of his Eternal Power, and Godhead) which the Apostle sound
fault withal? Let all examine and Judge, and read the Scripture Romans 1. and
try.

Pr. He says obedience to Christ within is a sentence of the Law not of grace,
and denying Christ overwhelming the afflicted in sorrow without hope, and
turning the feet of the lame out of the way. And bids beware of such Doctrine,
etc. See page 12.

Ans. If people must beware of the Doctrine of the Apostles who has told them,
Christ was in them except they were reprobates, And Christ was within them the
hope of glory, to whom he Preached; For they turn people out of the way who
keep them reprobates without hope, and is a denying of Christ that Preaches
not Christ within, and a keeping people under the Law, which Christ is the end
of, and where Christ within is, there is obedience which is the end of the Law,
and there is grace.

Pr. He says the Justification and redemption by obeying the Light within,
appears to his understanding to be a mystery of iniquity, etc. See page 13.

Ans. Thy understanding must come to naught, for he that believes is Justified
from all things, and comes not into condemnation, and he has the witness in
himself. And that lets him see his Redeemer, his Mediator and Savior the
Light, which walking in it, he is cleansed from all sin, and so no mystery of
iniquity, for the mystery of iniquity is out of the Light: none sees
Justification and Redemption but with the Light within, which comes from Christ
who has enlightened him.

Pr. He says the Ministration of grace cannot he known by the Light which
Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the world withal, etc. See
page 14.

Ans. Contrary to John who says, as many as receives him to them he gives
power to become the Sons of God, and no one knows the Ministration of grace
but by the Light which comes from Christ the Covenant of grace.

Pr. He says none can know the mystery of God in Christ with the Light in
them, etc. See page 14.

Ans. Which is contrary to Scripture, I will give him for a Covenant, for a
Light to the Gentiles, he shall be my salvation to the ends of the earth says
the Lord. So this was the salvation, so it gives the knowledge of the Ministry
of salvation, the Light that shines in the heart gives the Light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, who is the mystery
that shines in the heart of them that believe in it; and them that do not, are
condemed with the Light. And so they are reproved with the spirit of truth
which leads the Disciples into all truth, which spirit the world cannot
receive, for they do not receive the Light, and so are not like to receive the
Spirit of truth.

Pr. He says the Light of Christ (in natural man) knows nothing of the
spirit, etc. And the Scripture was the Image of Christ without, etc. See page
14.

Ans. Scriptures without are writings, and endures not for ever, but the power,
Christ the power of God endures for ever; And who ever is in the Light, comes
to know Christ in the spirit, him who is the life. And it leads the natural man
from his natural state that believes in it, For all by nature are the children
of wrath: who believes in it, it leads from the nature; and from the wrath,
which who believes in it is made free from the wrath to come, and they that
believe not in the Light are reproved by the spirit, and that which reproves
them is manifest to them, and so they know it.

Pr. He says to affirm the Light in the conscience (which we say is the Light
of Christ) the way or guide to Christ whereto only to attend; is a darksome,
fleshly, and most legal principle, and calls it grave wherein Christ is buried,
etc. See page 15.

Ans. Which is contrary to Christ's Doctrine, who says he that believes in the
Light shall not walk in darkness, but have the Light of life. And he that does
believe in the Light, has entered into his rest and come to the Sabbath, out
of the grave and out of the legal and out of the fleshly, and out of
condemnation. And none comes to the Son Christ, but who comes to the Light
which comes from him which he has enlightened them withal.

Pr. And again he says to say the Light in every man is Christ the Redeemer is
a twofold error, etc. See same page.

Ans. Contrary to John who says this is the true Light which does enlighten
every man that comes into the world. And he was in the world, and the world
knew him not. So shows himself to be one of the stock of the world that knows
not him that was, and is in them the Light of the world, and the world knew him
not; which he that believes in the Light has the Light of life, and he that
receives the Light, receives Christ the Redeemer. And he that receives
Christ, receives his spirit. And he that receives not the Light that he is
enlightened withal, receives not his Redeemer but hates him: it is his
condemnation, and he is in the error.

Pr. He says the Light within was not given for righteousness, neither could
it reveal or give life, etc. page 16.

Ans. Contrary to Christ who says he that believes in the Light shall have the
Light of life. So thou art unskilful in the word and Doctrine of Christ, and
Christ within is given for righteousness; who reveals the Father and gives
life, and they that have not Christ the Light within are reprobates.

Pr. He says the Light within knows nothing of the precious Gospel Mystery,
See page 16.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle who said the Light that shined in their hearts
should give the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and
the Light within comes from the mystery, and is of the mystery it self, and
lets see the precious mystery which none knows but with the Light within, and
so the God of the world has blinded thy mind, and has showed thy self that
thou art of them that hates the Light, and shows that thou comes not to it;
for he that comes to it, comes to the mystery, for the least Light of Christ in
man is of the mystery, and comes from the mystery.

Pr. He says, to say Christ came to Redeem the Israel from the Law without, to
establish the work within, and law in the conscience, in obedience unto which
men come to be Redeemed, and the Law in the heart, thus to say he says is an
error, etc. See page 16.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle who Preached the redemption, established the Law
in the heart, and Christ within who redeemes men from under the Law, who is the
end of it, and the word of Faith in the heart, and they that have not this be
in the error, though they may talk of Christ.

Pr. He says it is the Divinity of Sophisters, and a blotting out of the glory
of the grace of Christ, to set forth Christ as a lawgiver, and worker in us,
etc. See page 17.

Ans. Which I say, none knows him as a Mediator and a lawgiver, nor an
offering, nor his blood that cleanses them but as they know him working in
them, and they be in the Sophistery of their Divinity that knows not the glory
of the grace of Christ working in them.

Pr. He says a man shall not see himself dead and buried with Christ, and
raised up with Christ by any work or obedience to Christ within, etc. See page
18.

Ans. He that believes has the witness in himself; and there is the work
within, and that is the work of God: and Faith is wrought within. And this is
contrary to self, for over it, it gives victory, and teaches to deny himself;
So see how thou confounds thy self; and he that believes is past from death to
life, and they that are dead with Christ seeks those things that are from
above.

Pr. He says again, the Light within is the spirit of the world, etc. See page
18.

Ans. Contrary to John's doctrine who says he was in the world and the world
knew him not, neither does your spirits of the world know him now, and the
worlds Spirit knew him not, and the world hates the Light, and darkness cannot
comprehend it, though it shines in darkness. And here thou art meddling with
things that are too heavy for thee, and the corner stone falls a top of thee,
and the Light that enlighteneth every one that comes into the world, was
before the spirit of the world was.

Pr. He says that they that affirm the light in every man that condemns for
sin to he Christ the Redeemer, have set up an Idol, etc. See page 19.

Ans. Does not Christ say, I am the Light of the world, which is the true
Light, that lights every man that comes into the world, who is the Redeemer
and the Salvation to the ends of the earth, and he that receives it receives
Christ. And is not this it that brings off of all Idols? And are not they
setting up Idols, that are from the Light? And does not Christ the Light come
to condemn sin in the flesh? and is that the Idol? How dare thou say so! he
was manifest in the flesh, to condemn sin in the flesh; and he says, I am the
light, and that is not an Idol.

Pr. He says, Christ comes not down in spirit into our persons to redeem, but
to manifest the redemption; and says, he comes the second time without sin
unto salvation, etc. See page 21.

Answ. The Apostle bids them work out their salvation with fear and trembling.
And Christ brings not peace on earth, but a sword, and judgment, and comes to
make blind, who is the redemption, and makes it manifest by his spirit, and
whose light does condemn him that hates it, for he will not have that which
manifests salvation; And whosoever knows redemption, knows it to be
manifest in him from Christ.

Pr. He says, They who had the light within, and pierced into the invisible
things, and eternal power, and Godhead, had but the wisdom of this world,
etc. page 23.

Ans. And so he would make the light of Christ, the wisdom of this world;
which light comes from Christ the wisdom of God: the wisdom of the world,
cannot pierce into the eternal power and Godhead.

Pr. He says, The light within denies all things that God has done for us in
Christ, which has no glory, but spreads a veil over, etc. page 25.

Ans. Which none knows what God has done for us, nor sees the glory in Christ,
but by the light which comes from him, who works all both in us and for us,
according to his good will and pleasure, and brings not to deny what God
works in us; and they nullify it that are against his light, and are against
his glorious person; for the light that is within lets see his glory.

Pr. He says, Obedience to the light within is another atonement, and a
denying the atonement of Christ, and calls it a mystery of iniquity. See page
28.

Answ. Which none knows the atonement of Christ but by the light within, and
all be in the mystery of iniquity that be out of the Light which comes from
Christ the covenant of God to Jews and Gentiles, and that gives them the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. Mark! he
says, the light is that which gives the knowledge, and the Light within does
not set up another atonement; but they do that do deny the light within, set up
another atonement then Christ.

Pr. He says, To obey the Law within (which we say is the law of the spirit of
life, which makes free from sin and death) in this he says, we agree with the
Papists and Pagans. See page 30.

Answ Now in this thou may see where thou art out of the Apostles doctrine: And
neither thee nor the Papists, nor Pagans own us in this, that we should be made
free from the Law of sin and death, while we be upon the earth: And here the
blood of Jesus is witnessed, and the atonement, and the Father and the Son,
and this is all seen with the Light within.

Pr. He says, He began by faith to behold the love, joy, and redemption
prepared for him, before any evil or good was done by him, etc. page 37.

Answ. Do not thou say, thou beheld it by faith? And now is not the work good
to behold by faith? And does not that give victory over the evil? And does not
that do good that beholds by faith? And so what is not of faith is sin.

Pr. He says, He is in heavenly places, and yet in the shadow of death with
the earthly. See page 38.

Answ. He that is in heavenly places is in Christ Jesus, a new creature: And he
that believes in the light, shall not abide in darkness; so comes out of
shadows: And he that believes, abides not in the condemnation, and so comes
out of the shadow of death, though they have sat in the shadow of death before
belief; and comes out of the earth, and so have proved thy self not a true
believer, which comes out of the shadows, and death.

Pr. He says, To purify the members, as reckoning it our redemption, our
righteousness, all such purity is sin, blindness, and idolatry, page 40.

Ans. And the Apostle calls Christ our redemption, and our sanctification, and
our righteousness; and so we can truly say Christ is ours, and no idolaters.
And them that cannot say Christ is their sanctification, redemption,
righteousness, and mortification, is in the idolizing and sin.

Pr. He says, The way to attain the spirit of Christ is not by waiting on the
light within, etc. see page 52.

Answ. Christ says, believe in the light, that ye way be children of the
light; and he that is a child of the light, comes to the birth born of the
spirit: And Christ does enlighten every one that comes into the world; And as
many as received him he gave them power to become the sons of God: And none
hears faith, but who hears the light within, which is Christ within, who is the
Author of it, by which the spirit is received.

Pr. He says, That doctrine or spirit that calls to the Light within, does but
build up the worship of the world, etc. page 53.

Ans Contrary to the Apostle, who said, The light that shined in their hearts
would give them the light of the knowledge of God in the face of Christ Jesus.
And Christ says, they that worship God, must worship him in truth; And he is
the light, and he is the truth, that does enlighteth every man that comes into
the world, and this throws down all the worship of the world. And I say, none
comes out of the worships of the world, and the doctrines of the world, but who
comes to the light wherewith Christ has enlightened every man, etc. that shines
in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not.

Pr. He says, To believe in God as in the Light within men, redeeming from
sin, is to deny the witness of the Son, and have neither Son nor Father, etc.
page 54.

Ans. Which I say, none owns the witness of the Son, but who owns the Light
which comes from the Son with which he is enlightened; Nor none knows the Father
nor the Son, nor receives them, but who receives the light which Christ the Son
has enlightened them withal, nor knows God to be a Savior but by the Light
within.

Pr. He says, They that seek for righteousness by obedience to the light
within, differs nothing from the Jews, but only in the copies of the Law,
etc. See page 56.

Ans. None sees the obedience of Christ the second Adam, the end of the Law,
and copies of it, but with the Light within, which comes from Christ Jesus,
that brings in righteousness, and ends sin and transgression, who is the end of
the righteous Law, with which light man sees the weakness and unprofitableness
of it, and the types and the shadows of it, which Christ is known in the light
within, who ends it.

Pr He says, To rest in hope that I am saved from sin and wrath by the blood
of Christ the head, and while conscience condemns for sin, this is to hope
against hope, etc. See page 57.

Ans. Such as are saved from the wrath by Christ the head, and his blood, they
are saved from their sins: And then they that are saved from their sins, how
can conscience condemn for sin, and the wrath come upon them for sin; and they
that are saved from the wrath, they are saved from their sins: But where
conscience does condemn for sin, there is wrath; and he cannot witness a
cleansing, nor salvation wrought out, nor saved from sin, but is in the false
hope, and not in the true hope which goes against hope, for the true hope is
Christ within.

Pr. Whereas thou speaks of Christ's working and giving an example, etc. page 67.

Ans. Yet thou and the rest are offended at those people that are called
Quakers, who say Christ was their example. And so ye can allow what ye speak
your selves; but if another speak the same words, it is an offense to you.

Pr. He says, Such as preach redemption by the light in every man are not of
God, etc. See page 70.

Ans. The redemption of Christ the light that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world; And every man that comes into the world that sees his
redemption, it is by the light, which he that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world has enlightened him with, which is Christ the Redeemer,
the Savior, the second Adam, the way to the Father, who shall make every
tongue to confess him to the glory of God; but thou that hates the light art
condemned.

Pr. He says, Not the light in every man, but the words of the Prophets and
Apostles, is that which leads to the Lord Jesus, etc. See Page 82.

Ans. Many may have the words of the Prophets, and the Apostles, but none comes
to that which leads to the Lord Jesus, but who comes into the light, and life
that the Prophets and Apostles was in, which Christ Jesus is the end of, who
does enlighten every man that comes into the world. Therefore every man that
comes into the world must come to the light which Christ has enlightened him
withal, before he come to the end of the Prophets and the Apostles, Christ
Jesus the Lord of life and glory.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures are the image of Christ; and he that seeks for
God out of the humanity of Christ, he shall lose both God and himself, etc. See
page 82.

Answ. The Scriptures are writings, and the writings will not endure for ever;
and the image of Christ is the image of God. And all who be in the life that
gave forth Scriptures, be in the image of Christ, which was before Scripture
was; and all that have the Scriptures out of the life that gave them forth,
they have not the image: And he that is out of the truth may have the
Scriptures; but he is out of the image, all are who be out of the truth; but
who be in the truth, be in the image. And God was in Christ, reconciling the
world unto himself. And who knows the Son, knows the Father: And he that has
found the Son, has found the Father also. And he that seeks after God out of
Christ, shall never find him.

And as for the rest of thy lies and slanders in thy Book, and unsavory
expressions which are not worthy mentioning, upon thy own head they will come
one day, and thy own words shall be thy burden.

Jeremiah Ives his Book, called, Innocence above Impudency, or the strength of
Righteousness exalted above the QVAKERS Weakness and Wickedness. His
Principles are as follows.
Pr. HE says, It is a rare thing to see any of the seed of the Devil grown up
to that degree of impudence to charge a man, that he has done that which he
never did do, etc.

Answ. The seed of the Devil always said that which was not true, so not a
rare thing to find them; for the Devil and his seed is out of the truth, and
when he speaks a lie, he speaks of himself, and so speaks a thing that is not,
and there thou art.

Pr. He says, The Apostle in his Catalogue of the evils of the times, etc.
page 1.

Ans. Is it not better to call the Scripture a declaration (as they call
themselves) then to call them a Catalogue? and some of you will say it is a
History, and some a Catalogue; and again ye will say, it is the Word of God,
which the Scriptures of truth is words; and God is the Word, and thou art in
the evil time, out of the good, and thy time and day is evil.

Pr. He says, The Quakers give that name (as quaking) to themselves, and
others do not give it them as a Nickname, etc. See page 2.

Answ. The first that ever I did hear them called Quakers, and the name given
to them of Quakers, was one Gervase Bennet in Darby, a persecutor called a
Justice of Peace, though many years before the power of the Lord was witnessed,
yet I never heard them have that name of Quakers given, before that corrupt
Justice gave it them, and misnamed them so, and in scorn called them so, and
thou art one of his Scholars; and Quaking and trembling we own, though they in
scorn calls us so; and the salvation wrought out with fear and trembling we
witness.

Pr. He says, The Devil speaks truth sometimes, etc. page 2.

Ans. Christ says, he was a liar from the beginning; and when he speaks a lie,
he speaks of himself, and has no truth in him; and so he cannot speak truth
as it is in him; And the greatest professors upon the earth are there, of the
Devil that speaks the words of truth, but not as they are in it, as so says
Christ to the Jews, they were of their father the Devil, they speak of
themselves. So they that speak the Scriptures, not by the spirit, as was by
them that spoke them forth, they speak of themselves, as the Devil does that
abode not in the truth, but a liar from the beginning; and thus the truth
comprehended it: For it is one thing to speak the truth in the truth, and to be
in it, for he speaks not of himself, but the truth in him; but the other all
speaks of themselves, and there thou art (and so does the Devil) and truth is
not in him, nor them, and there with truth they are comprehended.

Pr. He charge us, Whether ever any gave worse words to us then we did to
others, etc. page 9.

A. To speak truth is not to give bad words, to tell a Cain, he is a Cain; or
an Esau, or an Ishmael, to be an Ishmael; or a Wolf, he is a Wolf: and say
the evil Beasts are the evil Beasts, that are worse then the common beasts. And
to say, the greedy dogs that can never have enough, are worse then the common
dogs that are biting and tearing; and are worse then the common beasts that
feed in peace, and eats their meat in peace. Now to speak such words and
names as these are to them that are not so, that is a giving of bad names,
wrong names: But the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, it gave such names
to such as was found in those steps. It lets see now, and the whole Nation may
witness, that friends may answer to his Challenge; and the Gaols and the Courts
does show the greediness of such, and their persecution, and their malice
against the Lambs; and so the Saints in the spirit does give them their proper
names, to properties in their places, among which names thou art found.

Prin. He says, Much of the Scriptures may be understood without the spirit,
etc. page 12.

Ans. The Scriptures was given forth from the spirit of God, and they are the
things of God, and the words of God, and they are not known nor understood, but
by the spirit of God again, for there is a spiritual understanding. Neither
can they understand any of the Scripture of truth which cannot be broken but by
the spirit of God within that gave them forth, which is of God of whom they
were learned.

Pr. He says Christ was not a Minister of the circumcision, etc. See page 14.

Ans. And the Apostle said, they were circumcised with a circumcision made
without hands; and the putting off the body of sin, of the flesh, they were
circumcised with the spirit; but who was the Minister of this Circumcision? For
the Apostle says, it was the circumcision of Christ, Coll. 2.11. And again the
Apostle says, We are the circumcision that worship God in spirit, and have no
confidence in the flesh.

Pr. He says, What man in his right wits would say a wilderness was a City,
etc. page 14.

Ans. When the people have transgressed the Law of God, they are erred from his
ways, they are become a Wilderness, and bears the fruit of brambles and
briars, and not seeing any way to get out, till the Lords mercy be manifest to
them; which is further then the Law of justice. And thou have not seen thy wits
end yet, nor seen the Wilderness in thy heart fenced, though a City; and the
children of Israel were called a wilderness, in trangression, though in Cities.

Pr. He says, He can tell things to come without the spirit of God: And thou
says, the Pharisees could tell by the skies what should be the weather, and
the days should bring forth, and this without the spirit of God, etc. page 15.

Ans. That which gives to understand the Creation, and the altering and
changing of the Creation, either in weather or days. It is the wisdom of God,
and his spirit by which all things was made, that knows these things in the
truth; who counts the Stars, and numbers them in their kind; who sets the Sun
to rule the day, and the Moon to rule the night. Now who understands these
things, it is by the spirit of wisdom who understands them aright; and there
may be a wilful rejecting, and a having these things in the form, yet not a
knowing these things in truth, and so Christ calls them hypocrites. And a man
may know things by the spirit, and go in the error from the spirit, and then
hold them in his memory.

Pr. He says, Every man that comes into the world has not the light of
Christ in him, etc. page 16.

Answ. This is the true light that does enlighten every man that comes into
the world; and it shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not.
Now this light reproves where it is come to, where it is hated, and their deeds
be evil, and not loved, it is their condemnation, and so is not that which
reproves them, in them; which does make manifest the heart, and are not those
that do quench the spirit, the wicked, and those that are led by the spirit,
are not these the good? And is not here both ^ood and bad? Thou art that
darkness that John speaks of, that cannot comprehen^ the Light which shines in
darkness, like the Pharisees.

Pr. He says, There may be a light to convince people of sin, and yet not
within them.

Ans. There is no people convinced of sin, but they are convinced within
themselves and with the light within them; and it is the light that makes
manifest to a man when he is convinced: It answers to something, and reaches
to something in their particulars, though the words be spoken without them from
the Light.

Pr. That every man in the world should not have his sins pardoned, etc. page
17.

Answ. Christ gave himself, his body for the life of the world; he was the
offering for the sins of the whole world, and paid the debt, and made
satisfaction, and does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that all
through him might believe; and he that does not believe in the offering is
condemned already.

Pr. He says, It is an error to say that every man has a light within him,
to teach him to worship God, etc. page 18.

Answ. Every man that comes into the world having a light from Christ Jesus
the truth: Every man that comes into the world being in the light which Christ
Jesus the truth has enlightened him withal, and walking in it, he shall
worship God aright in the truth, and come into that the Devil is out of, and
worship God in the spirit. But none worships God aright but who be in the Light
which Christ has enlightened every man with that comes into the world; For who
is in the light, is in the truth, for it is truth: And all other worships out
of the Light is as the Devil is, and there thou art condemned with the Light.

Pr. He says, That is the error that he charge us with, that the light
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, it is an error to
say it is within every man, etc. page 19.

Answ. Which he is ignorant of the Scripture: I will give him a covenant of
light to the Gentiles, a leader unto them; and a new covenant to the house of
Israel and Judah, and this Covenant was written in their hearts: And as I said
before, the light shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not: And
where the light shines out of darkness, it shines in the heart. He that hates
the light is enlightened, and he that loves it; and that, reproves the evil
deeds of him that hates it which is within him, and it is in the Saints heart.

Pr. He says, It is miserable darkness to direct people to the Light within
them, etc. page 26.

Answ. Which was the Apostles doctrine; he was sent to turn people from the
darkness to the light. And he told people, that the light that shined in their
hearts would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Christ Jesus. And Christ bids them walk in the light, and believe in
it: and they be in miserable darkness that does not.

Pr. He says, It is a known error to say that a man was in hell, and in
heaven, etc. page 21.

Ans. Who in this shows his ignorance of Scripture; for it gives testimony of
men that did witness, that they had been in hell, in the nethermost hell; and
witnessed again they were in heaven, and sat in heavenly places in Christ
Jesus; and such were in heaven as is spoken of in the Revelations.

Pr. It is an error to say they have perfection, and they themselves not
perfect, etc. And to say they have communion with the body and blood of Christ
at the Gentiles Table, etc. page 23.

Ans. There is many of the servants and children of God, whose meat and drink
is the body and blood of Christ that comes among the Gentiles, and their
Tables, to witness against them, yet nevertheless they have communion with
the body and blo^^ of Christ: And many may witness Christ the perfection in
words, though they are ^ot in it, as the whole world does; yet who are in
Christ, are in the spirit, and are perf^^t. So that it is one thing to be in
the thing, and another thing to have sight of the t^^ng, and another thing to
profess the thing without the sight. Yet I say, the sight that ^eeth Christ is
perfect, and sees perfection; and the faith is perfect, whereby he com^th to
the knowledge of the Son of God, and to the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ.

Pr. He says, The writings of the Scriptures may be burned, but the Word of
God contained in them cannot be burned, etc. page 34.

Ans. If he had said, the word that it speaks of, or testifies of, he had
spoken proper like Scripture: But to say, the Word is contained in the writing,
and the writing says it testifies of Christ the Word. And there is a proof to
thee, that the Quakers are sent of God, who speak to thee of the Scriptures
right as they are.

Pr. He says. It is a lie to say every man has the light of Christ, etc. page
44.

Ans. Contrary to John, who says; every man that comes into the world is
enlightened. And as many as receives him, to them he gives power to become the
Sons of God: And he that believes in the light, shall not abide in darkness,
but shall have the light of life, and so it is sufficient: And he that does not
believe, is condemned already; and he has it to believe in, or to condemn him.

Prin. He says, Thousands stumble, because they have no light in them, etc.
Page 44.

Answ. They are such as hate it, and does not receive it, which has enlightened
them, and not walking in it, and so is their condemnation; and it shines in
the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not: And so they are in
darkness, and there is the unregenerate state.

Pr. He says, The Pharisees were far enough from having the Kingdom of
heaven within, etc. page 45.

Ans. Contrary to Christ's words, who said, it was within them.

Pr. He says, It is a notion to say, the light of Christ is in every one, etc.
page 47.

Ans. Which is contrary to John's doctrine. It is not a strange thing to the
Saints for these Priests and Teachers to question the light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world; for the Jews, Priests, and Levites
stumbled at it in the days of John, and it set them all up in an uproar as it
does you; and they examined John, and questioned John, and he said, This is the
true light that lights every man that comes into the world, that all men
through him might believe.

Pr. He says, None were ever baptized into the name of the Father, Son, and
holy Ghost, that were not baptized with water, etc. page 52.

Answ. Where was Matthew, or Mark, or Luke, or John baptized, and many more
which the Apostle said, he thanked God he had not baptized? etc. which he had
begotten many. Baptizing is making disciples to the Lord Jesus, and Baptizing
them into his name, that is his power, and he tells the Saints that they were
Baptized with one spirit, into one body, such he tells that he thanks God he
had Baptized but a few: but he told of the spirits Baptism, and brought the
Saints off from things that were seen, and water is seen and its Baptism. And
as for all thy rabble from thy contentious spirit, and railings, and unsavory
expressions, they will turn home upon thy self; and thy own words will be thy
burden; and the witness in thy conscience will answer in the day of thy
Judgment.

Francis Harris his Book called, his queries to the Quakers, etc. his
Principles follows.
Pr. THou says does not these people that pretend to the light stumble at noon
day as in the night, and there be no Gospel Light, we mean of the revealed and
written Gospel Light in them? etc. page 9.

Ans. The Gospel Light is that which does enlighten every man that comes into
world: and who hates it, neglects the Gospel Light, and receives not the power
from God which is the Gospel, for that is the Gospel Light Christ Jesus that
does enlighten every man that comes into the world. The Light which every man
that comes into the world is enlightened withal is the Gospel light, and they
that walk in it stumble not; They stumble that be out of the Light which every
man that comes into the world is lighted withal, which Light is the way to
the Father: and many may have the written words, yet out of the Gospel Light
and the power of God which is the Gospel, as Romans 1. which brings people to
where the sheep lies down at noon day.

Pr. He says what did Christ mean when he bid people search the Scriptures, or
Peter when he called the Scriptures the sure word of prophecy, the light
shining in the dark place? and yet Scripture without is a dead letter, etc.
page 12.

Ans. And yet they call it the Light, and the word, which is a dead letter.
Christ's bids the professors of Scriptures to search it, that thought to have
had life in it (not that they should find life in it) but that they should
search it and see how it did testify of him who was the life; that was his
end, and those that was come to Christ the life; they was come to him the
Scriptures testified of, as John 1. we have found him of whom Moses and the
Prophets writ: and those were them that was come from John: the others were
them that stuck in John, and came not to the life, but to the Scriptures to
have had life in the Scriptures, and came not to him the Scriptures testified
of, and persecuted that. And Peter means as he speaks; he tells them of the
sure word of Prophesy, and bids them take heed to it, as unto a light that
shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day Star arise in their
hearts. He does not say this is Scriptures without; which thou says it is a
dead letter, how can that shine.

Pr. He says does not this draw people to gross Idolatry; to bid people to
take heed to the light in you, which you call the pure Light of God; not the
light of nature? And whether you do not delude people, by saying there is a
pure Light of God and Christ in every man and woman by nature, etc. page 14. 17.

Ans. The light which does enlighten every man, etc. leads from all Idolatry:
for all that be out of the Light that does enlighten every man that comes into
the world; they be in the Idolatry. And every man that comes into the light,
the light which they are enlightened withal, be in that which was before any
natural lights was: and the the natural lights are the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars. And they delude, and deceive people that say the light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world is a natural light, and they
keep people in the Idolatry; And so shut up the Kingdom against men, and go not
in themselves, nor suffer others; for all Idolatry is out of the Light.

Pr. He says, to be carried up to the power, and to the Spirit which resembles
fire, whether this be not Antichrist like a Lamb; to call fire from heaven to
come down in the sight of men? And whether the power be from God or from Satan,
that brings people into a trembling and shaking like Belshazar, etc. See page
20. 21.

Ans. That power was not of Satan that broke down the head of gold, the breasts
of silver, neither was that power of Satan that made Belshazar to shake and
quake: and that power all must know, before the most High rules in the Kingdoms
of men: and to be carried up by the power, and the Spirit of God is not
Antichrist, nor is not as the beast which with his lying wonders caused fire to
come down from heaven, for the power, and the Spirit of God fathomes all such
things; and sees those were the Spirits that were erred from the Apostles; and
the life they lived in that did so.

Pr. He says the most righteous man falls seven times a day the Scripture tell
us, See page 22.

Ans. The Scripture does not speak any such thing as seven times a day, but it
says the Just man falls seven times, and rises again, but the wicked falls
into mischief.

Pr. He says such as have fasted till their neighbors who lived nigh them
have not known them; they have been as though they had been come out of the
jaws of death: whether this be not as the Pharisees? and an occasion to Satan?
etc. page 24.

Ans. What would ye have said to David in his days, when that he fasted till
he might number his bones? and was a stranger to all his acquaintance; was this
an hypocrites fast? and because some now by the same power, are moved of the
Lord so to do? Is this now like unto the Pharisees that appears to do so? Have
not all Ministers and teachers showed their ignorance of the Scriptures, and
the life that gave it forth, and to be such as cannot divide the word aright,
nor speak a word in season? But are rather such as burdens the just, and
oppresses; whereby the poor groans, and cries under: not to distinguish
between the fasting of the servants of God, and you that appeared to fast. So
in this you show you put no difference between the precious and the vile, and
are not able to Judge of things that differs; so are Judged with that which
does put a difference in things that differ: and David was a wonder to his
neighbors about him.

Francis Higginson, his Book called, A brief Relation of the Religion of the
Northern QUAKERS. His PRINCIPLES follow, etc.
Pr. HE says in his Epistle, The great number that is fallen away from the
Word of God.

Answ. The falling away from the Word of God was before the Apostles decease,
and since the world is gone after you, and them that are fallen away; and so
you put the Letter for the Word, the Scripture which are words, and so run into
all opinions, into Sects; but now are people coming to the Light, and so to the
Word Christ Jesus, him by whom the world was made, before it was made, from you
apostates, to the word and the Apostles are we come.

Pr. Again he says, I do not detest Popery it self more heartily then I do
your Religion, Quakers, etc.

Ans. I do believe thee, for Popery it self is thy stock: The Tithes, the
Universities, the Steeple Houses, Masse-houses, and so I know thou must be a
friend to Popery, and detest us before thou can Popery, the Kingdom would be
divided else against it self, and then it were not like to stand: But Popery
and you we see is come up since the days of the Apostles in the apostasy, and
so with the power of God ye are denied.

Pr. Again he says, Beware of false Prophets, for there shall arise false
Prophets, and false Christ's, and if it were possible they should deceive the
very Elect, Math. 7. and Matthew. 24.

Ans. And Christ said, they should come, and they should be inwardly ravening
Wolves, but they should be clothed with the sheeps clothing; to his Disciples
he spoke this, and before the Disciples decease they saw that they were come,
the false Prophets and the Antichrists, as in 1 John 2.4. which went forth from
them, that inwardly ravened, that Christ said should come that had gotten the
sheeps clothing, which the Apostle saw was come, that went forth from them:
And in the Revelations he says, all the world went after them. All the world
wondered after the Beast and the false Prophets: And the Beast had power over
all Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues, and Peoples, and the false Prophet
which the world went after, and these made war against the Saints, and overcame
them. And so the false Prophets and the Antichrists, you have had the sheeps
clothing, but have been the wolves, ravening and devouring the Lambs: Ye could
not have deceived, if ye had not had the sheeps clothing upon you: And so the
Beast and his names, who have had power over all Nations, and Kindreds, and
Tongues, and so the Beast and Whore has been upon you Tongues, which makes you
Orthodox men, which John calls waters: Here have been the beast and his names,
who have had power over all Nations. And the mother of harlots, the great
whore, which all nations have drunk her cup of her fornication, that the
inhabitants of the earth are drunk with the wine of the wrath of her
fornication; and the Kings of the earth have committed fornication with her,
and she sits upon the waters, and the waters are Peoples, and Tongues, and
Nations, and Multitudes. Now you have told long (the poor people) that the
false Prophets are come but now, and the Antichrists are come but now, and bids
them come to Matthew. 7. and Matthew. 24. and so have showed your ignorance of the
Scriptures, which says they were before the Apostles decease, as in the first
Epistle of John, which went forth from the Apostles, the false Prophets,
Antichrists, and false Spirits, which Christ said should come, which the world
since have gone after them. Now have, and does your ignorance of the Scriptures
appear, and not to be men able to divide the word aright. The discerning now is
risen among people, that they begin to see and know who divides the word
aright. And so all this has been but for pretense, to bid people to go to
Matthew. 7. and Matthew: 24. and say false Prophets should come. Now we see you
which John said, they were come, and all that dwelt upon the earth went after
them: And so ye have had the form of godliness, but the power has been denied;
and so you have burst into names and heaps, and sects; but now is the vials,
and thunders, and plagues, and trumpets sounding and going forth, and the seven
woes going out: And now are the Kings of the Earth, and the Beast, and false
Prophets, and Antichrists, and the mother of Harlots, and the Beast and his
names, and horns gathering together, with the old deceiver the Devil, to battle
against the Lamb, and the Saints of the Lamb: But the Lamb and the Saints have
got the victory, and the rivers of living waters is opening to all that thirst.
Sing and rejoice, let us give glory to God, for now is the marriage of the Lamb
come.

Pr. Again thou makes a great pudder, that any one should witness he is equal
with God, etc. page 2.

A. And in a Catechism of the Assembly of the Priests (called Divines) which
they put forth to the Nation, in which they have laid down (for young children,
and old men, and all to learn) That the holy Ghost and the Son is equal in
power and glory with the Father. Yet if any one come to witness the Son
revealed in him, or come to witness the holy Ghost in them, as they that gave
out Scriptures; or witness the mind of Christ, and witness that equal with
the Father, that equality which you speak of: You Priests destroy that which
you have put forth to the Nation, and cry out horrid Blasphemy. And thus ye
confound that which you have set up, and kill that which ye have begotten.

Pr. He says, I shall mention their errors. First, they hold their speakings
are a declaration of the word Christ in them. 2. That the letter of Scripture
is carnal. 3. That Jesus Christ is come in their flesh, that he is in them as
man. 4. And that the Scriptures are not the written word of God. 5. That the
soul is a part of God, or a Divine essence. 6. That they enjoy God here, and
Christ here. 7. And attain to a state of perfection. 8. That sprinkling of
Infants is a mark of the Beast. 9. And our Church, and worship, and Temple are
Idols Temples, and Beast-houses. 10. And not to be called of men Master. 11.
And the not speaking to a single person in the plural number, etc. These he
calls Errors.

Ans. All your Temples set up (imitating the Temple of Solomon built) since the
days of the Apostles, are Idols, for God never commanded them. And have not
the Papists had them? And have they not been Masse-houses, Beast-houses, and
are they not? Is God worshipped in Temples made with hands? Is not he
worshipped in the spirit and in the truth? And the Scriptures are words of the
Prophets and Apostles, and Christ; they are words, and so called in the
Scripture; they are not called the written word, but words, and Christ the Word
comes to fulfill them: And all you that does not speak from the Word, if your
Declaration be not from it, you are the spirits gone out into the world,
apostatized from the spirit that was in the Prophets, Christ, the Word, and the
Apostles, that does not speak from Christ the Word in you. And the Letter
written in paper and ink; now paper and ink is not spiritual, but that which
it speaks of is spiritual: And (thou) to a single, and you to a single, makes
it appear that neither thou nor you never learned your Accidence yet, neither
are perfect of the Bible what it says: For neither the Bible nor the Accidence
teaches to speak any such language as you to a particular. Therefore ye are
pitiful men to go to instruct the Nations, and cannot endure sound righteous
words, and simplicity of speech but stumble at it. And again, God will dwell in
you, and walk in you, and your bodies are Temples of the holy Ghost: And Christ
is in you except you be reprobates, says the Apostle. And again, God breathed
into man the breath of life, and he became a living soul; For that which came
out from God was the cause that man became alive, a living soul, and is not
this of God? And God who has all souls in his hand, and Christ the Bishop of
the soul; And is not that of God which comes out from God? Is not that of his
being? the soul which he has in his hand, and so divine, and is not Christ in
man? And does not Christ say they must eat his flesh? And so if they must eat
his flesh, is not his flesh in them, and have they not the spirit? And how can
any eat Christ's flesh, if his flesh be not in them. And does not the
Scriptures say, that he was manifest in the Apostles flesh? And how can ye call
him Christ in man, without the man be there? And sprinkling Infants, which the
Scripture does not hold forth, but a thing got up since the days of the
Apostles, not witnessed by Scripture, they cannot show by the Apostles that it
was one of his marks, but a tradition of men, an invention of men: and then
they may all see (such as say they have not a command to do it) if it be not a
mark of that beastly spirit that is erred from the Apostles, who is out of the
power? And Christ says, be not ye of men called Master (it is his command)
for ye have one Master even Christ, and ye are all brethren. So thou that
opposest the commands of Christ, and teaches men to practice the contrary,
thou and you are Antichrists, and show your spirit of error from Christ's
spirit. Now let all read and see if this man divides the word aright to people?

Pr. He says, They have an unction, need not that any man teach them. And
waiting for the Spirit to come down upon them, by inspiration, and give them
utterance; And he says they sit silent, and not whisper among them. And they
do not own David's Psalms to be sung, See page 12, 13. these are errors says
he.

A. Was it not the Apostles Doctrine that they need no man to teach them but as
the same anointing teaching them that abide in it? And was not they seducers
that drew from it? 1 John 2. And did not the Apostles wait for the receiving
the Holy Ghost the Comforter, the Spirit of truth? And did not the holy men of
God speak as they were moved by the Holy Ghost? and so the Gospel and the
things of God was revealed to them; what they had heard, and seen, and was
revealed to them, and spoke as the spirit gave them utterance; and prayed for a
door of utterance, and others was to pray that they might have a door of
utterance given to them when they was to Preach; And to sing David's Psalms,
without David's spirit; people sings not with the understanding: now in all
these things have not ye showed, and made manifest your spirits to be all the
false spirits gone out into the world, from the Apostles Spirit, holy-mens
spirit, that spoke forth the Scriptures as they were moved, and waited for the
Spirit which led them into all truth, and revealed to them the things of God?
so you that be out of this Revelation, and Preach against this, you have
Preached up your spirits out from the Apostles; and declared your folly to all
the Nation. And then because they wait in silence, and not a whisper among
them; Is not that agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine and the Prophets? Is there
not a learning in silence? And was not whispering forbidden by the Apostle? And
does such things as these offend thee? and so thou have showed thy spirit.

Pr. He says they meet in the night, and they make their object of their
teaching, of Ministers and Tithes; and of the pure light that is in every man
that comes into the world. And for any man for to know what is in him, by
looking at him, or upon him, or discern his soul; this he suspects to be an
evil eye. And he says that the learned men and Ministers, and Physicians to be
in the power of Satan, etc. page 16. 17. 18.

Ans. Here again ye have made manifest your power, who are gone forth from the
Apostles, into the mystery of Iniquity, which has wrought long since their
days. And now is the power of God made manifest, which breaks down the
mystery of Iniquity; and raises up the mystery of godliness; that of this
power, neither the learned men, Physicians or Ministers, are able to Judge of
it, but as they do own Christ the power of God. Formerly in the days past, as
the learned Rabbis Judged of Christ, so do they Judge of the power now, so not
strange to us. And the Saints met in the night, yea till midnight. And we do
deny the Ministry that takes Tithes, and say the Priesthood is changed, and the
Law is changed by which is was made; and the Commandment disanuled that gave
tithes and the Priesthood changed that took them. Heb. 7. And we say Christ is
come a Priesthood after the order of Melchisedeck the similitude, and likeness,
who ends the similitude and likeness: in Christ is the end of similitudes and
liknesses, and wars in whom is peace. So no tithes paid to the similitude and
likeness: But all is to come to the Son, and to hear the Son, and honor the
Son. I will give him for a Covenant of light unto the Gentiles and a new
Covenant to the house of Israel, and the house of Judah. Among the Jews to whom
Christ was promised, he told them he was the light of the world; and the
Prophet said he would give him for a Covenant of light unto the Gentiles. And
Christ bid them believe in the Light, and they should have the Light of life,
and they should not walk in darkness. And John says if ye walk in the Light
then have ye fellowship one with another, and the blood of the Son of God
cleanses you from all sin. So none comes out of the darkness, and out of the
stumbling: and have peace with God, but who comes to the Light. And art thou
offended at this object? Do thou stumble at this Light? at the door, the
Rock, the cornerstone, splitting thy self against it, but it is fallen upon
thy head. Again the spiritual man discerns and Judges all things; And as face
answers face, so does the Spirit of the Lord in man: And man may discern by the
Spirit of the Lord God, where the seed is in the Death, and where the seed is
not, and where the soul is living, (in which the Lord has pleasure) and where
it is in the death, as the Scriptures of truth does testify. The holy men of
God discern it, and ye being ignorant of this, does manifest that ye have
neither salt, nor savor: nor handling, nor tasting, nor seeing, nor feeling;
But what ye know, ye know naturally as bruit beasts and so there is the evil
eye not having spirits of discerning and savoury. How should ye minister unto
people, to their states and conditions, if ye cannot discern their spirits
which is in them? How are ye ministers of the spirit? The natural man, though
he have all the natural tongues, does not receive the things of God, yet the
natural man may get the letter: and if he have not the spirit that gave it
forth, he is ^ot a Minister of the spirit, but of the letter, and c^red from
the spirit that the Apostles was in as you are, and you have made your selves
manifest.

Pr. He says the Quakers will have no Tools taken out of the shops of humane
learning to work withal, See page 26. again they call our Ministers States
Ministers, or Priests; and some of them quakers go naked through the streets,
etc.

Answ. How ignorant art thou here of Scripture? will not all people here judge
thy ignorance, and your ignorance? which the Scripture lets them see that the
Lord did make his Prophet Isaiah to put off his clothes, and go naked for a
sign among the Egyptians, and Ethiopians, to Egypt, and Ethiopia; a figure of
their nakedness: and if the Lord did make some signs among you, or have made
some as signs among you to go naked; a figure of your nakedness; who are of
spiritual Egypt, and of their root, and stock; And of those spirits, false
spirits that went out into the world from the Apostles. If the Lord make some
signs as among you of your nakedness, how you have ravened from the spirit of
God, and wants the clothing of that, look upon your own shame; are they not
Innocent people that go naked among you, and are an offense unto you, who sees
not your shame, that that may be covered? And are not ye State Ministers made
by men, and Schools, and Colleges set up by States maintenance from the
State, and Tithes from the State, out of the States allowance? And ye say ye
never heard the voice of God, nor Christ's voice immediately from heaven: whose
Ministers are ye then, but States Ministers? and deny immediate Revelation, and
inspiration: How can we say ye are Ministers made by the will of God, when as
ye tell us ye never heard his voice? Or how can we say you are Ministers of
Christ, and deny Revelation, and inspiration, and immediate voice from heaven,
and so knows not the Son and the spirit that reveals? As for your tools that
comes out of your shops of humane learning, The Quakers deny your shops of
tools that comes out of the humane learning. And the Scripture gives no such
expressions as a shop of tools that ever the Prophets; or A^ostles had a shop
of tools of humane learning. But your shops of tools of humane learning has
come up in the Apostasy since the days of the Apostles, and these are your
tools that you work withal in the Apostasy; And so ye workmen will fall out
with one another work, and with your tools strick at one another: Ye have had
a shop, that inwardly ravened; that went forth from the Apostles; the false
spirits that went out into the world, ye have had a shop of tools with which
ye have worked, and lived in your old A^thors, and books, and studies, and
Fathers; and so burst into many heads and heaps; and one destroying another
about one another work since the days of the Apostles who have a shop of
tools out of your humane learning. So all your tools ye have wrought withal
since the Apostasy has been taken out of the shops of humane learning which is
earthly, this proves ye are apostates, and the spirits gone out into the world.
And Luke says the tongues of the Hebrew, Greek and Latin was set up a top of
Christ by Pilate who crucified him. And John says the beast had power over all
tongues. And the whore sits upon the tongues; and the tongues are waters. What
has the beast sat upon our tongues? our Orthodox-men, our Schools and
Colleges? what does the whore sit on our tongues, Original, and upon our tools
and shops that which is a top of Christ? It is not unlike but that the Beast
may have power over all these. The earth was of one language before they built
Babel, and when they imagined to build Babel, God confounded them into many
Languages: And so the life is risen, Christ Jesus, which was before Babel was,
and when Babylon is not; and before Pilate was that set the many Languages upon
him. The life is risen over them and you all, which life is Christ which breaks
your shops to pieces of your tools of humane learning, and your tools both,
which was before Babel was, and when Babylon is not: and so your glory is
marred there, and your pride is stained. The life is risen, Christ the life is
risen over you: The Merchants and the Tradesmen rages which has long had your
shops. Sing and rejoice over them ye Saints.

Pr. He says the Apostle says, The last times are perilous, there should be
false accusers, and fierce despisers of them that are good. Again he says, a
Turk or an Indian will deny the light within him. Again, Christ is in heaven
with his carnal body. See page 43. 45. 48.

Answ. Christ's body is a glorified body, and the Scripture does not speak any
where that Christ's body is a carnal body in heaven.

Again, the perilous times came before the Apostles decease, they saw them
that were false accusers, and fierce despisers of them that were good: They
that had the form of godliness, but denied the power, that should be lovers
of themselves, and covetous, and these were crept up before the Apostles
decease; and since the days of the Apostles the world have been after them:
That both covetous, and heady, and fierce despisers have ruled; they have been
like Jannes and Jambres who withstood Moses, when the children of Israel were
to come out of Egypt. And so do you that crept up since the Apostles decease,
who are covetous and high-minded, heady, fierce despisers of them that are
good, have a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof, which are to be
turned away from, and so keeps people in spiritual Egypt and Sodom. Are ye
not all covetous, and lovers of your selves? And do not you all deny the light
that lights every man that comes into the world, Christ the power of God;
and so keeps people under your teachings all their life time, laden with their
sins and diverse lusts while they be upon the earth, and the body of it? and
telling them that there is no perfection here? That Ministry that tosseth
people up and down with your slights and wiles, and windy doctrine, and never
able to come to the knowledge of the truth; which truth is the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world. Are not ye fierce despisers of
them that are good? Has not all the blood which has been shed since the days
of the Apostles, of the Martyrs and Saints been by the stock that you are in,
who are the false spirits erred from the true spirit that the Prophets and
Apostles were in, and gone out into the world from them, as ye confess ye have
not the same infallible spirit as the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles had,
and Eaton the Pastor says: And the Indians will not deny the Light, nor Turks
neither, that convinces them of sin; for to the Turks and Indians was the
Covenant promised as well as to the Jews, for they are Heathen; and thus your
ignorance appears of the Scripture of truth, and Ministers of God, and with
them you are judged.

Pr. Priest Coal says, The light which he is justified by is a created light.
Page 56.

Answ. The Scriptures of Truth which the Saints declared, and Christ, never
held forth such a light as was created, as justified them; for the Saints are
justified by Christ the light by whom all things were created. Light was not
created, that was the Saints justification.

Pr. He says, Who are washed from their sins by the blood of Christ, and made
Priests unto God; and in this sense if they themselves do not once become
Priests, they will become companions of Devils for ever. See page 56.

Answ. They that become Priests to God, and are washed by the blood of Jesus
Christ, are come out of the Devils power, and overcome him by the blood of the
Lamb, and owns the light to be their justification, which thou denies.

Pr. He tells us of Paul's mediate call, and his extraordinary call of it self
had not been sufficient.

Answ. The Scripture tells us no such thing of Paul's mediate call; and Paul
declares himself (take Paul's own words) not of man, nor by man, but by the
will of God: and that was sufficient; which call you are out of since his
days, by men are ye called.

Pr. He says, Christ does not forbid, not simply to be called of men Master,
etc. page 62.

Ans. It was Christ's command plainly to his Disciples, Be not ye of men called
Master, for ye have one master even Christ. And thus thou stands against
Christ's doctrine, and commands, and so a transgressor, and an Antichrist.

Pr. He says, Christ's humane nature, etc.

Ans. Where does the Scripture speak of humane, the word humane? where is it
written? tell us that we may search for it. Now we do not deny that Christ
according to the flesh was of Abraham, but not the word humane. And Christ's
nature is not humane, which is earthly, for that is the first Adam.

Pr. Priest Coals principle: He says, His justification is not done within
him, but without him in the Court of heaven.

Answ. Reprobates may talk of Justification: Did not Christ work Justification
without them upon the earth for man kind, and brought righteousness? And
where there is Christ made manifest within, is not their Justification wrought
there from heaven within? Where faith is witnessed within, does not that
justify? and none knows Justification in truth, but where it is wrought
within. See page 77, 78.

Pr. Again, Priest Coal says, The life that he lives is a created life.

Ans. So thou have showed thy self a natural man, not spiritual, nor a son
of God led by the spirit of God; nor in the faith, and do not live by faith,
nor a living in the spirit, so have manifested vain glory.

Pr. He calls trembling and quaking the shaking of the soul.

Answ. The power of the Lord God comes to shake down that nature which prisons
the soul, etc. and sets it free. And as for all thy other Complaints, Reviles,
Railings and Lies will turn upon thy self, and they will be hard for thee to
bear; and thou shall cry out with Cain, when thou and you feel the burden; who
are cut of Christ's steps, who is the light that lights every man that comes
into the world; In the day of thy judgment thou shall witness, and the
witness in thy conscience shall answer.

Francis Fullwood His Book, called, A True Relation of a DISPVTE. His
Principles follows.
Pr. HE says, The Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation. Again, the
Son in whom eternal life is, is only found in Scripture, and they are they
that testify of him, and therefore eternal life is found in Scripture.

Ans. Many had the Scriptures, but stood against the Son of God; and many may
have the Scriptures, and not the Son of God. The Son of God is not Writings,
Scriptures signifies writings: And many may have the Scriptures, and not have
the Son of God, and so not eternal life: For the Devil has Scripture, but
has not eternal life; for he that envyeth his brother, has not eternal life
abiding in him. So who have eternal life, they have that which the Scripture
speaks of, testifies of, it testifies of Christ the life, of the spirit, and so
they are the words given forth by the spirit of God, and so are to be fulfilled
by the same spirit again. And the Scriptures are able to make wise unto
salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. For they were not wise unto salvation,
who had the spirit without the faith.

Pr. He says, We attain our Gospel another way then Paul did. And it is
blasphemy to tell us that what ye deliver is by revelation from heaven, etc.

Answ. You have received your Gospel another way then Paul did I do believe,
who are apostates from them: And is it not blasphemy for you to speak, and
preach that which ye have not received from heaven? and so ye have brought your
selves under the curse, and showed another Gospel. For whosoever receives the
Gospel which is called the power of God, it is immediate, and by immediate
revelation from God from heaven; And so your Gospel which is of men, and after
men is another, not the power of God, received from God; for whosoever
receives the Gospel, the power of God, must receive it immediately, for the
power of God is immediate; and that is the glad tidings to poor souls, that
sets the souls free, which is immediate.

Pr. He says, We claim Tithes not by the Law of God, but by the Law of the
Land, and Tithes seems to be Christ's wages, and Melchisedeck still lives to
receive Tithes in Christ. etc.

Answ. Christ is come, the everlasting Priesthood, who ends the true
commandment that gave tithes, and the Priests that took them; which ends in
him, Melchisedeck that received tithes of Abraham, of whom Christ came
according to the flesh. And so Christ does not any where to his Disciples (who
ended the true command that gave tithes) give forth his Disciples an order to
set up another Law in the Nations to give them tithes, the tithes of men's
estates, and so you are none of the Order of Melchisedeck, never come thither;
but of the order of them which Christ said should come, who are inwardly
ravened, which John saw was come, and went forth from them, the false spirit
that went forth into the world, into the earth; and so ye have set up Tithes,
and Temples, and Schools, and Priests by the Popes authority. Had ye not your
Spiritual Courts not long since? And was not the Pope the first author of your
Tithes? And are not you of that Order? (far off of that spirit that leads after
the Order of Melchisedeck) for ye are ravened from the spirit: For none comes
to the Priesthood after the Order of Melchisedeck, but who comes to the spirit
of Christ, and these are Kings and Priests to God for ever. So ye have received
your Tithes after the order of that spirit that went forth from the Apostles
into the world, into the earth, that inwardly ravened, and went forth from the
Apostles, which the world have been after since the days of the Apostles, and
have had the sheeps clothing, but ravened and devoured the Lambs, and worried
the sheep, Ministers, Prophets, and Saints: So your Order will all men
comprehend (that be of the royal Priesthood after the order of Melchizedeck)
to be come of the Popes stock, for the Apostles and Christ did not set up
Tithes.

Pr. He says, Baptism comes in, in the room of Circumcision, and it is called
the circumcision of Christ. Again he says, that thee and thou is a custom: So
if any man be contentious, we have no such custom in the Church of God.

Ans. Circumcision is no where said to be a type of sprinkling Infants; and
that sprinkling Infants is no where said to be the circumcision of Christ. But
the circumcision without of men, was a type of the circumcision within: And
that the Apostle witnessed the fulfilling of it in the spirit, and so denies
the outward. And the baptism of John was a type of that within; And you to a
particular, which is your custom, which the Scripture does not declare to us,
that that custom was in the Church of God. But the Apostle bid them keep to the
form of sound words, that could not be condemned. Now you to a particular is
not a found word, as they can tell that have but read either the Bible or
Accidence: And there is no Heathenish customs comes into the Church of God
that will spot or wrinkle it, nor nothing comes into it (that is the pillar
and ground of Truth) that will be condemned.

Pr. And he tells us of a word Trinity: And he says, the only ordinary way to
know Jesus Christ is outward Revelation; and to attain to the knowledge of
Christ is by the Scriptures; and he may be a Minister of Christ, though he be
partly out of Christ's doctrine, and though he be called of men Master. He
says, the Scripture tells us plainly, that Baptism is a Christians
circumcision. Again, He that says that light which is in every man is
sufficient to discover and lead men to Christ, is under the darkness of his own
fancy, having so far left the true light, the word of God.

Answ. The light in every man which Christ has enlightened him withal, loving
it and walking in it, it is sufficient to discover Christ and salvation; and
they that be out of that, be in the darkness and fancy. And as for the word
Trinity, that comes from the old stock the Pope, the Scripture teaches us no
such word. And none can know Christ by the Scriptures, they testify of him;
but none can know Christ but by Revelation; flesh and blood had not revealed it
to Peter; and the Son was revealed in the Apostle; and none can preach Christ
(that deny revelation) in truth; and they that are Ministers of Christ, they be
in his doctrine; For when they are out of his Doctrine and his commands, then
they are wrong Ministers which ministers not for Christ, but they preach
themselves, and are Antichrists transgressors: And the Scripture does not tell
any where, that Baptism is a Christians circumcision, as sprinkling Infants;
but Circumcision in the spirit, and Baptism in the spirit is all one, in which
the o^^ward ends.

And as for all thy other silly expressions published to the Nation, it bad
been better thou had kept silent, and all of you, then to have published your
shame to the Nation. But your folly you must bring forth to make it manifest to
all men, whose eyes are opening. Are not you in the Devils snare, who are out
of the discerning? For you cannot tell what to bring people into; alack for you
who are hung about with rags, and are not covered with the spirit of the Lord,
but are all from that which we are in, and so have kept people in darkness,
and not turned them to the light, being all ravened from it, and so think there
is life in the Scriptures, which testify of the life: So I say search it, and
see if it do not testify of the life: And every one of your words that ye have
all spoken that have not been from the life, shall be your burden, the
witness in thee shall answer it.

Thomas Weld, Richard Prideaux, Samuel Hammond, William Coal, and William
Durant, Ministers in Newcastle. Their Book called, The perfect PHARISEE. Their
Principles as follows.
Pr. THey say, If they shall say that every man has the knowledge of Christ by
special revelation, and that immediate by the spirit, that which it quite
contrary to the common knowledge of thousands.

Ans. All that ever come to know Christ (you and all the people upon the Earth)
it must be by revelation; for no man knows Christ but by revelation. And all
that ever own Christ, they must own the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world to be the covenant of God; which light men are to
believe in; which not believing in, they are reprobated. And thousands and
thousands I do believe you, who have had the sheeps clothing upon the back of
them, and so have covered the Wolf with it; Neither you nor they never knew
the revelation of the Son of God; and so never know the son of God until he be
revealed, and so has not the knowledge of him. The Scriptures testify of him,
but they that had the Scriptures knew him not, but who was in the light, and in
the Covenant; and so ye have all discovered your selves in the apostasy,
apostatized from the Apostles spirit; and all to be the false spirits gone out
into the earth, into the world for means, for maintenance, and so ye are all
puffed up in your pride; and so that makes all your doctrine to be so dry and so
barren, there being no revelation among you, nor no immediate speaking from God
and Christ, but feeding people with the husk, with the outside. And have proved
your selves here to be but the Wolf in the sheeps clothing, inwardly ravened
from the spirit: But with it ye are comprehended; and if it had not been so,
you would never have published your folly to the Nation. But the spirit of
love, and humility, and meekness (which bears all things) comes to be known by
the spirit.

Pr. For people to be led with a light within, this is to make the Scriptures
useless.

Ans. No, this lets see the Scriptures in their place, and the fulfilling of
them, which was given forth to be believed, practiced, read, and fulfilled, not
for men to make a trade of them, and call people from the Light within, with
which they should see the Scriptures; and none comes into Covenant with God,
with their hearts and their minds, that they need not say one to another know
the Lord, that they may be always living under man's teaching.

Pr. How clear (say they) the Scripture is, that faith comes by hearing, and
not by minding the light within.

Answer. Does any man know Christ but by the Light within? And is not Christ
the Word? Can any see without the Light, the Word? Does it not make manifest?
Nay, does it not give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Christ Jesus? read 2 Cor. 4.1. from whence faith comes; and so faith
comes by minding the light within, Christ, the author of it, and brings to look
as him, and hear him.

Prin. And Multitudes were converted by those fair Epistles written by the
Spirit.

Answ. None are converted but who be in the spirit that gave forth those
Epistles, though they may have all the Epistles: For that has been the Papists
and your convertings who has had the Epistles, by the Epistles, out of the
life, since the days of the Apostles, and so made proselites Pharisee-like;
For that baptizeth, and that circumciseth, for in that is the fellowship and
the unity. People (as I said to you before) may get the sheeps clothing as ye
have long time been covered with, but inwardly ye have been ravening wolves, as
your fruits have declared, as the Northern part of the nation may make it
manifest. The witness in all your consciences shall answer for me, and let you
see that your own words are your burden, and an heavy cry will come upon you
when ye feel it, who now are fat, and full, and fresh, and lusty; but a day of
requiring is coming, and inquisition is made for the blood that has been shed
of all the Prophets, Martyrs, and Saints since the days of the Apostles, and
the prisoning, and the persecuting by you and your offspring got up since the
days of the Apostles; the false spirits that went out into the world, that are
now standing against the light which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world: So marks that you be inwardly ravened, and that you be the
Antichrists and the false Prophets, you are not like to own the light in every
man who are ravened from it, and are turned against them that walk in the
light, and keep the testimony of Jesus. Here is the Beast and the false Prophet
that makes war against the Saints, and overcomes them for a time; but the Lamb
and the Saints must have the victory. And you (about Newcastle) Ministers and
Teachers, are like to a heap or dunghill, sogged and mudded; but come to the
witness, else eternally you will be condemned.

Pr. They say, Blessed are they that hear the Word, and keep it; which is a
word spoken and written, not the eternal word. It is a notion of the Word of
God, to call the Word of God a Declaration. And the holy Scriptures is able to
make men wise unto Salvation, to the Law and Testimony.

Ans. To the Law and to the Testimony; The law is light, says Solomon: And the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. And many may have the Old and New
Testament, and yet be out of the Light, and out of the Testimony as you, and so
out of the spirit of prophecy. For Isaiah had the testimony before Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, and the Revelations was written, and bid them come to the
Law and to the Testimony; and you that do not speak according to that rule, it
is because you hate the light in you. And the Scriptures, Luke calls them a
Declaration, who was a Minister of the Word, and the Scriptures are the words
of God, and the words of Christ, and so not the Word, but the words which the
Word Christ fulfills. So ye are men not capable, nor of a true understanding to
divide the word aright, nor to speak a word in season to the wearyed, but do
all lead the halt, and lame, and blind out of the way; who for so doing must
find misery.

Again, they that hear the Word of God, they hear that which lives and does
endure for ever; and this Word is eternal which lives, and does endure for
ever, which they have within them; and with that they see the words, and
letters, and writings, or outward Tables may be broken, but still the Word
remains. That ever the Ministers of Newcastle should say, that the Scriptures
are able to make men wise unto salvation, and leave out faith; you are no more
made wise then the Pharisees was with the Scriptures without faith: The
Pharisees were not made wise unto salvation by the Scriptures without the
faith, neither are you: But who are in the faith, they are made wise to
salvation through the Scriptures, and comes to Christ the end of them; for it
gives to see the Scriptures, and in it (in the faith) is the unity which
Scribes and Pharisees, and Apostates are out of.

Pr. That a mediate call since the time of the Apostles; and that the Officers
and Elders of the Church are to be ordained by a mediate way, the power without
the person, government without governor is a mere fancy.

Ans. Since the days of the Apostles, that Christ said should come, and
inwardly ravened, that went forth from the Apostles, the false-spirit gone out
into the world, and the world has run after them. They can speak no therwise
but of a mediate call; and their Elders and Members are made mediately, and so
have all erred from the power and spirit of God (of that which they call a
Church) and this is since the days of the Apostles. For all Elders and
Officers of the Church of God (the pillar and ground of Truth) they are made
immediately by the spirit: For the Church is spiritual, else how should they
see the things that are immediate, or behave themselves in the Church of the
living God, which is the ground and pillar of Truth, the Church, which is in
God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The power of God rules and orders
people when there is no outward government: Nay, it strikes down government of
men and governors, as in the days of Daniel and Pharaoh, and in many other
places of Scripture mentioned, the power of God strikes down government and
Governors out of it, and this is the power that is honored which strikes down
false governors and Government and which is not a fancy as you ignorantly say.

Pr. And ye say Christ does not forbid to be called of men master in the
expression of civil honor, and we will warrant a Pulpit from the Scripture,
Ezra's example: and ye say they that stand praying in the Synagogues that are
reproached as Antichrist, etc.

Answ. They that pray for money, and Preach for money, and get up a Pulpit and
plead Ezras example, They might have pleaded the Pharisees had the chiefest
seat; they are ignorant of Christ the Light, and the life, and the power; who
came to put an end to Ezra, and the Pulpit both; who Preached up and down the
mountains, and wildernesses and denied the Pharisees praying, and all that are
got up there without the power, and that is the Antichrist that is got up in
the long robe, and praying for money, and pleads Ezras Pulpit; and says it is a
civil honor to be called of men master, and so slights and transgresses
Christ's Commands, and calls it civil respect; these I say are they that have
gotten the sheep clothing upon their backs, but inwardly ravened from the
spirit of God, and deceives the world. But now their hypocrisy cannot be hid,
but must come to light, and be published upon the house top, and give light to
the whole house, and not under the bushel, and the children of light shall
shine that men shall come to glorify their Father which is in heaven; and you
Antichrists in the Apostasy has got up in Ezras Pulpit which comes to end.

Pr. They say it is a civil respect to say you to one. Again Christ laid down
the very reason why his disciples should take neither gold nor scrip, but
wholly depend upon the means due unto them for Preaching, etc.

Ans. When saw we the New castle Priests go out in this manner, without gold or
scrip, and wholly depending on the Preaching of the Gospel? Or when saw we any
of them called Ministers of England do so? go without a scrip, depending only
upon Preaching the Gospel? nay are not there Petitions flying up and down the
Nations to the Magistrates for maintenance, enough to shame both Magistrates,
and Church, and themselves too, if they had any shame; that their flocks, and
Vineyards would not maintain them; to shame all the people that ever they have
Preached too, and make people so ashamed of them to turn their backs on them.
For they cannot say that they have lived upon the Gospel, but they have lived
upon the States, and what they have got by ravening, He that lives upon the
Gospel gets a flock and gets a Vineyard, ye are found in the Popes maintenance
(which is tithes and offerings from men) and not in the maintenance of Christ
which he allowed to his disciples, whom he is with to the end of the world. Now
these are States Ministers made by man; and so have their allowance so put in,
and taken out by men; so are out of the allowance of Christ which he gives to
his disciples whom he is with to the end of the world: which you may see ye are
out of the steps of them; and will appear to all sober people to be the
Apostates, in the Apostasy ravened from the spirit of the living God; and the
power the Apostles was in, who said have not I power to eat and to drink; not
great sums of money, Stipends and Gleab-lands, and tithes set forth by the
Magistrates. And the Apostles often would not use their power to eat, though
they had power. And never did any of the Prophets, or Apostles bring up their
people they Preached too with an hour-glasse, no such form or custom, or when
any spoke within their hour glass, they had a law to prison, that is the beast
that does so, that quenches the spirit, and is not the Ministry of Christ.
And does not many of you shake the glass, and think the time long? And you
could not tell when to give over, and you would run all into confusion but for
a glass. And is not this carnal glass your limit? See how ye can Preach
without it, and so tell well when ye have done without a sickness in your
spirits, which must have a carnal to limmit them: which shows man has not
power over his own spirit. And the power of God know^s when to speak, and when
to keep silent. And so all your Preaching by the glass, which is a limit of
your earthly spirits, which went out into the world, forth from the spirit the
Apostles were in which they Preached by, but that which ye study out of old
Authors, the sheep clothing, ye sell yearly by the glass. Is that your
measure? The Priests measure that he measures out to people? look in any
steeple-house almost and see if the Priest have not a measure, or it may be two
measures a day. Do not call this the weakness of the people; for many people
are ashamed of these things that you should give them but two glasses a week.
Now is it not more honor to lay by your glass, and come into the spirit, and
Preach by the spirit and so speak as it moves, and gives utterance: and quench
it not in any, and so that all may learn, and all may be comforted in your
Church, and you to one is not a form of sound words, so not civil but to be
condemned and shows you have not learned your accidence nor Grammar.

Pr. Such as trembles at the word of God; and works out their salvation with
fear and trembling, is judged to be notorious, bringing back to the Covenant of
works.

Ans. Nay the power of God that works out the salvation with fear and trembling
brings off from the Covenant of works, and brings above all the powers of
wickedness, and so that is it which brings the people of God to be persecuted,
and hated, to live in the power, and the seed of God: and no one knows
salvation but who knows fear and trembling.

Pr. It is a delusion (with you) for one to witness an Immediate call, and
others to witness with them that they are so called.

Ans. Was not the Apo^tles and Saints written in one another hearts, and one
another Epistles there? and called immediately, and witnessed one another as
it is now?

Pr. And ye say some of them go naked. And another to come and say he had a
call Immediately from heaven to take away the Priests hour glass. And of their
mean apparel. And the forsaking the world, though they neglect their families.
And they run up and down in places and streets, or Steeple Houses to vent their
Doctrine, etc.

Ans. These are the marks they give to us, whereby they give to their books the
name of perfect Pharisees. And the Apostles Preached as they went up and down
in Towns, and Markets, and Synagogues; and those was not Pharisees, but those
was Pharisees that held up Synagogues, and Tithes, and Temple, and Priests; so
ye have the mark of the perfect Pharisee. The name is entered into your bowels,
and hearts. And as for any being moved of the Lord to take away your glass
from you, by the eternal power it is owned. And to take away your limmit,
carnal limmit to your earthly spirits, that are gone out into the world from
the Apostles, from the spirit. And if any have been moved of the Lord to go a
sign among you, to put off their clothes, to show you are naked and want the
covering of the spirit. And as for any going in mean apparel, and forsaking
the world, and come off from cos^ly attire; was not this the Apostles doctrine?
Are ye like unto the Apostles, the messen^^rs of Christ? or the messengers of
Satan crying up the world, and its glory, and costly attire. And who are come
to forsake the world, are come out of the sinful neglect of their families,
into the wisdom of God that preserves the creation, and not destructive. And
as ye are speaking of Perfection, so far as men are perfect, they are perfect
in glory, and changed from glory to glory, and witness perfection upon earth,
and see an end of it, as David did, who had out-stript all his teachers; but
among all yours, that are kept under your teaching, there is no talk of
perfection among you, nor your hearers, so fall short of coming to see the end
of it. And the one offering, and the blood of Christ, and the new Covenant,
that perfects, blots out, and cleanses from all sin.

And as for all the rest of your unsavory and hard expressions in your Book,
the judgments and sorrow ye will feel for them; and in the day you are judged,
the witness in you shall answer:

Thomas Pollard, a member of the Church about Litchfield, in his Book which he
calls, The Holy SCRIPTVRE clearing it self from Scandals. His Principles
follows.
Pr. HE says, It is a cavil to say thee and thou to a single person.

Ans. Which shows that he never learned Accidence nor Bible, the Language that
the Saints spoke one to another.

Pr. He says, It is wickedness to call the letter of the Scripture, and what
is gotten from the Scripture to be brain knowledge, page 4.

Answ. The letter, paper and ink; the letters are carnal, and what is gotten
from it is brain knowledge without the spirit. But the Scripture, the thing it
speaks of is spiritual, the Word is spirit, etc.

Pr. He says, the Lord never said to us as he said to David, that you are
after his heart, or any of your way, or that ever went in your way; and do not
destroy all by your Doctrine. page 7.

Ans. No, David had out-stript all his Teachers, so have we many of us, who
have trembled as David did, witnessing the new covenant Christ Jesus, in which
we need not say know the Lord: And who witnesses this, witnesses the
Tabernacle of David built. Again, our Doctrine destroys but men's and
transgressors, and does not destroy the smoking flax, and bruised reed, and we
can say we are after his heart, and God has said we are after his heart.

Pr. He says, And how people may find rest to their souls, take the Law and
Testimony. See page 9.

Answ. They that had the Scriptures, and have the Scriptures, denied the Light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, and say, prophecy is
ceased; so then they may say the spirit is ceased, it is all one: For the law
is light, says Solomon, And the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy.
Now cries the world, the Law and Testimony is the Old and New Testament; which
many may have the Old and New Testament, and yet deny the Law and Testimony,
which is the light and spirit of prophecy; for the Law and Testimony was
before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and the Epistles and Revelations was
written, in the days of Isaiah: And so they that be not according to the Law
and the Testimony, they be out of the light and the spirit in the darkness,
though they have all the Scriptures which the Law and Testimony ownes in their
places. And many may have the Scriptures given forth from the spirit of God,
and yet not have the comfort and rest to their souls till they come to Christ
that the Scriptures testifies o^.

Pr. He says, Try the spirits whether they be of God, for many false Prophets
are gone out into the world, page 11. And Satan transforming himself into an
Angel of light; and false Apostles and Ministers of unrighteousness
transforming themselves as the Ministers of righteousness. And he says, If
they bring another Gospel and Doctrine then what is preached, receive them not
into your houses, nor bid them God-speed.

Ans. That which ye tell people is the Gospel now which ye preach, is the 4
Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John you say, etc. As instance Priest Shaw of
Aldingham in Lancashire said so: Contrary to the Scriptures, which says, the
Gospel is the power of God: And many may have the four Books of Matthew, Mark,
Luke and John, etc. the form, but deny the power, and so deny the Gospel,
which is the power of God: And so they that deny the power have put the four
books for it; and they that have not the Father and the Son are not to be
received into their houses, as says the Apostle John, for they would come in
the form, and deny the light as you do: but he that has the Son and the
Father, he is in the power, the substance of the form.

Again, the Devil transformed himself as an Angel of light before the
Apostles decease, and the false Apostles, Devils messengers, and Ministers of
unrighteousness was got up before the Apostles decease; and the false Prophets
were gone out into the world, and the false spirits before the Apostles
decease, as in John; which since the days of the Apostles they have led the
world after them, they have been received into houses, and corrupted the whole
earth, of whom you have been. Therefore the Apostles brought the Saints then to
the anointing within them, and to the light that shines in their hearts, which
would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ Jesus, which light you bring from it: And now since the days of the
Apostles have ye been carried away, swallowed up by such as have not the Father
and the Son; and the false spirits that went forth into the world, and the
false Prophets, and Satan, who has transformed himself as an Angel of light,
and the Ministers of unrighteousness, and false Apostles, which do confess
they have not the same spirit as the Prophets, Christ, and Apostles had, so are
erred from the false spirits and false Prophets, who has been destroying since
the days of the Apostles, and gone out into the world, and false Apostles; for
the false Apostles, Satan's Ministers, transforming themselves as Angels of
light, the false spirits that went out into the world, and the false Prophets,
these went all out from the spirit that the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles
was in. So these were the spirits that was to be tried by them that had the
anointing in them; you who now are seen and tried by them that are come to the
anointing in them to be gone out from the Apostles.

Pr. He says, You put out the eyes of poor souls by bidding them to hearken
to the light within, etc. page 14.

Ans. The eye that sees the soul is the light which comes from Christ the
Bishop of it; and no one knows the eye of the soul, but who comes to the light
within, and opens it, which comes from Christ the Savior of it, which gives
him the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ, 2
Cor. 4. and lets him see his Savior.

Pr. He says, I do affirm that no man can have salvation by virtue of his
obedience, etc. page 17.

Answ. He that believes is saved, he has salvation; he that does not, is
condemned already: and no man has salvation but by believing; and where
believing is, there obedience is to the Gospel. They that obey it not are
condemned, and neglect their salvation.

Pr. He says, They lay in wait to deceive, who call the breaking of bread
carnal, page 18.

Ans. We cannot say that the outward bread is spiritual the bread which
perishes, the carnal; and we say Christ is the bread which is spiritual, and
they deceive people which say outward bread is spiritual, and not carnal.

Pr. He says, How should we have known sin, to be sin; and righteousness to be
righteousness, and a Christ that died at Jerusalem but by the Scriptures; he
says nay we could not have known those things. Page 21.

Ans. That which makes manifest sin, is light: and they that had Scriptures
knew not Christ that died at Jerusalem; but that they crucified him; And David
and Joshuah saw his sufferings, and saw that Judas should betray him: and they
that had Scriptures knew not sin from righteousness they knew not the sin of
unbelief; they knew not Christ's righteousness who had the Scriptures and knew
not the way to the Father, but turned against the light the truth as you do,
which makes manifest sin, and as the Pharisees did.

Pr. To say, The officers of the Church are invisible its plain of the Father
the Devil. Page 24.

Answ. The holy Ghost made the officers of the Church overseers, and that made
the officers, the overseers to be invisible: for they saw with an invisible
eye; and so they was in the spirit, which is invisible and not in the flesh,
else they could not be overseers in the Church of God, and you are the visible
apostatized from them.

Pr. He says that which is contained in the Bible is spirit and life. Page 25.

Answ. That which the Bible declares of, is spirit and life which is Christ,
which you are ignorant of that has the letter, and deny the Light, and so
says life is contained in the letter.

Pr. He says the Scripture is able to make men wise unto salvation, etc. page
25.

Ans. Through faith it is: for the Pharisees and chief Priests had Scriptures,
yet were not wise unto salvation (neither are you who deny the Light of Christ)
and they are seducers, and evil men which the Apostle saw coming in which
should wax worse and worse, and have over grown the world with hardness, and
prejudice and wickedness that have the Scriptures but have not been made wise
unto salvation without faith in Christ Jesus, which have been since the days
of the Apostles, who have had the Scriptures without the faith, and so out of
unity.

Pr. He says Paul spoke of some men that should be punished with everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord and his glory, that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. See page 36.

Answ. Who obey the Gospel obey the power of God and comes to the substance the
end of all the Scriptures; and obeyes the Light which Christ has enlightened
him withal. And such as disobey the power, disobey the Gospel, and so you have
brought judgment upon your selves who get all the form, and put the form for
the Gospel: from the presence of the glorious God and his power, does the power
punish them, which they disobey, which power is the Gospel. And those was
coming up before the Apostles decease which have led into disobedience, since
the Apostles decease; but now by the power of the Lord manifest that discovers
it.

Pr. He says Christ left us an Example, who is our example, etc. page 32.

Ans. And yet ye are offended at others who say he is their Example: and would
have none to own his light, so he is not your example that deny the Light
Christ, but him that is out of the Light.

Pr. He says for a perfection in glory to be attained to, on this side the
grave, I utterly disown. page 43.

Ans. Where glory is in the least degree it is in perfection, and who have not
glory, and does not attain to glory on this side the grave, they are in a sad
condition; For the Saints rejoiced with Joy unspeakable, and full of glory, and
they witnessed the hope of glory within them while they was upon earth, and of
that hope they was to give a reason that was in them, and they saw the glory of
God, and the Father, and so came to be changed from glory to glory till they
were come into the Image of God. And the Apostle saw before his decease such as
would not endure sound Doctrine; such as was given to fables; and had the
itching ears, and heaps to themselves teachers, and those forsook the faith,
which such have now since the days of the Apostles reigned, whereby none among
them comes to be out of all teaching, that they need no man to teach them; and
that they need not say know the Lord, and to see the glory of God. None comes
into the everlasting Covenant, into the power out of the form, and none comes
to know all things by the anointing in them, but they are all on heaps about
their heaps of teachers, and itching ears, and so cannot endure the sound
Doctrine, that any should come into the Covenant of God; that they need not to
say know the Lord. That is the sound Doctrine to come into the Covenant of God
Christ Jesus the substance of all the Prophets, glorified before the world
began, to learn of him who is the way to the Father, the truth, and the life:
and the heaps of teachers are all erred from him and the Apostles, and so from
the true teacher Christ Jesus who says learn of me. And there people would
destroy one another about their teachers, which Christ teaches otherwise to
love their enemies: and so there is men following their imaginations, and not
the Lord; and reprobates concerning the faith, in which is the unity, and there
are you.

Pr. He says Paul did not commit the Church to the light within them: for he
told them deceivers should come, etc. page 39.

Answ. Paul when that deceivers was come and false Apostles among the Church of
the Corinthians, he told the Corinthians that the light that shined in their
hearts would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Christ Jesus; and so hear thou shows thy ignorance of Scriptures, and
of the Church, and of Paul's Doctrine, whose work was to bring them to the light
within them, when the deceivers was got up, and so committed the Church to the
light within them, and told them that that would give them the knowledge, etc.
So they that draw people from the light within are the false spirits that the
Apostle speaks of that went out into the world before the Apostles decease,
which led the world after them, by whom the way of truth came to be evil spoken
of, for the Apostle told them that the Light that shined in their hearts would
give them the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and
not their teachers without them, as you do, who bring them from the Light
within them, and so act contrary to the Apostles.

Pr. He says to bring people to the Light within is dispising the word: again
he says the Light that is in a man is not able to lead him to happiness, etc.
page 50.

Answ. No man comes to happiness but who comes to the Light within which
comes from Christ the happiness of all man kind, the Redeemer, the restorer
of man kind, out of the fall, out of the first Adams state to God, into the
second Adams state, who is the Covenant of God with man in which they have
peace. So in this Light stands every man's happiness; and he that has the
happiness, has Christ the light within him; and the peace with God. And the
light within which comes from Christ the word is not against the word, nor
Scriptures which are the words, but it ownes them, and with them has unity;
and no one sees the word but with the Light within. And as for all the rest of
thy unsavory expressions, and childish speeches is not worth mentioning. And
thou had better have let silence have covered thee, then to have published
thy nakedness to the Nation: for thy words will be thy burden in the time of
thy necessity, the witness shall answer in thee.

Ralph Farmers Book, called, Satan enthroaned in his Chair, etc. His
Principles follows.
Ans. Which is a Title suitable to himself, discovered by the children of the
day, who is his Seeds-man, as to the Nation he has declared: But them that be
in the Truth, Love, and Peace, he does not touch.

Pr. HE says, We do not pretend to infallibility as you do, which is lying and
hypocritical, etc.

Ans. We do believe you, that in the infallible spirit of God you are not, but
in the false fallible spirit gone out into the world, that went forth from the
Apostles, who had the spirit of Christ: And so how can you be Ministers of the
Spirit, and not the Letter, if ye be not infallible; For who be in the spirit,
are in that which is infallible. This I say, none be Ministers of the spirit,
nor none be in the spirit, nor none have the spirit of Christ, nor the holy
Ghost, nor the spirit of the Father speaking in them, but who have that which
is infallible, and in that which is infallible. And they be in the lying spirit
and hypocrisy that be out of it, and all the false spirits that is gone out
into the world: So ye do well to confess that ye have not the infallible
spirit, ye are not infallible, and so no Ministers of the spirit: And how can
they but delude people that are not infallible, and are none of Christ's, which
have not the spirit which is infallible, and are not Ministers of the Gospel,
which is the power of God, which is infallible.

Pr. He says, We are foretold that false Teachers that shall bring upon
themselves swift destruction, and evil men and seducers which wax worse and
worse, deceiving and being deceived, should come. And there should come false
Christ's and seducing spirits, and the doctrine of Devils, speaking lies in
hypocrisy, such as deceive the hearts of the simple with their feigned
speeches, etc. See page 39, 40.

Answ. Have not thou here brought forth thy ignorance of the Scriptures, which
says the seducers, and the false Christ's, and the false Apostles, the Doctrine
of Devils, and the feigned words, and fair speeches, which deceived the hearts
of people, came up before the Apostles decease; and does not thou in this show
thy spirit to be that spirit that went out into the world, not able to divide
the word aright? but art telling people they are now come, when as the Apostles
saw they was come before their decease; which since the days of the Apostles
all the confusion has been among them, and you that deny the light, are in
distraction. And yet ye that be not infallible in the infallible spirit, but
fallible, are crying to people they are come but now, and so grow until ye are
worse and worse. And thee and the Priests of Newcastle, and many of the rest of
you are crying against such as say Christ is their example; And yet many of you
have published to the Nation in print, that Christ is an example, and the men
are respected who speak them, and not the words simply as they are in
themselves, and that is the partial and the respecting of persons, not the
truth it self.

Pr. He says, If we will but acknowledge their Ministry and Church according
to Christ; he will write a Recantation, page 53.

Ans. Your Church and your Ministry has made it self manifest not to be
agreeing to the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles; for you say you are not
infallible, and you say you have not the infallible spirit: And you say you
never heard the voice of God immediately from heaven, which the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles did. And how can you be Ministers of the spirit, who
are not in the infallible spirit, but the false spirit gone out into the world?
but such as are ravened from the spirit of God, and only have the sheeps
clothing, and so cannot gather to the Church in God, but make the Nations like
waters. And ye must recant before ever you come into the Ministry of God, the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles was in, and to their Church, and to own the
light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world.

Pr. He says, The wise men of the East came to Christ by a Star, etc. page
64.

Ans. You say the Scripures brings to Christ: and the Jews had the Scriptures,
and came not to him (nor knew him not) who was out of the spirit that gave them
forth; and so are you by your confession, and so not come to him.

Pr. He says, A man is not justified by that which is within him, etc. page 65.

Ans. We are justified by faith, which is a mystery held in a pure conscience
that purifies the heart, and this is within. And here again thou have showed
thy spirit to be that that went into the world, which was reprobated concerning
the faith held in a pure conscience, without which men are not justified. And
so ye are broke into heaps, into sects, and opinions, who are out of this faith
which is a mystery held in a pure conscience, by which people have access unto
God, through which faith they are justified; which you are out of, on heaps, in
which is unity, and gives victory over sin which you plead for while you be
upon the earth.

And as for all the rest of thy stuff in thy Book, it will be thy own garment,
and a heavy load and a burden thou will feel it, whose nakedness might have
been covered by thy silence, but thy spirit must be tried. I say the Lord
forgive thee, for a heavy charge is come upon thee, and you: For in stead of
seeking the peace of all men, you have made your selves manifest to be neither
Ministers, nor Fathers, nor Elders, nor sober Christians, but Wolves, that
tears and rents to pieces. Indeed the ragged righteousness of men, the worlds
clothing which hangs on your backs ye may have; but the Elect, and the Saints,
and the Lambs clothing, the righteousness of the Saints, ye cannot touch, but
the Lambs are in the fold laid down.

Magnus Byne, his Book called, The Scornful QUAKERS Answered. His PRINCIPLES
follow, etc.
Pr. HE says, Beware of false Prophets that come to you in sheeps clothing,
but inwardly are ravening wolves. Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits
whether they be of God, because many false spirits are gone out into the world.

Ans. Must thou show thy ignorance of the Letter? So much a man unlike to
divide the word aright? For Christ says, false prophets should come, and
Antichrists, that should be inwardly ravening wolves, that had the sheeps
clothing, that John saw was come before the Apostles decease; which went forth
from them, which all the world went after them: and they could not have
deceived the world, if the Wolf had not had the sheeps clothing upon them: So
as you may read in the Revelations, how they ravened and devoured, and drunk
the blood of the Martyrs, the Saints and the Prophets; And so you that are
crying to the world they are come but now, are the deceivers of the world, as
you may read Matthew. 7. and 1 John 2.4. Revel. Chap. 13, 14.17, 18. and not men
dividing the word aright. For now from them are people come, and coming to
Christ the Rock, the foundation of God, and to that spirit which you ravened
from; which stands sure, before the world was made, out of the waters; For the
Nations are as waters, and the false spirits, the false Prophets, and the
mother of Harlots have ruled, and with the sheep clothing have deceived the
Nations; but now the Lamb and the Saints shall rule: For ye have confessed that
ye have not the Infallible spirit, as the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles
had; so we say ye are ravened from it that they was in, and only have the
sheeps clothing: For the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles had an infallible
spirit; which the false Prophets, Antichrists, Devils, and Deceivers was always
out of; and the mother of harlots, and Babylon, though they might get the
sheeps clothing.

Pr. He says, It is filthy blasphemy to say, the spirit of Christ that dwells
in the Son, dwells in man, and he must be infallible, and he must be perfect,
and sinlesse: and says, Let them alone to their Father the Devil, etc. See
his Epistle to the Reader.

Answ. He that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his; and who has the
spirit of Christ, has that which is infallible, and this is out of the spirit
the Devil is in: And they that were not in the spirit, and are not in the
spirit that dwells in the Son, though they have all the Scriptures, are in the
spirit of blasphemy, and there thou art that will blaspheme against the Son:
And the false spirits that be in the world are on heaps about the Sons, the
Prophets and Apostles words out of the infallible spirit of those that gave
them forth, who was perfect and sinl^ss^; as in Romans 6. they were made free
from sin. The Apostle said they were perfect, and he spoke wisdom among them
that were perfect. And this you deny who are ravened from the spirit of God,
and the one offering which perfects for ever them that are sanctified, and so
the unsanctified.

Pr. He says, There is many ways to Sion.

Ans There is but one way to God, and that is Christ the Light, out of the
Fall, into the Paradise to the tree of Life, out of the Condemnation; and that
is the Light, the Covenant of God. Now with the light the way to the Father is
seen. In the first Adam is many ways, fighting about their ways, and
destroying one another about their ways; which Christ the light, the way to
the Father teaches otherwise, to love enemies, and to do good to them, and to
overcome evil with good, and heap coals of fire upon their heads; which way
is but one which you are out of, who deny the Light in the many ways, and
names, horns, and heads, and images, which is the Beasts number, who are
ravened from the spirit of God, and are from the one way, Christ the Light, in
which is unity.

Prin. He says, The Scriptures may be understood by the help of Tongues, Page
12

Ans. All Scriptures was given forth by inspiration; and so without the same
inspiration it is not understood again. Pilate had the Tongues, and yet did not
understand the Scripture, nor Christ the substance of it. And this you have set
up since the apostasy, your Tongues, ye raveners from the spirit.

Pr. H^ says, Tithes is not his infirmity, the Lord has given him Tithes: And
he does take them as the Lord giving him maintenance and it is his liberty.

Ans. Tithes to the first Priesthood was allotted by God; but Christ the
second Priesthood ended that Priesthood and Tithes both, and the Priests that
took them made by Gods law, and the commandment that gave them disannul'd. And
Christ is come, the everlasting Priesthood, not after the order of Aaron, but
after the order of Melchisedeck, the similitude in whom the similitude ends,
Christ the end, the substance, the end of W^r. So thou that takes Tithes art
(out of the substance of Melchisedeck, and the first Priesthood that took
Tithes) in the Transgression, and in the Imitation, and the veil is over thy
heart, and thy liberty is bondage in the unsanctified state: But the
sanctification is in the Son of God, who ends types and similitudes: And he it
is that sanctifies; And who preaches the Gospel, lives of the Gospel, and
the Pope has given thee thy tithes by his command, and not by the command of
the Lord, for Christ and his Apostles established them not.

Pr. He says, That the Scriptures are the sure Word of God: and that the
Scriptures are a precious light, page 17. Again he says, The Son of God is the
first principle of the pure Religion.

Answ. The fullness of the Godhead dwells in the Son, and he is in the Father,
and he is the Author of the first principle and the end of the Law, for he is
all and in all; for many may have something from him, yet cannot say he is
come; but he that has him, has life eternal, has the substance, the end of
things. And the Scripture declares, and testifies of the light which is Christ;
and many may have the Scriptures, but stand against the light, for they are
them that testify of me the light: So Christ is the precious light, and the
Scriptures are the words of God; which Christ the word was before they was
given forth, the word in whom these words of God end^: So thou may see thy
ignorance.

Pr. He says, While we stay in Sodom, we crucify the Lord of glory. And
Christ is buried in us, etc.

Ans. And John Bunyan a Teacher there fights against him; and thus they are not
only against the Truth, but one another. But he must know the suffering of
Christ in the spiritual Sodom in him, and to see the seed that suffers there
before it reign, and he reign with Christ in glory.

Pr. He says; It comprehends our suffering in the flesh after his example.
Page 21.

Ans. At this does the Priests of Newcastle, and John Bunyan, and many others
of the Teachers of the Nation rage: and here you are one against another; but
Christ says, why persecutest thou me? And he was in prison, and it is your
work to put him in prison.

Pr. He says, He has the tithes of two Parishes; and it is the old man that
minds the ^athly things, page 23. Again he says, and those that take tithes
are not Antichrists: And the Scriptures is a choice vessel of the Lords
Sanctuary, and it is the letter and the history, etc. page 25.

Answ. Well may people be all in confusion, when ye say the Scripture is a
History. a Declaration, the Letter, a Vessel, the choice vessel of the Lords
Sanctuary, a light, and yet the Word of God. Now is not this to break people to
pieces? The Scriptures of Truth are the words of God, and it is called a
Declaration and a Treatise: And the choice v^ssels were them that gave it
forth, of mercy, and of honor; and they that take tithes, and pay them, they
be out of the substance Christ, who is the end of Tithes; for he is the sum of
tithes, and all other figures that did pertain to the first Priesthood, first
Covenant, and all similitudes: so thou taking tithes of two Parishes, it is the
mark of the old man. For the Apostles did preach up and down in many Synagogues
where the Priests was, yet they did not seek for the tithes that did belong to
them, that did pertain to the first Priesthood: They preached the Gospel, and
lived of the Gospel, and said, they were evil beasts, that did mind earthly
things; amongst whose spirits ye are found, judged by the Word, which is Christ.

Pr. He says, He is called of men Master through man's courtesy, and calls
them blind and sinful, and in error that speaks against it. Again he says,
it is not oppression in him to take tithes of two Parishes, etc. page 28. 30.

Ans. Here under the woe of Christ art thou come; who said, woe unto them that
was called of men Master; and said, be not you so unto his Disciples, etc. For
ye have all one Master, which is Christ, and they abode in his Doctrine. And we
do not read of Mr. Paul, Mr. Peter, Timothy or Titus, or Mr. James or John; but
among you the Apostates we read of such titles. And to set up that which Christ
(him by whom the world was made before it was made) came to fulfill and end, in
the world which typed him forth, Christ the way to the Father, out of the
world, and tithes in the first Priesthood is not the way, they are oppressors
that cries them up, and builders up of that which Christ ended, so
transgressors; So have not the Son nor the Father: and they bring not the glad
tidings, for the Gaols may witness in the Nation, that glad tidings is not
brought; and the Courts and the oppressed Parishes of which ye take treble
damages of many people ye do not work for, and cast into prison; and so this is
not the Gospel, this is not the glad tidings, nor the Gospel.

Pr. He says, I find not this power of binding Kings with chains, and Nobles
with fetters of iron, which is the honor of the Saints, this Scripture I find
not fulfilled, etc. page 35. Again he says, A Saint may be found in that which
is sinful, though this man (the Quaker) will not allow of sin. Again he says,
the people of God are more then conquerours in the Lord which gives them rest
and peace in the midst of their wars. Again, hope keeps the soul groaning and
waiting all the while in the earthly tabernacle, etc.

Ans. I know the power, and spirit, and sword of the Saints that executes the
judgments, to bind, and chain, and fetter Kings and Nobles, thou art out of
it, which is now among the Saints; and that Scripture is fulfilled, yea in
England among the Saints: And such as are more then Conquerours, they see the
end of Wars, and that which causes Wars. He that is a Conqueror may be in the
War; but he that is more then a Conqueror, he is in that which takes away the
occasion of Wars, and is come to that which was before Wars was: And he that
has this hope (which is Christ) he has that which purifies himself even as
he is pure, and comes to witness the Kingdom of God that stands in joy,
peace, and rigteousnesse, and so is not always groaning in the earth, under the
earthly tabernacle while he is upon the earth, but comes to know the body of
sin put off, made free from the body of sin. And the Saint is not sinful,
neither does the Saints ever allow nor approve of sin; he that allows and
approves of that is out of the sanctified state.

Pr. Notwithstanding thy passing the first and second resurrection (as thou
says) there remains a torment for thee at the last day, and woe, page 42.

Answ. They are blessed that have part in the first Resurrection, the second
Death has no power over them, but are made free from wrath that is to come,
and are passed from death to life, and are translated into the Kingdom of the
Son of God, and are in unity with the Son of God and the Father both, and so
thou utterest forth lies.

Pr. He says, To declare against such as are called of men Master, is a matter
of his faith.

Answ. They had not faith that were called of men Master, which Christ cried
woe against; nor the Jews neither have you who breaks his commands.

Pr. He says, The Spirit that declares in the Letter, keeps me from vanity,
frees me from the law of sin and condemnation.

Ans. The spirit that was in the Saints that gave forth the Letter, did free
them from the Law of sin and condemnation, and kept them from vanity. The
spirit is not in the Letter, for many may have that, and not the spirit: and
they are in the sin and vanity, and are not freed from the Law of
Condemnation, none is, but who be in the spirit.

Pr. He says, They are to feed the people who are ordained over a particular
place, over which the holy Ghost has made them overseers, and they are
covetous wretches and worldlings that keeps back their Tithes. And no more
wages he receives then what the Gospel allows. And he is a thief that keeps
back the hire from the Labourer, and the Lord gives man tithes as a portion in
the earth, etc. See page 57, 58, 59, 60.

Ans. The holy Ghost made the Apostles overseers of the Church, and the Elders.
But that which has made you overseers has been men, and the Pope, by your
Schools and Colleges; so thus you deceive the people, by telling them the holy
Ghost made you overseers. For ye say ye have not the same infallible spirit as
the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles had (as witness Samuel Eaton in his
Book, and diverse others) and Tithes was allotted by God to the Priests and
Levites and people in the first Covenant and Priesthood, and they were Robbers
that kept it back. But Christ is come, the everlasting Covenant, who ends
Tithes and Priesthood, and the first Covenant, and blots out the Ordinances.
Therefore they that be covetous, will take them by violence from the people.
But them that are come to the Gospel allowance; freely ye have received, freely
give: What they set before them, of that they are to eat, preach the Gospel,
live of the Gospel; these triumph and trample upon the first Priesthood,
types, figures, and shadows, sees the Priesthood is changed, the Ordinances
blotted out, the Commandment disannul'd that gave them, Do witness the one
offering for the sin of the whole world, and are of the royal Priesthood:
Such as these cannot pay tithes, covetous and worldlings may do it, and take
them that are apostatized from the Apostles, set up by the Popes authority, by
which the true seed is oppressed; who went forth from the Apostles by a usurpt
authority, under whom you are sheltred for your tithes; But now you are seen by
them, who are come to the Apostles that you went from, and judged.

Pr. He says, The Lord has given tithes for the maintenance of the Ministry
of this Nation.

Again he says, This light within is turned into utter darkness, page 62. 65.

Ans. It was the Pope and the apostates from the Apostles since their days
that has given Tithes; from the spirit that the Apostles was in they are
ravened that take them, for the Apostles took none, their fruits in the Nation
declares it; which if they will not give the Priests Tithes, how they cast them
into Prisons, Dungeons, until death: For Christ's maintenance which the
Apostles witnessed; freely they had received, and did give again freely; and he
that preached the Gospel, to live of the Gospel, and coveted no man's silver,
goods, nor apparel. But do not ye covet men's silver and goods, when ye take
treble damages of them, and cast them into prison? Is not this the work of the
Ministry of the Nation? Is not the overflowing scourge of the Almighty gone
over you? and the Rod and the Lash come upon you all?

Again, the Light within has led to the light of life, and leads to the light
of life out of utter darkness, in which thee and thy generation is seen that
stands against the light. So all you Apostates are whelmed under in the
apostasy since the days of the Apostles, who are out of the allowance of
Christ his wages and maintenance, the giving freely, which shows they have not
received of God, but bought, and sells, yea and after great rates too; and so
are the Merchants that John speaks of in the Revelations, and this cumbers the
creation, yea Nations; Ye bring not the glad tidings to them, but burdens
them; ye are seen and felt.

Pr. He says, Away with your bodily, fleshly, litterall trembling and
quivering. See page 70.

Answ. Habakkuk his lips quivered, David's flesh trembled, Daniel trembled, Paul
trembled, David's bones quaked; and this man the Lord regards that trembles at
his Word, though cast out by thee and thy generation in this age, as was in the
days of Isaiah. So thee and thy generation, who says away with trembling of
the flesh, and bodily. Away with the power of God that throws down that which
defiles the flesh; so before flesh, sin is condemned in it, and the powers of
darkness wrought out of the flesh. You must know trembling, thou and all thy
generation, before the Devil be dispossessed out of your earthly Tabernacles:
you must all know trembling, and thou and thy generation have showed your
ignorance of the mighty power of God, the salvation that is wrought out with
fear and trembling. And that power that threw down in all ages, the nature
that captivated the seed of God, and defiled the flesh, and darkened the
understanding, the sense and reason, and warred against the soul; ye have
showed your ignorance of that power that throws all these down, and that which
defiles the spirit and the body, whereby the body, the soul, and the spirit
comes to be sanctified: And before this be so, ye must know a bodily trembling
and shaking; and he cries away with it before ever he came at it, lest he
should be tormented before his time; who is one of them who ever was against
the holy men of God, but the power of the Lord God has overtaken thee, and with
that are ye comprehended, and ye are in the press, and your cluster is full,
and the sickle is gone out.

Pr. He says, The Priesthood is changed, but not the Tithes abolished by the
coming of any substance; and they that keep back tithes of God, he has
preferred his mammon before his God, and is guilty of the sin of Ananias: And
denying to pay tithes is weakening the hands of the Ministers: and God in
wisdom has required by an outward Law, in the absence of the inward, for the
maintenance of the Ministry by tithes or other maintenance, and so they owe a
tribute unto God; and so they must pay tribute, and custom to whom custom is
due. Again he says, custom, tribute, Tithes, etc. love will teach thee these
things are due, therefore covet not another portion.

Ans. When the Apostle had spoken of tithes before the Law to Melchisedeck like
unto the Son of God; and spoken of Tithes to the Priesthood made by a Law, had
a command to take them: he says the Priesthood was changed, the Law was
changed, the command was disanulled that gave them Tithes, the Son of God was
come the end of the similitude and the likeness before the Law. Now says he of
the things (for tithes were things before the Law, and in the Law) of the
things which we have spoken this is the sum, Christ a Minister of the Sanctuary
which God has pitched and not man. So there is the sum of the things and the
substance: and the plentious Redemption that leads men out of the earth, that
brings them to lay down all at the feet of the Apostles, which is beyond
tenthes which was to the service of the Lord due; Here the earth comes to be
known to be the Lords; it is given up here, and man Redeemed out of it, of this
glorious Gospel are ye all ignorant; and so Tithes is not as Annanias, to be
compared with Annanias, not now; and not as a tribute, but as a custom, which
since the days of the Apostles in the apostasy, that the Nations have drunk
the whores cup, there have been Queens and Kings that have made Laws, that is
gone out of the power of Christ which the Apostles was in, into the beasts
power, and made Schools to make their Ministers, and have set up Tenths; So
this custom of the sin, has taken away the sense of it, that people have been
hardened that they have torn people, spoiled their goods, and cast into prison,
and taken treble damages, and kept them in prison, and haled them before
Courts and Sessions, Assizes, and Benches; which is not like the Ministers of
Christ; for the law is changed of God that gave tenths, and since that was
changed, the Law in the heart, and a new Covenant; And since the apostasy from
that, men have got the sheep clothing ravened from the spirit, wolves whose
fruits declare it; who have deceived Nations, and the world, and have got up a
Law from man, and a command from man, the Pope being the Author; and the Law of
God is changed; and the command of God is changed that gave tithes, and they
have got up this to take them, the Law of man, the command of man; and the Law
of God and his command is denied, spoken by the Apostle Heh. 7. which all that
be in the wisdom of God sees over these things, and feels over them, and Judges
you all, and executes Judgment, and is in the power and Authority to execute
Judgment, and convince all, and are in the honor of Saints. So your Ministry,
if Tithes fall, is weakened; but the Ministry of Christ came in, when Tithes
fell, and that Ministry fell that held up tithes, and that Priesthood which the
Priests lips was to preserve the peoples knowledge. So by the fall of that
Ministry that took Tithes, the Ministry of Christ came in, is the rise of this
Ministry since the days of the Apostles in the apostasy that is made by Kings,
Bishops, Popes, Schools, and Colleges? in the fall, this Ministry that takes
tithes, (which Tithes falling say they, and says thou the hand is weakened of
the Ministry) it is not the power that strengthens the hand but the earthly.

Now I say in the fall of this maintenance which weakens this Ministry, weakens
you Ministers in the apostasy, ye have showed what ye are covered withal in
the rise of the Lamb, and his Ministry, in the Preaching of the everlasting
Gospel, and the everlasting Gospel shall be Preached to them that dwell on the
earth, which is the power of God: and though the Devil, and the beast, and the
false Prophets, and the Kings of the earth do make war against the Saints and
the Lamb, yet the Saints and the Lamb shall get the victory, and that's come to
that the Apostles were in before you was, and so in your fall, this rises.

Pr. He says Christ without the Church, does not comprehend all the Elect; and
we are not elected, though we receive Christ because we are elected in him,
etc. Page 80.

Ans. Thou art meddling with things too weighty for thee, Christ is the Elect
who God upholds, and the election obtains it, (the victory) and Christ knows
his, and said he had other sheep, and he knew all the Elect; and is the wisdom
of the Father, the Light, the Life, and the power of God, the offering, the
sacrifice for the whole world, the Redemption of mankind; and who receives
him, and are in him, are the Elect; and out of their own works, and have
possessed him, and his Image and glory; and are come to the throne of grace who
is in all and over all; the salvation to the ends of the earth, and who are
elected receives Christ, and are in him.

Pr. He says thy denial of sin, and Satan, and Antichrist to be, where they
are in power and part is the old trick of the evil one, etc. page 83.

Ans. Who are come into the Lambs power, they are come out of the power of the
beast, sin, and Satan; into the City, the midst of the Paradise of God where no
unclean thing enters; but the tree of life is the food, and they are a top of
sin, Satan and Antichrist, and all thy tricks; and witness against all sin.

Pr. He says when the dissolution comes, he bids farewell to all the Saints of
God. page 94. Again if we say we have no sin we deceive our selves; and the
truth is not in us: if we say we have not sinned, we make him a liar. page 89.

Ans. The Saints are in Christ and God; and at the dissolving of the earthly or
sin, they do not bid all the Saints farewell; for then they come into unity
with them, with the Elect. And John does show there was a time to see they had
sinned, and a time to see they had sin, and a time to confess it and forsake
it and a time to witness the blood of Jesus Christ to cleanse from all sin, a
time to witness the birth of God born, which does not commit sin, and the seed
of God remaining in them, that the wicked one could not touch them.

Pr. He says the Saints are neither in the fullness of the Godhead, nor part:
away with this Blasphemy that says this is, etc. page 92.

Ans. The work of the Ministry was to bring people to the knowledge of the Son
of God, to a perfect man, to the unity of the faith; to the measure, and
stature of the fullness of Christ, and Christ will dwell in the Saints, and God
will dwell in them; and thou says they have no part of the fullness of the
Godhead; and John says of his fullness have we all received; in whom dwells the
Godhead bodily. And ye be all in the Blasphemy that be out of this part of the
fullness.

Pr. He says the Quakers knows a man whether he be a Saint or a Devil, as
soon as they see him, or hear him speak, or act, and they are beyond all our
forefathers; And the Apostle says, what man knows the things of a man saving
the spirit of a man that is in him: so we are not as Christ in this respect;
and thou says thou art as Christ in this present world: and no man can be
without sin in this house of clay, and says I was shapen in iniquity and in
sin my mother conceived me; and my flesh is sins freehold, etc. page 94. 95.

Ans. Here thou have showed that the Quakers have a spirit given to them beyond
all the forefathers (which we do witness) since the days of the Apostles in the
apostasy, And they can discern who are Saints, who are Devils and who are
apostates, without speaking ever a word, they that be in the power and the life
of truth. And the natural man knows not the things that be in another man: but
with the spirit within him may know what is in himself: but the spiritual man
searches all things, yea the deep things of God. Here thou have made no
distinction betwixt the spiritual, and natural; And as Christ is, so are we in
this present world; and where Christ is manifest, he destroys the sin in the
flesh, where they come to be as he is; they come to be above clay and mortal,
and fading, and so the flesh comes to be put off which thou calls sins
freehold, and the body of it, and comes to be made free from the Law by the
body of Christ; and this the Saints witnessed while they were on earth; And the
creature comes into the liberty of the Sons of God. And as thou was born in
iniquity thou shows thou was born in the unregeneration, there was some
sanctified from the womb, there is some children clean who are believers; he
that can receive it let him; so thou art an ignorant man not able to divide the
word aright nor can Minister unto the people, not knowing the condition they
be in, unless they tell thee, and so apostatized from the Apostles, and not
Ministers of the spirit, that Ministers to the spirit; for could not the
Apostles Preach and speak to the Jews and Gentiles, unless they come and told
them what condition they were in? or did all the Jews and Gentiles come and
tell the Apostles what condition they were in before they Preached to them?

Pr. He says the Light in man is imperfect, a weak, faint light, page 97.
Again the light in the Gentiles is called a natural light. page 88.

Ans. The light that every man has that comes into the world, is not an
Imperfect light, a weak, or faint light, or natural light; but who are weak, go
from it, and faint, and hate it, and dispiseth it, as Esau, and run into the
earth, And who believe in it, have the light of life; and receives it, becomes
the Sons of God. And the light in the Gentiles which brought them to do the
Law, was spiritual, not natural, which the Apostle sets up to be the
Circumcision, and the Jew inward: and throws out the Jew outward, and
Circumcision both: and this he brings to have the praise of God, which the
Jews had not in the outward, and this makes the Jew no Jew, and their
Circumcision no Circumcision, and Judged them. And all professors upon the
earth that be from that that does the Law in the heart, and the Jew inward, you
be from that who stands against the Light of Christ that does enlighten, etc.

Pr. He says, If an hypocrite reign, his power is of God: and Saints are to
yield to the power and it must be honored, and have obedience from the Saints.
Page 101. And so they that call them corrupt Magistrates are the filthy
dreamers that Jude speaks of. Page 102.

Answ. Such as are turned into corruption, and are hypocrites they are gone
from the higher power, which the soul should be subject to, and its gone over
them; and so for the Lords sake the Saints cannot be subject to that power, but
that power that brings down the hypocrisy, and the corruptions in Magistrates,
and as they come to be clothed with the power of God, they are able to put a
difference betwixt the precious and the vile, and that they own; those are a
praise to them that do well. The Jews of old time could not obey the heathen
Magistrates, bow to their gods, that feared God, that lived in the Law of God;
nor to their Commands nor their power nor authority; nor the Apostles could not
bow to the Authority of the Jews, to their ordinances, their power that held
them up, which Christ came to put an end to; which was held up by Magistrates:
nor that among the Gentiles held up by Magistrates. For Christ was come to
reign who had all power in heaven, and earth given to him. And since the days
of the Apostles in the apostasy the Saints cannot now bow to that which the
Pope, and Kings, and Queens set up; though they call it a Supreme power that
commands the things, which who be in the power of God, that destroys that
which defiles the flesh and the evil speaker, and that is the dignity which the
Saints own and live in, and speaks not evil of, but they do that transgress
the Spirit of God, and goes from it as Jude speaks of; therefore have the
Martyrs, and Saints, and Prophets suffered since the days of the Apostles by
the Beast, and the false prophets and the great whore which have been in the
power of the Devil that went out of truth, and that the Saints was not subject
to. But now Christ is come to reign, the Lamb and the Saints shall have the
victory, and the higher power is owned, that is higher then all the
transgressors upon earth, that reaches to the soul; and the transgressed
principle of God in every man upon the earth: for the Beasts power has set up
your Tithes, Temples and Colleges, and compeld men to worship, which the
Saints could not, and therefore have suffered by it, that have worshipped God
in the spirit and truth, that the devil is out of; and such was in the higher
power.

Pr. He says there is a kind of Infiniteness in the soul; and it cannot be
Infiniteness in it self. Page 103.

Ans. Is not the soul without beginning coming from God, returning into God
again, who has it in his hand, which hand goes against him that does evil,
which throws down that which wars against it; And Christ the power of God, the
Bishop of the soul, which brings it up into God which came out from him; has
this a beginning or ending? And is not this infinite in it self, and more then
all the world?

Pr. He says the soul is a creature: and yet it is a noble power, and an
Essence, and is the appetite, fancy, etc. Again he says he knows that the
soul is a spiritual thing; and cannot be divided into parts and powers, as
being one single entire essence. Page 107.

Ans. The soul being in the death in transgression, so man's spirit there is not
sanctified, and the soul is in death: And fancy, and the appetite, and anger,
and pleasure, etc. which thou says is taken for the soul usually, and called
the soul, are them that wars against it; so thou divides the soul into parts,
which is one, and art ignorant of it, and yet thou said it cannot be divided.
So thou art in the Babylon, and confusion. So the living of the soul, and the
spirit sanctified, that diligent hearkening is come to where the Counsel of God
is stood in, his voice heard, his hand felt, that the soul comes up into, that
comes from him from God; that's living and Immortal, and gives a Creature its
feeling, and sencibleness through things: and so the Covenant of God comes to
be received wherein the soul lives, the Bishop of it which is immortal, and
then the new creature born is known, whereby the spirit of man is sanctified,
whereby the God of the spirits of all flesh is known. Now where the power and
life guides up to God the Father of life, that works down, and directs the mind
up to God where the soul has the issue, the immortal, to the immortal, whereby
light springs in Christ is known, the soul praises God the Savior; the low
estate that God has regarded and reached down to it. Now where the light is
hated, that of God within transgressed (that does pertain to the righteous Law
of God, and answers it) the spirit of man is not sanctified and man's
understanding darkened the higher power is denied, the soul comes into death,
transgressing of the Law is known; the witness buried which should guide the
mind whereby the soul should live in the diligent hearkening; thereby comes man
to be defiled, and his spirit and body and mind, whereby he glorifies not God
in his body and soul, and spirit, and glorifies not the God of the spirits of
all flesh; thereby he comes to be an alien and a stranger to the life of God,
and his ways and Covenant, and thou says the soul is a spiritual thing, and
yet a creature, an appetite and fancy. And every man that comes into the world
having a Light from Christ the second Adam (though they be in the first Adam)
the Bishop of their souls; So every one being turned to the Light which Christ
the second Adam has enlightened them withal, they shall see the Bishop of
their souls Christ the power of God, which is immortal, brings the immortal
soul into the immortal God, Christ their sanctification, who sanctifies their
spirits, and bodies, and brings the soul up into God from whence it came,
whereby they come to be one soul: For in the lusts of the world, and the
affections of it, is the war against it, and there is the powers of wickedness;
the soul must be in the higher power, higher then the flesh which stains the
man, spirit and body, and powers of wickedness. So the light being turned to,
he receives the spirit of God which sanctifies him, the spirit of
Sanctification in Christ Jesus, the Sanctification and Redemption. So every man
that comes into the world having a light from Christ Jesus the way out of the
fall, the second Adam; receiving the light they receive their Redemption, and
Sanctification, whereby their spirits, bodies and souls are sanctified.

Pr. He says, The binding of Satan shall not be by a personal reign of
Christ in a body. He says, the Quaker denies the light written in Scripture:
And he says, when ye that pretend most love to Christ within, and light
within, ye deny the Lord that bought ye: And the high talk of a Light within
goes out for ever into utter darkness.

Ans. The Light within, and Christ within; who owns this, and are come into it,
owns the Lord that bought them, Christ and no other; and they that receive not
this within, are Reprobates without him, and deceives him, yet talk of him as
the Devils, false Prophets, and Deceivers: And they that go from the Light
within, go into utter darkness, and stumble, and do not know whether they go,
and wants the garments, and the Lambs clothing. And so the Light within, he
that believes in it has the witness in himself, abides not in the darkness,
nor in the condemnation, but has the light of life. And the light within that
shines in the heart, gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ Jesus. And who knows Satan bound, and false Prophets, and
Antichrists, and Beasts, and mother of Harlots taken and cast into the fire,
and Christ reign, and know his bodily presence, they know his flesh, and are of
his flesh and of his bone, and his spirit, and mind, and power, who has all
power in heaven and earth given to him over the Devil, over the A^tichrists,
false Prophets, Beast, and mother of Harlots reigns above their power,
triumphs, tramples above their power, and this is known by the Light within.
And now does Christ reign in his Saints, and the Paradise of God is known, and
Eden, where all things are sanctified and blessed, and good; where there is no
curse, but blessing: and he that went out of this did transgress, and
disobeyed, which brought the death upon all his posterity, earthly Adam: But
who are come in through the obedience of another, the second Adam, Christ
Jesus, who became the Curse, and took away the Curse, who is the
sanctification, and brings the blessing and redemption; by whom and through
whom are many entered into the Paradise of God, and have the right to the tree
of Life. And they are not come into this, who are yet in the disobedience, the
unbeliever, and liar, and reviler, and whoremonger, and Adulterer hates the
light in the disobedience, and cannot touch the tree of life, for the sword
turns every way upon them.

And as for all thy hard expressions and reviles in thy Book, they come from
the Disobedience, over which the sword is that keeps it in awe, over whom goes
the higher power, and that cannot touch, nor taste of the tree of Life in the
Paradise of God, in the Ancient of Days, thou shall feel my words to be truth.

Robert Simpson, Robert Parnell, John Andrews, Thomas Ewen, Bryan Hanson, and
Richard Moon, In their Book called, The Church of Christ in BRISTOL recovering
her VEIL. Their Principles as follows.
Answ. It is a true word to you: And that you are recovering the veil more
then the life, and substance (that takes away all vails) as your Principles
that follows in your Book makes it manifest.

Pr. YOu say, Now the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter times some
shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of
Devels: And also of your own selves shall men arise speaking perverse things,
and draw many Disciples after them: And they went out from us, it is manifest
they are not of us, 1 John 2, etc.

Ans. You have brought these words to show your ignorance; for the Apostles saw
such as should depart from the faith, and the false Prophets and Antichrists
that Christ said should come, John saw was come, and went forth from them
before the Apostles decease: And they went forth from the Church, and departed
from the faith, in which faith the Church had unity, and this they apostatized
from; which since the days of the Apostles they have had the sheeps clothing,
and so got up an imagined Church with a vail on it (in the apostasy) and these
were they that drew Disciples after them, which caused the way of truth to be
evil spoken of; and the seducing spirits, and the doctrine of Devils have
been up since the days of the Apostles, which they saw come in before their
decease; and such went from the faith, in which is the unity. And thus they be
in the enmity, destroying one another, persecuting one another, prisoning one
another about Religion, and Church, Doctrine, and Scriptures, and Christ's, and
the Prophets, and Apostles words; which show they be out of unity with God,
with the Scriptures, and there you are; and out of the faith that works by
love, by which they should heap coals of fire on the heads of all the
adversaries. And so this is the dawning of the day, the ending of the night of
apostasy; you who be of the skirts of the great Whore are seen, as you have
manifested by your tale you have told to the world in your Book, who styles
your selves, The Church of Christ, which is made up by the Letter. How want ye
the life the Saints lived in that gave forth the Scriptures? Oh! ye want the
covering of the spirit of the Lord God. And now are all your spirits and men
departed from the Faith, and false Prophets that should inwardly raven, that
Christ said should come, that got the sheeps clothing, but inwardly ravening
wolves, whose fruits should declare them; which John saw was come, which went
forth from them, which led the world after them; and the false Apostles, and
Satan's Ministers and messengers, which the Apostle saw come up before his
decease: These since the days of the Apostles have been the guides and leaders
of the world, and Teachers, and gatherers of people into Names, into Heads,
into Horns, whereby one has been against another, that they have gathered
people out of peoples; and brought people to a head, and not to Christ, and yet
all have professed themselves Christians: So they have had the sheeps
clothing, but inwardly ravened from the spirit of God, and so have been Wolves
clothed with the sheeps clothing, tearing the Lambs to pieces, yea and many
Gaots and Beasts too sometimes, which the fruits of this has declared
sufficiently since the days of the Apostles, and in this Nation: And these
have deceived the world, and have been the wrestlers against flesh and blood,
strikers at the Creature; such as have departed from the faith, ravened from
the spirit, went forth from the Apostles, had sheeps clothing, such have been
the Teachers and gatherers into Sects, and Names, and Heaps; and every one will
cry, his Church, his Church, and all against the light which comes from Christ
where the Church stands. But now he is redeeming and recovering that which has
been lost since the days of the Apostles, in this night of the Apostasy. The
light is come, the night is gone, the Lamb and the Saints are going on
conquering, and to conquer. The Throne of the Lamb is set up; and all those
false Prophets, Beasts, Antichrists, and mother of Harlots, great Whore, and
Kings of the Earth, and the Devil, are making War against the Lamb and the
Saints.

Now are all the Antichrists appearing, and are in arms, and rising against
Christ and his light. The Lamb is on the white Horse, who slayes with his
Sword, which are the words of his mouth, and the Lamb and the Saints shall have
the victory. Glory in the highest, and rejoice ye holy Prophets over her.

Pr. They say, The mystical body may sometimes be subject to distempers, and
humors, and wants, page 1.

Answ. Are you Judges? Can you judge of the mystical body which the Saints are
baptized into? Is their humors, wants, and distempers in the body which the
Saints are baptized into? Is not the wants, humors, distempers in your body?
Do you here in this divide the word aright? Distinguish things in the ground,
and speak aright of things; and yet ye would not be judged, and say Judge not;
and is not mystical, spiritual?

Pr. You say The Scriptures are the word of God.

Answ. The Scripture says it self, the Word is God; Christ, whose name is
called the Word of God; and the Scriptures are words, the words of God, the
words of Christ, the Declaration which the Ministers of the Word set forth;
which words ends in Christ the Word who fulfills them: And it is called the
Scriptures of Truth which cannot be broken; and so ye do not speak as the
Church did that gave forth Scripture. And the spirit of God was the rule that
led them to speak forth the Scriptures, which brings to know the right use of
them again.

Pr. They say, To call that light in every man Christ, is to slight Christ's
glorious person in heaven, and to nullify it.

Ans. In this have not you showed your ignorance? And to be them that went
forth from the Apostles, and so are hardened from the spirit they was in; which
said, Christ is all in all, which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world; And none sees the person of Christ in heaven but who be in the Light,
that he has enlightened them withal; yea, the Covenant of Light to the
Gentiles and Heathens as well as Jews, and so God is not a respecter of
persons. And all that be from this Light are now making war against the Lamb
and the Saints, and the accuser of the Brethren is cast out, and the light
which does enlighten every man which comes into the world, is Christ.

Pr. They say, It is a delusion for them that are in the light to see what men's
inward states are before God. page 29.

Ans. Have ye given your selves a name of the Church of Christ, and is there
not a spirit of discerning among you? Have ye not manifested here that ye are
harlotted from the Church of Christ the Apostles was of? And how can ye
minister, or teach people if that ye do not discern their states, how they
stand before God? How can you commend your selves to every man's conscience in
Gods sight? How can ye present the souls of men to God, and see not their
states how they are in his sight. How come ye to have fellowship in the Spirit?
How can you or any Minister to the state and condition that people be in, and
see where they are, and does not know how they stand in Gods sight? in this how
have you showed your ignorance of the Scriptures, and the Epistles written to
the Saints which speaks to the state and conditions the Saints were in? How
have ye a name, but declared your selves dead from the life? How have ye
stained your own glory, and marred your own beauty, and sets your selves out of
the steps and paths of the Church of Christ?

Pr. Simpson he says, If my heart deceive me not, I could wish that God would
recover you out of the Devils snare. page 40. And ye speak of breaking of
bread, and Ordinances, and the Lords Supper, and Baptism, page 35.

Ans. The prayers of the faithful are acceptable that are in the spirit; but
he that doubts, he knows not his own heart, and prays without discerning,
being out of that which purifies it: And for Baptism, and Ordinances, and the
Lords Supper, and the bread that the Saints broke, ye have all been ignorant of
in this night of apostasy since the days of the Apostles; who had spoken to
the Corinthians, what he had received of the Lord, he delivered unto them: And
as often as they did eat that bread, and drink that cup, they did show forth
the Lords death till he come, and they were to do it in remembrance of him. And
afterward the Apostle writ again to the said Corinthians, and tells them, the
light that shined in their hearts would give them the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus: And said, while we look not at
things that are seen, but at things that are not seen: For the things that are
seen are temporal (Bread, Wine, and Water are seen) but the things that are not
seen are eternal; And bids them examine themselves, and prove their own selves
(and said) Know ye not that Christ Jesus is in you except you be reprobates?

Pr. He says, He has been a Preacher of the Gospel at Bristoll and Wells,
and he has not need to seek a proof of any man, page 43. And he says, I am no
Preacher to bid every man turn to the light within him, neither did I ever read
or hear, that any of the Apostles or holy men of God preached such a Gospel.
And they said, Sarah Latchet (who was excommunicated, who had been one of them)
it was fittest to send her to Bridewell.

Answ. This was not the Ministers of the Gospels work to wrestle with flesh and
blood, which is yours. And they in the sight of God had witnesses, and they
could seek them; which thou says thou needs not: And they turned people from
the darkness to the light; and Christ bid them believe in the light while they
had it, that they might become the chilldren of the Light And the Apostles
doctrine was, that the light that shined in their hearts would give them that
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and
this thou never heardest of (as thou say) And thy Gospel that is not this,
and agrees not to the Apostles, is another, and so accursed: And the Saints was
one another Epistles written in one another hearts, read and seen of all men;
And thou have been a bad Preacher at Wells and Bristoll, that knows not the
Light.

Prin. They say, A man may be a Christian, a believer, a converted soul, he
may be in Christ, and yet not not have received the spirit of sealing and
establishing, page 53.

Ans. This is like to the rest of thy Doctrine who are out of it themselves;
they are not able to judge of the state of babes, believers, converted souls
which are in Christ: For they that are in Christ have the spirit; and they that
are converted, are converted by the spirit: And he that believes comes to be
sealed with the spirit of promise.

Prin. They say, The light in every man is a notion, and yet they seek God by
prayer solemnly. And they shut up the Kingdom of heaven against men, that bid
all men turn to the light within them, and from the believing on the person of
Jesus Christ, page 60.

Answ. None opens the Kingdom of heaven to all men, but who turns people to the
light which Christ Jesus has enlightened every man withal that comes into the
world. Nor none believes in Christ, but who believes in the light which Christ
the light has enlightened them withal, and such have the witness in
themselves, and can set to their seals that God is true: And they see their
Sanctification, Justification, and Redemption; and none ever prays the
acceptable prayer of the Lord, but who be in the light that comes from Christ;
and such calls not the light a Notion, for all notions be among such that be
out of the Light, which Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the
world withal: They are from the Rock, the Foundation, and Sanctification, and
see not Christ. And this is not to deny Christ, but receive him, and believe in
him. And all upon the earth be Antichrists, that denies the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, and be from it.

Pr. And as for your speaking of judging, and not to judge before the time
until the Lord do come, etc.

Answ. That was spoken to the Corinthians, who will bring to light the hidden
things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of the heart. Now the same
Apostle said to the same Corinthians, that God would dwell in them, and walk in
them; and they were not to judge before the time until that he did come. And
he told them the Saints should judge the world, and the world should be judged
by them. Now where the Lord is come, such as have the Son, and the Father, and
bring this Doctrine, they are to be received; and they know where sin and
transgression is finished, and where it is standing: So if any man have an ear
to hear this, and can receive it, let him.

And as for the rest of the things in your Book, your silence might have
covered your shame, for every man's words shall be his burden. Therefore he
that has the word of God, and speaks that that shall not be so, which now
comes to be richly known, and is known among the Saints and Believers, the true
Church which is come out of the Apostasy, since the days of the Apostles, to
that the Apostles was in.

Jonathan Clapham, a labourer of the Gospel (as he says) and William Jenkin:
Their Book ( called, A Discovery of the the QUAKERS Doctrine) to the PROTECTOR.
Their PRINCIPLES, etc.
Pr. HE says, I dare not say that I am infallible (as the Pope and the
Quakers) And the Magistrate in this external politic Kingdom is a Mediator,
though he is no Officer nor Magistrate in the Spiritual Kingdom of his
Church: And if this be received by Magistrates, that they have nothing to do
with the worship of God, Christ is little beholding to them: Then they may
protect the worship of Mahomet, as well as Christ's. And yet ye say, That the
Magistrate is the Officer of Christ. See his Epistle to the Protector.

Answ. How is it then if the Magistrate be no officer of the Church, that you
make use of Magistrates to prison, to persecute, to give you Tithes, and to
quench the spirit when any thing is revealed to another that sits by? Was not
the Magistrates in all ages stirred up by the blind Priests, and Prophets, and
Teachers, to persecute, and to prison such as they judged to be blasphemers?
And so did not all the Saints in all ages suffer, not as for Truth, but as for
blasphemy; yea by them that had the form, covered with the sheeps clothing?

Now the Magistrate that is in the power of Christ, he is beyond an external
Kingdom, and sees over the Kingdoms of the world; and that as he is a
Help-Governour for Christ, he is a member of the Church, and he knows who
worships God, and who worships Idols. And who worships God be in the power of
God; He is in that which sees over all external Kingdoms, that is the higher
power which the soul must be subject to, and that is the true Magistrate: And
thou not being infallible, thou art not in the spirit, and so art not a
Minister, and art not able to judge of powers that is not infallible, nor
Magistrates, nor Kingdoms, nor Churches; For who is in the infallible, is in
the spirit that Christ was in, and the Apostles and Prophets that gave forth
Scriptures. But we say, that thou nor the Pope thy elder Brother (in the
apostasy from the Apostles) are neither of ye infallible, nor in the infallible
spirit that the Apostles was in; but ye are both erred from it in the apostasy,
as your fruits declares, contrary to the Apostles.

Pr. They say, The Magistrates are to protect the Church from the ravenous
Wolves: for ye to stop the freedom of the Quakers in your Dominions, and
their License, and the Lord bless your Highness. See his Epistle to the
Protector.

Answ. Before thou said they were not Officers in the Spiritual Church, and
now would thou have them to limit and quench the spirit? and to be your
Executioners, by telling them the Quakers seduce people? Ye have manifested
your own spirits that ye have not the spirit to resist their spirits, but are
crying to the Magistrates. And did John bid the Saints call to the Magistrates,
to the outward powers of the earth, to try Seducers, or did the Saints? And
have not you manifested your selves to be them that cry, help men against
Christ and the Saints? and cries to the mountains to cover you; crying to the
Magistrates, Help men of Israel, these are the men that will turn the world
upside down, and so go to the arm of flesh? Have not ye here showed your
spirits to be them that should come, who were inwardly ravened, which John saw
was come, and to be the Wolves in the sheeps clothing, and the blasphemers,
such as you cannot tear your selves, you would have the Magistrates to tear.
But the Lord has opened an understanding among many of them that they see you.

Pr. He says, We dare not contest with the Quakers, they teach men by minding
the light in the conscience, to attain a moral righteousness, that is the
highest; and as if they had accomplished it wholly now, and not to be fulfilled
in another world. See Epistle to the Protector.

Answ. We do believe that you are not able to resist the Quakers, who have
appeared in that that cannot be shaken. Therefore is it not a shame to you to
say you are a Church and Ministers, and to say the Magistrate is no Officer in
the Spiritual Church? And yet you to fly to the Magistrate, and tell him you
dare not contest with the Quakers, and bless him if he will but stop them?
Think ye not the Magistrate will see you in these things? And the light which
Christ the righteousness of God has enlightened every man that comes into the
world withal, leads man from the end of the righteousness of the Law that
comes to be fulfilled in all its righteousness whatsoever, and so the light is
too heavy for thee, and hard for thee; and it is the precious stone thou
stumbles at: And things fulfilled in another world, the Prophecies, the
Parables, the Types, the Figures, the Shadows, the Gifts, the Revelations, the
Dispensations, these things was in this world manifested: And Christ who is the
end of all, who comes to him into the power of the world that has no end. What
is there, to fulfill there, in the world that has no end. Things are to be
fulfilled in this World, that has an end: And thus thou have showed thy
ignorance.

Pr. He says, The Scripture is the Word of God. And he says, Christ is not
properly the Word, but figuratively, page 3. And the Scripture is in more
proper sense without figure called the Word of God. He says, without the
Scripture we do not know how to worship God aright, and serve him, and therein
attain to eternal life.

Again they say, God is not pleased to use this way of immediate Revelation
now: Neither indeed is it the work of Gods holy Spirit to discover things unto
us now immediately, page 5.

Ans. Christ's name is called the Word of God properly, and not figuratively,
and more properly then the Scripture, as in the Revelations. And the Scriptures
are the words of God, and words which Christ fulfills (the Word.) So it is
properly to call the Scriptures the words of God, and properly to call Christ
his name the Word of God; and the Word that became flesh, that is proper
Scripture: And they that had not the Scriptures worshipped God before the
Scriptures was written, as Abraham and Enoch and others; and they attained to
eternal life. And if people have all the Scriptures, and not the Spirit (which
was before they was given forth) they want the standing rule; they cannot know
the Scriptures; they cannot worship God aright; they cannot find eternal
life; they have not unity with God, neither do they worship God aright; but who
be in the spirit that gave them forth: And we do believe you, that immediate
revelations now by the holy spirit of God revealing things to you
im-immediately ye have not; and you say it is not the work of Gods spirit now,
nor the way of God now, etc. You that have ravened from the spirit of God
inwardly, have been the Wolves which Christ said should come, which John saw
was come, which the world has gone after you, and ye have burst into Names,
and Heads, and Horns, and Sects. And the power was given to the Beast, and the
false Prophets, and the great Whore has corrupted the earth: All Nations have
drunk her cup of fornications, and the Kings of the Earth. So they have flown
to the Kings for help against the Saints and against the Lamb, but the Lamb and
the Saints shall have the victory. And so when you have been ravened from the
spirit of God, it has not been like ye should attain to immediate Revelation
by the spirit of God. But now who are come to the Lamb, are come to that ye
ravened from, they witness immediate Revelation. They are come to that the
Apostles was in, the spirit of Christ, the spirit of God, they witness
immediate Revelation. Who are come into the fear of God, the things of God is
revealed unto them; who are come into the spirit of God, it reveals to them the
deep things of God. So you that deny immediate revelation by Gods holy spirit
now, and discovering things to you immediately; you have showed your spirits to
be the false spirits, unclean spirits that be in the earth, like the Frogs that
go out of the mouth of the Beast and the false Prophet, which was discovered by
John, and revealed to John, discovered and made manifest; which now with the
same holy spirit of God are you all apostates revealed and discovered to the
children of the Light, to the Lambs and the Saints, who witness the spirit of
God which reveals the things of God to them, and immediate revelation. As ever
the false Prophets, false Apostles, false Teachers, in their false prophesies
and teachings did, who had gotten the form, and denied the power, immediate
Revelation by Gods holy spirit. And was it not they then that cried to the
powers of the earth for help against the Saints in all ages, which was
discovered and judged by the spirit of God, and must go into the fire.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures are able to make wise unto salvation, and they
are a more sure word of prophecy then any voice that we can hear from heaven,
page 6. And we will call them the Word of God whether the Quakers will or no,
and we are to go to the Law and Testimony, page 7.

Ans. In this ye are contrary to the Ministers of the Word, who calls the
Scriptures the words of God, and Christ the Word, and calls the Scriptures a
Declaration and a Treatise, which Christ the Word came to fulfill. And the Law
and Testimony which ye say is the Old and New Testament; which many may have,
and yet stand against the Law which is light, as says Solomon; and stand
against the testimony of Jesus which is the spirit of prophecy, and crucify
them that be in it, in the Law and Testimony, they that have the Old and New
Testament, as witness the ravening Wolves that have had the sheeps clothing,
but inwardly ravened from the spirit; which Christ said should come, John saw
was come, went out from the Apostles, which since the world have gone after
them: And many may have the Scripture, and stand against the voice from heaven,
as the Jews did him that spoke from heaven, which was more sure; him that
spoke from heaven who was the end of the Scripures, and comes to fulfill them.
And the Scriptures are not able to make wise unto salvation, as you say, who
leave out the Faith; but through faith they are.

Pr. Let the Quakers show where ever Christ or the Apostles bid people look to
the light within them. And the Quakers say they write from the spirit of the
Lord, and speak from God immediately and infallibly as did the Apostles, and
does not this bring them under the curse in the Revelations? page 8. And say
the Letter is a dead and killing letter, these he calls wicked errors. And to
say the light within is sufficient, an old Popish argument.

Answ. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, is the salvation to the ends of the earth, and sufficient; for he that
believes in it shall have the light of life, and come to witness the Law of
God in his mind and in his heart; and the new Covenant, which he shall not
need to say, Know the Lord. And the letter of Scripture, paper and ink is a
dead letter: And thou and you all that speak and write, and not from God
immediately and infallibly as the Apostles did, and Prophets, and Christ, but
only have gotten the words, you are all under the, Curse in another spirit,
ravened from the spirit that was in the Apostles, only have had the sheeps
clothing, inwardly ravening wolves; so deceived the World and the Nations, and
have been held up by the powers of the world, the powers of the earth. And the
Kings of the earth have drunk the cup of fornication, and they were like to
maintain that which they have drunk. And so power has been given to the Beast
over all Kindreds, Tongues and Nations, and they should make war against the
Lamb and the Saints, and continue it till the words of God was fulfilled: And
the Apostles told the Corinthians, that light that shined in their hearts would
give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ
Jesus: And so all people upon the earth that have gotten a knowledge, and if
the light that shines in their hearts has not given it them; what they know,
they know naturally; in these things they corrupt themselves. And so thou and
you that be ignorant of the Apostles doctrine, the light that gives people the
knowledge, and the immediate infallible spirit that the Apostle was in, and
that the Scriptures was given forth from, are and the Pope together in another
fallible spirit then the Apostles were in, comprehended with the spirit that
gave forth Scriptures.

Pr. And what a dreadful Judgment is upon them that leave the Scriptures, to
look to the light within them. Page 9. And many deceivers should come into the
world that confess not Christ come in the flesh, receive them not into your
houses. And the man Christ is testified against by the light. Page 13. and he
says they publicly deny the resurrection of the dead body. And he says,
Christ in the flesh his sufferings was but an example and a figure.

Ans. Christ ended all figures in suffering and examples, and paterns; yet he
is the Saints pattern, and example as the Scripture witnesses, and there is no
other example nor pattern to be heeded but Christ alone, which they are to learn
of, but to say he is nothing but a figure, for that thou, and you all will be
judged: for he ended all figures and is the resurrection, and the life both;
and thy dead body shall live with my dead body, this is Scripture, and they
that said the resurrection was past in the days of the Apostles, overthrew the
faith of some. That which overthrowes the faith denying the resurrection kept
the seed in death, where it has been in you all since the days of the
Apostles; for who are of faith, are of Abraham, of Christ according to the
flesh; and so if the dead arise not, their Preaching is vain, and their faith
is vain. So I say mortal must put on immortality, and corruption must put on
incorruption: the first man was made a living soul; the second was made a
quickening spirit, there is earthly bodies, and heavenly bodies: and there Is a
resurrection of the just, and unjust, the one to eternal life, the other to
condemnation. And the Judge is the man Christ Jesus to Judge the quick, and the
dead, who both dyed, and rose again that he might be God of the dead, and the
living. And the light which every man has that comes into the world does not
testify against Christ; And the light does not bring to deny the Scriptures
but to own them; And none ownes them aright, nor Christ, but who are in the
light which comes from him. And all that do deny the light that does enlighten
every man, etc. are the wolves, and the false Prophets, and Antichrists that
have gotten the sheeps clothing, and such cannot be received into the houses
of the Saints, that are from the light which every man is enlightened withal.
And none confesses Christ come in the flesh, but who is in the light which
Christ has enlightened them withal. And so now is all Professors, and
teachers upon the earth; and Kings of the earth ravened inwardly from the light
which Christ enlightened them all withal; standing against the light, and the
Lamb, and the Saints, that be in it; and are not to be received into the houses
of the Saints, neither to bid them God speed, for they be out from God that be
out of the Light which Christ the Son has enlightened them withal.

Pr. And he says Christ has a humane reasonable soul. Again, Christ the
Eternal Son of God distinct from the Father Eternally; before he was made
flesh, his spirit was distinguished from the Father and the Son from Eternity;
and not only when he was manifested by descending on Christ in the likeness of
a Dove, or by falling upon the Apostles like cloven tongues, etc. page 17.

Answ. Christ says he is in the Father, and the Father is in him, and he will
send them the Spirit of Truth the Comforter that proceeds from the Father and
the Son, and Christ says he was glorified with the Father before the world
began; and yet ye say, the Son is distinguished from the Father from Eternity:
and the Son says he is in the Father, and the Father is in him: and you say
the spirit is distinguished from the Father and the Son from Eternity, and
Christ says it proceeds from him and the Fathers and he is the God and Father
of the spirits of all flesh, and the substance of all things; And is not a
humane soul, earthly? for you say that Christ had a humane soul, and is not
humane earthly? and has a humane body, and is not a humane body an earthly
body? Is not his body of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh? and is not
his body a glorified body? was not the first man of the earth, earthly, and had
an humane body, the second man the Lord from heaven? And is not the soul
immortal which comes out from God which is immortal and goes into God again?
and is not humane, or earthly mortal? And are there not three that bear record
in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and are not they all one? how
then are they distinct, and three that bear record in earth, the spirit the
water, and the blood, which agree, in one? And Christ says. I and my Father
are one; and I in the Father, and the Father in me, and he is in the Saints,
and so not distinct.

Pr. He says it is impudency in the Quakers to deny the word Trinity and three
Persons. And the Church ever denied such as denies the Doctrine of the Trinity.
Page 18. 19.

Ans. As for the word Trinity, and three Persons we have not read it in the
Bible, but in the Common Prayer Book or Masse-book which the Pope was the
Author of; but as for Unity we own, and Christ being the brightness of the
Fathers glory, and the express Image of his substance of the Father we own;
That we own which agrees with the Scriptures, and for that which the Scripture
speaks not; which men speak, and teach for Doctrine their own words, that the
Scriptures speaks not, nor teaches, such the Scriptures shut out, and we deny.

Pr. He says that is the weak, ignorant, dark, and the wicked Sect of the
Devil, that maintains an equality with God; the soul to be one being with God
or part of God. And says (the Quakers say) there is no Scriptures speaks of a
humane soul, and the soul is taken up into God, and God is all, in all.

Answ. The Assembly, or Synod of Priests put forth a Catechism, and say that
the Holy Ghost and the Son is equal with the Father in power, and glory: and
this they put forth that people should learn it: what then if any come to
witness the Holy Ghost, they come to witness that which is equal in power and
glory with the Father? what if any come to witness the Son of God revealed in
them (which he that has not him, has not life) do they not come to witness
him who is equal in power and glory with the Father? (this is your own
Catechism) and is it blasphemy to confess your own words, that ye have given
people to learn? God breathed into man the breath of life, and he became a
living soul. God, who has all souls in his hand. And is not this that comes
out from God, which is in Gods hand, part of God of God, and from God, and to
God again? which soul Christ is the Bishop of, and does not thou speak of a
humane soul, an earthly soul, and is earthly, immortal and cannot die nor be
killed? And is not that which came out from God, which God has in his hand
taken up into God again, which Christ the power of God is the Bishop of, is not
this of Gods being? And does not the Scripture say, God is all and in all? And
how do thou here devide the word of God aright? who shows so much ignorance
of the letter of Scripture.

Pr. He says, It is a wretched doctrine to say men have not a humane soul in
them, and to say that the soul is a part of the Divine Essence.

Ans. Is not that of God that come out from him? and is not the earthly and
humane of the ground? and is not that mortal; and is that which is immortal
humane? And do thou say it is humane, and is not that earthly? And where does
the Scripture of the Prophets, Christ or the Apostles tell people of a humane
soul; and of Christ having a humane body in heaven? and does not the Apostle
speak of his glorified body?

Pr. He says that God should dwell in his Saints, and Christ inhabit in
believers; how can this be? the heaven, of heavens cannot contain him, how much
less shall the strait heart of man?

Answ. The Scripture says God will dwell in men, and walk in men, and Christ
that fills heaven and earth is in you except ye be reprobates, and so in this
thou have showed thy self one not able to divide the word aright, and the
bodies of the Saints are the Temples of God, and God will dwell in them, and
walk in them, and he will be their God, and they shall be his people.

Pr. He says, Nor is it an essential in-dwelling of the Divine nature in Gods
people, etc.

Answ. Does not the Apostle say the Divine nature the Saints was made partakers
of? and God dwells in the Saints, and Christ in them, except they be
reprobates? And does not the Saints come to eat the flesh of Christ? and if
they eat his flesh, is it not within them?

Pr. He says God dwells not in the Saints as a personal union, etc. page 22.

Answ. How comes the Saints then to eat of his flesh and to be of his flesh and
bone, and God dwelling in them, and have unity with the Son and the Father, and
to be of his body, which is the Church, and Christ the head.

Pr. To say a man is justified and made righteous (by Gods putting
righteousness into us,) and by righteousness wrought in the creature, confounds
Justification and Sanctification, etc. See page 25.

Answ. The Apostle brought the people to the faith by which they was justified,
that was in their hearts, for with the heart man believes unto righteousness,
etc. And the light they was to believe in, that was Christ. And the light that
shined in their hearts gave the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ Jesus their Savior. Now Justification by the works of the
Law, was, do this and live: Circumcise the children; if they did not, they was
to be cut off: and they was to keep the Law, and the works of the Law, the
faith of Christ ended: for it took away the nature that the Law went upon; now
the Papists, and Priests be out of the works of the Law, or the works of faith
that works by love, for they are slaying one another about Religion, though
they pretend works, and this was ever out of the faith of Christ Jesus to kill
one another about Religion: Now the Apostles was in the works of faith, who
neither prisoned, nor persecuted any that was a contrary minded that did so,
nor wrestled not against flesh and blood, but against the power that captivated
creatures. And so all this work about works does show you and the Papists both
be out of the faith that works by love, where love should overcome all things,
and bear all things. I do not measure Priests, and professors, nor Papists by
the works of the Law which the Apostles speaks of, which the false teachers
were bringing people to, in the days of the Apostles; Neither do I compare or
measure Papists, or Priests with the works of faith that works by love, that
becomes all, to all, for the winning some of them. Papists, and Priests and
professors will kill one another about their faith, which is not the faith that
works by love; and contrary to the Apostles, and Quakers faith.

Pr. He says our warfare cannot be expected to be over as long as we are in
the body: and the best of Saints do not live free from sin. Page 27.

Ans. The Apostles said they was made free from sin, and the blood of Jesus
Christ the Son of God cleanses us from all sin; and such as witness the
everlasting Covenant of God, that blotted out their sins, and transgressions.
And they did witness the one offering that perfected for ever them that are
sanctified; And the Saints did witness the Kingdom of God which stands in
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; and were new Creatures,
and the old man put off, and they were more then conquerours. So thou art
ignorant of the Scriptures, And it is the Doctrine of Devils that Preaches
that men shall have sin, and be in a warfare so long as they be on earth, that
is not the Doctrine of Christ which brings people to the faith, the which gives
the victory, in which they have unity one with another, and please God.

Pr. He says to witness heaven within and hell within, and the resurrection,
is the mystery of Iniquity. Page 31.

Ans. Which shows thou never knew heaven in thy self, nor hell there, nor
Christ the resurrection and the life, which they are blessed that are made
partakers of the first resurrection, on them the second death shall have no
power. And the Scriptures does witness heaven within. And if Christ that was
offered up the resurrection, and the life, be not within thee, thou art a
reprobate.

Pr. He says, We shall have incorruptible, powerful, glorious and spiritual
bodies; and yet they say Christ is in heaven with a humane body (which is
earthly) See page 34. Again the spirits can enter into heaven, while the body
is upon the earth, etc. And he says the fourth Commandment commands the
keeping of a seventh day: and he that breaks the least Commandment and
teacheh men so to do, is least in the Kingdom of Heaven. Page 41.

Answ. Have not all the Priests and teachers in England, denied the Jews
Sabbath, the seventh day? and do not you work on it? And do not you meet
together on the first day of the week? And do not you all teach men to break
the Commandment there? And you keep markets and fairs on the seventh day; the
Jews Sabbath? ye meet together on the first day of the week: (which is the
eight day and so not one in seven. And if the Saints-sat in heavenly places
with Christ Jesus; And if the Saints in heaven must have a glorious body, and
Christ an humane body (which I say is earthly) how does this agree with
Scripture, that says Christ's is a glorious body? And is it an earthly body the
Saints eats, when they eat the flesh of Christ? And is not people in their
first state, in the earthly, before they come to witness a spiritual body like
unto his glorious body? How do you divide the word aright? and they that have
the spirit of Christ, their spirits are in heaven, and they have unity with the
Father.

Pr. We have no such immediate converse with God now, as to see him face to
face, page 42.

Ans. We do believe you have not, who are gone from the spirit that the
Prophets and Apostles were in, ravened from it since the days of the Apostles
in the apostasy, and so are not in the counsel of God, and are out of his
teaching and instruction, and so far off of having fellowship with God; for
who have fellowship with him, comes to see him; and you are not of Abraham's
seed who saw God face to face, but are of the Pharisees stock, who never saw
his shape, John 5.

Pr. And you say, In the last days false Prophets should arise, and show
signs and wonders; and if it were possible they should deceive the Elect. And
the coming of the man of sin is after the working of Satan, with all power, and
signs, and lying wonders, etc. page 44.

Answ. Christ said they should come, the false Prophets and the Antichrists
which John saw were come; yea, many Antichrists were gone out into the world.
And the Apostle Paul saw the man of sin before his decease, the coming of him
with the lying signs and wonders; which since the days of the Apostles in
this night of Apostasy, they have ruled and reigned, the man of sin with his
lying signs and wonders; and these are not the true signs, but lying. And
when they were ravened from the spirit of God they got the sheeps clothing,
inwardly ravening wolves, which if it were possible, they would deceive the
very elect; which went forth from the Apostles in the apostasy, and since, they
have deceived the Nations, the wolves, the inwardly raveners, though covered
with the sheeps clothing. And here these things have been among you in the
apostasy: And the Apostates have reigned and ruled, and have had the dominion
since the days of the Apostles; But now (with that which ye all have ravened
from) are ye made manifest and comprehended. So this man of sin with his lying
signs and wonders, who ravened from the spirit of God as the Devil did, who
went from the Truth, is he that compels all his members to plead for the body
of sin while they be upon earth, and so to keep them out of the faith of Gods
Elect, that gives the victory over the world: And such he cannot deceive, nor
none of his members, that ravened from the spirit of God.

Pr. He says, The Quakers, the despising the fashions of the world, contemning
the honors and pleasures thereof, and their sober carriage and deportment
among men, and willingness to suffer; all these he calls wickedness. See page
49, 50.

Answ. But it seems this practice, soberness, denying the fashions of the
world, and contemning of honors and pleasures thereof, and the sober carriage
offends him and the world, and the rest of the Priests and Professors, and to
deny their lusts which they be in.

Pr. He says; The Devil is not an Adulterer, page 51.

Answ. Did the Devil abide in the Truth? And did not he go out of it? Are not
all that go out of the Truth of him, Adulterers, who begets his own image? and
is the foundation of adultery?

Pr. He says, The light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, is a natural light, or law, page 56.

Ans. Which light is the end of the Law, Christ Jesus, before any natural
light was made or created; for all things that was made, was made by him, and
he does enlighten every man that comes into the world, who is the end of the
Law.

Pr. He says, the light will not bring men to salvation, page 56.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, is
Christ the salvation to the ends of the earth.

Pr. He says again, The light is not sufficient to lead men to salvation, page
60. And to witness Sanctification within, and Justification there, is to
confound justification and sanctification. And grace, and justification is a
created thing, and the sight within is mere darkness which the Quakers speak
of. See page 61.

Ans. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal comprehends all darkness, and leads out of it, and there is no
occasion of stumbling in it; for as many as receives him, to them he gives
power to become the sons of God. And the light is not darkness; but he that
says the light is darkness, is out of the light, in the darkness. And
Justification and Sanctification within does not confound it without, but is
the same that is within as is without: And grace is the gift of God, and
Sanctification both, Christ Jesus, who was before any creature was created, and
the grace comes from the Throne.

Pr. He says, They are the unstablished people that are running after every
way of error, that owns the Quakers in these Nations, page 62.

Ans. In that the Nation will witness against thee; for them that own the
Quakers, it is known that they have been the most knowingest, seeking people
that have been in the Nations, and the most sincerest people; and none comes
out of error, but who comes to the Quakers light which they follow, which is
Christ.

Pr. He says, That Christ has a humane created soul, See page 63. Again, and
the light in the conscience to be Christ is a false Doctrine. And the Quakers
seek to bring people from all other teaching but the light within them. page
65.

Answ. The soul of Christ is witnessed; But to say it is humane, earthly, and
created (when the Scripture does not teach us that doctrine) we cannot own your
words, nor believe, but deny them. And Christ is the light in the conscience,
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, who was before any
creature was; which he that receives it comes to him to be his Teacher, and
feels him reign. And every man must come to the Light which Christ has
enlightened them withal, etc. who is the Covenant of God, to feel the Law
written in their hearts, and in their minds, to bring them off all other
Teachers, whereby they need not teach one another, nor to say, Know the Lord.

Pr. He says, Men may be called of men Master, and it is but a cavil to deny
it. And they may deny to be called Father, as well as Master, etc. See page 68.

Answ. Thou have in this denied the doctrine of Christ, and slights it, who
says, be not ye of men called master; for ye have all one Master, which is
Christ, and ye are all brethren. And thou have showed thy self out of the
Brotherhood; and there is a birth to be born, which can call no man Father
upon earth, which thou art ignorant of.

Pr. He says, There is lawful respects of persons, and it is said God
himself is the respecter of persons: and the Quakers overthrow all authority,
because they do not respect persons, because they deny that, page 71.

Answ. God is not a respecter of persons, as says the Apostle, for his
Covenant he gives to the Gentiles as well as to the Jews. And the faith of
Gods elect is held without the respect of persons; and he that respects persons
commits sin, and transgresses the Law. And so thou divides not the word aright.

Pr. He says, False Prophets shall arise, and damnable heresies, and many
shall follow their pernicious ways, by which the way of truth shall be evil
spoken of.

Ans. The Apostles saw them come up, the false Prophets that brought in the
damnable heresies, that was covetous, etc. and many followed their ways. And
the false Prophets goes from the light that Christ has enlightened them
withal, and raveneth from the Spirit, and gets the sheeps clothing, and
through their covetousness makes a trade of that: and you are such which
causes the truth to be evil spoken of, which are come up, manifest since the
days of the Apostles.

Pr. And the Quakers are not to be received into their houses, nor bidden
God-speed, and such as creeps into houses, leads silly women captive, laden
with sin, and led away with diverse lusts.

Ans. The Apostle saw such as crept into houses, and saw such as transgressed
the Doctrine of Christ, that was not to be received into houses, and saw the
deceivers that walked after their ungodly lusts, before the Apostles decease;
and such as led people always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the truth, as it is manifest now in the world, they are learning 40. 50. or
60. years, and yet there is a cry among them, that they must have the body of
sin while they be upon the earth, and live in their sins, and none can be
without it; and this is the height of your doctrine it leads too, which is now
in the mouths of all people that be under your teaching that teach that
Doctrine; and yet you will say, the work of the Ministry is for the perfecting
of the Saints, to the edifying of the body of Christ, till all come into the
unity of the faith unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ: And this work ye have denied your selves to be in; but such
that are as Jannes and Jambres, how should it be otherwise? that ravened from
the spirit of God inwardly; that went forth from the Apostles, that be
covetous, that keeps people always learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. So you are them that keeps people from the light that
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, and keeps them in
spiritual Egypt, Sodom, and Gomorah, where they be always learning, having
the form of godliness, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth;
and this to you all will be a sad cup at last.

And as for all thy lies and slanders in thy Book which are not worth
mentioning, they will come sad upon thy self one day for the grievous lies
thou have uttered in it unto the Nation; which thousands in the Nation that are
not under the name of Quakers knows, and sees the contrary to what thou have
published; but they will fall upon thy own self, and be thy own burden: And
then thou shall say, when thou feelst thy own works burn, thou had better
have been silent, and not have published forth thy folly, and made thy name to
stink, and brought thy name upon record, who has made lies thy refuge; but
the hail is come, and coming, that will sweep them away.

William Thomas, called Minister of the Gospel of Vbley; His Book called, A
Vindication of the SCRIPTVRES and MINISTERS. His PRINCIPLES follows.
Pr. HE says, Christ directs to look for life in Scriptures, because they
testify of him; and that the Scriptures are the ground of Faith, and the
Saints rule. And again, We are justified by Christ without us, and not within
us. See his Epistle.

Ans. The Scriptures many had, and searched them, and found not life in them,
for Christ is the life; and if men have all the Scriptures, and have not
Christ, they have not life. And so Christ did not say they should have life in
Scriptures; but he says, they thought to have life there, and they testified
of him: And they would not come to him that they might have life. How ignorant
art thou of the Scriptures, and of Christ's words, to divide them on this
manner? And Christ is the Author of the Faith. And many if they have
Scriptures, they have not the ground of faith, until they have Christ the
Author of it, and God the giver of it, which is able to make wise unto
salvation through the faith which Christ is the Author of. For Enoch and Abel,
etc. had faith before the Scriptures was written, and so before thy ground was.
And the Saints had a rule before the Scriptures was written; for the spirit was
their rule that led them into all truth, and to speak forth Scriptures; that is
the rule that mortifies, circumciseth, baptizeth, and leads into all truth: The
Word of God that fulfills Scriptures, leads into all truth; that is the truth
that leads into all truth. Now the Scriptures cannot lead into all truth, but
it testifies of that that does so. And if Christ be not within people, they are
reprobates: And is a reprobate justified? And if Christ be within, is not the
Justification there, redemption and Sanctification witnessed, Christ the same
yesterday, to day, and for ever?

Pr. He says, We consider how few there be in the Church that belongs to God.
See his Epistle.

Answ. This is your own Church, which is not the pillar and ground of truth.
For who be in the Church of Christ, the pillar and ground of truth (where there
is not a spot nor wrinkle, nor blemish, nor any such thing) they are them that
belong to God; they are living stones built up together a spiritual household,
but this thou art afar off.

Pr. He says, We willingly acknowledge we are fallible men, that may be
deceived; and to find infallible Teachers is against experience. None pretends
infallibility but the Pope. See page 9. He says, The Scriptures is the Well,
and living Fountain from whence living waters have been drawn this hundred or
thousand years, page 8.

Answ. If every one that has the Scriptures has the fountain, has the Devil
the fountain? for he can bring Scriptures: Has he the Fountain and Well of
living waters? Nay we say, God and Christ is the fountain of all good: And
says David, all the springs are in him. And so many may have the Scriptures,
and yet want the waters, want the fountain; which has had them since the days
of the Apostles, which have had them this many hundreds of years in the
Apostasy, the sheeps clothing, and have known no other Fountain but it, nor no
other Well: So there has all the leanness of souls been among people, that
they have not known the Fountain of whom they learned that gave forth
Scriptures. And we do believe you that ye are fallible men, that say the
Scriptures is the well and fountain of living waters, and you are not
infallible. And it is contrary to your experience to be infallible: And we say
the Pope is not infallible neither, though he be your Father, the Ancient. Yet
we say, he and you are apostatized from the infallible spirit that the Apostles
was in, in which we are come, with which ye are seen and judged. So not to have
the spirit of Christ Jesus, not to have the spirit of the Prophets and
Apostles, not to be led by the spirit of truth into all truth; not to be in the
spirit, not to speak as ye are moved of the Holy Ghost. But to be such as
ravened from the spirit of God inwardly, and have gotten the sheeps clothing,
ye and the Pope, and so have devoured Nations for this many hundred years, so
have all been like ravening Wolves. For who witness these conditions that they
were in that gave forth the Scriptures, they witness infallibility, an
infallible spirit; which is now possessed and witnessed among those called
Quakers, glory to the highest for ever. That your folly now should be made
manifest, the morning is springing in, the night of apostasy is going. So I say
the Devil, false Prophets, Antichrists, Deceivers, Beast, mother of Harlots,
none of these can witness an infallible spirit, nor the Well nor Fountain, but
the Letter; though they may get all the sheeps clothing, and come in likeness
of a Lamb or a Sheep to deceive people withal. But being out of the spirit
that Christ, the Prophets and Apostles was in that gave forth Scriptures, they
are not infallible as they were; but with that they are all judged out, which
will answer that which they are all gone from where the key is known, and the
Well was, and is in believers.

Pr. And the Scriptures is the rule; and the Quakers dream of the Light to be
their Rule to walk by. Page 14.

Answ. The word of God which lives, and endures for ever (which came to the
Saints of old, which caused them to give forth Scriptures, and to write them)
which fulfills all the words again, is the Rule: which word was spoken to the
Saints before Scripture was written: which lets all people see that declaration
and fulfils that declaration to them, Christ the leader of the people, the
Covenant of God, who is the light and they are in the dreams that denies it.

Pr. He says, But Christ by his Magistrates has appointed Tithes a
maintenance for his Ministers. Page 21.

Answ. Since the days of the Apostles the Pope did give Tithes: and other
Magistrates that followed him: and he has had the tenths of the Tithes since
this night of apostasy, and the reprobation has been from the Apostles
Doctrine. And many have had the sheep clothing, but have been raveners from
the life that they lived in, that gave it forth: so have not seen to what
state, and condition the Scriptures was spoken from, and to; being out of the
life they was in, that gave it forth; And sees not the substance Christ Jesus
who came to end the first Priesthood, and the Ministers that took Tithes
tolerated by the first Covenant which the Apostle witnessed the end of, an
everlasting Covenant and another ministry, and another maintenance to them:
which since the days of the Apostles, such as are ravened from the spirit of
God, have lost the maintenance the Apostles and Christ gave; and so set up
another, Tithes and a ministry; which is neither agreeable to Jews, nor
Gentiles; nor Christ's, but more darker. But the night of apostasy is going
over, the true Light shines, and the light of the living springing in.

Pr. He says, The immediate spirit excludes the word to be the rule. Page 38.
And the word, and the spirit he says are different things; And the Pharisees
thought right, that eternal life was laid up in the Scriptures. Page 39.

Answ. Christ told the Pharisees they would not come to him that they might
have life: and he was the life, and he was the way, and no one comes to the
Father but by him: he does not say he was scripture, but he bids them search
it, for it testified of him: and no one has life but who are in him. And the
word, and the spirit are one: and the spirit does not exclude the word nor the
Scriptures for they was given forth from it, and ownes them again, with it are
they seen, given forth in time, fulfilled in time, cannot be broken, and the
Saints, life is hid in Christ who ends them.

Pr. He says, Men are saved but not by Christ within us. Page 42.

Ans. How is man's salvations wrought out, but by the power of Christ wihtin?
How is the old man destroyed, but by Christ within? How is the Justification
felt, but by Christ within? And the seed Christ made manifest that suffered
without; is made manifest within, there is redemption, and life. He that has
the Son of God, has life, redemption to God out of the first Adam, and who
feels Christ within feels salvation; and who does not are reprobates though
they may talk of him.

Pr. He says, It is a fond sign to depend upon an unwritten word immediately
within themselves: and say from that word is the life manifested within. Page
43, And Christ is not come to them in the flesh, and he says Timothy had the
gift of God freely; and Elders are called ordinarily, and not Immediately. This
call ordinary is common to all Ministers, to continue to all ages in the
Church. Page 47.

Ans. All they that have not the unwritten word in their hearts, which is
immediate, knows not the word of faith, knows not the word of reconciliation:
knows not the Ingrafted word that is able to save their souls, knows not that
which lives and abides and endures for ever; knows not eternal life, neither
have they it that has not the word, the immediate word within them; knows not
the immortal seed. And such be in the fondness, and have the Scripture and put
that for the word, which is words. And since the days of the Apostles in your
Churches; your Ministers, your Elders, your makers of your Ministers, have been
all mediate, and so it is ordinary as ye call it. But before the Apostasy, in
the days of the Apostles we say neither Elders, nor Ministers, was mediate: But
that which made the elders, was the Holy Ghost, to oversee; and that which
brought them to minister was immediate: and so they was Ministers of the
spirit, and all Elders made by the mediate, is carnal, earthly, and their
weapons are earthly, and their rule which they over-see withal is earthly.
Therefore has your Church broken into so many pieces: and they divide, and
cannot hold together like earth, because ye are not in an Immediate spirit. And
so we do see it is so since the days of the Apostles, neither your Elders nor
your teachers are called Immediately. But only have the sheep clothing,
ravened from the spirit of God. And so are the wolves tearing one another to
pieces about the letter, and your apprehensions of it. And Timothy, which many
of you say had not an immediate call, and yet thou says, he had the gift of
God. Does not that which God gives to men, bring to do his will? And that which
is given from God to man, is not that immediate, and perfect? And we do believe
you, ye do not witness that ye are of his flesh, and of his bone, that ye have
not eaten it, nor drunk his blood: therefore do you say the Scriptures is the
fountain of life, and have been this hundreds or thousand years, which the
Pharisees had Scriptures in their ages, and had not life: ye have had the
Scriptures which ye call the well and fountain of life many hundreds, or
thousand years; yet though you and the Pharisees have all Scriptures, except ye
do eat the flesh of Christ, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you,
neither you, nor the Pharisees; which flesh is our food, and blood is our
drink, which we do believe you, this many hundred of years ye have not eaten
his flesh, nor drank his blood: and so are not of his flesh, nor of his bone;
therefore cry ye so much against immediate, and infallibility.

Pr. He says, The holiest man that is, is not able to give an infallible
Character of another man. Page 49. we do grant, that our Ministers came from
Antichrist, and past through him. And he charge people for leaving their
callings: and say that the Quakers are like to them that fly from the wrath to
come.

Answ. We do believe that your Ministers came from Antichrist, and through
Antichrist, for he was the Channel; But the Quakers are neither of you, nor of
Antichrist, nor of the Pope: but they are of the Apostles stock, and of
Abraham, and of Christ before the Pope was, Antichrist was, or you was and so
with the spirit of God and the Apostles you are fathomed. And the Quakers do
witness they are made free from the wrath to come, which the Pharisees did not
that fled to John. And there thy measure is too short; all may see it that be
in the light, and thy ignorance of the Scriptures thou have discovered and
showed, and thou says that the holiest man is not able to give an infallible
Character of another man: have not thou in this discovered thy self to be no
Minister of Christ or of the spirit? who cannot give an infallible Character of
another man, how can thou minister to his condition? how can thou see where
he is? how can thou see them that be turned from the darkness? and that be in
the darkness, and distinguish the one from the other, and a holy man, from an
unholy man, that can not give an infallible Character of any man's state? How
can thou know when men be in the spirit; and that they are Epistles written
in one another hearts; not with paper and ink, but with the spirit of the
living God? oh a divider of the word aright has been wanting among you dark
ones, thou may say right enough, your Ministers came from Antichrist, and
through Antichrist; And did not the Saints leave their callings?

Pr. He says, It is a fancy to witness the righteousness of Christ within us.
Page. 61. and to maintain persecution, he brings Ahabs slaying the false
Prophets, and for the laying on of hands, he brings the practice of the
Apostles. And to stop the liberty of conscience, he says must Saul be
permitted to do what he will against Jesus of Nazareth?

Answ. False Prophets are enemies, yet they are not to slay them; now the
Apostles did not wrestle against the flesh and the blood, with the false
Prophets, at you Ministers do now; though Saul did before he was Paul, and
showed himself of your nature you be now in unconverted; And who ever be not in
that state to witness Christ in them manifest in their flesh: and there
condemning sin in the flesh; that they may through him become the righteousness
of God; they be in their fancies: And Christ destroys the ground of all fancy,
and brings to see where there is no shadow nor changing, and brings their
conscience into liberty, and washes it and sprinckling it, where the Ministry
of faith is held in it. And your laying on of hands, (since the apostasy from
the Apostles) is not as the Apostles, who have not an infallible spirit, nor
are infallible, (nor called immediately) as they were; none of them you lay on
your hands can receive the Holy Ghost, who you your selves are not in the
immediate spirit, nor infallible, nor called immediately. So all in the
apostasy is from the Apostles hands, and calling; your folly is made manifest,
the light has discovered you, at which ye are stumbling; and every one is
wrestling against the Lamb, and the Saints that are wrestling against the
Light: and such are Antichrists that shall be slain with the sword, the words
of his mouth: and the Lamb, and the Saints shall have the victory.

Pr. He says humane learning helps to understand heavenly things. Page 70.
Again Christ inlightens men no more ways but one, to wit by a natural light.
Page 71. And the righteousness within is not that which justifies, and we are
not freely justified, and saved, and redeemed (that is) through that
Redemption, and righteousness that is within us. Page 74. 75. He says, We are
justified freely, but not by the grace wrought in us.

Answ. By grace ye are saved and that not of your selves, is is the gift of
God; and this in the heart manifested before it be known, and possessed. And
every one that knows Justification, Redemption, righteousness and salvation,
this is all known within us, else people be in the first Adam, drove from God,
not come to the second Adam, not knowing salvation in the ground, Justification
in the ground, Redemption in the ground. If Christ the righteousness of God,
Redemption, Justification, and salvation, the righteousness be not felt within,
and found within, they are Reprobates. And the Reprobates may talk of it
without; but where that is, there is salvation, righteousness, Redemption,
Justification, etc. And Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the
world him by whom the world was made before it was made, which light people are
to believe in; which is not natural: which gives to see over the nature, before
the natural was? for the natural lights are the Sun, the Moon, and Stars which
may be seen with a visible eye: which Christ the light, the Covenant of light
to Jews and Gentiles, the salvation to the ends of the earth, which does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, that all men through him might
believe. Here is God no respector of persons; he that believes in the light,
shall be saved: and he that does not, is condemned. And he comes to be a Child
of light, who believes in the light: and now shall the world be reproved, for
not believing in the light, and humane learning is that which is earthly, and
natural; that does not open the heavenly: that which reveals the things of
God, is the Spirit of God, beyond all the worlds wisdom. For that you call
humane learning, and humane soul, and humane body, is earthly, not heavenly,
nor understands them. The earth is below, so they that are of the earth, and
they that is from above speak of the things above, and so they that are below
measure by the earthly wisdom below, and so that which gives to understand the
heavenly things, is the spirit of God and the spiritual wisdom; which is not of
man, nor from man; for says the Apostle neither knows any man the things of
God, but the Spirit of God.

Pr. And the righteousness of Christ by which we are justified (he says) is
not within us: Again the Lord will pour out his Spirit upon all flesh; but
that is not meant that all should have the spirit, for some have not the
spirit, as in Jude. Page 79. He says he desires God to lighten with a better
light then that which lightens every man, etc. and to lead them out of these
gross delusions. See page 80.

Answ. You that are not justified by that Christ that suffered without,
manifested within you shall never know Justification; if the Justification be
not within, you are reprobates. And the Lord has fulfilled his promise, by
pouring out his spirit upon all flesh, Sons, and Daughters, handmaids, old men
though they quench it: And they in Jude, prove they had the spirit which went
in Balaams, Cores, and Cains way, but they erred from it; where you are in the
sensual state, in the sects, and seeing not the promise of the Father pouring
out of the spirit upon all flesh, Apostatized out of the life the Apostles was
in, and the Prophets; manifest your selves to the whole world. And so you that
ownes not the Light Christ Jesus that God sent into the world, and gave his
only begotten Son into the world, which does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, that all through him might believe: but thou that desires a
better light of God then he, (to wit, Christ) shows thy tempting, and
Blasphmy. For there is no other way to the Father but by Christ the Light of
the world, that does enlighten every one, etc. and he that does not believe in
that light is condemned.

Pr. He says, And Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
that is meant the Church. See Postscript. Paul and Peter instructed by
immediate Revelation, which we are not so presumptuous as to expect. And he
says, Reproaches are cast upon the Ministers, because they are not infallible,
and preach not by immediate inspiration as the Apostles did. Postscript.

Ans. You that do not instruct and preach by the same immediate infallible
spirit as the Prophets and Apostles was in, you be all in an usurped authority,
out of the spirit, run, and not sent from God: For whom God sends, he sends
immediately; and teaches, he teaches immediately, and they know his
infallible spirit. And none knows the Scriptures of Truth of you all since the
days of the Apostles in this night of apostasy; but who are in the infallible
spirit, and immediate, which the Prop^ets and Apostles was in, which you from
it are gone forth, and it is presumption in you to teach without it. And so you
are not reproached, nor the Pope that are the false Prophets, and Antichrists
that Christ said should come, and the Apostle John saw was come, that inwardly
ravened, and have gotten the sheeps clothing, have the form, but deny the
power; who deny infallibility, and the immediate call, and the immediate
Ministry, have denied the power of God, and so keeps people always learning,
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth, in the usurped authority,
which the Apostles stopped and rebuked before his decease: And so you do not see
the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which
Christ faith, I am the light of the world, not of Saints only. And says the
Prophet, I will give him for a Covenant to the Gentiles, not a new Covenant to
the house of Israel only; and there he was prophesied of before John came, the
greatest Prophet who was born of a woman, who said, This is the true light that
does enlighten every man, etc. And when Christ was come, he said he was the
light of the world: And whosoever did believe in him, should not abide in
darkness, but should have the light of life. And so since ye ravened from the
spirit of God, and have only had the sheeps clothing; ye have brought people
upon heaps and Sects: and they that be not in the infallible, are they that
reproach; for they be in the reproachful spirit, which the spirit of God never
did, which was immediate and infallible, which the Prophets, Christ, and the
Apostles were in, which always judged the reproachers, which was from the
infallible spirit.

Pr. And thou says, To the Law, and to the Testimony: and how that he gave
some Apostles for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry,
for the edifying of the body, till all come into the unity of the faith, to the
knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature
and fullness of Christ.

Answ. Thou, and you all that have denied infallibility and immediate
inspiration and teaching, have shut your selves out of the Law and Testimony,
and the work of the Ministry, which is for the perfecting of the body, and
bringing them to the unity of the faith, to the knowledge of the Son of God,
etc. For the Law is light, that is infallible and immediate. The testimony of
Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, that is infallible and immediate. And ye may
have the Old and New Testament, and say that is the Law and Testimony; which
the Law and Testimony was before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Acts, the
Epistles, and the Revelations was written in the days of Isaiah, see Isa. 8
chap. And that which perfects the Saints is infallible; that gift which was
given to the Ministry is infallible and immediate; that which edifies the body
of Christ is infallible and immediate; that which brings to the knowledge of
the Son of God, is infallible, perfect, and immediate; that which brings to a
perfect man, to the unity of the faith, is infallible and immediate, and
perfect; that which brings to the measure of the stature of the fullness of
Christ, is perfect, and infallible, and immediate. And the infallible and
immediate you having denied, ye have shut your selves out of the work of the
Ministry in the Apostasy.

As for the rest of the lies and slanders in thy Book, will be thy own burden,
which utters forth thy own folly, and it touches not the Saints, but falls
off like dust, they are of no weight. And the day is come that tries men's works
infallibly, what is for the fire, and what not.

Jeremiah Ives, His Book called, The Quakers Quaking. His Principles follows,
etc.
Pr. HE says, Have a care of slighting your watchmen, lest the Lord remove
them into corners.

Answ. Christ the Teacher is witnessed, who is the end of Moses, the Prophets,
the Covenant of God with his people, in which people know God if all their
Teachers were removed into corners. And they that have their Teachers in
corners, their houses are left desolate, from the Covenant of God they are
strangers. So in this thy ignorance appears of that Teacher that cannot be
removed into a corner, who is the salvation to the ends of the ear^h.

Pr. He says, It is an error to say the Light within is equal with
Scripture, and Gods Word.

Ans. Christ within is the Light (and he is above Scripture) and Gods Word
which was before Scriptures was given forth.

Pr. He says, Is it any more a Nickname to call a man a Quaker that quakes by
the power of God? page 3.

Answ. Yes, if the power of God does make that to quake and tremble, that must
quake before the salvation be wrought out, and man come out of the Fall of
Adams state in the transgression in the earth, and darkness, corruption, and
pollution, and death, he must know the power of God that shakes that which is
to be shaken, before he knows that raised up that cannot be shaken; which the
world is ignorant of, though they have the form of it. And the first nick-namer
of the Quakers that ever I heard was a corrupt Justice in the year 1650, whose
name was Gervase Bennet in Darby, that ever named the people of God with the
name of Quakers, though the mighty power of the Lord God had been known years
before.

Pr. He says, It is an error in those men that will allow nothing to be
called Gods Word but Christ, page 6.

Ans. Christ's name is called the Word of God; his name is above every name, and
over all things he must have the pre-eminence, words and names. Yet I say, the
Scriptures of truth given forth from the spirit of truth are the words of God:
Gods words which Christ the Word fulfilled by him in whom they end, who was
before the words was spoken forth.

Pr. He says, It is an error to say they are immediately sent of God, and to
have an immediate call from God to go out of their Countries to preach the
Gospel, etc. Page 9.

Answ. Thou, and all you that speak, or preach, or go to people, but not by the
immediate spirit, and a call from God, are them that run and the Lord never
sent you; and you profit not the people at all, as all the fruits in the Nation
declares upon the house top. Therefore are ye wrangling, and envying such as
are immediately sent from God, and left their Callings as the Saints did, and
Prophets. I say none can preach the Gospel upon the earth, but who is in the
immediate call; for the Gospel is the power of God, and that is immediate. The
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles which gave forth the Scriptures, they all
spoke by the immediate spirit of God: and all that be not in that, they are not
able to know the Scriptures, as that unsavory Pearsival says, he has not the
infallible spirit; yet he will bawl of the Scrip^ur^^ that was given forth from
the infallible spirit. Though the Devil wandered from ^^e tr^th that
compasses the earth; though the Pharisees compass Sea and Land; th^ugh the
false Prophets and Antichrists have gone over Nations: Now all these may get
Scriptures, but be out of the life of them: Such makes Proselytes, Devils
Disciples, and Messengers: But such as be in the power of God, and life that
gave forth Scriptures, that comprehends and fathoms the world, they are in that
which the Devils, Antichrists, false Prophets, mother of Harlots, and all their
proselytes that have Scriptures out of the life, they be in that which they are
all out of: Such are the Quakers, therefore does all the world rage against
them, who witness that which cannot be shaken.

Pr. He says, It is an Error to say that every man has a light within him,
that will teach him to worship God aright, page 18.

Answ. Christ the truth who has pre-eminence does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, which shall make every tongue to confess him to the
glory of God; which if they love the light which comes from Christ the truth,
who is the life, it will teach and direct every man to worship God in the
truth, in that which untruth is out of. So every man having a light sufficient
to salvation, for it comes from the salvation; Christ the power of God, the
salvation to the ends of the earth. And this light will let every one see the
Son of God beyond all external means, wisdom, knowledge whatsoever. It is
that which darkness cannot comprehend, this light which John bears witness
of, which is the true light which lights every man that comes into the
world, which the Jews and Levites stumbled at, which set all Jerusalem up in
an uproar, as it does, the wisest Priests and Professors in this age. And no
one upon the earth shall ever know Christ but by the light which he has
enlightened him withal. If he have all the Scriptures that speaks of him come
already, as the Pharisees had, that spoke he was to come; yet if they hate the
light, they shall all be snared, and stumble, and fall, and split themselves
upon the Rock. And such as are now stumbling at the light which every man that
comes into the world is lighted withal, are the builders with the words,
which says, Christ is come, as the Pharisees did with the words, that said, he
was to come: And so both these builders reject the cornerstone, and stumble at
the elect stone laid in Sion; and none sees God but with the light they be
enlightened withal. And all the preaching of the Apostles, the substance of it
was to bring people to the Covenant of Light, both Jews and Gentiles, to whom
he was promised: And all upon the earth that be from this light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, they be in the error, out of
the Covenant of God, and strangers from the covenant of promise.

Prin. He says, It is an Error to say, the letter of Scripture is carnal,
page 22.

Answ. The letter of Scripture (paper and ink) we cannot say it is spiritual;
but that which it speaks of is spiritual.

Pr. He says, It is an error to say they are perfect, and without sin, page
23. And another error to say, that none can come to God and Christ, but they
that come to perfection.

Ans. Whoever comes to Christ, and comes to God, he comes in the one offering
which has perfected for ever them that are sanctified, and who ever comes to
Christ, comes to him that is perfect; and without holiness none can see him:
And they that pretend coming to God and Christ out of perfection, they be in
the error, and all sin is error, and who be in it be in the error; which the
Apostle said, that they were made free from sin, and had put off the body of
sin, and by the blood of Christ was cleansed from all sin; and by one offering
he had perfected for ever them that are sanctified. And so they that say men
must have sin while they be upon the earth, and that plead for it, they are not
the friends of Christ. For who are the friends of Christ, be in his power, a
top of the power of sin, trample it under foot.

Pr. He says, That the Scripture is the Word. And though Christ be the true
light that lights every man that comes into the world, yet that light in
every man does not direct a man into the worship and service of God, though it
be the true light of Christ, page 35.

Answ. Nothing can direct men into the worship and service of God but the true
light; for the light is that which does let them see, and is that which does
make manifest, which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal; which he hating it, and not come to it, because his deeds be evil,
that will be his condemnation. And that thou shall feel it heavy at the last,
though now thou may roar and rage for a time, yet the bond is gone over thee,
the Chain is set, and the sentence is given.

Pr. He says, It is an error of such as leave Water-Baptisme, and breaking of
Bread, page 38.

Ans. Does not the Apostle bring people off of those things that are seen? And
is not outward water, and outward bread the things that are seen? And are not
these things temporal? though these things in their places and service is
owned. But who comes into the baptism of the spirit, they come into the one,
in which all the other ends, the greater. For there was many come to John; but
when they should have come to receive Christ the Light, which does enlighten
every man, etc. they stood against him, as you do now. And Christ told them
they received honor one of another, as you do now (a mark of the unbeliever)
and the love of God was not in them, and the Word of God was not abiding in
them; and they had never heard the voice of God, nor seen his shape at any
time. And there are you like unto the Jews, whose Table is a trap, sticking in
the outward things, standing against the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, and so stumbling at the Cornerstone, elect and
precious: But it is fallen upon your heads, and will grind you to powder,
fight, bustle, and do all all that ever you can do, it is upon you, and all
your complements will do you no good. And none seeks the honor that comes from
above, but who be in the light that does enlighten every man, etc. And none
honors the Son, but who be in the light that comes from him though they have
all the Scriptures as the Pharisees had in their age.

Pr. He says, Error in life does not prove error in judgment, page 46.

Answ. Who erres in the life, erres in the judgment: For all that erres in the
judgment, they are from the life, from it erred. And all the Pharisees that had
Scriptures; yet from the life being erred, they all erred in their judgment,
and knew not Christ the substance of Scriptures: So all you that be in error
in life, you err in your judgment, you all stumble at the light with which
Christ does enlighten every man, etc. And none be out of the error of life,
but who be in the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, and out of the error of conversation.

Pr. He says, That the Quakers foam at the mouth, etc.

Ans. It Is a shame that ever men should lose their soberness, and come to be a
shame to all modesty; that so many that do call themselves Teachers in this
Nation, should publish such odious lies and untruths to the Nation: And how the
Quakers have hung Ribbons upon one another, and given Ribbons to one another,
as instance G. F. should have from M, F. Oh! that ever modesty should be so
lost, and shamefastness quite gone, which should have been a garment to have
covered impudency. That ever men, and Teachers of people, and professors should
make lies their refuge: But I say, the Lord forgive you, for all these things
shall be your own burden; and a heavy burden is come upon you, and coming
upon you all in the Nation that trusts in lies. But what if you should see
every man with his hand on his thigh, in pain to be delivered.

Pr. He says, The Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my name, and I
have not commanded him to speak he shall dye. See page 26.

Ans. Here thou have brought thy self, and you all under thy own judgment,
and given sentence upon your selves, and all the rest of the Teachers, that say
they never heard the voice of God immediately from heaven, nor immediate
inspiration, nor revelation: So ye all want the spirit of God, and are out of
it that the Prophets and Apostles were in, and with it all judged. Though ye
may run in pretense of his name (with the form) and say ye never heard his
voice, but that Prophet shall dye thou says. So thou have judged your selves,
and there be all you Teachers in the apostasy since the days of the Apostles.

Pr. And Christ said, many deceivers should come in his name, and deceive many:
and such as serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies. And with
good words, and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. See Title page.

Answ. Christ said in Matthew. 24. and in Matthew. 7. that false Prophets should
come, and Antichrists, which before the Apostles decease they saw them then
come; and such as served not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies; which
went forth from the Apostles, which in the Revelation, John saw the whole world
gone after them, and those got the sheeps clothing; and so with the good words
and fair speeches deceive, who was inwardly ravened from the light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, and such have good words, and
fair speeches, but deceive the hearts of the simple: And gather people into
forms and heaps, and sects, and ways, and opinions one against another, which
are nothing but the Beast and his names, and all against the light that does
enlighten every man, etc. and so are making war against the Saints of the Lamb;
but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory, who will slay with his
sword, the words of his mouth: And judgment is come through unto victory, and
set in the earth: And so the Deceivers and Antichrists are telling people, now
is the last times; now are they come, and bidding them come to Matthew. 7. and
Matthew. 24. which indeed Christ did say they should come; but John said they was
come, whereby they knew it was the last time: And in the Revelations he says,
That all Nations have drunk the Whores cup, and the Kings of the earth have
committed fornication with her, and the Inhabitants of the earth are drunk with
the wine of her fornication; and the earth is corrupted, as ye make it appear,
your fruits declare it. And this is that which has brought the Nations to
waters, and Peoples to waters, and Tongues to waters, and Multitudes to waters,
which ravened inwardly from the spirit of God, yet have gotten the sheeps
clothing to deceive the Nations. Such as drunk the blood of the Saints, the
Prophets and Martyrs, did make war against the Saints, and overcame them: But
now the Saints and the Lamb have the victory, glory to the Highest: And to that
which they ravened from, are people now come.

William Dell's Book, called, A Stumbling Stone. His PRINCIPLES follows.
Pr. HE says, The carnal Church is a great enemy to Christ's Church: And they
are offended at Christ, because in him there was no humane nor earthly thing,
page 13. He says, It is the greatest error that raigns under Antichrists
Kingdom, to affirm that the Universities is the foundation of Ministers. And
Peter undoubtedly taxes the Universities, with such men to be false Doctors,
false Prophets, out of which proceeds all the Teachers in the world in their
Towns and Cities, under the whole Kingdom of Antichrist, which have such
Doctors and Teachers in the University for the whole world, page 27.

Answ. The rest of the Priests and Teachers which are come from the
Universities, and such as have set up themselves to be Teachers (as in this
book ye may see) They say that Christ in heaven has a humane body, and others
say that he has a humane soul; and thou says there is no humane or earthly
thing in him. And for as much as thy saying it is the greatest error under
Antichrists Kingdom, to say the Universities is the fountains of Ministers.
That is a true word; it will be well for thee if thou be not caught in this
fountain among these errors, maintaining of them; for such are they that quench
the spirit, and speaks the Scriptures in that spirit which came not by it.
And these are them that have deceived the whole world: And all such as make
Ministers in their wills, quench the spirit, limits the holy one, despises
prophesying, makes a trade of Scriptures, which came not by the will of man,
for the satisfying of their own wills. And happy would Dell have been, if he
had lived in what he spoke.

Gyles Fermin called Pastor of the Church at Shalfor in Essex his Book called,
Stablishing against Shaking. His Principles are as follows, etc.
Pr. HE says take away learning, and England becomes a dunghill.

Ans. Peter, and John was unlearned men, yet was no dunghill.

Pr. He says true teachers pleads hard for their peoples ears. The Quakers say
we are not Ministers, because we Preach for hire, and are covetous and divine
for money; and the Apostles took wages, and maintenance, and says they eat, and
drunk, etc. and he says the Lord did ever be team^ his Ministers honorable
wages. Page 5. and he says the labourer is worthy of his hire. Page 6.

Answ. When the Apostle speaks of taking wages, of eating and drinking to them
that examined him, he speaks this among the Saints, gathered out of the world,
from among Jews, and Gentiles. This was not spoken to such as held up Temples
Tithes, and Priests, but a gathered separated people from them. And the Gospel
they Preached, the power of God, it opened the hearts of the people to give
unto them, and not by an outward Law. And the great work of the Apostles was
not to wrangle about their maintenance, as it is the great work of the
Ministers now, (in the world made by men) in our age: and such as do Divine for
money, and prophecy for money, And hire, was ever looked upon to be the false
Prophets wages without the spirit of God that gave forth the Scriptures, and
the false spirits in the earth; for the Spirit of God would never value, equal,
or measure his gift with the earthly things And when the Apostle speaks of
the labourer, is worthy of his hire, he says who goes a warfare at his own
charge; and they that was taught, they was to communicate every good thing to
them, this still was spoken among the Saints this was not spoken in Temples,
and Synagogues, and them that took Tithes; for those was warred against by them
that was in the substance: and the warfare was to bring people to the
substance; out of the first Adam, to the second; and out of the shadows. And
that whereby the Ministers had the double honor, it was in the life, and in
the power: such as measured not a gift with earthly things; which brought them
to lay down all their estates at the Apostles feet; which was more then Tithes.
But this Gospel we see not among you, nor this power, the power of God; neither
Preachers, nor hearers? and the Apostles did not bid the Gentiles, nor the
Jews that was in their forms and inventions, and traditions, that had Elders
among them; he did not bid the people obey them that had rule over them: but
they brought them from under those Rulers, from those Elders to Christ the
substance the Elder Brother; and so who was in the life grown more then
another, was the Elder; and he watched over the weak. And it does make it
manifest that you never received the gift of God whose work is thus to Jangle
for outward things. For the gift of God which is perfect, would break through
the unperfect, and raise up the witness to give freely.

Pr. He says, No man can be a good text man unless he have attained to the
Languages which has cost us so much; and he cannot know the errors but by
learning. And he says he may thus speak for the necessity of Arts without
which men cannot be sufficient Ministers.

Answ. None knows, nor is made Ministers of Christ by Arts, nor by Languages;
let them get all the Languages upon the earth, they are still but naturalists;
and men learning another man's natural Language; and he has learned but that
which is natural and he knows but that which is natural; what another natural
man can speak, and all their Arts is there. Now that which makes a Minister of
Christ is beyond the natural: yea, all the natural Languages upon the earth;
and sees before they was: let it cost them never so much, yea gold, and
silver, a wedge of gold and silver to get naturals and the most precious things
upon the earth, cannot purchase, nor make a Minister of Christ, that which
makes them is the Spirit of God, nor none knows the Scriptures but with the
Spirit of God, given forth from the Spirit of God. Nor none knows the errors
but by the Spirit of God. Now if all men upon the earth have Scriptures, in
every one of their natural Languages: yet none of these knows the errors, nor
none of these knows the Scriptures without, the Spirit of God from which they
was given forth.

Pr. He says, If the Magistrates could find out any other way for maintenance
for Ministers, they would part with tithes, which have been this many hundreds
of years. Page 9. And there is many Ministers will not take their Tithes but
they compound with the people for their Tithes. And we dare not trust the
people for maintenance. But we see care has been taken for us many many
hundred years before we were born, etc. Page 10. And why does not the Quakers
charge us with idleness, as well as with taking wages.

Answ. Are ye not all a company of idle fellows, bred up at School in the
filthiness of the earth, pride, and filth: and when ye come out ye raven after
great Benefices, and troubling Parishes, and stirring up the people to envy
against one another, like a company of madmen, and suing, and hailing people
up and down to Courts for maintenance; Are not these the works of belly-gods?
And is the Magistrate the Lord of the vineyard that he must allot Ministers
maintenance and the laborers? Has not Christ told his Ministers what they
must have already? And was not the Apostles to go forth without any thing, and
to trust the Lord, and the people, which you dare not trust them? And trust to
the Gospel, which ye dare not trust the Gospel to maintain you? but you have a
set Benefice, or augmentation, or a Magistrates power to give you maintenance
before you go out to a Parish; Oh how are ye biting, and devouring one another
for such things as was not accounted of or, esteemed among the Saints, who
suffered joyfully the spoiling of their goods, by such devourers as you are!
And is that your deceit to compound with people for their Tithes? and is that
your cloak then to say you do not take Tithes? and since the days of the
Apostles in the apostasy: since the power of God the Gospel has been lost
(has tithes been set up) which men should have Preached and lived on. So you
that have had the form of godliness, denied the power, (the Gospel) ravened
from the life of God: your Gospel will not maintain you; and ye cry help
Magistrate, help Law, cast into prison, summon up to Courts and this has been
your work for many hundred years for maintenance. And so all sober men that
stands and looks on are ashamed of you. Thus the poor people are deceived with
your false covers, wolvish spirits, you have gotten the sheep clothing upon
your backs: but now is the vials, and hail storms fallen upon your heads, which
makes many of you gnaw your tongues, and now is the thunders coming out and
plagues which makes many of you free your selves.

Pr. He says, False Apostles and deceitful workers, and Satan transforming
himself into an Angel of light, etc. Page 11.

Answ. Christ said false prophets, Antichrists the inwardly ravenors in the
sheep clothing should come, the Apostles saw they was come before their
decease, which was devouring, as most of the Epistles declare of them, the
Apostles saw them before their decease: that made a prey upon the Saints; that
served not the Lord Jesus Christ but their own bellies, now since the days of
the Apostles has the world run after them; and they have devoured the world,
and they have gotten the sheep clothing upon their backs: therefore have ye
deceived the world. Now you have been the skirts, and the suburbs of this great
City; the day has declared you, your City is besieged, and the Lamb and the
Saints have conquered it: by whom the Saints have been slain, and their blood
drunk? In which City has a trumpet sounded, and the piping has been and the
mourners have gone about the City. But now is come Lamentation, desolation, and
woe to her, and all her Merchandise, that has builded up, and thrown down:
whereby the world is brought into confusion, the faith and truth, and life; and
love being reprobated out of, and from that the Saints was in, that gave forth
the Scriptures; that which the Apostles saw coming in before their decease,
which Christ said should come, has ruled, and reigned since their decease,
until this day, that Christ has come and made it manifest.

Pr. He says the devil could not do mischief in the Church where the candle is
burning, and light shining: but he gets on his garb: and the weakest of
children are carried about with every wind of Doctrine. page 17. He says the
prince of darkness is transformed into an Angel of light, he walks in the
Churches. page 18.

Answ. The Church of Christ is the pillar, and ground of truth, which truth,
the Devil is out of, and abode not in it: he walks on the out side, and is not
in the Church, and so children thou knows not, that are heirs of the Kingdom
of Christ and are of his Church, the pillar, and ground of truth. And the
devil, and false prophets, and mother of harlots; though they have all the
sheep clothing; yet cannot get into the Church where the candle is, and the
burning shining light: with all his Garb as thou calls it. Let the whore be
arrayed never so gorgiously, who has ravened from the spirit of God, that's the
Church, the pillar, and ground of truth that be in the spirit of God, the
Candle is burning, and light shining; this the whore, and the Devil, and the
wolves, and the false prophets, and Antichrists, and beast, is out of raging on
the outside, in the earth? so the Church is the pillar and ground of truth, the
Church of Christ and here the elect is known that cannot be deceived. And the
Devil, and the Prince of darkness, though he transform himself into an Angel of
light: yet he does not walk in the Church for the Church is in God, the pillar,
and ground of truth, and out of that he is, and all his Apostles, and his
messengers and truth is a top of him, and them all, and with it are shut out.

Pr. He says honor is the expressing of the inward respect that we hear to
persons, and many Scriptures he brings for bowing and for master, page 23. and
so stumbles at thee, and thou.

Ans. Which shows he never learned his accidence, or Bible and is a
transgressor of Christ's commands, who says be ye not of men called master for
ye have one master even Christ and ye are all Brethren; and a transgressor of
the Law, which they that respects persons commits sin, and are convinced of the
Law as transgressors, and reprobate concerning the faith which is held without
the respect of persons. And though they bowed in the old time: several that
bowed before the Angels: yet Christ is come by whom all things was made, the
salvation to the ends of the earth; to whom powers, principalities, Thrones,
and dominions must be subject: to whom Angels, and Thrones must bow; yea things
in heaven, and things in earth, and every tongue confess him to the glory of
God, and every knee bow and there people comes into the unity, and there they
hold the head.

Pr. He says the Quakers light teaches to forsake the Scriptures; and set up
a spirit in man, which will not be examined by Scriptures. page 26.

Answ. This is he which is out of the truth, speaks it: for the Quakers have
not received the spirit of the world, but the spirit of God; by which they know
the things which are freely given of God, and know the Scriptures given forth
from the spirit of God: and with the same spirit the Scriptures is owned again.

Pr. He says, Paul swore after Christ, and the Angels swore, page 27.

He says, I wonder Paul should so forget himself, and sin so fearfully in
swearing, etc. So the Quakers light that denies swearing, is of Satan, and not
the light of Christ, page 28.

Answ. Christ the Light (which Satan is out of) who is the oath of God, ends
all oaths sworn by Prophets or Angels whatsoever: And who swears be fallen into
the condemnation of the Devil; and it is no where said that the Apostle swore;
but such as thou art, matters not what thou speaks. So that spirit that
preaches for swearing is not the spirit of Christ, but is the spirit of
Antichrist, preaches up that which Christ and the Apostles preached down, and
preached Condemnation to them that did swear.

Pr. He says, The light in the conscience that takes them from the Law of God,
is the light of Satan.

Answ. The light Christ in the conscience is the end of the Law for
righteousness sake: And that which keeps men from that which does end the Law,
is not the Doctrine of the true Apostles, but the false.

And the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which
is the substance, leads men off of all types, and figures, and signs: who
comes to enjoy him, enjoys the end: who comes off of all outward Elements, as
Bread and Wine, and such things, to the substance it self, to look at things
that are not seen. For things that are seen are temporal, but the things that
are not seen are eternal.

Pr. He speaks of a new creature distinct from Christ, and says while we live
sin lives. And says, I deny that the righteousness of Christ whereby a
believer is justified, does dwell in him, page 36.

Answ. Is not the new creature in Christ? He that is in Christ is a new
creature, and is not distinct from him, and how have thou divided the word
here? And Christ is justification, sanctification, and wisdom, and
righteousness; and if he be not within ye, ye are Reprobates: And where Christ
is, he is not without righteousness. Therefore they are not without
righteousness, and wisdom, Justification, and Sanctification, if Christ be
within, that is within; for where he is, that is not wanting: And the Apostle
said they were made free from sin: And let not sin have dominion over your
mortal bodies; mind, mortal bodies which sin was not to have dominion over:
And old things pass away, and all things become new. Sin is an old thing, from
the old deceiver: So while any sin is standing, all things is not made new, and
sin has its dominion.

Pr. He says, He has not read where a believer dwells in Christ's
righteousness, page 37.

Answ. Every believer that is true is born of God; and he that is born of God
does not commit sin: And he that dwells in Christ, dwells in righteousness, and
truth is that which sin and the Devil is out of, which blots out sin and
transgression, where the body of it comes to be put off.

Pr. And the light which teaches men to say they have no sin, is of Satan. And
says, The Quakers light teaches them to deny prayer.

Answ. The Apostles light taught them to say they were made free from sin, they
had put off the body of sin, and their sin and transgression was blotted out.
Little children their sins was forgiven them that walked in the light, the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses them from all sin, taught them to know the
says that gave them victory over the world, that purified their hearts held in
a pure conscience. And this is the Quakers light which teaches them the path
of the Apostles; and it teaches men to be holy, as God as holy, and perfect,
as he is perfect. This was the light of Christ, and bid them to be as Christ
is, and said, as he is, so are we in this present world. And the light that
guides the Quakers does not teach them to deny prayer, but brings them to pray
aright with the spirit, and with the understanding; which all prayers without
it be in the hypocrisy.

Pr. He says, We acknowledge there is a thousand of perfect men in England, as
perfect as children tossed too and fro, page 40. But he says, I deny that any
man has that perfect knowledge of Christ in this life, etc.

Answ. Christ is in you except ye be reprobates. And the Scripture speaks of
such as had both the Son and the Father. And all those children that are tossed
too and fro, and are carried about with the windy doctrine, which has gotten
up in the apostasy since the days of the Apostles, that are ravened from the
spirit of God: Such their doctrines are windy, and does not settle, nor does
not perfect, not does not bring into the unity of the faith, nor the knowledge
of the Son of God, the faith that gives the victory; nor to a perfect man, nor
to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ, which was the work of
the true Ministry which was before the Apostasy. Nor none comes to the knowledge
of Christ but by the light.

Pr. He says, The Church teaches to pray without ceasing; but you bid stay
till the spirit moves us, etc.

Ans. The Church (prays not without the spirit) which is the pillar and ground
of truth. And such as prays without the spirit, prays without understanding.
And they that pray as the spirit does move them, they know what they ought to
pray for. So every man that comes into the world, being in the light that
lights every man, it will direct him to pray, and to pray aright, and to ask
in the name of Christ, who is the way to the Father.

Prin. He says, The Children of GOD never assumed to themselves an infallible
spirit.

Ans. Did not the Apostles say, they that had not the spirit of Christ were
none of his? and was not that infallible? And was not all the Scriptures given
forth from the spirit of God, and is not that infallible?

Pr. The spirit of Christ is a spirit of wisdom, and a rational spirit. The
light that brags of an infallible spirit, and cannot speak sense nor reason,
is the spirit of Satan, page 46.

Answ. The spirit of Christ that was in the Apostles, which led them to speak
to the world, who was in their own wisdom, knowledge, and understanding. It was
foolishness always judged with that wisdom, knowledge, and understanding; for
they ministered to the spirits in prison. And Christ the Covenant of God which
was promised to come, and should say to the prisoners, show your selves forth,
who was accounted as a mad man by the wise Jews; and the Apostles and Prophets
likewise was as fools. Was not ever the Saints judged by the world to be (by
the sense and reason) but just like mad men, and fools? Christ a mad man? the
Prophets fools? and the Apostles mad, a babbler? Who be in the spirit of the
Prophets, of Christ, and the Apostles, with this generation are judged the
same: So is the spirit of the Quakers, so tried and known of all men, the
witness in all men's consciences shall answer them.

Pr. Thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox that treads out the corn:
And they that plow in hope, and thresh in hope, are made partakers of their
hope: And we are denied of our corn, and are fain to go to the Magistrate, our
nursing Fathers. And so we thresh half a year, and can get no wages, then are
we fain to go to the Magistrate, page 47.

Answ. How can you thresh or plow, and have not the infallible spirit? Can any
get out the Corn, the Wheat that has not the infallible spirit? Now we say,
all them that has not the infallible spirit cannot get out the corn; they may
beat the air, they may get the sheeps clothing upon their backs, and go out,
and beat the air; and so when their Gospel will not maintain them, then they
are fain to fly to the Magistrate and to the hills that must be beaten as
chafe, because they cannot live of the Gospel they preach; which does not open
the hearts of people, does not get out the seed of God.

Prin. He says, The Quakers light condemns such as the light of Christ
approves. And says, Tell us what it is to walk holily, as the holy men of God
did, etc. Page 49.

Answ. Who walk holily, walk in the spirit that the holy men did walk in,
that gave forth the Scriptures which is infallible: And none walks holily, but
who are led with that, out of the self-righteousnesse. And the light which the
Quakers be in, is the light with which Christ does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, which comes from Christ, and is one with him. And no
one upon the earth owns Christ but who owns the light which does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, which the Quakers are in (which thou
calls a light from Satan) And they must all come to the Quakers if ever they
own the light; and if ever they own Christ the way to the Father, and come into
the power of godliness.

Pr. He says, It is wretchedness to say that Christ has redeemed them
perfectly, and now lived in them the Lord of all things, by which they are the
sons of God, page 50.

Ans. The Scriptures says he is in all, and through all, who is God blessed
for ever. And who are redeemed, are they not redeemed into perfection, into
Christ? are not they redeemed perfectly? Are not they redeemed out of
imperfection? And does not Christ say, he will dwell in the Saints, who is Lord
of all? And are not all they in the wretched state that will not have him to
reign over them?

Pr. He says, The Ministers of Christ received the Gospel not by man, nor are
taught it, but by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, but we own no such
Revelation as this, page 51.

Answ. We do believe you who are apostatized and ravened from the spirit of
God, having only the sheeps clothing, and are the Wolves abroad in the world;
which if it were possible ye would deceive the very elect: But the elect is
kept in the arm of Christ, ye cannot pluck one of them out of his hands: His
father and he is greater then all. And none knows the Gospel, but who knows
immediate revelation; for the Gospel is the power of God unto salvation, and
this is immediate. And so all you since the days of the Apostles are fled from
the foundation Christ Jesus that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world in the Apostasy, with it you are all seen, and fathomed over the world
does the light reach, answered with that of God in every one, the salvation to
the ends of the earth; which light comes to fulfill Scriptures. The Apostles
were judged deceivers who came to bring the people to the substance the
Scriptures spoke of, so they were judged deceivers.

Pr. If the Quakers say that the Ministers have not the spirit that the
Prophets and Apostles had, then positively we say we have not. And if the
Quakers say they have it so, then I say the Prophets and Apostles had it not,
page 53.

Ans. We do believe you, that ye have not the same spirit that the Prophets,
and Apostles, and Christ had: Therefore does it make manifest that ye be all on
heaps about their words, and are fain to run to Schools and Colleges to be
made Ministers by men, and not by the spirit. And the Quakers witness the
spirit that the Prophets and Apostles, and Christ had, with which they own
their words; with which spirit they see you who have gotten their words, and
makes a trade of them, and are all on heaps about them, and falls out about
Church and Ministers.

Pr. He says, The infallible spirit did not guide Isaac when he blessed Jacob,
for he missed the person, page 53.

Answ. God with his eternal spirit did direct Isaac what to do, for that stood
in his counsel, though of that spirit thou have showed thy ignorance and thy
fallibility, and thy self, in whom the Devil is transformed into an Angel of
Light; which Christ said should come, the false Prophets, and Deceivers, and
false Apostles, which the Apostles saw was come, which since their days they
have had the reign over the world. But now to that which they ravened from, and
into the truth (the Devil abode not in) is the Saints com^; and the Lamb
reigns that is the substance of the Scriptures, the end of the Scriptures, that
has domin^^^, Glory in the highest for ever.

And as for all the reviles, lies, slanders, vilifyings, hard expressions in
thy Book, they will fall upon thy self, and to thee they will be sad, and thou
shall feel every one of thy own words shall be thy burden, and they shall
come home unto thee, cramed into thee again; for thou must eat thy own dung;
and drink thy own piss that comes from thee, for all that in thy book is but
dung; in the day of thy Judgment the witness in thee shall answer. All along
thou have showed thy ignorance of the spirit, that is poured upon all flesh
that's infallible, for whosoever prays, or has a humility, or sings, and not
by the infallible spirit, they sing not with the understanding, nor pray not
with the understanding, And under the Judgment of God thou have brought thy
self, and all thy generation.

Thomas Collier his Book called, a Dialogue between a Minister of the Gospel
and an Enquiring Christian. In it his Principles are as Follows.
Pr. HE says that the Scriptures is the absolute rule of Saints that are
endued with the spirit and faith. page 7.

Answ. Such as were endued with the spirit and faith, before the written
Scripture was, they had a rule, and they knew the seed, and they knew the
promises, and they knew Christ more then the Pharisees that had the Scriptures:
nay more the the Apostates since the days of the Apostles that have the
Scriptures, and the Epistles and Revelations. For by faith they saw the glory,
they was in the Foundation, they saw Christ the everlasting Covenant and that
is the foundation still, Christ Jesus, him by whom the world was made, before
it was made, and all that have the Scriptures, and have not him, they can do
nothing. And that which ruled the Saints before the Scriptures was written, is
the Saints rule after the Scriptures is written; to know the Scriptures what is
written, and to know God of whom they learned that gave it forth, or writ it:
with that they know to what state and condition it was spoken. And the spirit
is the record, and he that has all the Scriptures, and wants the true record,
which is the spirit, he cannot know all things.

Pr. And the Scripture is the New Testament of the Saints rule, and the rule of
Judgment. page 10.

Answ. The Scriptures given forth from the Spirit of God, people knows not to
what state they were spoken; but as they come into the spirit that gave them
forth. And besides, the Epistles was written to the Saints in several
conditions, according to their growth: and some of them grew higher then
others, for some of them the day star was not risen in their hearts, and some
of them was children of the Day. So that, still was the rule that led them to
give forth the Epistles, and revealed to them the states and conditions of the
Saints, and to ages, and to generations, and to Nations, and the condition the
world was in, and should come upon it; that was the rule, and is the rule by
which all these words are seen again: and there is the record of the Spirit of
God. And he that has found the true record the Spirit of God; with that he
shall know all the Scriptures: and is come within the book where all things are
written; and which writes all things forth, the spirit.

Pr. He says the Scriptures is that word which makes the Devils to stand in
aw, and tremble. The written word for after generations by which men's souls are
brought to Christ. page 14 15. again that the Scriptures is the sword of the
spirit. page 16.

Answ. The Pharisees had the Scriptures, which Christ said was of the Devil,
and was swallowed up in his power; and they stood against Christ the life, the
substance. The Devil came with Scriptures (who is out of the truth) to tempt
Christ the Word: but the Word, the substance of Scriptures hammerd down the
devil, and Pharisees that had got the Scriptures, but were out of the life,
that gave them forth. And they have the sword that have the word of God which
was before the Scriptures was given forth, and they be in that the Devils be
out of. So if the Devil, and wicked men bring Scriptures; they hammer them
under, and redeem the Scriptures out of their ungodly mouths. And the written
word brings no soul to Christ the life, but who comes to the life that the
written words speak of: and so it testifies of him the ^i^e, that brings them
to Christ that gave it forth.

Pr. God is willing that all should be saved; but he works not all into a
saving condition. page 21. He says it is true, there is a spirit and life in
the Scriptures. page 22.

Answ. The spirit, and life is not in the Scriptures, but the spirit, and life
the Scriptures testifies of, and the light Christ Jesus (the salvation to the
ends of the earth) does enlighten every man that comes into the world with a
saving light. And the light which every man has that comes into the world is
saving: but many hating the light, and not coming to it, which has enlightened
them; they neglect their salvation, and slight their salvation, and not
believing in it, they walk in darkness and come not to the light of life. But
they that believe in it, come to the light of life, and abide not in the
darkness. And the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men,
such as turns it into wantonness, and walks despitefully against the spirit of
grace ownes it not for their teacher, but sets up teachers according to their
own lusts; so turns against that which brings their salvation and walks
despitefully against it, and follows their own lusts, and tramples upon the
Covenant of grace, and the blood of the new Covenant. And all that see the
Bishop of their souls, Christ Jesus the Savior of their souls, it is with the
light that comes from him, and God wills that all men should be saved.

Pr. He says to use Christ's name to catch souls, when indeed it is but
Juggling, and to stab him, and crucify him a fresh. page 42. If Christ does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, etc. If this were truth then
Christ died in vain, and in vain has Christ spoke of himself, saying, I am the
way, the truth, the life, the light, etc. page 45.

Answ. Such as do not believe that Christ does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, are such as mentions his name, and haters of the light that
comes from him, these be in the Juggling state, deceivers of souls and people.
And none sees Christ the one offering, but with the light that comes from him:
nor none knows the Savior Christ Jesus; but with the light that comes from
him: and that lets see the body prepared, Christ who was the seed of Abraham,
according to the flesh, the one offering, that ends all offerings; and his
blood that is the atonement, which is the Saints drink, which who drinks it
shall live, with which their consciences are purged from dead works, to serve
the living God. And none knows the foundation of God that stands sure, nor
feels it, nor sees it, but with the light which comes from Christ the
foundation, which breaks down all other foundations; which light that every man
is enlightened withal gives him the knowledge of the foundation of God.

Pr. He says, I do believe that there was never a Saint perfectly free from
sin here, but they shall have the body of sin and death, which will be their
burden to keep them humble. Page 52. And it does not appear that they do
attain purification, or perfection, before the change of the body.

Answ. That which is the true humiliation bears the sin, and iniquity, which is
Christ; such as are not brought down with the Judgments for their sinful
actings, never knew the seed that puts off the body (from which all the roots
proceed) in that is the true humility, and the righteousness of Christ and the
glory revealed. And the Saints witnessed the body of sin, and death put off,
while they were upon the earth; and such as was in Christ was new creatures,
all things become new. And the Apostles spoke wisdom among them that was
perfect: and that was before the change of the body, as ye look upon. And the
work of the Ministry was for the perfecting of the the Saints until they all
come into the unity of the faith, (that gives victory) and to the knowledge of
the Son of God; unto a perfect man: unto the measure, and stature of the
fullness of Christ. This was the Ministers work. Not as children tossed up and
down with every slight and windy doctrine of men, who lie in wait to deceive,
So ye have tried the work of your Ministry, and brought it to the Light.

Pr. He says such a trembling as a way to perfection, is to set it in the
room of Christ, beside the truth, and slight and undervalue the word of God:
and justify trembling: let all men beware of this trembling. page 78.

Answ. Who ever ownes the word of God, that reconciles to the Father, and
hammers down, and brings out of the fall, and cuts down and burns up: they must
know their salvation wrought out with fear, and trembling. And these ownes the
word of God, and the words of God the Scriptures: and these owns this
trembling: there is a cloud of witnesses in the Scriptures and none will deny
this trembling that ownes the salvation wrought out, or to be wrought out: but
such as be out of the truth; and that gets Scriptures (being out of the truth)
and deny the power of God who are with it judged, those that have the form, but
deny the power; deny the trembling, so they deny the salvation to be wrought
out with fear, and trembling, and none knows the salvation but them that know
trembling. And such may say (that are the the Devils messengers) beware of this
power that makes to tremble.

Pr. He says the Scripture is truly the Ministry of the spirit to us. page 67.

Answ. Those were the Ministers of the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures:
And those are the Ministers of the Letter, that be out of the spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures, and that cannot Minister the spirit.

Pr. He says the Scriptures does not speak of a general Redemption of all,
from the state of sin, and freedom from sin. page 75.

Answ. There is a general state and redemption of all, and freedom from sin by
believing in the one offering the blood of Jesus Christ; and unbelief shuts out.

Pr. He says mystical Babylon shall fall by the Kings of the earth. And many
precious Saints shall destroy Babylon with the sword. page 84. And he says, I
cannot apprehend that the Saints shall have the Government of the world. page
86. And the beast when he arises shall give a mark in the right hand, etc.

Answ. Christ has all power in heaven, and earth given to him; who believe in
him, and are in his power (who has all power in heaven and earth given to him)
have the government and are in the government the Lambs government: but the
unbelievers are out of it. And that which slayes mystical Babylon is not the
Kings of the earth and the Saints that be on the earth, slay not with the
carnal sword: for they that kill with the sword, must perish with the sword,
here is the faith, and patience of the Saints. Their weapons are not carnal,
but spiritual, mighty through God to the pulling down of strong holds. And the
Lamb slayes, and kills with the sword, and takes them, the beast, and the false
prophet and the Devil, and casts them alive into the Lake of fire, where they
shall be tormented for ever, that burns with brimstone, who kills and slayes
with the sword which is the words of his mouth. And the Beast has been long
up, his marks, and his heads and horns with his names, but the Lamb and the
Saints is trampling him to pieces under and over him getting the victory. And
the everlasting Gospel is Preaching: and the witnesses you are ignorant of: but
are them that have been the slayers of them.

Pr. He says, I do not profess my self infallible, but I shall freely give my
apprehensions. page 110. to contend earnestly for the faith which is the first
unto Justification and services of faith. page 111. he says false Christ's, and
false prophets shall come. And to the Law, and to the testimony, etc.

Answ. The Law is light, and the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy,
and men may have all the Scriptures of the old, and New Testament: yet being
from the light, the spirit of prophecy; from the Light, and from the spirit;
they know not the Law, and testimony. And we do believe thee, that thou art not
infallible, but art only in the apprehensions, and before thou come to contend
for the faith, and to know that by which the Saints are justified, thou must
come into the Light that does enlighten every man, etc. which lets see Christ
the Author of the Faith. And false Prophets and Antichrists Christ said should
come, which should get the sheeps clothing, and say, lo Christ is here, and
lo he is there: These Christ said to the Apostles should come, which before
their decease did come; which since their decease the world has gone after
them. So every man that comes into the world being enlightened, and having a
light from Christ the Savior of the soul; every man being in the Light Christ
has enlightened him withal. Every man with the light which comes from Christ,
with it they shall see a Savior Christ Jesus, from whence it comes: And the
light shining from the East to the West, and the coming of the Son of man, and
receive Christ, and so come to the Rock. And so people having been from the
Light which every man is enlightened withal that comes into the world, they
have been all brought on heaps. But now they are coming to the Rock. And thy
words Thomas Collier shall be thy own burden, and for them thou shall receive
judgment. And this is the word of the Lord God to thee, and thy time is not
yet past.

John Billingsley, who calls himself Mr. of Arts, Minister of the Gospel, and
Pastor of the Church at Chesterfield, in his Book called, Strong COMFORTS for
weak CHRISTIANS. His Principles follows, etc.
Pr. HE says, He would have the Mayor and Aldermen of Chesterfield to show
themselves to be really affected to the cause of Christ and his blessed
Sabbaths, etc.

Ans. In this thou have showed thou art one that keeps people in darkness, and
not a Minister of the Gospel of Christ, and the new Covenant, but of the Law,
and in the signs and shadows. For the Sabbaths, the Apostles did bring people
off of them, and they met together on the first day of the week, and denied the
Jews Sabbath; and still it is your practice, and yet thou cryest up to show
themselves for the cause of the blessed Sabbath: what blind and dark stuff is
this? For never did Pastor or Minister of Christ preach up such a Doctrine, as
to stir up Aldermen and Mayors, and great men to show themselves zealous for
the Sabbath: And thus thou have showed thy self to be one of them the Apostles
was afraid of, that observed the days which he brought the people off to the
substance; which they met together on the first day of the week, which Christ
rose on, and so was a cross to the Jews, who met together on the seventh day.
And Circumcision was on the 8th day, on that day Christ rose.

Pr. He says, The Scripture and the Spirit are unseparable (which he calls the
Word) Page 7. and that the spirit is always in the Scriptures.

Again, He is in the gall of bitterness, and bond of iniquity, who calls the
spirit a dead Letter, page 9.

Ans. Every one that has the Scriptures, cannot say he has the spirit that
gave it forth; for the Devil may have Scripture, who is out of the spirit. And
the Apostle which said, the Letter kills, and was old, was not in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity. And the spirit was in them that gave forth
the Scriptures: And the Scriptures are the words of God which ends in Christ
the Word, who fulfils them.

Pr. He says, Prize the holy Scriptures, through which is all our hopes of
eternal life, communicated to us: And I wonder what any soul has to show for
eternal life, but the Scriptures. So I call it Gods warrant. Page 13. And in
the midst of thoughts prize the Covenant of free grace: And if ye would have
substantial comforts from the Covenant, do not lay hold of Covenant comforts.
Page 12.

Answ. Thou cannot speak a word to the wearied, who art in the presumption thy
self, and to be brought down, who art applying the promises to the wrong
nature. And many may have the Scriptures, and many have the Scriptures, and all
ignorant of eternal life, until they all come into the life as they was in
that gave forth the Scriptures. For the Scripture communicates not the life,
but God, of whom they learned that gave forth Scripture; it is it that
testifies of eternal life. And the souls comfort is Christ, which it speaks of.

Pr. He says, The Apostle to the Philippians speaks of Saints as Citizens, our
trading is in heaven. Now Citizens great trading is Mercandize, as ships go
from London to India, etc. So thousands of souls go toward heaven, worth
nothing, a poor empty creature. See page 15.

Answ. The merchandise is in the earth, in Babylon, and there thou and you are
all. The soul is worth more then all the world which goes to heaven; it goes
richly, full of all attire and fruitfulness, and not empty. Is not an empty
creature, that which God breathed into man the breath of life, whereby it
became a living soul? And he has all souls in his hand, and Christ is the
Bishop of it, the power of God, and therefore it is not empty; for the Saints
had the heavenly treasure in earthen vessels.

Pr. He says, The Sacrament and Baptism is a most refreshing cup, for we
walk by faith, and not by sight, page 18. I can say frequent mention is made
of salvation by Christ, without mentioning any act of faith in us, etc. page 19.

Answ. Sacraments and sprinkling Infants called Baptism; who walks after them,
walks after sight, not by faith, for these things are seen; and they follow
their own traditions, and not the Scriptures for them, either sprinkling
Infants or Sacrament: And who walks by faith and not fight, comes off the
things that are seen. For things that are seen are temporal, but things that
are not seen are eternal, says the Apo^^le. And he that believes shall be
saved, and he that believes not shall be condemned (this is the doctrine of
Christ to the Apostles) they are condemned already. And where the belief is,
there is faith and salvation seen and known; but where belief is not, there is
condemnation, there salvation is not known, and every one that is saved,
believes.

Pr. I do not say that there is perfect victory against every corruption. But
that grace will be eating out, and curbing sin in the heart, page 21. And there
is no peace nor comfort that is miantained without warring and constant
combating, etc. Yea, peace and war against sin are always inseparable
companions, page 22. All true comfort has its foundation from the written
Word, they are fancies and flashes, rather then comforts from pretended
immediate revelations, page 23.

Answ. None knows true comfort but who comes to the immediate Revelation, that
is to the spirit that reveals the things of God. If men have all the
Scriptures, the written words, and not the word in which they end; they have
not comfort, neither can they do any thing without Christ, neither have the
wearyed rest, neither is the Bishop of the soul known, neither is the burden
and the old yoke gone off, though they have all the Scriptures; but as every
one does come to the life that gave forth the Scriptures, with which they see
Christ the end, the substance of them, him by whom the world was made before it
was made, these have comfort of the words. And the Scriptures are words, not
the Word; and such as are here comes to know peace and the end of war, and the
occasion of war taken away: And sin and corruption is separated from the
precious, and contrary to the Just, with it it has no unity. And there is no
true peace until they come into the Kingdom which stands in joy, in peace, in
righteousness. Now where the body is standing, and the root of sin in the
heart, not a perfect victory; The Circumcision is not known that puts off the
body; the victory is not known while the body stands; which the Apostle
withessed the body of sin put off by the circumcision of the spirit which was
in the inward man; and he thanked God through Christ who had victory, who was
manifested in his flesh to condemn sin in his flesh, that he through him became
the righteousness of God: And the life that he lived was by the faith of the
Son of God. And such as are made free from sin, and dead to it, and cannot live
no longer therein, these had the peace. And such have not the peace where the
body of sin is standing, and sin in the heart, there is the war: But such as
stand in the faith which purifies the heart, and comes to witness the
Circumcision of the heart, they come to have the heart purified, and the
victory over the body as the Apostle declares.

Pr. He says, James Naylor deserved to be hanged, page 5. He says, I tell my
people they cannot be free from sin, a perfect freedom from the being of
corruption in them, while they are on this side heaven, pa. 9. And your
speaking against Ministers, and speaking in Markets is as bad or worse as to
bait a Bull, page 8. And he says, The Steeple house is the Church.

Ans. The Ministers of Christ, and the Prophets of the Lord which spoke his
word, which spoke in Synagogues and in Markets, in high ways, and under the
hedges, and upon the mountains, which disturbed the world; and all professors
upon the earth that had the words of truth, which was out of the life, and
disturbed the Heathen that knew not God; And all such Ministers of the Letter
that have it, and not the spirit that gave it forth, are disturbed by the
Ministers that be in the spirit, that preach and speak forth the substance of
the Scriptures. And we know you, and do believe you (who says, your people
shall not be made free from their corruption; and tells them, the Steeple-house
is the Church; and say the creature deserved to be hanged) to be such at
inwardly ravened, which Christ said should come, John saw was come, and the
whole world has been after you that are wrestlers against flesh and blood, and
strikes at creatures, in stead of striking at the power that captivates
Creatures, and so have kept people under the bondage of corruption; and led
people always learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth,
and kept them in spiritual Egypt, Sodom, and Gomorrah, in filthiness, and
telling of them the Masse-house is the Church, the Steeple Houses. Was it not a
place for the Mass, set up for the Mass, with a Cross at the end of it?
Look, is it not on yet? And is the Masse-house become thy Church? thou may
thank the Papists for that. Was not the Pope and the Papists the setters up of
all your Masse-houses, and Colleges, which have gotten up since the days of
the Apostles, among you inwardly ravenors from the Church which is in God, and
so have gotten up the Masse-house for your Church, and there ye do keep up
people, telling them they must have corruptions while they be upon the earth?
So ye are Ministers of corruption, which is contrary to the Apostles, who said
they sat in heavenly places, and had escaped the pollutions of the world; and
they were children of the day, not of the night, and the true light shined: So
you that are ravened from the spirit of God, have got up the Masse-house, got
people thither, and telling of them they must have their corruptions, and they
must have sin, and they must not be perfect while they are on this side heaven.
Now they can but have sin, and can be but imperfect, if they never came at you,
nor at your Masse-houses. Now you are the Devils Messengers and Ministers that
preaches up sin, and corruption, and imperfection that people must be in, and
have sin while they be upon the earth. But the Ministers of Christ preached
up perfection, to be perfect, and overcoming sin, and made free from sin; and
the blood of Jesus Christ cleanses from all sin; and they had faith, which
gave them victory, and the Circumcision that puts off the body of sin, and the
new Covenant that blotted out sin and transgression. And such Ministers as you,
that make a trade of Scriptures, as the Scripture it self, the Prophets, the
Apostles, and Christ does make you manifest, your fruits to be contrary to them
that gave forth Scriptures. So with it are you disapproved and judged with the
life that gave it forth.

Pr. He says, And it seems to me to be no more sin to bait a Bull, then any
other recreation. And he says, The Quakers came into the Steeple-house, and
bid people to look to the light within them, and to tell him that he was an
Antichrist and blind guide. And says, I had rather be a hireling, such as
Christ has hired in his Vineyard, and receive a penny, then some of the
Quakers that go naked in the markets.

Answ. The Quakers who be in the power of the Lord God, have been moved of the
Lord God to go into the world among Apostates, who are ravened from the spirit
of God, and so are the Wolves that tears and rends, and are ravening up and
down for your Benefices; and would eat one another out if you could, and
swallow one another like the fishes to the Sea. Are you contented every one
with your penny from Christ? Are not you all fighting, and striking, and
smiting, and casting into Prisons for means, for Tithes which ye do no work
for? Is not Christ come, and has found you smiting and striking your
fellow servants, eating and drinking like Sodom, and living in pleasure like
the old world, some having two hundred, some three hundred pounds, some less,
some more; is here equal a penny? Are ye like Christ's Vineyard dressers,
Husbandmen in the Vineyard? Blush, and be ashamed! The stones are thrown now
at Babylon, and dasheth her children to pieces: And Sion is building, and the
Tabernacle of David is rearing up. Come up ye Saints and Prophets, the Lamb and
the Saints has the victory: And all those upon the earth, and you all are the
blind guides and Antichrists, who guides not people to the Light within, and
bids them not look at that, but leads them from the Light within; ye lead them
in the darkness, and you are from the light in your own particulars, and so
the blind, guides for the fleece, for the earth, out of the Apostles Doctrine,
and Christ's, who brought people to the Light, and bid them believe in it; who
told them, the light that shined in their hearts would give them the light of
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus.

Pr. The Priests bear rule by their means, this is the means of the false
Prophets says he. If there be a burden upon paying of Tithes, lay it upon God
and the Magistrates, and not upon me, the Pastor.

Answ. Tithes to the similitude Melchisedeck, Tithes to the Priesthood made by
the Law of God; Christ is come, the end of the similitude, the end of the
Priesthood, and disannuld the commandment that gave Tithes: and all his
Ministers, Pastors, and Teachers preached down Tithes, and preached up the
substance, and preached down the Priests that took them, and the Law that gave
them, and the authority, and the Magistrates both that held them up. And so you
that have gotten Tithes since the days of the Apostles, whose root and ground
was by the Papists in the apostasy, are such that burdens the Creation, and a
grief to all true Christians that be in the life and the power, and the spirit
that the Apostles was in before the apostasy.

Now if thou were a true Minister of Christ, if the Magistrate would give thee
tithes, thou would not take them; which is got up since the Apostasy came in,
them that have got the sheeps clothing, but are ravened from the spirit of
God. And does not thou think that the Priests that were obedient to the Faith,
if they would have turned again to the Jews Magistrates, do thou think they
would not have given them tithes? And do thou think that any of them that was
obedient to the Faith, that they took Tithes after they were converted to
Christ and his faith, the substance? And do thou think that any that is out
of the apostasy now, will take Tithes of the Magistrates now if they would give
them? which were set up since the days of the Apostles in the apostasy? I will
warrant thee they will dye before they will lose their glory and their Crown:
And they that preach the Gospel, shall live of the Gospel. And the Prophets
prophecy falsely, and the Priest bears rule by his means. What, does the
Priest receive his gifts by the false Prophets means? Does not the people love
to have it so? And are not you all found fallen into this Ditch that are
inwardly ravened from the spirit of God? The false spirits gone into the earth
for money, and for tithes, for lucre, for means, for gifts, admiring men's
persons because of advantage; yet covering your selves with the sheeps
clothing, crept up into a Masse-house, and calls it a Church; and tells
people, while they be upon the earth, they must have corruptions, and the body
of sin, and this is the work of your Ministry: So among the Liars;
Whoremongers, Sorcerers, Adulterers, inwardly ravened from the spirit of God,
out of the Kingdom are ye found.

And as for all the rest of thy rabble, and unsavory expressions in thy Book,
they are not worth mentioning: But in the day of thy judgment thou shall feel
thy own words thy burden, in the trial of the Fire thy works will burn.

Immanuel Bourne, who calls himself Pastor of (...) Church in Ashover, in his
Book called, A Defense of the Scriptures, and the holy Spirit speaking in them,
are these Principles following. And Priest Gifford of Bedford his PRINCIPLE.
Pr. HE says, Christ himself sent his hearers to the Scriptures, as the
chief judge of Controversy, and of Faith.

Answ. Christ did not put the Scriptures above himself; he said, All judgment
was committed to the Son, and for judgment he was come into the world. And the
Pharisees that had the Scriptures they could not judge of Faith, nor of
controversy, nor knew not Christ the Author of the Faith; nor none can judge
but who be in the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures. And the Scriptures was
given forth from them that was in the faith of Truth; but such as be not in the
faith, knows not the Scriptures, neither is it able to make them wise unto
salvation without the Faith. For the Pharisees and chief Priests were not,
though they had Scripture, and they judged and condemned the Author of Faith,
that had Scriptures without the life; and so do all that are out of the life
still that have the Scriptures, judge the Author of the Faith, Christ Jesus,
who does enlighten every man that comes into the world: And the holy spirit
spoke in them that gave forth the Scriptures, and so they spoke it forth.

Now they that be from the spirit of God in their own particulars speaking
there, knows not the spirit that spoke in them that spoke them forth; but such
are they that says, The spirit speaks in the Scriptures. Such are the
Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit that gave it forth. And the
spirit that gave forth the Scripture is that which judged of all conditions,
which gave them the spiritual understanding. For people have not the
spiritual understanding to judge, and to discern if they have all the
Scriptures, unless they be in the spirit that gave it forth: And so the
Scripture it self without the spirit that gave it forth, cannot be the Judge
of Controversy, nor of Faith, but is a dead Letter in it self, but the spirit
is it that gave forth Scriptures.

Pr. He says, Christ within is inherent holiness: And George Fox professed
equality with God. page 20.

Answ. Christ within is beyond all men's righteousness, or holiness, for he is
the righteousness it self. And the Assembly of Divines gave forth a
Catechism, presented to the Parliament, for people to learn; wherein they say,
that the Holy Ghost is equal in power and glory with the Father. Now every one
that comes to witness the Son of God, and the holy Ghost that gave forth the
Scriptures by your account, they witness that which is equal in power and
glory with God. And does not the Assembly give forth this in their Catechism,
that people should learn? And is it blasphemy for to come to witness this
which you have given forth, and the mind which was in Christ? Yet
nevertheless Georges words was not spoken as ye preach them; for his words
were spoken beyond all creatures, and out of all creatures, and he did not say
Geo: Fox.

Pr. He says no natural man, that is darkness, is bound to look to the light
within him to direct him to salvation; for it is in vain to look for light in
darkness. Page 22.

Answ. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, the salvation to the ends of the earth; which no man comes out of
darkness, out of his natural state but who does believe in the light; which was
Christ's Doctrine, believe in the light, that ye may be the children of the
light: and he that believes in it shall not abide in darkness. And so they
come to see the spending of the night and the light shining out of darkness,
giving them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ Jesus; and the light shining in the darkness which the darkness cannon
^^^prehend it. And no one upon earth ever sees their salvation, but with the
light ^^ich comes from Christ their Savior, who does enlighten every man that
comes into the world; that all men through the light might believe: he that
does not believe in the light, is condemned. And so he that follows the light
shall not walk in darkness; and he that follows not the light walks in
darkness. So with the light thou art comprehended to be a Minister of darkness;
in the apostasy, keeping people from the light. And one of the false prophets
ravened from the spirit, which Christ said should come, John saw was come, and
the world goes after you, that tells people the letter is the word, and the
spirit is in the Scriptures, which is contrary to Scripture, and them that
spoke it forth, which said the spirit of God was within them. And the
Scriptures were words of God: and Christ the word, comes to fulfill the words;
who is the word, who was before the words was given forth; in whom the words
ends.

Pr. The Kingdom of heaven is within you, not as Christ is in every one, but
the Kingdom of heaven is within you, or among you. Page 29.

Answ. Christ is within except ye be reprobates; yea I say within all
Professors is Christ, in Christendom, Christ is within them all, except they be
reprobates. And if Christ be not within them all, they are all reprobates, but
if Christ be within them all, the body is dead, and there is Christ's reign, and
his Kingdom, and no Babylon, nor Antichrist where this is so. And the Kingdom
of Heaven is within you says Christ, yea in the Pharisees: and that is the
Kingdom in man that never consents to sin; like a grain of mustard seed, like
unto leaven, that leavens the new lump. And he that comes to know that little
Kingdom, and receives that little Kingdom as a little child, it makes the
Kingdoms of the world become the Son of Gods Kingdom: and knows that no
unrighteousness, nor ungodliness must enter into it.

Pr. And Christ spoke to the multitude when he said be not ye of men called
Master, and call no man father upon earth; and did not bid the Apostles not to
be called of men master.

Answ. He spoke this to the multitude, and to the Disciples both, and said the
Scribes, and Pharisees was called of men Master, who had Scriptures: whom he
cried woe against. And he said be not you of men called master for ye have all
one master, even Christ; and ye are all Brethren, this was Christ's Command. But
all ye Pastors, and Ministers (Bourn) and the rest who are apostatized from the
Apostles Doctrine, and Christ's Doctrine, ye trample upon the Commands of
Christ. It manifests that ye have the form of godliness, and denies the power:
and are not Brethren past from death, to life but are all on heaps about the
Scriptures, Christ's, Prophets, and Apostles words; and making a trade of them
for your own self ends in the Apostasy; such as Christ said should come, which
John saw was come; which should inwardly raven, which the world is gone after,
But now with that which ye all ravened from are ye all comprehended. And Christ
says call no man father upon earth, where Christ is witnessed, the seed of God
raised up, no earthly man is his father, nor cannot call no man father upon the
earth, according to the Command of Christ, he that is heir of the promise of
the world that has no end; of the second Adam born not by the will of man: but
he that is of the first Adam is in another state, and stands against Christ's
doctrine, and is the Son of Adam in the fall.

Pr. He says such as pretend Christ within deny the blood of Christ his
righteousness for Justification.

Answ. Who witness Christ within, they are not reprobates; Justification and
Sanctification is possessed, the thing that was imputed to the believers.

Pr. And giving honor to men, etc.

Answ. Christ the second Adam receives not honor of men, neither does he
respect men's persons, his enemies could say so: and they that received honor
one of another was the Pharisees, the great Professors, which was a mark of the
unbelief: which Christ would not receive their honor, the second Adam which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, will not receive the
honor of men. Now he that receives the honor is out of the light, in the
first Adam; is out of the power. And where humility is, which goes before the
honor, there is no want of honor; for he comes into the power that makes
him honorable in the hearts of all people, answering the humble principle in
every one; a terror to the evil doer; and here Magistrates that fears God,
attain the honor that is without the respect of Persons in the humility
answering with the higher power the just principle in every man: so come they
to be honored in the hearts of all people in the sight of God, and a praise of
them that do well, which he that respects persons, transgresses the Law, and
commits sin; and is convinced of the Law as a trangressor, he that respects
persons is out of the faith of the Lord Jesus Christ which purifies the heart,
which is held in the pure conscience, and gives victory over the world; which
who are of faith are of Abraham.

And so for all thy lies, and slanders, and reviles, and unsavory and bad
expressions which are loathsome before all sober people, and stincks; who has
published thy shame to the Nation in Print, it shall cover thy self, and be thy
own garment; and every word be thy own burden, and lay a weight upon thee in
the day of thy misery, and calamity, and in the day of thy Judgment when thy
works are tried in the fire, the witness in thy conscience shall me answer.

Gifford who is chief Priest at Bedford his Principle. He said (openly) That
faith was not perfect, etc.

Ans. Faith is holy, and the gift of God, and purifies, and justifies, and is a
mystery in which is the unity, by which God is pleased; and this is perfect
being the gift of God; and from this he has showed his reprobation, and his
ignorance.

Thomas Moore in his Book called, A defense against the poison of Satan's
Design. These are his Principles Following.
Pr. HE says Christ Jesus is personally absent from a believer. And Christ is
in, and to our hearts the hope, but not the possession, nor do we possess the
glory. Again he says, The grace of God which brings salvation to all men;
instructs them not to look into themselves or to any light or spirit in them.
Page 5.

Answ. Christ in you the hope of glory, says the Apostle. And if the Saints
sat with him in heavenly places, they are not absent from him. And if he say I
in them, and they in me, so not absent from them. And the Son of God was
revealed in the Saints. And he that has not the Son of God has not life, such
may say they are absent from him. But such as have him revealed, have life, and
he is not absent. And such as be absent from him have not eaten his flesh, nor
drunken his blood; and so are not of his flesh, nor of his bone. And they may
talk of him, and say he is come, as the Jews did that he was to come, and he
not in them, and so reprobates. And the grace of God that brings salvation
which has appeared unto all men which is the Saints teacher, whose hearts are
stablished with grace, this is within them, which brings them to know the
hidden man of the heart; and a strength in the inward, and comes to look at the
light within them; agreeable to the Apostles Doctrine, who said the light that
shined in their hearts, would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And such as have Christ in them have the
possession, have the substance, have the glory which was with the Father before
the world began.

Pr. He says there is none here has yet ceased from their own works, as God
did from his. page 9. And the Apostles received the last Revelation to be given
forth immediately. And such as slight the word, and call it a dead letter; and
brings people to the light within them, a spirit within them, this is a strange
doctrine. And if there be not something to be added, and given forth by men,
and another manner of Preaching then by the Apostles, what need is there of
Printing? etc. Page 15.

Ans. He that believes has entered into his rest, and ceased from his own
works as God did from his. And since the days of the Apostles there has got
up another Ministry by man of man, made by man (which is not as the Apostles
who received it not of man, nor by man) And these stands against the light
within, and the spirit of God within, which none knows true teaching, nor true
instruction, nor opening of the Scriptures, but as they come every one to the
spirit of God in them, as was in them that gave forth Scriptures. And who be
here, have the thing within them, as they had that gave forth the Scriptures;
enjoying and possessing it; And these Fathomes the Apostates, out of the
Apostles Doctrine, and witness the Preaching as the Apostles was in, which all
they since the days of the Apostles, that ravened from the Spirit of God, be
out of, and this does not deny the Scriptures, but sees them all in their
place, and to what condition they were spoken. And the letter is a dead letter
of it self and gives not life to any, but who comes to the Spirit of God in
their own perticulars, as was in them that gave it forth. For the Jews had not
life, though they had Scriptures, until they came to Christ, which the
Scripture testified of.

Pr. He says Christ is not natural.

Answ. Yet some of ye say he is humane. And as for thy speaking of his
mortality; ye speak, ye do not know what; Christ is the same to day, yesterday,
and for ever.

Pr. He says, It is the Apostles sense of them that served their bellies they
pretended to an inward light: and this is the Apostles sense of belly who did
cause divisions contrary to the Doctrine they had learned, and here their belly
maybe understood their mind, heart and spirits, or also their experience of
these inward, etc. To rejoice in any thing under the Sun, is opposite to the
Apostles who had their conversation in heaven. Page 42.

Answ. None comes to witness their conversation in heaven, but who is come to
witness Christ within them, the substance, the second Adam who redeemes out of
the earth, and the Apostle which brought the Saints to the light that shined in
their hearts, etc. this was not a serving of Bellies that walked in the light,
that light shining in them, and believing in the light Christ, out of whose
belly flowed rivers of living waters, and such made not divisions, but were in
unity in the light, and fellowship. But those were they that made the divisions
that inwardly ravened, and went from the light, which Christ had enligtened
them withal, and such went from that which should give them the knowledge, and
enjoyed the earthly things; and served not the Lord Jesus Christ, (that be out
of the light which comes from him) but their own bellies. And they act contrary
to the Apostles Doctrine; and rejoices in things under the Sun, which who
does, serves their bellies.

Pr. He says yea, when enlightened by that heavenly light even from Jesus, yet
they are of themselves deceitful, etc. page 44. And the light is something else
besides the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ
Jesus. Page 45.

Answ. The light which every man is enlightened withal, etc. is not
deceitful, but leads men out of all deceit. And it is of God that gives them
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. and it is one, and the
same that lets see to the begi^ning, and ending; which comes from the beginning.

Pr. He says, That none may expect to receive the word immediately from Christ
as the Apostles; but mediately. Page 46.

Ans. Such as receive not the word of God immediately from Christ as the
Apostles did; they are not Preachers of the living word that lives and abides
for ever. And we do believe you, that since the days of the Apostles, ye have
not received the word immediately from Christ as the Apostles did, but are
only Ministers of the letter. And such were they in all ages that closed their
eyes, and stopped their ears, and inwardly ravened from the spirit. That marred
the face of Christ above all men, who was the spiritual Sodom and Egypt where
Christ is crucified. These got Scriptures, but were from the spirit of God
within, that gave them forth, and such was the hypocrites that Judged all ways
the spirit of God that gave fo^th the Scriptures, and shut out of the Kingdom,
in which spirit now ye are found in these last days.

Pr. He says, That Christ ascended without material blood, and the Apostle d^^
^^t Preach both the word, and faith in the heart. page 50. and that the new
Jerusalem is (...) come down from heaven. page 51. and a brief discovery of the
wolves in sheep skins, etc. Page 57.

Answ. The blood of Christ which satisfies the Father which the Saints ^^ink,
and his flesh which they eat, which in so doing have life; is that which the
world stumble at; which who drinks it, lives for ever. And the Apostle
Preached the word of faith in their hear^^ and in their mouths, and the word
reconciles to the Father, and hammers down, ^^d cuts down, and burns that which
separates from the Father; and over it gives victory. And the word material,
the Apostle does not call it so, but precious, and Jerusalem is come down from
heaven and witnessed among the Saints, heavenly Jerusalem and the Babes knows
their mother. And who are in Christ, and Christ in them, see it, possesses it.
But all such as are against the light within, which does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, are the Antichrists, the false prophets, the wolves
which have gotten the sheep cloa^^ing; (which may deceive the world, but not
the elect) as thy book has declared ^hee. And such Christ said should come,
and John saw was come: and since the days of the Apostles the world has gone
after them. And they inwardly ravened from the light and so have gotten the
Kingdoms of the earth into a profession, and form which are now standing
against the Light within, and gathering against the Lamb, and the Saints that
are in the light, and is the light, which they ravened from, making War against
them, but the Lamb, and the Saints shall get the victory.

Pr. He says, And the righteousness of God wrought by Christ for us; which
need not to be wrought over again in us. page, 58. And that Christ our
Justification should be in us, that dyed, and suffered, that ascended, this he
calls a fancy, to fancy him in a particular person. Page 59.

Answ, Whosoever has not Christ within, are Reprobates; and whosoever has
Christ within, has the righteousness. Now Christ that suffered, Christ that
was offered up, is manifest within, and the Saints are of his flesh, and of his
bone, and eat his flesh, and drink his blood; and not another. The Christ that
ended the Priesthood, ended the offering, ended the Temple, ended the Law, and
the first Covenant the seed of God, Christ Jesus, this manifest within; he that
has him, has life, Justification, Sanctification and Redemption. And so
Christ the same to day yesterday and for ever, who is the hope, and the Author
of their faith. And so all be in the fancy that be out of the state of
witnessing Christ (that suffered) within them and rose again: and who be in
this, they be out of the fancy and shadows: and comes to see where there is no
changing, but possesses righteousness, glory, substance, the end of their
faith, and Christ their hope that remains, that abides.

Pr. He says, There is something of God in man that will render the light
which the Quakers speaks of natural. Page 67.

Answ. That which is of God in man captivated, viz. life and immortality; who
are not come to the light, will not render the light (when he comes to it
through the Gospel) natural, which the darkness now cannot comprehend though
in it it shines, and that of God in man will not call Christ (the light)
natural which the Quakers speaks of.

Pr. He says, Ye may remember in the last times, false Christ's and false
Prophets shall arise, and shall bring in damnable heresies, etc. and will show
signs and wonders, and if it were possible they would deceive the very Elect.
And such as follow strong delusions, and believe lies, and be damned, who obey
not the Truth, nor receive it in the love of it, page 68.

Answ. Christ said false Prophets should come, Antichrists should come with
signs and wonders, which the Apostles saw was come, which inwardly ravened,
and went forth from them; which since the days of the Apostles they have got
the sheeps clothing, and the world is gone after them, and have deceived the
world by their lying signs and wonders, and have brought them to be all on
heaps about Religion. And the damnable heresy, and the lying signs and
wonders, and strange delusions; ye may look into the whole Christendom, among
your selves, and your own stock of Papists: For none obeys the Truth, but who
owns the Light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which
comes from Christ the truth; and all false Prophets are from that, and all
Antichrists are from that, which has reigned since the days of the Apostles
in the apostasy, and inwardly ravened, have gotten the sheeps clothing; which
have made war against the Saints, and overcome them; but now to that which they
ravened from, are the Saints come: And the woman has been in the wilderness,
and the man-child is brought forth to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron. And
all such now that inwardly ravened from the Light, are standing up against the
Lamb and the Saints: But the Lamb and the Saints have the victory, and the
rej^ycing over the Beast and false Prophet is come, who kills and slayes with
the sword, which is the words of his mouth: And the Saints which are with him,
their weapons are spiritual. And none lifts up the Son of God, as the Serpent
was lifted up in the Wilderness; but as every one is in the Light that the Son
of God has enlightened him withal, and then they know him that draws all men
after him.

Thomas Moor, In his Book, called, An Antidote, etc. Are these Principles
following.
Pr. HE says, God does not give the Revelation of these things now
immediately, as he did by the first Apostles, nor in such manner as he did to
the Prophets of old. See his Epistle.

Answ. All that have the Scriptures, and are Ministers, and not by the same
power and spirit as the Apostles was in, knows not the Scriptures; and all who
be in it are in the immediate, and in that which reveals, and in that which
fathoms all the Ministers of the Letter, who says, God does not give forth now
immediately as he did to the Prophets and Apostles: Since the days of the
Apostles in the apostasy, such as have ravened inwardly from the spirit of God,
the time of Antichrist, Beast, and false Prophets reign, and the mother of
Harlots, who have had the sheeps clothing, such immediate Revelation has been
hid from them; and such should continue until the words of God was fulfilled,
and the fulfilling of the Prophets: But now is the fulfilling of the words of
God, and that come into, which the Prophets and Apostles was in, with which
that is seen and known, and him that has been slain from the foundation of the
world.

Pr. He says, To look to the Light within, that is in opposition to looking
at Jesus. That the light in every man is natural. And if ye turn your eye
inward, ye shall presently see their mover and teacher: and this he calls
foolish and Antichristian. And says, That no man has in him, as of him, that
light spirit and wisdom in the inward parts. See his Epistle.

Answ. All upon the earth that ever comes to the knowledge of the glory of God,
they come to the light in them, which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, which light was before any natural lights was made or created;
which light gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ Jesus; and this is of him, and from him: And all that be from this, be
in the foolishness, and be in the drunken spirit drunkning. And all that ever
comes into Covenant with God, to have Gods Law written in their hearts, they
must come into the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened them withal, which
brings them into him who is the life and knowledge of Christ, and there they
shall find their Teacher within them.

Pr. And he says, To the Law, and to the Testimony.

Answ. Many may have the Old and New Testament, yet stand against the Law and
the Testimony, and put the Old and new Testament for it: For the Law is light,
says Solomon. And the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. And many
may have the Scriptures, and stand against the Light, and say prophecy is
ceased, as the world does now, who are inwardly ravened from the spirit of God;
and despises prophecy, and so quenches the spirit: And the light within does
not deny Jesus: And none knows him nor owns him, but with the light that comes
from him: And the Pharisees and the Jews were opposite to Christ that does
en-lighten every man that comes into the world; and was from that of God in
their own particulars, their eyes closed, and their cares stopped, as you are now.

Pr. He says, Take away the Word of the Lord as declared by the pen, and then
what wisdom is in them. Epist.

He says, If a believer should turn his eye into himself to look for
counsel and direction, be may be led to walk in the flesh as other Gentiles
in the vanities of their minds, and follow their abominations.

Answ. There is none upon the earth hears the counsel of God, or Christ's
teaching, but who are come to the spirit of God within, and to the Light
within: And all people upon the earth, that are led from the vanities of their
minds, and walking in the flesh, they are come to the spirit within, and led
with it; which all the Jews and Gentiles was astray from, while they walked
after the vanities of their minds, and then crucified the Just: And none hears
the counsel of God, or comes into the faith of Jesus, nor the grace of God
that brings their salvation, but they come to feel it within, the grace in
their hearts, and the word in their hearts, and the faith in the heart, there is
that which purifi^s. And all that be from the light and spirit of God within
them, they are in the vanity of their own minds in the flesh, out of the
counsel of God, and the wisdom of God which the Saints had, and was in before
the Scripture was penned or printed. And the wisdom of God, Christ Jesus; them
that had the Scriptures stood against the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, as all you do now, and never come into it; But as
ye come into it that does enlighten every man, etc. the wisdom of God; which
none comes out of the sin and the evil, but who come into that: And that is
not opposite to the Scriptures without, but owns it given forth from the life
in the wisdom of God.

Pr. He calls Perfection a Devilish doctrine. That the Scripture is the
absolute rule, and medium of our faith, page 2. And Timothy did not receive his
furniture and service of the Gospel immediately from the person of Christ. And
he says, If I had seen Christ as Paul did, I might have received the Word in
the same manner immediately from the person of Christ.

Answ. Timothy had faith and the gift of God; and Christ is the Author of
Faith, and so that is received immediately, whereby he was made wise unto
salvation through faith, with which he knew Scripture, and so by that he was
furnished. And we do believe thee, and you all, that ye have not seen Christ as
Paul did, nor the Apostles: So ye be out of the faith, and show he is not in
you, neither do you sit with him in heavenly places. Who ever receives faith
from Christ, or knows Christ the power, knows immediately; which from God thou
have showed thy self a reprobate, and under the judgment of it thou art come.
And the Apostle preached Perfection; and Christ bid them be perfect, as their
heavenly father is perfect, and the Saints was to grow to perfection: And the
work of the Ministry was for the perfecting of the Saints, till they all come
unto a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. And
thou in this have denied the work of the Ministry, that calls the Doctrine of
perfection a devilish Doctrine. And the Scriptures is not the Author, nor the
means of it, nor the rule, but Christ who gives it, and he increases it; and
Faith was before Scripture was given forth: And all they that gave forth
Scripture had faith from God, and they are able to make wise unto salvation
through the faith which is in Christ Jesus. But them that have the Scripture,
and deny the light that does enlighten every man, etc. and hate it, have not
faith, as the Pharisees had not; and so such as the Apostle spoke of which was
reprobate concerning the faith before his decease, that had got the form of
godliness, are them that say, the Scripture is the Medium of Faith, and
absolute rule; but that which rules it, and increases i^, is Christ.

Pr. He says, Christ his grace brings salvation, but not by any such light or
power dwelling in them. Page 6.

Answ. The grace of God which brings salvation, that teaches the Saints, is in
their hearts, and stablisheth it: That dwells within them, which brings
salvation, is their Teacher; the grace of God which brings them every one to
say, this is the Lord which I have waited for, where the everla^ting life runs,
and fl^ws.

Pr. He says, Such as cause divisions are to be marked, that serves not the
Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, their lusts, will, or light within
them, page 12.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every man, etc. Christ Jesus the second
Adam, leads men from their lusts and wills, and serving their own bellies, to
serve the Lord Jesus Christ from whence it comes: For such as serves their own
bellies are out of the light, in the transgression, in the first Adam, in their
own lusts and wills, where thou art among the Apostates deceivablenesse,
mystery of Iniquity, which the Apostle saw was coming in, which since the days
of the Apostles it has reigned; but now with the light discovered and made
manifest. And such as have served their bellies, and serves their bellies,
which the Apostles saw coming in before their decease, are now manifest, such
as deny the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
which is the salvation to the ends of the earth: Are not they casting into
prisons, and haling before Courts, such as will not put into their mouths, that
they do no work for, for their own bellies? and these cause divisions among all
people. Do not these serve their bellies? And are not people come to mark them
what a division they have set among people? yea for Tithes, and maintenance,
and persecuting, and prisoning for it, and haling before Judges and Justices,
by Writs into Courts, and at Assizes and Sessions? Does not these serve their
bellies, that makes all this division, and not Christ? but they deny the light
which does enlighten every man, etc. and so deny Christ the Lord that bought
them. And the light that every man has that comes into the world; and the
light that shines in the heart, it gives the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and brings all off from serving their
bellies, and leads out of the lusts in the fall, which came by Adam in the
transgression.

Pr. He says, To speak the Word of God immediately, and that which I speak I
speak it immediately. I am strengthened against that, and admonished by God, to
hold fast the form of sound words. And that which is able to make men wise unto
salvation through faith. And Timothy was to stir up the gift of God that was in
him mediately, and the putting on of the hands, and the neglecting not the gift
that was in him. And God has published his last dispensation, and nothing more
to be added or altered. page 15.

Answ. It thou art strengthened by God against speaking his Word immediately;
or if thou speaks immediately, thou being strengthened by God against this (as
thou says). In this thou shows thou never knew him; who ever is strengthened
of God, it is by his power, and that is immediate; who ever speaks his word
that lives and endures for ever, it is immediate. In this thou, and you all
have showed your selves to be Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Word of
God, which is immediate, which lives, and abides, and endures for ever, and is
immortal and fades not away; and this thou and you speak not immediately, and
therefore have ye indeed put the Letter for it, that be from the Word of God in
your hearts, not born again of the immortal seed, the Word of God. And
whosoever stirs up the gift of God in them, it is immediate, and by the
immediate. And who ever holds fast the form of sound words, the Scriptures,
they are made wise unto salvation by them through the faith, they are in the
immediate gift of God; and gift which brought Timothy to lay on the hands upon
the Presbytery, and see and divide the word aright, and kept him out of
partiality, it was immediate, and the immediate Word of God that he was to
preach in season and out of season: And since the days of the Apostles from
this have you all been apostatized, and asleep in the night of apostasy in the
great City; though there has been Pipers among you, and sounding of Trumpets,
and the voice of the Brid^ ^^d the grinding of Mills, and the light of Candles.
And the time is coming that B^^ylon shall fall, and become the habitation of
Devils, and the Saints shall rejoice and sing over her, etc.

Pr. He says, It is not properly, and absolute in a full sense that God is
manifest, or glorified in the flesh of his Saints, page 29.

Ans. The Saints are the Temples of God, and God dwells in them, and walks in
them; and they come to witness the flesh of Christ, and they glorify him in
their souls and bodies, and the Lord is glorified in their bringing forth much
fruit: And they witness the seed, the one offering for sin and transgression
to be manifest within, and such are not Reprobates, yet witness the one
offering Christ Jesus; and them that have not him within, they are Reprobates.

Pr. He says, The body is dead because of sin, yea it is, yet in it self is
but a wretched vile body, page 30. And Christ is in, or among believers the
hope of glory. And that person Christ is personally absent from the believers:
And we do not possess the glory of this glory Christ in us. page 32.

Answ. I do believe you that are not come to the Light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, ye do not possess the hope of glory in
you, ye are ab ent from Christ, and do not feel him. But the Saints in the
light receive Christ the hope of glory, and so he is not absent from them, for
they have unity with him and the Father, and knows a change in them from glory
to glory; and witness Christ in them as believers in the light, which walks
not in darkness, that have the light of life. And where the body of sin is
destroyed and put off, they glorify God in their souls and bodies and spirit
which is the Lords, and those are not wretched.

Prin. He says, CHRIST is absent from us while we are in the mortal body.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, who says, the life of Christ is manifest in
their mortal flesh.

Pr. He says, Christ is in heaven with a spiritual body.

Answ. And Priest Higginson says, he is in heaven with a carnal body. And
thus ye are confused, and discerned, who are from the Light, and can speak of
the body of Christ by the Letter, and tell where he rose by the Letter, as the
Priests of old could tell Herod where he should be born; but Christ's body is
glorified.

Pr. He says, The first Resurrection we desire not to account our selves to
have apprehended, page 44. Such as magnify their belly to be some eternal
operation, and making it withal deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them
that perish, glorying in their shame, minding sensual earthly things: All
since the Apostle have not the Ministry of the Gospel immediately, but
mediately from the person of Christ in their believing through their word, page
46. And the Text says, not the word of faith in the heart.

Answ. Romans 10. The word of Faith which they Preached was in their mouth, and
in their heart, nigh them even in their heart. And all since the days of the
Apostles we do believe you have not received the Word immediately from Christ,
as the Apostles did, who have erred and apostatized from them. (So none are
Preachers of the Word in the Truth, but who are Preachers of it immediately)
and such all are the false Apostles, and such as serves not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own bellies, which mind earthly things sensually, and are in
the deceivablenesse of unrighteousness, deceiving the people with the good
words; forcing, and taking maintenance of people they do no work for, and
keeping of them all from the immediate teachings of God, they themselves being
out of it, and concluding all under their own dominion, and shall all agree in
one against the immediate teaching. And they that be out of the immediate
teaching, is under the power of the Beast, and Antichrist, and the great whore
the mother of Harlots: And so they served their bellies, when they went from
the immediate teaching into the strong delusion, as since the days of the
Apostles it has discovered it. How are people all on heaps, out of the life,
and spirit, and power of God? And so all that perish in the deceiveablenesse of
unrighteousness, they are from the light which Christ does enlighten every man
that comes into the world withal; for none perishes who be in the Light. And
the Saints witnessed they were risen with Christ; and them that were risen
sought the things that were above, and not the things upon the earth. And they
that know the first Resurrection, and are in it are blessed, the second death
has no power on them: and they are a top of Adam, and they are in Christ the
resurrection, and the life. And such as be in the first Adam drove from God,
and loves to live in the Fall, looks not after the first Resurrection, neither
desire to come into it.

Pr. He says, The glorious bringing down of the Kingdom and glory is yet to
be waited for even by the Disciples all the time of this mortality. page 54.
All believers are personally from Christ in their mortal bodies: and none of
the Fathers saw the day of Christ as actually revealed, accomplished in their
time.

Ans. He that believes is born of God, and overcomes the world, and abides in
the doctrine of Christ, and has the Son and the Father, and the spirit of
Christ, the life of Christ in the mortal flesh: And the Kingdom of heaven
Christ said was in the Pharisees, and the Saints comes to, and possesses the
Kingdom: And the Kingdom of heaven is within them, is in righteousness, in
peace, in joy in the holy Ghost, and in power, and they were changed from glory
to glory; and they rejoiced with joy unspeakable and full of glory; and that
was in the Kingdom, and this was while they were upon the earth. And Enoch and
Abraham saw the day of Christ, and David saw the betrayer, and whose feet
should be snared, whose eyes should be blinded, and whose back should bow down;
and he saw Judas that betrayed Christ: And Isaiah saw the suffering of Christ,
and how God laid the iniquity upon him. And Isaiah saw his name, and made his
soul an offering for sin. And Daniel said the Messiah should be cut off, but
not for himself, which the Apostles witnessed fulfilled.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures is the power of God unto salvation, page 59.

Answ. Many may have the form, but deny the power of God, which is the
Gospel. And the Letter does not give life, neither is it the power of God unto
salvation.

Pr. He says, That Christ is distinct from every one of us, and without us in
our particular persons, page 61.

Answ. The Apostle said, Christ was in them except they were reprobates; and
they were of his flesh, and of his bone; and they eat his flesh, and drank his
blood, then it was within them; and he is distinct from none but Reprobates,
who hates the Light.

Pr. Nor are we to wait for a further Revelation to us to be given forth, then
the Scriptures. For the Word of GOD came not first to the Gentiles immediately,
but to the Apostles, page 77.

Answ. The Apostles that preached the Word of God, it was immediate to
whomsoever they preached it, for they had received it immediately. For the Word
it self is immediate, for it is the savor of death to the death, and of life
to the life, and none knows the Scriptures but by the spirit that does reveal
them: So all that witness the spirit of God, witness the Revelation, and the
revealing of the Scriptures to them by it, and the things of God, laid up for
them that love God, which the eye has not seen; which the eye may see the
Scriptures outwardly. And none knows the Son of God, neither knows any man the
Father but the Son, and he to whom the Son reveals him. And so people may have
the Scriptures, but not the rev^lation of the Son of God by them. For the
Pharisees had the Scriptures, but not the thing they testified of.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures are the Word of God, and the key of knowledge
page 79. and the opening of all things contained in the Scriptures.

Answ. The Scriptures are the words of God, and that is his Word who fulfils
them, Christ Jesus, whose name is called the Word of God. And that which opens
the Scriptures is the spirit that gave them forth, that is the key of David,
who in the light saw more light. For the Pharisees who crucified Christ, had
that which testified of Christ, the Scriptures. And you that be in the apostasy
since the days of the Apostles; but ye want the key, and have taken away the
key of knowledge: And all that dwells upon the earth, that stops their ears,
and closes their eyes against that of God in them, that does deny the light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, wants the key of
knowledge.

Pr. He says, He gives gifts unto men for the work of the Ministry, some
Prophets, some Evangelists, some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of
the Saints, for the edifying of the body of Christ, until all come into the
unity of the faith, and the knowledge of the Son of God unto a perfect man,
Page 81.

Answ. And yet he said before, Perfection was a devilish Doctrine, and a
fancy: so out of this work, and this Ministry thou have thrown thy self; For
this work, and this Ministry has been lost since the days of the Apostles in
the apostasy; but now is appearing in the end of Babylon, the knowledge of the
Son of God people are coming to, and the unity of the faith from among the
Apostates, who have had the sheeps clothing, but all on heaps about it, being
ravened from the spirit of God inwardly. Among whom the Proclamation has been
in the Steeple Houses, and Pulpits, in Markets, Towns, Disputes: No perfection,
no overcoming of sin; Perfection is a Doctrine of Devils, a devilish Doctrine,
and a fancy, etc. And this has been proclaimed among the Apostates in the
apostasy since the days of the Apostles, by the Beasts authority, under Satan's
power, the deceiver of the Nations, where the mother of Harlots is; But I will
reward her double, and shall take the Devil, and with him the Beast and false
Prophet, and cast them alive into the fire. Rejoice ye holy Prophets over her,
and Saints, who are come into the unity of the Faith, and to a perfect man, and
to the knowledge of the Son of God. And the everlasting Gospel shall be
preached to them that dwell upon the earth, and God shall be feared, and glory
given to him. And none comes to the knowledge of the Son of God, the salvation
to the ends of the earth, the Covenant of Jews and Gentiles, until they come
into the light which Christ does enlighten every one withal that comes into
the world, that gives him the knowledge of the Son of God, of the author of his
faith, and the taste of his fullness, and to become a perfect man.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures is the means whereby the righteousness is
revealed from faith to faith, page 82.

Answ. The Pharisees had the Scriptures read every Sabbath, and the form of
godliness, denied the power, and was reprobate concerning the Faith and the
righteousness of Christ Jesus. And God it is that reveals the faith, and gives
the faith, and the righteousness; and many have the words, and yet not it; who
has it, has the word in their hearts, and the spirit that gave forth the
Scriptures, and sees God the original of all good; and the Scriptures cannot
reveal it, but they testify of it: and all must come into the spirit, before
they know revelation, or know the Scriptures either.

Pr. He says, New Jerusalem is not come down from heaven, and be will make all
things new; not has made, page 83. He says, The body is dead because of sin,
yet there is a remainder of the old man in the members, page 84.

Answ. Where the body is dead because of sin, and that put off by the
Circumcision of the spirit; If the root be holy, the branches are holy also;
and such comes to glorify the Lord in their bodies and souls which are the
Lords, who has redeemed them out of the sin. So they that are Christ's, have
crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts, and all things are become
new. And the new Jerusalem is witnessed come down from heaven among the Saints;
for who witnesses Christ, and know Christ, knows the Tabernacle of God, and
knows the new Jerusalem, and knows the place where there is no curse. And many
knows their Mother now, and that which had led captive, is gone, and going into
captivity.

Pr. He says, The Apostles gave the last and full revelation of the Gospel to
all Nations. And Timothy learned Doctrine mediately, and since none may expect
to receive so immediately as Paul did, but all mediately, page 88, 89. Again,
God now gives, and teaches mediately and spiritually by the testimony of him
mediately, page 90. It is a little necessary to show the vanity of their
pretense of immediate revelation from Gods spirit, page 91.

Answ. All them be in a pretense, and in vanity that are from the immediate
revelation of the spirit of God: And if all people have all Paul's Declaration;
and if they have it not immediately revealed to them by the spirit of God as
Paul had, they have not the comfort of Paul's words, neither have they the
comfort of the revelations. And John says, the everlasting Gospel must be
preached to them that dwell upon the earth since the apostasy from the Apostles
(mark that) And that which Timothy preached, who was in the faith, the gift of
God, and spoke his word, and divided it aright, it was immediate. But since the
days of the Apostles has the immediate been lost; and I know ye cannot
expect it in the state ye all stand in, inwardly ravened from the spirit of
God, and truth. But now is the Saints come to that which ye ravened from, and
the Apostles were in, who witnessed the immediate teachings of God; and Gods
teaching is immediate, and the testimony of Jesus is immediate, which is the
spirit of prophecy; but many have that which testifies of him, and be from the
immediate spirit as was in them that gave forth the Scriptures. And all upon
the earth that be from the immediate spirit of God, as was in them as gave
forth Scriptures; and their Ministry be but mediate, and they be but in the
mediate, they are all Ministers but of the Letter made by man; and what they
have it is but from man, and not from God immediately. Such have nothing but
the sheeps clothing, and inwardly ravened from the spirit of God in them. And
here is Babylon the mother of Harlots, and the Beast, and his names: but over
all have they victory that be in the immediate, in that which the Apostles was
in, and answer that in them all which they ravened from.

Pr. He says, Even now, in the days of their adversity, while the person of
the Lord, the fountain of their teaching, for whom they wait, is personally
absent from them, Page 92.

Answ. All they that hate the light, sees not Christ the fountain of teaching,
and these be them that inwardly ravened: Such have their teachers in corners,
and are in the days of adversity, and eat not the flesh of Christ, nor drink
his blood, and are not of his flesh and bone, and receives not his spirit. But
all who wait in the Light which Christ Jesus has enlightened every man that
comes into the world withal: Every man that comes into the world, with which
light he has enlightened them, their eyes shall see their Teacher that cannot
be removed into a corner. Salvation they shall see, and days of adversity
shall end, and his guiding they shall know, and come to be in unity with
Christ, and eat his flesh, and drink his blood, and be of his flesh and bone;
which thousands do witness this, and the Prophet raised up, the end of the
Prophets; and they that hear him not are to be cut off. And none lifts up the
Son of God, but who be in the Light which lights every man that comes into
the world, and that brings him to understand the Scriptures, and the substance
of them.

Pr. He says, The grace of God that brings salvation, it is a fancy to say it
is stirred up in them; but is a thing wrought in another for them: And to say
the Word of the Lord is within, and the spirit within, is men's following their
own brain, and visions of their own hearts. And he says, whereas they imagine
of a light within them, all that knows God, shows the light in them to be
darkness it self. See Postscript.

Answ. All that knows God, owns the Light within them, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, which light shines
in their hearts, And all that knows God, owns the Light that does ^^lighten
every man that comes into the world, Christ Jesus, and believes in the Lig^^,
and has the witness in themselves. And all that be from the Light within
them, be in the darkness, and stumbles, which have been in this night of the
apostasy from the Apostles Doctrine. And all Gog, and Magog, and the Beast, and
false Prophets, and the Kings of the Earth are making war against the Light
that does enlighten every man, etc. but the Light shall get the victory. And
all that be from the Word of God within in their hearts, and their mouths;
though they speak of the Scriptures without, yet they use their tongues, and
follow their own dreams, and visions of their own hearts and brains, and be
from the Word of God that lives, and abides, and endures for ever. And all that
ever witness the grace of God that brings salvation, they feel it in their
hearts, stablishing of them, and seasoning of their words, and knows the throne
of grace from which it comes: And this does not deny what Christ has done,
but owns him all along from the foundation of the world; and what he wrought,
and what he did, and what he said for us. And all upon the earth that have the
Scriptures, and are out of the spirit that gave them forth, they are all in a
confusion here, and on heaps about words: And the Word of God within, and
spirit within, it leads people from following their own dreams, and following
fancies of their own brains, which all have done many hundreds of years past,
in the apostasy, since the days of the Apostles.

And as for all thy lies and confusion in thy Books, they will be thy own
burden, and the witnsse in thy conscience will answer in the day of thy
judgment; thou shall feel a smart work thou have to go through, who art now in
the pack, and body of confusion, buried under the body of iniquity. But thy
folly is discovered sufficiently to the Nation, and thy spirit is now tried,
who art one of the heads risen up against the Lamb in his day, and his Light,
but it is thy condemnation.

Matthew Caffinn, In his Book called, The Deceiving QUAKER Discovered. His
Principles are as follows, etc.
Pr. HE says, Nothing will cure the soul but the knowledge of salvation which
is made known by outward means, because the will of the Lord in order to
souls peace and rest was discovered by outward means. page 4.

Answ. The Pharisees had outward means, Reading, praying, and expounding, and
yet knew not the souls comfort and peace: For Christ bid them come unto him,
that their souls might have r^st, all that was weary and heavy laden. So if
people have all the Scriptures upon the earth, hearing, and praying, and all
the outward means, and be not in the power, which is the Gospel, which is
immediate, not outward, they have not their souls comfort and rest: And if they
be not in the life that gave forth the Scriptures; for the soul is in the hand
of God, and Christ the Bishop of it, and the Minister of the spirit watches
for it; and they that hearkened what the Spirit said, their souls lived, and
this was not outward. But when men stop their ears, and close their eyes to
that of God in them as the Jews did, and all the inwardly raveners, false
Prophets, and Antichrists in the apostasy, since the days of the Apostles,
such hearken not diligently, and their souls live not. And all such as deny
the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, sees not
Christ the Bishop of their souls, nor their salvation.

Pr. And he says, The Quakers cry wait upon the light within you, and this is
another report then that of the Scriptures. And he says, I do not find where
it is spoke that God spoke in this people. page 5. And t^^ Apostle which was to
go to preach to all Nations, did not turn the people to a teacher within t^em,
to teach them all things. And the Apostle affirms that they was to give them
the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. and not their teacher
within them. page 8.

Answ. It was the Lord that spoke in his Prophets, by their mouths, and in his
Son, and they were the mouth of the Lord. And where God dwells in his people, he
speaks. And the Apostles were to go into all Nations to preach the Gospel, and
preached the Covenant of God; which who came into it, the thing they preached,
the Law written in their hearts, needed not any man to teach them, nor needed
not to teach one another, saying, Know the Lord, as it had been in the first
Covenant, people had been taught to know the Lord; and the Priests lips was to
preserve the peoples knowledge. But who are come into the Covenant of God,
Christ Jesus the second Covenant, they are come into the treasury of wisdom
and knowledge. And the Apostles told the Saints, that the light which shined in
their hearts would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ Jesus; and this is not another report then the Scriptures,
but this is the Scriptures report; And John told the Saints, that the anointing
which abides in them would teach them all things; and the word was in their
hearts and in their mouths, to obey it, and do it, and this was the Ministers
work: and to the hearing of Faith, which Christ is the author of, whereby they
receive the spirit. And the Apostle brought the people to their Teacher within
them, which is the Light, and turned people from the darkness to the Light,
and from the power of Satan unto God; which light shining in their hearts, it
gives them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. See 2 Cor. 4.
Chap. Now light shines in the darkness, they being turned from the darkness
to the light, it gives knowledge: So such come from under the power of Satan
unto God; for while they be in the darkness, they be under the power of
Satan, and nothing gives nor makes manifest the knowledge of the Savior, but
the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which
shines in the darkness; and they being turned from the darkness, and from the
power of Satan, such the God of the world cannot blind: But they in whom this
light shines, and they in the darkness, the God of the World blindes, and the
light of the glorious Gospel they do not know.

Pr. Says Antichrist, If you will believe in the Light within you, it will
lead you to Christ. To wait upon the teacher within, there will be such an
eternal light that will make known all things. page 9. And the Quakers exhort
all ignorant people in the world to depend upon a light within them. Wherefore
be counseled not to be carried away with strange doctrines. page 11.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, is
not a strange Doctrine; the light to the Gentiles, the teacher of the Gentiles,
the salvation to the ends of the earth, the new Covenant to the house of Israel
and Judah. And this was a strange Doctrine to the Jews and to the Gentiles,
though to them is had been promised: So this light shines in the darkness, and
the darkness not comprehending it, such are ungodly wicked men, and they must
be turned from the darkness to the light, before they come to retain God in
their knowledge, or come to that which must give them the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And all that come to
witness their Teacher within, Christ, are possessors of the Prophet Christ
Jesus raised up, the teacher of this people according to the promise: And that
is Antichrist which keeps people from the light, and the false Apostles; for
that was the true Christ, and the true Apostles that bid people believe in the
light, and walk in the light, and brought them to the light within; and the
true Prophet and Prophets said, that he would give him a Covenant to the
Gentles; and this is the true light that does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, and all that denies this are Antichrists and Deceivers.

Pr. He says, How beautiful are them that preach the Gospel, etc. not by the
light within. And the word of faith cannot be said to be in men's hearts and
mouths. page 14. And the sure word of prophecy spoken of in Peter, is the
Scriptures which people must take heed unto, as unto a light shining in a dark
place: and the Saints received the words of the Apostles not as the words of
men, etc. Wherefore the Quakers suppose that God himself is their teacher, and
so err, not knowing the Scriptures. page 17.

Answ. They that preach the Gospel which is the power of God, which gives
relief to that which was captivated in every creature, they are in the light in
their own particulars, with which they know the glorious Gospel, and answer the
light in every man that shines in the darkness, and life and immortality there
comes to the light, through the power which is the Gospel, and this is that
which is beautiful. And the word the Apostle preached of faith, was in the
heart, and in the mouth, and is so understood by all the regenerate. But by all
them that have only the form, and inwardly gone from the spirit, knows it not,
but are of this ignorant; they cry, how should this be so? As the Jews said,
how is it that thou makes us to doubt? Yea, the Word was it that made them
doubt. And the sure word of prophecy, which people do well to take heed unto as
unto a light shining in a dark place (mark) in the dark place, until the day
dawn, and the day star arise in their hearts. This was it that let them see
that no prophecy of Scripture came by the will of man: and this lets them see
that such as went in Cains, Cores, and Balaams way, which were Preachers of the
Form, but wanted the power, but lost the holy Ghost, and such admired men's
persons because of advantage, and came to be dead, twice plucked up by the
roots; which those dead have long reigned, laid upon the earth, whose carcasses
stinks, since the days of the Apostles in the apostasy; so many may have the
Scriptures, and quench the prophecy.

Pr. He says, Christ is not yet so the Word, but be himself testifies the
Scriptures is the Word of God. page 21.

Answ. Christ his name is called the Word of God; and the Scriptures are the
words of God, which Christ the Word of God fulfills, in whom the words all
ends: And such as the light shines in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not, they are not like to see the spirit until they be turned
to the light.

Pr. He says, They err, not knowing the Scripture, when they affirm that the
only means of faith is the immediate teaching of Christ dwelling in them. page
23.

Answ. Could the Apostle preach Christ until he was revealed in him, who is
the Author of every man's faith? And the doers of the Law are justified, and not
the hearers only.

Pr. The Quakers will not own the Scriptures to be the touchstone to try the
spirits withal. page 28. And the Scriptures are not the rule: Oh shameful
deceit! And George Fox said, that he knew Christ come in him page 29. And this
is the deceiving of many; and this cannot be till first the true faith of his
coming be made void, which these men endeavor to do. page 29.

Answ. The holy men of God before the Scriptures was, had a rule, and a
touchstone; and the Pharisees had Scriptures, but were out of the life that the
holy men was in that gave it forth, and wanted the rule, and the touchstone:
But the Apostles that was in the life, and the substance of what they spoke,
they had the rule, and touchstone. And all in the apostasy since the days of
the Apostles, that are ravened from the spirit of God, have had only the
sheeps clothing; but have lost the touchstone, and so have destroyed one
another about Scriptures, the Saints words, which was not the work of the
spirit that gave it forth. And Christ is in you except you be reprobates. So
reprobates witness it not, therefore they stand against it, and therefore are
against them that witness it. And all the false Christ's, and the destroyers of
the Faith of people, are such as draw people from the Light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, and keeping them from witnessing and
receiving Christ in them, the substance and the author of their faith, and such
never knows him come in the flesh, nor the spirit. And such as witness Christ
within them, receive the author of their says, and destroy the faith of none.
And the spirit was the rule of the Saints that led them to give forth
Scriptures; and it lets them see in all ages who got the form of godliness,
who used their tongues, who lived in the spirit, who erred from the spirit, who
run when the Lord had never sent them, whom the Lord had never spoken to: and
this was the rule, and this was the spirit of discerning, and this was the
touchstone to try withal.

Prin. And they say, they own Christ that suffered, meaning the Spirit within.
page 36.

Answ. There is none knows Christ nor his suffering, but with the spirit of God
within; for with the spirit of God in the Prophets, and the holy men, they knew
Christ that was to come to suffer; with the spirit of God in the Apostles, they
knew that was the Christ that did suffer; with the same spirit of God within
people, they now come to see him, and enjoys him, and receive him the same that
did suffer, which none does that are out of the spirit. And the Pharisees that
had Scriptures knew him not, who were gone astray from the spirit; nor the
Gentiles, though they had Scriptures: Neither does the Apostates, who are
inwardly ravened from the spirit of God, though they have all the sheeps
clothing, know the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, though they be for multitude as the sands on the sea shore; nor does any
know it, and receive it, but who comes to that which they ravened from.

Pr. He says, That Christ is a distinct being from the Father. page 40. They
that hold that they are now in the possession of the Kingdom of Christ, and
that they have eternal life now in possession, perverts the right way of the
Lord. Page 42.

Answ. Christ is not distinct from the Father, for he and the Father is one;
the Father is in him, and he is in the Father, and the Father and the Son
dwells in the Saints who are out of the transgression of his Doctrine; and he
that has not the Son of God, has not life: and he that has the Son of God,
has life eternal, really in possession, and such perverts not the right way
of the Lord; but such as have not the Son of God, they are all in the first
Adam, in the crooked ways, and crooked bypath in the world, n^ witnessing
life, but standing against the Light which shines in the Darkness, which
their darkness cannot comprehend; which are all the inwardly raveners since
the days of the Apostles, among whom has been the apostasy and the Apostates,
from w^om the light of life has been hid: But he that follows the Light, he
comes to have the light of life: And he that receives the light, receives
life eternal and to receive the Son of God: And he that receives the Son of
God, has eternal life in substance and possession.

Prin. He says, Death which has passed over all men is not a spiritual
Death: page 51.

Answ Thou and all you shall feel it as a spiritual Death before ye know life
and immortality come to light, and the spiritual wickedness wrestled against,
whose weapons are spiritual, and not carnal, that wrestles not against flesh
and blood, but spiritual wicke^nesses in high places: And that is it which
causes the life of all creatures to groan, and oppresses it, whereby life and
immortality is hid from the eyes, and the power transgressed, whereby the
spirit and soul of man must be sanctified before he witness through
purification, before he come from under the death, and spiritual wickednesses:
For sin brings death, and that is the spiritual wickednesses that is to be
wrestled against, and transgressing the pure Law of God, the commands of God,
brings death. And so he entertains the spiritual wickedness which brings
death upon his life, so comes oppression on his body, and on his spirit, and
his soul burdened and wearyed, and unsanctified, and polluted, which Christ
gives rest to, who is the Sanctification, and Redemption, and Justification;
which the Law goes upon man, agreeable to that of God in him: but Christ's body
makes free from the Law, and redeemes from under it: So as the power of God,
the Gospel is known, and Christ known, the creature comes from under the
bondage of corruption, and life and immortality comes to the light through the
Gospel, whereby the death is known, which who believes shall never dye, and
the life is known, which shall never dye.

Pr. The Quakers deny Water-baptisme, and slight it, and call it a carnal
thing.

Answ. Outward water is not spiritual, but it is a carnal thing as it is in
it self; and it is the spirit alone that baptizeth into the body, which brings
off of things that are seen, which are temporal, as the Apostle said, while we
look not at things that are seen; for the things that are seen are temporal,
etc. and water is seen.

Pr. He says, False Prophets and Antichrists should come in sheeps clothing.

Answ. These Christ said should come, to his Apostles: And before the Apostles
decease, they saw they were come. And the Apostles saw before their decease the
Devil transform himself into an Angel of light; and Satan's Messengers and
Ministers come up, such as had a feigned humility and will worship got up, and
the abstaining from meats, neglecting the body; and such as Jannes and Jambres,
that crept into houses, which had the sheeps clothing, the form of godliness;
and such were the seducing spirits, the doctrine of Devils, which ran into the
strange delusions, bringing in the damnable heresies; which went in Cains,
Cores, and Balaams way; and they saw the coming of the man of sin; and the
Apostles all saw by the spirit of God before their decease, which Christ said
should come, which inwardly ravened, which since the days of the Apostles the
world has gone after them. All this which Christ said should come, which the
Apostles saw was come, and coming, before the coming of the just One: But the
Just One now is come, who has revealed it, the light which does enlighten
every man that comes into the world. Cain, Core, Balaam, false Prophets,
Antichrists, such as goes into strong delusions, and brings in the damnable
heresies, and forbidding the eating of meats, and Marriage; these all inwardly
ravened, an^ these all have been up since the days of the Apostles, and these
have been covered with the sheeps clothing; and the false Prophets and
Antichrists, they inwardly ravened, and the Devil the man of sin he went out
of the Truth, and abode not in it; which Truth which he went out of, all they
that have the sheeps clothing; and he, and they all can get Scriptures, but
inwardly ravened and gone from the spirit of Truth in their own particulars,
such are the destroyers of the creatures, and of the Creation: But with that
which they all ravened from, are they all manifest and discovered, which to
that are now people come, and coming, which these inwardly raveners have had
the sheeps clothing, which have been the Beast, and false Prophets, Devils
messengers and Ministers out of the truth, which have reigned since the days
of the Apostles, having had the sheeps clothing, which have long deceived the
Nations. But now the Devil, Beast, Antichrist, and false Prophets are all
discovered with the light, and life, which they all went from, and the truth.
And the place is seen where there is no Curse; and the Beast, and the false
Prophet is taken, that they shall deceive the Nations no longer, and is cast
into the lake of fire, under whose dominion thou art, whose words shall be thy
burden.

Pr. He says, Let us mind the Law and Testimony.

Answ. Then ye must all mind the Light; for the law is light, says Solomon,
then ye must all mind the spirit, for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy; which many may have the Old and New Testament, yet be from the Law
and Testimony; for the Law and Testimony was before Matthew, Mark, Luke, John,
the Acts, Epistles and Revelations was written, as in the 8. of Isaiah, which
the Prophet minded. And they that say the Old and new Testament is it, shows
themselves to be ignorant of the spirit, and ignorant of the Law and Testimony.
And the Law and Testimony does not deny the Scriptures, but owns them in their
place, and sees the fulfilling of them with the Testimony of Jesus, they see
Jesus who was before Scripture was, and comes to fulfill it.

William Jefferies, his Book, called, ANTICHRIST made known. In which these
PRINCIPLES are following, etc.
Pr. HE says, Men are mistaken in saying, the Romish Whore of Babylon is
Antichrist. And the chief City of this great Whore, the mother of Harlots is
the City of Rome, the Pope, Cardinals, Bishops, and Clergy. And the spirit of
Antichrist denies Christ come in the flesh, and say the light within them is
Christ, when at the best it is but the light of nature. And this is the spirit
of error and darkness, and their light is become darkness. See page 63, 64.
68.

Ans. The light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, is
Christ, and none can confess him in Truth, nor see him, nor lift him up, as
the Serpent was lifted up in the Wilderness, but who be in the Light which
comes from him. And by this thou have overthrown thy self; for them that
confess the light in them to be Christ (which Christ says he is the light)
these does not deny Christ come in the flesh. And the Devil may confess the
Son of God, and the Jews may confess him he is come, as the Apostates
confess him he is come: But none of all these knows him in the flesh, confess
him come in the flesh, or knows his flesh, or the flesh of the Son of Man, but
who be in the Light that comes from him that does enlighten every man, etc.
which light was before any natural created lights was made, glorified with the
father before the world began: and in the light walking, it leads into the day
where there is no night, which light is Christ the Covenant of God, and such
here comes to know darkness past. Now I say, neither Apostates nor Jews,
whose cares were stopped, eyes closed to that of God in them; and the Apostates
that are inwardly ravened, having sheeps clothing, which are Babylon, which
are the Harlot, who ravened inwardly from the spirit of God, brought the world
after them, which was the mother of them all: None of all these can confess
Christ come in the flesh, but only from the Letter, for these knows not his
flesh; the Devil is out of the truth, and truth is a top of him. The Jews
eyes must be opened, and their ears unstopt before they know his flesh. The
Apostates must come all to that which they have ravened from inwardly, before
they come to know Christ's flesh, and are of his flesh, and eat his flesh, and
confess that Christ come in the flesh, who is the offering, and the sacrifice
of the whole world that makes the peace between God and man, and perfects for
ever them that are sanctified. The top-stone laid a top of all sin, and
transgression, Death, Hell, and Grave, bruised the Serpents head. Here is no
Babylon, nor here is no Antichrist, and this the Quakers confess with the
Light within them. And all upon the earth are Antichrists, and knows not
Christ, not Christ come in the flesh, that be from the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, and owns not that, but denies
it. And all Sects. Bishops, mother of Harlots, Antichrists, Popes, Cardinals,
and Clergy, Babylon, Romish Whore, which is gotten up since the days of the
Apostle, inwardly ravened having had the sheep clothing; they are not like,
none of these that are ravened to own the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world. And so Babylon and so Harlots, and so waters, and
so from the Rock.

Pr. And he says the Whore will confess Christ come in the flesh. Satan
transforming himself into an Angel of light, he makes the fountain of waters
bitter, the sweet promises, the water of life; which maker glad the City of God
like wormwood, and changes the taste of them. Page 72 74.

Answ. Antichrist, the mother of harlots, false prophets which went forth from
the Apostles as in John's Epistle. These will confess Christ come in the flesh
as ye do, and all Sects upon the earth; else ye could not deceive the Nations,
but as ye get the sheep clothing. So ye have brought the Nations, tongues,
people, Languages and multitudes to be like waters; But these are the waters
which now begins to grow bitter, for neither the Devil, nor Antichrist, nor
false prophets nor mother of harlots who are gone from the Truth, and are
inwardly ravened, though they may have the sheeps clothing; they cannot touch
the waters of life, nor the fountain to make them waters better that makes glad
the City of God. For ye that inwardly ravened, which got the sheep clothing,
are as the Devil which went out of the Truth, get Scriptures, and their
confession of Christ is as his is, which since the days of the Apostles the
world has been after them. The inwardly raveners have gotten the Scriptures;
who are out of the Truth which the Devil who is out of the Truth the deceivers
of the Nations. And there the beast, false prophets Antichrist, mother of
Harlots, deceivers, man of sin, Devils messengers and Ministers, damnable
Heresies, their tongues are waters, their peoples are waters, their Nations
waters, and multitudes waters: all on heaps about Scriptures destroying one
another, about the prophets words, the Apostles words, Christ's words, Ministers
maintenance. Now the Devil, the Beast, false prophets and Antichrist is taken,
and mother of Harlots, and cast in the Lake of fire, and Babylon confounded,
and the everlasting Gospel shall be Preached to every Nation, kindred, tongue,
and people. And as for all the rest of the stuff in thy book, thy pack of
confusion, Babylons children, it will fall heavy upon thy self, and be thy own
burden, and press thee under; which in the day of thy Judgment thou shall
remember that I am a friend to all souls. There is neither Jews that
professes a Christ was to come, nor Christians that professes a Christ is
come; nor none upon the earth (though ye have all the Scriptures) knows the
flesh of Christ, but who ownes the light which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world. For the Jews knew not the flesh of Christ, though they
had Scriptures, (but crucified him) whose ears were stopped, and eyes closed to
that of God in them: the Gentiles knew not the flesh of Christ who was astray
from the life of God, neither do those called Christians know the flesh of
Christ who are inwardly ravened from the spirit of God in them, though they
have gotten all the sheep clothing, and talk Christ is come, and died at
Jerusalem, as the Jews could say of him to come, and to be born at Bethlehem;
yet they could not confess him come in the flesh, nor did not know his flesh,
no more do these Christians know his flesh, though they have all the form of
godliness; But who comes to the seed Christ himself, they know it in them,
then they shall know the one offering (a top of all the worlds Sects) for the
sins of the whole world, which none knows the flesh of Christ, nor Christ, nor
as God was in Christ, but as every one comes to the light with which they are
enlightened: which who hate it, knows him not, but it is your condemnation,
and that ye shall all feel at last. So the one offering which is Christ is set
over the whole world, and his flesh the world knows not, nor the Princes of
the world, which where the seed is come out of the grave, it knows him, the
seed knows him, and are of his flesh, and of his bone, it is their meat and
drink. And Christ is come now, who treads the wine press alone without the
City, though all the Beasts and false prophets and Antichrists upon the earth
rise against him, yet the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory, and the
Nations shall be ruled with a rod of iron, and he that was dead, is alive
again, him by whom the world was made is manifest, and he rules in his Saints
and the Tabernacle of God is with men.

Pr. And whereas thou says that Antichrist will be a single person.

Answ. which is contrary to the Apostle 1 John 1.18. who says, even now there
are many Antichrists whereby we know it is the last time; and they went out
from us, but they were not of us the Antichrists which is against Christ.

The agreement of Diverse Ministers of Christ so called in the County of
Worcester and parts adjacent which are 58. in Number. Some of their Principles
follows.
Pr. THey have sought Gods direction out of the Scriptures which they call his
holy word, and what is the greatness of their work, and edification and
salvation of souls, etc. And do humbly bewail our too great neglect, who have
not frequently, and earnestly labored in so great a work: and especially that
we have done no more in Catechizing, and personally instructing, etc. Page 3.

Answ. It was the Ministers work before the Apostasy to go from house, and warn
all both small and great, yea with tears; this was the work of the Ministry in
the Spirit; And they was in the spirit that gave forth Scriptures: and so
brought people into the life that gave it forth, with which they was able to
instruct one another, and to stir up the pure in one another. And the work of
the Apostles, the Ministers of the Gospel and Christ was to bring people into
the life that gave forth Scriptures, and into the substance Christ Jesus that
the Scriptures testified of; But you who are fain to seek in the letter for it,
in the Scripture for it; and have it not from within, as they had that gave
forth the Scripture and received it of God: ye are never like to beget to God;
And when truth comes, as it did among the Pharisees, which came to end their
forms, and their shadows, the builders stood up, and rejected it in their
forms. And now since the days of the Apostles, such as have had the
Scriptures, but inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, are standing against
the light Christ Jesus that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world; And so ye may get people into a form, and cover them with sheep
clothing. Now Christ is come, Reigns and Rules, his Saints with him, all rise
up in arms against him, Kings of the earth, beast, and false prophets, the
Dragon and his Angels; but the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory,
glory to the highest. And so that is but the blind zeal that is stirred up in
the Apostates, against Christ in this age, as it was in the Jews against
Christ in their age. But Jews must come to that which they closed their eyes,
and stopped their ears against, and the Apostates must come to that which they
ravened from, before they be stirred up in the pure zeal.

Pr. And you say aged men are commonly more ignorant then the younger sort, and
our unskilfulness, and others unfitness for the work, etc. Page 7.

Answ. Your unskilfulness, and ignorance of your old men that is the cause of
that ye have been ignorant of the work of God, therefore is there so much
ignorance among you and the old men; and this you may publish to your shame to
the Nation. And who will be Catechized by unskilful men, and ignorant men? But
this is it, that your folly might appear, and that ye might publish it forth,
and set it upon the house tops, that all that run might read you 58. Pastors
and Teachers, and your young men as your old men.

Pr. You say ye receive the public maintenance to this end that you may be
enabled to lay out your endeavors for the good of the whole Parish from whence
we receive it. And we are further oblidged in justice to do our best for their
salvation.

Answ. How can men that are ignorant, and unskilful, (and the old men are yet
foolish) and your unfitness do good for the salvation of men, when that the old
men are so ignorant, yea, more then the young? But it is the public
maintenance that enables you, which did not enable the Apostles; And that is
the thing which you in the Apostasy have looked at; For take away that from
you, and pluck down your Schools and Colleges: we should have but a few
Ministers in England among you; a few instructers. So these are all made by
men, since the days of the Apostles in the Apostasy, and teaching for filthy
lucre, and the love of money which he ought not, disapproved of by Paul and
Timothy. And take away but your public maintenance, and few of you would be
able to Preach the Gospel freely; if this trial, and proof was among you, to
prove you, it would be found that your God was your belly, and him it was ye
served; and him it is that means, helps; and enables; which Christ and God was
the enabler of his Ministers, and Prophets, and Apostles; whom the earth was
his, and they trusted in him: in Christ by whom all things was made, that was
made and Created.

Pr. It astonished us many times (ye say) when we have talked with some of our
hearers that they know so little of our Doctrine, which we have taught to them
many years. It is sad to us to hear many men that can talk so about matters of
the world understandingly, that can scarce speak a word of sense about the
matters of their salvation, or scarce give a reasonable answer of a Question of
the Foundamentals of Christanity. Page 19.

Ans. Thus you have spoken to your shame and it is manifest that here is like
people, like Priest, that shows ye have not profited them at all: and it
shows that the Apostles words are fulfilled among you, the doctrines of men,
the commandments of men, they perish in the using of them; And who are greater
in the world in striving for the earth for maintenance, for Tithes, casting
into prison, hailing before Courts, and Sessions, then you that have called
your selves Pastors, and Ministers of the Gospel, which your fruits have
declared to all the Nation? and so unlike the Ministers of Christ, as your
hearers are unlike Christians (by your own relation) without reproving one
another, which the Apostle reproved them that taught for filthy lucre: Christ
reproved them that were called of men master, and reproved them that taught for
money, and for means, and those that minded earthly things, But how can ye
reprove these things and live in the things your selves, one to reprove
another, and be in the same thing himself; this will stinck among all sober
men, and set you all on heaps among one another, as ye are. So how can ye, or
they know any thing of the foundamentals of Religion, or salvation, or your
people either? that deny the light that does enlighten every man that comes
into the world. Christ Jesus the foundation of God, the wisdom of God, the end
of the Prophets, and the Law, types, figures, and shadows; ye have denied the
very key that opens to it. Therefore ye all come short of the glory of God: and
Teachers, and people are all fallen into ignorance; since the days of the
Apostles in the Apostasy: but now Christ is come, and coming to reign.

Pr. They say upon the sad experience of men's ignorance, we have been brought
to consideration of our neglect, etc. And our hearts have been brought low to
think how we have wronged Christ, least God should require your blood at our
hands. Page 19

Ans. Repent, repent for ye have long deceived the people, and the blood will
lie upon you, and the blood of many that has been shed in the Nation, and have
dyed in prison, and whipped, and stockt, and beat through your means: the blood
lies upon you all. Repent: the Judgment of the great whore is come. The
Magistrates begin to see you, and you shall not ride upon them. And your
ignorance and all your hearers, you may well cry out of them, Repent, and come
to the light which Christ Jesus has enlightened every one withal that comes
into the world, to give you the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Christ Jesus, out of the ignorance: which none comes to the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God, etc. but who comes to the light that
shines in their hearts (yea in darkness) Christ has enlightened them withal;
Where it shines out of darkness, it gives them the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And all are ignorant, who are
from the light, and wrongs Christ, and you have all wronged him that have
denied the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, who
are inwardly ravened from it, and have had the sheep clothing: and so have
kept people in ignorance, blindness and darkness. But now the true light
shines, the day of glory is dawning; Christ and the Saints is reigning, and
have the Kindom, glory to the Lord for ever.

Pr. They say, Alas that any reasonable soul should be so brutish, most of
their lives is spent in ignorance, and worldliness, living in the flesh, etc.
Page 24.

Ans. Here is the fruits of your Ministry. Are not ye ashamed to manifest your
fruits thus now to the whole Nation? Is this like a vineyard, that your people
that you have taken maintenance of, and the Magistrates, that they should give
you maintenance all this time, and your people spend most of their lives, in
ignorance, worldliness, and the flesh? Is this like the fruits of the Ministers
of Christ, or the fruits of the false prophets, that have not profited the
people at all? Did not the Apostles keep them from them that bewitched them,
and would have brought them into the flesh. And ministered to the spirit, got
out the wheat, and the corn. And are not you ashamed to publish such a thing to
the Nation, you 58. Ministers. To say a reasonable soul should be so brutish?
can that which is reasonable be brutish? that which is brutish Wars against
the soul. But this is but to discover your Ministry, and what ye minister to,
and that the soul ye are ignorant of it.

Pr. They say, Is it not pity that God should have any reasonable Creature that
knows not his maker, or his Laws, or his own happiness? Is it not pity, that
after all that Christ has done, and suffered for the world, that any that
calls themselves Disciples, should so little know him, and the salvation, and
should set so light by him. Page 26.

Answ. In this you all Pastors and Teachers have showed your work; what does
not the creatures yet know their Maker? what are they heathen yet? what do not
the creature yet know Gods Laws? what worse then the Jews, heathen, and them
that call themselves the disciples of Christ, and Christians so little know
him, after Christ has suffered for them? what has been your work all this
while, what have ye been doing, what have ye had wages for, that they so little
know him that has suffered for them, and their salvation? and should set so
light by him how can they prize him, or see any light from Christ, when ye keep
them from the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world?
which none sees salvation but with it; and by it; and none sees Christ that
suffered, but with it, and by it: and none comes to see, and know Christ's end,
and the end of Gods Law, and prize him, and set much by him, but by the light.
And does not reasonable creatures know the Law of God? Are not reasonable
creatures in the faith? are not the unreasonable out of the faith now that
knows not their Maker, nor his Law, nor little of the suffering of Christ, or
their own happiness, and little know their salvation, and set light by Christ?
Are not all these your fruits? Are not all these your hearers, that ye complain
of to the Nation? Have not ye now discovered your selves in this that have the
form of godliness, but denies the power? that keeps people always learning,
but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth? But such as be led away
by with diverse lusts and laden with sins. And now are ye complaining that your
people serves the lust of the flesh, and the earth, not knowing their Maker,
nor knowing his Laws, nor their salvation, and setting light by Christ: this
ye may complain of with shame, who are such as crept into houses before the
Apostles decease, and since ye have gone over the world; But now ye are
discovered with that which gives to see the end of the Apostasy and Apostates,
which gives to see before the world was made.

Prin. They say if the Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost; whom the
God of this world has blinded their minds, of them that believe not, least the
light of the glorious Gospel should shine unto them; who is the image of God.
And the people perish, when visions fail, etc. Page 28.

Answ. Who believes not in the light which does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, the God of the World blinds their minds. Every one that comes
into the world is enlightened, that through the light they might believe. And
every one that believes in the light, has the witness in himself, and
abides not in the darkness, but has the light of life. And you that keep
people from the Light that does enlighten every one, etc. are the messengers of
Satan out of the truth; And the God of the world blindes the minds of such as
do not believe in the Light that every man that comes into the world is
enlightened withal, that all through it might believe. And who believes in it
that does enlighten every man, etc. the light of the glorious Gospel shines in
them, which is the mage of God.

Prin. And you say, Visions are ceased, and Revelations, and immediate
Inspirations.

Answ. But I say, Repent every one of you, and come to the Light; for the
burdensome stone is fallen upon you, and all that stands against the light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, shall split your
selves against the Rock, and be grownd to powder. And every one that comes
into the world, Teachers, Professors whatsoever, must come unto the light which
Christ Jesus the salvation, that saves the souls, has enlightened them
withal, before they come to life, or know the light of the glorious Gospel
shining in their hearts, or come to the end of the Law, or end of the Prophets,
or end of the Revelation, or out of the apostasy, or out of the Jews state,
whose ears was stopped, and eyes blinded, out of the Gentiles state that goes
astray after the vanities of their mind. So all you, and all upon the earth,
Jews, Gentiles, and Christians of what sort soever, must come to the light
which every one of you is enlightened withal, before every particular comes to
see their salvation or satisfaction; yea, the salvation to the ends of the
earth, the glory of Israel, the light of the Gentiles, which the apostate
Christians have ravened from the spirit of God within them, have got the form,
but stands against the Light that does enlighten every man, etc. such have
caused the way of truth to be evil spoken of, yea among other Nations of the
Heathens. They have been hot, and broyled in their lusts, having had the form
of godliness, and sheeps clothing; but all standing against the Light that
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, smiting, striking their
fellow servants. (Now the Lamb is come, and the Saints to reign with him.) Such
their portion must have with the hypocrites, who to every one will give a
reward according to their works. And the Lamb, and the Saints shall have
victory, him by whom the world was made before it was made, glorified with the
Father before the world began. Now is the seed Christ come to reign, and the
Just have pre-eminence. And I say to you all Subscribers to all these Books,
Priests, Professors, Teachers whatsoever, your patience would have better
covered your shame and folly then your have, extremes, and rashness, But your
folly must come forth, that to all men it might appear.

Abundance more of Stuff is in it which is not worth mentioning, whose words
shall be your own burden, the witness in all your consciences in the day of
your judgment, when your works are all tried with fire shall answer, to a
friend of your souls, and your goods eternal; but judges your fruits, words
and actions, for the day of the Lord is come that will try every man's work.

John Stalham, who calls himself a Servant of the great Bishop of Souls, who
watches over a Flock at Terling in Essex, In his Book called, The Reviler
rebuked. These are some of his Principles following.
Pr. HE says, Immediate Ruptures and Revelations seduceth simple peoples
minds, etc. And the perverse Principles of their selfe-adorning light. And the
Quakers deny all external worship of divine Authority, as not to be found
among us: And let Learning be advanced among pious men, for God has his witty,
and learned ones. And the life of their Religion is the rule of the holy
Scriptures, the glory of the blessed Trinity. See his Epistle to the Protector.

Answ. The life of Religion is the spirit that gave forth Scriptures; for all
that have the Scriptures, and be out of that, be in the feigned Religion. And
the Scripture no where speaks of a Trinity, but the Papists, who be apostatized
from the life of the Scripture. It speaks of Father, Son, and holy Ghost, and
the water, spirit, and blood; and the learned ones upon earth never knew Christ
with all their natural learning. And if one get all the Naturals upon the
earth, and the Scriptures in all the natural Languages, and one supreme power
of a Nation tolerate all these Languages to be the Original, and they have
the Scriptures in all these Languages, these are witty ones; but these knows
not God nor Christ by all this, though they have all the Scriptures, while they
are from the spirit of God that gave forth Scriptures: For that which brings to
know God, is by the revelation of the spirit of God, the light which does not
deceive the mind; but their minds be deceived that be from the light. And all
worships that be in the spirit, and in the truth, that gave forth the
Scriptures, called the Old and New Testament, that we own, and is owned among
the Quakers. For God who is a Spirit, who led his servants, and Prophets, and
Son by his spirit to speak forth the Scriptures, which Christ the Son is come
to fulfill, who says, they that worship God, must worship him in spirit, and
in truth, and that among the Quakers is owned. And the light which comes from
Christ leads from perverse Principles, and adorning self, for it leads out
of its righteousness; But perverse men ever stood against it in all ages, and
so spurned against the foundation, and overthrew themselves.

Pr. He says, The spirit speaking in the Scriptures. And them that say they
have no sin, a gracious heart will slight and despise. He says, the Kingdom
of God is not within them, Luke 4. And he says, The soul prepares it self
for death. See Epistle to the Church.

Answ. Such as had gracious hearts, never despised him that had no sin, but the
ungracious did. As for example, all the Pharisees against Christ, and against
the Apostles, and Saints, and the holy men: And the Apostle which told the
Romans, they were made free from sin; and they that were dead to sin, how
could they live any longer therein? he slighted them not, but encouraged them.
So we find thee not to be a Minister of Christ, and have proved and tried thy
spirit to be of such as say they are Apostles, and are not; And the spirit
spoke in them that gave forth the Scriptures, so they were declared forth. And
men may have the Scriptures, and not know the spirit that spoke in them that
gave forth Scriptures: So that is the cause that all people be on heaps about
the words, and saying, the spirit speaks in the Scriptures, which spoke in the
holy men of God that spoke them forth, and learned of God the Father of
spirits. So who have not it, the spirit, have but Letters, and are Ministers of
the Letters, and not of the Spirit. And the Kingdom of heaven is within you,
says Christ in Luke 17. to the Pharisees, and thou says with, or among them.
And I say, that is the Kingdom within them which never consented to sin, and
in you all, which one day ye shall witness; which the gazer, and observer
abroad, his eye and ear is closed, and stopped too, which he must come to,
before he be as a little child, and know the leven that levens up the new lump;
and knows the Kingdom, which is like unto a grain of mustard seed; and where
the diligent waiting is, the soul comes to live, and the everlasting Covenant
felt. And thou that brings souls to be prepared for death, thou art more like
to do that, then to present them to God, a slayer and executioner, so not a
servant to the Bishop of souls, where the soul lives, and rejoices, and
comes out of death, and magnifies God the Savior: And so all the Ministers of
Christ their work is to prepare souls out of death, for life.

Pr. He says, The Bible is the souls physic: And people must depend upon the
spirits speaking in the Scriptures. He says, the person of Christ is not his
manhood: and the natural light the Quakers call Christ within, and nature
grace. And he says, The body of sin is in the believer till he lay down the
body. Epistle.

Answ. The souls refreshment is Christ, and Physician Christ. Many may have the
Bible, and not know it, and the Scriptures, as the Pharisees had. The souls
Physician is that which the Scriptures speaks of; which many may have the
words, the Bible, and yet have not the thing it speaks of; and they that have
the thing it speaks of, have both. And many holy men had their souls Physician
before the Scriptures was written and printed: and they that had the spirit
that gave forth Scriptures, they had the souls Physic; and they know all the
springs is in God, and the Lord, who in his hand was the souls: And such as are
in the spirit they depend upon that, and they come to see the Scriptures by the
spirit given forth from it; and such comes into the unity of the spirit, and
the light which is Christ within, by which all things was made and created, was
before the natural Lights was, and Nature: For all the Naturalls that was
made, was made by the Light Christ Jesus, the wisdom, who is the wisdom of
God, by which all things was made, with which wisdom we see over the natural
Lights, and over Nature. And the grace (that comes from the Throne) that brings
salvation, which is the Saints Teacher, teaches not to call Nature grace. And
he that believes is borne of God, and he overcomes the world, and enters
into his rest, and shall never dye. And he that believes has victory, yea
while he is upon the earth, he comes to witness the Circumcision that puts
off the body of sin, and makes free from it, which the synagogue of Satan
cannot witness.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures are the Word of God, page 4. And the Spirit is
given by the Letter. And he says, the spirit proceeds from that which is put
within the Book or Bible. page 5. And I judge them that pretend the spirit
without the Scriptures. And the Scripture is a more sure rule then visions and
revelations. page 7. And God that gave the letter, gives the spirit with it,
and by it. page 9.

Answ. God gave the spirit before he gave forth Scriptures: And the Devil and
wicked men may get Scriptures, but they have not the spirit, nor none have it,
but as they come to feel it given from God, as it was given to them that gave
forth Scriptures. And so people are to find the spirit of the Father speaking
in them, as it did in them that gave forth Scriptures, then the spirit answers
to the spirit that gave forth Scriptures; then there is an unity with the
words, and with God of whom they learned; which many may have the Bible, and
not know the spirit that spoke it forth, but be erred from it: And the
Scriptures are the words of God, of truth, God spoke all these words. He that
adds to these words, the words of God is pure. Christ is the Word, his name is
called the Word of God, who was before the words were spoken forth, who comes
in the volume of the Book to fulfill the words: And the spirit was before the
Scripture was given forth; for it led them to speak it all forth, the words of
God, as they had learned of God: So the spirit comes not by the Letter, but the
Letter comes forth from the spirit. And many had the Scriptures, and knew not
the Revelation, and judged the Revelation of the Son of God, and judged Christ
who was come, the end of the vision, which was for an appointed time. So
therein thou have concluded thy self to be among them that have the
Scriptures, and sets up that beyond the Revelation of the Son of God, which is
the end of Scriptures; which none knows the father but the Son, and he to whom
the Son reveals him, though they may have all the Scriptures. And the things of
God is revealed by the spirit of God.

Pr. And he says, The Scriptures is the rule and the guide of Saints. And
says, the old administration of the Covenant of grace is abolished. page 13.
He that understands, Matthew. 11.2 27. of immediate revelations only, shuts out
all mediate revelation by the Scriptures, and falsely accuses the Lord of the
Scripture. page 14. And the Apostle says, not that the spirit reveals the deep
things of God. If we should deny the Scriptures to be the rule, we should deny
the Scriptures of God. page 18.

Answ. The Saints rule was the spirit that gave forth Scriptures; and the Word
of God which fulfills the Scriptures, without him they can do nothing, if they
have all Scriptures. And the spirit of truth shall lead into all truth. And
none knows the Scriptures, nor God, nor can be a Minister of the spirit by a
mediate Revelation, but a Minister of the Letter; for who are Ministers of the
spirit, are immediate, and are in the immediate revelation of the Scriptures to
them by the spirit that gave them forth; and these ministers to the spirit, and
brings people to God the Father of spirits, that they may know what to reveal
to others they minister to. And all they that have the Scriptures, and not the
spirit that gave them forth, they are on heaps about words, and wants the rule.
And the Covenant of grace, which is the end of the old Covenant, is witnessed
and stablished, and cannot be abolished, which ends the decaying Covenant. And
as for abolishing the Covenant of grace, thou do not know what thou speaks
of. And the Apostle said, the deep things of God was revealed by the spirit of
God; and no one knows the Scriptures and the things of God, but as God unto
them does reveal by his spirit; which in this thou have showed thy ignorance of
that spirit guided the Saints to God the Father of spirits, which revealed unto
them the deep things of God, with which spirit again the Scriptures are known.
And the spirit which always rules the Saints, and guides them up to God, and to
speak forth the Scriptures. They did not deny the Saints words spoken before
them, but was in unity with them in the spirit, and so came to the spirits of
just men; which none does but who are come into the Saints rule that gave forth
Scriptures. And so people have had the Scriptures, but inwardly ravened from
the spirit, thou and the rest of thy fellows, and have been all on heaps about
words, and so void of the revelation that they were in that gave forth
Scriptures. For all are unlearned upon the earth that are not in the immediate
inspiration as they were in that gave forth the Scriptures, and in the tongue
of the unlearned, like the Egyptian Sea.

Pr. He says, Printing was a rare invention, and it was the gift of God. page
21. And only Gods servants preached by the written Copies, and since by the
printed volume. page 22.

Answ. That which is invented, and men have invented, it is not the gift of
God; and men only preaching from the Copies written, and since by the Volumes
printed. in this have thou showed that you have had only the sheeps clothing;
and that has been it which has made you Ministers: For they that were the
Ministers of the spirit, their only preaching was not from copies and volumes,
that did not make them Ministers, but what they had received from the Lord,
that they declared forth, and was not Ministers of copies and writings only.
But the copy and writings of the Scripture, had you them in the life that gave
them forth, you would have gathered people into the unity; which being ravened
from it, you bring them all upon heaps.

Pr. The letter or writing of the spirit of God is the Law, and touchstone.
page 23. He says, the Scriptures is the spiritual sword. page 26. And the
Scriptures is the ground of all Saints actions. And have not I written unto
thee excellent things in counsel and knowledge? page 32.

Answ. The Pharisees had Scriptures, and had not the spirit that gave them
forth; so they wanted the Word of God, the sword of the spirit, and they stood
against the substance of the Scriptures. And they had Scriptures, but they were
out of the Saints actings; for they turned against the Just: And so does all
upon the earth that have the Scriptures, but out of the spirit that gave them
forth, they are out of the ground of the Saints actings. And none knows the
excellent things written of knowledge nor counsel, but who be in the spirit
that gave forth Scriptures: Though they have the Scriptures in their own
knowledge and wisdom, yet they understand not the excellent things written,
but as they come into the spirit that gave them forth. So thou art a man not
dividing the word aright; and many may have the Scriptures, yea the whole world
may have the Scriptures, and not being in the spirit that gave them forth, they
break into Sects among one another. And the Devil may come with Scriptures, but
has not the spirit to fight withal, who is out of the Truth.

Pr. He says, Women are excluded from speaking, though endued with more then
ordinary gifts, and they are not allowed to teach. page 34. And the Canon of
the Apostles is the key to open the Scriptures. And the sure word of prophecy
is the Scriptures. page 38. which is a more sure word then an immediate voice
from heaven. He says, the word which the Apostle speaks of to the Romans, in
the mouth, and in the heart, is the Gospel promises without, Deuteronomy. 30. And the
Scripture, Books, and Chapters, is the light that shines in man's heart, and the
new Creature is too narrow for a rule. page 44.

A. The new creature is subject to the Law of God, for he is in Christ who is
the end of Law, Types, Figures, Shadows, Parables, and there is rule,
direction, counsel, wisdom; and the old man comes to be subjected, which is
not subject to the Law of God, and here comes the blessing and the peace of the
Israel of God, who walk according to the rule of the new creature; for he walks
in the life that gave forth Scripture, which the old man walks out of. And he
may say, the Scriptures is his rule, but he is not subject to the witness of
God in himself; nor owns not the light which Jesus Christ has enlightened him
withal, but does the evil, and loves the darkness, which light is his
condemnation. And the law is light, and the Testimony of Jesus is the spirit of
prophecy. And many may have the old and new Testament, and stand against the
light, the spirit of prophecy within. And many may have the Scriptures, Books,
and Chapters, and stand against the Light Christ Jesus, that does enlighten
every one that comes into the world: And so put the Letter for the Light, and
walk from the light in their own particulars, which should lead them into a new
life: Such comes not to know the new life, nor the blessing of the Israel of
God. And the woman (the Evah) must be silent, for she was first deceived; and
the woman Jezebel, that calls her self a Prophetess, that must not be
suffered to teach, or to usurp authority; But Christ in the male, and Christ in
the female, is beyond the first Adam, or Evah, or she that calls her self a
Prophetess, or the great whore that reigns over the Kings of the earth, there
is all their languages under: Christ in the Females shall comprehend this as
well as in the Male, and give judgment, and the daughters shall prophecy as
well as the sons. And such as limit or quench the spirit in the Males or
Females, are them that are apostatized and ravened inwardly from the spirit of
God, and despise prophecy, only have the sheeps clothing (such as thou and
you) and knows not the spirit, but are ravened from it, the spirit of God that
has power over all flesh, and so makes your selves ignorant of it, and are
such as quenches it in others. And the spirit of God in the Apostles being
witnessed, it opens the Scriptures, is the key, lets to see what has been
since the days of the Apostles, and ruled, and reigned, and had the dominion,
the Wolf in the sheeps clothing; which have deceived the Nations, and such as
have led the world, and brought them all upon heaps, and have never heard the
voice of God, and have published it in the Nation in print, nor the voice of
Christ, and have not the same infallible spirit as the Apostles had, and no
immediate revelation nor inspiration as they had: so these have taken away the
key of knowledge from among people since the days of the Apostles; and as for
the word Canon, ye may go to the Papists. The Apostles showed the fulfilling of
the Scriptures, that Christ was come, and the Apostles saw what Christ said
should come, which inwardly ravened, went forth from them, which the world has
gone after; which now we, with the same spirit the Apostles was in, which you
all ravened from, do see ye, and what has reigned since the days of the
Apostles. Now is the fulfilling of the Prophets; And the word was in the
Apostles, and in the Saints, yea the word of faith, and this comes to fulfill
the Scripture, this word of faith which was preached in the heart, and in the
mouth; and which was promised before. And the light was in the Apostles heart
that shined, and the sure word of prophecy that did let see, and foresee, was
in the hearts of people which led them to give forth Scriptures, and that which
fulfills the Scriptures, the prophecy, is of Christ, who ends it; and the
spirit led them to speak it forth, the spirit of prophecy: which many may have
the Scriptures, and not have the more sure word of prophecy; And many may have
the Scriptures as the Pharisees had, and stand against the Revelation of the
Son of God from heaven, which is surer, for he was before Scripture was, who
ends the Scriptures. for many may have Scriptures and be out of the life, and
not know him, the Revelation of the Son of God; as the Jews did not, and so
say the Scriptures is more sure then Revelation from heaven, so more sure then
the Son of God who is greater then all; and the Scripture was given forth by
Revelation, and none knows it but by Revelation.

Pr. He says Christ does not give to every man the light that leads to the
Father, and there is not in every man that redeeming light, which leads to
the Father. And it is false to say the light which John speaks of, is a
salvation light; he says the light in every man is but the candle light of
natural understanding. page 56. And the light which every man has, is a low
common benefit, and no drop of this immortal seed. page 57. 58. Nor is the
light which every man has, his Mediation. And I call the light which every man
has, natural. page 59. And the light which every man has, teaches nothing of
the way, truth, and life of Jesus Christ. page 60. And the light which is in
every man is opposite to Scriptures, page 61. This is the light which is in
every man's conscience which is but natural. And the Apostle says he warns
every man, and teaches every man that he might present them perfect in Christ
Jesus. But he says the Apostle did not warn every man: he did not level the
Saints light with every man's. page 62. It is not meant that every man is
enlightened, but the Church. Page 63.

Answ. I am the light of the world, and does enlighten every man that comes
into the world says Christ the life. So the light which every man that comes
into the world is enlightened withal, will let them see the life which it comes
from, will let them see their salvation Christ Jesus, will let them see their
Mediator, will let them see the truth, for the light is truth, which comes
from Christ the truth. And the light is Christ the way, the truth, the life
that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world. In him was life, and
the life was the light of men, in him by whom the world was made, which light
was before any natural lights was; the Sun, Moon and Stars are natural lights;
and these was made by Christ the light, who does enlighten every man, etc.
which men having a light from him by whom the world was made, by whom all
things was created, who was before any things was created, Lets them see before
any created light, natural light, made lights, which gives every one the
knowledge of life: which lets every one see the salvation to the ends of the
earth; which lets every one see the Covenant of God that love it, and believe
in it, they come to the life Christ, him from whence the light comes. The
light is of the immortal seed of Christ Jesus, one with the Saints light, the
Saints believe in that the world hates, and receives that which the world
hates: so it is the worlds condemnation: it is the condemnation of them that
hate it. And so was he promised a Covenant to the Gentiles, as well as to the
Jews and so does enlighten every man that comes into the world, according to
John's witness and testimony, to the Priests, and Levites which came from
Jerusalem to examine him. So the Priests now examine us in this age and
professors which the Quakers are witnesses of, and bears testimony to, which
Paul warned every man, and taught every man, that he might present them perfect
in Christ the light. So the light is one with the Saints light, that condemns
the unbelievers. And the light which every man that comes into the world is
enlightened withal; that through it he might believe, and who believes in it,
and receives it, he has the light of life, and they become the Sons of God;
and who hate it, it is their condemnation: and they are against Scriptures, but
the light is not against Scriptures, but ownes them. And so the light is not so
low as ye esteem it, for it was before any thing was made or created: as for
the word Trinity, there is no Scripture for it: without ye find it in the
Common Prayer Book. And the light in the converted shines out of Darkness in
their hearts, and gives them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God,
etc. And the light in the unconverted shines in the Darkness, and the Darkness
comprehendes it not.

Pr. He says that the light without the Scriptures is no light. Page 64. And
to call the light that does enlighten every man the word of God, is
contradiction. And there was no light before the Scriptures, which is now
revealed in Scripture. page 64. That God is light, not the light in every man's
conscience. page 68. And the best light that every man has, is but created.
Not one man in the world knows God till he find him in Scripture. page 69 The
Lord Christ the Eternal Son, the Essential word of the Father, is more in
Scripture, then in every man; or any man. page 70. They that speak from the
Scripture rightly understood, speak more from Christ, then they that speak from
the light within them.

Answ. The light was before Scripture was given forth: the light was before the
Created lights was, and makes manifest all created lights: for all created
lights, was created by it, and all that ever had the Scriptures, and are not in
the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world; the light
by whom the world was made, He knows neither the word of God, nor Father, nor
Son, nor Christ, nor the Lord, nor Scripture; and the word, and the Father, and
the Son, and Christ, these are to be found in man, the Lord searches the
heart, and is not to be found in the letter; but it testifies of these things.
And they that speak so much of Christ from the letter, which gives not life
because it speaks of him; and are from the light within them which comes from
Christ which does enlighten every man, etc. they speak as the Devil does; and
the Pharisees preaching a Christ is come, as they did he was to come and stood
against the light that does enligthen every man that comes into the world; and
sent their Priests, and Levites to examine John, as they do now who be
professors, and Priests. And many may have the Scriptures, and yet be from the
light, and deny the light; the Devil who is out of the light may bring
Scripture, and he has not the light; And that is light, and that is the word
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world. So he is all, and in
all, and through all, God over all blessed for ever, which shall make every
tongue to confess, and all stand guilty before him that hate it, and say he is
righteous. And Christ which is called the word of God which does enlighten
every one that comes into the world, is not contradiction. And many may have
the Scriptures, and yet never know God, till they come to the light which comes
from the Son who reveals him.

Pr. He says Christ saves by the declaration, or by Scripture; and makes the
Declaration saving.

Answ. Christ is the Savior, and that the Scripture declares of and speaks
of; and many may have the Scriptures, and declaration and reject Christ as the
Jews did, and all do, that deny the light that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, from their Savior which is not Scripture.

Pr. And to say the light in every man gave forth Scripture, and will open
Scripture to us is palpable darkness, and contradiction to Scripture. page 74.

Answ. All be in the utter darkness, and know not the Scripture, until they
come to the light, that every man was in that, gave forth Scriptures, for the
light lets them see to what it was spoken, and Christ the end of them.

Pr. And to say every man's light is the sure word of prophecy, is an old
fable, page 75. No man shall be able to spell out a syllable of the Gospel, by
all that is written in man's heart. And the universal light, lays waste the
free grace of God, so never was it every man's light, or free gift. And the
light in every man's conscience is a bill of condemnation, discovers no
salvation. page 76. And that which Adam had before the fall was imperfect.

Answ. The light that every man is enlightened with, is Christ Jesus the gift
of God; the Covenant of God, the way to the Father, that all through the light
might believe in him who is the way to the Father, out of the first Adam, the
state in the fall, who fell from that which was perfect, and so became
unperfect. And the light which every man that comes into the world is
enlightened withal, which shines in the darkness, will be his condemnation if
he hate it, and a sure word of prophecy to him he shall find it, and condemn
him for all his faults, and it was found in the heart which brought them to
know God that gave forth S^ripture. He goes unto fables when he goes from the
light: which all ye, and the world is in the fables. And the light which every
man is enlightened with that comes into the world, does not lay waste the
grace of God: but he that is in the light, sees the Covenant of grace, and
receives it. And all that deny the light tramples the new Covenant under their
feet. And the light which every man is enlightened withal, is the light of the
Gospel; which all men shall be Judged according to, and it is it that discovers
the Savior, which does condemn.

Pr. He says the light is an imperfect light; and it is mixed with darkness.
And if the Saints should say they have no sin, no darkness, they are more dark,
and sinful. page 78. And every man is in Christ while he has sin in him. p.
79. and the light in every man is none of the six principles in the Hebrews.
Page 81.

Answ. The S^ints witnessed the darkness was past, the true light shined; they
was not in the night: and the S^ints was made free from sin; and the night was
over, and they were children of the day, not of the night. And the light is
perfect which does enlighten every man, etc. And all lights that was made, was
made by the light Christ Jesus that was before any thing was made; this is it
that discovers them, and le^s see them, and this is perfect. And all be in
ignorance that be out of it. And who be in Christ, does not commit sin, is a
new creature; old things pass away the old man and his deeds. And in the light
which every man is enlightened withal, all the principles in the Law, in the
Prophets, in the Hebrews, ends: for it was before any words was spoken forth
glorified with the Father before the world began.

Pr. He says no man will ever be saved by his best obedience to the light
which does enlighten, etc. page 85 Christ has satisfied, and merited for a
certain number of sinners their deliverance. Page 87.

Ans. No man is saved, or does witness salvation, but who are in the light
Christ Jesus does enlighten them withal. And who are in the light, they are in
obedience of faith, and they neglect not the Gospel, nor the hearing the voice
that speaks from heaven. But who hate the light, they neglect the Gospel, and
him that speaks from heaven, and does not come into the obedience of faith,
but be in their own works, in the dark, without light. Christ is the offering
for the sin of the whole world, not for the sins of a people, but the seed
Christ the second Adam, overthrowes all the sins, is the offering for all the
sins that was brought in by the first Adam, and reconciles to the Father, and
is the restorer; and nothing shuts out, but the unbelief in the light, for
Christ says believe in the light. And so Christ is the offering for the sins
of the whole world, and not for some only.

Pr. He says Christ the surety pays the elects debt. Page 103.

Answ. Christ is the surety for all that dwell on the earth that believe in
him, as he does enlighten every man. And God lays no charge of sin to the
elect, for it is not possible that they should be deceived. And the cause of
all bringings into Sects is that people be out of the light, and so out of
unity, and sees not the Savior, the Redeemer, the substance of all types,
figures, Parables, the end of the Law that goes upon the man of strife. And so
being out of the light, out of the unity, out of the Covenant with God; In the
light is the Covenant of God.

Pr. He says the whole soul and body of Saints and every faculty of the soul,
and member of the body there is some presence of sin in them all their days.
Page 113.

Ans. The Saints are sanctified, and washed, and cleansed, body, soul, and
spirit, and they are made free from sin, and then can live no longer therein;
and the body of sin is put off; And they witnessed the darkness was past: so
then the works of the true light shined, and the day was come, and they was of
one soul, And they witnessed as he was, so was they in this present world. And
he that is in Christ is a new creature. And where Christ is within, the body is
dead because of sin. And he that is born of God does not commit sin. And the
Saints was upon the earth, when they was made free from sin, and not all their
days sin in them, as thou speaks of.

Prin. He says sin dwells in the Saints; if any Saint think otherwise he
knows not himself: and if he be one really sanctified, he is under a strong
delusion, and drousie dream Page 119.

Answ. He that is sanctified is sanctified from sin, and washed, and cleansed,
and he that is out of this sanctification is in the drowsy dream; For who are
in sanctification, are in Christ the righteousness of God, and they are
awakened to righteousness, out of the fall, in the second Adam, and drowsiness,
and dreams, and delusions that come in the first Adam. And sin, and drowsy
dreams, and delusions dwells in them that pretend that they are sanctified
ones, and not really.

Pr. He says it is a Popish Tennent that sanctification is wrought within men
and Justification, or a believers being justified from sin, and ungodliness,
and not in it; but the mystery of iniquity lies in this qualification. page
120. And they that are justified by their sanctification, it is a falsehood. And
that none are justified but Saints perfect in holiness, is a notorious
contradiction. Page 121.

Answ. He that is the sanctification, is the justification, and so by their
sanctification are they justified; it is one and the same, that which
sanctifies, justifies. And every man that comes into the world having a light
that comes from Christ the sanctification, redemption, justification; but them
that be not in the light, are with it condemned. And such as be in the light,
they come into perfect holiness, and their sins are not imputed to them; But
them that does not believe in the light, the spirit of truth that leads the
believer into all truth, reproves them for their unbelief, and their
righteousness, and their judgment, and so does not justify them, but reprove
them. And the justification within, roots out all Popery, and all
contradiction. But to speak of justification, and sanctification without, and
not manifest within, ye are yet in the first Adam (in the Popery, where ye must
have a Puratory to cleanse) and not the righteousness of Christ within, and
sanctification within and Justification. So such be reproved that can talk of
it without, sanctification without: so there is the old Adam, in the sin and
transgression. And all falsehood is among them that can talk of justification
without them, and not witness it within them; For who witness Christ within
them, they witness justification there, and sanctification; for Abraham
believed, and it was im^uted to him for righteousness; and his belief was
within, and he saw Christ his glory. And such as believe they come to witness
the imputation; But such as come again to witness that they are nearer then
when they did believe; and to witness that they have received Christ within, is
the end of their belief, there they witness the righteousness it self without
imputation, which is the substance, that which the promise ends in, and all the
fathers hoped for, who stood in the imputation, and all the believers in him:
But Christ being come, the end of man's belief, the righteousness it self; here
is a justification alone, without the imputation, Christ the righteousness of
Gods blessing, and glory for ever. And a believer that is j^stified, he is a
new Creature, and is past from the death which came by the sin; comes to enter
into his rest where sin is not. And all the falsehood and the contradiction is
without the possession of justification and sanctification which reprobates
talk of it in the mystery of iniquity, and unbelievers in the mystery of
iniquity; which have the sheep clothing the outside, the clothing of the
Saints, yet ravened from the spirit inwardly; These have not been like to own
justification within, or sanctification there, that inwardly ravened from the
spirit of God: which all must come to that which they ravened from, and they
themselves before they feel the justification, sanctification, Christ within
them, and have received the substance, the thing the Scripture speaks of:
which not believing in the Light, and going from it; though they get all the
sheeps clothing, yet are they not thereby justified; though they get all the
good words, and the form of godliness, and obey not the Gospel, the power of
God; for none obeys the Gospel, but wh^ obeys the Light within. And who are
justified it is by the faith of Christ Jesus, and without faith they cannot
please him; And who are in the Faith, are the believers in the Light, and so
the Justification and the Faith does qualify from their old nature, and minds.

Pr. He says, They are not justified because they are newborn, nor for their
believing. page 122. And I can say I am crucified with Christ, and yet I have a
corrupt rotten heart, and an old lying heart (as before he says) and Christ
lives in him, and there is a body of sin and death dwells in him: And the life
that he now lives in the flesh, is by the faith of the Son of God. Page 124.

Answ. Where Christ is within, the body is dead because of sin; and where the
says of the Son of God is lived in, it gives victory over sin. And the life of
Christ is out of Adam, in the Fall, in sin and transgression; And the
Circumcision comes to be witnessed that puts off the body of sin. And where the
life of Christ is lived in, the new Covenant is there, the new heart, rotten,
corrupt, lying is put off, the old man and his deeds, with his deceitful lusts.
And he that believes is borne of God, is justified, and he comes into the faith
by which he pleases God; and he that does not believe is out of the faith, and
it is impossible he should please God, and is out of that which should justify
him.

Pr. He says, Christ's works in us are not to be joined with our faith in
Christ's works, for that brings into the wilderness. page 131. And to say that
men are justified no farther then they are sanctified, is to deny Protestant
doctrine, etc.

Answ. Men are justified by the believing, and in the faith, and by the faith,
and in believing they overcome, and have victory; and there is Mortification,
and Sanctification, and Redemption, and Justification, all possessed together
in the one which is Christ, and this to the particular satisfaction. And all
Protestants or whatsoever that have a Justification and Sanctification, and
they in the unmortified state, unsanctified, they are out of the faith that
purifies, out of the belief that is born of God, who has past from death to
life, and so is out of the substance that justifies, and is without Christ, and
so are reprobates; but where Christ is within, there is Justification,
Sanctification, and Redemption. And they are they that blaspheme the Tabernacle
of God, and them that dwell in Heaven, that call good evil, and evil good;
and leads into snares, and into the wilderness, that go about to confound the
Justification, but split themselves upon the Rock that denies the Light; and
Christ is the offering for the sin of the whole world, who does enlighten every
man that comes into the world, that all men might believe in him, the
offering, and they are justified in him from all things which the Law could not
do. And here is the Covenant of God to the Jews and Gentiles, the light of the
Gentiles, the glory of Israel, the new covenant to the Jews, the Law in the
heart, and in the mind, by which the people should not need to say, Know the
Lord; for all should know him from the least to the greatest, the salvation to
the ends of the earth, where the way of redemption is the way for the ransomed
to walk in, in which the fools shall not err in it; in which way there is no
wilderness, nor slippery places; but the path of life, the way of the Just,
and of holiness, and the way of Sanctification, and the way of Redemption and
Justification.

Pr. He says, Christ was a sinner by imputation. page 132.

A. The Scripture does not speak such kind of words; but that he knew no sin,
no guile was found in his mouth: A Lamb without spot or blemish, though it
pleased the Father to lay the iniquity upon him, by his stripes we are healed.
And by the one offering, perfected for ever them that are sanctified, made
himself an offering for the sins of the whole world; who breaks down the
partition wall bewixt Jews and Gentiles, slayes the enmity among men,
reconciles in one unto the Father by his body, his death upon the Cross. Of
his body are all the Professors, Protestants and Papists upon the earth
ignorant of, this seed that breaks the enmity; therefore be all in the enmity
one among another, having sheeps clothing, but the sheep in you is not put
forth; but the Wolf is ravening abroad against the sheep, tearing them where
the seed is risen.

Pr. He that throws off imputed righteousness, may go shift for his
justification where he can get it: and Christ shall profit him nothing, though
he be in faith or love, and self-denial. page 133 And it is not the work of
Christ in us that justifies and reconciles our persons. I can detect this for
an error, that Christ's works in us, is that which justifies our persons before
God. page 134.

Answ. Christ works in us Faith, and is the Author of it, and by faith is every
one justified in the blood of the seed, the flesh of Christ the Lord from
heaven, shed for the sins of the whole world: And this faith in this blood of
the seed, not of the first Adam, nor the Beasts, but the blood of the seed
Christ, the precious blood which is the life of Saints, and his flesh which is
the food of Saints, which whosoever eats it, and drinks it, has life in the
Son of God, and lives in him as he lives in the Father. And this is wrought
within, and no one knows it, but as it is wrought within by the faith in the
blood of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, the great sacrifice
for the sin of the whole world, overthrew Death and Hell, bruised the Serpents
head, Devil, and sin, the sacrifice for the whole world, the blood shed upon
the Cross for the sins of the whole world. The blood of the seed, which is the
life that cleanses, and this blood is felt within, for it purges the
conscience from dead works to serve the living God. And here is the great
mystery of God, and the wisdom of God, which covers all the wisdom of the
earth, the knowledge and the wisdom of the understanding ones of the earth.
The seed and the blood of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world,
which sacrificed and offered up, the body prepared, who fulfilled all types,
figures, offerings, ends them and all other bloods, whom Death and Grave could
not hold, dead, raised again, set at the right hand of God, manifest in the
Saints, and in the midst of his Church, singing praise, was dead, and is alive,
and lives for evermore, manifest in the Saints. And he that has him has life,
and he that has not him, has not life. And whosoever witnesses Christ
within, they witness the end of Imputation, they witness the thing it self,
the end of their belief, and they possess the sanctification, and such comes to
know faith and love. And such as may have all the Scriptures, and preach of
Justification and Sanctification without them, and not within them be as the
Jews, be as the Witches and Reprobates. They are reprobate that witnesses not
Christ within them, nor Sanctification there, nor Justification there, and so
witnesses not faith, and love, nor the faith that works by love, and they be
in the error and shifts thou talks of, and Babylonish; and none comes to
witness the reconciliation, but who witness Christ within: So out of
Justification and Sanctification there; if he be not within, they cannot
witness reconciliation: If they be not believers in the Light of Christ, they
cannot witness justification, but condemnation. B^t in the light, in Christ,
Christ received in them justification, sanctification, reconciliation is
received, Christ Jesus the Light, that which reconciles to the Father.

Pr. He says, The body of sin is the natural body, consisting of flesh and
blood, and bones, and the living soul is immortal. page 140. And sin will
dwell in the house, until the house be plucked down over its head, which is the
natural body. And there is not one Saint that is absolute free from the
in-dwelling and working power of sin. page 140. To plead for Perfection is
inherent holiness, and to serve under Antichrists colors, and to make void
the suffering of Christ. He that holds the Saints perfectly fulfilling all the
Law, in all degrees of obedience and conformity to it in this life before
death, has drunk Antichrists cup. page 144.

Answ. The Saints after they witnessed the body of sin put off, and made free
from sin, they glorified God in their bodies, souls, and spirits. And so the
body of fin is not the creature, for that causes the creature to groan, before
it comes into the liberty of the Sons of God, that causes the body of sin,
the clothing that comes upon the Creature, the old man, which comes by
transgression, the first Adam, that leads out of transgression, brings the
creature into the liberty of the sons of God, and so who is in Christ is a new
creature; And old things pass away, and the body is the Temple of God, a holy
Temple; And the living soul is immortal; yet many of thy generation say it is
humane, that is earthly, yea, that Christ's soul was humane, as ye may see in
this Book, in the rest of your Principles, of them that call themselves
Teachers and Pastors, whose souls are in death, and life; And immortality, not
come to the Light, through the power of God which is the Gospel, and so have
showed your ignorance of the soul. And whosoever witness the perfect
holiness, and preaches up that, they come from under Antichrists Kingdom.
They that preach up Imperfection, they wear Antichrists livery, and his
colors, and sounds the Trumpet of Antichrist; and who be in the
righteousness, are in the perfection it self, without a thing meritted by man
in his will. And who loves God, keeps his Commandments, and to him and them
they are not grievous: And this was the seed that kept the Commandments of
God, that Antichrist, Beast, mother of Harlots, and false Prophets made war
against, as you may read in the Revelations: But this seed is a burdensome
stone (unto yo^ all) that keeps the commands of God, that loves God; and they
that be born of God does not commit sin: And the natural body which is flesh,
blood, and bone, is not the body of sin, it was never read so in the Scripture,
that that was the body which was to be put off; for the Saints had bodies,
after they witnessed the body of sin put off, and made free from sin.

Pr. He says, That R. F. is against the doctrine of sin continuing in the
godly till death, page 148.

Answ. That doctrine of Sin was never preached up by the Apostle, that it
should continue in the godly till death, I say it continues not in the godly;
for the godly are like God, out of sin; it continues in the ungodly, that is
not like God. And he that is in Christ, is at the end of the Law, and the
Precepts, and the Statutes, and the Ordinances, and the Commandments, and is
in the substance, Gods righteteousnesse.

Pr. He says, The Letter is no dead letter, and it has life in it self. And
if there be but this letter or Ministry, it is Christ's two-edged sword. page
153. 155. It serves unto his design of searching hearts. And the Apostle would
take people off from the conceit of perfect seize. page 162. And may not
filthy hearts transform themselves in the fancy of perfection, as the Devil
into an Angel of light?

Answ. The Devil transforming himself into an Angel of Light, or into a
similitude, is like unto all the filthy hearts who fancy perfection without
them, not within them, and speaks of Christ without them, not within them, as
the Devil did; But the Doctrine of the Apostle, who preached Christ the
Covenant of God, and brought people off of that which made nothing perfect, to
that which was perfect, and bid them be perfect, and of one mind; and he spoke
wisdom among them that were perfect, so he did not bring the people from it,
but to it: And the Letter it self is dead, as it is of paper and ink: And all
Ministers of Letters and Books written in paper and ink, and speaks from
letters of paper and ink, and have not received from God what they preach, are
Ministers of the Letter, and they are the Ministers of death, though they
minister all the Letters written in the Scripture, and have only but the
sheeps clothing, and begets not to God; but only making Proselytes as the
Ministers did in old time, as the Jews did, But they that were Ministers of
the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, they have the sword of the Spirit,
which the Jews, the Ministers of the Letter had not: Nor they that be out of
the spirit, though they have all the Scriptures given forth from it; they that
be out of the spirit, be out of the spiritual weapons* And that which
searches the heart, is that which gave forth the Scriptures, which led all the
holy men of God to speak them forth, who is the Lord, the searcher of the
hearts; which spirit owns all the words of the Scriptures of truth declared
forth from the spirit; but the spirit was before the Scripture was given forth.

Pr. He says, Men that are redeemed from all earthly worships perfectly
justified before God, sincere in their sanctification, yet they are in
concupiscence, and blemishes, and conflicts. page 166. And the Word of God does
not abide in them that say they have no sin. page 179.

Answ. Who are redeemed out of all earthly worships, and sanctified, they are
redeemed from the blemishes, from the conflicts, from the concupiscence, and by
their redemption they come to witness the Kingdom of God that stands in
righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, out of the conflicts; and who
are in the spirit, they are in that which mortifies sin. And the Word of God it
makes clean where it dwells, they are sanctified by the Word, and made clean: It
comes, and finds the sin, and takes it away, and makes clean, and hammers it
down, cuts it down, burns it up, reconciles to the Father, which sin and
iniquity separated from.

Pr. He says, Sacramental water, and sprinkling Baptism and water, etc.
shows our being ingrafted into the body mystical. p. 176. 178. which consists
of a sign of a thing signified.

Answ. Sprinkling Infants is a sign of your own making, and Sacramental water
which the Scripture does not hold forth, but it is a thing presumed above what
it written. And that sign, a tradition, does not bring into the body
mystical, but leads from it, neither does any elementary thing; But that which
baptizeth into the body is the spirit, whereby all comes to be one: And that
baptizeth not into an elementary body, but into a glorious body, the spiritual
body. For there is lying signs come since the days of the Apostles, which is
out of the Apostles practice. You can show nothing for your sprinkling with
your Sacramental water; but the Baptism that the Scripture declares of, and
the spirit is owned in its place.

Pr. He says, Bread and Wine are spiritual Institutions, and is not carnal
in a sense as set in opposition to spiritual Institution: and that is not mere
carnal bread and wine after Christ's institution to be used, nor an ordinary
bread and wine. And he says, In the Lords Supper is Christ's body, and it is
his blood. page 188. And this is my body and blood, the word of a Command, do
this. page 191. And Christ fed not the souls with wheat bread, and red wine,
etc.

Answ. By all this what differ ye from the Papists? have not ye laid their
foundation, and laid their ground? Bread and wine, is but bread and wine, a
temporal thing, a thing seen, and may turn to ashes; but the body and blood of
Christ will not do so. And the bread is not spiritual, and the wine is not
spiritual, but is a thing seen, and visible. And who eats the flesh of Christ,
and drinks his blood, hungers no more, and thirsts no more; but who eats
temporal bread and wine, hungers more, and thirsts more. And Christ did say,
as often as ye do eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye show the Lords death
till he come. And that which the Apostle had received of the Lord, he delivered
to the Corinthians: As often as they eat that, and drank that, they were to
do it in remembrance of him, showing the Lords death till he come. But then
says the same Apostle to the same Corinthians in his last Epistle; Examine
your selves. Know you not that Christ is in you except ye be reprobates? And
said, while we look not at the things which are seen; for the things that are
seen are temporal: So bread and wine are things that are seen, are things
temporal, but the things that are not seen are eternal. Now bread and wine is
but bread and wine, not spiritual after consecration, it is but the same bread
as it was before; and it is no nearer the body of Christ after they have
consecrated it, then it was before. Who is in the life and power of God, that
gives every creature its being, and causes every creature to come forth, is in
the life and virtue of all creatures, and the being of all creatures, and the
wisdom of all the Creation, that is spiritual: He gives every creature its
being, and causes every creature to come forth, and gives the sense and
feeling of all creatures that is spiritual. And there comes up the soul to be
known, and the seed CHRIST, his body, and his blood.

Pr. He says, The worship of God in the spirit stands out of man's will, and
they must wait in the light to feel the Spirit; but let all lost souls beware
of this counsel: And to bring people to the commands of the Spirit is opposite
to the Scripture Letter. page 204.

Answ. All true worshippers of God that he seeks to worship him, is in the
spirit, in the truth, that which the Devil is out of, and in the spirit that
gave forth the Scriptures; that is that which man's will is out of, where all
poor souls comes to worship God aright, and magnify God, and glorify God, and
to pray in the spirit, and to stand in the counsel of God. For no prophecy of
the Scriptures came by the will of man: It was that which led them to speak
forth Scriptures, which was beyond man's will: So men's will getting the
Scriptures, which no prophecy of it came by it, they cannot worship God in the
truth, nor in the spirit, but in their own wills: But who be in the spirit and
truth that led them to speak forth the Scriptures, that learned of God the
Father of spirits, and God of all truth, this is not will worship. Now
will worship is among them that have the Scriptures given forth by the spirit
of God in their own wills, which no prophecy of it came by it: and can sing,
pray, preach, read in their own wills, and be out of the spirit that gave it
forth; they are in a will worship, out of the worship of God in the spirit: And
such are opposite to the Scriptures, and cannot agree with the letter of the
Scriptures, that are fighting about words, falls into sects and heaps about the
words; which the worship of God is in the spirit that gave forth Scriptures,
which learned of God the Father of spirits, owns all the Scriptures in their
places, and nor opposite to it.

Pr. He says, Never was Psalms sung as they ought to be, but had some musical
tune or Poetry. page 205. And the holy Ghost made overseers and Elders over the
Church, but that was not immediate. page 207. That no man can read out of
Scripture that Paul was free from covetousness, etc.

Answ. Paul says, Let not covetousness be once named amongst you as it
becomes Saints. And no covetous one should enter into the kingdom; and he
says, it is idolatry. And the Apostle lived the life of the Son of God through
the faith, and witnessed he was made free from the body of sin, and had victory
over it, thanks God, and said, there was no condemnation to them that were in
Christ Jesus; and Paul was in Christ, where there was no condemnation, which
covetousness is out of. And the holy Ghost is immediate that makes the
officers in the Church. It is the same as was in them that led them to speak
forth Scriptures. And the holy Ghost that leads men to speak forth the
Scriptures, and makes Elders and overseers in the Church, these are not made by
men; but these see the fulfilling of the Scriptures, and comes into that which
fulfils it, and are in it. And your singing your Psalms, and your Poetry, and
setting them in frame and a musical way, these are come up since the Pope, as
Tunes, Organs, since men have ravened from the spirit, and gone from that, they
got up this Poetry, and turned David's conditions into a Meeter, and given them
to a people who are ignorant of David's conditions: And Psalms are spiritual
songs, and all are ignorant, when they are from the spirit of God that led the
holy men of God to speak forth the Scripture; with which spirit of God, all the
Psalms, and Spiritual Songs, and Hymns are seen, which from it was given forth,
and all the Scriptures, and in that is the singing in the spirit. And the
Ministers maintenance which the Apostle said, Have not I power to eat, and
power to drinks? And as Christ said, freely ye have received, freely give. This
was not spoken to the Heathen, nor Jews nor Gentiles, who were unconverted,
but spoken among the Saints who was a Vineyard, and spiritual things sown, and
to such as they were made partakers of their hope; which hirelings and those
that taught for filthy lucre, the love of money, that minded earthly things,
that seek for their gain from their Quarter, that bear rule by their means,
was all out from this, judged with the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, to
be such spirits, and have got the form, and taught for the earth, and made the
earth a Wilderness, and such got not out the Wheat, nor plowed but in vain,
which is the plowing of the wicked which is sin. So there is a great difference
between them that Preach the Gospel, the glad-tidings to all nations which
relieved the oppressed: for the oppressed b^ing relieved, immortality comes to the
light, and life through the Gospel: the wheat was gotten out, the spiritual
things sown the vineyard planted, the flock was known, the milk was known, the
corn gotten out: among such some used their power to eat, some did not, (mark)
that power that did not oppress, that did not hurt. But all you that preaches
for Tithes, and will take money of them that ye do no work for, by a Law, and
cast into prison if they will not give it, and take treble damages; you bring
not the glad tidings to the Nations, you are the oppressors of the Nations, of
the Ju^t; and are not helpers, and relievers of the oppressed: and so have made
manifest your Apostasy: and to be Apostates out of the Apostles Doctrine; and
out of the Gospel the power of God, which the Apostle was in. But now shall the
Gospel be Preached that gives liberty to the oppressed, and strikes down all
the oppressors.

Pr. He says, God sends either mediately, or immediately: and he sends by man's
Ministry mediately, page 211. He says, they pretend to no such call of an
Apostle, an officer in every Church as Paul, etc. page 213, And some are
converted mediately sent by man, with their mediate call. Page 214.

Answ. All who are converted, are brought into the mediate, and converted with
the immediate: there is none converted upon the earth, but it is with the
immediate Spirit of God that mortifies. And all Ministry that is sent of God,
and from God, and called of God, where that speaks to them, it is immediate,
for whosoever hears his voice, it is immediate and powerful. And all Ministry
of man, sent out by man (which is mediate) never converts any souls to God, for
the soul is immediate, and mediate reaches not to the immortal soul; but the
immediate Ministry reaches to the immediate immortal soul, and so Preaches
the immediate Gospel to it the power of God. And all Ministers that are sent
forth in the power of God; who are moved of God to speak to any by the power of
God, and the eternal Spirit of God, by the Holy Ghost, that is immediate, and
not of man, and that begets unto God, and converts them; that is immediate, not
mediate, and they do as the power of God moves them which is immediate, and
that is for God in that place. And they shall feel the Spirit of God in them
witnessing with that power, and the Spirit of God in another that speaks to
them. And the power of God is eternal, where it moves it is one, and the spirit
of the Prophets, subject to Prophets. And all you since the days of the
Apostles that do not not pretend to such a call as the Apostles had, and to be
such officers as the Apostles in every Church; which we do believe you have
not: you have showed that the Holy Ghost has not made you overseers; And you
have declared your selves to the world to be such as inwardly ravened from the
spirit of God: and all to be but Ministers of the letter, not of the spirit,
and so only have the sheep clothing; So ye are such as have brought people,
and Nations to be all on heaps, and like waters: not made overseers, as the
Apostles was, not having the call as the Apostles had, so not by the
Holy Ghost, as the overseers was by, not in the immediate power of God, as the
Apostles was called withal, and was in; and so not Preachers of the Gospel as
the Apostles was, who was immediate, therefore these things have been wanting,
the Holy Ghost to make you overseers, and the spirit the Apostles was in, which
would cool and quiet all the spirits of the people. For want of this are ye all
on heaps about Scriptures; But the Holy Ghost opens it again to overseers. And
so ye that have ravened from the spirit of God inwardly, there is no talk among
you to have the call as the Apostles had, and to be overseers (as they were)
over your Churches that we do believe, your fruits declares it. But the spirit
it is witnessed which the Apostles was in, which has discovered you and your
Church glory, be to the Lord God for ever.

Pr. He says immediate teaching in the least degree of God immediately is
contrary to Daniel 9. and Timothy. And says I am yet to learn the promise of
immediate teaching of God. page 216. And women are excluded from this kind of
prophecy. 218. He says Ministers, pastors, teachers having the grace of God,
gift of prophecy, called out among Brethren to office, to oversee a flock, as
Bishops, of the Lords institution: these are not so taught immediately. Page
220.

Answ. All Bishops, overseers, officers are taught immediately that are of God,
by the the same spirit, and the power that the Apostles was in, and owned, and
allowed, by them: for the Holy Ghost is immediate that gives them to oversee:
and all who feels the grace of God, and turns it not into wantonness, feels
that which is immediate. And such as have turned the grace of God into
wantonness, and walks dispitefully against the spirit of grace, and set up a
heap of teachers after their own lusts, they are gone from the immediate grace
of God that brings salvation. And all the teachings of God in the least degree,
is immediate, which brings them to open Parables, speak forth Parables to the
nature that is a top of the witness, that spirit is immediate, though they take
a mediate Parable or comparison, yet that spirit is immediate that gives them
to understand the Parable aright. And the gift that was in Timothy that he was
not to neglect, was immediate, whereby he came to discern on whom he was to lay
on his hands, and on whom he was not, suddenly to lay upon any man, that was
immediate. And that which brought Daniel to understand by writings in books was
immediate; and that which brings to understand the Scriptures is immediate. I
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, your sons and daughters shall
prophecy, and that is immediate, and prophecy is not to be quenched in the
daughter, as well as in the son, in the male, and the female is one. And we do
believe thee, and you all, who are Apostatized from the Apostles Doctrine, in
the Apostasy, ravened inwardly from the spirit of God, ye are yet to learn the
immediate teaching. So are the Antichrists standing against the light which
Christ Jesus has enlightened every one withal that comes into the world, the
Covenant of God in the heart with which all people shall come to know the Lord,
and be taught of God, that they need not say know the Lord.

Pr. He says I conclude that immediate teaching did not only furnish men for
a teachers or Ministers function, but mediate ways also. page 211. And the
Quakers think it a lie against God to say the spirit is in the Letter, and
Scripture, and is given by it, and makes a jangling about immediate teaching
Page 222.

Answ. There is no one is furnished for the work of the Ministry of God, but
who is in the immediate Spirit of God, which is to Minister to the Spirit. And
there is no one made a Minister of God by the mediate; but by the immediate,
For who has the spirit of God, the spirit of wisdom and understanding, to sing
in the spirit, or pray in the spirit, it is immediate. And all that be out of
that be in the earthly, sensual, and Devilish, perishing knowledge, and that
understanding must come to naught, and wisdom must be confounded, and as for
the word Function, it is thy own, and must come to naught. And the spirit is
immediate that led the Saints to give forth Scripture. And the spirit is not in
the letter, but it was in them that gave it forth. And them that have not the
spirit in them, that was in them that gave it forth, and are disobedient to
that, are them that say the spirit is in the letter. And such say that the
teachings immediate is jangling, that be from the spirit that is immediate,
ravened from it in their own particulars, such are never like to beget to God:
but are the Ministers of the letter, not of the spirit; and by that which the
Devil, and they are out of, are they comprehended who be in the jangling, and
in the lie.

Pr. He says Christ took up a Bible, and Preached on a text. And as for uses,
points, trials, and motives, you must go to Titus 3.16.

Answ. Christ who came to fulfill, took the book, and read, and said it was
fulfilled. He did not take a Text as you do, and lay half a year in it, as some
of you: and have ten shillings a day for your pains, or more, or less; but he
said it was fulfilled. And that place in Titus there is no word of motives, nor
points, nor trials nor uses, as you pretend: though he who was in the faith did
study to divide the word aright, in whom was the gift of God which was perfect.
This is not like your divination of your brain, for money, which ye sell
weekly, nor your taking a text, and laying half a year in it; And thou has
showed your selves to be the novices.

Pr. He says, Though the righteousness be wrought in us by the strength of
Christ and be found in us that are sanctified: yet as to Justification of a
person Paul would not be found in it for a world. p^ge 229.

Answ. The righteousness of Christ fulfilled in us, and be found in the
righteousness of Christ, that was the thing the Apostle strove after (not in
his own righteousness) in that which ended the Law. And that righteousness
which is wrought in us by the strength of Christ is Christ's where
sanctification is witnessed, this is Christ's who is the end of the Law, and in
this was the Apostle found, and stood for, which was out of the world.

Pr. And honor all men. And the fifth Commandment he brings for bowing the
knee, and he says putting off the hat is but a token of respect. Page 234.

Answ. Honor all men, that is to have all men in esteem, all men are had in
esteem, for Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the world, that
they might all through this light believe, and he that does not is condemned;
and that will bring all men to seek the honor that comes from above that love
it; but if they hate the light, they seek the honor that is below, that is of
the first Adam in the transgression, and that is the hat. But Christ the light
that does enlighten every man, etc. receives not honor of men; and the light
of Christ which every man has, etc. will not receive the honor of men. Now he
that receives the honor of men, is of the first Adam, from the light in the
transgression. Earthly Adam looks for honor of the earth, these are the marks
of an unbeliever. And the fifth Commandment does not speak of bowing the knee.
And Jacobs bowing, and David's bowing to Saul, etc. There is a time the elder
must serve the younger. And Joseph and Abraham's bowing before the heathen, and
the rest of bowings which thou speaks of in the Scriptures, the old Testament.
Christ is come, to whom every knee must bow, and tongue confess to the glory
of God; and not the Angels bowed down to, nor worshipped. So ye have showed
whose Ministers ye are of, that are crying up bending and bowing the knee, is
not this like kissing of Baal, and bowing the knee to Baal? Now Christ is come,
to whom every knee must bow down to him. And as for Master, ye have thrown your
selves into that transgression; (for Christ says, Be not ye of men called
master, for ye have one master even Christ, and ye are all brethren) and
excluded your selves from among the brethren.

Pr. He says Swearing is a part of Gods worship. page 235. And Christ was far
from overthrowing the worship of God, And it was the formal part of an oath,
when the Apostle Paul said, God was his witness. page 238.

Answ. Christ who said God was a spirit, and would be worshipped in spirit, and
in the truth, said, swear not at all, who was the oath of God that ended oaths;
but said, in all your communication let your yea be yea, and nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more comes of evil. And the Apostle was so far from swearing,
who in the doctrine of Christ abode, as he says above all things my brethren
swear not at all, not by heaven, nor by the earth, nor by any other oath.
Neither did any of the Apostles, though men that were in strife swore, and
their oath ended the strife among them; and they swore by the greater, that is
the true oath; But Christ, in whom is the peace, the covenant of peace, where
souls comes to be one, and hearts one, who are the true brethren in him, are
in the oath of God, the end of all oaths. For God when he could not find a
greater, swore by himself that did not change, concerning of his Covenant with
men that does not change, in which men come to have peace with God. And so men
swear by the greater, whose oath ends their strife and controversy. But God
could not find a greater, swore by himself concerning of his Son the Covenant
of God, which ends the strife among men, and between God and man, and is the
peace on earth, and good will toward men. Now the swearing of the Angels, the
swearing of the Priests, the swearing of Jacob, and Joseph, and David, and
Solomon. Christ is the end of all these, the oath of God, in which their faith
stood; and to which all the Angels must bend and bow to him that says, swear
not at all. But your swearing now is not like to the Jews, for they swore by
the Lord, not swore by the book of the Prophets writings; neither did they
swear by the Tables in which the Law was written. Neither did the Apostles nor
the Saints swear by the Epistles nor Christ's words after they were wri^ten, and
recorded: Now this is worse then the Jews, for they were to swear by the Lord
from whom the Law came; they were to swear by the Lord of whom the Prophets
learned, and not by the Tables, nor by the Prophets words. Now the heathen was
to swear by Moloch, and to swear by Baal, and kissed Baal; and the children of
Israel to swear by the Lord, not to swear by any Writings or Declarations of
the Prophets, or Moses: Neither do we read that the Saints swore by the
Epistles, or the Revelations, or Matthew, Marks, Luke or John, and kissed it: For
the true Christians that wi^nessed Christ the end of the Prophets, the end of
Moses, a greater then Solomon, Him by whom the world was made before it was
made, before Abraham was, which reigns over the house of Joseph, and Jacob, to
whom the Angels must bow, says, swear not at all: This is my beloved son says
God, hear ye him.

Pr. He says, A believer has both the rise and furtherance of his faith and
evidence from what is written. And if the Scripture be a dead letter, and the
word in the heart be one with the Scripture, then that in the heart is dead.
page 246. Let them tell the world how the Scripture is the Declaration without
contradiction, and yet the word in the heart. page 247.

Answ. The Scripture as it lies, and is in it self, is a dead letter; but as
the word is felt in the heart that gave it forth, then it is its own words. Now
to them that be from the Word within, the dead mind, the dead letter. And so
the words themselves there gives not life to that, but as the words is raised
up within; as it was in them that gave it forth: and that is it which gives
life, and that sees the Scriptures, and the fulfilling of them; and then that
knows the Scriptures that cannot be broken, and in that the words ends, the
word Christ: And that is it that gives life to all people, and saves the soul,
which the Letter does not, as it is in it self, without one have that which
gave it forth, and that is not dead. And a believer, the author of his Faith is
Christ, and the giver of it: And if he have all that is written, and be not in
the light Christ, who is the author of his Faith, he wants the foundation of
God that stands sure, Christ Jesus, that all the Fathers and holy men of God
rest in, in the faith before any Scripture was written, in him stood their
faith, the foundation of God, Isreal's glory, the light of the Gentiles, this is
that which fulfills all Scriptures, and ends the faith, the salvation. And the
Ministers of the Word that comes to fulfill the words, those Ministers of the
Word, they took in hand to set forth in order a Declaration of the things
wrought among them, which had a perfect understanding from the very first, of
what Christ both said and did: And so this Declaration was given forth to be
read, believed, fulfilled, and people to enjoy the thing it speaks of, that
which the Apostles preached to Jews and Gentiles, the new Covenant, the one
offering, the blood of Jesus Christ, him the end of the first Priesthood, that
Abraham saw, and David saw, and Moses had the type of, the Prophets wrote of.
Now who enjoyes him that these all spoke of, saw, and preached, they have the
end, the comfort of the Scriptures. And here is the Declaration seen, and
known; and here is the substance possessed, and here is the words of God, and
here is the Word of God that fulfills the words, which word was before the
words, in which word the words end, and are all sum'd up into.

Pr. For to say Christ and faith is not to be found in Scriptures, He says, I
hope no humble Saint will pin his faith upon this, etc. And they crying up thee
and thou to a particular, etc. page 247.

Answ. Christ was before the Scripture was written; and Christ is life (not
found in a dead letter) nor faith, and he is the end of the Scriptures, and the
substance of them; and many had the Scriptures, and could not find faith in
them, nor Christ, nor life. And Christ told the Pharisees he was the life, the
Scripture testified of him, but they would not come to him that they might have
life, who is the end and substance of the Scriptures, by whom the world was
made. And as for the words thee and thou, and you who are stumbling at it,
shows they have never learned their Accidence or Bible. So short o^ the
language of the spirit that teaches to speak sound words that cannot be
condemned, who are ignorant of the literal knowledge.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures was breathed forth by the spirit of God; but we
receive the spirit another way then they did as gave forth the Scriptures, and
the Scriptures was given forth immediately: but thus the Scriptures comes not
to us, nor the understanding of them. We have Books, and Canons, and printed
Translations in the Mother Tongue. page 248.

Answ. All your Books, and Canons; and if ye have all the Scriptures printed in
all the Languages of the world, and if ye have not the same immediate
inspiration that gave them forth, ye understand not the Scriptures. And we do
believe you, that ye have not an immediate inspiration as they had, nor do not
receive the spirit as they did that gave forth the Scriptures, who are ravened
from it; But who ever knows the Scriptures of truth, it is by the same spirit
as gave them forth; with this, and by this is the Scriptures of truth, the
excellent words known again to what state and condition they were spoken.

Pr. He says The spirit is in the Letter, or the whole Scripture. Page 254.
And they that writ forth the Scriptures were imperfectly holy; but Gods Word
was holy. To conclude the spirit is in the Letter, and given by it, daily
experience demonstrates it. And they that owns not the spirits dwelling in the
letter, have lost their faith of the spirits presence, and runs to other
Gospels and Doctrines, the spirit of error is in all men's Doctrines that have
not the spirit in them. page 255.

Answ. The holy men of God that gave forth the Scriptures as they were moved by
the holy Ghost; but the Apostle said they were holy, and we shall believe him
before we believe any of you apostate Teachers, which say they were not holy.
And the spirit was in them that gave forth the Scriptures, received of God the
Father of spirits, and dwells in God: And they that be from the spirit of God
within which gave forth the Scriptures, are such as follows their own spirits,
and uses their tongues, and gets the good words, the sheeps clothing,
deceives the hearts of the simple, and tells them the Spirit is in the Letter;
which never did none of the experienced Saints say the spirit dwelt in the
Letter; But did conclude the spirit dwelt in their hearts, the faith in their
hearts, the light in their hearts, the word in their hearts, the anointing
within them, God dwelt within them, Christ within them, the Law in their
hearts, the witness within them, the ingrafted word that saved their souls;
the gift within, the hidden man in the heart, strength in the inward man, the
holy Ghost moved them, the spirit of the Father spoke in them, this led them to
speak forth Scriptures: And these never said the spirit was in the Letter, as
all the filthy dreamers say, who are in the sensual separation from the spirit
of God, and in Cains, Cores, and Balaams way, turning the grace of God into
wantonness, ravened from the spirit of God inwardly, but wolves in sheeps
clothing; These are such as have got the good words, but deceives the hearts
of the simple, makes a trade of them, tells people the Spirit is in the Letter;
and that is them that ravened from the spirit of God in their own particulars,
and so they deceive people, and keep them from the spirit of God in their
particulars; But the spirit that gave forth Scriptures is witnessed, by which
that is known, they cannot deceive any longer: who are reprobates concerning
the faith, which crept into houses before the Apostles decease; which have kept
people always learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of the truth,
led away with diverse lusts. So have kept people in spiritual Egypt, and
Sodom, and Gomorrah, and have been guarded with Magistrates and powers of the
earth all over the world: But now is the Light breaking forth, and shining,
that ye are all discovered. And so they have set up other Gospels, and lost the
Faith, that tells people the Spirit is in the Letter, when the spirit and the
faith was in them that gave it forth, and is to be in all them that knows it
again, and knows God the giver of it.

Pr. He says, He that is borne of the Spirit, is borne of the holy Word
written. page 257.

Answ. He that is borne of the spirit, is borne of that which gave forth the
Scriptures, of the Word, which was before the Scriptures was given forth, which
lets them see the end of the words: so comes to dwell in God of whom they
learned that gave forth Scriptures.

Pr. He says, If setting the Scripture in the heart of every man be nothing
else, but telling people they have a light of conscience within them, and
stirring up that light which every man has that comes into the world: They
delude poor people, who never heard that light called Scripture before. page
257.

Answ. Them that never heard the Scripture outwardly, the light that every man
has that comes into the world, being turned to it, with that they will see
Christ, with that they will know Scripture; with that they will be led out of
all delusion, come into covenant with God, with which they will come to worship
God in the spirit, and serve him, and that is more then conscience.

Pr. He says, The light which John speaks of, which does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, is a dim light, and it is a piece of the mystery of
Iniquity, as subtle as any Antichrist, to say that the light shines in the
darkness, and shines out of darkness, the light of Christ for salvation.
page 261, 262. He says, Christ in you, the light in every man, is a poor,
base, beggarly scrap. Page 264.

Answ. And the lig^t which does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
is Christ the substance, the righteousness of God, and not beggarly; but all
the beggarly, they be out of the light, and it is not dim, but all be in the
dim that be out of him the Light, that with which he has enlightened them. And
all be in the mystery of iniquity, and are Antichrists, that sees not the
light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world, where it
shines, and where it shines out of the darkness. This the true Ministers, who
be in the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, Ministers of Christ within
witnessed and saw. And John was not antichrist, nor Paul, who said, Light
shined in darkness; and who said, light shined out of darkness; and who said,
this was the true light that lights every one that comes into the world. Now
ye are all ignorant of the Prophets before John, who said, I will give him for
a Covenant, for a light unto the Gentiles, and a new Covenant to the house of
Israel, and to the house of Judah; mark! here was every man; and John the
greatest Prophet born of a woman, says, this is the true light that lights
every one, etc. Christ Jesus, him by whom the world was made before it was
made, in whom is life, and the life was the light of men: and the light shined
in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not.

Pr. The law written in every man's heart does not condemn all sin, nor the
branches of it, not original sin, nor unbelief. page 266. He says, To say
that every man in his first state is natural, and every man in his first state
is as a beast, is a contradiction. And I every where deny the natural light of
every man; but I deny the highest degree of light to be here attainable: And
the Saints light is not to be seen while we are under the Sun. And he says, he
knows he is more brutish then a man, and has not the knowledge of the holy.
page 272. And the light that shines in the Scriptures, I profess my self to
know nothing; the least degree of it is above the highest degree of the light
that every one that comes into the world is enlightened withal. page 273.

Answ. The light which every one that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, was before degre^s, and ends degrees, and is not natural; for it was
before the natural was made, or created; and this bears not witness against
the natural, the Sun, Moon, and Stars, but ownes them in their places; And the
light which every one that comes into the world is enlightened withal, which
comes from Christ the Son, they not believing in it, it is their condemnation.
And that which does make manifest sin, is light, and does reprove, is light;
yea, all sin, branches, and roots, and original, and unbelief, that which does
make it manifest is light; and where this light is that makes all this
manifest, there is the law in the heart, and new Covenant written, the law and
the spirit of life that makes free from the law of sin and death. And the light
which every man is enlightened withal, they believing and receiving it, they
come into covenant with God, they come to know the Law of God in their hearts;
that is the law of God in their hearts; the light which does enlighten every
man, etc. And every man is in his first state, in the transgression, many are
worse then Beasts, and brutish; and what they know they know naturally, as
bruit beasts: And thee, and all of you, who are ravened from the spirit of God
inwardly; what ye have known, it has been natural, as bruit beasts; for ye
are gone from the Spirit that should give ye to know and understand, and so
that is no contradiction. And we do believe thee (who looks for the light in
the letter of Scripture) thou art brutish, and says the light of Scripture is
higher in the least degree, then the light which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world. Alack for thee, the light which does enlighten every
man, etc. was before Scripture was given forth. And the Saints that do receive
the light that does enlighten every one, etc. receives Christ the perfect
light, and does receive God, and Christ, the substance, the end of degrees. And
thou shall never see the Saints light, while thou art looking at the Letter
from the life within, which was in them that gave it forth; and the light
shined in the hearts of them that gave forth the Scriptures.

Pr. He says, The Scripture light, that is a standing rule for our faith, and
there is present light in it to guide men to salvation, and so are not
immediate revelations and teachings. And the knowledge of Christ and eternal
life is given forth in the letter. page 283.

Answ. They that had Scriptures knew not salvation, and they knew not the rule,
being erred from the spirit of God. And none knows salvation, but by the
immediate teaching and revelation of Christ Jesus the Son of God, the
salvation. And if men have all the Scriptures given forth from God, they
themselves are not able to make men wise unto salvation without faith, which
Christ is the Author of, who is the substance of what the Scripture speaks of,
and so they are not able of themselves to guide men to salvation. Neither are
they a rule of faith, but Christ is the Author of Faith, and the Spirit is the
rule that gave them forth; and all that have them, and is not in the Immediate,
knows them not, neither the Gospel. And none knows eternal life, nor Christ
(which is the Autho^ of life and faith, which was before Scripture was) by the
Scriptures, but as they come into the life that they was in that gave them
forth: And there is the life found, Christ found, Christ seen, him by whom the
world was made before it was made; for the life, was in them that gave forth
the Scriptures, by which they knew God, and eternal life, and Christ the
Savior, Abraham, the Prophet, and Moses; So the life must be in all now,
before they know Scriptures, or Christ, or God.

Pr. He says, If the letter declares of Christ's fulfilling, then we should
need to know no more of Christ then what for substance is in the Scriptures,
then there is no need of immediate teachings. page 284. He says, new Apostles,
and doctrine discovered of a righteousness within them, and that is their
justification. And this is as the ringleaders of the Jews among the
Galatians. page 286. And the salvation which is to be wrought out with fear and
trembling is not the same as made Moses and David, Habakkuk and Paul tremble.
page 287.

Answ. The power of God is one, which threw down Paul, shook Habakkuk, and
Moses, and David, whereby these all came to know Christ; which power, who
comes into it, and into the infiniteness of it, which raises up the seed
which is Christ, whereby the salvation is known, and wrought out with fear and
trembling. And when ye all come to know this power that works out the salvation
with fear and trembling, your reproaches will be laid aside, for reproaching of
such whose salvation is wrought out with fear and trembling. And
righteousness within, and sanctification within is a new Doctrine to you that
are inwardly ravened from the spirit of God since the days of the Apostles,
and so from the spirit of faith, from the hearing of faith; which they that
drew the people to the Circumcision without, went from the hearing of faith
within, by which they should be justified. So they that are come to the hearing
of faith, they are come to the justification, and sanctification within, and
looks not to the Circumcision and Baptism without: So this is an old doctrine,
and not new, but to you Apostates. And though the Scriptures declares of
Christ's fullness, and if people have all the Scriptures, that speaks and
declares of his fullness (which you say you need know then no more of Christ
then what for substance is in the Scriptures, and so no need of immediate
teachings) we believe you; But none knows the fullness of Christ, but who comes
into the immediate teachings. Your mouths may be full of Scripture, and use
your tongues about the ^aints words, and running up and down, and the Lord
never sent you, saying, Thus says the Lord, in Chap. and Verse: And it is
sufficient that the Scripture speaks of his fullness; yet I say, you, nor none
upon the earth never knew his fullness, but as ye come to the light wherewith
Christ has enlightened you withal, in every one of your own particulars, though
ye may have all the Scriptures; for they that knew the fullness of Christ, and
they that gave forth the Scriptures, had the spirit of God in them: So must
every one that knows it, and them again.

Pr. He says, If the Scriptures be a rule for thee and thou, then it is a rule
for respect to superiors: And keeping on the hat shows the pride of the
heart, and a lying spirit. He says, they have not a growth of Perfection in
this life, but a pressing on. page 290. And he says, the Prophets took Texts,
and raised motives. And he says, he that believes not our points from
Scripture, shall be damned, that he must tell him from Christ. page 299.

Answ. Who are standing up against thee, and thou, and the Hat, shows the
pride of their hearts, and be out of the humility, looking for an earthly
honor, which before the honor is the humility. Nay, the Scripture is not a
rule for the respecting of persons, neither is the faith of our Lord Jesus
Christ; they that do are out of the faith, and are convinced by the Law to be
transgressors, and committers of sin, and so out of the Law, and Faith, that
respects persons. And David, he saw the end of all that perfection, so he was
past the growth of it, when he saw it end. And the Scriptures, and Christ, you
know not, who are not come into the immediate teachings, nor have no need of
that; who says, the Scripture it is sufficient that declares of Christ. And
the Prophets did not take Texts, and raise Motives, and Uses, and Reasons, and
lay in them half a year together, and sell them for money, as ye do now since
the days of the Apostles in the apostasy; But now I am come to reckon with you,
and you shall have a portion, a reward according to your works: And I will slay
you with the sword, the words of my mouth, says the Lamb. And your Points, and
Reasons, and Imaginations, which ye fetch out of Scripture, is but to lead
people under condemnation, and keep them from the immediate teaching, and the
light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world: And James
Parnells blood who dyed in the Prison, that righteous man, his blood lies upon
you, and that shall lie upon your heads sparkling, and from under it ye shall
never come, but ye shall own it. And the spirit of God levels down all the
proud and lofty hearts of men, by which people are brought into unity with God,
and one with another.

And the first day of the week which ye call the Sabbath, ye never read it in
the Scriptures as a strict command among the Apostles.

Pr. And the Magistrate is not to level the Laws with the light in every man's
conscience. Again, If the Magistrate be in the Light, and discern into the
mind of Christ, and understand his law. Is he to compel all the Nation, and
Commonwealth, to come to the practice of his light? page 308.

Answ. The Magistrate of Christ, the help-government for him, he is in the
light and power of Christ, and he is to subject all under the power of Christ
into his light, else he is not a faithful Magistrate. And his Laws here are
agreeable and answerable according to that of God in every man; when men act
contrary to it, they do evil: So he is a terror to the evil doers, discerns
the precious and the just from the vile, and this is a praise to them that do
well.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures is the more sure word of prophecy that shines in
the dark heart until enlightened by the Law. And every man's light, etc. is the
shimmerings of the law, and not of the Gospel light: and it is the voice of the
spirit of unbelief that says, the spirit and the power is not in the
declaration. See his Appendix.

Answ. The spirit and the power was in them that gave forth the Declaration,
and many have the Declaration, and wants the spirit, and wants the power, as
the Pharisees did; as all you Apostates inwardly ravened from the spirit of
God, have had the Declaration, but not found the power in it, nor spirit in it,
and so are in the unbelief, and are all on heaps about it: For if ye had found
the power and the spirit in it, ye had been all one, and quiet before now about
Religion; yea, whole Christendom, in power, and in the spirit, and in the bond
of peace, and in fellowship one with another, and the Scriptures, and the
spirit, and God. And the light which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, every man being in the light which has enlightened him, he shall
feel the word of prophecy; he shall feel the light shining in his heart; he
shall feel the Day Star arise there in his heart, he shall see that no Prophecy
of the Scriptures came by the will of man, but holy men of God spoke them
forth. He shall see that many may have the Scriptures, yet quench the spirit
and despise prophesying; he shall see the Scripture is but the Letter declared
forth from the spirit of Prophecy, by the Prophets, and the spirit of God in
the Son, and in the rest of the Apostles. And the light which does enlighten
every one, etc. is the end of the Law, and all shimmering lights, and it is the
light of the Gospel. And none knows the Gospel, the power of God, Christ Jesus,
but with the light that comes from him. And here comes every man into his
particular comfort; And that is the voice of the unbeliever like the Pharisees,
that thought to have had life in the Letter, and would not come to Christ the
life, the substance of Scriptures, but stops his ear to the light of God in
him.

Pr. He says, Let all know, that the work within is not the ground and
purchase of true peace: And that God is more pleased with that which Christ
works without for them, then that which he works within them. And those that
Peter speaks of, that had escaped the pollutions of the world through the
knowledge of Christ, yea clean, and yet are in the natural state, first, and
last. See Appendix.

A. Them that have escaped the pollutions of the world through the knowledge of
Jesus Christ, and are clean, are out of the natural state, for they have
escaped out of that state which they were in first. And such as witness their
Sanctification and Justification wrought within them, they witness in this
they please God, by the faith in the blood of the Son of God. Now they feel not
the comfort, nor the benefit, but by the faith of Christ Jesus, the one
offering, in which God is pleased withal, which is acceptable, which is
Christ's offering, his sacrifice, his flesh, his blood, his life, his mind must
be manifest, and received within, before they come to Justification,
Sanctification, and Redemption, and the serving of God in the new life. And
herein is God glorified, to believe in the only begotten Son of God; and here
they honor the Son in believing in him whom the Father has sent. And so they
that feel not Chirst in them, are Reprobates.

And as for all the rest of thy lies and slanders, and strife, and confusions,
who would set one against another; all cool, and quiet sober spirits will see
thy confusion, and so thy words shall be thy own burden, and the lies torn
upon thy own self. And no man shall establish Sion, nor lay a stone there, as
he is in himself; but the Elect makes up Sion, and the living stones, where
the elect and precious stone is in the midst (which is Christ) laid in Sion.
And all thy Babylonish ways, actings, doings, and the rest of all thy
Brethren, and who are begotten with the same spirit of the great Whore, that
inwardly ravened from the spirit of God, which long has had the sheeps
clothing upon your backs, who all come from one Popish flock, are comprehended
now by the spirit of God which ye all ravened from inwardly, with it are ye all
fathomed. And how the Whore has been arrayed with the sheeps clothing, and
has had power over Kindreds, Tongues, and Peoples, and Nations, and
Multitudes, and brought Nations into waters, and Peoples, and Tongues,
Multitudes like waters, which have drunk the blood of the Prophets, and the
Saints, and the Martyrs. And so thou art flattering the Authorities of the
earth, and crouching under them, out of whose mouth goes the unclean spirit;
But that is stirred and stirring, and rising in people, which ye all ravened
from, and went from, with which ye are all comprehended.

And the judgment of the great Whore is come, and her garments shall be
plucked off, and that which ye all ravened from, high and low, shall answer the
judgment, and it is set a top of you all. For such as ravened from the spirit
of God inwardly, got the sheeps clothing, but turned against the Saints, and
the woman fled into the wilderness; but now the Lamb and the Saints shall get
the victory. Though now the Beast, and false Prophets, and mother of Harlots,
and the Devil, and the Kings of the Earth^ ^ake war against him; He that was
dead is alive, and lives for evermore. The Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world, who rides on conquering, and to conquer, who slayes with the sword,
and kills with the sword, which is the words of his mouth. Now woe to the
Dragon, and false Prophets, Beast, and mother of Harlots, and them that worship
the Beast, the unclean Spirits, Woes, Vials, Thunders, Plagues, Earthquakes is
come, and coming upon you: And he is manifest and come, that treads the
Wine Press alone without the City; who is the Wonderful, Counselor, the
Prince of Peace, whose name is called the Word of God. With him are the Saints
singing victory over the Beast, and the false Prophets, great Whore, mother of
Harlots, Babylon, Antichrists. Babylon is fallen, the Lamb and the Saints shall
have the victory. The body of witchcraft in it thou art found, that all that
reads thy Book, that be in the spirit of discerning, may see; whose body is
redeemed, and reigns over thine in the glory and victory.

Ralph Farmer, his Book, called, The great mystery of Godliness, and
Ungodliness. In which these PRINCIPLES are following, etc.
Pr. HE says, The soul is of an immortal, and spiritual nature. And GOD
has made man to serve him in an outward and visible way of worship.

Answ. Christ says, God is a spirit, and they that worship him, must worship
him in spirit, and in truth, and is the Spirit without, and visible, the Spirit
that makes all that is contrary to bend, in that is God worshipped? And others
that say they are Teachers (as ye may see in this Book) say that the soul is
humane, yea the soul of Christ, and thou says, the soul of man is immortal,
and a spiritual nature. Now the soul that gives the sense and feeling of all
things, is spiritual, and immortal, as it comes out from God, which is in Gods
hand, whom Christ is the Bishop of, the noble Principle that guides it, is the
light and life.

Prin. He says the eternal word enlighteneth all men with the common light of
nature.

Answ. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal; is not natural. For the light was before any thing was made, and all
things that was made, was made by it which lights every man that comes into
the world; though he be in the first Adam, in the sin, and transgression: which
light to him does make it manifest, which comes from Christ the second Adam,
the way to the Father who was glorified with the Father before the world began:
to restore that which the first lost, and this is the obedient Son; and the
other the disobedient one, which brings the death upon him, and all his
posterity and all his house. So the sons of Adam in the transgression may say,
and do say, that the light which Christ (the second Adam, the Redeemer, and the
Restorer, the salvation to the ends of the earth) does enlighten every one that
comes into the world withal, say this is natural. And so that is to deceive
people to keep them from the light, with which they might all see their
salvation; and come to receive Christ by which they might have power to become
the Sons of God.

Pr. The measure and degree it must be without thee. And it is a cheating to
tell people of God within, and Christ within, and a word within, and they are
without; which he calls a mystery of mere confusion, and emptiness. Page 27.

Answ. The degrees, and measures was in the Saints which spoke forth
Scriptures, and knew the Scriptures; But those that have the Scriptures, and
are from their degree, and measure in themselves, are without them. And Jesus
Christ is within except ye be reprobates. And where Jesus Christ is within, the
word is there and God is there; And this is the great mystery of godliness. And
where the power of God is set, the Cross of Christ is felt: for the Cross is
the power of God. And if it be not the same Christ as did ascend, it is
Antichrist, it is against him, and false: which now many hundreds, and
thousands do witness Christ within, him the Apostles preached; who have their
Joy, and reward; who do possess that which they long looked for. And all that
stands against Christ within and God within, and the word within, and the
Cross within, the power of God; they be reprobates, and in the mystery of
confusion.

Pr. The Apostle bid Timothy to Preach the word in season, and out of season,
etc. not immediate Revelation. page 32. And the time will come, they will not
endure sound Doctrine, but after their own lusts they will heap up to
themselves teachers, having itching ears, turning to fables, immediate
Revelations. Page 35.

Answ. There is none can Preach the word in truth, but who Preach it
immediately and by the immediate spirit, and knows immediate Revelations. And
all that be in the Faith as Timothy was, they be in the immediate Revelations,
the gift of God. But the Apostle seeing such as would not endure sound
doctrine, would get up teachers after their own lusts, as covetous, and minded
earthly things, and evil beasts, that serve not the Lord Jesus Christ but their
own bellies. Such the Apostle bid Timothy, and Titus examine before they
Ministered, prove them, and lay hands on no man suddenly and keep himself
clear, not preferring one before another. And such as went into their own lusts
got up heaps of teachers; lost the immediate Revelation, and the immediate word
of God, and erred from the faith that purifies the heart and gives victory: in
which people have unity. And such now that are got into the lusts that cannot
endure sound doctrine, lost the Revelation, and speaking the word immediately
have ruled, and reigned: of whose generation thou Farmer art. And people have
heaped to themselves teachers after their own lusts; and that is the cause of
all the strife, and wars amongst them: and teachers denying the immediate
Revelation; and Preaching the word of God immediately have declared your selves
to be the false prophets openly to the Nation, that never heard the voice of
God, nor Christ's voice; nor the voice of the spirit, nor Ministry of the
spirit, which all s^eak immediately, And the Apostle saw them come up before
his decease. Therefore he charge Timothy to Preach the word in season, and
out of season; which word is immediate; And so since the days of the Apostles
(ye have reigned) of Timothy, and Titus; and transformed your selves as
Apostles, as the Ministers of Christ, and gotten the form, the sheep
clothing, the outside; but no immediate Revelation, we do believe you really
it is so. So you are all Ministers of the letter in your own lusts, for the
word of God is immediate. And ye are ignorant of the grace of God which is
brought at the Revelation of Jesus; And ignorant of the Son of God who reveals
the Father; And ignorant of the spirit of God which reveals the deep things of
God, to the Minsters of the spirit. But Revelation is ceased say you, and the
rest of your generation do discover it. And thou says they went after the
fable^, itching ears, immediate Revelation. Nay they that went from the
immediate Revelation and turned into fables they had itching ears, as all whole
Christendom may, witness the itching ears, how are they itching abroad, their
ears without and cannot endure sound Doctrine; and all inwardly ravened from
the light which does enlighten every one that comes into the world, whereby
with which every man might see the Author of his faith, in which is the unity.
And how have you broken into Sects, and heaps, and into fables, and heaps of
teachers after your own lusts, and there burning after them, and broken wedlock
with Christ: and ready to burn, and prison one another about Ministers
maintenance, Churches, as whole Christendom discovers it. But I say it is
better to marry then to burn.

Pr. He says, That this God who is the Creator, is eternally distinct from all
creatures. page 53. That Christ being God only in one man's person, remains a
distinct person from all creatures and Angels. Page 55.

Answ. This is contrary to Scripture. The Saints bodies are the Temples of God,
and he will dwell in them, and walk in them, and he will be their God, and they
shall be his people, and this is to them that witness the new Covenant and
Christ in you the hope of glory; and he is within you except ye be reprobates.
And them that eat not his flesh, and drink not his blood, have no life in them:
and they that eat his flesh, have his flesh in them. And the Saints are not
distinct from him, for they sat with him in heavenly places, and he is in
them, and they in him; And Christ in you the mystery, the hope of glory, and he
is the head of the Church, and so not distinct.

Pr. He says God is distinct in his being, and blessedness from all Creatures;
And that God who is the Creator is eternally distinct from all creatures. Page
62.

Answ. God is a spirit, and he dwells in his Saints, and the heaven of heavens
cannot contain him; In him we live, and move, and have our being, who is in
all, and through all, and over all, God blessed for ever. And the spirit of the
Father speaks in the Saints, and he makes his abode with them; And the Saints
have fellowship with the Father, and the Son, so not distinct; so these keep
people from unity with God, and out of his knowledge, which the knowledge of
God shall come to cover the earth, as the waters cover the Sea. And while any
are separated from the Lord it is their misery; and distinct from him they are
from the Spirit of God in their own particulars, and are not Saints; But such
as come to walk in the spirit, they have fellow-ship with him, and lives in his
presence, and sees his face, and behold his glory, and stands in his Council,
and hears instruction, and they are one; he that sanctifyeth, and they that are
sanctified are all of one. And so God was in Christ reconciling the world unto
himself, though sin and iniquity had separated, who breaks down iniquities
bonds, and brings light, life and immortality to the light, through the power
which is the Gospel, whereby fellowship and unity comes with God, and not
distinct, and his blessing and blessedness felt; for they that have unity with
God, they have unity with his blessing, and they that have fellowship with God
know his blessedness.

Pr. He says if any man that comes into the world have a sufficient light
within him to lead him unto salvation, then there is no absolute need of a
Savior, and this is to offer violence to Christ. Page 73. 74.

Ans. Every man having a light from Christ the Savior of the soul; him by whom
the world was made before it was made, which none sees the Savior but with the
light which comes from him. And none sees the offering, and the blood of the
offering; but with the light which comes from him, the blood of the second
Adam the Lord from heaven. And all that does deny the light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, knows not Christ nor salvation. But they
being from the light, and out of the light which Christ has enlightened them
withal, they are out of the truth as the Devil is. And so he can confess
Christ without as they do, not within: now none sees salvation, the Savior
Christ Jesus but with the light which he has enlightened them withal, that is
within.

Pr. That the holy Scriptures is the rule of knowing God.

Answ. The Pharisees had the Scriptures but knew not God, knew not Christ, nor
none does but who be in the life that they was in that gave forth Scriptures,
with which they learned of God the Father of life, and stood in his Council.

Pr. He says, Christian, would thou have another righteousness then that of
Christ wrought in thee? I know thou would, and must have, if ever thou be
saved, then the righteousness of Christ wrought within thee for thy
sanctification, but to rely upon another righteousness for thy justification,
the righteousness of Christ without thee. p^g. 70. And it is a blasphemous
opinion and filthy puddle for to say the righteousness of Christ within. And I
had rather be a Papist, then a Quaker.

Answ. The righteousness within, sanctification within has been lost since the
days of the Apostles in the Apostasy amongst you and the Papists; And they
that witness a righteousness within, sanctification within they are not in the
blasphemous opinion, raking in a puddle. And I know, that thou had rather
turn to the Papists, then to the Quakers: for they was your root which ye came
from (the Papists,) who first erred from the faith, and so lost the
righteousness within, and justification and sanctification. And I say, none
comes to witness salvation, and to be saved, but who witness Christ within,
their sanctification, and justification, and redemption, and the others are
reprobates. And all upon the earth that can talk of a righteousness without
them, and sanctification, and justification without them, and a Christ without
them, and not within them, they are reprobates; for Christ is the righteousness
of God, and the sanctification and the justification of man from the Law, and
its works, who stands between God, and man. So he is the redemption, who
Redeemes man out of the fall, which he fell into; and he does sanctify him,
and he does justify him, and this is all found within: and this not being,
found within, he is reprobate. And so none are saved but who witnesses this
within. They have the letter, (the wolves,) the sheep clothing, the ravenors
inwardly from the Spirit of God, and those are them that denies it within.

Pr. He says, The spirit speaks expressly that in the latter times some shall
depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and Doctrines of Devils
speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their consciences seared as with a hot Iron
forbidding to marry, and abstaining from diverse meats. Page 73.

Ans. Before the Apostles decease he saw these things come up: and the spirit
speaks this, mark! it speaks exprestly. Now since the Apostles decease the
things have been fulfilled; the faith has been departed from the unity among
all Christians has been lost, in all Christendom, on heaps have they all run,
destroying one another about the Scriptures, Churches, Ministry, yea for
maintenance, from the spirit ye have departed to speak, so out of the unity of
it, which is the bond of peace, which should have kept peace in all
Christendom, and all the Professors of Christ, it should have kept them in
peace, and in it is the unity. From that ye have ravened, you and the Papists,
and all Sects upon the earth. So some forbiding of meats, and forbiding to
marry, whose consciences are feared as with a hot iron. The Devils Doctrine,
speaking lies in hypocrisy, and giving heed to seducing spirits, you are the
spirits that inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, that deny immediate
Revelation, and hearing the voice of God immediately, these are the seducing
spirits, and keeps all people in the burning and heating lusts, from the
marriage of the Lamb, all the seducing spirits does that deny Revelation,
immediate inspiration, hearing the voice of God immediately from heaven now as
ever. And therefore their fruits declares they are burning one against another,
destroying one another about their Religion, and Ministry, their consciences
seared as with a hot iron, tenderness lost, and gone, destroying people, and
casting into prison for their bellies, for maintenance, for Tithes. So ye have
got up your Church which was a Mass-house and Tithes, and sprinkling Infants
who have had the time of compelling others to worship. But the day is breaking,
the light is springing, life is rising, and glory is appearing, your Torment is
coming, and you can be no longer hid.

Pr. He says, Beware of false prophets, there shall be false prophets among
the people, which shall bring in damnable heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them, bringing upon themselves swift destruction, and many shall follow
their pernicious ways, by reason of whom the way of truth shall be evil
spoken. As Jannes, and Jambres withstood Moses, so do these resist the Truth:
but they shall proceed no further; for their folly shall be made manifest to
all men, as theirs was.

Answ. Christ said Antichrist should come, false prophets should arise, to his
Apostles before their decease, they saw they was come, as Peter and John
declares already in the world, whereby they knew it was the last time, and they
went forth from them, (the Apostles) and in the Revelations the whole world
went after them, that the Nations come to be like waters, and the peoples
waters, and their tongues waters, and multitudes waters; so many followed their
pernicious ways, by whom the way of truth has been evil spoken of by you and
them both, And they brought up the damnable Heresy: and are as Jannes, and
Jambres, being men of corrupt minds, and are Reprobates concerning the faith;
But they shall proceed no further, for now is their folly made manifest, and
shall be made manifest to all men. Does not the very heathens cry out against
Christendom, of the hardness of their hearts, and of their unrighteous
dealings, of their actions, and causes the way of truth to be spoken of by you
that are called Christians! Is not the damnable Heresy among you? Are not you
run into all heathenish ways, to set up Temples and Tithes, and Priests, and
Schools, and Colleges, and never heard the voice of God, as ye confess, as
may be seen in this book? Is not all this trumpery, and trash come up, and
fables among the Papists, and you since the days of the Apostles? And do not
you deny the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
The grace of God which brings salvation which has appeared unto all men, to
bring every man to a teacher? And does any one know the Lord that bought them
but who owns the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world? Does not all deny the Lord that bought them that does deny the light?
Does any see the Lord, and his blood that bought them, and purchased them, but
with the light that comes from him? And are not you all as Jannes and Jambres
that withstood Moses to have kept the people in Egypt? Are not you all denying
the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world? And was not
all them that inwardly ravened, got the sheeps clothing; which Christ said
should come, which the Apostles saw was come, went forth from them, the whole
world went after, are not all these in the witchcraft, Sorcery, Enchantment,
Negromancy, wizards, familiar spirits, witches that does deny the light, that
does enlighten every one that comes into the world? Has not Babylon, the
mother of Harlots, Beast, false Prophet, unclean spirits, Dragon, and
Antichrists, and deceivers, all these been up since the days of the Apostles?
And the great whore that deceives the Nations, dressed with the sheep
clothing, and has not this been the mystery of Iniquity, which has ruled
since the days of the Apostles? That cries prophecy is ceased, and slayes the
Prophets, and none can keep the commands of God, and made War against them that
keep the commands of God, and calls the Scriptures the testimony, and the Law,
and makes War against them that have the Law in their hearts, and the spirit of
prophecy? and have not thou manifested thy self to be of this number, and of
the stock of the great whore, that has drunk the blood of the Saints and
Martyrs and the Prophets?

Pr. Art not thou crying to Magistrates, Help; stop the mouths of Blasphemers?
In page 23. And stirring up the zeal of the Magistrates, and showing them the
zeal of the Jews Magistrates; how they did tear their clothes off at
blasphemers in thy page 31. And says thou could rejoice that they would breath
such an air throughout all the English Quarters and would not that the
Quakers should have Countenance from the Magistrates.

Answ. Now thou have made thy self manifest, that thou have not the spiritual
weapons: And thou may well deny immediate Revelations; was it not in all ages
such as pretended themselves to be Ministers, that had not the life that gave
forth Scriptures, that called to the Magistrates, to stop the mouths of
Blasphemers? was not the mouth of the Priests against Christ to the Rulers at
the Counsel, And against the Apostles, and against the Prophets? And is it
your mouth now to your Magistrates in the Apostasy since the days of the
Apostles? But do you think that the Magistrates will let you get a top of their
backs, and gallop upon them, to be their executioners? If ye be Ministers that
have the Spirit of God; stop the mouths of the gainsayers, for never did the
Apostles, nor the true Church wrestle against flesh and blood; But they struck
at the power that captivated the Creatures, to the intent that the Creatures
might come into the Liberty of the Sons of God. But thy fruits has stunck
about thee, and your fruits; how Barbarously the Saints have been used among
you, (and true Christians in the spirit) and so them that make War against the
Saints, are such that inwardly ravened from the spirit, and so got the sheep
clothing, and turned against them that had the Spirit of God: ravened from the
Spirit of God inwardly, lost the spiritual weapons, and had only the sheep
clothing, and that would not carry them out in the time of need, and so was
fain to fly to Magistrates, to the carnal weapons: and so by this means in all
ages the righteous have been slain by them that had the Scriptures; but from
the spirit that gave them forth, and all the Saints upon the earth have been
slain by them that have been from that of God in their own particulars, which
now that is awakened by which men come to be turned unto God. And so you now
that do deny the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the
world, that preach, men should have sin while they be upon earth, and the body
of it, and imperfection are such as have led people captive all their life
times, with the form of godliness without the power; And keeps people in
spiritual Egypt, Sodom, and Gomorah in filthyness, and darkness, where Christ
was crucified by them whose ears were stopped to that of God in them, and that
was spiritual Egypt. And so are all you that be inwardly ravened from the
Spirit of God in your own particulars: yet having a form of godliness, denying
the power, you are from that of God ravened inwardly. Ye are like to be
reprobated concerning the faith, ye are not like to lead people to the
knowledge of the truth: but like to keep them in the diverse lusts, laden with
their sins, and always learning, never able to come to the knowledge of truth;
there is all the witchcraft, and sorcery, and enchantments, and familiar
spirits; and such does deny the light which does enlighten every one that
comes into the world.

And as for all thy lies, and all thy slanders, and reviles, they will be thy
own clothing: and wear thy own garments thou must; and they will cover thee in
darkness in the day of thy judgment, when thy works are tried with fire, the
witness in thy conscience shall answer, I am a friend to thy soul. And thy
shame, and folly and wickedness thou have published to the Nation, which all
sober people see thy folly; and thy silence had been better to have Preached
thee a sober man. But novices, and fools must utter their folly. And the Truth
is gone over ye, and thou shall feel it one day when thou and thy works are
tried with the fire. And Eternally shall thou witness ^^ey are Judged, and
condemned.

Edward Boules, who calls himself a Teacher of the Gospel at York, in his Book
he calls, The duty and danger of Swearing, opened as he says, in a Sermon
preached at York, the day of swearing the LORD MAYOR. This is the Title of his
Book which he directs to Stephen Watson, Lord Major, the Aldermen and Common
Council of that City; whose work is to teach them to break the commands of
Christ, throughout his Book, in that which he calls a SERMON.
Pr. FIrst, he says, Christ brought down the rigteousnesse of the Scribes and
Pharisees, and how that the Pharisees wrests the Scriptures, or made the
Scriptures to bend to their own righteousness.

Answ. This is your own condition, and the Papists, who cannot own the
Scriptures as they speak; but you will make the Scriptures bend to your own
wills, and wrests them as the Pharisees did, and as you and the Papists do
Christ's words, who says, Swear not at all, and you say swear. How now, Edward
Bouls, who makes the Scriptures bend now? Thou teaches men should swear, and
Christ said, Ye shall not swear at all, and so art an Antichrist, and against
the Doctrine of Christ, and teach thy own tradition for doctrine, and makes
the commandment of Christ of none effect. He that is against the doctrine of
Christ, is an Antichrist, and so the Papists and Protestants, and Pharisees all
are found swearers out of Christ's Doctrine, that says, swear not at all, and
yet in your pride will make a trade of his words, and a talking of his words to
get money by.

Pr. Thou says, Christ came not to destroy the Law; and it has deceived some
to say, Swear not at all. The Scriptures must not be taken in general terms;
for Paul said, he became all things to all men: And Christ, and our Savior his
intent is this, that we should not swear as we were wont to do, for the word
General, not at all must be interpreted: so that you see it is the scope and
circumstance of this place, that this Swear not at all be interpreted, vain and
unnecessary customs, and abuse of swearing among the Jews: and it is not
unlawful to swear, but to all men not only a liberty, but in just cases a
duty of swearing, and part of divine worship, not Ceremonial or Mutable,
there is no shadow or type in it. An Oath is for confirmation and the end of
strife, it gives the last peale to all differences, and gives a great honor to
God, and is the proper end of worship, and consequently a great honor.

Answ. They are deceived that breaks Christ's commands; for when he says, swear
not at all. He says, in all your communication let your yea be yea, and your
nay, nay, for whatsoever is contrary is evil. So he lays down no other
Doctrine that men should practice then not to swear at all, but yea, yea, and
nay, nay, them that goes any further, go into the evil; whatsoever is more is
evil. So mind these 3 things, and the Apostle becoming all to all men, yet
not without the Law of Christ [Mark] the Law Christ, which was Swear not at
all, so still that is agreeable to Christ's words; the Scripture is taken
general, and Christ said, It has been said to them of old time, thou shall
perform the oath of the Lord. Christ said so, that comprehended time that was
the end of that old time where had been the swearing; But I say unto you now,
Swear not at all; and so it was not the frivolous oaths that was among the
Jews that swore, but it was true oaths that Christ brought them off, the oath
that was to be performed to the Lord, which Christ the oath of God ended, who
comprehends time, and told them the danger, if they went any farther then yea
and nay: And so your interpreting the Scripture, which are the private
Interpreters, is but to wrest them to your own earthly wills; and that which
opposes the commands and doctrine of Christ, brings not honor to God, is not
a part of his worship, nor is not divine, but in that which is out of truth
(for none worships God but who is in Christ, who says, swear not at all, who
is the end of the Law and the Prophets, and Oaths) and is but one of your dark
consequences, and so it is not men's duty in any case to swear; for the duty of
man is to keep the commands of Christ, and there is none that is just that will
swear, that obeys the commands of Christ; but such swears who are unjust, and
they be out of that which gives the last peale, and ends all differences, which
ends all oaths, and all strife, and all controversy, which is Christ Jesus the
covenant of God; for strifes, controversies, and differences is without the
covenant of Light and Life, Christ Jesus, the oath of God; and so thou art not
a Minister of Christ, that brings people back to the Law, and tells them it is
lawful to swear: Here the Papists and thee art one, both opposing the
commands of Christ, which would make people believe it was the frivolous oaths
among the Jews that Christ brought them off, and not of the true oaths, and
says it was not a shadow. I say yes, it made peace, and ended the strife
amongst men, the oath of God that was sworn by the Lord; but Christ the oath of
God ends the strife, and ends those oaths that men were to swear by the Lord:
So it was typical and ceremonial, and was to change, and was mutable; for
Christ that comprehends time, says in the old time the oath must be performed
to the Lord; but I say unto you now Swear not at all: So that was to be
changed, and it did type forth something. There you may see the substance of
it, Christ the oath of God, in which men have peace, who ends the strife
between men and God, who makes all things new: And so they that bring men to
the swearing, bring men into the evil; And they that bring men to the Law and
Prophets that speaks of swearing, brings men from Christ who is the end of the
Law and Prophets into the old time.

Pr. The ground and occasion of Oaths yet remains, and so a usefulness of
Oaths for the ending of Controversies, which must be established by Oaths for
the ending of humane societies. The Apostates taking for granted, that the
Christian Religion did forbid all Oaths, it is false and ridiculous; for the
Prophet said, every tongue shall swear: And thou shall swear by my name, Deuteronomy.
And men verily swear by the greater: And men and Angels have made use of Oaths
to confirm the truth, and avenge falsehood. I see not how swearing by any
creature can be exempted from idolatry: He that swears must do it righteously
in a lawful just matter Those that swear falsely are highly guilty of offense
against the God of truth. Can a Blackmore change his skin, or a Leopard his
spots?

Answ. Christ who has ended oaths, who ends controversies amongst men, and
brings them to peace one with another, and with God, and ends the Law, and
fulfils it, and does not break it, and ends the Prophets who swear, and Christ
is the end of the Law to every one that believes; and your humane societies,
which be of the earth from the ground, amongst whom is the oaths, the swearing,
be out of the doctrine of Christ, and knows not the end of the Law and the
Prophets, and they be the Apostates, and false, and ridiculous, apostatized
from Christ and the Apostles doctrine, that swear, and teach men so, and are
not the true Christians: and so you that will swear, will forswear, which be
out of the truth; for the truth Christ says, Swear not at all: And the Apostle
says, above all things my brethren swear not at all. So you be the false
brethren apostatized from the truth, and are come to be as black as the
Aethiopians and the Black moors, and the custom of the sin of your swearing
does take away the sense. And men and Angels swearing, and the swearing by the
greater: And to the Lord every tongue shall swear, and perform their oaths to
him; and they were to swear by the name of the Lord.

Now Christ, to him the Angels must bow; and as the people had sworn by Baal,
so the Prophet brought them to swear by the Lord to change their form, to
swear by the Lord as a true oath, and perform it to him; But Christ the end of
the Prophets and the Law, as I said before, and the true oath; for says he, It
has been said to them of old time, thou shall perform thy oath to the Lord;
that was a true oath, not a false oath, let all take notice of that. But I say
unto you now, swear not at all: So he came to end the true oath Christ, the
oath of God. And so though the Angels, or men in strife, or Prophets, or Moses,
the Law said swear: Yet Chrst, who comprehends time before the world was made,
who came to end that old time, says, Swear not at all, but yea and nay in all
your communications, and whatsoever is more then these comes of evil. And
many men are undone by these false oaths, and by swearing: And you that call
your selves Ministers of the Gospel, and teach men to swear; and Christ says
swear not at all, have brought another Doctrine, and so are to be accursed.

And again, do not you swear by the Bible, by the Prophets, and Moses, and
Christ's, and the Apostles words? and swear by the Evangelists, and Christ says,
swear not at all? What a perverse generation of people, of men, are ye
Professors and Teachers and people? What an unchristian spirit have you? And
see, have you not brought the judgment upon your selves to be the Idolaters?
For the true oath was by the Lord among the Jews, and you swear by the
Evangelists, and the Bible that tells you you should not swear. Did ever the
Prophets swear by Moses words? or Moses by Enochs? or the Apostles by the
Prophets or Christ's words? Now is not this a frivolous oath to swear by the
Bible, which says, swear not at all? And worse then the Jews that swore by
the Temple, who was to swear by the Lord, and to perform the oath to him?
Which that oath Christ ended, and brought men out of strife, and the earth into
peace with God to the beginning, to the glory which was with the Father before
the world was began, who brings the peace on earth, and good will toward men.
And do not you that swear by the Bible, swear by all that's contained in it?
like as the Jews swore by the Temple? and so has not the Bible judged you?
Here Christ's words and the Apostles that tells you ye should not swear, and
yet you swear. And if ye say the Prophets, and Moses, and Abraham, and Jacob,
and Joseph, and the Angels swore, and men of Strife swore; Does not Christ and
the Apostle tell you he is the end of the Prophets, a greater then Solomon?
David called him Lord Before Abraham was; reigns over the house of Jacob and
Joseph, to him the Angels bow, says swear not at all. This is my beloved Son,
hear him, is the end of the Law and the Prophets to him that believes, which
hears him; But it seems you will not hear him that are the swearers and
forswearers: And the Apostle brings that concerning an oath is the end of
controversy among men of strife; and men swear by the greater: Yet they swear
by the Lord, he brings the example, not that men should swear; but showing how
God could not find a greater, swear by himself concerning his Son, who is the
oath of God, the end of Oaths, and the true oath that men swear that ends the
strife: He brought peace on earth, and good will toward men, that ended that
oath, and brought men to unity to God, and one another, out of the Earth to the
beginning.

Pr. That Oaths are to be performed if the Scriptures were silent: The Law of
Nature and Nations would speak loud in this point, because of the particular
miscarriages in humane Societies: Therefore says the Lord, Mine oaths ye
despised, and my covenant ye have broken. It would be a great dishonor to the
nature of an Oath, if it should tie any man to disobey the commands of God.
Governors are ready to think it their great security to establish themselves
by Oaths.

Answ. The commands of Christ, let the Law (as ye call it) of Nature and
Nations cry never so loud for swearing, who stablish themselves by sin and
trangression in the earthly humane societies, the commands of Christ forbids
swearing: And I know that the Law of Nations, and the National Laws have sworn
by several Heathen gods and Idols, as the Jews swore by the Temple, and you
by the Evangelists; and Christ says, swear not at all, and his Apostles. And
here is great outcries for oaths, but here is a cry from the Lord Christ, says
swear not at all: And oaths was in the Covenant, which Covenant was to change
(mark that) Oaths despised, and Covenant broken. This was the first covenant in
which were the oaths that was to change and decay; which Christ came to end
both Covenant and Oaths, and bid them swear not at all, and took away the first
covenant, that he might establish the second. And so as the Jews brake the
first covenant, and despised the Lords oath which was to swear by himself, who
is the greater, and to him to perform it: So you despise his covenant, his Son,
the everlasting covenant, that ends oaths, and the first covenant, that are
teaching men to swear, and so there is swearing and for-swearing. The
lamentable work and doings as you may see in your Courts, how they will swear a
man has so much when he has not half so much, as the Writs and Indictments,
and all their bad stuff declares it. And so you that swear do break the
commands of Christ; though it was the command of God in the old time to swear,
yet it is the command of Christ who makes all things new, swear not at all.

And the Governors that are established by Oaths are out of the doctrine of
Christ, that establish themselves by that which Christ denies, and so establish
themselves out of the power, command, and authority, and does not hear the Son,
and are not the true christians, but are apostatized from the true Church, has
only his name, but are dead to the life.

Now Christ that takes away oaths, and showed the danger of them that went into
oaths, more then yea and nay in all their Communications, bid them swear not at
all, and that they went into the evil that did, he established a way; by two
or three witnesses every word is established: So they that would have any more
then yea and nay, may take the order of Christ, mind the order of Christ, two
or three witnesses, that ye may establish every word: And this is a^ way for
all Tradesmen, and Magistrates, and all whatsoever, that they may follow and
practice the commands of Christ, yea and nay in all their communications; and
if they will have any more, two or three witnesses, that every word may be
established: And such are the true Christians, the true Brethren, that abide in
the Doctrine of Christ, they are not transgressors, but has the Son and the
Father, which the other has not; and that is a practice for all true
Christians, Cities, Countries, and Magistrates upon the earth.

Pr. Thou says, Those that be engaged take oaths, and they must be circumspect
in taking of it, and this is the word thou adds: And you my Lord Major and
Sheriffs under the bond of an Oath shall execute your office.

Answ. The command of Christ, the doctrine of the Apostles, engages men they
shall not swear, and does not engage any to swear, nor Christ who is the end of
the Law and the Prophets; but you Ministers of unrighteousness, and false
Apostles, teach men to disobey and transgress the commands of Christ, which
are the false Prophets and Antichrists; which Christ said should come, John saw
was come, went forth from them, the Apostles, and since the world is gone after
you, and so you have taught the world to swear, and men to swear, and Christ
and his Apostles teach them not to swear: And so here is the Land mourning
because of oaths, among boys and girls it is become common in your Streets,
Courts, and Houses: Swearing, for-swearing, and profane swearing, and that
which is out of the command of Christ is profane; for they bewitch people, that
draw people from the command of God. The Apostle instances Circumcision which
Christ ended; and what are they that draw people to those things which Christ
forbids, but such as would not have him to reign; but Antichrists which has
been from the Apostles: And so you and the Papists are one here, doing what you
do by an oath; and the Apostle says (which you are apostatized from) Above all
things swear not at all, neither by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath
[Marke] [this was to the brethren, true christians, true believers, such as
obeyed. Christ's doctrine] for he tells them the danger, lest ye fall into
condemnation. Let all your communication be yea, yea, and nay, nay, what ever
is more, is evil: Not by heaven, nor by earth, nor by any other oath. Now
there was true, and false, and profane, whatsoever was comprehended in these
words, Not by any; but keep to yea and nay in all your communications. Now tell
the Apostle he does not mean as he speaks, give him the lie, pervert his words,
and Christ's words, who says swear not at all, and says, he means profane
oaths: And Christ brought the people off the true Oath which was in the old
time, that was performed to the Lord, a profane oath was not performed to the
Lord; that is not meant of that, but that as was sworn by him. Christ says now,
Swear not at all; and so they that break the oath, break the covenant, the true
oath; and so they that swear now, do not own the new covenant, which ends the
true oath and covenant in the old time; The profane oaths, they were judged by
them that lived in the first covenant, and they did not type out any thing, but
a true oath did which ended controversies among men; which the oath Christ
ends, which is the peace between God and man, and reconciles them to God and
one another. These be true brethren, true christians, that is come to yea and
nay in their communications, and cannot swear by heaven, nor by earth, nor by
any other oath, lest they come into the evil; but yea and nay in all their
communications, lest they come into condemnation: So you that teach men to
swear have brought them into the evil, and a great outcry to break the
commands of Christ, and under condemnation. He that teaches them to swear any
oath whatsoever, cast behind your backs the commands of Christ, and doctrine of
the Apostles: And the Apostle that bid the Saints keep to yea and nay in all
their communications, and swear not at all, said, if ye will have any more,
take two or three Witnesses.

And for all thy other confusion, and thy perverting and wresting of
Scriptures, to bring people into the condemnation and evil to swear, is not
worthy the mentioning, and will but come upon thy self in the day of thy
condemnation and judgment, thee and all upon the Earth that are departed from
the Apostles shall witness how ye have transgressed the commands of Christ,
and teach people to transgress them, and to sin, have has brought them into
the evil and condemnation: So repent, and while ye and time, prize it.

Samuel Hammond, In his Book called, The Quakers House built on the Sands. A
very fit Title for himself and the rest of his PRIESTS. These are some of his
Principles following.
Pr. YOung men and women having some convictions and awakenings of the Law, and
have followed the light of an awakened conscience, and sit down before they
have closed with Christ, and there be not a distinction between the
righteousness imputed, upon the account of the blood of Christ, and the
righteousness inherent wrought in us by his spirit: and this inherent
righteousness they confound the seize brought forth by the Light in every
man, not being able to distinguish the working of Satan.

Answ. Inherent righteousness is a word of thy own and the Papists inventing,
and thou art a man that cannot distinguish between the workings of Christ, and
the workings of Satan. For the light which every man that comes into the world
is enlightened withal, which brings men and women to know the Law, and the
convictions of it, it brings them to the end of the Law, Christ, and to see
that appear that cannot be shaken, and the Righteousness imputed to a believer
that is within felt: For he that believes has the witness in himself, and
feels it there; and the blood of Christ is felt within, justifying and
cleansing the conscience from dead works: And the righteousness of Faith is
found within, and that righteousness which is wrought within is found within,
and no man sees this but with the light which Christ has enlightened every man
that comes into the world withal, and this Light is that which confounds all
thy seize for Christ's righteousness, and his blood and spirit are all one
which justifies and sanctifies.

Pr. They dream of a perfection to obey the light within, and this is delusion;
they are not able to distinguish, between justified freely by grace which is
the favor of God upon the account of Christ's satisfaction, and the grace that
wrought by Christ's spirit in the soul: that natural light within, being
improved, they call grace the work of God upon the soul, leads into Covenant of
works, then it is no other then to tread in the Papists steps; so this is
delusion, and the ground of their delusion is their not distinguishing between
saving light given forth by Christ in conversion, and the light of conscience
that every man has.

Answ. None come, to the perfection out of the delusion, but who comes to the
light within, and follows that; it gives him the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; the Covenant of grace is one, that
which was wrought without is within in the soul, for Christ in you, etc, and he
is the Covenant of grace, of light, of life, and of peace: and none knows him
without, nor Justification by grace, but who knows it in the heart, and it is
the one and the same thing, it is not another grace, nor another Covenant, nor
another Christ, but the the same Christ in you: the Saints are in his spirit
and in his mind and are of his flesh, and of his bone; And thou who art so full
of thy delusions; Art out of this, and thou always have been in the dreams,
and never knows perfection, till thou come to the light within. And Gods work
in the soul leads to the end of the Covenant of works, who works all in us, and
for us; as says the Apostle, who works faith, grace, commands the light to
shine out of darkness shines in the heart to give the knowledge of the Son; and
so thou art in the delusion and the Papists doctrine, that knows not this
within, but calls it the Covenant of works, do not thou tread in their steps,
and have crept up in their great Masse-houses, and the light given forth by
Christ in conversion, and the light in the conscience is one, and it is not
natural, it was before natural was, it exercises the conscience toward God,
and toward man in them that love it; but in them that hate it, they are not
converted, but they live in the many ways out of the one way to God; for he
that's the Covenant of light is the Covenant of grace; and thus thou art
blinding people with many things.

Pr. The owning not the imputation of Christ as the matter and formal cause of
Justifications is damnable doctrine: to make our reconciliation to God to be
wrought by our improving the light within, and renewing the image of God in us
is damnable doctrine, to take men off from going to the fullness of Christ at
the right hand of God, and send them to look to a light within, which they say
is in every man, is a damnable doctrine, this is to forsake the fountain of
living waters and dig to themselves broken Cisternes: dangerous principle is
that of perfection by improvement of the light within.

Answ. The imputation to a believer is owned; and this imputation is within,
for he that believes is born of God, and has the witness in himself; now
Abraham believed, and the Romans, and to such the imputation was spoken in the
belief; and Abraham saw his glory, who is Christ Jesus the righteousness it
self; and the Apostle says ye are now nearer then when ye believed, and again
he says, Christ is in you, and God will dwell in you, and walk in you, so such
as has Christ in them, they have the righteousness it self, without
imputation, the end of imputation, the righteousness of God it self Christ
Jesus; No man knows the reconciliation, and his reconciliation made with God,
but by hearing and doing the word of God, that's in the heart and mouth, which
divides thy bad words [Hammond] and thy bad thoughts [thats the word of God]
and cuts them down, and Hammers them down, and burns them up, that's the word
that sanctifies and reconciles to God, and makes clean, and the word is Christ,
called the word of God, and Christ is the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, and that is it that renews man into the image of
God; for the light that comes from Christ is the Image of God, the light of the
glorious Gospel which is the Image of God, and so this is within, and thou that
knows not this within, and feels it not, thy lips are polluted, and art in the
damnable doctrine, and the light that shines in the darkness, and thou cannot
comprehend it; and indeed thou art too proud, high and lofty, and thou must be
brought down, the Lord God will abase thee; and no man comes into the image of
God, and renewed, and has reconciliation with God, but which comes to the
Light which Christ the Word has enlightened him withal, and that's within, and
they that believe in it have the witness in themselves, and they that do not,
the light condemns them And the light that every man that comes into the world
is enlightened withal, does not take them from Christ's fullness at the right
hand of God; but the light lets see him lifted up, and there is none upon the
earth comes to Christ at the right hand of God to receive of his fullness, but
who comes to the light which Christ does enlighten every man that comes into
the world withal: that's the eye, the light with which he sees Christ, and in
that he receives him, and comes to be engrafted in him in the Vine Christ
Jesus. And so thou that draws men from the light within which Christ has
enlightened every man that comes into the world withal, thou draws them from
Christ at the right hand of God, that they cannot receive this his fullness, and
so thou takes away the key of knowledge from people, who art in the doctrine
that's damnable, that's from the light, to be condemned; and none comes to the
Fountain of living mercies, but are all broken Cisterns, that are from the
light within them, which comes from Christ the Fountain of living mercies which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that with it all might
come to see the Fountain and believe in it, so they that do not are condemned;
And no one knows perfection, nor comes into the perfection of Christ, but are
in the dangerous estate, where thou art which does not come into the light
which does enlighten every one that comes into the world; for the imperfection
comes by the first Adam and Eve, and the Devil going out from the truth; the
perfection comes again by Christ to destroy the Devil, death and his works, and
sanctifies man and reconciles man again to God; which does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, that in the light all men might see the perfection
of God Christ Jesus; which none does but such as come to him, the Light.

Pr. That there is so much light in every man that will reveal Christ, and save
them that believe in it: and that an Indian has it, and to send to this to
lead to perfection, and to neglect the Fountain of wisdom at the right hand of
God, is a soul-destroying principle.

Ans. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, is saving to them that believe in it, they are saved, them that do not
are condemned, and this leads to perfection, the light, to the Fountain of
wisdom, Christ Jesus the light of the world, to know the Bishop of their souls;
and all that are not come to the light in their own particular, which comes
from him that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, their
principles are destroying, which are thine that stands against the light, thou
art Antichrist kicking against the light, with which Christ has enlightened
thee wi^hall; no man knows a Savior, nor sees salvation, but as every man
comes to the light, wi^h the same light they come to see Christ the light and
Savior, to save them from their sins, and that light is sufficient; I will
give him for a Covenant of light to the Gentiles; and I will make a New
Covenant with the house of Israel and Judah, them that had the old; (and here is
all the world,) and he shall be my salvation to the ends of the earth; and the
Gentiles was heathen: call them Indian or what thou will, I will give him for a
Covenant to the Gentiles, a leader of the people, which many Gentiles have
found their leader the Covenant of light; and in this light, Jew and Gentile
are one, and in unity if ye walk in the light as he is in the light, then have
ye followship one with another, and this breaks all your Sects, the Covenant of
light Between Jew and Gentile, and brings them to one in believing in the light.

Prin. That light that is in every man is the Relics of the first Covenant of
works which cannot reveal Christ as Mediator.

Answ. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, which is Christ by whom the world was made, ends the Covenant of
works; the creation was made by him, and he was before it was made, so he is
not a created light; But that by which all things was created, and thou art in
thy works, the Covenant of works, and thy created lights that calls the light
that enlightens every man that comes into the world (Christ Jesus) a Covenant
of works, or natural light, which was before the Covenant of works was, or a
natural light was created; which ends the Covenant of works, and thou art to be
judged for thy words, and with that light every man sees the Mediator,
believing in it, if not, it condemns him.

Pr. That all the light they have is but the light of a natural conscience, and
that is a blurred one too. Nay how comes it to pass that in old England we see
so many hundreds, that manifest no other light but a natural conscience; and
New England, that have conversed with the Indians, and never saw the least
breaking forth of the light.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, by
whom the world was made, was before natural conscience was, or natural light
either, or the blurred light as thou calls it; And many of the Indians do show
forth more in their conversations of the light then you do; and as for old,
England what have you been doing all this while, if you see so many hundreds
manifesting no other light but a natural conscience? But how should they
manifest it, when you keep them from it: your work is to keep them from the
light within; But now there is thousands that are manifesting the light on the
house top, by which the world was made; which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world; and you Ministers of Satan out of the light and truth,
are them that stands against it; for the Devil that went out of the light and
truth, who sowed his seed in the hearts of people: he would not have them to
own the light in them; and he would confess a God without him, and so he
teaches them in whom he sowes his seed not to have the light within them, the
seed Christ, the tree of righteousness, the root of God.

Pr. I charge the Quakers to show one Scripture that bids look to the light
within, the old trick of Error, the righteousness of faith does not direct
people to look for a Christ within, this Scripture bids weary laden souls, go
to Christ, is this to the light within them? I am amazed at their ignorance.

Answ. The righteousness of faith brings people to look at Christ within; and
what abundance of ignorance have thou showed, who has been a teacher of the
people these many years, and shows how contrary thou art to Christ and the
Apostles in doctrine, for in 2 Cor. 4. the Apostle tells the Corinthians, the
light that shined in their hearts to give them the light of the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, this was the work of the true
Apostles, when the false Apostles, and Devils, Ministers and messengers was got
among them: for the Devil is out of truth, and so are his messengers, and they
will draw people from the light within, and blind their minds that they should
not come to the light within, to see the glory of God in the face of Christ,
from whence it comes; so thou do conclude thy self among the Devils
Ministers, and false Apostles and messengers, and no wearied soul that is
burdened, that comes to Christ who is the souls rest, but first comes to the
light within, which comes from Christ who is the souls Bishop, with which light
they see him, he shines in their hearts, it gives them the knowledge of him, and
the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; and thou that leads them from the
light within, leads them from Christ and the glory of God who should save them
from their sins, and give them ease rest and peace.

Pr. I said looking to the light, and living upon the light within, will lead
men to Hell; and going to, and living upon a muddy puddle of natural light.
That Christ is the light in all in a saving manner, I deny; for Christ to be
the righteousness of men in Justification differs; and to send a man to live
upon a light within, it not to send him to Christ; and if he live upon it, upon
the light as it is Justication, it is a plain Covenant of works.

Ans. There Is no man lives but in the light which comes from Christ the light
by whom the world was made, in whom was light, and this light is the life of
men, and this light and life is manifest in us; for he that has the Son of
God, has light and life: he that receives not this, though he be enlightened,
has not life that hates it; such as lead people from it, go from it in their
own particulars, they lead people into hell, into its gates, it prevails
against them; but who be in the light, the gates of Hell cannot prevail against
them; and believes in it, they are not condemned, and so they live in the muddy
puddle, and goes into the natural light that denies the light within, which
Christ has enlightened every man that comes into the world withal, they live
not upon the life, but in the muddy puddle of darkness, and are Antichrist out
the light, and are against it in their particulars, and against them that walk
in it, and such are unlike the Ministers of Christ: Every man that comes into
the world is enlightened with the saving light, and he that believes in it is
saved, he that does not is condemned. There Is no one comes out of the covenant
of works, but by the Light within, which Christ the covenant of God has
enlightened him withal: And there is no one lives out of the covenant of works,
but who lives in the Light; and who lives in the Light, lives in Christ, and
Christ in him. I in you, and you in me; and who hates this Light, they live not
in Christ, it condemns them, for they be in their own Covenant o^ works. Who
believes in the light, has entered into the rest, and ceased from his own
work as God did from his: And righteousness and justification is one, where
Christ is known, and felt in man, they are both felt in one; For Christ the
righteousness of God, and the justification, and Christ in you, and see if
thou can read this; who says they differ?

Pr. What warrant have you to go out to the Quakers? Shall a man go hear the
Jews and Popish Mass, because Paul bid try all things? No, no.

Answ. Paul bid us quench not the spirit: and where the spirit is not quenched,
they may try Papists, Jews, Protestants, who quenches not the spirit; but who
quenches the spirit, and draws people from the light within, they draw from
that they should see withal, then you stuff them up with old Authors, and
lying stories, as you print abroad.

Pr. Christ's revealed Will is the word of Reconciliation.

Answ. The Scriptures is not the word of Reconciliation; But Christ is the word
of Reconciliation, who reconciles man to God, and satisfies the Father, and
gives men peace with God, and this the Scripture declares. And as for the
Ministers of Newcastle, who has persecuted the people of God because they met
there, and banished them out of their Town, this does not show the spirit of
Christ, nor the love of God among you, but the works of the Pharisees and Cain:
And thou never knew the Gospel that denies the Light of Christ that has
enlightened every man that comes into the world withal, but found among the
Monkish-holinesse thou speaks of, and the Pharisees and the Papists; for the
Pharisees, the Papists and you do not own the light Christ Jesus that
enlightens every man that comes into the world, so with the Light you are all
comprehended and condemned in one body: Not to be true believers that believes
in the true Christ the Light, who bids people believe in the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, that all men through him might
believe, that is the end, that he that does might be saved, and that he that
does not might be condemned.

Pr. Thou says, The Saints laid down their estates at the Apostles feet.

A. Now you Priests say you are Ministers of Christ and the Gospel, and you are
fain to cast men into Prisons because they will not put into your mouths. Now
all people may see that you have a contrary power to the Apostles; for when did
a people, your hearers lay down all at your feet? N^y, you are fain to cast
into Prisons, hale before Courts a hundred, or two hundred miles, and take
treble damages. Now do you not think that most people begin to see you
apostatized from the Apostles, and the power that they were in, with which you
are fathomed, and with the life the Apostles were in are you judged.

And whereas thou speaks of Circumcision, and tells people, that they that are
circumcised cannot be saved; the Quakers bring no people to circumcision but
that of the spirit, which puts off the body of sin, which you say they must
have while they be upon the Earth, and so has ravened from the spirit of
Circumcision; and such keeps people in the covenant of works from the spirit
within that puts off the body of sin.

And as for all the rest of thy torn confused Stuff which is given forth from
thy v^in thoughts, it is not worthy the mentioning; But in the day of thy
judgment, the witness in thy conscience shall answer it, and all thy Works is
fuel for the Fire.

Priest Bennets Looking-glass. These are some of his Principles following.
Pr. JAmes asks the question, Can one fountain send forth sweet water and
bitter? He says, it is a new fancy to say there is a light in every man which
will guide him to salvation. He says, there is a fancy of perfection.

A. One fountain cannot send forth sweet w^ter and bitter, and yet it is bitter
to them that be in the transgression; for the righteousness^ of God being
revealed to the wicked, is a terror to him; which the righteousness of God
being revealed to the Saints, is their joy and the truth; which speaking truth
to the dec^ipt, it is bitter to him, but to the Just it is not; and the light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world Christ Jesus, the
salvation to the ends of the earth. Thou art in the fancy that stumbles at this
cornerstone; and this light that enlightneth every man, is the perfection of
beauty, and they that be out of this, be in the fancy of a perfection, where
thou may see thy self and the Pharisees that stood against Christ [the Light,
the covenant of God promised to Jews and Gentiles] though they had Scriptures,
them thou art like, that art now at the Light stumbling at which they did, so a
mark of an unbeliever, one that has the form, but denies the power, and art
not a Preacher of that which people should believe in, that is the Light.

Pr. The Scriptures are the Lanthorns of Israel: The Scriptures are the wisdom
of the Cross.

Answ. The Word of God is the Lanthorn of Israel, as says David; and Christ
Jesus is the wisdom of the cross; Christ the wisdom of God, and the cross
of Christ the power of God: And Abraham had a Lanthorn, and Enoch and Abel,
before Scriptures was written forth.

Pr. Thou says, The corruptions of the damned in Hell shall never be
destroyed; and it would be good news, if the Quakers should go and preach to
the spirits in Hell. And thou says, David would open his mouth in dark
sayings of old.

Answ. The Scriptures, and David's words to thee that art in darkness, they are
dark, but not to them that be in the Light. And the Quakers have been among the
prisoners that be in Hell, and ministered to that, and the corruptions shall go
into the Fire that has no end; and they that do wickedly, and forget God,
sh^l^ go into Hell and Death, an^ Hell shall go into the lake of fire, and
there is more in these words yet then thou can receive: For God is the
salvation of all men, but especially them that believe. But I must tell thee,
thou and thy flesh is for the fi^e thou art speaking of; And when thou art
burning in it, remember thy judgment in thy life time, and what thou did:
And the end of Ezekiel is known, and the Prophets, and Moses, Christ Jesus the
Savior and Redeemer of the world.

Pr. That a natural man may preach the Gospel in the History. And thou brings
Judas for an example. Thou say, Christ said, destroy ye this Temple, and I
will build another.

Answ. That which led Judas to minister was not natural, for the same
condemned him when he went from Christ: And a natural man cannot preach the
History of the Gosp^ll truly, for he cannot receive it; but natural men are
giving other meanings to it, and that brings all the confusion in the world
about the Scriptures; For Judas was made partaker of the Ministry, and when he
went to the Priests from Christ, then he was condemned. And Christ did not say,
Destroy ye this Temple, thou perverts his woe ds. Neither did he say, he would
raise up another of Lime, and Stone, and wood, which you dark Priests of the
world blind peoples eyes withal; but he meant the Temple of his body in whom
God dwelt, which the outward Temple was a figure of.

Pr. That it is an absurdity to say the Light is in every man to teach him.

Answ. The light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
which is Christ Jesus, is the Teacher: and he that believes in it receives
Christ, and it teaches him that hates it to see his evil deeds, to see his
evil ways, and he hates it because it reproves him, because his deeds are
evil, and so hates Christ, and hates his Teacher, and sets up Teachers without
him, and does not come to receive the anointing within him, and so that light
is his condemnation, and so he sees not Christ the head.

Pr. Thou says, The Ministers may receive a courtesy, and the Scripture thou
brings for it is, the earth shall help the woman.

Answ. The courtesy the Saints received, which was from them whose hearts was
opened, that the Lord had opened by his power that is not condemned; But your
taking Tithes of people you do not work for, and casting into Prison till
death, for not giving it you; How are you like the Apostles, or like the
Ministers of Christ, or like the woman thou speaks of, the Church that was
persecuted? Now you persecute, this signifies she was persecuted; And you
persecute for means, and hale up and down in Courts and Sessions, and will
take treble damages, treble tithes of them you do no work for, and so you will
not stand to the courtesy of people, nor wait for the power to open their
hearts; but are in a power that will take it by compulsion, and by violence
away from people: So you have given judgment against your selves, and are not
of the number of them the Lord opened their hearts that ministered to their
necessities, and so unlike the Ministers of Christ that received the courtesies
of the people, whom the Lord opened their hearts.

Pr. Thou says, When people have no guide but what is within, and that this
principle be rooted, it will turn all into Babel. And thou questions, whether
it be not a principle of sedition to say, that every man has a light within
him.

Answ. All people in the world runs into Babel and Babylon, and are building
up, and throwing down, and so goes into confusion about Law and Gospel,
Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles words, when they be from the spirit within,
of truth, to lead them into all truth, and up to God the Father of Truth, of
whom they learn that gave them forth, and with that spirit are they seen; in
which spirit is unity, which is the bond of peace. And the light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, leads all men out of sedition;
and they be in the sedition that denies it, and says to the contrary, and in
darkness, and cannot comprehend it, as John says; which says, this is the
true light that enlightens every man that comes into the world. And Christ
says, Believe in the light. And the Prophets said, God gave him for a Covenant
of light to the Gentiles, and a new Covenant to the Jews, and he shall be the
Leader of the people, and salvation to the ends of the earth; and every man
that comes into the world is enenligtned. He that believes is saved, and he
that believes not is condemned already.

Pr. Thou queries, When the Act of the Commission for the Ministry was
repealed, since Christ said, he would be with them to the end of world. And
thou say, It is not said simply, they shall teach no more every man his
neghbour; but it is added, Know the Lord. Thou say, that every man is
enlightened only with a natural reason, and the elect are enlightened with a
saving knowledge. Thou say, I bring John 4.23. to overthrow all outward
worship. Thou say, You can praise God with your bodies and spirits.

Answ. The 7th of Matthew, and Matthew. 24. Christ said, false Prophets should
come, and should be inwardly ravening wolves, having sheeps clothing; and John
said, they was come, Chap. 2. and Chap. 4. And in Revel. All that dwelt upon
the earth went after them, and such killed the Saints. When they had gotten a
head they killed the Saints and the true Ministers, and they that were of the
false killed the true: and since those days the false has reigned, which has
wrestled with flesh and blood, prisoning, killing the creatures, and warring
against them, and not with the Principalities, and spiritual wickednesses, and
powers of darkness, and such has been out of the power, the Gospel the
Apostles were in, has killed them that kept the testimony of Jesus the spirit
of Prophecy. And it is said plainly, Heb. 8. They shall not teach every man his
neighbor, nor every man his brother, saying, know the Lord, for they shall all
know me from the greatest to the least, says the Lord: And so thou perverts
the Scriptures, and art judged by them, for it, that belies them.

And the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, is the
same Light that the Elect lives in; which the world not believing in the Light,
Christ Jesus the Elect, and covenant of light, and life, and peace, promised to
the world, they are condemned already; but he that believes in the Light is
saved, so that saving is sufficient. And Christ says, they that worship the
Father, must worship him in spirit and in truth: Not at Jerusalem, not at
Samaria, nor at the Mountain. So say I, not at your Masse-houses, with a Cross
at the end of them, which the Popes set up, and you since the days of the
Apostles. So they that worship God, must worship him in the spirit and in the
truth. Truth does not change, neither does the Spirit, and these be them the
Father seeks to worship, and has found many: And Christ overthrows the outward
worship at Samaria and Jerusalem, and the Mountain, and so do we at your
Papists Masse-houses, and tell you God is worshipded in the spirit and in the
truth; and those are the true worshippers that God seeks to worship, and that
will stand when Masse-houses, Samaria, and Jerusalem is down, the spirit and
the truth that remains.

In the mouth of the wicked praises is not comely; And as for your singing
David's conditions, or the Saints conditions given forth from the spirit, when
you confess you are not in the spirit as they was that gave them forth: So
then judged with it to be such whose mouths the praises are not comely, that be
in another state then they where that gave Scriptures forth.

And Adams state before the Fall thou know not, but art found in the steps
of the Pharisees and Papists: As the Pharisees got words of the true Prophets
and Moses out of the life, so the Papists and you have got the words of Christ
and the Apostles, and be out of the life, and persecuting them that be in the
life, as the Pharisees did, and killing the just, the just being imprisoned in
your own particulars, as it was in the Pharisees. And you with your dark eyes
have looked upon the Scriptures ever since the apostasy, and ravened from the
spirit of God the pure eye, and so with that you are comprehended, felt over,
and seen over, and with that shall the principle of God in you all be answered,
that you are apostatized from the Apostles in life, and power, and doctrine,
and so are in heaps about their words, out from that which is the ground of
communion, the bond of peace.

And all thy confusion in thy Book, is thy own garments, who with it is for the
fire, the witness in thy conscience in the day of thy condemnation shall
witness it.

Thomas Tillam, his Book called, The Seventh-day Sabbath. His Principles
answered as Follows.
Pr. ALl sacrifices did type out Christ, but the Sabbath did never type out
Christ, and therefore never to be abolished nor changed.

Answ. Ezekiel says, the Sabbath should be for a sign which is spoken of among
the Statutes. Cha. 20. and the Apostle says let no man Judge you in meats or
in drinks, or in respect of an holy day or of the new Moon, or of the Sabbath
day, which are all shadows, [mark] of good things to come, but the body is
Christ, Colos. 2.16, 17. Now they are called shadows here, the Sabbath called
^ shadow, the body is Christ, and Ezekiel calls them signs, and such as rest
in those things in the shadow, may beguile people in a voluntary humility, and
worship^ing of Angels, intruding themselves into those things that they never
saw, not holding the head, and neglecting the body to the satisfying the flesh;
which would live in the signs and the shadows, for the Sabbath in the
beginning it was not a command to men to keep it, as to Adam and Evah; you do
not read it was a command given to them, but in the transgression and fall,
when the children of Israel came out of Egypt, then to them the Lord gave the
Sabbath as a sign, the Lord said unto Moses speak to the children of Israel,
and say, nevertheless keep ye my Sabbath for a sign between me and you, in all
your generations. Now in all the generations of the Jews, in the first
Covenant here was a sign between them and the Lord, and he that defiled it, was
to die the death. Now the body is Christ the end of the sign, and the shadow
Christ the sanctification, so he that goes from Christ goes from the rest, from
the sanctification, and he dies, for he that has not him has not life, he
shall die the death, and shall be cut off from the people; so when the children
of Israel came out of Egypt, then was the Sabbath given to them as a sign, not
commanded to Adam and Evah, the Scripture does not declare it before the fall,
but given to the children of Israel after they came out of Egypt, who received
the Law, added because of transgression; upon the transgressors: to such was
given the Sabbath as a sign amongst them that had the offerings; and such was
to keep it, and to sanct^fie it, but before the fall, when the Law and power
was in man, before the transgression, there was no mention of a Sabbath to keep
it; Now Christ came which was the end of these offerings, and the end of these
Sabbaths, which are the shadows, for the Apostle says (except any will dare
tell him he lies) he says the body is Christ, and who are not Judged
concerning such things, in respect of Sabbaths and meats and drinks, but are
come to the body Christ which ends all those things and before those things
were, to him by whom all things was created and made Christ, the
sanctification; and are come to him in whom there is rest; as the Jews was to
rest upon the seventh day, is come into Christ the body, the head, the
substance, they are come into the rest, the sanctification and the
glorification who was glorified with the Father before the world began; where
no changing nor shadow nor variableness is, need not have a shadow nor a sign
or change, who is come to the body, Christ the substance, now if thou says
Christ was a sign: yes, but he ends the sign and shadows, to the unbelievers
he was a sign, as the people of God was signs formerly, to such as stood in
outward things, so Christ the body the end of the shadow, the head known and
felt, him that is Lord of the Sabbath, Christ, which is a mystery; so they that
be out of him be out of the life, and dies as they died that went from the
Sabbath; so do they that turn from Christ the souls rest and peace and life:
and this Sabbath was to be observed in the Jews generation for an everlasting
Covenant, and he that did any work upon the Sabbath day was to dye the death:
now this Covenant which stood in shadows and types Christ came to take away,
The End; and he that believes in Christ has entered into his rest, and ceased
from his own works as God did from his. And the Apostle said, the first
Covenant was to decay, as in Heb.

Pr. Thou says, Such as obstruct the Gospel-priviledge of Gods Sabbath,
rectified by the Son, and observed by the Saints.

Answ. But did ever Christ or the Apostles give a command to the Jews that
they should observe it strictly, as it had been in the Law before the substance
was come, the body which was Christ? Nay, you read no where that among them the
Apostles preached the Gospel, that they laid any command upon the Saints that
they should keep the Jews Sabbath day, but t^ld them they were shadows, and
the body was Christ, and said, Let no man judge one another in such things. Now
are you not come under the judgment of such things? and so the Lord of the
Sabbath that ends the types in him, and in the Saints, and so are come to him
who is the substance, the body and head Christ Jesus. Read Colos. 2.

And so whereas thou speaks of changing of Laws or Sabbaths, this thou
might have charged on the Apostles, who told the Saints no where of keeping
the Sabbath Day, but told them they were shadows, and told them such as was
there was in their will-worships, neglecting the body; for the body and
substance was Christ, and such were intruders, and so thou art comprehended to
be one of the intruders into those things thou never saw, which will puff up
thy fleshly mind, not holding the head and the Lord of the Sabbath. The Son of
man is come, and the Saints go not about to blot out the name of the Sabbath;
for the pure Sabbath, the sanctified day was a sign and a figure of the pure
Christ, the sanctification, by whom the day was made, and which day the people
was to rest, and the beasts, which was to be sanctified, the pure day, the pure
Christ, who was before the day, was the sanctification in which all the Lords
people have rest, who is Lord of the Sabbath, before the day was made, fulfills
the type, the shadow, the sign, the body is Christ, the head is held: So you
that are running to observe days and times, are them that the Apostle speaks
of, that he was afraid of, that his labors he had bestowed in vain, and so
gone from the body into the shadow and the sign. Neither do you keep it as you
ought to do, and profess a Sabbath; your Horses and your Cattle is doing
work, drawing you to your worships; your making fires through your
Congregations, your bearing burdens, your gathering your meat on that day as
you call your Sabbath. Now to all people you are dissemblers to what you
profess, and pretenders to a thing to which you are not faithful; and so by
the Law according to your own judgment, to be cut off, and to dye as
Sabbath Breakers; for they were not to make a fire, gather any meat, bear any
burden, Ox or Ass, manservant or maidservant, or stranger, but was to keep
holy the Sabbath of the Lord, if they did, the Law took hold of them; for six
days they were to labor, and do all they had to do. Now the Law being
received by the disposition of Angels: So now the Law, the first Covenant, the
shadows, types, and figures, ye may run into those things from the body, and so
neglect the head, and neglect the body, and go into the Signs, and so come
into the will worship, and the worshipping of Angels, intruding your selves
into the things you never saw, neglecting the body to satisfy the flesh, by
which your vain minds are puffed up. Now the enemies of the Sabbath are such as
neglect the body, the substance, he that is Lord of the Sabbath.

Pr. And whereas thou say, they had eaten the bread of Christ, and they had
turned the heel against Christ. And thou says, the Quakers, some Notionists,
and others are against it.

Answ. Our rest is in Christ ^he body that ends the shadow, that ends the
signs, who is the substance of the shadows and signs, and those Notionists
are of thy self, and so the Saints rest is in the substance Christ, the end of
the signs and shadows, who was before the sign was, the day was, in him is
rest. Here all men rest from their works, and every soul that believes has
entered into his rest, and has come from shadows, signs, and types into the
body Christ that ends them, and holds the head, and out of the will worship,
worshipping of Angels, and satisfying the flesh, for such are blinded as
concerning the body, and come to be judged about the days, and they hold not
the head; But such as are come to the body and head Christ Jesus, to whom all
Angels bow; for they that neglect the body will satisfy the flesh, and live in
signs and shadows, and will worship, and intrude into those things they never
saw, and worshipping of Angels, which come to be judged in respect of days,
which is but shadows; and such as are in those things satisfy the flesh, and
keeps them from the body Christ, and the head holds not; and they that will
rest in a shadow after the substance is come, the Son of man, the Lord of the
Sabbath, ^ill rest in that which decays, and a false rest.

Pr. And whereas thou say, A filthy shift of Gods Sabbath, to say Christ is
the Sabbath.

Answ. This Sabbath was rest, and they were to rest on that day, and it was a
sign, and given as a sign and shadow, and in the first Covenant; But Christ
the second Covenant, the perpetual and everlasting rest, the souls rest of
his people. Come unto me and ye shall have rest; and so he is the end, the
substance of the sign and the shadow, who was [as I said before] before the
day was, in whom is a rest for the people of God; for the Sabbath being given
as a sign, wherein all Strangers, Servants, Beasts, Horses, Oxen, Asses, and
all Cattle whatsoever might rest upon the day, it was given forth, sanctified,
and given to be a sign, for the whole Creation being burdened, both horse,
man, cattle, servants, and all things was burdened, and mankind was
oppressed by transgression: So the Sabbath was a sign of rest, yea to the
stranger, to all that was within the gates, a figure of the restoration, and
the sanctifier Christ Jesus, which destroys Death and the Devil, and the power
of Death, and his works, who is the cause and the Author of the burden of the
whole Creation, and of mankind. So the rest, the Sabbath was a sign of its
rest from their labors, Christ the restorer, and Redeemer, and Deliverer of
all the whole Creation, and bringing it to unity and reconciliation again to
God, who is the rest both to man and beast; and the Stranger should rest within
the gates of the Sabbath, within Christ. And much more is to be said of these
things, which this is but a touch of, that which is further in the words, which
might be declared.

Now as for the ten Commandments, amongst which the Sabbath is spoken, he that
covets, he that steals, he that commits adultery and kills, he that sets up
graven Images, he that covets his neighbors house, wife, or goods, or any
thing that is his, or commits Adultery, is from that principle of God in his
own self; so the Law was added upon him: He that is led with the spirit does
not transgress, nor does not oppress, nor does not covet, nor steal, nor
bear false witness, and so love fulfills the Law, and his Commandments; And
he that believes comes to Christ, the rest, before the day was, by whom they
was made; and so Christ telling them what was done in the old time, for
following the Oath the Lord, he brings them now not to swear, into himself,
the Covenant of God, he brings them to the Covenant of God, the oath of God,
and so into himself who is the Restorer, before days was, as I said before:
And the Apostle likewise brought them off from Circumcision without, which was
an everlasting Covenant, as well as the Sabbath was a sign, he brings them off
of that to the Circumcision within, and so to that that answers the power, the
life of God which has been transgressed, where love is felt in the heart, that
remains, and so the thing comes inward; for as it is said, he that believes
has entered into his rest. And so Christ came not to break the Law, but to
fulfill it every tittle, who is the rest of his people, yea and gives rest to
to the Creation, destroys the oppressor of it, and the foundation of the
oppressor; and so he was the Lord of the Sabbath that fulfills it, for the
Sabbath was in the Law, and Christ is the end of the Law to every one that
believes; he that is in Christ before days was, profanes no day, is in his
rest, and will give rest to his creatures, will not oppress any thing at all,
and comes in the wisdom of God by which they was created, to order and use
them to Gods glory.

And whereas thou says, that Adam being in honor, did not abide a night, and
brings Psalm for it, which does not mention Adam, nor night nor day; And I said
before, thou who art in the shadow, art intruding into things thou never saw;
for thou never saw where Adam was before he fell, and therefore art corrected
and judged.

Pr. And thou says and confesses, The Jews Sabbath was given to the Jews for
a sign.

Answ. The Apostle will tell thee that the body is Christ: If the Sabbath be a
sign to the children of Israel, it was a sign of something to them; for the
other signs given were signs of something, and so something those signs did
signify forth, which thing did end them. Sabbath signifies rest; for the
earth shall enjoy her Sabbaths.

Pr. And thou says, That the inventions of men's hearts have blotted out the
remembrance, of the Sabbath day, they first cast it out of Paradise, and shut
it out till Moses time. And thou says, the Sabbath was not at all a type or
ceremonial.

Answ. What is a shadow is a type, and a shadow and type is ceremonial; when
the substance comes it ends, and in him is no shadow, as in James the first,
who is the body before the days was; and thou never read that the Sabbath was
spoken of from Paradise until Moses, and then it was given unto him for a
sign through the generations of the Congregations of the children of Israel,
not to gather meat, make a fire, bear burdens: So who comes to Christ the
body, the end of the sign, the rest, who was before days was, bears no
burdens, gathers not their meat, makes not a fire.

Pr. Thou says, It Is an absurd confusion, that we must offer sacrifices if we
will keep a Sabbath.

Answ. Thou shall offer sacrifices made by fire of a sweet sacrifice unto the
Lord on a Sabbath day, Numb. 28. Now offerings was a shadow of Christ the
offering, and the Sabbath was a shadow; and so if ye will observe one, you
must observe the other, and so deny the body, the substance Christ, the one
Offering, and so that is ceremonial.

And thou says, the Law justified the Disciples, and brings Deuteronomy. 23. for
plucking the ears of corn upon the Sabbath day, which speaks nothing to the
thing, and does not mention the Sabbath day: And so Christ the end of the Law
who comes to fulfill it, who is the Lord of the Sabbath, that the Disciples
followed, in whom they had rest, saw over the day and the shadow to Christ the
substance, which forbade them not gathering the meat on that day, the Sabbath,
the shadow that was the Law; But Christ the end of the Law and shadows, the
substance, the Disciples as was in him plucked the ears of corn on that day;
and so Christ did not break the Sabbath, but came to fulfill the shadow, and
was the substance, who was the end of it, the Lord of it, and therefore might
do what he would being the Lord of the Sabbath, what had any to do to question
him.

Pr. And whereas thou say, the cripple carried his bed on the Sabbath day,
which the hypocrites speaks against our Savior for.

Answ. The Law says, thou shall not bear a burden on the Sabbath day. Now
Christ the end of the Law, and the end of the shadow that fulfills it, and is
rest, often gives rest upon that day: Yet not a breaker of the Sabbath, but a
fulfiller, and convinces the gainsayers, with this; Which of you having an Ox
or Ass fallen into a ditch, would not pluck him out on that day: And the
Circumcision was to be on the eighth day, on which Christ rose, and on which
the Saints met in the circumcision of the spirit, in the spirit which
circumcises, which puts off the body of sin, which has laden them in; which
spirit they have rest, and are led withal up to God the Father of spirits, and
so comes to know the first day and him, before it was made.

Pr. And thou says, and brings the Apostles words, Men esteeming one day above
another, and another esteeming every day alike.

Answ. Now the Apostle here did not lay any burden upon the Saints, or tell
the Saints of the Sabbath day, nor burden them concerning it; that, if they
did not keep it, they should dye, as the Law says, but that every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind, and not to judge one another in such cases, but
that every man stand or fall to his own master. Now these words were spoken
among Saints, who was leading from meats and drinks, and days, to the truth,
to the body Christ; and so he judged that judgment as was judging one another
about the days, but brought every one to the truth in his own particular,
wherewith he should stand or fall to his own Master: For about shadows and
signs until they come to see clearly, there is the weakness of the meats, of
the days before they come to see him which was before the days was, the Lord
of the Sabbath, and the everlasting offering, where ends the judgment, in
which they have peace.

Pr. Thou says the Apostle says, Ye observe meats and drinks, and days, and
months and years. And thou says, Will any be so bold as say he does
reproach the Sabbath?

Answ. The Apostle does not t^ll the Galatians that was running into
Circumcision and days, that they was to keep the outward Sabbath; for
Circumcision was an everlasting Covenant as well as the Sabbath to the Jews,
throughout all their generations: So they that draw people to Circumcision
without, and to days, they draw them from the body [mark his judgement] and
the Apostle was not a reproacher, and was out of the nature of a reproacher.

Pr. Thou says, Let no man judge you in meats and drinks, and in respect of
any Feast, new Moons or Sabbaths, which are shadows of things to come, but the
body is Christ; But in this bold absurdity some will cast off the Sabbath, the
seventh day.

Answ. The Apostle says, the body was Christ, and the Sabbath was a sign and
a shadow of good things to come: So then this fulfils Moses words, the body is
Christ, the Sabbath a sign: So the good things being come, Christ, it ends the
shadow, the the sign, that is the substance; and rose on the first day on
which the Saints met, and the Apostle does not call that a Sabbath, nor does
not establish the other Sabbath among the Christians, nor bid them keep it,
that ye read of no where; For if that had been observed as it was in the Law
time, the seventh, which signifies perfection, the Apostle would have spoken of
it some where; for those things that were observable was often spoken in Law
and Gospel, and this being no where spoken of, nor to the Saints as that they
should keep the seventh day as a Sabbath, for offerings was on that day, and
offerings changed; and the offerings being changed, the Law also changed, and
the offering cam^, Christ Jesus, and the Law came within, and the Circumcision
came within: And Christ the rest, who is the Lord of the Sabbath, and the rest
for the people of God; and he that holds up Sabbaths, Offerings, holds up
Circumcision and Works, and so keeps people from the body and the head in the
signs and shadows, and so the works of the Law, which the Law commands.

Pr. And thou says, Six days thou shall labor, and do all thy works of sin,
but the Sabbath day thou shall not sin, thou nor thy son, thy daughter, thy
cattle and stranger within thy gates.

To keep thy Son, Daughter, and Stranger from sin, as for the poor Cattle they
are not capable of such a rest.

Answ. In the six days thou was to do that which was just, and that which the
Law commanded, which was justice, and to do to all men as thou would be done
to. Not to covet, steal, bear false witness, nor kill; the seventh day was
the rest, that signified Christ Jesus the end of the Law, the rest. If any man
can receive this, let him.

And the Sabbath Day, that all servants, strangers, cattle, son and daughter
might rest upon it the seventh day, the sign, the shadow, which Christ the
body ends, was a figure, and a sign, and a shadow of the restoration of the
Creation to the rest, whereby the Gospel might again be preached to every
creature under heaven. This is a touch of the thing, more might be said in it.

The Sabbath was everlasting to the state wherein it was, and Circumcision was
everlasting to the state wherein it was through their generations, and it was
in the first covenant, shadows, types and figures; but the body is Christ that
came to do the will of God, which ends them all, and sanctifies man, and brings
him to rest and peace with God before days was.

Pr. And thou says, J. E. was instructed in the Old Testament, which is able
to make wise unto salvation through faith; therefore be instant in season and
out of season. Now the only moral season the Scriptures enjoynes us is the
seventh-day sabbath, never changed till the little horn arose. And the holy
spirit in the Apostles highly approves us in our fulfilling the Royal Law
[which as to the season of worship] is none other then the seventh day-sabbath.

Answ. They who are made able and wise to salvation, they know the Scriptures
through the faith, they see the substance of them Christ Jesus; and they see
while Moses was read, the vail was upon their hearts'; for the Sabbath was the
sign, type, and circumcision, and this was in Moses, and this was the sign
read, the shadow was read, the type was read, and the figure read, the vail
over the heart. Now as the seed Christ the body comes to be known, the sign,
the shadow, the type is ended, the body is known that does the will of God,
that brings people to the rest. So who knows the Scripture that is able to make
wise unto salvation (mark that word) through the faith that is in Christ Jesus
they have salvation, which are able to make wise unto salvation that testifies
of it; and so Christ the seed, the body takes off the veil of men's hearts,
that ends the types, figures, and shadows: And such as come to know the
fulfilling of the royal Law according to Scriptures, he comes to the body
Christ, in which the Law ends to every one that believes; and so they as be in
days, Sabbaths which Moses speaks of, was a sign, and Ezekiel and the Apostle
said was a shadow, they be not yet come to the body which is Christ, that was
before any days was, who is the sanctification and rest of his people, and who
are in him that is the truth, worships God in the truth and in the spirit which
never changes; but shadows, signs of a thing is not the thing that is signed
too; for signs and shadows will change, but the spirit and truth does not
change, in that is God worshipped.

Pr. And thou says, It cannot be that horn, except he change your times also,
and that he had no time to change but the seventh-day sabbath, and the Sabbath
is perpetual a rule of righteousness.

Answ. Christ made all things new, he ends the Law, and brings it in the heart;
he ends the Covenant, and changes things as was in the old time, changing
circumcision, offerings, Priests, and ends the Sabbath, which was perpetual to
the Jews in that generation among the types, as the Covenant was, and
Circumcision, and the Law was a rule of righteousness for them; but Christ who
is the end of the Law comes to redeem them that are under the Law, and ends
their covenant, and ends their shadows, and changes those times, him by whom
time was made; and so thou that knows not the time in his hands shows thou art
not in the time that are in his hands, and so not of the body of Christ.

Pr. And whereas thou says, No other time but simply the seventh part, must
from week to week be devoted to Gods worship; for whenever the seventh part
of time is altered, the morality must be destroyed.

Answ. They worshipped God that said the body was Christ, and the Sabbath day
was a shadovv of good things to come, and so they that worship God must
worship him in spirit and in truth; and in that which all figures and
shadovvs, and signs does end in the spirit and truth before they was, and not
one day in seven, a signification of rest, sanctification, the Lords sign he
gave to the people in transgression. Before transgression ye do not read it was
to men given, as a command to the first Adam, but of the earth, earthly; But
who comes to the second Adam, the Lord from heaven, he by whom the world was
made, comes into that that all types, figures, shadows ends, and so does not
destroy nothing of the Law, but comes to that which ends it.

Pr. And thou saves, It Is a great stumbling block as to believers in Christ,
because Christians violated the Sabbath.

Answ. Christ is the body that ends the shadows and the signs, and fulfills
the Law, him who was before the world was made, in him are the Christians, the
body that ends the shadows and the signs, in whom the vayl is come off of
their hearts; and so Christ did not break the Law, but fulfilled it, and in him
that fulfills it the Saints met, who met together in him, and gathers together
in him; Who is the body, they are the members, he is the head, who is the
Church, in whom he is in the mids of.

Pr. And thou says, So that to produce the world of wonder, manifest it is
that night was the beginning of time.

Answ. That Is false; the beginning of time was God and Christ, and times and
se^sons are in his hands, and God is Light, read that who can.

Pr. And thou says, Thou supposest it will not be questioned in Moses time.

Answ. This was while Moses was read, while the body was not come, Christ
Jesus, that ends the sign, the shadow, the type, and blots out the Ordinances
and Commandments that held them up, from which veil the Apostle brought the
People to the body Christ Jesus, where no shadow was, nor changing. Now days
are changing, but Christ does not change which is the body: And you that hold
up the sign, the shadow, the type, the figure, you hold up the dead, and come
not to Christ the life, the body, the Sanctification it self before days was,
by whom they was made.

Pr. And thou say, The unthankful Christian ought to sanctify the Sabbath.

Answ. Here thou brings them into days from the body which is Christ, and so
brings them into days, and shadows, and types, where the veil is over their
hearts, and the false Christian may run into signs and days that be out of
Christ's life, and the Apostles; But who be in the life of Christ and the
Apostles, that be in the body, out of the signs and shadows, and offers up the
spiritual sacrifices, such be in the rest, and have the High Priest, the
everlasting Priest Christ.

Now if ye have the Sabbath, ye must have the offerings, the Priest to offer,
and your Altars, and to offer upon that day; which the Christians that
witnessed the body Christ Jesus, the one offering, comes in the volume of the
Book to do the will of God, this substance that the shadow and signs, and
figures gave forth, ends them all, and brings people to see to the end of the
shadow, to Perfection, Christ Jesus.

Pr. Thou says, We should not grudge to give God every first day as an
addition to Gods seventh-day sabbath.

Answ. The Priests call it a Sabbath, and you call it a first day, and you
would have a Sabbath besides. Now this is your cover, but the life takes away
all your shadows. It Is true, the Saints did meet together every first day on
the week; And the Saints do so, though they do not say it was a command: And so
the Apostles that brought people off their observing of days and times, and
told them the body was Christ, and the Sabbath was a shadow of good things to
come. Thou may say the Apostle was the little Horn that changed times, we
find no where he commands the Saints to observe it; but brings people as you
may read in the Romans, from the Law, being justified by the Law; for if they
keep the Sabbath, they were justified, it not, they were condemned: So Christ
the body, the end of types, figures, signs and shadows is the Justification
without, the works of the Law, and the Sanctification it self, and sanctifies
man to God, and so the Christians no where, as you may read through the
Epistles, did observe the days, the shadows that was believers in Christ's
that ownes the body.

Prin. Thou says since the blessed Creator celebrated the seventh day, Man
thinks to be wiser then his Maker, in altering and disobeying, pretending
spiritual observances; poor worm, dust and ashes, who in expounding his own
Law, sums up all in this; be ye therefore perfect as your heavenly Father is
perfect, that is in quality not in quantity.

Answ. He that is perfect, as his heavenly Father is perfect, is perfect as he
is perfect; if thou or any have an ear to hear, let them hear, and lay away thy
qualities and quantities, and take, the words as they are, and all that are
come into Christ, are come into life from the dust and ashes, and are the
spiritual men. But him that talks of celebrating days, and Sabbaths are
celebrating signs and shadows, and be in their own works from the body of
Christ, and keeping others, and such, if they do not all the works contained in
the Law, are accursed.

Pr. And thou says Christ confirms the seventh day Sabbath, and assures us it
shall continue every jot and title, and Paul says he established the Law,
which cannot be ceremonial, therefore let such as slight the seventh day
Sabbath, take warning and make sure work that it be not broken, in no point of
the Law, which every jot and title is established by Christ, and his Apostles;
when the Lord of the Sabbath, and the Saints endeavored to observe every jot
and title of it to the ^^d of the world, and our Redeemer particularly ownes
the Sabbath, above all other days by his works, and Miracles and great wonders
on that day, and God forbid that Saints should side with evil seducers, and
reproach our Savior for putting on his glory on that day, but rather let that
Sabbath be celebrated.

Answ, Christ came not to break the Law, the Apostle said the Law was good in
its place, and he established it, yet the Apostle says that the Sabbath was
shadows and the body was Christ, and he brings them to the Law in the heart,
in the mind, and there he established it; and Christ did not come to break one
jot, or title of it, but [Mark] to fulfill it, and he said not one jot, or
tittle of the Law should be broken until fulfilled: and Christ which is the
rest to the Jew, which had the Sabbath day a sign of rest (Christ) the rest
give the people rest on that day often, that was bound, that was burdened, or
that was wearied of that day, and Christ that did give them rest on that day,
and the Apostle which establishes the Law, which was good in its place, neither
of them does bid keep the Sabbath day; he does not say the Sabbath day must be
kept, after him the Apostle no where commands it, but says it was a shadow,
and the body was Christ; and so them that came to the body Christ in the days
of the Apostles was come to the end of the shadows, in that age in their
days, and for example thou may see it, for some did observe a day, and some
did not, and they was not to judge one another about those things; and Christ
giving rest on that which the people was to rest on, was a figure of the
everlasting rest, and of the Restoration: who did the work of God on that day,
and gave rest to the burdened on that day; that signifies an inward rest, that
Christ was the rest and Lord of the Sabbath, and of rest both to the people of
God, and them that celebrate the Sabbath day, must celebrate a sign and live in
the shadow, and keep them from the body, and so from the Church which Christ is
the head of, and who are celebrating Sabbaths must also bring their offerings,
and then they must have the first Priesthood to offer, and deny the body that
does the will of God, the everlasting Priesthood and the one offering, and
holds with the first Covenant that must decay, in which those things stood: and
deny the everlasting Covenant, and he that blotted out Ordinances, and ends
types and shadows: and so Christ is the end of the Law to every one that
believes in every jot and title and print in it, and signs and shadows that
was held up by the Law, Christ is the end of that; yet the life of the Law, the
power remains, though the outward changing shadows and things end, the body
is that that ends them all.

Pr. Thou says the Sabbath was honored with the conversion of souls on this
day, and the day before did they break bread together.

Ans. Was that the Sabbath day that Christ and his Disciples brake bread
together on; did the Apostles, and the Saints establish the Sabbath day, when
they said it was but a shadow, and brought them to the body which is Christ?

Pr. Thou says the Sabbath is mentioned with new Moons, and sacrifices, that
the Actions, Baptism, and breaking of bread, are the signs of a Christian
Sabbath; its high presumption to alter the word of God, in calling every day
the Lords Sabbath; and honoring any other day as the Sabbath. So if we be
followers of God as dear children, and take the spirit to be our guide, we must
honor the Sabbath withal holy devotion.

Answ. The Sabbath is mentioned with new Moons, and sacrifices but the Apostle
says they were shadows of good things to come, when this is come, which was
before the shadows was, which is the body Christ which was before days, new
Moons, or sacrifices was, the body, who be in that ends them all: and to that
the Apostle brought people, and not to the days; now there was some brought
them to observe days, and he was afraid of them that did observe them, and he
brought them to the body Christ, to whom all the Angels did bow, for they as
did observe the days, new Moons, and Sabbathes are worshipping of Angels,
neglect the body which is Christ, and this was for the satisfying of the flesh,
and now what art thou satisfying, which art teaching to observe days, signs
and shadows which the Apostle brought people off, to the body and to the head
Christ Jesus? and to worship God in spirit, and brought them into that, that
ended all shadows; for the devil will lurk in a shadow, or a type, or a sign,
or figure, and creeps into those things after the substance is come to keep
people from the body, and they will persecute such as will not bend to the
shadow and come from the substance; and breaking bread and baptism, is no sign
of the Sabbath day, of the Jewish Sabbath day; the Sabbath was a figure of the
rest, and sanctification of the Creation, and breaking of bread among the
Saints was a figure of the bread Christ, which the Saints eat, and live for
ever: and the word of God cannot be altered, and the word of God cannot change,
man may alter, but the word of God cannot be altered, but abides and lives for
ever.

And the Saints which comes to the body Christ, comes to honor him who ends
the Sabbath which is a sign, and a shadow, and such honors God the Redeemer and
Creator and Christ by whom all things was created and made, and which are the
dear children of God the Apostle speaks of, he did not bring them into days,
and to observe Sabbaths, and signs, but brings them to the body Christ the
Lord of the Sabbath; and does not set up that which thou calls devotion; in
holding up the Jewish Sabbath, which was a sign, on which they should rest; the
rest of the creation, and the rest of all man kind, cattle, and beasts, that
God would restore, and redeem all things by Christ who is the word, and gives
rest; and is the sanctification, and gives rest to the whole creation.

Prin. Thou says, this is the time of Gods worship observing the seventh day;
Christian look well to thy walkings, see that thou make all things according to
the pattern in the mount.

Answ. They that worshipps God they come into Christ, the truth, the body which
ends the sign and the shadow: and the end of Moses who made a pattern which was
a figure of that which was to come, and he made it at the command of God, and
the Christians are not to make the pattern, which was showed to Moses in the
mount, for while Moses is read, the vail is upon the hearts of Christians, and
all people whatsoever, and the sign, shadows and figures: the body is not
seen, nor come to, which is Christ; And Paul, and the Saints, the true
Christians worshipped God in the spirit, and in the truth, who witnessed they
was in the body, that ended the shadows, and types, and Moses, the Law, and
the Prophets, Christ Jesus him by whom the world was made, before it was made;
and a pattern is not the thing, there is the thing the pattern is of, and that
ends the pattern and lives in the thing, and they need not have the pattern,
for the pattern was made of a thing that was to come.

Pr. Thou says if the Apostle of the Gentiles who was the rejecter of the
ceremonies, did constantly celebrate the seventh day Sabbath, then much more
them Apostles among the Jews, there is not a plainer precept in all the
Scripture, then Paul's practice herein, for the seventh day Sabbath: if we tread
in the steps of Paul, he was but a man, and sometimes a very angry man, and he
strictly requires all believers to follow his example, as he followed Christ,
and certainly in observing the Sabbath: and Paul reasoned with the Jews on the
Sabbath day; and Christ's custom and Paul's was to go into the Synagogue on the
Sabbath day, and was there difference betwixt Christ's preaching and Paul's? and
where is the difference between Christ's observing the Sabbath and Paul's?

Answ. The Apostle never taught the Christians, Neither Jews nor Gentiles to
celebrate the seventh day, nor never mentions it to them to keep it not in all
the Epistles: there is not such a thing; but tells them, they were shadows, the
body was Christ, and Christ's and the Apostles going into the Synagogues and
temple on the Sabbath days, was to fulfill and show the fulfilling of the
types, and figures of him, and brings to the substance of the signs, types and
shadows, not to hold up days, times, offerings, but to bring them to the body
Christ; as Colos. 2. and so Paul and Christ does not disagree, for he Preached
Christ the end of the Law, and the substance, and though Paul went among the
Jews and circumcised and did several things, went into the Temple, yet tha^
was not to hold up the Temple, or to hold up the offerings, types, and
shadows, but to bring them to the substance. And mind, what the anger was, as
Paul was in, and Paul followed the substance, and was more then a man, there
was more in him then a man; Paul nor the Apostles no where commands the Saints
to observe the Jews Sabbath day, though he went into the Jews and consented
to many things to the intent to bring them out of them, not to keep them in
them, but to bring them to the substance, and that was the end of Paul's going
into the Jews Synagogues, and Temple, to bring them out of the shadows,
types, and signs, to the substance, and the end of Christ's going thither, was
to bring them to the substance of which was typed forth that people might
believe in him who was the body, which was before heaven or earth was, who
fulfils every jot and tittle of the Law, and to him did the Apostle bring the
people, to this body, which types, signs and shadows, signed, shadowed, and
typed forth, which the body of them all is Christ; and in thy principles thou
art confused; and so who follows the Apostle comes to the body out of the
sign, and the types, and figures, and shadows which as every believer
follows, comes to the body, and from the observing of signs, and shadows,
Sabbath days to Christ the Son, the end of them all.

Pr. Thou says fancy is no fuel for a Christian faith.

Answ. Fancy and fuel is out of a Christian faith; which thou art in that is
got among the signs, types, and shadows in the fancy, and so from the body
Christ.

Pr. And thou says if the Lord be thy God; thou must observe the seventh day
Sabbath. And thou says its Antichrist that persuades to change the day, And
thou charges them to do no manner of work on that day; And thou says it is not
ceremonial, but was before Jew or ceremony had a being.

Answ. The Sabbath was not before Adam was, and the Apostles served the Lord
God, that had the Law of God written in their hearts, he was their God, and
they his people, which witnessed the end of the first covenant; which stood in
ceremonies, and so shadows, and signs are ceremonies, and the Sabbath was
spoken of, before ceremonies was, that's true; but not as a command then, but
when ceremonies came up in the days of Moses, the Sabbath was given as a sign
amongst the other signs, and a shadow amongst the other shadows, and he tells
you plainly, if you will believ^ him, the body of all is Christ; and this
Sabbath, which was before ceremonies wa^ given among them that had the
ceremonies, a day of rest; for cattle, man and beast, strangers, and servants,
which the body of this shadow and sign is the rest, that gives rest to all the
Creation, man and beast, stranger and servant, and so rest to the whole
creation.

And the Apostle was not Antichrist that said the body was Christ, and the
Sabbath was shadows, and brought them off of days and off of signs, types and
ceremonies, and the first Priesthood, first covenant and offerings, and
brought them to the body Christ, that ended them all, and takes off the vayl
that is upon the hearts of people while Moses was read. Now they be the
Antichrists that be setting up signs, shadows, and brings people from the body
which is Christ the substance, and are keeping people in the observing of a day
in which people should have rest for a day, cattle rest for a day, servants
rest for a day, not minding the substance, the body of Christ, who restores the
creation into unity as it was in the beginning; and gives rest to man and
beast, servant, stranger, and cattle, and is rest to them all. They that are
come to the body knows the substance, the end of the Sabbath days work.

But then again thou says in thy charge, Ye may not do any work on that day.
How is it then that ye make fires through all your congregations? How is it you
keep Markets on the Sabbath day, which God commanded? How is it that Ox and
Horse bear burdens on that day, and you both? How is it that you gather sticks
and make fires on that day, and gather your meat on that day, in which meat was
not to be gathered on that day, and he that gathered sticks was stoned to
death? And how is it that ye profess a day, and do not observe it according to
the day, are ye not all hypocrites in this, professing that as ye do not
practice? for by the Law ye should be stoned to death, ye should dye all. And
how is it that you Professors likewise, that professes the first day to be the
Sabbath, and yet will not go to your worships, abundance of you, except you be
drawn with horses? Why pollute you the Sabbath day? ye are all polluters
according to your own words: And why gather ye your meat, and make fires on
that day? Keep it according to the Law, and be not dissemblers and mockers of
God and man. If ye will keep a Sabbath, go according to Scripture and the law
of God.

And the poor creatures must bear a burden to lug you to your worships; and
yet if a poor man be found but carrying a loaf of bread, or a burden of sticks
to make him a fire, he shall it may be fined for it. Now by the Law of God he
should be stoned to death, and your horses should do no work on that day; And
you will fine some for going to a Meeting of the Lords people, yet you must
have your Horses and Coaches, and Coachmen, and put them to labor to draw you
to your worships, and so here is your confusion. And so are judging one another
in days, which was not the Saints work, Nor the Apostles, who witnessed the
body was Christ, and met together in him who was the end of days.

Prin. Whereas thou say, The Sabbath is perpetual, and fenced above all
other Laws.

Answ. If it had been perpetual; the Apostle would not have said it was a
sign, and the body was Christ; but the Jews that had the types, to them it
was perpetual, it was highly to be observed; but Christ that ends the Law,
ends that, and the things that is in the Law, the shadow and sign that is in the
Law, who was the body of it.

Pr. The Jews received the lively Oracles from Mount-Sinai. Whether was it
given us to be broken or kept, slighted or observed? If to be kept and
observed, then we must either deny the seventh-day sabbath to be one of
Mount-Sinais lively Oracles, or deny Stephens Doctrine delivered to the Jews.
We must sanctify this lively Oracle of the seventh-day sabbath.

Answ. Stephen he preaches Christ the end of the Law, types, figures, and
shadows, the substance, and showed the Jews that they had not kept the Law, in
which was the shadows of Christ, and so Christ is the end of the Law, and the
Signs, and the Similitudes, and the Days.

And Stephen saw the end; Hagar or Sinai is a Mount in Arabia, and answers to
Jerusalem which now is, and is in bondage with her children: Now read where you
all are; But Jerusalem above is free, which is the mother of us all [now mark]
us all, who are come to the body Christ the end of the signs, shadows, and
figures. Jerusalem below had types, had figures, had shadows, had signs, when
that rests that is in bondage: Hagar with her children, and here you may come
to know the Allegory of these two Covenants; and so who is come to the Son, to
the body, is come to the end of all shadows, and before any shadows was.

And Stephen held not up the shadows, but preached Christ the end of them,
only he judged the Jews that had not kept it, which Christ is the end of it
to every one that believes. And Stephen was a believer, and they accused him
for speaking against the Law and Moses, who witnessed the end of it.

Pr. Thou says, There is a conceit, that the Disciples in assembling on the
first day, did celebrate the Sabbath: And they were so far from believing as
Christ was risen, that it seemed to them as idle tales. The first day was
finished before they believed, and so they could not have faith to do any such
thing.

Answ. The Scriptures speaks no such thing, and tells us no such conceit, that
the Disciples did celebrate the first day to be the Sabbath; but this is thine
and your imaginations got up among you that owns not the body Christ, that ends
all signs, types, and shadows. Christ, who was before days was, and who lives
in him does not celebrate days.

Pr. Thou says, John intends a single day, it is much like it was the Sabbath
day; and he speaks of the Lords day, Iudgement-day, and this he calls the day,
and this day he must show unto John in the vision. The ancient Christians who
call it the Lords day, did never term it the Sabbath; But religiously
celebrated the 7th. day with it.

Answ. John does not call it the Sabbath Day, nor the Christians did not
celebrate the Sabbath with it, but said the old was signs and shadows, the
body of them was Christ; But since the days of the Apostles and the Apostasy,
ye have wanted the body Christ, and ye have fell into the days; for Christ
saw those as should come up, and draw people into the days. And the day of the
Lord is light, and in the day of the Lord was John.

Pr. Thou says, Old things are passed away, and all things are become new.

Answ. Then the Sabbath was a thing, and it must pass away; and it was a rest,
and must have a new rest: and the Sabbath was in the old time given as a sign,
and a command, and given by God to be kept since the Fall.

Pr. Thou says, There remains therefore the celebrating the Sabbath to the
people of God.

Answ. But the Scripture, the New Testament does not say so. The Apostle says,
there remains therefore a rest for the people of God, such as come off the
signs to Christ the body, the souls rest, there remains in him a rest for the
people: And such as celebrate the Sabbath, rest in the shadow, and does not
come to the body Christ, and such are not the Believers that do enter into the
rest Christ: And such as rest in the sign and shadow, and there remains,
celebrating the Sabbath, come not into the body Christ the rest of Gods people.

Pr. Thou says, Christ rested, or ceased from his great work, and entered
into his rest, and this is laid down as a Gospel-reason why the Sabbath remains
to the people of God. And he lays the Believer under a double engagement to
sanctify the seventh-day sabbath.

Answ. Christ speaks no such thing, nor the Apostles neither, that they should
sanctify the seventh day, he speaks no such thing to the believers; But the
Apostle brings them off of the shadows, off the signs, and shows them the body
of all, and he does not mention a double engagement; and the Sabbath the Jews
was to rest on, which was death if not kept, was a figure of the redemption,
Christ Jesus the rest, who was put to death on the sixth day. Man was made on
the sixth day, and he was put to death on the sixth day, and he was crucified
through the means of them that had the shadows, the outward day, the outward
rest, from which day they should have come, from the signs and shadows, to the
body Christ, who was the rest and restoration of the Creation.

Pr. And thou says, To hold forth the passage over of that rest which
prevented the women of the application of their spices, that was the Sabbath,
and I am satisfied the seventh day is the Sabbath day.

Answ. Now though the women did rest on the Sabbath Day, and came with their
Spices on the first day, there was many of them did question whether this was
the man that should redeem Israel, and so that is no ground at all to hold up
the Jews types and shadows, for Peter denied him, therefore that is no ground;
But what did they do after the Holy Ghost was come to endue them with power
from on high? And what says Paul, he brings them off from the signs and
shadows to Christ the body, though there is much more to be said to this; for
while the questioning stands, the questioning part does pertain to the shadow
and types, which the body ends, and with that is felt and seen, there is no
changing, nor shadow, nor variableness, nor altering, and that overthrows the
questioner, unbeliever, stumbler: The great stumbler was the Jews that is
resting in the shadows, types and signs, they stood against the body Christ
Jesus.

Pr. Whereas thou says, The seventh-day sabbath is one of the lively Oracles
Israel received from Sinai, given to us. O Christian! Remember it, and love it,
in thy bosom.

A. Here thou would bring the Children from her Mother above, which is
Jerusalem, to Jerusalem below, and Sinai, and so to Hagar into the shadow, and
the Christians witnessed the end of the shadows and Sabbaths, and witnessed the
body Christ Jesus and Jerusalem that is above, and come to Christ the end of the
Law, and into God by him, from whence the Law came, and so Christians cannot
put signs in their bosoms, no type, shadow or figure in their bosom, that
have Christ within them, and cannot touch the Doctrine, Commandments,
Ordinances of men, which have a show of wisdom in the Will Worship; and that
which the Jew, the outward Jew, had types, shadows and figures; the Jew inward
witnessed the substance, which is the true Christian, the Law in their hearts,
and circumcision there, and the end of the Law comes into, and enters into the
rest Christ Jesus, that is not an outward seventh day; but entered into his
rest, ceased from his works as God did from his; which man enters into his
rest, and ceased from their own works, the type, the figure, the
Seventh-day Sabbath: Do no work, thou nor strangers, nor the Cattle, and so
the Sabbath was a rest from all: This was a type, and God gave them the Sabbath
for a sign, who has ceased from his own works, enters into his rest, a figure
of the restoration of the creation (of Christ) the rest, the Restorer,
Redeemer, and Savior that brings peace on earth; And so they that believe has
entered into him, into the rest Christ, the rest to all wearied souls, and
helps all creatures upon the earth, man and beast, and destroys the cause of
all oppression, and so many is come from Hagar: And though the seventh day the
Law was a rule among the Jews a true type, yet the Apostle that preaches
Christ the end of the Law, brings people to the body, Christ.

Pr. Thou says, Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, but keeping the commands of
God (viz.) of sanctifying GODS Sabbath. And thou says, The seventh Angel
sounded forth the Ancient of glory, the Lords Sabbath, swearing that time
should be no longer.

Answ. Circumcision was a command of God, and so was the Sabbath, and they that
love God, keep his Commandments. And did not the Apostle bring people off of
circumcision, and off of the signs and shadows, the Sabbath days, and told
them the body was Christ? And was not Offerings and Sacrifices the commands of
God? Now they that love God, keep his commands, and those are believers that
have passed from death to life, and has come to the end of the Law and the
Prophets. And the Angel in the Revelations, makes no mention of a Sabbath
there; but many are come to witness him to whom the Angels must bow down to,
and saw the end of time, and the beginning of time, and the supper of the Lord,
and the Rest, and the Temple of God with them, and heavenly Jerusalem come down
from above.

Pr. Thou say, It cannot be but Gods people must bethink themselves of this
Doctrine delivered by Stephen to the sanctification of the Lord of the Sabbath.

Answ. Stephen no where mentions the Sabbath day in his Examination, though he
judged the Jews for not keeping the Law which they had received, but
persecuted the Just one: so he preached the substance, Christ, the end of the
Law, and said they had not kept the Law, but turned against the Just, and
persecuted him; he did not establish the Jews in their Ceremonies, signs and
types; But Stephen brings them to the substance, and so God that gave forth the
Law with types and figures, and shadovvs in it to the vveak capacity of people
in their transgression, sent his Son to redeem them from it, and to end the
types, figures and shadovvs in the first Covenant, who is in the new and
living way; which is no changing and shadovvs, no variableness nor altering,
no turning.

Pr. And thou says, Sin is double on the Sabbath Day. And thou says, I
conceive a Sabbath days journey is so far as a person may ride to go without
toil to a meeting: So where there is no law, there is no transgression, and the
extent is left to the conscience.

Answ. How now, must the Beast bear a burden? Where does the Scripture say
that thou was to ride upon the Sabbath day? Do the Beasts work then? He
says, Thou shall do no manner of work: But six days shall thou labor, and
do all thou have to do. And you that make Sabbaths, and set the up old
Sabbaths, and do not keep it according to the Law of God, with the Law of God
are you judged and condemned, if ye do not fulfill it in every point; and they
that believe Christ is the end of the Law, to them he is the body, which is the
end of the shadow.

Pr. Thou says, That the Jews that were not to make a fire on the Sabbath
day, this was mentioned of the Ceremonial Law, and so concerns not Christians,
and so not in danger of stoning. The revealed will of God, that we should not
turn our foot to the defiling the Sabbath. When the six days is done, be
sure thou do not turn thy foot to pollute the Sabbath.

A. And do not thee confound thy self in this, and turn thy foot to pollute
it, and says, it is the Ceremonial Law that commands it? and they that
gathered sticks and made a fire were stoned to death: Did not they pollute it?
And does not thou say it does not concern the Christians, and they was not in
danger of stoning? And so have not thou taught them to break the Law and the
Sabbath both, and pollute it, and so has overthrown all thy doctrine in thy
Book, and confounded thy self? And does not he that goes out and gathers
sticks and makes a fire, turn his foot from the Sabbath? For he that went out
to gather sticks, broke the Sabbath day, and was cursed, and stoned to death:
For no fire, no me^t, no burdens was to be borne on that day of rest, a figure
of the everlasting rest, wherein no meat is gathered, no fire is made; no
burden is born, and there is no turning the foot, but all walking in rest and
peace, and so I find thee neither in Law nor Gospel.

Pr. Thou say, But to be sure, the Law was made for Christ's Disciples.
Whosoever boasts of a Light within, and speaks against this Law of the Sabbath,
has no light in him. And thou says, Quakers will not admit of this Royal Law
as a rule of righteousness, but perverts the Scriptures, which says, The Law
was not made for a righteous man.

Answ. The Disciples of Christ, the Law was not made for them that came to
witness Christ the end of the Law; for they said plainly, the Law was not made
for the righteous: And Christ is the end of the Law to them that believe for
righteousness sake. And the Quakers witness Christ the end of the Law, for
their rule of righteousness, and do not pervert the Scriptures but are the
believers in him who ends the Law, and before it was, and is the body which
ends types, shadows and figures, and they that draw people under the Law, and
the types, and shadows, and figures from the light within, does not know Law
nor Gospel; for the Law is light, and the Gospel is the power of God, and such
as witness Christ the end of the Law, witness the end of the Sabbath.

Pr. Thou says among all Gods Laws, none sets the soul more at liberty then
the fourth lively Oracle.

Answ. And yet thou says men may make a fire, and not be stoned, and so thou
teaches to break it, and thy Horse may bear a burden, and so do not thou
pollute it here, and destroy thy own soul by thy own Judgment, but I tell
thee; Christ is the Bishop of the soul, who ends the Law, and brings the Law
within, into the mind, and heart, so now the soul being subject to the Higher
power; the power by which all the changeable things is held up by: that power
remains when all the changeable fails, and decays and ends, and the soul
witnesses that, and the body of Christ the power stands.

Pr. The Sabbath was intended to righteous Stephen and all his followers, and
is designed to all persons, to whom the Supper is joined; the Sabbath is a
precept, ancient and universal both for Adam a public person, and for all his
posterity, but none can sanctify the Sabbath saving Christ's disciples.

Answ. Stephen suffered death for witnessing against the shadows and
witnessing the substance, and the Apostle no where joins the Sabbath, with the
Supper, but Stephen saw Christ the body in whom was the rest, in whom he
entered, and the Saints that come to sup with the Lord, and is supping with
him, comes into the body which is the end of all types, and shadows and
signs, which are Sabbaths, and has seen them flee away, and are come to the
beginning, before the world was made, him who was before signs, shadows and
types was.

The Sabbath was not given to Adam in the beginning who had the dominion over
all creatures living, but given to Adams posterity in the fall a sign, when
they came to receive the Law of God; the types, and shadows and figures, which
they was to rest on, a sign of rest. But when Christ came, who gives rest to
the day from the inward burden that men were bound; the Apostle that Preached
him who was the body, Preached the end of the shadows, types, and figures,
that took off the nature, which caused the oppression and transgression, and so
the Disciples which was in the rest Christ, in the body they was in the
sanctification, and the Apostle no where speaks that the Disciples did
sanctify the seventh day and bid people do it, but thou do not sanctify the
seventh day, that bids people make a fire, and so art a breaker of it, and
Preaches up that people should break that, which thou affirms should be kept
holy.

Pr. Thou says there is already many signs of displeasure upon Sabbath
breakers, against the Oracle of God: laboring wtih all their might against it,
in the Birth upon Quakers: yea, the Galileans were great sinners, but I tell
thee except you repent ye shall all likewise perish; and thou compares them to
the sow wallowing in the mire that goes from the Sabbath of the Lord.

Ans. This thou might turn upon the Apostles who brought the people off from
types, figures; signs and shadows: to the body Christ, and to the end of the
Law, and told them all things must become new, [Mark] all things become new,
what, would hold up any old thing, what a new Sabbath then? and has the
Quakers been persecuted as thou calls examples and signs for witnessing the
body Christ is he persecuted? They go in the wallowing mire like swine, and
like the Prodigal feeding upon the husk, as goes into the signs and shadows,
and from the body Christ the life the substance, and comes not to the rest the
body and holds not the head, and so they satisfy the flesh, and runs into the
mire and wallowes there, and are satisfying it, and such are the intruders
worshipping Angels; will worshippers, without the body.

Pr. Thou says the seventh day is a perpetual royal rest established by
precept and president: for Gods praise and Saints privilege, the
unchangeableness of the seventh day Sabbath.

Ans. It was so to the Jews in their generation; perpetual to them in the
generation where they was and so was circumcision, and so was the offerings;
but Christ by whom the world was made, came to end the offerings, who is the
rest to weary souls and takes of all burdens, is the everlasting rest, and
restores the creation and ends the Jewish signs: given as a sign and shadow of
the body, Christ, him by whom the world was made before it was made, and so he
changes the covenant and Priesthood, ends the Law, ends the shadows; the body
Christ, who believes in him are entered into his rest, and there is the Saints
privilege.

Pr. Thou says when will the the new Moons be gone that we may sell corn, and
the Sabbath day that we may set forth wheat. All the Discipline of the Gospel
calls for self-denial: as this weekly duty of the holy Sabbath; The Christian
complains for want of spiritual enjoyments with Christ and acquaintance with
Christ, the Sabbath opens the door of the Holy of Holies, and is as a spring of
the spiritual joys.

Ans. In the time of the Law and Prophets they was crying up new Moons, and
Sabbathes which were shadows, types, and signs: But the Saints denied
themselves and was come to the body, and did not set up weekly duties of the
Holy Sabbath, but said they were shadows and came to see the end of Sabbathes,
and new Moons, and witnessed the body Christ; before the day was made in whom
is the rest: and the Christian complaining for want of spiritual enjoyments and
acquaintance with Christ; are such that is among thee; that is in the shadows;
and come not to the body Christ in whom there is Communion and life, for the
body is the light of the world: the body is the life given for the life of the
world in whom there is rest, yea to them that had the true Sabbath, which was
the sign which they was to rest on: a sign, a shadow is of something that is to
come, therefore the sign and shadow is not the thing; and they that lives upon
the sign, and shadow and cries up them, keeps from the door of Holies where
all the springs of Spiritual Joys are in, which all the signs and shadows
and types, and figures ended in Christ before they was; in Christ by whom the
world was made, before shadows and types was. And a great deal more confusion
is there in thy book not worthy mentioning, but will fall into the mire, and
the dirt with thy self, therefore now thou have time prize it, and give over
deceiving the people; for thou art wallowing in the mire thou speaks of, and
would bring people thither into the shadows from Christ the body, the
substance and Life.

John Burton and John Bunian, calls themselves Ministers of the Gospel in their
Book called, Some Gospel truths opened. Their Principles are as Follows.
Pr. THey say, To witness Christ manifest in our flesh, is to deny Christ come
in the flesh, and says, that Christ says he shall be absent from his Apostles
touching his body.

Ans. Contrary to Christ who said that they might eat his flesh, and contrary
to the Apostle who said that they were of his flesh and bone, so they do not
divide the word aright, and to witness Christ within, is not to deny him come
in the flesh, but to witness him, and such are not absent from him.

Pr. And they say, Others have been depending upon something that they call the
righteousness of Christ within, and Christ within them; and this they say is
opposite to Christ without, and this they call the spirit of the Devil.

Ans. Which is not agreeable to the Apostles doctrine, but contrary to the
Apostle, who said, he was manifest in his flesh to condemn sin in the flesh,
that he through him might become the righteousness of God, and this is not
opposite to Christ that dyed at Jerusalem; but it is the same that is manifest,
and not the spirit of the Devil, but that which destroys him; For the Devil
and Reprobates may talk of him without, but the Apostle said, that Jesus Christ
was in them (that is the Emanuel, God with us) except they be reprobates, and
none knows righteousness but within.

Pr. And they say, This is one of the Devils lies, to deceive, to bid people
follow the light.

Answ. That Is contrary to the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, who bids them
walk in the light; and Christ, who bids them believe in the light. And I will
give him for a Covenant of light, a leader of the people. And Christ said, I am
the light, he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of life: And that is the Devil and the Liar that leads people from
the Light, for he abode not in it.

Pr. They say, Faith is not perfect in respect of its degree and measure in us.

Answ. The faith of God is the gift of God, and it is p^rfect in us in it is
measure and degree, though thy measure and degree is not perfect; and here thou
have tried thy faith and thy gift which is not perfect, for the gift of God is
perfect.

Pr. And yet they say, The work of this faith is for purifying and justifying,
and not perfect in the degree and measure of it in us.

Answ. Can an unperfect thing purify and justify? And does not the Scripture
speak of one Faith that gives victory? And does not the Apostle say, that faith
abides? And can that abide which is not perfect? And Christ says, He that has
faith as a grain of mustard seed shall remove mountains, and is not that
perfect? Now here all men may see if you who call your selves Ministers divide
the word aright. We say, faith is perfect in the least measure and degree, the
righteousness of faith, Romans 10. And it is that with which men please God,
which faith works by love, and so brings off the works of the Law by which
faith men are justified, which is in the heart.

Pr. They say, It Is a manifestation of the deluding of poor souls to hold
forth a crucified Christ within, risen within, ascended within, and Scriptures
within, and says, this is a new Gospel.

Answ. If Christ that is crucified be not within, and Christ that is risen be not
within, I say that you all are Reprobates; and if the Scripture be not within,
which was spoken forth from within, you all want the spirit that gave it forth,
and Christ the substance of it; and you have not eaten his flesh, neither are
you of his bone, and this is not opposite to Jesus Christ without, that dyed at
Jerusalem, but the same; for who eats his flesh has it within them, and this is
not a new Gospel.

Pr. And they say, False Christ's has a new false faith to apprehend this
crucified Christ within.

Answ. Which is contrary to the faith of the Apostles which preached Christ
that is crucified within, and not another, him that was raised up from the dead,
was risen, that Lord Jesus Chr^^^ within, the same yesterday, to day, and for
ever, by whom the world was made, glorified with the Father before the world
began. It was he that was manifest in the Sa^nts that was, and is, and not
another, for the other is the Antichrist.

Pr. And they say; It is a Scripture of the Devils making to apprehend this
crucified Christ within.

Answ. Now I say, if there be any other Christ but he that was crucified
within, he is the false Christ, and the Scripture holds forth this, and the
Devil never made it, but he and his messengers are against it; And he that
has not this Christ that was risen and crucified within is a Reprobate, though
Devils and Reprobates may make a talk of him without.

Pr. They say, The light of revelation renders Gods Christ odious.

Answ. None knows the Son of God but by revelation, and with the Light, and
they are them that renders Christ odious that be out of the light, of
revelation of the Son, as the Pharisees did, as now the Beast and false
Prophets does, in making war against the Saints in light, and the Lamb; but the
Lamb and the Saints shall get the victory, glory to the highest: They that
walk in the light are not opposite to Christ, but to the Beast and the false
Prophets, but are in unity with the Son, and with the Father.

Pr. And they say, What a sad doctrine is that which says, follow the light
with which Christ has enlightened all which comes into the world.

A. This is contrary to the Apostles doctrine; which was to go into all Nations
to turn people from darkness to light, and preach the new Covenant to Jews
and Gentiles, the salvation to the ends of the earth, a leader of the peeple;
and contrary to the Apostles doctrine, which bid the Saints walk in the light,
and they should have fellowship one with another, and so not sad, but
fellowship; but thou and you that are Apostates are from this light gone, and
that which does make manifest is light, and with it are you that are apostates
from it, seen, and so follows not the light that every one is enlightened with
that comes into the world, and so be out of unity one with another, and
fellowship with the Son, and with the Father, and be out of his covenant, all
on heaps in the apostasy, that walks not in the light, but calls it a sad
doctrine, to bid others to follow it. Ye children of the light, ye are the
light of the world, let your light shine before men, that they may glorify
your Father which is in heaven, like lamps burning; for ye are as a City set on
a hill that cannot be hid. And Christ says, he that follows the light shall
not walk in darkness.

Pr. They say, It is a rendering of the Scriptures odious, and Law, by telling
of the Scripture within, which Christ never taught, nor his Disciples; but God
has given them up to a reprobate mind.

Answ. Was not all the Scriptures from the spirit within? and was it not there
before it came out? And must not all upon the earth have the spirit within that
gave it forth, before they can understand the Scripture without, given forth
from the spirit of God within others? And was not the Apostles and Christ's
preaching of the Scripture within, the Law in the heart, and the Word in the
heart. And the Kingdom within, and the spirit within leading into all truth,
the spirit of the Father speaking in you, and Christ within? and is not this
extolling Scripture of truth? and are not all they reprobates that have
Scripture without, and not within?

Pr. And they say, But this is the Devils design by pretending that people may
attain a more excellent way, following what is made known to them from the
Light within them.

A. I never read such a Doctrine that the Devil taught, that any should follow
that which the light made known within them, and I know he did not; for he is
out of the light, and that which it makes known within; for the light which
shines within makes known the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, whereby
men come to be changed from glory to glory, till they come into the image of
God, and this the light makes known within, 2 Cor. 4.

Pr. And they say, God has a Christ distinct from all other things whatsoever,
whether they be spirits or bodies.

Answ. Gods Christ is not distinct from his Saints, nor his bodies, for he is
within them; nor distinct from their spirits, for their spirits witness him:
And God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, who is the head of
every creature. And there is not any creature but it is manifest in his sight;
and he is in the Saints, and they eat his flesh, and sit with him in heavenly
places.

Pr. They say, They are deceived that think to obtain salvation by the
conviction of the Law which they call Christ, page 37. and 39.

Ans. Christ is the end of the Law, and who follow him are not deceived, but
comes to witness the Law of life, and him revealed in them; and they are
deceived that calls the Law without by Christ, that does convict, and gives it
that name; But who follows Christ the end of the Law has the righteousness of
God revealed in them from says to faith, which the just lives by, and Christ
revealed in them, as the Apostle witnessed whereby they have eternal life

Pr. And they say the Quakers would obtain salvation by the obedience of Christ
the Law which gives the knowledge of sin.

Answ. The Quakers obedience is Christ Gods righteousness the end of the Law,
which makes them free from the Law of sin and death: Christ the seed, the
second Adam.

Pr. They say, Now every man that comes into the world receives a light from
Christ, as he is God which light is conscience, and this will show a man that
there is a God, and discover the eternal God which some falsely calls Christ.

Answ. Christ says I am the light of the world, and does enlighten every man
that comes into the world; as says John, and does not say that (its
conscience for the light was before conscience was; which shows thy ignorance;
Not knowing what conscience is) for conscience was since the world: but light
was before the world was made, and he that evil does, hates the light; and so
conscience is seared, and so light condemns, and the light which every man
that comes into the world is enlightened with, is Gods Covenant to Jews and
Gentiles, and salvation to the ends of the earth, so you have given Christ a
new name, that calls him conscience: contrary to Scripture, and is conscience
eternal that may be seared: and will that show that which is eternal? will
conscience blot out sin and transgr^ssion (Christ will) Gods Covenant that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, which light believing in it,
they serve Christ the Author of their faith which faith is a mystery held in a
pure conscience.

Pr. And they say that every man has not the spirit of Christ, and he brings
Jude to prove it.

Answ. That proves that they had it, but went from it, and the spirit that
leads the disciples reproves the world.

Pr. John Burton says John Bunian is furnished with spiritual gifts, which
gifts the Ministers of Christ must have whether learned or unlearned; as to
humane, and John Bunians preaching he says is not by humane art; yet he says,
Christ is humane.

Ans. The Scripture has neither taught John Burton nor John Bunian this
Language, To say this knowledge is not humane, and yet to affirm Christ is
humane is to say thy knowledge is not from Christ, but we shall try his gifts
whether they be from God, and whether or no he divids the word aright, and
whether they be agreeable to the Scripture, which fills up his book with
mentioning the word humane twenty times over, which humane is from the earth,
to say Christ is humane thy knowledge is from the ground earthy, and he has no
Scripture for it, he says that the soul is immortal.

Pr. And he says it is the Devil to keep people to live and die in their sins,
and he that cries free grace through the death of the man Christ Jesus; that
sinners does attain to eternal life, and deny his own righteousness, this he
says is a notion, and says he is empty of sanctified grace.

Answ. The grace that comes from Christ it seasons the heart and the words are
sanctified, and this is not a notion, but all be in the notion that speak of
the thing, and be out of the grace and salvation, and you that believe people
must have sin, whilst they are upon the earth, are them that keeps people in
their sins, and so has judged thy self to be the Minister of sin, as thou
may read the fruits in thy own book.

Pr. John Bunian says he that confesses Christ come in the flesh, and was
crucified, taken from the Cross and risen, he that believes this is not
Antichrist.

Answ. The Pope and all the profane people in Christendom called Christians
will confess this in the form without them, and they that denies the power,
for Christ is the power of God; and that I say is Antichrist, he that has not
Christ in him is a reprobate, and so would make thy self, and all Professors,
the Pope and all hirelings not to be Antichrist, and are all on heaps one
amongst another: that's a mark of Antichrist: though they may have all in the
form, Christ and the Prophets words: which denies the power, yet confess
Christ without; he that denies the power, denies Christ, and so he is
Antichrist who denies the light which Christ has enlightened him withal.

Prin. Man at his coming into the world he has conscience, but he has not the
spirit of Christ.

Answ. Man at his coming into the world has a light from Christ, him by whom
the world was made, which is more then conscience, but he that hates the light
abids in darkness, and so is not like to receive the spirit, but is reproved
with it.

Pr. They say them that are carried away by the convictions of conscience are
misinformed by the devil.

Answ: This light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world,
which he calls conscience, teaching and misinforming by the devil, is the light
that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that through it they
might believe (and is not conscience) and he that believes has the witness in
himself, and that all might hear the Son and confess him to the glory of God;
and therefore are enlightened who was glorified with the Father before the
world began; and Christ bids them believe in the light, which believing in,
has the light of life, but he that believes not is condemned already; and them
that hate the light are them that are informed by the devil.

Pr. Now they say he converts a new birth, persuading them it is wrought by
following the light, and this he says is like Baals Priests.

Answ. That's contrary to Christ who says I am the light, and he that follows
me shall not walk in darkness: but shall have the light of life; he that
believes in the light shall become a child of the light, and this is far above
Baals Priests, and all that hates it, hates Christ, and these are Baals Priests
that hate the light.

Pr. And they say that the spirit of Christ convinces of sin, and yet they say
all has it not, and yet it shall convince and reprove the world.

Answ. Now its one thing to be reproved, and another thing to receive that
which does reprove, for the believer in the light is led with the spirit of
truth into all truth, and he that believes not in the Light, is with the spirit
of truth reproved.

Pr. They say for one to be convinced of his sins against the Law, and have
some power against them; these they call miserable blind Pharisees.

Ans. Them that was blind Pharisees transgressed the Law of God, lived out of
the power, and that which convinced of the transgression of the Law: so they
said and did not, and woe was pronounced against them, and so judgment came to
be neglected, and the doers of the Law was justified and not called blind
Pharisees; and that was in (its) place, but Christ is the end of the Law for
righteousness sake to them that believes, and those was not called blind
Pharisees which followed that which showed them the transgression of the Law;
for those was the doers.

Pr. They say the spirit shall convince all men and women sufficiently of that
righteousness which Christ fulfilled.

Ans. That which does convince of righteousness, all men and women as thou
confesses, if they believe in the light, which Christ has enlightened them
withal, it will lead them from their own righteousness, and be their teacher,
and come to be taught of God.

Pr. They say the light convinces of sin against the Law, but will not show a
soul a Savior or a deliverer.

Answ. That's contrary to the Apostle, who says the light that shined in their
hearts will give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Jesus Christ, who is the Savior, and he shall be my salvation to the ends of
the earth, covenant to Jews and Gentiles.

Pr. They say the light will not show a man his lost condition, righteousness,
blood, death, resurrection and intercession of Jesus Christ.

Answ. There Is nothing makes manifest but light; Nor none knows the blood,
death, righteousness, and resurrection of Jesus Christ but with the light which
comes from Jesus Christ who has enlightened, every man that comes into the
world, and that's it shall give all men assurance that he is raised from the
dead; the light of the body is the eye, that lets see salvation.

Pr. They say Christ went away into heaven, from his Disciples and so not
within them.

Answ. Did not he say he would come again to them, did he not say he was in
them, I in you: and did not the Apostle say Christ was in them, except they
were reprobates, the hope of glory; was not he revealed in the Apostle and so
in him, and did not the Apostle Preach Christ within, and you Preach Christ
with out?

Prin. They say that those believers that are in the body now at this day are
absent from the Lord.

Answ. Does not the Apostle say that Christ is in them except they be
reprobates, and he is in them the hope of glory, and they have fellowship with
God, and God will dwell in them, and walk in them, and he that believes,
believes in him, in Christ, so not absent

Pr. And they say he is absent from them, as touching his flesh.

Answ. Does not the Apostle say that they are of his flesh, and of his bone,
and he that eats not his flesh, has no life in him, and they fit in heavenly
places with him, and he that eats his flesh has it within him.

Pr. They say that there is not any heaven within, into which the man Christ is
ascended; for can any man contain a man four foot long?

Answ. Christ is a mystery and is not he to be revealed within, who is a
mystery, he who did ascend to be revealed, and made manifest in his Saints, in
flesh and spirit, that did descend, which is now manifested, that the world
wonders at, that is ascended far above the heavens, who is the Saints life,
living bread, and drink, and where ever used the Ministers of Christ any such
expressions, as thou does, which shows that Christ is yet to thee a mystery?

Prin. They say, Stars falling from heaven is professors falling from the faith
to the earth.

Answ. This is fulfilled upon you all who have given Judgment upon your
selves, and so from the faith in which is the unity, in which men please God
and has victory over the world, and this you may read since the days of the
Apostle who are fallen all down into the earth for money, and stipends.

Pr. They say that God has given assurance to all men, and commands all to
repent every where, in that he will Judge the world in righteousness by the
man Christ Jesus.

Answ. That every man that comes into the world is enlightened by Christ the
light of the world, him by whom it was made, who will give them a reward
according to their works that denies his Light and are found in the works of
da^kness.

^r. They say, That the end of Christ's coming is, that the people of God should
shine as the sun, and the cause that hinders them for shining is the body of
death.

Answ. The righteous and the Saints comes to witness the body of sin put off,
and thanks God who has given them victory, and comes into the second Adam, the
Lord from heaven, out of the first Adam, where the shining state is witnessed,
the holy mount of God, the city that cannot be hid.

Pr. They say, If a man's obedience flow not from the faith, it is but sin in
the sight of the great God.

Ans. And yet they say, faith is not perfect in the measure and degree.

Pr. And they say, Four times that Christ ascended away from his Disciples, and
was not in them.

Ans. And Christ said, I in you, and you in me; and he would come and dwell in
them, and make his abode with them, which the Apostles came to witness, and
sat with him in heavenly places.

Pr. They say, that the man Christ that was crucified, his body is now in the
presence of his Father, absent from his people, as touching his bodily presence.

Answ. Does not the Apostle say he is the head of the Church? And does not the
Apostle say, they are of his flesh and bone, and sit with him in heavenly
places with Christ. And Christ says, they must eat his flesh, and he is in
them.

Pr. And they say, that Christ is absent from the Saints in the world, its
clear.

Answ. When the Apostle says, Christ was in the Saints; and Christ in you the
hope of glory. And the Apostle says, he has revealed the Son in him: And he
that has not the Son of God has not life: And after the same Christ which was
crucified and risen, came to be manifest in his Saints, and not another. And so
the Saints come to feed upon his flesh, and drink his blood which is their
life, which body Christ gives for the the life of the world, and which blood
appeaseth the wrath of the Almighty. And as for the rest of John Burton, and
John Bunians lies and slanders, they are not worth mentioning, but the
Scriptures are owned. And John, art thou finding fault, because men wears no
hatbands, and eats and drinks bread and water, and casts by their pride? Now
thou may see who thou have taken part with, and who is the scoffer, and
shows thy self, and who is thy Master, short of all good: And as for all your
bad names, and misconstruing of Scriptures, it will come upon your selves; and
thou have showed in all thy Book that thou art not able to divide the word
aright, nor an instructor of Babes.

Pr. And thou says, that Christ dyed for the sins of the elect.

Answ. And the Scripture says, he was an offering for the sins of the whole
world; and who shall lay charge to Gods elect whom he justifies.

Pr. And thou speaks of God destroying men for their ignorance, and they shall
find no favor in the day of judgment.

Answ. Whereas the Scripture says, in the time of ignorance God winked at, but
now he commands all men every where to repent, and every man that comes into
the world is enlightened: And the spirit of truth shall reprove the world of
sin, of righteousness, and of judgment, which leads believers into all truth?
And the grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men, but they
turn it into wantonness, which is the Saints teacher: And this shall make
every tongue to confess to the glory of God, and every knee to bow at his
name; which is the Emanuel, and so none shall plead ignorance, as thou say,
who art in the ignorance thy self, but inexcusable because convicted, and have
rejected the tender mercies, who have lifted up thy self against the Saints
and the Lamb; but a stone is set over thy head that shall grind thee to powder,
and the Saints shall have the victory; and the Kingdom that is an everlasting
Kingdom, the witness in thy conscience shall witness against thee for all
thy hard speeches, and let thee know that you and thou had better have been
silent, then to fight against the Lord, the Lamb and his Saints, that is the
word of the Lord God to thee and you all. When ye are judged, the witness in
all your consciences shall answer.

W. P. his Principles, in his Book entitled, according to truth, that quakes
not, trembles not, nor quails.
Pr. THey say, If the Apostles had been put to preach upon a short Text, or
methodically, as by a long practice in the Church, it is expected from us that
they might often times have studied for it.

Answ. In this you have showed your spirits, and made manifest you are void of
the revelation from God, and your ignorance of the Scriptures; for the holy
Ghost shall not speak of it self, but take of his: And the Apostles, what they
had seen and heard they declared: And Christ, what he had received of the
Father, he declared; and the spirit, that which speaks in the Church, and it
shows the fulfilling of the Scriptures, and it keeps not people long in Texts,
as the world does, that wrests Scriptures up and down, and keep people in
sects; and so there is the spirit leading into all truth, and the spirit of the
Father speaking within, and the holy Ghost that moved men to give forth
Scripture, that teaches to divide the word aright, which is the spirit of
prophecy in the Church, not studying.

Pr. They say, Every man that has the spirit in some measure, does not attain
to the great height and degree that they did that gave forth Scriptures, that
therefore may not lawfully and infallibly teach as they did.

Ans. Every man that has a measure of the spirit of God in the least measure
or degree, it is infallible, and so far may they teach infallibly, and know
Scriptures; but they cannot know all Scriptures, but as they attain to the full
measure of the spirit of the Prophets and Apostles, and to the measure and
stature, and fullness of Christ: and if they do not attain to all this, they are
not able to know all the Scriptures; and the work of the Ministers of God was
to bring people to this, to the measure, and stature, and fullness of Christ,
and says, Let every one minister as he has received the grace; And take heed
of any of you going beyond your measure, and them that deny the grace of God
appearing to all men, cannot minister.

Pr. They say, The greatest part of professors in the visible Church were, and
are always earthly minded, nor can rightly value spiritual and heavenly things.

Ans. In this you and your Ministers has showed your fruits like Balaams,
which withers and are earthly, such as Jude speaks of that separateth
themselves, sensual, and had not the spirit, but went forth from the Apostles,
that are got up since the days of the Apostles, Church and Ministry, like
Priest like people, and to be such as was coming up before the Apostles
decease, as he speaks on in Timothy, which minded earthly things; like Teacher,
like People, that preach themselves through with many hurtful lusts, while they
coveted after money, they lost the faith, and so came people to be all on heaps
(out of unity) in the earth, being out of the faith of Gods elect: so this is
all in the apostasy since the Apostles.

Pr. And he says, That he is not a hireling that takes wages. The wages are
allotted to him for his work.

Ans. But do not all you preach for hire? and is it not for hire you preach?
Now the least in the truth may see you. Is there ever a Priest in the Nation
but he is hired to work, or if he have it not, he will not stay? Now to prove
that you do preach for hire, where many Steeple Houses in many Parishes that
has no Priest, thither you go not, because there is but a little Benefice, and
they have souls as well as others; and where there is agreement for so much a
year, thither you go, is not this for hire? and so the Prophets words fulfilled,
the Priests preach for hire; and all these great sums of money which has lifted
you up, and gathered a great deal of it out of poor men's labors, this has
been the undoing of you all (and Nations) and many poor people because they
cannot put into your mouths; but now is God come to judgment upon you all in
the apostasy, apostates.

Pr. And thou calls the Steeple-house a Church.

Ans. Which is the Church which is come up since the days of the Apostles in
the apostasy; for the Church is the people of God, the elect seed, which Christ
is the head of, who in the midst of this Church does sing praises, which is the
pillar and ground of truth, without spot or wrinkle. Whereas the Steeple-house
you call your Church will spot, wrinkle, and blemish, and decay, and fall down,
and wicked men may prevail against it; but the gates of Hell cannot prevail
against that Church which is built upon the rock.

Pr. And thou say, Thou do not speak in that degree of the holy Ghost as
the Prophets and Apostles did that spoke forth Scriptures.

Answ. Then thou must take heed of exalting thy self above thy measure; for
thou can not know Scripture, but by the same degree of the spirit the
Prophets and Apostles had.

Pr. And he says, He has no command in Scripture to sprinkle Infants, and he
holds it not absolutely necessary, and he has no command in Scripture against
it, and he has a commandment of the Governors, and so he is subject to every
Ordinance of man.

Answ. An ordinance of man that is not of absolute necessity, consider what it
is, and that which the Scripture no where commands, nor thou have no example
for it, consider what that is; and to say the Scripture no where forbids it, it
forbids all the traditions and doctrines of men: so that is judged by the
spirit of God that is set up by men.

Pr. Thou say, The Lord may give with the outward washing the spirit to the
child.

Answ. Can man receive the spirit of God by following traditions of men and
outward things? Was not they all from it, and from the spirit? and does it not
judge them for setting up such things God never commanded?

Pr. And he speaks of David's Psalms given to the world sutably.

Answ. The world must repent and be in the spirit, for it lies in wickedness,
before they can know David's singing; for the Prophet says, their songs must be
turned into howling, and David's condition is not the worlds.

Pr. He says, men may respect persons in their places.

Answ. That Is contrary to the Apostle, who said, God was without respect of
persons, and that the Gentiles should be accepted as well as the Jews. He that
does righteousness is accepted with God; who holds the faith of Christ it is
without respect of persons, it is in the unity, and they that be out of that,
be out of the unity: So thou have pleaded for that which art out of his
Doctrine. He that respects persons commits sin, and is convinced of the Law for
a transgressor, as says the Apostle. W. P. thy works are tried and weighed,
and found too light, and condemned for the fire, the witness in thy conscience
shall answer; but now in thy security thou art asleep, but the wrath of the
Lamb shall find thee out.

And as for all thy lies and slanders thou heaps up in thy Book, they are not
worth mentioning, but will come upon thy own self, for they are thine own
covering, which is judged, the witness in thee shall answer.

The Elders and Messengers of the several Churches of Ilston, Abergevenny,
Tredingnoge, Carmarthen, Hereford, Bredwerden, Cledacke, and Liangors, Meeting
at Brecknocke, whose Book is Titled, An ANTIDOTE against the Infections of the
TIMES. Which has showed your selves full of poison, and such as infect the
Times, but with the spirit of Truth ye are comprehended and judged. Your
Principles are as Follows.
Pr. YOu say, you are conceived in sin, and brought forth in iniquity, Psalm.
51.1.

Answ. David does not say, you who were conceived in sin, but (I) and W. P.
says, John was sanctified from the womb; and the Scripture speaks of such as
were sanctified from the womb, and children that were clean: And so you do not
speak as Elders and Messengers of true Churches, or men dividing the word
aright; but you are one against another, though you are all against them you
call Quakers that be in the truth.

Pr. They say, They observe the design of Satan to cast down the walls of
Sion, and to remove the living stones thereof from the sure foundation, the
rock of ages, the Lord Jesus Christ, and draw them to build upon the sands.

Answ. Is this like that the Elect should be deceived? living stones should be
drawn from the sure foundation, the rock of Ages, the Lord Jesus Christ? for
these living stones to be built upon the sand, and drawn from the Rock of Ages?
this Doctrine does not sound like men of understanding; For the living stones
are the spiritual household, and the royal Priesthood; and there is the
foundation that stands sure, the Rock, the Devil is out of, and the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against it, you in your Notions let living stones alone,
for none can pluck them out of the Fathers hand.

Pr. And they say, No man can redeem the soul of his brother.

Answ. Solomon says, the fruits of the righteous ^s a tree of life; and he
that wins souls is wise: And he that saves a man from his evil ways, saves a
soul from a multitude of sins. Again thou say, No man, the greatest of men
can redeem the soul of his brother. Ye should not have left out Christ the
Savior, the Redeemer, the man Christ Jesus, the elder Brother: so you are a
company of blind Pastors, contrary to them that gave forth Scriptures.

Pr. To say heaven and glory is in man, which was before man was, they are
sottish and blind.

Answ. There Is none have a glory and a heaven but within them, which was before
man had a being.

Pr. Wherefore take heed of depending upon any righteousness within you, or
any righteousness done by you.

Answ. This is a strange Doctrine, that men must take heed of any
righteousness done by them, or within them: This is contrary to Scripture,
which says, the kingdom of heaven is within, that stands in righteousness,
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and the fruits of the spirit is righteousness
and goodness, and this is that which ends the righteousness of the Law; and he
that does righteousness is righteous and Christ the righteousness of God is
with them.

Prin. Man has received a light from Christ as a creature: but not as a
Redeemer.

Answ. That's false; For whosoever has received a light from Christ has
received a Redeemer, and a Savior, and he that does believe in it is saved,
and he that does not is condemned.

Pr. And they say, If you love your souls beware of such delusions, least ye
perish eternally, that say it is the true light that enlightens every man that
comes into the world; following it, it is sufficient to bring men to heaven,
which light is natural reason and conscience.

Answ. The light that every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, comes from the salvation Christ which is the way to the Father, whose
throne is in Heaven, and Christ says believe in the light, that ye may become
the children of the light, and he that believes in the light shall not come
into condemnation. All men is enlighened, that through the light they might
believe, so you are not able to divide the word aright, and all that be from
this light are lo here, lo there: and so are in the natural reason and
conscience, which the light is not; the light was before they was.

Pr. They say none should never have known a Justification nor a
Sanctification, if it bad not been written.

Answ. I do believe you had not, but hear you have laid aside the Holy Ghost:
how knew they before they gave it forth; hear thou have denied Revelation of
the spirit, for though a man has all the writings, yet he knows nothing of
God, but by the the Spirit of God, nor sanctification, nor justification which
is Christ, and the light which comes from him.

Pr. You say, You are, fallen into the last times prophesied of by Christ, and
you are to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the Saints.

Answ. The faith delivered once to the Saints ye are out of, in respecting
persons, and are Apostates from it; and the last times which Christ spoke of
should come, which John saw was come, when the false prophets which Christ
prophesied of was come, which went forth from the Apostles which since their
days the world went after them; and now from them is the Lord God bringing his
people to the rock of ages, into the faith they are out of.

Pr. Foolish man would have his righteousness in himself.

Answ. Every one that has Christ has the righteousness of God wrought in him,
and none owneth the righteousness of Christ but who owneth the light that
enlighteneth every man that comes into the world; and they are foolish that
know not this, and the righteousness of faith in them.

Pr. It is blasphemy they say and colorable pretenses to witness an infallible
spirit in them.

Answ. The spirit that leads the Saints into all truth, is infalliable and that
shall reprove the world, and he that has the spirit of Christ, has that which
is infalible, and he that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his; but are
in the colorable pretenses.

Pr. They say, The Scriptures is the quick and powerful word.

Answ. Many may have the Scriptures and the form, and deny the power, and the
Scriptures are words of God, and the word is God; and this word is in the
heart, which led them to speak forth Scripture; And many Scriptures they bring
to oppose the Doctrine of Christ, who says be not ye called of men Master: for
ye have one Master even Christ, to whom every knee shall bow, and every tongue
confess to the glory of God: will men receive worship, when Angels would not
receive it, but bad them worship God?

Pr. They say, They rail and cavil at the lawful maintenance that God has
ordained for them.

Answ. God has suffered the beast to make havoc and spoil the Saints goods:
but where does God ordain that you should take (Tithes) and treble damages,
Easter reckonings, and Mid-summer dues, and that you should sue men at the Law,
and cast them in prison till death, where did God command this? they that
Preach the Gospel should live on the Gospel, and they bring glad tidings to
people, and this is not glad tidings to cast into prison till death, and hale
up and down to Courts and Sessions for outward maintenance: if these men bring
glad tidings let the spiritual judge, or whether they do not make their folly
manifest to all men that can but read the Scripture.

Pr. They say, Such as trust in their own inherent righteousness compass Sea
and Land to make prosolytes.

Answ. It was so in the days of the Pharisees, it has been so since the days
of the Apostles, since the beast and the false prophet got up, who deny the
light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world, Gods
righteousness (Christ) and such as denied the light had the form, and such
gather people into the form of Moses, the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles
words; establishing their own righteousness, and denying the righteousness of
God, the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world, and
all you that does deny the light that does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, has trodden the blood of the Covenant under foot: and you tell us of
humane and inherent righteousness, which the Scripture tells us no such words:
and as for all the rest of the lies in the book, we let them go home again upon
their own heads, and every word shall be their own burden, and that in your
conscience shall witness; and the Scriptures are owned by the Quakers, and
denied by you, but owned for your own ends that deny the light.

A BOOK Entitled, The Quakers Cause. But no name is found in it, but is a Book
of darkness, railing, and lies, is come to light, and because some who leave
father, and mother, and wife, therefore he rages who is out of the Light and
Doctrine of Christ. And the Principles are as follows.
Pr. SUch as forsakes husband and wife to do the will of God; this he calls a
breaking of relations.

Ans. And thus ignorantly speaks evil of those things he knows not. Thus
ignorant of the command of Christ and the Scriptures, but has showed himself
to be a member of the world, and not of Christ, who says he that does not
forsake father, and mother, wife and children is not worthy of me.

Pr. He says, Because he says thou to God, it does not follow that he should
say thou to his earthly father, to speak to God as he does to man.

Answ. Now mind what proud flesh would have of whom thou have learnt to speak
you to an earthly man or to a particular person, which the Scripture has
taught no such Language, nor (the accidence) that which teaches thee to give
more to man then to God is the spirit of the world, but the Spirit of God
teaches to speak righteously, and when there is but one, not to say as of many,
and so there is thou to one, and you to many; And so here is the form of sound
words that cannot be condemned: now you may see where your Original stands,
which cannot endure the form of sound words.

Prin. He says, To be justified by grace which is Christ in them, this is a
kind of Popery.

Answ. Contrary to Scripture and the Apostles Doctrine; Before the Pope was,
and them either, which says Christ was in them, who are justified by faith;
and faith was in the heart, and justified in the spirit, and who witness the
spirit, the spirit of grace; and by grace ye are saved, and that which saves,
justifies, and being justified by grace, and thou that art of the Pope, and in
the Apostasy denies this.

Pr. To say, Christ is within, is never to mention Christ without.

Answ. There Is none knows Christ within, but he knows him without, the same
yesterday, to day and for ever, and there is none knows him but they know him
within revealed of the Father, which is beyond flesh and blood.

Pr. And he says, To run upon new birth: self-denial, light within, Christ
within man, if this be not a kind of Popery, and a fair gate for Rome, he is
deceived.

Answ. Light within, Christ within, new birth, self denial is out of your works
and Romes, which was the Doctrine that the Apostles held forth and the Saints
witnessed Christ within, light within, and new birth: such were they that came
into the the Kingdom of God, over the Kingdoms of the world; and because some
have been moved of the Lord to go naked among you, a figure of your nake^ness
and want your clothing, at which you rage; that you may appear more naked of
the spirit of God. And as for all thy lies and slanders and hard expressions in
thy book, though thou have hid thy name, yet truth will bring thy works upon
thee, and make the witness in thee to answer; who, and which is for the fire,
and to thee this shall be thy burden who art like a man that scorns and
scoffs, and thou hides thy self.

Pr. And thou say, That good woman called which went naked.

Answ. Thou have justified her to be good, and thou can not say that that
which was good, called that which was good beastly or bad that went naked,
which was your figure, then thou talkest of higher power and honor of men,
like thy brethren the Pharisees, and not like one that knew the higher power,
which respects no man's person, and the good women are those that fear God, that
have the adorning of the hidden man of the heart, that has the Array of Sarah.

John Jackson, Entitled, Stength in weakness. His Principles are as follows.
Pr. ONe that's kept groaning and waiting for the adoption, for the adversaries
assaults and contests within her; and yet she is in the kingdom, thou say,
and union with Christ and spiritual Sonship.

Answ. Spiritual Sonship, and in the kingdom, and yet groaning for adoption:
how have thou brought thy self to the light to be judged? for the least in the
kingdom was greater then John, he that's in the kingdom is in righteousness,
peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost, and thou say in the Kingdom of grace
groaning, that is but a notion of the Kingdom that keeps them groaning for
adoption.

Pr. And as thou say false prophets, and Christ's, and d^ceivers many should
come: if it was possible to deceive the very elect.

Answ. Yea Christ said they should come to his Apostles, which before their
discease they did come and went forth from them, which Christ said should
inwardly raven: and get the sheep clothing, which since the days of the
Apostles all the world went after them as thou may read in the Revelation, and
now are people but coming from them to the Rock, and now shall the everlasting
Gospel be Preached to them that dwell upon the earth, over the heads of the
beast, and the false prophet and they shall be taken, and the Lamb and the
Saints shall have victory.

Pr. He says, I hope you will not condemn the generation of the righteous
because they are not perfect.

Answ. That which condemns is righteous, it condemns that which is not
perfect, and that which is righteous is perfect, and the generation is
righteous and not to be condemned.

Pr. A son or daughter that's translated into the kingdom of the dear Son, has
filthiness pollutions of flesh and spirit to put off, and the members to be
mortified.

Answ. How is he translated into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God or grace if
he have that before mentioned to put off, and what is he translated out of,
that when he is translated into the Kingdom he has filthiness of flesh, and
spirit, and members to put off and to mortify there, after he is translated
into the kingdom, the which filthiness of flesh and spirit, and unmortified
members comes not into the kingdom: for they are mortified in their passage to
it, for no unrighteousness enters into the Kingdom, and as says the Apostle,
nor no unmortified thing comes into the Kingdom of God; for it consists of joy
and peace in the Holy Ghost, and unrighteousness and all filth of flesh and
spirit, and unmortified, is without it.

Pr. It is the comforter that convinces the world of sin, but all men have not
the spirit neither are they convinced so, of their unbelief.

Answ. Every man that comes into the world is enlightened that he may believe
in the light, and he that believes in the Light receives the Comforter, and he
that believes not in the light, the spirit of truth reproves him for his
unbelief, for his righteousness and his judgment, and I say the light that
does enlighten every man that comes into the world is sufficient believing in
it, and shall have the light of life, and shall not abide in darkness, and come
to the rock Christ, and all being in the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, shall in the light see their salvation, to the ends
of the earth; and need not say, lo here, or lo there: and as for all the
wrangling stuff in thy book, what he said, and what she said, and what say
thou, a garment to cover, you had been better silent and not have laid open
your nakedness to the Nation, I say unto thee this stuff, and bush will burn in
the fire, and the witness in thee shall answer, which shall witness me, and
judge thy contentious spirit, which shows you are far from the Kingdom, and
silence had Preached more, and the patience, then the strife which stands in
self justification, and to justify that ^o be mortified and put off which
never came there; And all men that does not believe in the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, the spirit does convince them,
and is manifest to them, and in them.

A Book, Title Page called, Hosanna to the Son of David. But the Book is
namelesse, and so reviles and rails, and hides himself in the dark; and his
intent and drift in his Book is to make the light that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, a Covenant of works, or Law without; which Christ
the Light is the Covenant of God, the end of the first Covenant and its works,
and end of the Law to Jews and Gentiles, in which they have peace one with
another, and with God. And secondly, he goes about to make the Comforter above
Christ the light, that does enlighten every man that comes into the world;
which Christ the light says, that he will send to them, that has the light,
the Comforter, and he shall take of his, and give to them, and not speak of
himself; which Christ had not spoken of himself, but as he heard and saw of
the Father, he spoke. And the rest of his Principles are as follows.
Pr. THou say, The lying murderer, he has sent forth his Instruments, which
goes under the name of Quakers, and disguised with piety and purity to preach
the everlasting Gospel: and they hold forth a light, which does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, what it does in every man, and what it is
in every man; and how it will lead men to purity and righteousness, and from
drunkenness and taking Gods name in vain, and check them when they do wrong,
and make manifest all ungodliness and worldly lusts, and it will bring to
worship God. These things among others are the scope of the lying murderer,
and bids them believe not every spirit, but try them whether they be of God or
no; for many false Prophets are gon^ out into the world.

Answ. The false Prophets and Antichrists came up, which Christ said should
come, came up in the days of the Apostles before their decease, and went forth
from them into the world, which since the world went after them, and they had
the sheeps clothing, but ravened from the spirit, and so broken into sects and
heaps one amongst another, which made war against the Saints and overcame them;
but then again the Beast and false Prophets, and the Kings of the earth, the
Devil and the Dragon should make war against the Lamb and the Saints; but the
Lamb and the Saints should get the victory over the Beast and the false
Prophets, Devil and Dragon, and the everlasting Gospel should be preached to
them that dwell upon the earth: So it is not a strange thing to us that the
whole world should be standing against the light, and against the Saints and
the Lamb, but their garments they cannot touch; and so wickedness has budded
forth into a rod; but he is brought forth to rule the Nations with a rod of
iron, which was dead and is alive: And ye discern not the times, like
Prarisees; and the light which leads men from the world, their lusts, and
taking Gods name in vain, and all ungodliness: You never came into this, the
Devil never came into this, nor none comes into it but who be in that which the
Devil is out of. Nor none sees the salvation which is to the ends of the
earth, but who be in the light that John bore testimony of, the witness in thy
conscience shall answer it, and condemn thee for thy hard speeches; and the
light by which all things was made, which does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, it is the end of the Law, and before a natural Light was, and
changes men from their natural estate believing in it, into the Covenant of
life and peace with God. I say the Law of God that came by Moses, is above
conscience, much more Christ the end of the Law, that does enlighten every one
that comes into the world, the righteousness of God. And the Devil is out of
piety and purity, who is the lying murderer, and never brought people to the
light within, who himself is out of it, and he cannot disguise himself nor
thee neither from the children of Light.

Prin. And the light simply considered, makes not any thing that is done good
or evil.

A. Did not Christ the light testify against the world that their works was
evil? and does not the light make manifest evil? And is not he that hates the
light reproved, and so with it condemned? And does not the Scripture say the
Law is light? And does not that make evil of that which is evil, and own that
which is good, and judge it? Nay, and does it not grieve the spirit of God?
Them that act contrary to the Lord, did not God bring evil upon them that did
evil? Is there any evil in the City, and I have not done it? Though it was
evil to them, yet it was justice, for they went from that of God in them
first: And does not Christ the light distinguish between the good and the
evil? And does not Christ make that which is good to be good, and that which
is evil to be evil?

Pr. He says, The law of faith did not make void the law of works, but
established it.

Answ. That Is contrary to the Apostle, that said, the Law was changed, and the
first Covenant was to decay; So with it their outward works, whereby the Law of
faith came in, which works by love, where the boaster is excluded, and the Law
of life witnessed; and there comes the living in the spirit, which makes free
from the Law of sin and death.

Pr. He says, Neither the new man nor the renewed man is endued with the
principle of light and life, according to the image of him that created him.

Answ. In this thy ignorance of the Saints conditions thou have showed; for
they was in the image of God, of him that created them; and they was not in the
flesh but in the spirit. And the Apostle tells them, that they was renewed, and
the light that shined in their hearts was to give them the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; And the Saints had
put on the new man, which is renewed in knowledge after the image of him that
created them: And he that believes has the light of life; and if they have not
the spirit of Christ, they are none of his: And God will dwell in man, and
walk in man, and Christ in them the brightness of the Fathers glory, the
express image of his substance.

Pr. The natural man retains not the things of the new Covenant.

Ans. That is while natural men are from the light and that of God in them,
there is that in the natural man, harkening to that, which will bring him to
do the thing contained in the Law, which shall be justified before the
Professors of the Law, and not doers of it; which is one with that ye
professors acts contrary to; But no man can know the things of God, save with
the spirit of God: So natural man's eyes is in that which is natural, from
that which is spiritual; but there is that in the natural man which answers
the Law of God which is spiritual, though he be sold under sin; and as he
comes to see the seed (Christ) he shall see the end of all that. A natural
man's estate, and the Law of sin and death by the faith in Christ, and there is
our justification and life, though the other things are owned where they were
in their place.

Pr. Man is not able to discern the things of God till he be born again.

Answ. And the Scripture speaks of discerning the eternal power and Godhead,
and that was a thing of the spirit of God: And the Apostle says not, that they
were born again; and yet I say, that none knows the things of God, but the
spirit of God, and that which may be known of God is manifest in them, which
God has showed unto them; for that of God in them was of his spirit, who is
the God of the spirits of all flesh, which brings them to discern his eternal
power and Godhead.

Pr. He says, That the light by which all things was made, which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, is not the powerful word of
faith.

Answ. Is not the word, Christ, the Author of Faith, by which all things were
made and created? Is not that the powerful word of faith? Is not he the Author
of it, which faith that comes from him gives victory over the world? And is not
the Son of God him whom the Father has sealed, that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world? And whosoever believes in him shall not perish,
but have eternal life, and are sealed. So every man in the light shall see the
new Covenant and the Mediator, before he has power to become the Son of God;
and there is prophecy before the Son is born, and openings from the Lord, and
those are things of God.

Pr. No man can ever see God who is invisible, with the light by which all
things were made, and calls it a little light.

Answ. This is contrary to John, who says, he that walks in the light shall
have fellowship with the Son and with the Father, and so sees him; and it is
not a little light by which all things were made and created.

Pr. The unction in every man is not the light.

Answ. It is far from the Apostle to say, that the Unction in men is the light.
If the Unction be Christ in the man, it is light; and every man that comes into
the world he must receive the light that Christ has enlightened every man that
comes into the world withal, before he can receive the unction; and he that
has the Unction, has the light of life.

Pr. The sure word of prophecy the Apostle speaks of is the prophecy of
Scripture, or Scriptures.

Ans. Does the Scripture shine in a dark place until the day dawn? Are they
them that must be taken heed unto, as unto a light? Can any see the Scripture,
and know the Scripture, but with the light within? Cannot a Cain, or a Balaam,
or Core bring Scripture that is gone from the spirit of prophecy within, and
then put the Letter for it.

Pr. They know not absolute perfection that are admitting of measures and
degrees: Nor come to the day, nor the bright morning star is not risen.

Answ. Did not the Apostle speak that they were children of the day, and night
was over, and knew the whole body, and yet said he would not go beyond his
measure? And does he not speak of the stature, and measure, and fullness of
Christ? And were not they come to perfection, and spoke wisdom amongst them
that was perfect?

Pr. He says, The evil done can never appear to be evil by the light.

Answ. Does not the light make it manifest, and reprove the evil done, and
condemn it?

Pr. He says, It is not in the power of the light to call any thing that is
done good or evil.

Answ. This is contrary to Scripture, that says, whatsoever does make
manifest, and reprove, is light; and there is power in that that does make
manifest and reprove, and call that which is evil to be evil, and that which
is good to be good.

Pr. He says, The light convinces man not, for not believing in Christ.

Answ. It condemns him, and convinces him, and reproves him.

Pr. He says; The light or law as he calls it will convince a man of sin, and
there leave him inexcusable before God.

Answ. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness sake to every one that
believes in the light, and so comes to witness the Law of faith and of life;
the hope, and the promise of this brings from under the Schoolmaster to the
Sonship, and to know and see his salvation, which none does but with the light.

Pr. He says, That Scripture in John is misapplyed, which says, that Christ
does enlighten every man that comes into the world. And says, it meddles with
none but the children of the new Covenant.

Answ. This is contrary to Scripture that says, one loves the light that does
enlighten every one that comes into the world, and the other hates it: He that
hates it, it condemns him, and he has it, (to the other the light of life) and
he is a Covenant, a light to the Gentiles and to the Jews, whether they own
it, or believe in it, or receive it or not; he is so nevertheless, according
to the promise of God, and it is the covenant of light which does enlighten
every man believing in it, and he shall not need to say, Know the Lord; for he
shall find the Law in his mind, and the Law in his heart, and the Saints
witnessed the light shining in their hearts, and that gave them the knowledge of
the glory of God, and they are passed from death to life, and from darkness to
light; and the unbeliever abides in darkness, and in the death, and the light
shines in the darkness, and the darkness does not comprehend it, and there
thou art; and such know nothing as they ought to know, but naturally as bruit
beasts.

Pr. He says, The light in every man which comes into the world, will not
open all Scripture, nor lead men out of the fall to God the Father, and to
eternal life.

Answ. The light which does enlighten man that comes into the world, is the
substance of all Scriptures, and the way out of the Fall up to eternal life,
out of the first Adam, and is the life, and that opens all Scriptures, and that
all Scriptures ends in; man being in the Fall, in the first Adam drove from God
in the sin and transgression; Christ the second Adam, which does enlighten
every one that comes into the world, who is the way again to God is he who
brings in righteousness, life and immortality, and finisheth sin and
transgression, and ends the Prophets, types, figures, shadows, and opens and
lets see all Scriptures.

Pr. He says, The light tumbles men into the grave, and roules a stone upon
them, and tumbles them in transgression, and he shall act against the anointed
ones of God, and against the Lord.

Answ. Nay, the light leads men out of transgression, and from wallowing in
their blood, whereby they have life; and leads them out of the graves, and from
under their stony hearts and rocks, whereby the new Covenant of light is known,
and the new heart which is pure, with which God is seen; and the light which
every man that comes into the world is enlightened withal, will prick them
that persecute the anointed ones, and act against the Lord, though they kick
against it.

Pr. He says, To what purpose should Christ be preached dead and risen, to be
believed on for life if the light be in every one.

Answ. Mankind being in the fall, Christ being made manifest to witness that
he should come, and made manifest to many witnesses when he was come; and John
came to bear witness to the true light, which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world. Then these witnesses that did believe that Christ was
come, was to go into all the world, all Nations, Jews and Gentiles, and preach
the everlasting Covenant of God to them, which was promised, and was witnesses
of his Resurrection: And to turn people from darkness to light, and the power
of Satan to God; and then told them the light that shined in their hearts would
give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God. And the Law was in
their hearts, and the Word was within them, and the anointing; and such had
the gifts for the work of the Ministry, for perfecting the Saints, for the
edifying the body of Christ, till they all come to the knowledge of the glory
of God, and to a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

Pr. He says, Christ is without his Saints in respect of his bodily presence.

Answ. How then are they of his flesh and of his bone, and eat his flesh, and
drink his blood? And how have the Saints his mind and spirit, and he with
them, and they with him, and sit with him in heavenly places; and he is the
head of the Church, how then is he absent? Ye poor Apostates from him, who
feels not Christ with you, but he is with the Saints, and they feel him.

Pr. He says, Salvation and faith are the gifts of God distinct from Christ.

Answ. They are all of him, and from him, and with him: And how is he the
Author of Faith, in whom it ends, from whence it comes?

Pr. He says, The light which discovers sin and iniquity in man's heart, is not
Christ the light, the door.

Ans. The first Adam was the door where all sin and transgression entered:
Christ the second Adam, the light which does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, says, I am the door, the way, and the life which finisheth sin
and transgression, and brings in everlasting righteousness, and the way of
life out of death, which Light discovers sin.

Pr. He says, To call Christ the light, the gift, the door, the way, is to
take the Gardener for Christ as Mary did.

Answ. Christ the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, we do not put him for the Gardener: We know him, and as many as receives
him, he gives them power to become the sons of God, and this thou say is not
used power, but prerogative authority, and thus thou art wresting Scripture: So
thou should have been more meek and low in thy heart, and then thou would
have bridled thy tongue, and so have learned of Christ, and so come to the
light, the sure foundation, out of the error of thy ways, and have kept in
the footsteps of the flock; and if thy tongue had been shorter, and thy bridle
streigher, then would not thou have mixed the Covenant of God with man's
spirit, and have compared it to the Law of works, which Christ the light which
does enlighten every one that comes into the world is the end of: And man's
spirit in the Fall is polluted, and his body; but as the light is believed in,
and the mind changed; his spirit is sanctified, and his body, and so comes to
be a child of the Light, and his spirit witnesses with our spirits that we
are the Sons of God: And none owns the Door, Mediator, the Life, the Way, but
with the light which Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the world
withal, which light is the door, the way, and the life.

Ellis Bradshaw, His Book, called, The Quakers quaking. Principles which he
directs to the PROTECTOR. His Principles are as Follows.
Pr. HE says, That Christ who does enlighten every man that comes into the
world by an immediate illumination, not the Elect themselves to bring them to
salvation.

Answ. Does not Christ say, I am the way, the truth, and the life? And he is
the Door, and no man comes to the Father but by him, and learn of him. This is
my beloved Son, hear ye him, says God. And is not he the new Covenant in the
heart, by which men need not say, Know the Lord? And there is no other name by
which men can be saved, but by the name of Christ, who does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, that all through him might believe: And he that
believes in the light, abides not in darkness, but has the light of life; and
they that believe not in it, but hates its the light is their condemnation; and
the light that does enlighten every one that comes into the world is the
salvation, though men neglect it, which the Elect walk in, which condemns the
unbeliever, which is immediate; and no man sees salvation but who comes to the
light.

Pr. He says, The Word that was made flesh is visible, and the Word is the
Letter, and they never received the spirit of life from it, and that is the
Quakers error.

Ans. Such as had the Scriptures, which was the words of God to them in old
time, and the ordinances the Apostle calls carnal, which the Jews stuck in,
and would not come to him that they might have life, not to Christ; And so if
men have all the Scriptures, and have not Christ, they have not life: For the
Devil he may have the Scripture, and has he life therefore? And the power of
God, Christ, his name is called the Word of God. The Word of God lives and
endures for ever, and the Spirit is not in the Letter, and the Letter is not
the Word which was made flesh, and they be in the error that thinks so, for
the Word is invisible.

Pr. Paul advises not only to the Light within, but is bidding them bring his
cloak, books and parchment, and give attendance to reading.

Answ. The Apostle did tell the Saints, that the light that shined in their
hearts might give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God, and bids
them walk in the light: And Christ bids them believe in the light, and they
should not walk in darkness; and there is no other name under Heaven by which
men can be saved, but by the name of Christ; And the Scriptures none sees the
substance of them, nor the fulfilling of them, but who walks in the Light, whom
God speaks to by his Son, who is the end of the Prophets, and there is the true
reading and knowing of all books and p^rchments; which none knows the
Scripture, but by the light which comes from Christ, in whom they end.

Pr. And again thou say, there is more words then one.

Ans. God is the Word, and the Scriptures of Truth are his words, which Christ
fulfills.

Pr. He says, They have fellowship with the Father, but not in the like
measure of the gifts of grace the Apostle had.

Answ. Then you are not like none of you to understand the Apostles words, nor
to be judges of them; but as you do come into the like measure and gifts as
they was in, else you will not be able to judge of their conditions, nor know
their words.

Pr. He says, There is no man justified through the faith in Christ that owns
the Scriptures to be but a dead letter; But that ownes them to be the Word of
God, in which there is spirit and spiritual life, as words of eternal life.

Answ. The spirit and the life is not in the Scriptures, but was in them that
gave it forth, and many have the Scripture, and not the spirit of life. The
Devil may get Scripture, and therefore has he spirit and life who is out of
it? This is like the Pharisees that thought they had had life in the
Scriptures, but would not come to Christ the life which the Scripture testified
of; and the Scriptures are words of God, but many have the words, and deny the
Word it self: and none are justified that has the Scriptures, and out of the
life that gave them forth.

Pr. He says, It Is a sottish Doctrine to direct people only to the Light
within, and what an absurd thing it is to tell our children of the Light within
their conscience, and to bid them obey and follow it; that light and word
that is in their hearts and mouths, and so fully neglect the teaching of the
Scriptures.

Answ. Is not this Souls zeal, kicking against the pricks, who had Scripture?
And this is not the neglecting to teach the Scriptures, nor the Apostles
doctrine, to bring people and children to the Light within, and the word in
their hearts and mouths to obey and do it, which was the Apostles doctrine; and
they are sottish that be out of it; and they were them that made Proselytes,
that brought not people to the word within, nor to the light within, but from
it.

Pr. He says, The Apostle thought to do many things against the Church, and
thought he ought to do so, and the light within did not inform his conscience.

Answ. Did not Christ say it was hard for him to kick against that that pricked
him, and was not that within him that pricked him?

Pr. And thou say thou art too ignorant of the ways of God, and witnessing
the meaning of his spirit.

Ans. We do believe thee, therefore you had better have been silent, and have
hearkened to the Light within thee, and the Word within thee, and the word of
faith and wisdom; which none hears the word of faith, but who comes to the
light within.

Pr. Thou say thou art too much troubled with carnal thoughts and vain
imaginations, and addicted to the world.

Answ. Those dictates are not like to own the light within, word within. It is
not a strange thing that thy spirit should stand against the Apostles doctrine,
that is, light within? Cor. 2.4.

Pr. Thou say, It is a disparaging the Scriptures to direct people to the
light within, rather then the Scriptures, to direct them to eternal life.

Ans. The Scriptures many may have, and be from the light and spirit of God
that was in them that gave it forth; which none has eternal life, but who
comes to the light within, and the spirit that was in them that gave forth the
Scriptures, and to you this is the word of the Lord.

Pr. Thou say, The light within is gross darkness, and what darkness and
blindness is there where the Scriptures are not minded and known?

Ans. The Apostle who did direct to the light within, did not call that gross
darkness nor blindness; but turned people from darkness to light, from the
power of Satan to God: And Abraham and Enoch was not in gross darkness and
ignorance, who had not the Scripture to mind, which was in the spirit and
faith as they were in that gave forth the Scripture, who comes to witness the
same spirit as was in them that gave forth the Scriptures, they shall come to
witness the Covenant of God written in their hearts, and shall not need say,
Know the Lord, and cease from man whose breath is in his nostrils; and they
that comes into this, owns the Scripture without, and be in Abraham's faith.

Pr. He says, The elect may be deceived, and fall from their own stedfastness
for a time, and come under the death and power of Satan.

Answ. The elect seed is in the grave, which it is not possible to deceive, and
the elect shall be brought from under all the deceivers, and death and bonds,
and the gates of Hell they shall come over, and on top of them, although the
seed has been in captivity; and it is not possible to deceive the Elect, it is
the world that is deceived, that which has led captive shall go into
captivity. Eve, and the first Adam may be brought into transgression; but
Christ the second Adam, the seed in you all you must know which is that which
bruiseth the Serpents head, and the ground of all deceiving, and so the Elect
may lie under for a time, and suffer; but the election shall obtain, and not
him that wills, nor him that runs, but come over to the crown of honor and
glory.

Pr. He says, Satan deceives men into bringing them to a self-denying posture.

Answ. It is not the Devil that brings men to be humble, and to deny
themselves; that which teaches self-denial is Christ; that which keeps out of
self-denial is the Devil, for that he went into himself out of the truth.

Pr. He says, They can never be clear of a degree of blasphemy that has the
spirit of God in them, and speaks against Ministry, Magistrates, and
Ordinances, and bid people listen to the light within them, and to the spirits
teaching, and that they are all taught of God.

Answ. They that witnessed the spirit and light within were taught of God, and
were moved of the Lord to declare both against Ministers, Magistrates, and
Ordinances that stood against Christ the power of God, and these were called
blasphemers, which were not, the Scripture declares it; but owned the power
that ended all changeable things, which upon all the heads of the transgressors
and blasphemers came, which power was a praise to them that did well.

Pr. He says, That Scripture may be bought and sold they say, and it does not
profit; but the Light within is of an eternal nature, an infallible guide: So
obeying it, they shall be sure of perfection and eternal life. Now he says,
those that say so are the poor ignorant and unstable souls.

Answ. Cannot ye buy and sell the Scriptures, and your Sermons, and Prayers?
And can any have the comfort of the Scriptures, and an infallible guide,
perfection, and eternal life, and the soul established, and come out of
ignorance, but who comes into the light and spirit of God within that gave
forth the Scriptures, with which they came to know God the Father of spirits,
of whom they learned that gave forth the Scriptures, and so come into the
spirit, and the bond of peace and unity with the Scriptures, with God, and one
with another: And the spirit of God does not bring men to dislike of Scriptures
nor Ministers of Christ, But to see what estate and condition they were spoken
forth too.

Pr. Thou say, The measure of Christ must be so, that you ought to lay down
your lives for the brethren, and love one another, much more to lay down your
estates.

Answ. When was there a Priest in the Nation that did lay down his estate for
the love of Christ or his brethren, but he had a selfish principle in another
thing? Or when saw you a Priest lay down his estate to save others out of
prison; but he is rather casting into prison till death because they cannot
give them Tithes? The Apostle does not say, have not we power to take Tithes?
But have not we power to eat and drink? And they that preach the Gospel, live
of the Gospel. And they bring glad tidings to them; but that is not glad
tidings to cast into prison, and hale before Courts; and they that preached the
Gospel lived on the Gospel, that opened the hearts of people without men's
compelling power.

Pr. He says, You must not give ear to the Quakers, for they tell you your
Ministers look for their gain from their quarters, and are Hirelings, and this
he says is deceiving, and the depth of Satan, and a lying malicious spirit.

Answ. The Prophets spirit was not a lying and malicious spirit that cried
against them that sought for their gain from their quarters, and said they were
Hirelings, in which spirit is the Quakers, and sees you walk in the same
steps, and take away your gain from you, and your hire; and you are suing in
the Courts, and haling up and down, which shows your spirits to be the false
spirits the Apostle speaks of which went out into the earth.

Pr. Thou say, Above all things beware of covetousness.

Answ. If you had heeded that, you would have been better examples to the
Nations about you; but in covetousness you are swallowed up, and so are
excommunicated out of the life of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles was
in, and so your reward from him you shall have. And you are finding fault that
the people are covetous, and thus complains to the whole Nation: You should
have complained of your selves for being out of the power of God that should
have struck down that, and that you are not in the life and power the Apostles
was in, and it has not such an effect with it as the Apostles had: So you have
manifested and showed your spirits to the Nations, and shows you want your
covering. And the Apostles did not write abroad to the world, that they and
their Church was covetous, and send it to the Magistrates, and complained to
them, had not they here dishonored their power of the Church, if they had done
so, and shamed it, as you do yours?

Pr. He says, Many false prophets are gone out into the world, believe not
every spirit; and Satan transforms himself into an Angel of light.

Answ. These things the Apostles saw come into the world before their decease,
the Devil transforming himself into an Angel of light, and false prophets and
false spirits gone out into the world, which since the days of the Apostles all
that dwelt upon the earth went after them, the false Prophets and the Beast:
but who has their names written in the Lambs book of life before the
foundation of the world; and the Apostle when Satan was transforming himself
into an Angel of light among the Corinthians, he brought them to the light, in
them which would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in
the face of Jesus Christ; and John saw they was come which Christ said should
come, the false Prophets and false spirits, who bid them not go after them; and
John told them they had the anointing within them, to teach them, and needed
not any man to teach them, but as the same anointing taught them; and they
should continue in the Son, and in the Father, where no false spirit was: these
false spirits, Prophets and Antichrists which Christ said should come, which John
saw was come, and went forth from them, has drawn tongues, peoples, multitudes,
and Nations to be waters, and there is the fruits of them, as Revel. 17.18. And
now are people but coming from these waters, and false spirits to the R^ck, and
these are them that draw the Nations to waters; As has turned against the
Saints and the Lamb; But the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory;
nevertheless these false prophets, beasts, Antichrists, false spirits, all
inwardly ravened from the true spirit, has had the sheep clothing, else
they could not have deceived the world, and led the world after them, and could
not have brought Nations to waters, and herein has been the beasts power over
all kindreds, tongues and Nations, and his heads and names in the Nations and
among the tongues, yet all these heads and Names has agreed together in one
against Christ the light which enlighteneth every man that comes into the
world; and the Devil, beasts and false Prophets, which made War against the
Saints and overcame them; but the Saints and the Lamb shall overcome them, and
the Devil shall be taken, and with him the beast and the false Prophets, and
Babylon confounded, and the Lamb, and the Saints have victory. rejoice ye
Saints and holy Prophets over them, the Lamb and the Saints shall have the
Kingdom and power over all kindreds, tongues and Nations who are redeemed from
them, and from the earth, to reign with Christ, and a top of the Devil and his
Angels, which cannot get into the seed.

Pr. He says, It is a boast of the Quakers to say that they have the eternal
Spirit of God in them, and says they may properly use the word you to one, and
taking off the hat is reverend, due, and honor, and he must not quench the
smoking Flax, but be courteous, and custom to whom custom, and to the Law,
and to the testimony.

Answ. He that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his, and that's Eternal;
and he that says you, to one, shows he has neither learnt accidence nor
Bible, and the hat is the honor of men below in the earth; Adams honor in the
transgression which Christ the second Adam says I received not honor of men;
how can ye believe that receive honor one of another, and seeks not that
honor that is of God only; and so the mark of an unbeliever and the Apostles
did not observe the Jews customs nor the heathens customs, for if they had,
they needed not have been persecuted by them. Courteous is good, and to do one
another good; but how is this practiced amongst you when you cast into prison
these that cannot put into your mouths, and you do no work for them? Where is
your courteousness? here; they break not the bruised reed nor quench not the
smoking Flax, that owneth the light that does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, and these neglect not their salvation, but they that deny the
light that enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, neglects their
salvation, and such be they that breaks the bruised reed, and quenches the
smoking Flax, and that brings to own the Law and testimony, which many may
have the Scriptures, and not the Law and testimony; for the Law is light, and
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, and this was before the New
Testament was written, as Esaias the eight, and that was before Matthew, Mark,
Luke, and John or any of the Epistles was written; and as for the rest of thy
lies, slanders and hard speeches, they shall fall upon thy self, and be thy own
burden, the witness in thy conscience shall answer me in the day of thy
judgment; And they that have not the Eternal Spirit are none of his.

Thomas Weld, Richard Prideaux, Samuel Hammond, William Coals, and William
Durant, their Book called, A discovery of a generation of men called Quakers.
In it are their Principles as follows.
Pr. FIrst, That the soul is a part of the Divine Essence.

Asw. That which comes from God, which God has in his hands, which Christ is
the Bishop of, is of God, and Divine and immortal, which many of the Priests
say is appetite, lust and pleasure, and the soul of Christ, say they, is
humane, which is earthy, and so you that are come from one mother are not
agreed here among your selves, and people begins to see you, the time has been
they knew not which of you to believe, but now they believe in Christ, who is
the Bishop of their souls.

Pr. There lies a Mystery of iniquity for to say, The world calls them so, by
such and such names, or gives them their Christian name.

Answ. There are names given by the heathen, the heathen outwardly, which men
are called, there is a new name which the world knows not; written in the Book
of life; here is the new man? known, after God in rigteousness created and true
holiness; Now who is this new man? and this new name? the world may call him
by the old; So it is not a mystery of iniquity to say the world calls him so.

Pr. It is a sinful neglecting of their families to wander up and down; And the
forsaking of apparel changeable, he calls it monkish holiness.

Answ. When people runs into transgression from the life of God into the earth;
Then comes up the lusts of the eye, the lusts of the world, and the pride of
life, which leads them into all the fashions of the world; which is not of the
Father but of the world; Now the lusts and the affections must be mortified,
which have outwardly transgressed the pure principle of God within, whereby the
minds has gone out into the creatures, and things without, whereby it falls
under the creatures, and so comes to worship the creatures thereby more then
the Creator, who is God blessed for evermore; being gone from the Principle of
God in their own particulars, that is it which mortifies the world, when men
turn to it; and this brings off all the lusts of the world, and excess, and
affections, and professions, whether they be such as thou calls monkish, or
notionists, or whatsoever, it brings into the possession, into the life which
mortifies; for this which thou calls monkish holiness, is like unto your own,
who have not the spirit as they lived in who gave forth the Scriptures; so all
holiness which stands out of that, is self righteousness; And the Apostles and
the faithful in all ages that wandered up and down, did the will of God, spoke
the word of God, were commanded and moved of the Lord, forsook all for Christ;
Christ did not teach men sin; And he that does not forsake all, is not worthy
of him, House, Lands, wife, children, whatsoever, he that esteems any of those
more then Christ, he lives still below, he lives still not given up, he is not
worthy of him, and they that do not forsake all and come out of all, are in the
sinful neglect of the family of the Lord of heaven and earth, and they stick
below in their own cieled houses, habitations, nests, holes and rocks, falling
into the mountains, and there garnishing the Sepulchers, and living in all
fashions, customs, honors and pleasures of the world; And the Priests work
has been this, to teach the people to keep in the lust, and not to forsake and
come out of all their lusts to Christ who are not worthy of him, and if any do,
they look upon them to be sinful neglecters of their family; which wisdom was
before all things were made, and is the preserver and finisher of all things,
and not the destroyer, but tha it rebukes, and in this are men ordered to Gods
glory.

Prin. The Quakers deny the imputed righteousness, prayer, baptism,
Church Government, Ministry.

Answ. That ever ye five that are called Ministers should ever thus publish
your lies to the Nation! The higher powers, the one government, the Church, the
Pillar and ground of truth; The Ministry that is in the spirit, that Ministers
to the spirit in the prison, baptized with the spirit into the one body, prayer
in the spirit, the Lords Supper, who dwells in the Saints and walks in them,
and Sups in them, the Gospel the power of God, imputed righteousness to the
believer; Abraham believed, and it was accounted to him for righteousness, and
Christ come, and Christ in you, who is the end of the belief, who is the
justification it self, and righteousness it self, nigher then when they did
believe; And so here is justification it self without imputation the
righteousness of God, here the belief ends; And all these things are owned
according to the Scriptures; but all such teachers that be in the earth, and
teaches for money and means, we deny; and baptiseth, and sells your prayers,
and Preaching and Supper for money, we deny.

Pr. Will a discerning of the Gospel mysteries, prove a power to discern the
state, and condition of souls, what it shall be to all eternity? is not this a
large ignorance?

Answ. The Ministers of the spirit did watch for the souls, the Prophets and
Apostles knew its state, and knew Christ the Bishop of it; and saw when the
soul was in death, and saw when God had pleasure in it, when it lived, and saw
the soul in Gods hand, for who have the mysteries of the Gospel, which is the
power of God, which gives liberty to the captive, to the soul, and all that is
imputed in man; this is glad tidings to the Just, this is a true workman, that
divides his work aright, and is not ashamed of his work, of his building, but
presents the soul to God, and knows when it is in death, and when it is
living; And so who are come up into the Bishop Christ, they are one soul, they
know the hand of God which the soul lives in (which is the power) and so knows
it from eternity to eternity; And so ye Priests which do not discern the soul
and its state to eternity and from eternity, ye are not in the mystery of the
Gospel which gives liberty to it, neither have ye it; for ye are stumbling at
the light, which enlighteneth every man that comes into the world, which comes
from Christ the Bishop of the soul, and so your darkness cannot comprehend
that, and so what fellowship has the light with darkness? it is not a strange
thing; It has no fellowship with it, for your darkness cannot comprehend it,
though it shines in your darkness; So for you to talk of Saints judging the
world, and meddling with such things, who are to be judged with the Saints, who
are that darkness that cannot comprehend the light that shines in you, who have
not light to comprehend the Saints that be in the light, who have the just
weight, measure, and balance, who are the Judges of the world, reaching,
measuring, answering, agreeable to that of God in every man; And are stumbling
at such as are become the Sons of God, Adopted Sons and heirs, and of the flesh
and bone of Christ, and of his mind and spirit, who are in the possession of
the Scriptures, the durable life of the Saints, which makes you (darkness that
cannot comprehend the light in your own particulars) to rage; which none comes
to witness Sons-ship, heir-ship, Sons of God, but who comes to the light in
their own particulars, and receives it, and with it comprehends darkness, It
expels it away, sees over the night, and are the children of the day. And you
five Priests have shamed your selves that do not know the soul from eternity to
eternity.

Pr. It is blasphemy to say the soul is a part of the Divine Essence.

Answ. Ye may read in this Book how the rest of the Priests that are called
Ministers, some of them say Christ is humane, the soul is a creature, some
again say it is part of the Divine Essence, it is immortal; and again, it is
appetite and pleasure, and in this now is their confusion made manifest; The
soul is that which came out from God, and is in Gods hand, which hand goes
against him that does evil, and transgresses against the Principle of God that
is in him, which goes against the lust, which Wars against the soul, which hand
the soul being in, praises God, the hand felt, the power felt that turns
against that which Wars against it; here the soul magnifies God, and the soul
rejoices in God the Savior, the soul praises God, here is Gods pleasure. The
living Lord takes pleasure in the living soul, and appetite and pleasure are
humane; these are not immortal, which the soul is, and so you five have judged
your selves to be blasphemers who said the soul was part of the Divine Essence,
and yet it is blasphemy to say so.

Pr. Christ is to rule as a King; but in all he does not.

Answ. Those and you that hate the light will not hear him, nor have him to
rule over you and them, such are for the sword, and to be slain before him.

Pr. And the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
is not sufficient to salvation, nor gives a light sufficient to bring to the
Gospel, know the Mediator, and that light which has enlightened all men
withal, is not the way, but a created light by Christ.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, all
lights were made by it, and created, and this is the eye of the soul, which
gives to see Christ the Bishop of it, from whence it comes; and this light is
the Covenant of God which does enlighten every man that comes into the world,
and this light does let see the Mediator, the salvation, the Gospel: And all
that be from the light are out of the truth; they that went out of the truth,
the god of the world has blinded their eyes, lest the light of the glorious
Gospel should shine in them, which is the image of God. So created Lights were
created by it, and none knows the truth but by this light; and all men's
professions be but from that nature, that be from this light which has
enlightened every man that comes into the world, which all men must come into,
before they come into unity with God: And none can know the Mediator nor Christ
by the created and made lights, which were made by the light Christ; but as
they come into the Light by which they were made, that gives them the wisdom
of the Creation, and lets them see how they were made; and so they that hate
the Light, receive not the spirit of God, but remain in their natural state;
and what such know, they know as natural, from Books, Authors, and Studies: So
men come not to the Author of their Faith, Christ, who hates the Light.

Pr. How ridiculous is it to say, Christ dwells in all, so in all.

Answ. Christ is the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world; and the Scripture says, Christ he is searching the hearts of the
wicked, and trying their reins, and bringing to them their thoughts to the
light that shines in the darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not. He was
in the Saints, and the Saints were in the light, so he is in all, over all, and
through all, and blindness, darkness comprehends it not, who fills heaven and
earth. If thou go to the utmost parts of the earth he is there; if thou
go to the deep, and to the nethermost hell, he is there, where will thou
fly from his presence? Have not the holy men of God found this? Are all ye
Ministers of the Letter so ignorant of the Letter? so short, and come short of
the state that gave it forth? And I say, such as sit under the shadow of
darkness shall feel if they do but hearken and listen; and such whose hearts
be bad, shall feel him searching of them, and knocking such as go down to the
nethermost Hell, and to the utmost parts of the earth, they shall feel him if
they never stirred forth, present, and should not need to wander for a
habitation, but should feel their hab^tation. Such then should come to know
their souls progress, which is an inward travel, before it come into its
Bishop Christ the rest, him by whom the world was made before it was made, and
was glorified with the Father before the world began.

Pr. And it is an error to say, that the righteousness of Christ,
justification, sanctification, and redemption, that this is all within.

Answ. If Christ be within, if not they are Reprobates; and reprobates can
talk of Christ, and them that be out of the truth and the life, they can talk
of Christ, and bring the Scriptures; but who have Christ within, they have
sanctification, redemption, and justification, they have the wisdom and power
of God; for Reprobates are talkers without, for he that has Christ has all
the other, redemption, sanctification, wisdom, righteousness is spoken to
man, and the work is known within as he comes out of the fall of the first Adam.

Pr. Its error to say the light that discovers sin, justifies.

Answ. The light which is the Covenant of God that does enlighten every man
that comes into the world, discovers sin, makes it manifest, blots it out,
justifies, sanctifies, redeems, and condemns them that hate it.

Pr. It Is an error that the light within men will bring men to the fear of
God, and lead men to justification, sanctification, and righteousness.

Answ. None comes to Justification, to Righteousness, who are out of the fear
of God, nor to receive his righteousness; but who comes to the light within,
which comes from Christ the righteousness, the wisdom, the justification, and
sanctification; and ye be in the error that be not in this Light that leads
too, and lets see it.

Pr. Perfection in holiness cannot be attained in this life, for Adam was under
such a Covenant, he had no Mediator upon the breach of the command.

Ans. God said to Adam, the seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head,
Christ, the Promise, the Mediator made the way, which was the way in again to
God of man's redemption, and got down the Serpents head which got up in
transgression, that Christ the head should bear rule; that the seed of the
woman should have dominion, the second Adam, the seed Christ Jesus, the Lord
from heaven. Perfection is not to be attained to by the life ye live, until ye
come to the principle of God in you; but the life that David lived in saw an
end of all perfection: And all who come to Christ the second Adam, they come to
perfection; and all who attain to him, they attain to perfection in the life of
God out of the first Adam; but who deny the light that enlightneth every man
that comes into the world, and rest in the first Adam; the life they live in,
denies perfection, and never owns it in the life they live in; But who comes
into perfection, comes into Christ a new life out of Adam in the Fall, in
transgression. All Physicians to sick men are to make them perfect; And do ye
say, make none whole, make none perfect, make never a man perfect? For being
made whole, they are made perfect, for sin wounds; for the Ministry of God was
to bring people to the perfect man, to present them perfect. These were
Physicians of value and of worth, whereby the body, soul, spirit and all were
cured, and they glorified God in the body and spirit.

Now ye that say they shall not be perfect, and that none shall be without sin
upon the earth, no perfection in the life we live in; These are Physicians of
no value, ye are not worthy to have the name of Physicians, Ministers nor
Teachers, Thomas Weld, Richard Prideaux, Samuel Hammond, William Cole, and
William Durant; for ye are pleading while men be upon earth they must have a
body of sin, and he that says otherwise is a deceiver, and so ye keep them in
their wounds and sores, putrefying and imperfect, and not makers up of the
breach, and binders up of the wound; And the Lord says, Though their sins be
as red as crimson, I will make them as white as wool, and will blot out sin and
transgression. And this tender love and kindness of the Lord, and mercifulness
to sinners and transgressors, has the Lord made manifest amongst them which
the world in scorn calls Quakers; and it is not a strange thing that you would
not have people to forsake the fashions of the world, who are thus hung about
with ribbons and cuffs, and scarfs, and your double Boot-hose-tops, and more
like unto Stage Players then Ministers.

Pr. Perfection is a fancy, those were not words of true Physicians who brought
men to a perfect man, to the growth up in perfection amongst the perfect ones
who speak wisdom. They say, It is no where said that the Law is fulfilled in
any Saints in this life.

Answ. They that love God keep his Commandments. Christ is the end of the Law
to every one that believes, and who be in him be in the end of the Law; And all
that dwell in love, dwell in God, and love is the fulfilling of the
commandment; who are of the seed of God keep the words of God, which the
Beasts and false Prophets since the days of the Apostles, who have inwardly
ravened and turned against the royal seed of God, and keep the Commandments
of God; and so none of you that raven from the spirit of God cannot keep Gods
commandments, though ye have all the Saints words; for the Saints witness the
end of the Law, and witness perfection and a perfect man, and spoke wisdom
among them that were perfect, and growing up to perfection.

Pr. That Christ gives to every man a saving light, we utterly deny.

Answ. He is the true light that does enlighten every man that comes into the
world (says John the Minister of God) and he is salvation to the ends of the
earth, and they that hate the light, neglect their salvation, and turns the
grace of God into wantonness, and denies the Lord that bought them; And every
one that has heard and learned of the Father comes to the Son; and none
hears or comes to the Father, that comes not to the Son; But who comes to
the thing that is transgressed in them, and the light that every man that
comes into the world is enlightened withal, nor hears nor learns of the
Father, nor comes to the Son but by that, and the light that lighteneth every
one that comes into the world is the salvation to him that believes, and he
that does not, it is his condemnation.

Pr. But how dare these men lift up themselves in their blasphemous pride, to
say they are pure as God.

Answ. Does not Christ say; Be ye perfect as your heavenly Father is perfect,
is that blasphemy? and to be holy as I am holy? is that blasphemy? whose
Ministers are you, is not this the work of Christ and the Apostle, without
Holiness ye shall never see God, and as he is so are we in this present world?

Pr. The word of God is contained in the Scriptures.

Ans. The Scripture says God is the word, and the heaven of heavens cannot
contain him, are ye not more like void of reason, then Ministers, whose
ignorance thus appears of the Scriptures? which says God is the word, and the
Scripture is the words, and Christ is the word who fulfills them.

Pr. The Scriptures were given forth, some more darkly, some plainer.

Answ. They which gave forth Scripture, and they that be in that in which it
ends, to them the Scripture is not dark; but such as be from the Principle of
God in their own selves, they be darkness, so darkness happens to them, which
blinds their minds, and the Scriptures was not given forth darkly, but in the
light; but you who be from the light be dark.

Pr. The Apostles ordained them elders by a mediate call: and we are convinced
clearly of a mediate call to the work of the ministry and of the word.

Answ. That which made the Officers and overseers in the Church amongst the
Saints, before the Apostasy, It was the Holy Ghost; which holy men spoke
Scripture from, that made them Overseers, that was not mediate but immediate,
that did oversee in the Church of God; And we do believe that you Elders and
Members called Ministers are all mediate, and your order and Gospel since the
days of the Apostles who are such as Christ said should come, inwardly
ravening forth from the Spirit of God, and have got sheep clothing; which
since the days of the Apostles they have walked after you, who have deceived
the world and Nations. But we see, that the false Ministers, the worshippers of
the Beast, Antichrist and the deceivers, among whom is the Devil to deceive, is
now taken, with the false prophets, the Beast and Antichrist the Mother of
Harlots, and confounded and cast into the lake of fire, and the Lamb and the
Saints shall have the victory; And the Gospel is immediate, and he is cursed
that Preaches another, the word I say is immediate, it lives, abides and
endures for ever, and the Ministers that are in the spirit are immediate, and
these are furnished with the mysteries of the Gospel, and their calling is
immediate, and the Overseers of the Church which the Holy Ghost makes, are
immediate, and all that be in the life that gave forth Scripture (which nones
knows the Scriptures but by it) they are all immediate; that which does
convince of sin is immediate; But now your mediate Calls, your mediate Ministry
and Overseers, knowledge, Word, Gospel, and people, Church are mediate, we do
believe you, all this is so amongst you since the days of the Apostasy from
the Apostles Doctrine, power, life and spirit which they were in, with which ye
are judged, and who are in the life they are in that gave forth Scriptures;
which you are ravened from; and are not like to talk of immediate.

Pr. The Scripture is the Word and the Rule.

Answ. The Scriptures are the Words of God, and Christ is the Word in whom they
end; and the Word of God is the end which fulfills all Scriptures, which came
to the Prophets, which the Apostles Preached, which they discerned and spoke
forth the words, and the fulfilling of the words; which the Scriptures of truth
cannot be broken, but fulfilled by Christ the word: and the spirit is the rule
that gave forth Scriptures, and that led the Saints into all truth.

Pr. Thomas Castle went naked in the streets of Kendal, and Thomas Holmes of
Kirkby Steven.

Answ. This has been a figure of your nakedness; who are Egypt spiritual and
the Ethiopian black, and the Prophet Esaiah did not put off all his clothes
(say they) conrary to the Prophets words; and he was to go among all the
transgressors in Ethiopia and Egypt, a figure of their nakedness; so since the
days of the Apostles and the Apostasy ye have gone from the spirit of God,
inwardly ravening from that, ye have wanted the clothing with the spirit, ye
have had only the outside, the sheep clothing, but have been naked of the
life, such the Lord has moved his servants to give a true sign amongst you,
and not a lying; who have their clothing of the spirit, which ye want; which
ye shall witness the truth of the Lord God in the sign, if ever ye come into
the true clothing of the spirit of God.

Pr. And ye say Christ did not mean as he speak, when he said, be not ye called
of men Masters.

Answ. Which shows they are none of his Ministers which trample upon his
Commandments, and teach people that it is lawful to break them, showing the
lawfulness of them to be called of men Masters; so as for their calling of men
Masters, standing praying in the Synagogues, their long robes, salutations,
their Tithes and their Pulpits, these are the works of the perfect Pharisees,
which all people may look upon their fruits, their works and practices, and see
the very image, and that they have their very garments and places, according to
their condition, fruits and works; and as for all the rest of their hard
speeches, lies, slanders, villifyings and railings which they have poisoned
people withal, will be their own burden, and fall heavy upon them, and turn
upon their own heads; Their way is compassed, their bounds is set and their
limits, and in this the day of their account, every one shall feel his words to
be his burden, And their patience had been better then to have uttered forth
their folly, and published it to the Nation; But the day is come that tries
every man's work; and a witness is rising in people, the morning is broak, the
Sun is rising, the Day Star is risen, that lies people do not make their
refuge, neither do feed upon them, nor upon any thing, but what comes from God,
but the living bread that comes from God above; which who eats of it, lives for
ever; Many have their bread and their water, that hunger no more, nor thirst no
more.

The Worcestershire Petition to the PARLIAMENT, which are said to be six
thousand.
Pr. HE has made a Law commanding all people to whom we Preach the Gospel to
allow us a sufficient maintenance, that we may not be hindered from or in his
work.

Answ. The Scriptures and the Apostles did not speak of any such thing, that
Christ did make a Law for them, commanding all the world to whom they Preached
to allow them a sufficient maintenance, that they might not be hindered from or
in their work; What! will maintenance hinder them if they have it not? was not
this the command of Christ to give freely as they from him had received freely?
and then if any set meat before them they might eat it; But if this Law
commanding all the world, a sufficient maintenance and allowance to the
Apostles and Disciples had been first (which they might have been sure of
maintenance) this had been the way to have clogged the the peoples minds, and
have brought them into trouble; which the Gospel was otherways, glad tidings;
but if the Apostles had not Preached to the world without this law which ye
speak of, which commands all the world to give them sufficient maintenance,
what a condition would all people have been in? But they that had received
freely, was to give freely, so you have manifested your spirits to be the
deceivers of the people for means, That ever 6000 people should say he made a
Law commanding all the world to whom they Preach the Gospel to allow them
sufficient maintenance; When Christ says they were to Preach as they went, as
the disciples went, and they were to Preach if they did not receive them; and
they were to go into all Nations; yet the Apostles did not plead a Law where
they came that they were all to maintain them; no, they were in fasting often,
and would not use their power to eat among many people, though they had power
yet they would not use it, and so the maintenance did not hinder the Apostles
from their work, for they Preached often in fastings, and sometimes their own
friends communicated to them when they were up and down among the heathen in
other Nations Preaching; the Apostles did not plead a Law to the Nations whom
they Preached to, and thus they brought glad tidings, keeping the Gospel from
charge: are not you six thousand men ashamed to Petition for a maintenance for
your Ministers, that you should publish in a Petition your nakedness to a
supreme power of a Nation, that you are not able to maintain your Ministry,
that the Churches are not able to maintain their Ministers? does not this show
your beggarliness, and to be of the seed that is begging bread? which the
Scriptures says the righteous are not forsaken, nor their seed begging bread;
and in this have you not shamed your Ministers that they have no better
vineyards, plowes, and flayls, or did ever the Apostles or their hearers when
they came into a Nation Petition to the powers of the earth for means?

Pr. And ye say where any man will not do justly, and pay the labourer the
wages he owes him, The Magistrate must see justice done, or else I know not
what he has to do.

Answ. The Apostles Ambassadors and messengers of the Lord Jesus Christ which
were to go to all the Nations to Preach the Gospel, they had not a Law at the
Magistrates hands to give them wages, hale their hearers before them to give
them wages, or put up Petitions before every Supreme of the Nation before whom
they came, this was not the work of the Apostles, messengers and Disciples, who
were to go into all Nations to Preach the Gospel, when they had Preached the
Gospel to the Nation, they did not Petition to the Supreme powers of the
Nation, Powers or Principalities or Kings for maintenance from their hearers as
you do now; Oh! this stinks and shows it is out of the power which the
Apostles, disciples and messengers of the Lord Jesus Christ were in.

For they would have made their Gospel to have stunk, if they had come into all
Nations to Preach the Gospel, and then after they had Preached it, if their
hearers would not have given them maintenance, to have Petitioned to the
Supreme authority of the Nation, and have haled their hearers into Courts, to
Assizes, Sessions and Benches, would this have been glad tidings to the
Nations, or trouble to the Nations? and have been but deceivers, and pretenders
of glad tidings, and bringers of trouble to the Nation, and seekers of
themselves, and for themselves? and not to do the work which the Lord Jesus
Christ sent them about, Preachers of the Gospel that live of the Gospel, might
use their power and would not, and the power of God is the same now as ever it
was, and it tries all the spirits that are gone out into the world which have
Apostated since the days of the Apostles, out of the Apostles power; and now
with the power the Apostles were in, are they comprehended, which are gone out
of the power which the Apostles were in.

Pr. And ye speak of Jonas temptation and yet of your comfort in your studies.

Answ. The power that Jonas was in, ye are far off, or them that are to divide
the word aright, but swallowed up in the great temptation of the world, pride
and covetousness, in that are ye drowned, and hard heartedness, as the Goales
in the Nation are your witness; such as cannot give you maintenance, and such
as are moved of the Lord God to come and speak to you, by you are cast into
Goal, which shows that you are in another power then the Apostle was in, who
said quench not the spirit, and the Prophet was in, who said Limit not the holy
One; and denying prophecy; so now your power and authority to your Ministry
with the spirit of the Lord God is fathomed, and you to be out of the spirit
the Apostles were in, and to be spirits that are gone out into the world and
into the earth and fall, and so you usurp the authority, and usurp the
Ministry, in usurping the authority as your selves may see, read the Scripture
of the Prophets and Apostles, and there read the fruit of your Ministry and
Actions, try them by plain Scripture.

Pr. Ye say that the Ministry has no power to put you out of the Vineyard, but
to persuade others to do it.

Ans. Are the Ministry in the Vineyard of God, and have they no power, have
they no authority there in the Vineyard? Are the Magistrates then to put them
into the Vineyard, and to take them out? And all them that are laborers in the
Vineyard must persuade to put into the Vineyard, do not you in this show your
ignorance of the Apostles Doctrine, and of their work, who rebuked, stopped the
mouths of gainsayers, had power to silence, had power to try spirits, had
power to judge, had power to defend? Now have you not in this (if you be
Ministers) dishonored your power and authority; and have showed that you be
out of the power, and to be them that cries to the mountains fall on us, and
hide us from the glorious presence of the Lord, which is arising to shake
terribly the earth.

Pr. So if the Ministers maintenance be taken away, there is little likelihood
of a Ministry long.

Answ. It seems the maintenance has been that which has caused them to
Preach, and held them up, so take away their maintenance, down falls their
Ministry. But I say the power will stand, and the Administration of the spirit,
and the hearing of Christ, and the teaching of God, if men take away all their
maintenance, and cast them into prison for speaking; But this holding up of
Ministers by maintenance is that which came up before the Apostles decease:
which taught for filthy lucres sake and through covetousness made merchandise
of the people, through the love of money they erred from the faith, and pierced
themselves through with many hurtful lusts, and admired men's persons because of
advantage, and taught for gifts and rewards, these were come up before the
Apostles decease, now these Teachers admired men's persons, taught for filthy
lucre, the love of money and covetousness, which the Apostle saw before his
decease, which since the world run after them; take away their money and their
lucre, and their gifts, see how long these will Preach: Now have you showed
your Root, your offspring is found out. Now the Apostle Preached, and the
Ministers stood up which judged the Root from whence ye are sprunge, for your
Root was come up before the Apostles decease: And now try ye, if maintenance be
taken away, there is no likelihood the Ministry will stand long; And we say so
too, we know it, take away your maintenance, down falls the Preacher. Therefore
with Petitions are you troubling the Courts and Magistrates for your
livelihood, which if ye were true Ministers ye would be in the work, in the
Vineyard of God, and would be ashamed of such things, and with the power of
God, cover your nakedness, and not be Beggars, and Petition for outward things,
ye dishonor the power of the Lord God, and cause his name to be blasphemed
among the heathen. And so for shame let your mouths be stopped for ever, for
saying you are Ministers. The power would open the hearts of people if ye were
in that, and make them to give you, that there would be no want; And then the
Gospel would be Preached and you live in that, and glad tidings be known to all
Nations, and men would not be combered about Courts, and put in prison by you,
whom you do no work for.

P^. Ye say shall men have leave to Preach, railing against Christ's Ministers
and Church? reproaches to the world, and has Gyles Calvert owned his name at
them? and ye speak of your liberty of the Pulpit; But that the Pulpit should be
Satan's Oracle; as Apthecaries shop keeps open poison^ so Gyles Calvert does for
soul-poison.

Answ. This is not the way by railing, to stop poison; but your Pulpits have
been like shops of poison even to poison Nations; for have you not poisoned
many people and made their minds envious, and most of your stuff has been
railing one against another? which had ye been Ministers or spoken the truth in
the love of it, it would have preserved people in peace and unity, and not have
sought your selves.

And Gyles Calvert (as you call) an Apothecaries shop, has been a place
whereby many of your actions and fruits have been discovered, and made
manifest, not against the Church of God, not against the Ministers of God and
Christ, not against the Magistrates that live in the fear, and life, and power
of God, but against the injustice and the persecution; and the apostates gotten
up since the days of the Apostles as ye confess, if your maintenance be taken
away, the Ministry will fall. Now the power is that that causes people to
minister to any that ministers to them, not by compulsion, but freely, and
this is acceptable and pleasing to God, which the Lord loves. And so all your
poison of your Pulpits, as Satan's oracles, has been like such a thing; for the
Pulpiters are them which have caused the great persecution and imprisoning for
speaking to them; and because they will not give them maintenance, and so
quenching the spirit, and that which quenches the spirit is not of God; for in
the true Church all may prophecy one by one; and if any thing be revealed to
him that sits by, the other must hold his peace, that all may learn and be
comforted. The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets; And this
was the order in the Churches of God, before the Apostles decease: But since
their decease amongst you that are apostatized from them, this is disorder, and
sets you all on an uproar and confusion; So your Church and Pulpit is more like
Satan's oracle, then the Church of God; and you have been in your Pulpits more
like women's scolding to the Cuck-stool, which you speak of, then men that
preach the Gospel; as the Parishes may witness how they have been burdened
with your railing against other people which have not been present with you:
And when any of them have come to you, you have cried take them away, they
disturb you. Is not this worse then women's scolding; for women will stand and
scold one with another, but ye will scold behind their backs, and cannot endure
to speak to their faces, but cry to prison with them.

But the Rod is gone over you, and you are come under the scourge, the whip and
the lash for your evil words, which have corrupted your manners, when ye
should have been preaching the peaceable way to the Kingdom of God, ye have
been bringing people to strife, throwing them into prison for speaking a word
to you, that cannot give you maintenance, which you do no work for. But the
sentence spoken in Matthew. is coming upon you, ye cast into Prison to death
because they cannot give you maintenance, therefore ye are far short of
visiting them which be in Prison; And these covers will not cover you, and all
your hard speeches which you have vented forth in your Book, which is not worth
mentioning; but they will come upon your selves; for every one of your words
shall be your burden. Now fools may subscribe their hands to things they know
not, and go with a multitude to do evil; but wise men consider and ponder the
things beforehand: So all your Petitions, the holy Scriptures of the Prophets,
Christ and the Apostles, read and try them, whether ye have ever an example
amongst any of the Ministers of the Gospel, that ever put up a Petition to any
supreme of a Nation; or that Christ ever gave them any such command, that his
Disciples should go and beg with a Petition to the supreme powers of the Nation
for maintenance? Have not you in this dishonored the Gospel and Christianity,
and showed that you are not of the royal Priesthood, nor of the royal seed,
nor everlasting Covenant? nor you Ministers to them that do freely give, which
have freely received? but to be such whose spirits be in the earth: And you
Petitioners are not able to maintain them; which all Magistrates that stand in
the fear of the Lord God will judge, and so see that you have shamed your
selves, your Ministry and Church, and that you are not a Vineyard, that you
have not a Flock to give you milk, to give you fruit, but they must be fain to
give you fruit: And the Magistrates must be fain to give your Ministers milk,
and so showed the sloathfulnesse of them that have plowed, and are not made
partakers of their hope, but have lost it. In vain have they plowed and
threshed, and not got out the Corn. And in all this have not you showed your
idleness, that ye have not labored and got a Vineyard, and thresht and got no
corn; and have not plowed and sowed the seed? And will not the Magistrates see
you in this? and have not they wronged you in maintaining you in idleness?
Will not the Magistrates see that they have done so to you in this, and become
pack-horses no longer, and executioners, who has executed your malice upon
them you do no work for, neither have hired you? and cast them into prison when
they have spoken to you to repent and fear God? and so it is time for the
Magistrates to do justice, and execute the Law upon you idle vagabonds.

William Thomas, a Minister of the Gospel at Vbley (called) in his Book called,
Railing rebuked, or, a defense of the Ministers. His Principles are as
Follows.
Pr. HE says, His Epistle reflects upon two sorts of persons, and how many
false Prophets have risen.

Ans. The work of the Ministers of the Gospel was not to reflect upon persons,
or strike at creatures (as thou say) two sorts of persons; but they struck
at the power which captivated the creature, to the intent that the creature
might come into the liberty of the sons of God: And so thou that art reflecting
upon persons, do show a mark of thy self to be a false Prophet; in stead of
speaking of the power, thou art reflecting upon persons; and this reflecting
upon persons was never the way to beget to God; but that which strikes at the
power which captivates creatures, reaches to the witness in prison, and
brings people into unity with God and one another in the spirit, which is the
bond of peace.

Pr. To love the Word, for the good parts, that in regard of the Christian is a
dangerous thing, and in regard of the Word of God, a dishonorable thing.

Answ. Where the good parts are not in the Christian, that is a dishonorable
thing to the Word, and causes the Word of God to be evil spoken of: As the
whole Assembly of you Ministers have done by your bad conversations, earthly,
covetous, impatient spirits, that cannot endure any should speak but your
selves in your places, so by you has the Word of God been dishonored, and not
honored; for the Apostles did write that they were to show themselves Patterns
and Examples to the Flock of God in life and conversation, that the Word of God
might not be evil spoken of. Now where the Word is evil spoken of, and the bad
parts in a Christian proceeds, this grieves the righteous, and causes the
truth to be evil spoken of, and the Word makes them vessels of honor in whom
it is.

Pr. Now when Christians leave the Word and Sacraments and Sabbaths, it is a
dangerous pride, lifting up the Light within, as they do.

Answ. The Christians that denied the Sabbaths, and witnessed Christ the
substance, the rest, said, The light that shined in their hearts would give
them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus
Christ. And they lifted up Christ the Light, and they walked in him the
Covenant of God, and of light to the Jews and Gentiles come; which who walk in
it, are in peace with God, and unity one with another, and have the light of
life and rest, and all be in the dangerous state that be out of that. And as
for the word Sacrament, there is no Scripture for it, but one of the Papists
common words, and the Light brings off it, and the Jewish Sabbath.

Pr. Buy the truth, and sell it not, not pleading for sufficiency of a common
light, and leaving their Callings as the Monks, and their books flying abroad,
their wings unclipt, and no mention of eternal salvation from the wrath to
come. And he says, he loves the word Sacraments, Sabbaths, and Ministry.

Answ. Christ came to put an end to the Jewish Sabbaths, and the Apostles
preached their end, and forsook all for Christ, and so to revile such as are in
the same power, and to call it by the unsavory expression, Monkish, thou and
ye are more like to that, that tells us of Sacraments, which is from the
Monkish holiness. And for speaking of clipping the wings of our Books that
flies abroad, that is another unsavory expression, and shows that spirit, that
it is not able to resist that spirit that gives forth the Books. As for the
Word and Ministry, that thou have showed thy self against, though thou
professes the Scripture to be the Word: And those are the words of God, which
Christ the Word fulfilled, and this the Ministers of Christ witness; And ye
never read that the Ministers of the Gospel said they loved the Jewish
Sabbaths, and held up the Sabbaths; those were the Ministers of the Law that
held up the Sabbaths which Christ the Rest came to put an end to, by which the
world was made before it was made, glorified with the Father before the world
began. And you sell the Truth, and take the world, which deny the Light that
lights every man that comes into the world, which is sufficient to him that
believes in it.

Pr. We exercise and order our preaching for the getting of money and
maintenance: And the greetings in the Markets, is but that which humanity
requires, nor to be called of men Rabbi, else Christ would not have taken it.
Must a Minister lose the members of his Church, and the maintenance of his
place both at once?

Answ. Christ said to his Disciples, they should know the false Prophets by
their fruits, and said be not ye called of men Master, to his Disciples, for
one is your Master, even Christ, and denied the Pharisees greetings in the
Market, which thou calls humane right: And the Apostles ordered not their
preachings to get money by them; but they labored to keep the Gospel without
charge, and the Ministers of Christ brought the people off the Jews
Assemblies, and their maintenance both: And ye that be found out of the
Apostles Doctrine in the apostasy, such as come from you, that you do no work
for, how can you expect that they should give you maintenance? or how can you
in righteousness take maintenance of them that you do no work for? So if ye
lose the members, will ye take the maintenance? which of the Apostles did so?
Nay, is it not the way to gain members, to deny the maintenance? Is not that
the way whereby the power of God may be known that raises the seed of God,
whereby the hearts of people may be opened, and whereby the seed is known? And
the Apostle declared against such as taught for filthy lucre, and made
merchandise of the Word, and that which thou calls humanity, which is your
earthly right, seeing your conversation is in earth, and not in heaven.

Pr. It cannot be concluded that there is a light in every man teaching unto
Christ, and unto salvation. And if Christ put a light in every man that comes
into the world, to guide him unto the Father, and unto life. I deny that to be
true; for that is a natural light which is only the light which Christ the
Word communicates to all men. Nay, the light that all men have, though it seem
to make them to know God, as God, yet it is not sufficient to make them to know
that there is a Father or a Son, or the holy Ghost, that there is a Gospel.
And says, I am the light of the world, that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, that is both Jews and Gentiles. And he that walks in the
light shall have the light of life. Now here lies the deceit.

Answ. The light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, the C^venant of God to Jews and Gentiles, which does enlighten every
man that comes into the world; which they that walk in the light, walk in
Christ, and come to see before any natural light was; And he that walks in the
light shall not abide in the darkness, but shall have the light of life; and
with the light he shall know God, he shall know the Son, he shall know the
Gospel, he shall know the holy Ghost, and that light is not natural. And he
that knows God, knows the Father; and none knows him but with the light of
Christ Jesus who reveals him; for God is the Father. And I will give him for a
Covenant, a light to the Gentiles, a new Covenant to the house of Israel and
Judah, which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, a leader of
the people, a leader of them from death to life, to God, out of the fall, the
first man Adam, a bringer in of righteousness, peace and joy, and truth, and
grace to all that believe and receive him; but them that hate the light it is
their condemnation. The light, Christ, the Covenant of God is the leader of the
People out of the fall, out of all deceit unto God, and it is sufficient; It is
the end of the Prophets and the Apostles teaching, the fountain of life, in
which every one sees life.

Pr. Has every man a light sufficient to bring him to God, when none comes to
God but by Christ? If there be a light sufficient within for the enjoyment of
life, For direction to the Father the fountain of life; the holy Ghost says,
Ye shall teach no more every man his neighbor, ye need not that any man teach
you. He does not speak absolutely and strictly.

Answ. Jews and Gentiles who witness the new Covenant of God promised, the
Law in their hearts, it is absolute, they need not say to one another, Know the
Lord, in the Covenant of life and peace with God, in him by whom the world was
made before it was made; But they that have these words in a form, are they
that set to themselves heaps of Teachers: And the teachings of the Apostles to
all Nations were Ambassadors of this Covenant, declaring the substance to the
bringing of people off all Teachers, that they needed not be taught by any man
to know the Lord; and the light Christ which does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, is sufficient to guide to eternal life, and he that
believes in it shall not abide in darkness, but shall have the light of life,
and shall come out of condemnation; and he that hates it abides in darkness,
and knows not whether he goes: And it is sufficient to let every man see his
salvation; For I will give him for a covenant of light, says God, he shall be
my salvation to the ends of the earth, the Covenant of light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world.

Pr. What Christ and the Apostles says, swear not at all, neither by heaven,
or earth, or any other oath. They did not mean as they spoke, but that men
should swear; and they did not speak against all swearing: And the Quakers may
blush, for it is, as if God should speak as he meant by Moses in the Law.

Answ. Christ and the Apostles meant as they spoke, to what state and condition
they spoke, the words was truth to that state, if it was by parables, or
patterns, or figures. Now Christ being the end of Oaths and Types, says, Swear
not at all, who is the Covenant of God, the end of the Prophets, of Abraham, of
David, of Solomon, of Jacob, of Joseph. Oaths and swearing, and Angels which
must bow to him, who s^ith, swear not at all. And the Apostles preached this
Covenant, this Oath of God, Christ Jesus; and the Apostle that was in the
Doctrine of Christ, bid them above all things my brethren swear not at all, but
in all your communication let your yea be yea, and your nay, nay, for
whatsoever is more comes of evil. And they spoke as they meant; for they came
into condemnation that broke the doctrine of Christ. Now Apostates, and
Hypocrites, and false Brethren may swear, that be out of the light, the
Covenant of God, that have the form of godliness, and denies the power, and
such be Antichrists, against his doctrine, and wrest the Scriptures to their
own destruction, and say that Christ and God, and the Apostles did not mean as
they spoke; which God did mean as he spoke, when he spoke to Abraham: And
Christ meant as he spoke, when he said swear not at all: And the Apostle meant
as he spoke, my brethren, above all things swear not at all.

Pr. We are Ministers under the new Covenant, and have the allowance of the
Gospel; and the tithes being only designed unto us, we may with a good
conscience take it. And the tithes are not in themselves Ceremonial. Abraham
paid tithes to Melchisedeck. If there be not a maintenance settled out to the
Ministry, we know we cannot subsist to do service to their souls without a
worldly support, a sufficient maintenance. They call us greedy dogs, because
nursing Fathers and Mothers have provided for our nourishment a maintenance for
us. To work or to beg are two straits, whereof the world might be ashamed, but
especially the Saints.

Answ. The world would not be ashamed, nor the Saints to see you work, who have
taken the peoples bread for whom you do no work, and the Saints do witness
against you. The Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles declares such to be greedy
dogs, that can never have enough; And Christ came to put an end to tithes
before the Law, to Tithes in the Law, to a Priesthood made by the Law, which
had a command to take Tithes, who is a Priesthood for ever after the order of
Melchisedeck, who was the similitude and likeness (and not after the order of
Aaron) who continues a Priest for ever: And so when the first Priesthood was
ended, Tithes and all ended, and the command that gave them; and the
Priesthood, and the Law which was made when Christ reigns over the house of
Jacob, who asore Abraham was, I am, that Abraham paid tithes too, the
similitude and likeness, which Christ is the end of; here the Rock, and the
substance. This is my beloved Son, hear him (says God) who was in the bosom
of the Father: So they that know him, come to preach the Gospel, and live of
the Gospel; who breaks down the earthly part, and opens the hearts of people;
who breaks down the earthly part, and reaches to the seed. And as for your
nursing Fathers and Mothers, such as give you maintenance, else you could not
continue your Ministry without a worldly support, That is it which has held
you up long, and who are fain to fly to the old worship, among whom the Tenths
were paid, and so roving up and down in sheeps clothing for your own ends to
get maintenance; and if that falls, your Ministry falls: And your nursing
Father and Mother was the Pope, the Pope was the Author that set forth your
Tenths at the first, since the apostasy from the Apostles, and the Apostles
doctrine has been lost: Therefore that life the Apostles were in, is people
now come to, by which ye are seen and comprehended: And a worldly support is
not that which holds up the Ministry, but Christ which is with them to the end
of the world; and they that preach his Gospel, live of it, and they are far
above shaming the Saints or the world either, for maintenance; but ye have both
shamed your selves, and the Saints are ashamed of you, and many of the world,
and your own hearers are ashamed of you, and will not justify your practices;
and so ye have showed your consciences who take the tenths, that you are not
exercised with the light, neither be in the mystery of the Faith which gives to
see the end of all changeable things: And are not you begging with your
Petitions for more maintenannce? with your Petitions flying up and down for
Glebe-lands and Augmentations to the powers of the earth? and sending for
Writs, summoning up to the Courts people that you do no work for? and this has
been the end of your fruits.

Pr. He that scorns to make use of the labors of men for his improvement in
the things of God, shows himself proud; If there be occasion to make use of
humane Authors, which we offer to our Hearers.

Answ. Humane Authors are from the earth, from the fallible nature, to mix and
mingle that, with that which is received from God, he shows that he has not
discerning, and makes that not sufficient which he has received from God; and
this is contrary to the Apostles, what the Saints of the Lord had delivered,
they did not mix it with men's enticing words of wisdom, neither did they
speak it in the words which man's wisdom taught, but which the holy Ghost did
teach them: Therefore this is to teach from men's labors or humane Authors; for
men's Labors, and the humane authors invented come out of that nature which
prisons the seed of God; and so that is not agreeable to that which is received
from God; but every ones words there shall be his burden; and so humane
authors are not to be mixed with the word of God, for the word is pure, and
nothing is to be added to, or taken from it, he that does shall be proved a
liar, and the higher power is not humane nor fallible.

Pr. Paul and Pe^er were instructed by an immediate revelation, which we are
not so presumptuous to expect, or to make the Ap stles condition our condition,
humane learning will not acquaint us with the mind of God, yet being sanctified,
it is a great assistance to that end.

Ans. Are not ye in the presumption and usurp authority to preach or to teach
that have not the immediate revelation, as the Apostles had, but have got their
words, and usurps the authority, and are out of their power, is not this
usurping? Are not all who be not of the power, in the words of the Apostles,
such as are to be turned away from by the command of the Apostle? And are not
all who be of God and in the power and the life that the Prophets, Christ, and
the Apostles were in, the immediate revelation of God? Can any know the
Scriptures, or the truth given forth from the spirit of truth, learned of God
the Father of truth, but by the immediate revelation which is the spirit of
God, which reveals the things of God? And thou speak of study and prayer,
can any dvide the word aright or pray aright, but in the spirit? and where that
is, is not there immediate revelation from God? and this thou calls presumption
to be in the revelation as the Apostles were in, which it is presumption to
meddle with their words, and not to be in the condition they were in, that is
persumption, and to usurp athority, and so ye are them that are got up since
the days of the Apostles, ravening inwardly from the spirit of God that they
were in, and have sheeps clothing, which Christ said should come, John saw was
come, and went forth form them, which since the days of the Apostles, the
world have gone after you, all but who have their names written in the book of
life before the foundation of the world, and keep Jesus testimony; And humane
learning does not help in the way and things of God as it is in it self, but as
the spirit does open through all things, and beyond all things, and comprehends
all Languages, and sees before languages were, that is it that ministers to the
spirits in prison, and that is not called humane learning which sees over
languages and beyond languages, and comes to have power over tongues, languages
and speeches, and sees before they were.

Pr. Costome has made it the civility of our language, to say you to one, and
not to say thou to a Superior, except it be a Familier, It is no great fault
to respect men's persons, and the Scripture only makes men wise to salvation;
And it is a pernicious error in placing justification and salvation in
righteousness within.

Ans. That the righteousness of Christ might be fulfiled in us, and where
Christ is within, there is sanctification, and there is justification, and
there is salvation known; for there is no salvation known nor felt without, but
first it is found within; Faith evidenceth it, the spirit witni^sing, the
spirit comes to witness it, the light sees it, and this is within; And so they
that have these words of righteousness, of sanctification of Justification
without, and not within, are in the error, and none knows them without but
first they know them within: and you to a superior, and Thou to a familiar. Is
not God the Superior, the supreme? and do thou say You to God? do thou
esteem man higher, in a place beyond God? is not this ambition and pride and
presumption and foolishness, must thou not come to be judged here, and be
humbled for your miscariages? and Thou to a familiar, a person of low degree,
can thou speak more familiarly to God then to man, Thou to him, and You to
man, is this righteous and sound speech that cannot be condemned? Do thou not
in this show that thou never learned the Accidence or Bible he that respects
persons, commits sin; do thou respect the poor and the rich in thy words, and
is by the law reproved to be a transgressor, and is out of the faith that is
held without respect of persons; And as for the rest of all thy lies and hard
expressions in thy Book, they shall come upon thy self, and to thee be a heavy
burden; And the day hastens upon thee apace, to the witness of God in thy
conscience I speak, which will let thee see that it had been better for thee,
if thou had never opened thy mouth, then to have opened thy nakedness to the
Nation; and this is not the way to convert souls, to rail; for railing never
converted any, but brought them into a form out of the power, and so increased
knowledge, which was their sorrow.

R. Sherlock, His Principles as follows.
Pr. HE says, They do not attain the knowledge, and understanding of the
Gospel by the same means as the Apostles did, says he we Preach the same
Gospel, as the Apostles preached, but do not attain to the knowledge and
understanding of this Gospel by the same means.

Answ. That which the Apostles received, they received from God; so ye
receiving it not by the same means, have received it from men, and not from God.

Pr. He says, The Apostles were eye witnesses, and understood by immediate
Revelation from God, inspired with the gift of the spirit, more then any man
could hope for since, and he says they do not pretend any such gift, nor
depend upon any such immediate miraculous Revelation from Heaven.

Answ. Then all may see now in this what ye have received, that has been from
man which is not from Heaven immediate, nor the gifts of the spirit, nor
received the Gospel by the same means the Apostles did, who are not the eye
witnesses, as the Apostles were, neither have ye attained to the same knowledge
and understanding as the Apostles did, nor received it from heaven; now let all
people question, whether it is the same Gospel, which is not received from
Heaven, nor immediately, nor by Revelation; for the Gospel is immediate, which
is the power of God, Romans 1. they are in the same power, understanding,
knowledge, and immediate Revelation from Heaven, that the Apostles were in,
that understand the Gospel, and they that be in another, cannot understand that
Gospel; so he confesses to the Nation in his answer to some Queries, and in
his discourse upon the holy spirit, that they have not the same knowledge, gift
nor immediate Revelation as the Apostles had; so he has made himself manifest,
and the rest of the Priests, that he is in the Apostasy, not to have the Gospel
the Apostles had.

Pr. He says page 11. An external means enables them to open the meaning of
the Gospel.

Answ. An external opens not the eternal, this all may judge that is in the
fear of God, and that is it which keeps them from being deceived, and seduce:
the external which opens the eternal, he says so, which is false; for the
eternal opens the external, and the Gospel is eternal, and that which reaches
to the soul which is immortal, and all they are seduced and seducers that
thinks and says the external must open the eternal.

Prin. He says, Learned men are them which must give the sense of the
Scripture.

Answ. Pilate was a learned man, and had Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and knew not
the sense of the Scripture, which crucified Christ; And the learning of God is
that which knows the Scriptures by the spirit that gave them forth, and not
the confounded natural Languages; and the Querie to him was, whether any was to
be called Master, his Answer is, Master is a Title of civil honor, a Pharisee,
a transgressor of Christ's commands, Mat. 23. that tramples upon Christ's command
and his doctrine, and makes the doctrine of Christ uncivil, and this is your
Lordship and your usurped Authority, who would lord it over Gods heritage, but
he is throwing you out as dung upon the face of the earth.

Pr. He says, The Pharisees paid Tithes when they neglected the Law of God.

Answ. Do not all you so? Is not this your condition that takes Tithes, whose
fruits in the Nation make it manifest, and the Apostle said the Priesthood was
changed that took Tithes, and the Apostles denied the Pharisees that took them;
but you take them by compulsion, and carry to prison till death if you cannot
get them, and in this you are worse then the Pharisees and first Priesthood
that took Tithes, which denied Christ was come in the flesh.

Pr. He says, That children are of the Kingdom of God, and yet they must be
born again before they can enter into the Kingdom of God, page 17. and
sprinkling of Infants is Baptism.

Answ. Which there is no Scripture for, he says Christ commanded both his
disciples and them to take and eat this, and yet they never heard his voice.

Pr. He says, To give an answer without imagination, or consequence, is
without reason or Judgment.

Answ. There is a reason and a Judgment out of imaginations and consequences
to be given, which is in truth, and out of the doubtful dispute.

Prin. He says, While men be upon the earth the body of sin is not wholly
subdued.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostles doctrine, who says they were made free from
sin, and this is to deny the Circumcision which puts off the body of sin; this
is to keep out of Christ the second Adam, in the first Adam, in the fall.

Pr. He says, The contents of the Gospel are things of the spirit of God
attained by an external means, and the Apostles was called of God immediately,
which he says no man must hope for since.

Answ. Then you have all followed your own spirits and are found amongst the
number of the false Prophets, and them that ran and the Lord never spoke to
them; and the things of the Gospel and of the spirit are not attained by an
external means.

Pr. He says, We must not look for an immediate extraordinary miraculous
teaching from the Lord.

Answ. Yet he says all men are taught of God; what confusion is here? the
grace of God which brings salvation has appeared unto all men, and teaches
us, and this he calls an outward teaching by the Lord Jesus Christ. Is that
which brings salvation outward all in the truth may Judge this and try thy
spirit, and the teachings of the Lord is not mediate, but extraordinary, above
all yours, which are men got up since the days of the Apostles.

Pr. He says, They shall teach no more every man his neighbor, saying, know
the Lord, but they shall all know me from the least to the greatest; and he
says again, the most knowing man has not attained such a perfection of
knowledge in his gift, as not to need teaching.

Answ. So he is one that believes not in the promise, they that love, are of
God, and they that loves knows God, and they that loves not God, knows
not God, here are the spirits of the world made manifest, and the spirit of God
in his Saints, from thy confusion; so them that know God are taught of him.

Pr. He says, The anointing within people, is a measure of spiritual wisdom.

Answ. And yet they attain to the Gospel by an external means, and it is only
all they that give heed to such spirits as these, that go from the anointing
within them, that did not take heed to the anointing, so going from the eternal
means to the external means, and from the immediate to the mediate, with which
they are now tried which the Apostle saw come in, which has been since over
the world, but now made manifest.

Pr. He says, Sprinkling of Infants is Gods Ordinance.

Answ. For which they have no Scripture, but a tradition which has been taught
men for a doctrine by them who cannot show where God commanded it.

Pr. He says page 31. For the spirit within we are not so blind folded to
follow the dictates thereof, and we draw men from the spirit within; It is
humane learning that distinguishes the naked Truth, whereby it is clearly seen,
and calls them blind that says otherwise: and cannot distinguish persons from
houses, he confesses it is contentions to go to Law.

Answ. Here he has given Judgment upon all the Priests the rest of his
fellows, who in most coasts of the Nation are troubling people for Tithes, and
their maintenance, and you are blind-folded who leads people from the spirit
within who are ravened from it, and has the sheep clothing in the humane
learning, which is from the earth, from the ground, and that cannot distinguish
the naked truth, and with that the Pharisees could not see Christ, as you be,
that cannot see the light which has enlightened every man that comes into the
world, nor the Sons of God who are led by the spirit.

Pr. He says, The Scripture was given forth in the Hebrew, Greek, and Latin
which we truly say is the Original, and to attain spiritual wisdom by
depending upon miraculous Revelations from heaven, is attempting the good
Spirit of God.

Answ. And here he is contrary to the Apostle, what he had received from the
Lord he declared, and David waited upon the Lord, and all the Prophets of God
for Counsel and teaching and Revelation, and this he calls a Temptation, which
no one knows the Son but by Revelation, nor the Father, nor the Scripture, not
a Hebrew, nor a Greek, nor a Latinist, but they that think to find it out by
natural Languages, are in the temptation from the Spirit of God which reveals
the deep things of God, which to all you inwardly raveners, is miraculous; and
as for the rest of thy confusion and lies, it is not worth the mentioning, but
shall cover thy self, thy Judgment, the witness shall answer and manifest thy
clothing.

John Wallace Priest of Kendal, William Moore Priest of Kellet; Priest WALKER.
Their Principles as follows.
Pr. THey say, That the Devil is transforming himself into an Angel of Light,
and this is to oppose the Light of Christ.

Answ. The Light which every man that comes into the world is enlightened
withal, is that which Satan is out of, and you that be out of the Light, which
Christ does enlighten every man that comes into the world withal, in you may
Satan transform, who tranformed before the Apostles decease, which since their
decease it has been him that has made this work among all creatures, which
you be under his power, since the days of the Apostles in the night of the
Apostasy, and he has been the cause of destroying people, which be out of the
Light, in which is the unity; To sing without the spirit, to sing words made
ready to their hands as the Jews could, whose song^ might be turned into
howling; and to sing in ^he spirit, there is the melody made to the Lord, where
hymns, Psalms and spiritual songs are known; but to say that Christ and the
Apostles sung David's Psalms turned into Meeter as you do now, a thing made
ready to their hands, this would make as though the Apostles and Christ could
not sing without David's Psalms, and would put every one besides the spirit; for
Christ was Lord of David, and the Apostles Preached the end of David, in that
they sung: and every man that comes into the world having a Light from Christ,
and that which may be known of God is manifested within man, though Jews and
Gentiles be from it, it guiding all minds, it will bring them to sing in the
spirit, as David, Solomon, Christ, the Apostles, and the Saints; and in this
let all make melody to the Lord in their hearts, all having moving and breath
from the Lord. So let all praise the Lord in the spirit, and in it unto him
sing, who in him moves, and lives, and have their being.

Gawen Eglesfield, His Principles as follows.
Pr. THat his call into the Ministry is mediate.

Answ. So is not a Minister made by the will of God which is immediate; nor a
Minister made by the spirit, which is immediate. Mediate is natural, and the
natural man knows not the things of God, for they are spiritually discerned.

Pr. And he says, The Law is not changed that gave tithes.

Answ. The Law of God is changed, and the Commandment disannul'd, though the
Pope set up another Law since the apostasy from the Apostles.

Ambrose Dickinson, His Principles as follows.
Pr. HE says, That there is nothing within man, but what puts him on a
Covenant of works.

Answ. First, there is faith within man, and there is Christ within man, that
works by love, and God will dwell in man, and walk in man, and the Son of God
is revealed within. Do thou liken all these to things without in the Covenant
of works which ends them all, and was before they was?

Pr. He says, There is no knowledge of Christ in this generation but by the
Scripture.

Answ. Many may have the Scriptures, and not know Christ; they will not give
the knowledge of Christ, that which comes from him, and shines in the heart,
does give the knowledge of Christ the light. And the Jews had the Scriptures,
but had not the knowledge of Christ, as you that does not know the Light that
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, the ear being stopped to
that of God in you, and eyes closed; and it is not the spirit; and the letter
of it, cannot give life.

Pr. John Stockdale said, the Scriptures must try the spirits.

Answ. The spirit was before the Scriptures was; and the Jews had the
Scriptures, yet knew not Christ, but crucified him, and that must try the
spirits that gave forth Scriptures.

Pr. He says, The spirit and the Scriptures are one and the same thing.

Answ. Scriptures are writings as the Priests and professors say, and Christ
was before it was given forth which owns it, and is when it ends, and is
fulfilled.

Pr. Priest Heywood in Lancashire said, It was blasphemy to say that the Church
was in God.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle, 1 These. 1.1. who said, the Church was in God.

Prin. Again he said, It was blasphemy to say, that God dwells or walked in his
Saints.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6.16. Ephesians. 4.6. which says, God will
dwell in you, and walk in you; and ye are the temples of God.

Christopher Wade, His Book called, Quakery Slain. His Principles are as
follows.
Pr. He says in page 3. Oh horrible! to say the infallible spirit must open
the Scriptures.

Answ. Which has shut himself out of the spirit that gave forth Scriptures,
and must open them again, in which is the unity, and that is infallible; and he
that has the spirit of God, has that which is infallible; and he that has
not the spirit is none of his; so out of the infallibility where thou art in
the horrible state.

Pr. He says, It is whimsicall to say, Christ, God and man, flesh and spirit
is in them.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, who said, they were of his flesh and
of his bone; and Christ in you, and he would walk in them: And he that has not
the spirit of Christ is none of his, and they are of his flesh and of his bone,
and Christ in you the hope of glory.

Pr. He says, It is a Devilish doctine not to forsake quaking and trembling.

Answ. So in this thou may say, it is Devilish doctrine to say, salvation
must be wrought out by trembling and quaking; so thou show thou never knew
salvation; for before men have salvation wrought out, they must know trembling
and quaking; and so thou have shut thy self out from Moses and David's
condition, and such as the Lord regards and trembles at his word.

Prin. He says, Flesh and bone cannot be a measure in one, and a measure in
another.

Answ. Whereas the Apostle says, we are of his flesh and of his bone. Here
thou art contrary to the Apostle, and that was more then one that had the flesh
of Christ and his bone, and his spirit.

Pr. He cries, Oh Luciferian pride to save souls!

Answ. What good does all your preaching do? Here thou spoilest all the rest of
the Priests, and shows thy self to be contrary to the Apostles, who watched
for the soul, and saved souls, that turned people from a multitude of sins.

Pr. He says, God the Father never took upon him humane nature.

Answ. Contrary to the Scripture, who says, God was in Christ reconciling the
world unto himself, and art ignorant of the great mystery, God manifest in the
flesh, and his name is called the everlasting Father. As for the word Humane,
which is from the ground, it comes from thy own knowledge which is earthly; and
Christ took upon him the seed of Abraham and David according to the flesh, and
this is Scripture Language.

Pr. He says; The holy Ghost is a person, and that there was a Trinity of
three persons before Christ was born.

Answ. Thou know not him that is in the Father, and the Father in him,
glorified with the Father before the world began: And the Scriptures does not
tell people of a Trinity nor three persons; but the Common-prayer-Masse-book
speaks of three persons brought in by thy father the Pope, and the Father, Son,
and holy Spirit was always one.

Pr. He compares immediate revelation from heaven like unto the false Prophets
dreams. And again he says, the Scriptures is the word of God.

Answ. Here he fights with the rest of his fellows, who says, Scriptures
signifies writings, and writings are not God; but the Scriptures of truth are
Gods words, which Christ, the Word, fulfils: They are not the word of God which
thou have blasphemously affirmed, but Christ is the word of God; and they be
out of the fear of God and the spirit, and knows not the Son nor the Father
that denies Revelations, but are among the false Prophets and false Dreamers.

Pr. He says, The Scriptures are the Word, except you dare to deny Christ is
God. And he brings a Scripture, Let the word of God dwell in you richly.

Answ. So he makes the Scripture Christ, and God, and he does not say, let
Christ dwell in you, but means the Scripture and God dwells in you: And the
Apostle said, Let Christ dwell in your hearts by faith, and God will dwell in
you; but thou says, Christ does not dwell in them personally. Does not Christ
dwell in his Saints, as he is in the person of the Father, the substance? and
are not they of his flesh, and of his bone?

Pr. They that hear the Word of God do not hear the Son, the holy Scriptures
are the mediate Word of God.

Ans. Now all people, where ever did you read of a mediate word of God? Does
not the word of God endure for ever, and is it mediate? And that he calls God
heavenly Father, and never heard his voice, nor his Sons, and denies immediate
teachings; and he that knows the spirit that gave forth Scriptures, hears the
Son.

Pr. He says, God limits the supreme holy one by the inspired writings of the
Apostles; and that is his third dispensation of his mind to men: And he says,
they are taught by inspired Scriptures, which is mediate; not by Letter, which
is literally, the Letters or Letter.

Answ. Inspired Scriptures, and yet mediate, the testimony of Jesus is the
spirit of prophecy; and the Spirit inspires, which the Letter does not; and
Gods teaching is by his spirit, and the holy one is not limited by the words of
the Apostles who fulfils them, and many words the Apostles spoke which he did
not write.

Pr. And he calls the Devil the tutor, to say, not made Minister of the Letter.

Answ. So we speak the Apostles words, and he makes the Devil the Apostles
tutor, who said, the letter kills, but the spirit gives life, who was not a
Minister of the Letter, but of the spirit, said, and says this, that makes the
Devil the Apostles tutor, which is a lie, and his own; and the Devil is the
Tutor of the Ministers of the Letter, and not of the Spirit; who can run into
it, who is out of the truth.

Pr. He speaks of a moral Law.

Answ. Which he has no Scripture for, the Scripture speaks no such thing, but
darkens counsel by his words.

Pr. He says, The Scripture contains the mediate inspired teachings, written
word of God, that was and is God.

Ans. Which the Scriptures say, the heaven of heavens cannot contain him; and
God and Christ was before any written words was; and the mediate teaching of
the whole Scripture-letter he speaks of, which he calls God and Christ; and all
the mediate teaching is carnal, and the Scriptures does not continue the
immediate teachings of Gods inspiration, but testifies of those things.

Pr. He says, The written word is the sword of the spirit. And he makes
another rule, besides the Scripture's, false.

Answ. Which we say is the spirit that gave them forth, whereby peace is known
upon the Israel of God; And the Pharisees had the Scriptures, but had not the
sword of the spirit, the Scriptures testifies of the sword of the spirit.

Pr. He says, It is a lie to say the Saints shall judge the world.

Answ. So he would make Christ and the Apostles liars, and would take the
judgment from the Son, and make Christ at a distance from the Saints, so he is
ignorant of the Saints and Christ both, and knows not the time of the Saints
judging when the Lord is come; but stands in the counsels of his own heart, and
in the hidden things of darkness.

Pr. He says, No Saint can be a judge of the world.

Answ. Contrary to Cor. 6. where the Apostle says, Do ye not know the Saints
shall judge the world? And they abide not in the truth that affirms it as thou
says; so have showed thy ignorance, and one of them that is judged by the
Saints.

Pr. He denies the Son of God to be revealed in man only by adoption, and
cries against equality with the Father.

Answ. And that is contrary to the Apostle, who had the Son of God revealed in
him. And the Assembly of Divines gave forth a Catechism, which children, old
and young was to learn, and said, the holy Ghost and Son was equal in
substance, and power, and glory with the Father; What, then all that have the
Son and the holy Ghost, has that which is equal in power and glory with the
Father. In this thou have not only judged thy self, but all the Assembly of
Divines at Westminster, 1649.

Pr. It is a false thing to say Christ's person is in man.

Answ. Which is as much as to say, none are of his flesh or of his bone, nor
eat it, nor had not his substance.

Pr. For denying all meritorious works that cast men out from enjoying any
thing from G^d for their salvation.

Ans. And nere they are turned to the Pope, who are in their own meritorious
works, out of the faith that works by love.

Pr. And there is no other way to salvation but by meritorious w^rks.

Ans. And there is no man attains to salvation by his own meritorious works in
his will, but they that attain salvation comes to the light which Christ has
enlightened them withal.

Pr. He calls that Satanicall, to say, as he is, so are we in this present
world.

Ans. Contrary to John, who says, as he is, so are we in this present world,
so thou have denied John's words.

Pr. That God does exclude all works wrought in man and by man, by what spirit
soever.

Answ. So here is thy spirit tried, and works are totally excluded without any
distinction, and so the works of God and Christ his Son are excluded by thee;
and the Apostle bids them work out their salvation with fear and trembling;
which he opposes, and gives another sense to it; and the works of God, Christ,
and the spirit are not denied by us, as thou do by the Devil which is in
thee.

Pr. To be justified by Christ alone, he calls it a justified self-quaker.

Answ. There is no man self-denyed and justified in the sight of God, but by
Christ alone: And they that are not justified by Christ alone, are in
themselves, and it is justification.

Pr. It is against the Scriptures to say men must be without sin, and that men
must be perfect.

Answ. That Is contrary to the Scriptures, for they mention that there was just
men, perfect men, and holy men upon earth, for they that gave forth Scriptures
were holy men; and Paul spoke wisdom amongst them that were perfect; and Joseph
was a just man; And the blood of Christ cleanses from all sin, and are
perfected by the one offering for ever (mark the words are) and he that is
borne of God does not commit sin.

Prin. He makes people believe, that false Prophets and Antichrists are come
but now.

Ans. Which Christ said should come in Matthew. 24. which John saw were come, 1
Epist. 2. And in the Revelation he saw the world go after them, which he is one
of them; but the Quakers own but one Christ, which is the seed, which is now
risen on top of them all, and witness the Lamb; He that was dead, is alive,
and lives for evermore.

Pr. That the Quakers are of the Devil.

Ans. And it has been the Devil in him that has testified against the
Quakers, and so makes his Kingdom divided against himself; and it is Christ
that is in the Quakers, and has appeared, that cannot be shaken, whom he calls
Beelzebub, like some of his old Fathers, but his reward will be according to his
works.

Pr. H^ says, No other people upon the earth go about to save souls but the
Quakers.

Answ. So he has judged himself and all the people upon the face of the earth
to be deceivers of souls, and not savers of souls; but the Quakers are so (the
preservers and savers of souls) and yet he calls them equivocating, deluding
hypocrites, which he has proved himself, and all others to be so, except
Quakers.

Pr. He denies, and says that the Saints bodies are not Christ's body.

Answ. And how are they Christ's? how dwells he in them? and how are they of his
flesh and of his bone then? and how brutish are you become in the knowledge?
has not he bought them with a price? and are they not his?

Pr. He says, That neither Gods Essence, nor the heaven, nor Christ's person
was in Peter's holy body.

Answ. But the Apostle said, God will dwell in you, and walk in you, and
Christ in you. And again he says, our conversation is in heaven. And here thou
art striving against the Apostles Doctrine; and the Beas^ is blaspheming
against the Tabernacle of God, and they that dwell in heaven; And thus thou
wrangles with the Apostle, who said Christ was in them; and is not his power
that which thou calls his essence?

Pr. He says, There is not whole Christ God and man, in men.

Answ. Then how must men grow up in the measure of the fullness of the stature
of Christ, and Christ and God will dwell in man, and walk in man, God that made
all things, and Christ by whom all things were made.

Pr. He says, It is a shame for the Quakers to say, as he is, so are we in
this present world.

Ans. Which is the Apostles words, and the Apostle was not ashamed to speak
them, but thou that lives in the power of darkness art ashamed to hear them.

Pr. He says, Christ had not appeared unto the Saints in his second coming to
them, much less in them.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, 2 Colos. And Christ said, he would
dwell in them. And the Apostle said, the son of God was come: and Christ said,
he would come again to the Apostles, which he did according to his word; and
God did dwell in them, and walk in them: and John in his Epistle said the Son
of God was come.

Pr. And he says, The Saints are not as Christ is.

Answ. So he denies John's Doctrine, who said, as he is, so are we in this
present world.

Pr. And he said, The righteous man sins seven times a day; and that David nor
no man living is justified in the sight of God at any time, so long as he was a
living man upon earth, and that the Proph^ts were not made free from sin.

Ans. And there is no Scripture that says, a righteous man sins seven times a
day; and David said his sins were removed from him as far as the East is from
the West, and yet thou says, David was never at any time free from sin, of
having sin in him while he was upon the earth. And God said, I have found David
a man after my own heart^ fulfilling all my will. So here he was justified:
And the Apostle said in Romans 6. that they were made free from sin, and were
justified by faith in Christ Jesus.

Pr. He says, Paul was not made free from all sin.

A. Yet Paul said he had kept the faith, he had kept that which purifies and
gives victory over sin, and yet he goes about to disprove Paul's words, and
says, Paul had sin when he had finished his course: so his great work is to
prove the Saints sinners, which they witness against him, and charging Job,
Paul, and David with sin, which God justified, and said, Job did not sin with
his mouth. Though Paul did cry out of the body of sin, yet he found victory
over the body of sin, and knew the redemption which the creatures waited for,
the liberty of the Sons of God; and said, they were made free from sin, in Romans
6. and they were justified from all things; and by the one offering for ever he
had sanctified.

Because the Quakers own the light Christ, and are come into the spirit that
gave forth Scriptures, and heard the voice of the Son of God, and denies all
them that says, they have not heard the voice of the Son of God and Christ to
be in them, Therefore he says, they have forsaken the truth, because they deny
them that have the form, and are out of the life, and despises, and denies the
power that shakes that which is to be shaken; for no one knows salvation but by
the light.

Pr. He said, God did not come in his spiritual Essence with his Son on the
earth. And he says, that God the Father was not in his spirit with his son
upon the earth.

Answ. And the Scripture said, the fullness of the Godhead dwelt in him
bodily; and the Father is in the Son, and the Son is in the Father, I in thee,
and thou in me: so he was not alone, but the Father was with him.

Pr. He says, The Quakers are lying deluders in saying the Kingdom of heaven
is within them.

Answ. That Is contrary to Luke 17. which says, the Kingdom of heaven is
within you.

Pr. And he has not heard of any other people in the world taught immediately
by Christ, but the Quakers.

Answ. And the two witnesses which he calls them, he brings against truth,
which opposed truth in London: So showing what he and all people are taught by
a mediate use of the Scriptures, all may judge where that is; and the Devil
rules such that be from the immediate; and all that are not taught immediately,
are not taught by God, nor by his spirit.

Pr. This sort of people that are for immediate Revelation, and it is dangerous
for any man to trust to immediate Revelations, and preach Christ within man,
and the two Witnesses preached Christ without. And this he says is a hellish
snare to please every man's palate.

Answ. And thus he may charge all the people of the Lord who were taught, and
are taught of the Lord: And thus he fights against them that were taught
immediately, and his teachings and man's teachings are mediate, and they are in
the snare that be out of the immediate teaching; and all that know God and the
Son, are taught immediate by the spirit that is immediate. And so it is not a
very strange thing that he should give forth so many ill-favored railing
expressions, which his Book is stuffed full withal against the people of God,
whose work in it is to charge the Elect with sin, but we say, the Lord rebuke
him.

Pr. And he says, The Saints are not any time without sin, even when they were
borne of God.

Ans. So not knowing the creatures coming into the liberty of the sons of God,
nor the birth born of God.

Pr. And says, Sin is in the saints for their humiliation.

Ans. Contrary to the Scripture, which says, Christ is their humiliation, and
bears their sins, and destroys it; which humility is not like man's, being
brought down by sin, for sin exalts.

Pr. That the inward man, and the power of God in man, never brings the outward
man so subject as to be without sin.

Answ. This we say, God wrought salvation by Christ alone, without man's works;
and who believes in him, are saved, and who does not, are condemned; and the
power of God and Christ subdues the sin in man, and destroys it, that man
becomes the Temple of God.

His Query is, Whether God could not have saved man without Christ's dying.

Ans. God can do what he will, who was in Christ reconciling himself to the
world; and Christ did not save the world without God. And thou have showed in
thy Book stuffed with lies, how thou have been tormented, and of the filthy
air come out of thee; And the Devil was in thee, and thou says thou art
saved by Christ without thee, and so has recorded thy self to be a Reprobate,
and ignorant of the mystery of Christ within thee; for without that thou do
not know salvation: And these before mentioned be thy Principles which thou to
the Nation has published in print, and all sober people may judge thee; as for
thy lies, they are not worthy mentioning, neither are they worth reading of
them, but upon thy own head they will fall, and a heavy weight and burden thou
must bear, who goes about to sow discord among the brethren, but the accuser of
the brethren is cast out, but the witness shall answer me in the day of thy
judgment. Christopher Wades Principle in his book called Quakery slain
irrecoverably, who himself has slain irrecoverably, and the same judgment
wherewith he judges us, he has brought upon himself, and the Quakers are
recovered out of his snare, and has taken him in his own, and has chained him
and bound him.

Henry Hagger's Book called, The holy Scripture clearing it self. His
Principles in it as follows.
Pr. DAvid never boasted of perfection, nor Paul, nor John, and such as say
they are free from sin, it is their whole work to carry away poor souls from
truth

Answ. There is none comes into the truth, nor no soul comes out of the
deceived estate, but who comes out of the sin, and is made free from it, as the
Apostles speaks of to the Romans, such as served God in a new life, was made
free from sin, and God said, Job was a perfect man and eschewed all evil (mark
all) and David said he had seen the end of all perfection, and Paul spoke
wisdom among them that were pe^fect, and said the life that he lived was by the
faith of the Son of God, though the Apostle had cried out of a body of sin, ye
the says he was manifest in his flesh to condemn the sin in his flesh, and
through Christ he has victory and witnessed the Circumcision that put off the
body of sin; and saw where there is no condemnation.

Pr. The Scripture is the sure word of prophecy, and the Scripture will bring
men to the knowledge of God.

Answ. The spirit is the rule that gave forth the Scripture, and the Word of
God gave them to discern and to savor, who spoke the word of the Lord; and who
stole their word from their neighbor when the Lord had never spoken to them,
where the spirit was in the prison, where the spirit was out of prison with
whom they had unity, and who had the form of godliness but denied the power,
and who was the false spirit that went out into the world, and the Antichrists
and the false prophets, and such as was turned from the faith, and such as
lived in the faith, and such as quenched the spirit, and despised prophecy,
and such as despised the holy One, and slaughtered the seed of God, and such
cast the law of God behind their backs, this was the spirit and the Word of
God which was the rule that led them to discern and savor, to try and taste
and handle, this was the touchstone, and this was the rule, and this brought
them to the knowledge of God, and they that had the Scriptures had not the
knowledge of God without this, nor the prophecy, as the Pharisees that had
Scriptures yet knew not Christ.

Pr. To the Law and to the Testmony.

Answ. Yea, as we say, to the Law and to the testimony, the Law is the light,
the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy: but it is tried in this our
day, the Letter is the Light, amongst the Ministers of the Letter, against the
light, and they say prophecy is ceased, and so puts the Old and New Testament
for it, and brings Isai. 8. for the Law and testimony which was before Matthew,
Mark, Luke and John, but this, is that their ignorance may appear.

Prin. And likewise he says, There is not a just man upon the earth and
sins not.

Answ. Read the words above in the 12. verse, be not just over much, neither
make thy self overwise, now mark this, just, this wise man upon the earth which
does good and sins not; that was the estate of the Law which Christ is the
end of, who is a greater then Solomon, who is the just and righteousness it
self, and makes men free from sin.

Pr. I do not affirm that any man can have salvation, by virtue of his
obedience, and thus you put out the eye of poor souls, and bids them hearken to
a light within them.

Answ. The eye of the soul is the Light which comes from Christ the Bishop of
it, and he that believes is saved, and there is his obedience, and he that
does not, is condemned already, and he has the promise of life and salvation
that believes in the Light.

Pr. He says, the Commission of Christ holds to the end of the world, who gave
some Prophets, some Evangelists, and some Pastors for the perfecting of the
Saints, and the edifying of the body of Christ, till all come to the faith and
knowledge of the Son of God, and to a perfect man in measure and Stature and
fullness of Christ.

Answ. Have you not all denied this work, Pastures? Teachers, Prophets
perfecting of the Saints and bringing to a perfect man? saying that none must
be perfect while they be upon earth, and to the unity of the faith which both
you, and your teachers be all of heaps about it, and that none must witness
the measure and stature, and fullness of Christ, and the knowledge of the Son
of God, that none must have him revealed; have you not denied Revelation, how
have you been in this work tossing people to and fro like chaff, and carrying
them about with every wind of Doctrine? and that is your wind that is not
perfect, that is not in the spirit that gave forth Scriptures, and there
lodges all men's subtility, cunning, and craft within lying and waiting to
deceive; this doctrine was coming up before the Apostles decease, which since
in the world has reigned, which all the heaps of Profession in all
Christendom discovers it how people are tossed to and fro, and changed about,
and every one stands against perfection, and overcoming sin while they be upon
earth, so throwing themselves out of the work that the Ministers of Christ were
in, so from it Apostated, and has denied the Ministers work which is the
perfecting, and you cry no perfection.

Pr. He says, They call breaking of bread carnal; faith comes by hearing of
the Scriptures, and it is the way to teach men to Christ to convince and
convert souls, how should we know sin to be sin, or righteousness to be
righteousness but by Scripture? Scripture has been a fit rule to walk by, and
guide into truth and peace.

Answ. Breaking of outward bread is not spiritual, for the Papists they say it
is spiritual, and you say it is not carnal, what differs Priests and Baptists
from Papists, and you say it is not as other bread is, and thus you deceive
people, and make them believe a lie, and the Pharisees had Scriptures and knew
not the way of truth and peace, nor was not guided in it, neither any upon the
earth, Except they be in the life, that gave it forth, and the Pharisees had
Scriptures read every day among them, and hearing not the word that they heard
that was in them, that gave forth Scriptures, they heard not the word of faith,
and the word of faith they have not, neither has any upon the earth; for faith
comes by hearing the word, the word Preached, not by hearing the Letter: he
that has the Word of God may speak it daily, for they were Ministers of the
Letter which begot people into a form, and they were more ten fold the children
of the Devil then they were before there was any Profession, after they were
got into Profession: and all upon the earth do not know righteousness to be
righteousness, but as they have the life that gave forth Scriptures; for the
Pharisees, chief Priests and Jews had the Scriptures, and read them every
Sabbath day among them, and they knew not righteousness to be righteousness,
Jesus Christ the righteousness of God, neither did they know sin to be sin, for
they crucified the Lord of life, they denied the light, the Covenant of God,
the Covenant of light, the Jews which had Scriptures, so none does know sin to
be sin, but as they do by the light which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ,
that makes it manifest, and Abraham and Enoch knew sin before Scripture was.

Pr. Again he says, Try their own hearts by Scriptures.

Ans^. They that tried their hearts, it was by the spirit of the Lord that
searches them, which led them to speak forth scriptures; for before Scriptures
were given forth, there was that in the heart to try it, which led all holy men
of God to speak forth scriptures, if all men upon earth had the scriptures,
and have not that which gave it forth, they have not that which will try the
heart; for the Pharisees had the scriptures, and they could not try their own
hearts, and so they turned against the light as the world do now; that have the
scriptures, for that is it which brings to stand approved of God, and tries
their hearts with it.

Pr. He says the overseers of the Church are visible.

An. That which does oversee and makes to be overseers was the holy Ghost,
before the Apostles deceased, which was invisible, but since the days of the
Apostles men have made officers by the letter, and such are visible, therefore
have all men come into diverse forms, out of the unity, and have lost the bond
of peace.

Pr. Likewise he says, That which is contained in the Bible, is spirit and
life.

An. This is as much as to say that spirit is in the letter, and life is in the
letter now had thou said, that which is declared of, is spirit and life,
these words had been true, and the letter it self death, and the life was in
them that gave it forth, that is sound; now the people have it among them as a
general word, that the Bible is a History or a treatise, or a catalogue, or
calls it the letter, these are the common words among professors and preachers:
now we say they are the words of God, and a declaration of the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles; and Christ is the word in whom they end, and that is
agreeable and according to scripture which cannot be broken, and sound words.

Pr. And the words was confirmed to them by signs.

A^. Them that had the scriptures knew not the word, by signs and wonders they
were declared, and signs and wonders showed unto them that had the scriptures,
from the word, now to them that had the sciptures, which the word to them had
showed maricles, when they desired a sign of the word, he told them that had
the scriptures no sign should be to them but that of Jonas.

Pr. And they say thee and thou to a particular is a proper speech, but it is
not a sin to say otherwise, and so not to give offense to Jew nor Gentile, but
you is the national speech, and the Devil said thou, and Cain said thou, and
this was the bad man's language as well as the good.

An. Though the Devil and bad men got the form of true words, yet the form
of sound words is to be held fast, and though Paul said, give no offense to Jew
or Gentile, yet we do not find that Paul spoke out of the form of sound word^,
as you to one, and because it is a national form of speech, and ye not come
into the form of sound words, which has professed both Scriptures, Christ,
and the Apostles, which show they never learned either, nor comes into the
practice of either; you to one is not righteous, and all unrighteousness is
sin: for one to say thou Henry Hager, art many men, would not thou say they
spoke unrighteously? now Judge thy self.

Pr. You call all men dead and carnal in the serpents Nature, in what form
soever if they differ from you.

Ans. All that be not in the light that inlighteneth every man that comes into
the world which is the way to the Father, Differs from us: such be dead, such
be carnal in the serpents nature: for none comes to the life, but who comes to
the light, in what form soever they be in, and such as differ from us, differ
from Christ, for none comes from under the Serpents head and nature but who
comes to the light.

P^. Likewise he says: But for a perfection in glory to be attained on this
side the Grave, I utterly disalow.

A^. We do believe thee, but a perfection in the glory is attained to, while
the Saints be upon the earth, for they were changed from glory to glory, so
there is a perfection in the least glory, and that glory which the saints was
changed from into glory, was not glorious, but as it was in the perfection in
the le^st degree or measure as it is in it self, and so for the rest of thy
lies and slanders, and unsavory expressions which are not worth mentioning,
will cloth thy self, and they cover not thy shame but make it manifest: they
shall be thy own wounds in the day of thy indignation: the witness within thee
me shall answer, and thy silence had been better, then to the nation to have
uttered forth thy folly, and whereas thou speak of the Church, that to thee
is a mystery, which is the pillar and ground of truth; but men have gathered
together a form in the apostasy, and the seed in the grave since the days of
the Apostles: but now is the seed risen which treads such out and down that
are gathered together in the words of scriptures, but out of the spirit that
they was in, that gave it forth, and that is the seed with which all the
promises is to, he does not say it is to the visible Church, but to the seed,
and who are of the seed are of the Church of Christ which is the pillar and
ground of truth, and so it is not the running up and down the scriptures, from
place to place, and bringing people chapter and verse, and telling people what
the prophets said and did, and what the Apostles said and did, and so to be
approved of in the sight of men, but such are approved of in the sight of God,
as be in the life that they were in that gave forth scriptures, and be in unity
with the Saints that gave them forth, with Christ the substance of them, and
with God.

Pr. He says, An Unlearned question to ask^, whether your Baptizers cast out
devils and drink any deadly thing, and it not hurt you, and whether the house
where you meet was ever shaken, and where he did give the holy Ghost to you.

Ans. This is to show that you are not belivers nor in the power that the
Apostles was in, and as for your saying the Apostles speaking, wicked men
should grow worse and worse deceiving and being deceived, now since the days
of the Apostles, who saw those things come up, those wicked men being deceived
and deceiving, now since their days it is manifest, that they have grown worse
and worse, till they have grown all to heaps; and killed one another about
religion, the whole Christendom can witness it, such as have had the form of
godliness but denied the power, out of the power and life that gave forth the
scriptures and out of the bond of peace in the poison, one poisoning one
another, and out of the holy ghost that gave forth Scriptures, and out of the
healing, and the belief that cast out Devils, and the devil the murderer, but
he has been your teacher to murder one another about your Religion, which did
not Christ teach, but to love enemies, and to save men's lives.

Thomas Leadger his book called a discourse, his principles in it as follows.
Pr. HE says, Such be in an error that sets up a light within above the
scripture or equal with the scripture, and knows no Christ but a Christ
within.

Ans. The light Christ by which all things were made and created, glorified
with the Father before the world began, which the scripture testifies of, is
above the Scripture before the Scripture was. They that be not in this Christ
within, are reprobates, in which the scripture ends and testifies of, and so it
is Christ the same to day, yesterday and for ever that the Saints come to
witness within them, not another Christ, neither many Christ's. And they that
professes a Christ without them, have a Christ without them, and another
Christ within them, here is two, for if it be not the same Christ that ended
all types and figures and shadows If it be not him that is within, they have
not the possession, the substance, nor the comfort of the true Christ, but who
has not Christ the end of the tipes, shadows and figures in them, they are
among Ante-christs and false Christ's, and they that have the form of
godliness can confess a Christ without them, and notwithin them.

Pr. Again he says, The Saints have a glorious light within them, but
imperfect, and it is an error to say they have an infallable light within them,
that they must follow which will show them all things, and to Judge of Scripture
that it must be fulfilled in them, and these are them that are brought up in
dark places of the earth that are as Saul's that go to the witch and not to
the Law and testomeny.

Ans. None comes to the Law and to the testimony, though they have the old and
new Testament, but who comes to the light in them for the Law is the light and
who comes to the spirit within them, which is the spirit of prophesy and all
that go from this, they go into dark places of the earth, and such are they
that go into the paths of Sau, l to such spirits that go from the light
within them, and the spirit, that is the testimony of Jesus, and the light, and
the glorious light of the Saints which they are enlightened withal is Christ
which is perfect, and they are changed from glory to glory, and so the light
which thou say the saints are in, and yet not perfect, and yet glorious,
mind thy words, consider thy measure, thy Judgment, the infallible light
which every one that comes into the world is enlightened withal, is the leader
of the people and the light they are to follow, and it is the way to the Father
out of the way from the Father that is in the first Adam in the transgression,
which light is Christ the second Adam that every man that comes into the world
is enlightened withal, and they who follow this and believe in it, and walks
in it, abides not in darkness, but have the light of life, and the light
within, and the spirit of God within, that gave forth the scripture, is the
trial of the scripture of truth, for men without that may wrest the words, and
wrong translate them; so the light within, the spirit of God is the Judge of
the scriptures and knows scripture which gave it forth, and is the rule and
ruled and led them to speak them forth, and is the rule that leads them again
to open them again, and to lead into all truth, as says Christ.

Pr. He says, That which they set up above the scriptures is heathenish, and
the scriptures is the ground of Faith, without it faith cannot act, and faith
has no bottom to rest upon but scripture, and scripture is more then faith,
the sure word of Prophesy, the balm of the conscience, it satisfies doubts,
heales wounds, discerns the thoughts.

Ans. The Pharisees and the chief Priests, they were not healed except they
came to Christ, they found no rest for their souls, though they had the
scripture, yet they came not to Christ the light, which was before the
scripture was given forth, The Pharisees had the scriptures, they had not
faith, stood against the author and the ground of it, Christ, so they had not
faith, the Pharisees had the scriptures but it was Christ and God that showed
them their thoughts, so the scripture knew not their thoughts but who are in
the spirit that gave forth the scriptures, it is that which shows men's
thoughts Enock and Abraham had faith, and had not scripture, all are heathens
that are not in the light which was before scripture was written, though they
have all the scripture, and the holy men of God acted in the faith, in
obedience to it before the scripture was given forth, and they were all in the
faith that gave forth the scripture, and they did not act as from the scripture
but from the spirit of whom they had learned who is the author of faith which
the Just lives by, and God and Christ the substance of the scripture.

Pr. And the scripture is an infallible rule of worship.

Ans. The Jews and Pharisees they had the scripture, and the Apostates since
the days of the Apostles they have had the scriptures and been out of the life
that gave it forth, they want the rule which is the spirit, in which God the
father of spirits is worshipped, and that was the rule which all the holy men
of God was led by to give forth scripture in which they worshipped God, for the
Pharisees had the scriptures and not the spirit which gave them forth, that
worshipped they did not know what, they wanted, the rule, the spirit of God
that was in them that gave forth the scriptures, in which they should have
worshipped God, so saw not the substance the ground of faith, and author of
faith, Christ Jesus.

Pr. They will not put off their hat^, they write thee and thou one to another,
they will not say master.

Ans. The honor of the hat, the putting of it off, is an earthy honor of the
earthly Adam in the fall, in the transgression, which Christ the second Adam
the Lord from heaven not of the earthly, comes to redeem man out of the sin and
transgre^sion, receives it not, he will none of it, but have the honor that
comes from above, and comes to stain that honor below, and sees it a mark of
an earthly honor of Adam in the transgression, and not of the second the
heavenly, and as for thee and Thou, you to a number, and Thou to a singular,
who stumbles at this, shows they have neither learned Accidence nor Bible; so
short of the spirit that spoke the sound words that connot be condemned, and
speaks proper which is the plant of renown, and as for being called of men
Master, which Christ says be not you, ye have one master, even Christ, you are
all brethren, they be in the error that slight his commands and tramples them
underfeet, and hypocrites that after they have trampled his commands under foot,
and after makes a profession of his words, Thomas Leadger thou professes thou
esteems the scripture highly, above ordinances, above Angels, and is not this
scripture which says, be ye not called of men Master, and Christ's command? yet
thou denies scripture and tramplest them under thy feet.

Pr. The scripture is the lantern of obedience, and it directs men to Jesus,
and he calls the scripture the word of God, the sum of truth, and they could not
have known there had been a Christ, or a mediator, or grace, or glory, or
worship, or father, or spirit, or light, but as it is declared in scripture.

Ans. I do believe you who are got up since the days of the Apostles in the
Apostacy inwardly ravening from the spirit of God, you had not known there had
been a father or spirit or grace or worship, if the scripture had not declared
it, but they that had not scripture, had faith, had the Ho^y Ghost, had the
Father, knew the Father, knew Christ, knew the spirit, they that had the
scripture, the Pharisees knew not the father, knew not the holy Ghost, nor the
Redeemer, but resisted (as it was in Steven, knew not father nor Christ the
author of it, knew not him that was borne of the spirit. Now they that had the
scriptures knew all these things that had the spirit that gave them forth, they
that had the scriptures, and not the spirit knew not these things they that had
the spirit of error that were in heaps about the saints words, now they had the
scriptures, the Pharisees walked in darkness had not David's Lantern to
their feet, and so could not see Christ as David did, says the Apostle their
table was their trap, there they struck David that had the life that gave forth
the scriptures, who had the lantern to his feet, and had not they a lantern
before the scripture was written? Abraham, Enoch, what led them all to give
forth scripture, are not all they that have the scripture, and out of that that
they was in, that gave them forth, out of the light, and out of the Lant-horne?
and they had a rule of obedience before the scripture was given forth, the word
of God, that lives and abides and endures for ever, that is the word of faith
in which the scripture the words of God ends. And man had the scripture and
knew not Christ that was from the life that they were in that gave forth the
scripture,

Pr. The Gospel is the scripture.

Answ. Many may have the Scripture and deny the power of God which is the
Gospel, many had the Scripture and the form, and stood against the Son of
truth, Christ Jesus, the power of God, the Gospel; And as for thy other lies
and slanders which are not worth mentioning, which comes from thy drunken
spirit, when the spirit is awakened that suffers by it, thou shall feel every
word of thy own, thy burden, and thou that does set the Scriptures above
Christ and God, and the spirit, art a heathen.

THOMAS LEADGERS Antiquakers Assertions. His Principles in it as follows.
Pr. HE says, The Divine nature is without mixture of sin, but it does not
destroy wholly, the sinful nature that is in us, and the being of sin dies not
until the body die, and sin has been in us to humble us.

Answ. Sin is that which does not humble, but lifts up, That which humbles
people, which brings down the sin, Is the humility which bears the sin and
iniquity, which is Christ, And the Saints were made free from sin while they
were upon the earth, and had the body of sin put off, And the Divine nature
they which have received it, knows it, and have escaped the pollutions that
is in the world, and the lust of it, and so the Divine nature destroys sin in
its being.

Prin. Again he says, The Scripture is a quickening spirit, the wisdom of God,
the power of God unto salvation, the words of the blessed Scriptures every Line
of it I have had (says he) the righteousness of God revealed in my soul, I
have had the love of God, the grace of Christ, the Communion of the Holy Ghost
manifest in me, but I trample upon all seize, the highest, as dung.

Answ. Many had the Scriptures, and stood against the wisdom of God, and stood
against the power of God, yea, killed and persecuted the Lord of glory, of
life; They that had the dead Letter without the life, and many got the form and
denied the power, and denied the quickening spirit, and the Spirit of Christ
does not bring to trample upon seize, not the love of Christ, nor the
righteousness of Christ, the love of Christ, the grace of Christ, the
righteousness of Christ, this was never esteemed on as the dung, trampled upon
as the dung, such as was transgressors was as dung, and they trampled upon the
love of Christ, the righteousness of Christ, but who comes into this, tramples
upon their own notion.

Pr. He says again that perfection is a golden dream, and the Scriptures is
the word of God.

Answ. Perfection is over all dreams be they never so golden, and it ends them
all, and is above them all: and Christ's name is called the word of God, and the
Scriptures are the words of God, which Christ the word of God by which all
things were made came to fulfill.

A Book called, A serious review of some PRINCLES of the QUAKERS.
Pr. NO man has reason to say that the spiritual substance is in the creature,
the Divine Essence is subject to change as is the soul of man, and every one is
enlightened that comes into the world by the light of Christ, and this he calls
a natural light, and that some persons are come up out of the fall, is an
error: I do not own a perfection without sin, and it is an error to say there
is any perfection without sin.

Answ. All erring is in the fall, and that which is come up out of the fall is
come out of the error into the second Adam where no error is which many
witness, for all error is in the first Adam in the fall, and in him that
tempted. And the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, by which the world was made, which was before the world was made, by
which all things was made and created, in whom is life, and this life is the
light of men; which men being in the light which they be enlightened withal,
they coming by the light to him from whence the light does come, they come into
the perfection out of sin; for all sin and imperfection is in the first Adam in
the earth; And perfection is in the second Adam, Christ Jesus, who bruiiseth
the Serpents head, the Author of imperfection. And who be in him, are in a
perfection without sin, and there is no sin in the perfection, nor any error
in the perfection of Christ, and all who be in the unreasonableness are
^gnorant of the spiritual su^stance, and power of God, and Holy Ghost the
spirit of truth, the Spirit of Christ, the nature that dwells in the Saints,
which all this is substance and not shadow, and the Divine power, and the power
of the Lord God, and G^d does not change nor his spirit, nor the soul, nor his
power; so read thy self: God does not change, in his being, neither does that
which comes from him, that which he has in his hand, and in his power.

Pr. H^ says, That which is imperfect can be reconciled to God, and that they
are poor blind creatures that say the light does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, and needs no light and discovery to help, and the
Scripture does no where call Christ the word, but the Scripture is the word,
and so these poor creatures err not knowing the Scripture; to speak in the
singular number is nonsense, and they that translated the words (thee) and
(thou) might have transl^ted them you.

Answ The spirit gave to speak the proper Language, singular and plural; and
spoke such words as cannot be condemned. And if translators that be out of
that, translate the words given forth from the spirit into what form soever
they will, yet the spirit will find it out, and the light which does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, by which all things were made, made
lights, and created lights, Christ Jesus the light, which does enlighten every
one that comes into the world, need not have these outward lights or
discoveries, they were all made by the light, which light was before these were
made, and they which are come into the reconciliation with God, are in
perfection out of the imperfection, from under the wrath; and the Word
reconciles, hammers down, cuts down and burns up, that which is contrary and
sanctifies, and makes clean, and Christ Jesus his name is called the word of
God, the Scripture says so, and they say that the Scriptures are the words of
God, which in Christ the word which was before they were given forth comes to
fulfill them, and that which is imperfect is done away.

Pr. To say that God is substantially in man, as Essentially one with him, can
be no other but the man of sin, the Devil himself having transformed himself
into an Angel of Light, and if it were possihle would ^^^^^ve the very Elect.

Answ. The Scripture says that God will dwell in man, and walk in him, and the
Saints had unity with the Father and the Son, and all that hates the Light
which Christ the Light has enlightened them withal, has not the Father, and
the Son, in such the man of sin reigns, and in such the Devil may transform;
but the Elect he cannot deceive, the Elect has the victory and Dominion which
were elected in him before the foundation of the world, glory for ever, and as
for all the other words in thy book, they are not worth mentioning, they will
be thy own burden, they will fall heavy upon thee in this day when thou shall
shall give an account to God.

James Brown, His Book called, Antichrist in spirit. His expressions and
Principles as follows.
Pr. THat the light in every man is a certain guide and rule in all things,
this is the means whereby Scriptures are slighted.

Answ. No one knows nor owns the Scriptures but as the light of Christ that
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, does guide and teach them
the light of Christ within, which gives them the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Christ Jesus (and Scriptures) and to see the Scriptures, and
does not slight them.

Pr. To witness God and Christ's glorious resurrection, and heaven, and the
happiness of new Jerusalem, this is looked upon as an error.

Answ. Christ within, who is the resurrection, the glory, the kingdom of
heaven is there; and David who witnessed him was in hell, he was upon the earth
too, and he that witnessed the new Jerusalem, and that happiness was upon the
earth: And they that have all these words, not possessing the life, they have
no comfort in what they speak, nor in what they profess; and the babes and the
children that are free, knows their mother that is from above.

Pr. If there be no outward means but light within, what need of the
Scriptures.

Answ. The light, Christ within, was in the Saints before the Scriptures was
given forth, and that was it which was their guide to give forth the
Scriptures, wherein they walked, and did not stumble; and that is it which
gives to see the Scriptures again to what condition they are spoken, and the
use of them.

Pr. The day is not yet dawned, nor the day star, the bright, and morning.

Answ. The Apostle tells the Saints of the Day Star, and they were children of
the day, and the night was over, the true light shined, and the darkness past:
Though some indeed were not come to the day star, and the light shined in
darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not. Where darkness rules, there
be the works that are out of the light, and among such as have apostatized
since the days of the Apostles, the day star is not risen to them, they see it
not; but amongst the children of light it is seen, and they that see it not,
are comprehended. The day star is risen, and they are children of the day.

Pr. And them that bring people to look at the light within them, are as
Corah, Dathan, and Abiram.

Ans. All that go from the light within them are as Corah, Dathan, and Abiram
amongst the Lords Prophets, exalting themselves, and persecuting.

Pr. All men are not so taught of God as they shall be at Isreal's return.

Answ. All men are taught of God that be in the Covenant, whether Israel hear
or not.

Pr. I know that many of the Quakers are temperate, sober, self-denying people,
but this is but the tything of herbs.

Answ. It was the Doctrine of the Apostle, who preached Christ the end of
tything and herbs, and self-denial, soberness, temperance was not called the
tything of herbs, for the spirit that gave forth the Scriptures brought to
this.

Pr. And the light within is darkness, and I never read of the Churches of the
Saints that spoke by two.

Answ. The Apostles doctrine to the Corinthians was, that they might speak by
two or three; And the light within, which is the light of Christ, which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, the darkness cannot comprehend
it, though it shine in it, till it shine forth in the heart, to give the
knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.

Pr. And that the Kingdom that is in the Saints is in the Pharisees, I deny.

Answ. The same that is in the Saints is in the Pharisees in the measure,
though it be but as a grain of mustard seed, which is like to the leaven,
little.

Pr. The state of arising from sin to grace is never called a resurrection.

Answ. They that arise from sin to grace out of the first Adam into the second
Adam, comes into the resurrection, the second death shall have no power over
them, and the Saints comes to judge the world.

Pr. Such as trust to a light within them, forsake the holy oil, the Lords
spirit that speaks in the Scriptures.

Answ. The Lords spirit spoke in them that gave forth the Scriptures, who had
the holy oil, the light within them: And the spirit speaks not from the
Scripture, but by that which gave it forth, which is the Author of it.

Pr. I deny that any have a light within them to attain to the measure of God
and Christ as they that have the writings.

Ans. None attains to the mystery of God but by the light which comes from
Christ the mystery, though they may have the Scriptures.

Pr. They that will not put off the hat, but say thee and thou to people, this
is a sin of their own devising.

Ans. Thee and thou is proper language, and a form of sound words; the hat is
earthly, Adam that is earthly, his honor which the second Adam never looked for,
but gives this mark to know an unbeliever by, who seeks it, and looks for the
honor below.

Pr. Is it not a shame for a boy to say thou to his Father, thou to his Mother?

Ans. Jephtha's daughter thou would her Father the Judge of Israel, and he did not
look upon it as a shame. And the children of God thou would their Father, and the
Lord never rebuked them for it, as we read in Scripture.

And as for all the rest of thy lies and slanders in thy Book, they are not
worth mentioning, but to redeem truth from them; and that none at all may make
them their refuge, for they shall feel it if they do, at the day of judgment.

Some of Philip Bennets Principles, called Minister at Cartmel in LANCASHIRE.
Pr. HE says, That none knew another to be the child of God.

Answ. Which is contrary to the Scripture, 1 John 3. Ye are the sons of God.
And the Apostles knew others to be the children of God; as the Ministers of God
does now.

Pr. Again he says, That he did not know why God did make a difference amongst
men, etc.

Answ. So is ignorant of the Ministry, which puts a difference betwixt the
precious and the vile.

Pr. And he said, None can give a reason of the elestion, or know the elect of
God.

Answ. And so is out of the Apostles Doctrine, who said, they were elected
before the foundation of the World, and ignorant of the Scriptures, which
says, Christ is the Elect.

Pr. Again he said, He would never exhort people to take heed to that of God
which is made manifest in them.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostles Doctrine, Romans 1. Cor. 2.4. Colos. 1. 1 John
2.27. Romans 10.8. which brought people to the light within them, and to the Son
within them, Christ within them.

Some of Adam Sands His Principles.
Pr. He said, He hated that which may be known of God made manifest in man,
which God has showed unto him who said, that was the Quakers foundation (And
it was told him it was the Apostle Paul's words, and showed him the place in the
Bible to read, and bid him see it) he said again he hated it.

Answ. So he is found in the nature of the Jews and Gentiles that went astray,
who were not like to retain God in their knowledge, while they are Reprobates
from that which may be known of God made manifest in them, and hate it; Neither
art thou, nor no Professor upon the earth, like to receive God or Christ,
Spirit or Faith, while thou hates that of God in thee.

Pr. And he called those with him brethren and servants of God; and yet a
little before he said, they had no grace in them.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, who said, the brethrens hearts were stablished
with grace: And the grace of God which brought salvation appeared to all men,
which taught the Saints, which you have turned into wantonness.

Pr. And he confessed, That they were more and more ignorant of God, and
blinder and blinder every day then other.

Answ. We do believe it. How should it be otherwise with you, who say ye are
brethren, and have no grace in you, and hates that of God in people? But the
grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men, which lets them
see ungodliness: So in that the Liar speaks in thee; for that which lets every
one see ungodliness is the grace.

Roger Atkinson, Reader at Turver Chapel in Lancashire.
Pr. THat the letter of Scripture was God (and it was asked if the letter,
paper, and ink was God) and he said it was God, and brought 1 John to prove
it. And again he said, The letter was the Word of God.

Answ. The Scriptures of truth they are the words of God, and were all learned
of God, and are writings; and Christ the Word comes to end all these words, and
all ends in him, so the Scriptures are not God; but they were holy men of God
which learned of God that spoke them forth, for he was before Scripture which
gave them forth.

Richard Stoaks, called Minister at Grayrig-Chappel in Westmerland.
Pr. He said, That the Scriptures is God. He said, that the Scriptures is a
God. And after he set his foot upon it, and stamped upon it, and he said, It was
but Hebrew Copies, and Greek Copies, and were not the Scriptures, and said they
were not true, before near an hundred people.

Answ. And yet a God, and they God; which the Scriptures of truth are the words
of God; and the carnal man, and the Devil (which is out of the Truth) may get
Scriptures; but the word, Christ, that fulfils them, stand against. And the
Scriptures of Truth are not God, nor a God, but are his words that cannot be
broken, and must be fulfilled by Christ the Word.

George Johnson Priest of Orford, said,
Pr. THat the light which John bare testimony to, is the light of Nature.

Answ. Which is contrary to the Scriptures; For the light which does enlighten
every one that comes into the world, was before any natural lights or created
lights were.

Pr. That the Americans were never ordained for grace and salvation; and that
the grace of God had never appeared to the Americans.

Answ. Which is contrary to the Scriptures, which says, The grace of God which
brings salvation has appeared to all men, etc. And I will give him for a
light, a Covenant to the Gentiles, a new Covenant to the house of Israel and
Judah, and that he may be my salvation to the ends of the earth. And many in
America have received truth and salvation.

Pr. That none can be free from sin, nor perfect whilst they live upon the
earth; and that none is able to keep the commands of God.

Ans. So he has denied the one offering, and himself to be out of the love of
God, and the Circumcision in the spirit, which puts off the body of sin, and
the blood of the new Covenant.

These be the Principles of the Priests of Orkney.
Pr. JAmes Morrison said, that Christ which is within men is a Devil: and all
who said they had Christ within them, were Devils and Witches, and so bid the
people take notice of it.

Ans. Contrary to the Apostle to the Colossians, who said, Christ in you the
hope of glory. And to the Corinthians he said, Christ is in you except ye be
reprobates. And they be in the witchcraft and of the Devil that have not
Christ in them, and reprobates, and this was and is the doctrine of the
Ministers of God.

Witnessed by Luke Liddall, Soldier, with all the rest of the Priests hearers.

G. W.

George Larcum, His Principles as follows: Priest of Cockermouth in
Cumberland.
Pr. HE said, He would come to Christ, and never own the light within him.

Answ. None comes out of transgression to the second Adam, but who comes to the
light within, which is the way to the Father, and that is it which gives the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, which
comes from him.

Pr. George Larcum said, I would to God I had power, thou should be severely
punished.

Answ. Here thou have showed thou art limited, and thy weapons and thy Armor,
and art not a Minister of Christ in the armor of God, the shield of faith, nor
shod with the Gospel; but such is the Priests and false Prophets, who got the
Magistrates into the form, that denied the power of God, on their side, that
they might be ready to help the false Prophets against the truth when ever it
arises.

Thomas Warwick, Priest, came to the meeting of those called Quakers, on a
Green, and struck John Grave, and plucked him off the Green; and his wife
struck and beat sore, and drew blood of friends. And the same Pri^^t said, If
the Law were rightly executed, thou might not stand there, it would cut off all
your necks.

Thomas Dentham Priest, called me out of the meeting to him, and said he would
stand to prove his practice, and then he went his way, and bade the people take
me away, hang me; and at his words the people did beat me, and pulled the hair
off my head. John Grave, witness.

Answ. You show your selves not to be Ministers of Christ, ^ut to be such that
ever was out of the Saints life, who was found in the spirit of murderers, and
persecutors of him you are, that is out of the truth, would drink the blood of
the Saints, this is the mark of the Beast and false Prophets, that would kill
creatures, and wrestle with flesh and blood.

Pr. That the Devil is a Minister of Christ in some sense.

Answ. Christ the seed of the wom^n bruises the Serpents head, and destroys
death, and him that has the power of it, and destroys the works of the Devil,
and judges the Prince of this world, and takes him, together with the false
Prophets and the Beast, and casts them alive into the lake of fire, that he
shall deceive the the Nations no more, and so he will not suffer the Devil to
minister; and thus the Devil and his Apostles are bound under with the Truth,
which he is out of.

Pr. The Scribes and Pharisees were Ministers of Christ in the same sort as
Moses was, when Christ commands to hear them, though in a lower degree of
manifestation.

Ans. The Scribes and Pharisees were not as Moses; for Moses was in the life
and light, with which he saw Christ: The Pharisees had the words of Moses, and
the Law and Prophets, but out of the life that Moses was in and the Prophets,
though got up in Moses Chair, they stood against Christ, and saw him not as
Moses did, whom Christ cried woe against: So they were not the Ministers of
Christ, but against him who was the end of the Prophets.

John Owen, who calls himself a Minister of the Gospel, his principles as
follows, in his Catechism which he gives forth, 1657.
Pr. ALl truth concerning God and our selves is to be learned from the holy
Scripture, the Word of God.

Ans. There was truth learned before the Scriptures were written, and the
Scriptures of truth are the words of God which ends in Christ the Word; and
there is no truth learned, bu^ as the spirit does lead into all truth, which
comes from Christ the truth, which was before the Scripture was written: And
the spirit of truth leads into all truth of the Scripture; And many has the
Scriptures, but knows not Christ the Truth, but as the spirit leads them, and
reveals them, and so he has thrown out Christ and the spirit.

Pr. There is one God in three persons, etc.

Ans. Where does the Apostle tell us of three persons, but tells us of Father,
Son, and holy Ghost; but thou, out of the Masse-book, and old
Common Prayer Book, who are the mutterers about three persons.

Pr. I am conceived in sin, and borne in iniquity.

Answ. Then thy Parents were not believers, so children unholy; for by nature
children of wrath, that is in the unconverted state, in the transgression,
unbelievers; for they who by nature are children of wrath, are not borne of the
believers; for the unbelievers are sanctified by the believers, else were their
children unholy, but now are they clean.

Pr. We have not kept the Commandments of God, but are all sinners and
transgressors of them.

Ans. We do believe thee John Owen, and the rest of you, who call your selves
Ministers of the Gospel, and yet have not kept the ten Commandments, and
would conclude all men in with you to be sinners and transgressors of them.
Nay, John was separated from you, who said, He that loves God, keeps his
Commandments. But what, are not you false-witness-bearers that calls your
selves Ministers of the Gospel, and coveters after other men's goods, houses,
etc? Are not you committers of Adultery and stealing? Are not you murdering men
in holes for goods like a troop of Robbers, as the company of Priests did in
the day of the Law and Prophets? Do not you live in dishonouring your parents
and God, and taking it to your selves? And do not you all come short of keeping
the Sabbath, bearing of burdens, making a fire, gathering your meat when you
should be at rest? Are not you all taking Gods holy name in vain both in
Pulpit, Town, house, Alehouse, Streets, Market-houses, and naming Christ's name
in your iniquity, so not held guiltless? Are not you all making Images, and
graven Images, and hanging them up in your Steeple Houses, and signs, and
houses, and gardens, and high ways, and things above, and things that are
beneath? And do you think that people do not believe you, when you tell people
in your Catechism, that you have broken all the ten Commandments, when we see
your fruits have declared it? And are you not ashamed to set forth such a
Catechism, who say you keep not the Commandments?

Pr. The Sacraments are the seals of the Covenant of grace.

Answ. It Is God that seal's the Son, and sent him into the the world, and not
outward shadows: And as for thy word Sacraments, the Pope was the Author of
them in his Common Prayer book. And as for the rest of thy work in thy book of
Catechism, is like unto the old Doctors of the Jews that broke the commands of
God; that loves him not whom Christ cried woe against.

S. Palmer, and R. Hook, who say you are the servants of Christ, your
Principles which follows, in a Book called, The form of sound words; And who
directs their Book to the Friends, Neighbors, and Parishioners of Gedling and
Sowdham.
Pr. THat henceforth ye be not children tossed too and fro, and carried about
with the sleights of men; which is in reference to false Prophets, of which
this Land is now full. You say. That a man cannot be made free from sin, and
cannot keep the Commandments of God perfectly.

Answ. Are not you in the tossing too and fro, and tossing people too and fro?
And are not you the false Prophets which Christ said should come, which John
said was come, and the world has been after you, who tells the people that
they cannot keep the commandments perfectly? Contrary to John, who says, he
that loves God keeps the commandments of God. And the Beast made war against
them that kept the Commandments of God; and herein is the love of God perfect.

Pr. You tell people of a Sacrament, a Creed, and three persons.

Answ. Which the Scripture tells no such thing, But the Common Prayer Book
does, and so you do not teach the form of sound words in your Catechim.

Pr. Out of the Scriptures we may learn the knowledge of the true God.

Answ. That which gives the knowledge of the true God is the spirit that gave
forth the Scriptures; for the Pharisees that had the Scriptures knew not God.

Pr. The state of man in this life is threefold, Creation, Corruption,
Regeneration.

Answ. In Regeneration the life is changed out of that life which is in the
Fall: So Regeneration and Corruption is not one in the new life.

Pr. A man by his own power cannot get into regeneration, for they are dead in
sins and trespasses.

Answ. Some are sanctified from the womb, and some children are holy, so all
are not dead in sins and trespasses; for they that are so, are but unbelievers.

Pr. All men have not salvation by Christ, and there are many that have no
share in salvation purchased by Christ.

Ans. This is contrary to Scripture, which says, that he is the offering for
the sins of the whole world, and the Savior of all men, and especially of
those that believe; And they that turns the grace of God into wantonness,
denies their salvation; and they which hate the light which enlightens every
man that comes into the world, hates their salvation to the ends of the earth.

Pr. The Scripture is the Word, and God is in his Word, and God in the
Scripture offers Christ: God in his Word offers Christ, which you call
Scriptures.

Answ. The Scriptures of truth are the words of God, and Christ the Word comes
to fulfill them; and God was in them that gave forth the Scriptures, and Christ
was in them who gave forth scriptures, and the Scriptures testify of him; and
the Scripture does not say that God is in the dead Letter, Paper and Ink; but
his power ye are ignorant of, and errs, not knowing Scriptures, and the
Scriptures are not God.

Pr. You say, That God works inwardly by his spirit, and outwardly by his Word,
and our faith is summed up in the Apostles creed.

Answ. Christ is the Author of the Faith; and the Apostle does not tell us of a
Creed, the spirit and the word are one, and they are inwardly known,
sanctifying.

Pr. The rule of Christian obedience is the Law of God.

Ans. That which is the end of the Law is a Christians life and rule, who comes
to the obedience of faith, in which they please God, and are justified, which
no flesh by the works of the Law is justified.

Pr. Brethren, be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind. No man is able
to keep the commandments of God, we break them daily in thought, word and
deed, in the best of our duties we are unprofitable servants.

Ans. Here is your confusion laid open; them that were perfect had a new mind,
and their deeds wrought in God, and their thoughts were changed that witnessed
repentance, and they kept the commands of God; and their fruits are of the
spirit and of faith, which are not unprofitable; But your works and fruits, who
are out of the faith, and out of the spirit of God, are unprofitable, who
breaks the Commandments; but they that love God, keep his Commandments.

Pr. Christians must attend upon Gods Ordinances and Sacraments, to know their
duty toward their neighbor, which Sacraments are the seal and the covenant.

Answ. The Apostles tell us of no such signs, sacraments, nor such words; but
that which fulfils Law is the Son of God, which brings him to do his duty
toward God, and toward his neighbor, which is Christ.

Pr. There are two Sacraments, and the Covenant of grace is to all that believe
and receive Christ; and the two Sacraments are Baptism and the L^rds Supper,
which are visible signs.

Ans. The Scripture does not any where call them visible signs, nor
sacraments; and the Covenant of grace is to all, whether they believe, or not
believe; receive, or not receive; and the Scripture does not call Baptism and
the Lords supper Sacraments.

Pr. Because Infants of the Jews were circumcised, therefore are children
baptized: Christ has ordained this Sacrament as bread and wine, and the
Sacrament is the food of the soul.

Answ. This is a Popish doctrine; that which feeds the soul is immortal, and
that is the souls food which finds rest in Christ the bread of life, the food
for the soul; And the Scriptures does not tell us that the bread and wine is a
Sacrament, and the Scripture does not tell us that Circumcision was outwardly a
type of Baptism outwardly, but of the inward; and you bring a Scripture which
is the 23. of Luke and the 43. verse. and says, that it says, that the souls
of the wicked are cast into Hell, which that Scripture speaks no such thing.

Pr. We are not to seek for happiness in this life.

Answ. The Saints were, and are made partakers of the heavenly riches, and of
Christ's fullness, and of his unspeakable joy, and full of glory, in Christ's
Kingdom, which is in them, who are upon the earth; and for the rest of your
lies and confusions is not worth answering.

Richard Baxter, His Principles in that which he calls one sheet for the
Ministers, which is two sheets, in whose mouth is found a lie, as in his Title
Page is to be seen. His Principles in it as follows.
Pr. THat we are hated of all men for the Name of Christ who are but Ministers,
who gave some Pastors, Teachers appointed for the perfecting of the Saints, for
the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all
come to a perfect man, To Disciple Nations, Baptize and Teach them, so cut down
the Ministers, the Pillars, and the buildings will fall.

Answ. In the steps of the Ministers of Christ you are not found, but in the
steps of the Scribes end Pharisees, called of men Masters, in the chiefest
seats of Assembles, in your long robes, uppermost Rooms at Feasts, causing the
Ministers of Christ to be haled out of your Synagogues, and thrust out, and
haled, and persecuted and prisoned, which are in the generation of the Serpents
that should fulfill Christ's words, Mat. 23. And the work of the Ministry, and
Pastors and Teachers, you throw your selves out of, who have received their
gifts from Christ; you who deny perfection while men be upon the earth, or
coming to a perfect man, you are not with them that edify the body of Christ,
but throw your selves out of that work, and you are not them that are for the
perfecting of the Saints, for none are the Ministers of Christ, and haled for
his sake, but who brings people to a perfection, out of imperfection, and to a
perfect man, and these are the Ministers that were haled by these Priests that
had the Law, and Tithes, and Temples, and Synagogues, that made nothing
perfect, but your Temple, and Tithes and Syagogues has been invented by such
that went forth from the Apostles, whose successors you are, that had the form
of godliness, but denied the power, and so they denied that which was perfect,
and this you have held up since the Apostles in the Apostasy, whose work and
Ministry and Foundation is to be overthrown with the power of God, which has
been that, that has drunk the blood of the Saints and Martyrs since the days
o^ the Apostles, but in the rising of the Lamb and the Saints you are all
overthrown, and rejoiced over, and slain with the sword which is the words of
his mouth, though you all beasts, false prophets, Antichrists may rise in
battle against him, the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory; you have
been the Pillars that have held up Antichrists Kingdom in the usurped
Authority, out of the power and life the Apostles were in, who were sent to
Preach and Baptize, whom you baptize and then Preach, which is quite contrary
to all reasonable men who have quite lost the true understanding; For first
they must be Preached to before they be Baptized. Did not John rebuke the
vipers, and asked them, who had forewarned them to fly from the wrath to come,
and bid them bring forth fruits meet for repentance, and think not to say you
are of Abraham, for God is able of these stones to raise up children unto
Abraham, now where is your measure you Priests?

Pr. He says, I Send thee to open the eyes of the blind, and to turn them
from darkness to light; How many millions of souls would these wretches sweep
away to hell if they had there will while thousands are in damnation for want
of the Light?

Ans. You all Priests and Teachers who calls your selves Ministers since the
days of the Apostles, who inwardly are ravened from the spirit of God, are
turning and have turned all people from the light to the darkness, and so have
kept thousands and millions of souls in damnation, and turning them and keeping
them in the path and way unto Hell, who are Satan's messengers and Ministers,
stopping the eyes of people from the Light, and their ears from hearing of it,
and this has been the work of your Ministry and has been ever since the days
of the Apostles, as this day, the people of the whole Nations have witnessed,
and may witness. Now Christ's Ministers were sent to turn people from darkness
to light, and to bring them to perfection, to a perfect man, out of that which
was not perfect. Satan's Ministers who went out of Truth, and so are his
Ministers and messengers whom he sends out from his Authority is to turn people
and keep people from the light to the darkness; And this has been your fruits,
and your works as your Pulpits and the Nations declares. So brings not people
into unity and fellowship one with another; which is in the light, but se^s
people at enmity one with another, and keeping them from the light, who are
with it condemned.

Pr. The enemies of the Ministers of Christ are playing the Papists game; That
it will be easier for Sodom and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, then for them
to despise the Ministers of Christ. Touch not mine anointed, and do my Prophets
no harm, and the enemies do reproach the Ministers of Christ, which is the
Devils game, and the Sects are against the Ministers of Christ, and do the same
work the Drunkard and Whoremongers do, etc.

Ans. This thou have brought upon thine and your own heads, though thou art
blind and see not thy self, and all D^unkards, Whoremongers, and Idolaters,
the proud and covetous joined with you called Priests, against them called
Quakers the only Ministers of Christ not made by men, but by the will of God;
Is not all Sects joined with you against them; Are you not reviling them, and
railing upon them in your Pulpits, and is not this the Devils game you are
doing? And if any come amongst you to prove you, either in season, or out of
season, you are they that cannot endure sound doctrine, nor able to resist
their spirits, or stand against them, but cries, take them away; so they are
beat and knocked down in your steeple houses, sent to stocks or prison; are you
not like Sodom and Gomorrah in this, and like the Pharisees, and the beast, and
the mother of Harlots, and false prophets which John speaks of, which takes the
blood of the Saints, doing their game? Has not the Lord reproved many of you,
yea, and Magistrates both for harming his Prophets, yet you go quite contrary
to Scripture which says, Do my Prophets no harm; And is not this the Papists
game, to prison and to persecute, and was it not the Papists game to set up
your Masse-houses which you call Churches, and their game to call out and to
persecute and make a Law, and decree that none should speak to them in their
time, of Preaching, reading, or singing Mass? and are not you quenching the
spirit, when any are moved of the Lord, to speak to you, was not this the
Papists game, which you are now doing? Did ever the Apostles hale any out of
the Synagogues, but were so done unto themselves, but the Jews game, and the
Papists game, and your game are like one another here, Unlike the True
Christians, Christ and the Apostles, who wrestled not with flesh and blood,
striking at the creatures, but at the powers which captivated creatures, to the
intent that the creatures might come into the liberty of the Sons of God: so
you that are striking the creatures, wrestling with flesh and blood, are
playing the D^vils game, like your mother from the beginning; Was it not the
Papists game to set up all your Schools and Colleges, and give your names to
them, and your Houses, and set them in the figure of the Temple, and when
altered you them? Do you not go on in the Papists game, was it not the Papists
game to set up Tithes? and are not you playing the same gain in taking them?
was it not the Papists game to set up your hour-glasses, and preach by the
hour, and marking with your Cross, and setting your Godfathers and
Godmothers? and are not many of you playing this game yet? what game are you
playing in your Steeple houses, but the papists have taught you it? The Papists
were persecutors, and so are you; they haled out of Synagogues, and so do you;
they took tithes and so do you they preached by the hour-glasse, and quenched
the spirit, and so do you; They preached for means and gleab-lands, and so do
you; They had the cross on the top of steeple houses, and so have you in many
places; they had Trinity College, Emanuel College, and Christ's College, and
so have you; They named the Saints days, and so you follow them; they called
their houses by the name of Trinity, Jesus, Emanuel, and their Masse-houses by
Peter, and Paul, and Mary, and so do you. Is not this the papists game? do not
they called Quakers deny this game, and you both, and Christ thou art ignorant
of, who is come to reign, and rule, and teach his people himself.

Pr. Ministers are spurring on the Magistrates, to cast out the bad and
scandalous Ministers; Have not Lawyers and Physicians an easier life, and more
honorable in the world then the Ministers? and have not the ministers been the
principal instruments to pluck down Deanes and Chapters, Bishops, etc? We
ministers break our health and all our wordly interests for you. And I had
rather be a ploughman or the meanest tradesman, but for the greatest necessity
and the truths sake.

Ans. Have not all you Ministers in this manifested your selves? did ever the
Apostles fly to the Magistrates, or spur up them to cast out scandalous
Ministers? had not the Apostles authority and the spirit and power to cast out,
reprove and rebuke in the Church? Had they not denied their power if they had
gone to the Magistrates and falen on the mountains, which is the papists game,
and not the Apostles? was it not the soldiers that were the cause of pulling
down your Railes and Surplices, and your Deanes and Chapters and Bishops, was
it not the Magistrates work? but have you had a hand in it, have you killed and
taken possession? have you put out Bishops, and got into their places, who are
in the Bishops and Deanes and Chapters maintenance? will you needs make your
selves so foul and odious to all people? were not many of you tradesmen and
ploughmens sons, poor men, and yet now gotten up into great interests, and
taking great sums of people, of many whom you do no work for? How can you
for shame say you leave your wordly interest, when you are but running into
them when you come to be Priests and ministers? who are the proudest people in
the parish in the glories and vanities of the world and honor of it but the
priest, and his wife, and his children? Are not you worse then Lawyers and
Physicians, taking the peoples money, and yet cannot make them perfect men, but
say they must not be perfect. The Physician is to make one perfect, do they
take money of people they do naught for? are they not ashamed to do so? but
you take money of them you do no work for, are you not worse then the Lawyers
who are bad? do you not take money of such people you do not work for, and
sue them and cast them into prison? Are you not the unreasonablest men upon the
earth? and this is the Devils game you are playing; and do you not live in
more honor in the world, greater gain, and no work done for it, then any
people in the Nation again, as the Goals in the Nation may witness your
fruits.

Pr. All nations that are of the Christan world are for the ministers to this
day, and they that are not, are the dry branches that are out from the Church.
Oh how have I besought the Lord that he would convert you to remember them that
has the rule over you, they that has spoken the word of God and rules well,
are worthy of double honor.

Ans. You are apostatized from those Elders among the Apostles, and from the
Apostles in an usurped authority, Ministers made by the will of men at schools
and Colleges, not by the will of God, as the Apostles were; so your honor
must be defaced, and you are the dry branches cut off from the true Church,
your Church and Ministry, both wanting the virtue and life of God among you;
so broken into heaps, and sects and names among your selves, wanting the unity
and bond of peace, the nations have gotten the names of Christians, but are
dead, are from the life, and your prayers are as the Pharisees, you being found
in their steps, as Matthew. 23. read you all. You say none must be perfect upon
earth, how then converted? who are converted are converted into Christ, who is
perfect, out of the first which is not perfect.

Pr. The enemies of the Ministers are the forerunners of the heavy wrath of
God, and the Jews were quite cut off from the Church and made vagabond upon
the earth, they mocked the the Messengers of God, until wrath came upon the
people, Ministers are either their Fathers or Nurses in the Lord, their sins
killed, and grace is quickened by the ministers means.

Ans. It was the forerunner of the wrath of God upon the Jews, that they had
Temples and Tithes, and stood against the Ministers of Christ, it is so to you,
as it was with them that saw not the substance, that now stands against the
light and fight against it. And was not Railers, envious men, and persecutors
always the vagabonds? and are not all you vagabonds from the life of the
Apostles, as the Jews were from the Law of God? and are not you all on heaps
about words and scriptures, showing you are without life? and is not the wrath
and plagues of God and over flowing scourge come upon you who are thus standing
against his Ministers in this his day, that are sent among you, cages of
unclean birds, who the people comforts not, their sins kills not, their grace
quickens not, keeping the people in their sins, telling them they must have the
body of sin, while they are upon Earth, they are crept into houses before and
since the Apostles decease, dispersed over the Nations of the world? Are not
you mocking the messengers and ministers of Christ? has not the wrath come
upon you? many of the people stricken dead for so doing? you that are out of
and Apostatized from the Church of the Apostles, that are persecuting and
mocking the Ministers of Christ which in scorn are called Quakers, who are sent
freely amongst you, not for Gleab-lands, Tithes, Easter reckonings, nor
Midsomer dues; nor like unto you that puts the Papists out of Gleab-land,
Tithes, Easter recoknings and Midsumer dues, and gets into them your selves
that puts Papists out of their Masse-houses and run into them your selves, so
in this you are not like the Ministers of Christ, the Apostles, who seeks not
these but them, but you are seeking these, not them, but are putting them out,
this causes plagues to come upon you; and so it is Papists and drunkards, and
them that are now called ministers which are seeking the peoples means, not the
people, which makes the true Ministers of Christ odious, which are in scorn
called Quakers, who seeks not theirs but them, and you are neither the true
Fathers nor the true Nurses, but in the Apostasy from them, and kicking against
that which pricks you, going in Saul's steps, who went with Priests that had
Tithes, who were strayed from the life, saw not the substance, as you Raveners
from the spirit of God have set up Tithes, who see not the substance, you
harden your selves, not hearing the voice, from whose eyes repentance is hid,
posting on for your earthly interests and means, posting to Courts, Sessions,
Assizes, Benches, and this is the work you are doing, and posting on in the
Nation, as the Courts Sessions, and Assizes declares, your hurrying the people
thither, seeking theirs not them, your spirits are tried at Courts, Sessions,
and Assizes, to be the false spirits that went forth into the world, which
Peter, Jude, and John speaks of, which went forth from them, and separated
themselves, which since the world went after you, who have been in Caines,
Cores, and Balaams way.

Pr. Tradesmen and princes labors preserves health, but mine consumes it.

Ans. Here thou have showed that thy labor, work, and ministry is not of God,
that preserves health and strength, for the work of the ministry is to bring
into the saving health, and preserve it, and not consume it, as thy work does,
that they may honor God with their substance, and serve him with all their
strength.

Pr. The law gives Tithes say the priests, and allows We may forbear working,
and we are content with food and raiment; and to give away our tithes, if the
people will allow us food and raymet for us and our children, as is fit to make
them servicabl^, yet the Q^akers call the ministers covetous.

Ans. The Jews priests who were made obedient to the faith which had a
commandment, while they were under the Priesthood to take Tithes according to
to the Law, but the ministers now turn again from the faith to the Law, and
says the Law of God gives it them, and says the Tithes are not the peoples
but the Lords, Did not the Apostles cut off tithes before the Law and in the
Law, the priesthood and law both? and have not you here showed your selves
Apostatized from the Apostles, so in the Apostasy, who have set up a Law, the
first author whereof was the Pope, and say the Law gives it us, and you would
not leave tithes unless the people would make a bargain with you to maintain
you, your wives and children, was this the work of the Apostles Ministry? what
shameless words are these, what, set your selves thus that all people may view
your folly? what the Apostles did give was it upon this condition the people
should give them food and raiment for it? D^d not the Apostles say, he that will
not work let him not eat? but from the whole practice of the Apostles you are
apostatized, and is not your covetous practices discovered through all the
Courts, Sessions, and Assizes in the Nations, you posting up thither, and
suing, and causing them to go thither you do not work for what is this but
covetousness and unrighteousness.

Pr. That the Quakers say, that the priests are persecutors like the priests
and phari, sees of old, but they shall be taught one day to know, that if the
Magistrates stop their mouths, he does no more persecute them, then a thief
when he is hanged, etc you say, you wish all the Lords people were prophets.

Answ. This is a lie found in your mouths; for you say prophesying is ceased,
this you sound abroad all the world over as far as you can. This shows that
you are not able to stop their mouths, nor resist the spirits of them whom you
say, it will be no more persecution for the Magistrate to stop their mouths,
then to hang a thief. And thus to all Magistrates that fear God you appear
with shame; and all may see what you crouch for under the mountains, for blood,
Jezebe like, and makes the Magistrates your pack-horses and executioners of
your malice; but the Lord God of heaven and earth in his wisdom is opening the
eyes of many; that moderation appears in such in whose hearts the fear of the
Lord is placed, that tries many of you, and turns many of you to your own
weapons, to see what weapons you have, and they find you but wrestlers against
flesh and blood, striking at the creatures, not at the power which captivates
them, to bring them out of it into the liberty of the sons of God. The true
Ministers work was to beat down blasphemers errors, false Prophets, and stop
the mouths of gainsayers: Rebuke, exhort, teach, instruct with all authority,
cut off occasions with spiritual weapons: And this power had they in the
Church, and cried not to the Magistrate, take them away, they disturb me! Oh
shameless! shame thy self before all the people in the Congregation! This was
not the work of the Ministers of Christ to do so; And this authority in the
Church before mentioned, had the Ministers of Christ to stop the mouths of
Gainsayers, silence false Prophets and blasphemers. This power and authority
they had from God, and looked not at men to help them; but they which
apostatized from the Apostles, the Beast, the false Prophet, the mother of
Harlots that deceived the Nations, that be out of the power of the Apostles and
Christ, and have their power from men, all the false Ministers upon earth are
seeking to them to stop blasphemers as they imagine, being but contrary to
their minds, while they themselves are the blasphemers, as weighed and judged
by the Scriptures and spirit of Truth. And the Magistrates work, the power
which he receives from God, is to punish profane open sins, and the Ministers
work is to bring people from under that occasion.

Pr. The Magistrates sets their guards at our doors, and lets in none but who
they please. Let the Kings of the earth show an uninterrupted succession,
giving them right to their Crown, and I will show a more undoubted succession
to the Ministry. All the Christians in our Parishes are our Flock, we
undertake to prove the truth o^ such Churches.

Answ. Your church is guarded with carnal weapons, and the succession of your
ministry is like unto the succession of earthly Kings Crowns, which are all
made by the will of men: And the Magistrates have been but your servants, and
through ignorance have quenched the spirit; and your work has been to destroy
the order concerning edification, practice and doctrine of the Apostles in the
true Church, which said, let all speak one by ne. If any thing be revealed to
another that sits by, let the first hold his peace. The spirit of the Prophets
are subject to the Prophets. From this you are apostatized, and have gotten a
law to stop the practice of this in your Church-apostacy, whose doors many of
them you keep with clubs and staves, lest any should be moved from the spirit
of the Lord to speak amongst you from the Lord. And your Parishes and Flock
which you undertake to prove to be a true Church; alack for you, that people
should be so impudent to say these are pillars and ground of truth, or the
Steeple Houses be the pillars and ground of truth? A company of Drunkards,
Swearers, covetous, proud persons, given to pleasures you are, like them that
said they were Jews, and were not, but the synagogue of Satan, a nest of
unclean birds.

Pr. We expect not perfect unity, till we have perfect knowledge and holiness.

Ans. Have you cried up your selves to be the ministers of Christ all this
while, and have not perfect knowledge, perfect holiness, perfect unity? The
least unity is perfect in the spirit, and the least knowledge, and the least
holiness in the spirit, and this you acknowledge you have not perfect unity,
perfect knowledge, perfect holiness, and this has been the cause you have
kept all people since the Apostles in blindness, out of the unity in that
which is unholy, who say you have not the perfect knowledge, for the least of
holiness is perfect, and in the holiness is the unity, in whith is the
perfect knowledge, though in the least degree, and this thou have confessed you
have not, and we do believe you, and so out of thy own words thou and you are
proved unsanctified; for who are sanctified, have perfect unity, perfect
knowledge, perfect holiness.

Pr. I use notes as much as any man, when I am la^y or busy, etc.

Ans. This is it which holds up your lazy minds, which you gather out of books,
selling it again by the hour-glasse, and make that day you call sabbath, your
market day, selling both prayers, and preaching, who have not the spirit of the
Lord to lead you to speak as it moves, and to lead you to all truth as it did
the Disciples, so it is lazynesse indeed that has set up your notes, and reads
them by the glass for money, and who have learnd seven years out of books and
Colleges, and then gather up out of your authors and books in notes, and thus
make a trade of them, and then te^ls the people you are sent, and it is the
word of the Lord, which it is but the reading of books, and yet you tell people
you never heard the voice of God if any ask you; and thus deluders are judged
out of their own mouths, who have a law, if any are moved of the spirit of the
Lord, while they are reading their notes, or speaking before or after, none to
speak against, what they have gathered out of their books and studies, which
was not the works of the true ministry, but the work of those who were out
from the true spirit, and so were ministers of the letter, and old authors, and
notes.

Pr. He says, They are unmercifull men that say, more glorious days are
appearing, and that the Saints shall rule the world.

Answ. In this thou have judged thy self, and there need no more words be
spoken to it. And the rest of thy lies and slanders in thy Book, which are not
worth mentioning, they will fall upon thy own head.

John Cole, His Book (printed 1658.) His Principles in it as follows.
Pr. It Is a common thing for the young Harlot to say, mind the Light within.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every man which comes into the world,
all Harlots draws from, and be out of it; and such may beget proselytes, and
father them upon God, which are not in the Truth; but the day is come that all
things are made manifest, and by it does appear; and the light which every man
which comes into the world is enlightened withal, is the offense to all the
evil doers who be out of salvation and the Covenant of God, and none sees
salvation but by it.

Pr. The young Harlot can but mend evil old Adam by her exhortations and
instructions, and doings, and threatenings, and she does fright some to her
obedience.

Ans. The Harlot is in that which evil old Adam is in, in the transgression;
and so they which be harlotted from the spirit of God, cannot mend and instruct
the transgressor, they themselves being in the transgression: They may tell
them of the Saints words, and speak them, as the Devil does, who is out of the
Truth; but thou John Cole art fallen into the earth, and there art quarrelling.

And as for the rest of the stuff in thy Book which is not worth mentioning;
but when thou feels the root and tree burn and fall into a fire about thee, and
thee in it, then remember thou have not that which does not savor withal, as
thy confused, childish work^ do appear, which in print thou have published to
the world.

Alexander Rosse, his Book, which he calls, A view of all RELIGIONS. His Lies
and Principles.
Pr. GOd is not in the quaking of the body.

Ans. Was it not God that made the body of David to quake? and Daniel, and
Habakkuk, and Job? and the mountains quake at the giving forth of his Law. And
does not God say, He does not shake the earth, but heaven also? Now do not
thou manifest thy self to be one of them that cast them out that tremble at
the Word, and tells them that God is not among them.

And as for Alexander Rosse his lies and slanders, in saying the Quakers said
Christ had failings, and distrusted God; which thousands of thousands that can
witness to thy face thou art a liar, it is a sufficient proof to them that thy
book is made up of such stuff, of lies, which is thy view from the Creation.
And the rest of thy Book is much like unto that, and the false prophets
studying a divination of their own brain, to get money by, we deny; but such
as divide the word aright we own; and all that pray and preach, and sing for
money, and make a trade of the Scripture to get money by, we disown; but such
as pray and sing by the spirit we own, and all your Readings for money we deny;
but who reads freely we own, and all your Seremonies we do deny, and are come
to the substance Christ Jesus, before the world was made.

Pr. The leaves of a tree are not the fruits thereof, and yet without them the
fruit would not prosper.

Answ. Art thou a fit man to give a view from the Creation of the World, who
erres thus in Naturals? For pluck off the leaves of the Vines, and see if the
grapes will not prosper? Art thou a fit man to give a view of Religion and
blasphemy, and error from the Creation, who art not able to give a true view
of the Naturalls?

Pr. Thou say, It is horrid blasphemy to say the Scripture is not the Word
of God, and to say the soul is a part of God.

Answ. The Scriptures are the words of God in Exodus, and the four Books of the
Revelations, but Christ is the Word in whom they end; and it is not horrid
blasphemy to say the soul is a part of God, for it came out of him, and that
which came out of him, is of him, and rejoices in him.

Why will thou lie, in saying the Quakers deny the Word? we say, it sanctifies
them.

His lies. Christ is not ascended into heaven; That there is no Heaven, nor
Hell, nor Resurrection of the body; That we have no Sacrament nor no Trinity.

Answ. As for the word Sacrament and Trinity is from the Pope, and the
Masse-book, the Bishops Common Prayer; but Unity and the Lords Supper is owned;
and Heaven, Hell, Christ, and Ascension, and Resurrection is owned by the
Quakers, as the Scriptures declares it: And your old Masse-house, with the
Cross atop of it, which you call your Church, that the Beast has set up since
the days of the Apostles, with his lying sign at the end of it, the Popes
Cross; And Christ did come to destroy self, and reconcile into one; and
Christ forbid men to be called of men Master, and said the Pharisees did so,
and Magistrates are owned in their place; But all such Ministers that teach for
filthy lucre, that serve an Apprentiship at Schools and Colleges like
Tradesmen, such we deny, such are not fit to study nor expound Scripture; for
they bring people into heaps and into blood, as their fruits in whole
Christendom declares it; but the Prophets, Christ, and his Apostles and
Ministers, their practices are owned, and Elders, and their honor, but the
honor of the false Prophets and Apostles is defaced by the true; and the
Scripture does not speak a word of sprinkling of Infants, but the Baptism of
the spirit is owned; and all your prayers in your Masse-house, Pharisee-like,
and your songs in the Temple shall be turned into howling; but that which is
according to the spirit of God is owned, and private and public instructions
are owned who be in the spirit of God; and David's Psalms in their place are
owned, and the Saints singing with understanding also we own.

Pr. They say, The Church is in God, therefore God is not in the Church they
may say.

Answ. This is like thy reason, and thy measure and weight, the Church is in
God, and God is in the Church; and where two or three are gathered together, He
is in the midst of them.

Pr. He says, We speak against Tithes and Clarks wages for saying, Amen, and
this thou says is an absurd opinion.

Answ. Tithes before the Law, and in the Law was owned, that they should give
the tenth of the spoil and the tenth of the earth, for the services that were
required, widows, strangers, fatherless and Levi who had no portion therein,
that there might not be a beggar among them, this tenthes preserved them from
beggars, and this was the Law, and Melchesedeck before the Law took the tenth
of the spoil, who was without father or mother, and Christ the end of the Law,
who put an end to all spoils and Redeemes men out of the ninth and tenth parts
of the earth to God, and here the day of salvation is known to Reign upon the
earth, for man transgressed, being drove from God in the earth, ^hen the Law
came, that was over all transgression, and led out of it, by that Law was they
to offer up the tenth, and Melchesedeck before the Law had the tenth of the
spoils, but Christ who ends the Wars, ended the spoils, who is the heir of all
things, and the tenths, the Covenant of God, who reconcils all things in one,
things in heaven, and things in earth, and this the Apostles Preached, who was
in the power of God, brought men out of the ninths of the earth and tenths to,
and brought men out of the occasion of the Wars in that which ended, who was
the power of God; but they which went forth from the Apostles into the earth,
that had the form of godliness and denied the power thereof, which lead the
world after them, set up ninths and tenths, unlike the Ministers of the Gospel,
who brought them out of the ninths and tenths into unity, with the power of
God, and the Son, and to reign upon the earth; and them that took Tithes now,
are unlike them that took Tithes under the Law, or before the Law, who met them
with bread and water that Abraham gave the tenths of the spoil to, and who now
have no storehouse for widows, strangers, and fatherless, that there need not
be a beggar among them; so you who are called Christian Priests, are worse then
the Jews, who cannot get their tenths without prisons, Courts and writs, and
treble damages, and cast into prison until death for them; this is called the
Christian practices in our days, who are Apostated from the true Apostles and
Church, and from the power of God they were in, but the maintenance that Christ
speaks of to his Ministers is owned, but all that make a trade of the Prophets,
Christ and Apostle words, who laid down their lives for speaking them forth, we
deny; and the Apostles did not give a Clerk wages to say Amen, but that came up
since the Apostles days, and judged by the spirit of truth, and whosoever will
make Alixander Rosses lies their refuge, are in a sad condition, in his book
called, A view of Religion, which he and his lies are condemned to the fire and
Lake by the power of God, glory in the highest, rejoice over them ye Saints.

Richard Mayo, Priest of Kingston, his Doctrine, And PRINCIPLES as follows.
Pr. THat the Light within is the light of Nature which teaches to do all
things that the Law commands, and to deny all things that the Law forbids.

Answ. That which teaches to do all things the Law commands and deny what the
Law forbids, is above nature, that is it which keeps nature in its course, that
it shall not be of a fire; but we see thy nature is gone out of its course; and
is all of a fire among you Priests and professors.

Pr. That God set up a dim light in every man.

Answ. The light that God set up in every man is not dim, but men grows dim
when they transgress the light, which God has set in them, to give them the
knowledge and feeling of himself.

Pr. He said the Devil was the power of God, and that Christ was made manifest
to destroy the power of God, and to destroy him that was the power of God.

Answ. The devil that went out of the truth, went out of the power of God, and
Christ was manifest to destroy the works of the devil, and not the power of
God, though Christ came to put an end to all figures, types and shadows,
Priests, first Covenant and Temple; Christ, who is the power of God, did not
come to destroy the power of God, the power of God is not divided against it
self and the devil that went out of the truth, the power of God went against
him: so he is not the power of God that went out of the truth, that tempted
others out of the truth to transgress and to sin, by which came death, by
which the devil has the power of death, that went out of the truth, so is the
power of death, which Christ the power of God destroys death, and him that has
the power of it.

Prin. Mayo says, To say the Gospel is the power of God is but a Metapohrical
speech.

Answ. The Apostle does not say so; for the Apostle says the Gospel is the
power of God unto salvation, to every one that believes, in plain words, Romans
1. Chapter.

Pr. He said, That Lanthorn and that Light spoken of in the Psalms, which was a
light unto David's path, was not meant Christ the word.

Ans. Why then does the Apostle bring often David's words, to prove that David
did speak of Christ; And spoke of the sure mercies of David, the everlasting
Covenant of light, and in his light should see more light, and called him Lord?
and David saw his flesh that should see no corruption, and see his
resurrection, and many other Scriptures might be brought to prove this.

Prin. He said, The Scriptures was the seed which the sower went forth to sow,
Mat. 13.

Answ. The seed is that which the Scripture speaks of, which Christ said is the
word, which many have the Scriptures, which knows not the seed nor the thing
it speaks of, nor the seed that is sown which is the word, as instance the Jews
and you Christians, which put Scripture for it; for if the Scripture be the
seed, it is sown already, it is printed, and what need you go out to sow it.

Pr. He faith, That Paul in the 5. of the Ephesians. 18. Exhorts the Ephesians to
follow a light which was not the light of the Gospel, and it is said in plain
Scripture, in so many words, he could not prove that any of the Ministers of
Christ does exhort the Saints to follow a light which was the light of the
Gospel.

Ans. We herein see his confusion who confounds himself; and Paul and that in
the Ephesians which he says was not the light of the Gospel, let all people
read, who bids them not be drunk with wine, but be filled with the spirit; And
this is the light of the Gospel, which does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, which darkness cannot comprehend, where the God of the world
has blinded the minds of the Infidels, least the light of the glorious Gospel
should shine into them, as the minds of all the Priests of the world does
appear, to be blinded, with the God of the world, that the light of the
glorious Gospel which is the image of God, which shines in the hearts of
believers, which they do not behold, and though the light shines in darkness,
there darkness comprehended it not; therefore they rage like the Jews, and are
professing the Letter as the Jews did, standing against the light, with which
Light they are comprehended which was before ages was.

Pr. He says, That Paul persecuting the Saints was a righteous thing in the
sight of men and he said, that he denied that any doer of the Law is justified,
so as to be saved.

Answ. Paul persecuting the Saints was not a righteous thing amongst righteous
men that was in the righteousness of God, for Christ the righteousness of God
says, Paul why persecutest thou me? now Paul's persecuting was justified by
them which were in the self righteousness, out of the righteousness of Christ,
and such that be in that righteousness may justify thee and thy persecution;
and the doers of the Law are justified, and who are justified are saved, and
Christ the end of the Law they come to know salvation it self, who redeemes
from under it; so I through the Law, am dead to it, and know it a
Schoolmaster, and the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in me.

Pr. That a man may be a righteous man, and not a godly man.

Answ. A righteous man in the righteousness of Christ is a godly man, who have
the righteousness of the Law fulfilled in him, but a righteous man in
self-righteousness is ungodly.

Pr. That a man may be justified by God, and yet condemned by his own
conscience, and justified by his own conscience, and condemned by God.

Answ. A man that is justified by God is not condemned by his own conscience,
for the mystery of faith is held in a pure conscience, in which men are
justified in the sight of God, and a man that is condemned in his own
conscience, is not Justified in the sight of God, that which condemns is the
light, and that is the cause of condemnation, the hating of it, and not
believing of it, and that is the cause the conscience comes to be seared,
whereby comes condemnation, and that in the Romans, proves no such thing which
thou lays down.

Pr. That every believer has not the witness in him.

Answ. That is contrary to Scripture and the Ministers of Christ's Doctrine,
which says he that believes has the witness in himself, (mark he) and after
he believes, he comes to be sealed with the spirit of promise, and can set to
his seal that God is true, and comes to believe the record of his Son, which is
the spirit that records all things.

Pr. That the Gospel is not the power of God.

Answ. The Gospel is the power of God; in this thou art contrary to the
Ministers of the Gospel, which said, the Gospel was the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes, and in this thou ha^t proved thy self to
be an unbeliever.

Pr. He would make Christ speak blasphemy; leaving out half his words.

Answ. That is false thou could not make Christ the power of God, the light,
the life, the truth, speak blasphemy in leaving ou^ many of his words, for all
blasphemy is out of the truth, and the power of God, and in the power and life
of God there is no blasphemy.

Pr. That a man may persecute Christ in the Saints, and be a righteous man, and
that the Scriptures saves instrumentally.

Answ. A man cannot persecute the Saints, and be in the righteousness of God,
or the righteousness of the Law, but they that persecute Christ, are in their
own self-rightrousness, and the Scripture saves not instrumentally, but as men
be in the faith; and men knows not salvation, but as they be in the Life that
gave it forth, and Christ the Savior it speaks of, and there is the
instrumental saving that the Scripture owns, for Christ asked them that had
Scriptures how they could escape the damnation of hell that were out of the
life of it.

Pr. They that did not swear broke the Law of God and man.

Answ. They that swear are not come to Christ the end of the Law, and they are
out of Christ's Doctrine and the Apostles, who said swear not at all, not by
heaven, nor by earth, nor any other oath, but let your communication be yea,
yea, nay, nay, least thou fall into condemnation, for whatsoever is more then
this comes of evil; so all swearers are in the evil, false brethren fall into
condemnation, out of the Doctrine of Christ, and breaks his command, and are
none of his Ministers.

Pr. He did believe in a Christ that died at Jerusalem, but not in a Christ
within.

Answ. He that believes not in a Christ within, does not believe in a Christ at
Jerusalem, and he that does not believe in a Christ within, and Preach Christ
within, is a reprobate, and out of the Apostles Doctrine, Col. 2. 2 Cor. 13.
and he is not in a true belief of Christ without, who believes not in a Christ
within, but is in the Devils belief and believes as the Devil does.

Pr. That if there be one grace within, it is created, and he believes not in
any created thing.

Answ. The grace that is within, that stablisheth the heart, is brought by the
Revelation of Jesus, the loins of the mind being girded up, knows it, the
grace by which they are saved, which brings salvation, which is sufficient,
this comes from the Creator; which grace teached us, said the Saints, to deny
ungodly lusts, and to live soberly.

Pr. That light which Christ has enlightened every man with, is carnal and
darkness.

Ans. The light which Christ has enlightened every man that is come into the
world with all, was before carnal or darkness was, and believing in it, it
leads every man from darkness and his carnal estate, into unity with God;
for no man sees his carnal estate and darkness, but by the Light which makes
it manifest and the light which lights every man that comes into the world,
is that which all professors in all ages stumbled at, that were without life.

Pr. He knew no scripture that the world was in the heart of man, and that it
was nonsense.

Ans. Thou art ignorant of Solomon's words, who says, 3. Eccles. he has set
the world in their hearts that they cannot find the beginning or ending of the
work of ^od, and here thou have showed thy self of the bottomless pit,
without the beginning or ending of the work of God, and he is in the nonsense,
that is not in the beginning or ending of the work of God.

Pr. That men cannot be saved that have no other light.

Ans. The light which has enlightened every man that is come into the world, is
the Savior, and no man is condemned, but for not believing in that Light and
no man is saved, ^u^ who believes in that light.

Pr. That there is no perfection attainable in this life.

Ans. There is no perfection but in wickedness in the life of Adam in the
transgression, and there men live in sin, and has it in their body, and
carries a body of it, which came by the devil, sin and transgression, but
Christ, the second Adam, that destroys the devil the power of death, and
death and his works, who saves men from sin, and blots out the sin and
transgression, and redeems from the Earth, and who are in Christ the second
Adam, are in perfection, and in that which is perfect, and makes free from sin,
and the body of it, and death, and him that has the power of death, and comes
to be perfect as their heavenly father is perfect, and the work of the
ministers of Christ, was to the perfecting of the Saints, and thou that do
deny perfection, have denied the ministers of Christ's work, who preach Christ
within, and preached every one perfect in him.

Pr, That the scripture is the word of God.

Ans. The scripture is the words of God, as you may read, Exodus and Matthew.
Revel. and Christ is the word of God, in whom the words end, before the words
were spoken forth, and man without the spirit cannot interpret scriptures.

Pr. That the ministers of this nation, are the ministers of Christ and the
Gospel, and that it is a sin to despise them.

Ans. And the ministers of this Nation, or no where else, are not the ministers
of Christ of the Gospel, that deny the light that enlightneth every man that
comes into the world, and holds up swearing, neither are they the men that are
to interpret scripture, they cannot see without the light, which inlightneth
every man that comes into the world, before it was made, who is the end of the
Prophets, with that they see the Prophets words, and the end of them, and so
such before mentioned are to be turned from, that turns from the light, and it
is no sin to obey the Apostles commands, 2 Timothy 3. to deny them which come up
since the Apostles decease, having the form but denies the power.

Pr. That they may lawful^y ta^e Tithes of the people.

Ans. And you that takes tithes of the people, are of the Popes tribe, got up
since the days of the Apostles, which said the priesthood was changed that
took the tithes, the Law was changed by which the priesthood was made, and the
commandment disanulled that gave tithes, and Christ the sum, the end of all
similitudes which comes before Abraham was that paid tithes, Heb. 7. the ^ope
is your author in taking tithes since the days of the Apostles in the
Apostasy, and Christ is the end of the Law.

Pr. Richard Mayo says, That it is not unlawful to say You to a single person.

Ans In this thou show thou never readst the Accidence or Bible, and it is
unlawful to speak unrightously, and to say there is many when there is but one
to call one many (you one.)

Pr. That Ministers may exhort men to walk by the light of Reason, as well as
the light of the Gospel.

Ans. No man walks by the light of reason, but who be in the faith, are in the
light of the Gospel, and all other reason is as the beasts of the field, that
which makes men reasonable is faith, and all that be in the faith are in the
light of the Gospel, and this is one, which all unreasonablenesse is out of
it, in the transgression, for none are in the reasonableness, but such as
comes out of transgression, and such as be reasonable walks by the light of
the Gospel.

Pr. That the Gospel it self is but a dead letter.

Ans. The Gospel it self is the power of God, that which the letter speaks of,
which many may have the letter, the form, and deny the power of God, and so
have not the Gospel,

Pr. That the Gospel is no more the power of God then the rose cake that lay in
his window.

Ans. The Gospel is the power of God preached in every creature, more then a
rose cake; that gives every creature its living and being? for it relieves the
oppressed, turns against the oppressor; so is called glad tidings, for the
Gospel is preached unto every creature in heaven, which is the power of God,
which turns against that which bondageth, to wit, the corruptions, and so
gives liberty and freedom to the captives, and this is glad tidings which is
the power of God, and is more then any Creature, and all the creatures, that
which gives liberty and freedom to all, is glad tidings.

Richard Mayo further says, It was no matter to him if the devil was the
original of Tithes, if the Law of the Land would give it him, he would have it.

Ans. We do believe thee, his servant thou art, thy seared conscience and
hardness of heart discovers it, but the ministers of Christ and the Gospel
never preached nor held forth such doctrine, nor would never act any thing from
that which the Devil was the original of, which thou do say thou would take
tithes though he was the original of them, if the Law of the Land would give
it thee; he has been the original of them, and the Popes Laws first set them
up, whereby the Saints goods are strained and spoiled and made havoc of, and
art not contented with the spoiling of their goods, but you bring their bodies
into your priests den; and thus you eat up people, and swallow up the needy
for a thing of naught, as they did of old, your as forefathers did transgress
for a pair of shoos.

Pr. He says, Cain was no vagabond after he had built a City, and he said,
there was no scripture as that the Apostles had no certain dwelling place; and
that the steeple-house was the Church.

Ans. This is contrary to scripture; for Cain was a vagabond, though he builded
a City, and disobeyed the command of God, and lost his habitation in God, so
all great men upon the earth, though they build a City, and are Lords, and
Earls, and Dukes, and Princes, and Kings, if they do disobey the command of
God, and do not dwell in him, they have no habitation, but are all vagabonds;
and Paul had no certain dwelling place, 1 Cor. 4 11. and yet he had a
habitation in God, and was no vagabond, and the steeple-house is no Church, but
the old Masse-house set up since the days of the Apostles, since they lost the
true Church, These. the 1.

Priest Bushels Principles. These words were given forth by Seth Bushel Priest
of Whitley, as follows, the 25 day of the first month, 1658.
Pr. MEn are not converted by the light within them.

An. If Christ be not in you, the body is dead, and he is light within: And the
light that shines in the heart gives the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Christ Jesus. And none are converted but they that be in
him, and by him within; and the light that shines in the heart, gives the
knowledge of conversion and unconversion; and there is none comes to conversion
but by it, the light which is Christ.

Pr. He says, That he denies that the light that lights every man is Christ,
as John speaks, 1 John.

Answ. In this thou have denied John's, Doctrine, who said, he is the true light
which does enlighten every man that comes into the world. And as many as
received him, he gave them power to become the sons of God: and thus thou art
ignorant of the Scriptures, much more of the power of God.

Pr. He says, The light which every man is enlightened withal never converted
any man to God.

Ans. Here thou go about in thy Doctrine to prove that Christ never brought
any to God, who is the light that lights every man that comes into the
world, who is the way to the Father, that saves men from sin, and destroys
death, and he that has the power of it, and brings men into that the Devil is
out of. Thou, with the light and thy Doctrines art comprehended and condemned;
and no man is converted to God but by the light which has enlightened every man
that comes into the world.

Pr. He says, That the light which lights every man is the broad way.

Answ. Here people may all see this Priest a Minister of darkness and
wickedness; for the light which does enlighten every man is Christ Jesus, who
is the way to the Father, and leads people out of the broad way, which is come
up by Adam, sin, the Devil and transgression, which all be in the broad way
that deny the light.

Hereford, the 8. day of the first month, 1658. these words were spoken in a
meeting by Edward Price and Philip Langford, which is their principles.
Pr. PHilip Langford said, Paul was not freed from the act of sin whilst in
this life.

Answ. And Paul thanks God he was made free from the body of sin, and saw where
there was no condemnation; and thus he wrestles and fights against Paul, who
said he was made free from sin, and could live no longer therein; and the body
of sin was put off, and their conversation was in heaven.

Pr. We do affirm, that they that be in this faith that turns from sin, be
subject to sin, the act of sin, whilst in this mortal body.

Ans. This is confusion and contradiction, and not sound doctrine; for faith
that purifies the heart from sin, over it gives victory, in which men please
God, and have access to him, by the which they are justified whilst on earth,
and by the faith the just lives; and the life the Saints come to live which
gives them victory over the world, is by the faith of the Son of God.

Pr. Priest Price says, faith in Christ Jesus purifies not from the
in-dwellings of sin whilst in this body.

Ans. In this the Scripture has corrected thee; for it says, faith purifies
the heart; that which purifies, takes away sin: Sin, which being unclean in
its self, makes unclean.

Pr. He says, The guilt of sin may be taken away, but the act of sin may
remain.

Ans. A silly man, one of the old Doctors the Scriptures speaks of. Do thou
act sin, and do not thou feel the guilt of it? Thou brings the whole world
upon thy head, the principle of God in them all will witness against thee: And
ask all the Thieves that are condemned to the gallows, and the Drunkards, and
such as act sin, such as profess Scriptures, which are not in the life of it,
whether or no they have not a guilt upon them for acting sin; but this is one
of the blind Priests principles, none but mad men will believe them, wicked
liars against that of God in their own conscience, and thus they preach up the
Devils doctrine of Lies.

Pr. Edward Price says, that all men should be judged by the Scriptures, and
that the Scriptures is the power of God.

Answ. The Scripture says, Christ is the power of God; And the Apostle said,
the Letter kills; and all judgment is committed to the Son, says the
Ministers of Christ. And the Scriptures are the words of God, and Christ is the
Word, and Judge, in whom the words end, whom thou have thrown out, and set
Scripture in his room: And as for the rest of his words, they are not worth
mentioning.

Enoch Howets Principles.
Pr. THe doctrine of perfection in the creature is a lie.

Answ. The doctrine of Perfection in the creature is Christ, who destroys the
Devil and his works, and binds the strong man, and spoils his goods, and
takes the possession of it to himself, and the creature is a perfect creature
out of transgression: He that is borne of God does not commit sin, being the
seed of God remains in him, and that is the doctrine of Perfection in the
creature, and Christ makes all things new; and thou that cannot witness any
thing made new, art in the old things, crying up imperfection, and that is
perfect that brings men to confess their sin, and that is in the creature.

Thomas Hodges, Rector in Oxfordshire, Batchellor in Divinity, says,
Pr. THat the holy Ghost speaks in the Scriptures.

Ans. Here all may see his ignorance, whether this man be fit to be a Rector
who is thus corrected with the Scriptures, which says, that the holy Ghost
moved in them that gave forth Scriptures, which led them into all truth, and
did not say, the holy Ghost moved in the Scriptures; but said, the letter was
dead, and did not give life. And thus he Rects into darkness, in telling the
people the holy Ghost is in Scripture, when the Scripture never gave forth that
speech, but said it was in them that gave it forth; for many may have the
Scriptures, and want the holy Ghost, as the Pharisees.

Pr. To the Law and to the Testimony, and thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image that is in heaven or in earth.

Answ. I say to the Law and to the Testimony, before Matthew, Mark, Luke and
John, Epistles and the Revelations were written, The law is light, the
testimony of Jesus the spirit of prophecy, as in the days, Isaiah the 8. And
you have told the people that it is Old and New Testament; which the new was
not written in his days, in the days of Isaiah. And why do you make
likenesses of things in heaven and in earth, and hang up in your houses, and
signs, yet thou says we should not make them, for it is a breach of Gods
command: Of whom have you learned to make all these Images of things in heaven,
and things in the earth, since the days of the Apostles, but of them that went
forth from the Apostles, of whom ye are of, the Popes tribe.

Richard Heath, Priest in Shrewsbury: His Principles as follows.
Pr. THat the drawing people to a light within them, you draw them from God t
themselves, from the instruction of the spirit.

Answ. Here thou art an unlike Minister to the Apostle, who brought people to a
light within them, Cor. 2.4. and told them, that the light that shined in their
hearts would give them the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the
face of Jesus Christ; And so none comes to the knowledge of the spirit, but
such as comes to the light within (and from themselves) though they have the
Scriptures as the Jews had.

Pr. If we Ministers should send people from all other lights to the light
within them, they should then turn them from light to darkness, from God to
the power of Satan.

Answ. None comes to God, but who comes to the light within, from the power of
Satan and darkness; And God will dwell in man, and walk in man, and make his
abode, who is light, and the end of all other lights before they were: And ye
that turns people from the light, turns people into darkness, the power of
Satan, and there keeps people under his dominion, from the light Christ Jesus
that has enlightened every man that comes into the world, with which they
might see their Savior.

Daniel Gaudry, Priest of great Billing in Northamptonshire. His Principles as
follows.
Pr. THat the Saints are partly sinful, and failing in their best works, and
subject to continual lustings one against another.

Answ. The life of the Saints is Christ, not sinful at all; and they are
ceased from their own works, and are true believers; and the works of faith are
not sinful, nor the works of the spirit which the Saints are led withal; and
they come into Christ in whom they have peace, and not lust one against
another, but live in the spirit in which there is unity, in which is the bond
of peace; and the lusting one against another is in the transgression of the
spirit of God: So who be in Christ, be in peace; and who be in the world be in
trouble, in wars; but who be in Christ, be in him who was before Wars was,
inward or outward, of whom thou art ignorant.

Pr. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin; the guilt of it instantly and
perfectly from the stain and power of it gradually.

Answ. Where sin is, there the guilt of it is felt at that instant; but whoever
feels the sin, shall feel the guilt of it; and the blood of the seed cleanses,
it makes free from that which the Law takes hold of; And the blood of the seed
it cleanses from sin, the power and stain of it, and then the guilt is gone of
it; and where this is known, the seed that destroys death and him that has the
power of it, which is the Devil, the fullness is known which is above degrees,
that which degrees ends in.

Pr. It is the tang of Popery that a man may fall from saving grace.

Answ. The grace of God that appeared to all men which brings salvation, is
saving, and such thee and many Papists turns into lasciviousness and
wantonness; That which brings salvation is saving: So you are turned to be
murderers of one another about Scriptures, which was not the practice of them
who lived soberly, righteously, and godly, who deny the worldly lusts and
ungodliness, but their hearts were established in grace which was their
Teacher; but you and Papists that live wildely and ungodly, unrighteously in
the lusts of the world, that from the grace (and the saving grace) are fallen,
your fruits, your actions daily declares and shows it; and so you be talkers of
grace which is turned into wantonness among you and the Papists both, your
unseasoned hearts and words makes it appear.

Pr. We shall not see Christ as he is till he comes to judgment, then and not
before we shall see him. And then he adds, Every man that has this hope
purifies himself, which also argues that he is not pure and perfect, but only
in hope.

Answ. You, where you are, sees him not, nor know him not as he is, we do
believe you; but the Saints, the true Church whom he is the head of, whom he is
in the midst, and in whom he is: (And Christ told his Disciples, they had known
him, and) they knew the Son, and had the Son, and they had the Father also; and
he that had not, had not life: And they had handled and seen, and hope in it
self is pure, and that is it which purifies man, and makes him pure, as God is
pure. The hope now is pure in it self, a distinct thing, and that is to make
man pure as God is pure.

Pr. God may justly require his due of man, though man cannot give it.

Answ. God requires no more of man then he gives.

Pr. That the Quakers sends men to the light within them to be perfected, which
is no better then darkness,

Answ. Thou that sendest men to any thing, but not to the light within them,
thou keep them out from Perfection in utter darkness; And none comes out of
utter darkness to perfection, but by the light within them; and so growing up
in the light, they grow up in that which is perfect, and so in the fullness
which is Christ, which is the perfection of God.

Pr. Christ saves his people from the guilt of their sins here in the state of
justification: The state of the best Saints here, are imperfect.

Answ. Who are justified are saved from the guilt of sin; and who commits sin
feels the guilt, and cannot say they are justified in the committing of it; for
he that saves, sanctifies, redeems, and destroys the Devil and his works, and
death where he has power, where he keeps up his authority: And if the best
Saints here are imperfect, then they are not brought out of Adams state in the
transgression; for a Saint is one that is sanctified, and one that is redeemed,
and one that comes to know the works of the Devil destroyed, and washed, and
cleansed, and sanctified through the name of the Lord; and that which
justifies takes away sin and it is guilt both; For as it is written, he shall
save his people from their sins, and from the guilt, and from the wretched
state.

Pr. Surely they cannot be perfect here or hereafter in equality, but only in
quality.

Ans. Christ makes no distinction in his words, but says, Be ye perfect, even
as your heavenly Father is, and be ye merciful as he is; And as he is so are
we. And that which is perfect and merciful, as he is perfect and merciful, is
in equality with the same thing which is of God and from him.

Pr. The Saints they were come to the spirits of just men made perfect, but not
on earth.

Answ. The just men's spirits that led them to give forth Scriptures was the
spirit of God, and that was perfect; and was while they were upon earth; the
Saints were come to (which was Christ the end of all words) and so to God the
Judge of all the Earth.

Philip Taverner, called Preacher of the word, in his Book called, The QVAKERS
Rounds. These are his Principles as follows.
Pr. WE distinguish between the Essential word, and the declarative word, we
own Christ to be the Essential, and the Scripture to be the Letter.

Answ. The Scripture tells us that Christ is the word; the Scriptures of truth
that was given forth from the spirit of truth, were the words of God, in whom
they end in Christ the word; and you talk of a declarative word, and the
Scripture you call a History; and you call it a Creed, and you call it a
Catologue; and these Titles and names you have given to the Scripture of truth,
the words of God, which as I said before was the Scripture of truth the words
of God given forth from the spirit of God which ends in Christ, and does not
speak of a declarative word, but you in your nicity.

Prin. There is a twofold coming of the Gospel, the one in word, the other in
power.

Answ. The blind people here thou would make believe that the word was not
the power, which the word and the power is one, for Christ the word, and Christ
the power of God, his name is called the power of God, and he that Ministers
the word, Ministers the power of God and the Gospel.

Pr. The Saints that stood upon mount Sion that followed the Lamb; those Saints
that was without guil before the throne of God, is to be understood in the
justification and not in sanctification, that is spoken of in the Revelations
14.

Answ. Here thou have manifested thy self to be an accuser of the Brethren who
are justified, and said to be without fault; now who are justified, are
sanctified, and are justified; it was said, in their mouths was no guile; they
were not defiled; and now these that have no guile, and are justified, and were
not defiled with women, such are sanctified; so that thou Judge of things
that are too mighty for thee; and medles with things that are two weighty, and
brings Judgment upon thy own head; whose measure is measured and weights are
tried; and thou art of them that art found too light.

Prin. He that is born of God sins not, after the same sort as them that are of
the Devil.

Answ. He that commits sin is the servant of sin, and he that commits sin is of
the Devil; and he that is born of God does not commit sin, for he cannot,
because he is born of God; born of that nature which cannot sin; and those who
does sin is of the Devil, is of the same nature of their father; but he that is
born of God does no^ commit sin at no rate, for he is of the same nature of his
father.

Pr. As John says; as he is, so are we in this present world, that Scripture,
says he, cannot be so in the latitude of it.

Answ. I believe you, for from the men of your generation, it was not given
forth but them that are the Sons of God understands it as it is, and believes
it as it speaks.

Pr. Christ was holy from his conception, so are not we, says he; but we are
sanctified; in time, Christ was holy, and so are not we, for there still
remains the in dwelling of sin in us.

Ans. And some was sanctified from the womb, and some children was holy that
were born of the believers, Christ in the male and in the female, is as he was
in his eternal generation; and is the same and remains; and is the
sanctification, sanctifies the unsanctified Sons of Adam in the transgression,
and who has that without, and not within, are hypocrites, and Christ changes
them and makes them like himself.

Pr. That the Saints are complete in point of justification, and not in
sanctification.

Ans. They that are not complete in sanctification, they are not complete in
justification, for they are one; they that are complete in the one, are
complete in the other; and so far as a man is sanctified, so far is he
justified, and no farther; for the same that sanctifies a man, justifies him;
for the same that is his sanctification, is his justification, and his wisdom,
is his redemption; he that knows one of them, knows all; he that does not feel
one of them, feels none of them at all, for they are all one.

Pr. Faith justifies only instrumentally; neither does it justify
instrumentally as a work wrought in us by the spirit.

Answ. The man is blind, he is angry there, and fretting himself about things
that are too weighty for him, about things that he knows not; For faith is the
gift of God which purifies the heart, which brings people to have access to
God; In that, and by that which purifies men, men are justified, and in that is
virtue, by the hearing of that, men receive the spirit; so that this is
confusion, and contrary to the Scripture, and confuted by it; for ye are
justified through faith, and by the spirit, and that instrumentally from God,
in which men please him, and without which they cannot; therefore that is
isntrumental, and in that they have victory, and in that they have unity one
with another, and in it have access to God: But says he, faith does not
justify instrumentally by any virtue that is in it any more then is in love.
Love and faith is one, without faith there is not love: Love is the fruit of
faith, flows from it, without it there is not unity, and without faith there is
no victory, and without victory there is no love, and it justifies and is
wrought by the spirit.

Pr. A perfect conformity to the Law of God wrote in the strength and power of
grace, the spirit working all in us and for us, and all this is no more then
the righteousness of the Law.

Answ. That Is the end of the Law that brings to the righteousness of the Law,
and to a perfect conformity to it, and fulfills it; that is the seed Christ in
the male, and in the female, by whom grace comes by Jesus Christ, which brings
to live in the righteousness of it, which is the righteousness of faith, by
which the spirit is received, which works all in people, and for them, who ends
the Law.

The BROWNISTS Principles.
Pr. THey never heard Gods voice from heaven, nor see his shape: And yet they
affirm, they have the same power and spirit that the Apostles had, though much
below; and yet they have the Word abiding in them.

Answ. You that never heard the voice of God, nor see his shape, you have not
seen him who is a spirit, nor his power, nor his Word abiding in you; for who
has the spirit of God, and the power of God, and the Word of God abiding in
them; with the spirit of God, with the power of God, sees Gods shape; and who
has Gods Word abiding in them, hears the voice of God; for God is the Word,
and God will dwell in them, and walk in them.

Pr. That they are brought to the Church that is in God, the pillar and ground
of truth, where there is neither spot nor wrinkle, nor any such thing.

Ans. And yet you never heard the voice of God; and how can you be brought to
the Church that is in God, and never heard the voice of God? for none comes to
the Son, but through the drawings of the Father; and none knows the drawings of
the Father, but they heard his voice. The Jews that came not to the Son,
Christ told them, they had not known the voice of God; and none come to him,
but whom the Father draws.

Pr. We do not look for any such thing as revelation from heaven, or speaking
as they are moved, or waiting for the power as the Apostles did, we say we do
not look for any such thing.

Answ. This shows that you have not received the grace; for the grace comes by
revelation, and you have not received the Son; for the Son comes by revelation;
Nor you have not known the Father whom the Son reveals; You are not come to
the holy Ghost whom the Saints witnessed, that led them to speak forth
Scriptures, which no prophecy of the Scriptures came by the will of man; so
you are among those men that have the Scriptures in their wills, and wants the
thing that the Scriptures were given forth by, that is the holy Ghost, for holy
men of God were moved to speak them forth, who learned them of God, and spoke
them forth as the spirit gave them utterance; Therefore how can ye say, that
you are come to the Church in God, and waits neither for the power nor
revelation as the Saints did, and were in; for if you have all the Scriptures,
and have not that, you have not revelation, and have not the holy Ghost; for
the Scriptures are not known but by revelation, and they are revealed by the
spirit that gave them forth: And though men have all the Scriptures, yet the
Son is not known but by revelation of the Father.

Pr. The Scripture is the Gospel, the Scripture is the Light, the Scripture is
the Word.

Ans. The Scriptures are the words of God given forth from the spirit of God,
learned from him: The Gospel is the power of God, the Scripture declares it. A
man may have the form, and deny the power, and so deny the Gospel; Christ is
the light of the world, the life and the light of men by whom the world was
made; and many have the Scriptures, but denies the light, the life and power of
it, Christ Jesus, who is the life, and power, and the authority of them.

Pr. That they knew no law of God against praying and preaching by an
hour-glasse; and that the Apostles did perform the Ordinances of God at set
times; and Daniel and David prayed customarily, and how this can be said to be
will worship, and to be seen of men, we shall leave it to the Lord.

Answ. The Lord judges it to be will worship, that which limits the holy one
to an hourglass; and the spirit of the Lord that taught the Saints to pray
never limited it self to an hour-glasse: so you by an hour-glasse pray and
preach as the Papists with their beads, so that that limits the Lord to a set
time, those are traditions and vain customs of the heathen, and traditions of
men, which always the spirit limited; which spirit gave freedom to the just
in every one, which said, quench it not, nor limit it; but knock down vain
customs and traditions of men, which was set up by men, which had quenched the
spirit in themselves, and would limit the holy one in others, and such were
always judged of the Lord, and them that had his spirit to be Idolaters, and
in the will worship, and not in the spirit, which are got up since the days of
the Apostles.

John Turners Principle.
Pr. THat light which convinces a man of sin was a wicked conscience.

Ans. The wicked conscience does not convince of sin, then Satan were divided
against Satan: That which does convince of sin, is not wicked, nor sin; but the
spirit of God, the light of Christ Jesus, that convinces of sin; and the Elect
has faith; where faith is, there is obedience.

The Ranters Principles.
Pr. CHrist without comes to destroy Christ within.

Ans. Christ is but one, and it is the devil that he destroys and his works,
the Antichrist and not the true Christ, the seed in male and female, and it is
the false Christ he destroys in the male and female, and he comes to end the
types and figures and shadows that people might live in him, the end of the
types, and figures and shadows, the substance.

Pr. And the woman that Paul speaks of that is forbidden to speak in the
Church, but must learn of her husband at home, is the whore that drinks the
blood of, the Saints in Revelations.

Ans. That is false, for the woman the Apostles speaks of there, that must
learn in silence, and must be in subjection and ask her husband at home, is
in the state of Eve, who must not teach, but learn in silence, as also said
the Law, for she was first found in the transgression; now the woman here has
a husband to ask at home, and not usurp authority over the man, but Christ in
the male as in the female, who redeems from under the Law, and makes free from
the Law, the man may speak, Christ in the male and female who are in the spirit
of God, are not under the Law, but the whore who drinks the blood of the
Saints, is gone, from her husband from under the Law, to ask the whore-master
that does drink the blood of the saints, which Christ the seed judges upon to
whom he gives judgment.

Pr. And the outward creatures which God had made, and created, and blessed are
the serpents meat, as the old Ranter of Bristow, when he was gnawing a piece of
plum pudding, said he was eating the serpents meat.

Ans. The Serpents meat is dust, and he goes on his belly, and so has proved
him self to be a serpent, who eats his meat; which the children of God, the
seed does not, and Christ who eat of the bread, he did not eat the serpents
meat, he did not call it serpents meat, and that is cursed and judged that
does so.

Francis Duke his book entitled, The fullness and freeness of Gods grace; his
Principles are as follows.
Pr. GGod made man perfection of parts in this life, but not perfection in
degrees.

Ans. Perfection of parts is perfection of degrees, for where there is a part
there a degree, so in this thou medlest with things that are too heavy for thee.

Pr. That God did elect that drop of humane seed to be personal God man, as
the text is; the seed of the woman shall bruise the serpents head.

Ans. The elect is Christ, the seed and Christ the second Adam is not humane,
for humane is earthly, so thou erres in thy judgment, for as Christ the seed
says, he that is born of the flesh, is flesh, and he that is born of the
spirit is spirit, and the election obtaines it, and he that is of the earth is
earthly, but he that is from above, is heavenly.

Pr. Men may obey imperfectly, but truly.

Ans. Truth is perfect, Christ is truth who is perfect, and they that obey
truly, obey perfectly, for perfect obedience, and true obedience is one.

Pr. The seed of the Serpent and the Devils seed remains in the best of men in
this life, for without this seed of the Devil issuing in humane nature, it is
not capable of Eternal life.

Ans. This seed of the Devil hinders men to be capable of eternal life, and
such as are sanctified from the womb, was capable of eternal life, and such
as were made free from sin and the body of death, and sin put out of them could
not sin, because the seed of God remains in them, and witnessed redemption,
the works of the Devil destroyed, and Christ manifested in their flesh,
condemned sin in their flesh, and Christ in them, the body being dead because
of sin, which was borne of God, and they did not commit sin, they were past
from death to life, for sin brought death, and where the Devil had the power
of it which went out of truth, but the seed having destroyed death, and him
that has the power of it, which is the devil, and God the God of all peace
have bruised Satan under the faints feet, such is a top of the seed of the
devil, and they are capable of eternal life, and tells thee thy doctrine is a
lie.

Pr. Man may believe truly, but never rightly.

Ans. He that believes truly, and is in the true belief, believes rightly,
and he that believes truly is borne of God, and he whose belief is false, and
not born of God, it is as his that is out of truth, which is not right, which
the true belief in truth is over him, in that the Devil is out of; and all
his generation that stands in an outward belief.

Pr. The will of man remains in good men and bad men in heaven, and in hell,
and in earth.

Ans. There Is noe prophecy of the scriptures came by the earthly will of man,
but that man's will be subdued, and denied with the Cross and power of God,
whereby he that does the will of God abides for ever, but he that does his own
will abides not ever, and flesh and blood enters not into the kingdom of God,
and they that go down into Hell, go down into their own wills and
wilfulness, but he must be born again before he can enter into Gods Kingdom,
he that is borne of the flesh is flesh, and will persecute him that is born
after the spirit, for there is the two wills and earth is their footstool.

Pr. The Saints affirm themselves that they are all unclean things, and their
righteousness as filthy rags.

Ans. The Saints are clean, and are sanctified, and are washed, and are
cleansed, now are you clean says the Lord, ye were such, and such; and the
saints rightousnesse is Christ, such as never will grow ragged, which was
before the world was made, which was before rags, and ragged righteousness
was, this is the Saints, righteousness, and true believers, and the saints are
not unclean things, for it is the unsanctified that be unclean.

Pr. The Saints have a twofold righteousness in this world.

Ans. The righteousness of the Saints is one Christ, and is in one in God, from
whence all righteosnesse comes, and the true believers righteousness is Christ
Jesus, the end of the Law.

Pr. Thou say that, James envies those that brag of their faith without
works, thou say, the Lord attributes that to the eye, which is not proper,
the eye is the light of the body, but yet the eye has no light in it self to
enlighten the body; so he attributes that to the eye which is not proper to the
Light

Ans. James did not envy, for envy was of Cain and of the devil, and of the
wicked one, he did not envy them whose faith was dead without works, and
Christ's speech was proper, who said the light of the body was the eye, and
without the eye the body has not light, look of it either inward or outward,
it is proper within, and proper without, for when the eye is blinded within, the
body is full of darkness, when the eye is blinded without, the body is dark,
and he wants the light, and the light of the body is the eye, that being single
the body is full of light, and that is perfect.

Pr. That God redeemes his church with his blood, yet bleeds not.

Ans. Here again thou cavellest with the Apostles words, and art a perverter
of the Scriptures, who art with it corrected, the Apostle speak of the blood of
God, and the blood shed, and the conscience sprinkled with the blood.

Pr. Justifying faith, simply considered in it self, as to justification of a
sinner, is but (...) dark body till it has received Christ, and his
righteousness.

Ans. Where and justification is, and justifying faith, there is Christ and his
righteousness felt, for he is the justification, and this is not a dark body,
neither justifying faith, nor justification of a sinner, but thou art the dark
body, that those has so judged, for it is all one.

Pr. It is but perfection of parts, but not of degrees that people attain to,
beware you dream not that y u attain to perfection of degrees, as the Quakers
do, for when you so think of your selves that is the hour and power of
darkeness, and fall into temptations and abominations.

Ans. Where perfection is in parts, there is degrees, and that which is perfect
keeps out of darkness, out of the temptation and abomination, he that speaks
of perfection of parts, and not of degrees, he does not know what he speaks
of, but is in a dream, and the hour of tentation and the power of darkness,
and in the tentation and abomination, and does not know what he speaks of, for
perfection of parts is perfection of degrees.

Pr. The Saints inherent righteousness, is but imperfection of parts, as
filthy rages!

Ans. Where do thou read of the word inherent righteousness, but the
righteousness of Christ wrought in us, is not filthy rags, but that which thou
pretends to work in thy self, by dreaming imaginations, is filthy rags and not
true righteousness of Christ, which is without rags, but where do thou read
of inherent righteousness but of thy father the Pope.

Pr. Job had too high esteem of his uprightness wrought by the spirit of
Christ in him, who also assisted him to perfect patience.

An^. A man cannot be too high esteemed in uprightness, wrought by the spirit
of Christ in him which will assist to perfect patience, and thus thou
confoundest thy self.

Pr. If Job had hanged himself, he might have said in this case, it is not I
but my deep, distemper which strangled me.

Ans. Thou wicked liar of thy Father the Devil, the murderer, had Job
consented to the wicked one with his mind to have done the thing, then it had
been Job, and this is not comparable to Paul's state, he says it was no more he
but sin that dwelt in him, who did not consent with his mind, so thou art no
true measurer, but a false measurer, for to say it had been the infirmity of
the members, but not Job, yet there is the eye which was before the word Job
was, which the Devil has naught in, so both thee and thy measure is judged
according to Scriptures which came not by the will of man, which is of no
private interpretation.

Pr. That the written scripture is a more sure word of prophecy, then the
excellent speech from heaven to Jesus upon the Mount, as your Quaking doctrins,
which is bottomed, upon the Light within, which neither you nor no man else
knows what it is.

Ans. The voice that spoke upon the Mount, the excellent speech was the same,
and was to them that gave forth Scriptures, now the written scriptures many may
have, and deny the spirit of prophesy, and knew not the light shining in the
dark place, until the day dawne, and the day star arise in their hearts, and
the Quakers light within, which thou nor no man else knows what it is, as thou
say, then why do you judge of things you do not know? we do believe that your
darkness cannot comprehend it though it shines in the darkness, but where
light has shined out of darkness and shins in the heart, it gives the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, but all that
be in the light, and walks in it, have followship one with another, and knows
what light is, and comes to life, Christ from whence the light comes, which you
nor no man knows what it is, which are ravened from the spirit of God and so
knows not Christ the light.

Pr. The Scripture is the ground of Faith.

Ans. The ground of faith was before written Scripture was, God and Christ
Jesus who were the givers of Faith, and the authors of it; as Abel, Enoch,
Abraham had Faith before that which you call your ground of Faith was written,
but I say its able to make wise to salvation through the Faith in Christ Jesus,
who is the author of it, thou go about to lay an other ground then God and
Christ Jesus that gave forth to them that spoke forth the scriptures of truth.

Pr. You call a light within, and tell us it is Gods word, and calls the thing
everlasting word and spiritual, King, and Christ, and this lie is the ground
of your faith.

Ans. The word is light, and Christ is light, and the everlasting word, and
King, and he rules the hearts of the Saints, and is in the midst of his Church,
and dwells in his people, and in them he makes his abode, and all that be not in
this, be in the lie, and be not in the true foundation Jesus Christ.

Pr. When Christ told the devil, that man should not live by bread alone, but
by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God, that was believing the
scriptures; and this, the word of God in the scriptures was the ground of
Christ's faith, and so to all that were his.

Ans. Many may have the Scriptures, and never hear the voice of God, as the
Jews in the fifth of John and they said they believed the scriptures, though
they were out of the true belief, but receiving the word from God, is, as they
that gave forth scriptuers, which man lives by, and not by bread alone, and so
knows him which was before scripture was given forth, and for saying that the
scripture is the ground of Christ's Faith, he was before the scripture was writ,
and fulfills their words, and is the author and finisher of the saints faith,
which was before the scripture was given forth, him by whom the world was made,
and is the author of the Saints Faith that bruised the serpents head under his
feet, which was before scripture was.

Pr. For the Lord Jesus Christ himself who was personally God-man, simply
created nothing, yet you would have your light, called Christ, to be a Creator.

Ans. God was in Christ, and they are one, the Creator, the Father in the Son,
and the Son in the Father, and Christ in you, and God in Christ, the Creator
the maker of all things, and God will dwell in the saints the Creator, he
creates in them right minds, new hearts new spirits gives them understanding
and knowledge, to know him which is eternal life and wisdom, to walk in his
ways which are perfect; where Gods dwelling is in Saints, there is light, and
they have fellowship one with an other in it, and with the Son and the Father.

Pr That although the essence of God be within, yet it no way conducts to the
happiness of man.

Ans. Man feels not the happiness, but as he is in the power of God, in which
he has communion with him, and thou speaks thou do not know what.

Pr. John said, he had heard and handled Christ and looked upon him, but your
Idol Christ your light and everlasting word, you say is within, so that you
nor any man else can say what it is, except whimsies.

Ans. Thou that have not handled, seen nor heard Christ nor felt him within,
art in the Idols whimsies and blasphemy, for we witness that Christ, and has
handled him and seen him, and heard him, and knows the everlasting word, and
him within, which torments thee and thy ground, and thy seed, because he cannot
reign, but Christ is come to take possession, to dostroy him and his works, and
reign; and none sees this, bu^ they that own the light within, which comes
from Christ the King.

Pr. By letters and witness without, we will oppose your lying light within,
there to maintain against the best men whatsoever, your light within is a lie,
for you say the light within, is Christ, I deny the scriptures are a witness
to bear to your light within, which is your Idol, and this word of God within
to be no more nor less then a lie.

Ans. The scripture bears witness to the light within, for I know that's thy
work and the devils which is out of the light which is the truth, to oppose it,
who rules in the Children of disobedience, but cannot rule in the children of
light, and the scriptures says Christ in you, and God will dwell in you, he is
light and they are light, the light that shines in your hearts to give you the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and
this the Scripture bears witness to, as in Cor. 2.4.2.13. and the word is nigh
thee, in thy h^^rt, and in thy mouth, Romans 10. and as for all the rest of thy
stuff, confused parsell of ignorance in thy book, as this before mentioned,
which is not worth setting pen to paper, but for the simple ones sake it is
given forth, for the day is appeared that all your works are seen and come to
light, praises and glory to the Lord God the Highest for ever; in the day of
thy fullness thou have been in the mischief of iniquity, but in the day of thy
poverty, when the witness of God stirs and rises in thee, and judgment enters
upon thee, then remember when thy works burn, and thou in the fire, what thou
did in the world, in thy life time against the Saints and the elect, and
spoke of things thou could not know nor weigh, but were too heavy for thee,
and how thou actest against the light of Christ within, which would have led
thee to salvation.

Enoch Howet of Lincoln, His Principles in his Book as follows, as he calls
the Doctrine of the Light within.
Pr. I Have taken upon me as my duty to forewarn all men of the Doctrine, that
teach men to look at the Light within them.

Answ. We do believe thee, here thou art not only Ante-Christ, but
Anti-Apostle, that's against him, who taught people to look to the light within
them, and told them that the light that shined in their hearts to give them the
light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and
this is the Doctrine which thou forwarnest all men of, and said it is thy duty,
so thou may see whom thou servest, that turns men from light, and warns
people of the Apostles Doctrine, in that all may Judge what thou turns them to,
and whose duty thou art doing, and whose messenger and Minister thou art, them
that be in the fear of God, see thee.

Pr. To look to the light within, is to look at his deceitful heart, and it
will offer thee darkness for light, and its evident, if thou look to that which
thou calls the light within, he brings thee to take council of a corrupt heart,
the prince of the Air, the prince of darkness.

Answ. The light that shines in the heart, that thy darkness cannot comprehend
it, is not the Prince of darkness, nor the Prince of the air, nor the deceitful
corrupt heart; but by the light within is all discovered and made manifest, for
its the light within that discovers a man's thoughts, a man's councels of his
heart. And Christ within is light and that the Apostle bid the Corinthians
examine themselves, and prove themselves, and know not they their own selves
how that Jesus Christ was in them except they were Reprobates? Now where Christ
is within, there is light; now Reprobates cannot endure to hear it talked of
within, but calls it blasphemy, corrupt heart, and deceitful heart, and so
forth; and the Apostle told the Saints that God would write his Law in their
hearts, and put them in their minds, and the law is light, and God would dwell
in them, and walk in them, and where God is, there is light, and in him is no
darkness, and the Saints are his Temple, and this Doctrine the light within,
its thy work and Ministry to teach and warn all men against.

Pr. To look at the light within, leads men to look at a judgment here in this
life, and to take off men from eternal judgment.

Answ. There Is none sees the judgment in this life, nor the eternal judgment,
but with the light within; for the light makes manifest, what must be judged,
and what must not. O that thou should be so blind! and who judge themselves
shall not be judged.

Pr. The people which depended upon light within fell into shameful enormities,
and when they pretended the light within, they pretended an Angel of light
which cozens us, which at the best is but a broken cistern, the Ephesians were
sometimes darkness.

Answ. They are the broken Cisterns that cannot hold the water of life, and
they are under the pretended Angel of light, that deny the light of Christ
within; and shameful enormities that be from the light which makes manifest all
those things; and though the Ephesians were darkness, yet the light shined in
the darkness, and the darkness could not comprehend it, John 1.

Pr. The light within draws from the expecting of the assurance of Christ by
working in our hearts, the children of disobedience; so that we wait not upon
God for assurance, but to trust to the light within.

Answ. None comes to assurance of Christ Jesus, but who comes to the light that
shines in his heart, which Christ Jesus has enlightened him withal who is the
way to him; none comes from under the power of the Prince of the Air out of the
disobedience, to the thing he had disobeyed, but who comes to the light within,
which shines in his heart, which gives him the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and there is none knows the working
of Christ but by the light within.

Pr. When they were pricked in their hearts, the Apostle did not bid them look
to the light within them.

Answ. Did not the Apostle bid them repent? And was not there something in them
that did give them to understand their trangression who might repent, and come
to receive remission for their sins by Christ the light, who lightened every
man that comes into the world, which shines in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not, which light shined forth, it gives the light of the
knowledge of God in the heart, and that which pricks them is within them.

Pr. To look at the light within puts us by the experience of the created word.

Answ. The light within brings to look at Christ, whose name is called the word
of God, by whom all things was created, and the light within gives experience
of him, which is beyond all created experiences that are changeable; and the
Scripture does not tell us of the created word.

Pr. To follow the light within, the natural man that is said to lead to
perfection, draws from and puts us from waiting upon the commands of God.

Answ. No natural man comes out of his natural state to perfection, to know the
commands of God, that which discovers all these things to him is the light
within, which comes from Christ, and brings him to know the Covenant of God;
who are kept from the light within, are kept from perfection, and the commands
of God, and the Covenant of God, and Christ.

Pr. There can be no reproof for breaking of a Law if it were not written.

Answ. Adam broke the Law before it was written, and was reproved.

Prin. Light within, and watching in that light to bring us to perfection will
be a vain watch.

Answ. None sees perfection, nor none comes to the true watch, but they who
come to the light within, which does manifest that which must be stood against,
and not received, and all watches are vain that be not in the light within, for
they will put evil for good, and good for evil; darkness for light, and light
for darkness, that watches not in the true light that shines in their hearts,
which makes manifest.

Pr. Let us leave leaning on the light within for direction.

Answ. Then you turn your selves from the Apostles doctrine, the light that
shines in your hearts, to give you the light of the knowledge of the glory of
God in the face of Christ Jesus, 2 Cor. 4. and you turn into darkness from that
which should give you the knowledge.

Pr. To look to the Light within draws us from or puts us past the blood of
the new Covenant the application of it.

Answ. There Is none sees the new Covenant; Christ Jesus, to Jews and Gentiles
the covenant of light which does enlighten every man that comes into the
world, and the blood of it, he that sees this, his eye is opened, and is a
believer, for who sees the blood of Christ and his righteousness, and comes to
the blood of Christ who has enlightened him, he comes to life; and none does
come to life, but who comes to the light which Christ has enlightened him
withal: For in him was life, and the life was the light of men; and the light
shines in darkness, and the darkness comprehends it not, though all things
were made by him; And them that live in the darkness, hate the light, and do
not believe in it, and so they are condemned by the light.

Pr. That this doctrine, the light within, draws us from Christ.

Answ. None comes to Christ, nor is drawn unto Christ but with the light, and
that is within, and gives them to know what they are come from, and what they
are come to, for it gives them the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of
Christ Jesus.

As for all thy other works of darkness in thy Book, they are not worth
mentioning; but whose messenger he is, the day does bring him to light, the
witness of God in his conscience shall answer in the day of his condemnation and
judgment, who is under the spiritual wickedness, and in whom is the high
places of it, who stands against, and denies the doctrine of the Light within,
the saints and Apostles has judged him to be a messenger of Satan, a false
Apostle, a Minister of unrighteousness out of the light, the truth, as you may
read in the Corinthians; for the true Messengers, Ministers, and Apostles of
Christ Jesus made by the will of God, brought people to the light within, that
shines in their hearts, and told them, that the light would give them the light
of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus.

Priest Fergison, his principles as follows, who is a Teacher in Kent,
confessed to Ambrose Rigge.
Pr. THat the scripture was the Law and Testimony.

Answ. This is contrary to the Scripture, for the Scripture says, the Law is
light, Prove. 6. and the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy; and the
Law and Testimony was before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, the Epistles and
Revelations were written, as in the 8 of Isaiah.

Pr. That the Scripture is the rule of life and doctrine, and that it was the
Word of God.

Answ. Adam, Abel, Enoch, Abraham, and the holy men of God had a rule for their
lives, before the Scripture was written, the spirit was the rule of their
lives, that led forth Saints to speak forth Scripture: And they that have the
Scripture, and not the spirit of Christ, they are none of his; and the Jews
had Scripture, but wanted the rule of life. Nevertheless the Scripture which
was given forth from the spirit of God, is profitable for Doctrine; and the
Scriptures of truth are the words of God, learned of God, and not the word, and
Christ the word before the Scriptures were given forth, by whom the world was
made, is the word of God, who fulfilled the words, the Scriptures in him ends,
who was before they were spoken forth.

Pr. That the Scripture is the way to God, and that the Scripture was the
ground of Faith.

Answ. The ground of faith is Christ; the Apostle bids the Saints look to him
which was the Author and finisher, not the Scripture, but Christ the Author of
their faith, the ground of it: And Abraham, and Enoch, and Abel had faith
before Scripture was written: so who has faith, are of Abraham, and they
witness Abraham's ground; and the Jews had Scriptures, but had not faith, nor
the ground: so your faith that has no other ground but Scriptures, is like
unto the Jews: And Christ is the way to God, who was before Scriptures were
written, who fulfills the Prophets, Abraham and David's words; and the Jews had
Scriptures, but stood against the way to God, Christ Jesus the light, as all
you do that stand against the light; And Abraham, and Abel, and Enoch had the
way to God before the scripture was written, and Christ Jesus is the way to
God. Christ says, I am the way, to the Jews, who had scriptures.

Pr. That there is no perfection to be attained to, while people live upon
earth.

A Then by thy doctrine Christ is not attained to while man lives, which is
contrary to the Apostles and Christ's own doctrine, who said, I in you, and you
in me: and Christ in you the hope of glory; and then none abides in the Vine by
thy account, which is Christ, and none bears fruit to the glory of God who
abides not in the Vine; and who abides in the Vine, abides in the perfection of
God; and thou art contrary to the Ministers of Christ, whose work was for the
perfecting of the saints.

Pr. That Justification and Sanctification differs.

Answ. Justification and Sanctification is one; for Christ who is the
justification and sanctification is one, and it is thou that differs from him.

Pr. That the word of faith in the heart spoken of, in the 10^h of the Romans,
is the Scriptures.

Answ. The Apostle does not say so; for many had the scriptures, and were under
the Law, and knew not the word of faith, the gift of God.

Pr. He said, the Scripture leads into all truth.

Ans. This is contrary to Scripture; for the Scripture says, the spirit of
truth shall lead you into all truth; this is the promise of Christ, and Christ's
words: And Abraham had his leader, and Enoch, to Christ and to God before the
Scripture was given forth. Oh that ever men should be set up to be Teachers,
that are so blind concerning the Scriptures, and receive so many thousand
pounds a year for teaching: And the Jews had scriptures, and were not led into
all truth as you Christians are now; therefore are you all in heaps about them,
wanting the spirit to lead you into all the truths of them.

Pr. He said, That Christ and the Father, and the holy Ghost are not one; but
they are three, therefore distinct.

Answ. This is the denying of Christ's doctrine, who says, I and my Father are
one; and the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and he was
conceived by the holy Ghost, and they are all one, and not distinct, but one in
unity; that which comes out from him, leads the Saints into all truth (that
ever was given forth from the spirit of truth) and so up unto God the father of
truth, and so goes back again from whence it came.

Pr. It is blasphemy to say the Son is one with the Father, and not distinct
from him.

Answ. The Father and the Son are one, the Son is in the Father, and the Father
in the Son, so that which is in him, is not distinct from him; and they
blaspheme that say the Son is not in the Father, and deny Christ's doctrine.

Pr. He said, The Father is a distinct incommunicable being from the Son, and
the Son a distinct incommunicable being from the Father, and the holy Ghost a
distinct incommunicable being from the Son.

Ans. The Son is one, and in unity with the Father, and not distinct, but
equal, and thought it not robbery: The holy Ghost is in unity with the Son and
the Father, which proceed from them, and they are one in unity, and not
distinct. Thy doctrine is dross, and you Priests are not fit to judge in such
things as they are, they are too weighty, and too heavy for you.

Pr. He affirmed, That the Scripture is the power of God, and that the
Scripture is the Gospel.

Answ. The power of God leads them to speak forth the Scriptures; and the power
of God is Christ, and the power of God endures for ever; but Scripture is
writing, and does not; and the Gospel is the power of God, says the
Scriptures, and does not say that the Scripture is the Gospel; for many had
that, and witnessed not the glad tidings, and so thou art here distinct from
the Ministers of the Gospel, and art not a Minister of it, the power of God,
but puts writings for it; which power of God was before writings were.

Pr. He affirmed, That the Father was the Creator, and not God.

Answ. This is contrary to the Scripture: For in the beginning God created the
heavens and the earth; the Father and God is one, the maker of all things; for
God the Father that made the world says the Apostle, Gal. 4.6. One God and
father of all.

Pr. He said, That Christ was not his rule, but the Scripture was his rule.

Ans. I do believe thee that Christ is not thy rule, so life is not thy rule,
wisdom is not thy rule, truth is not thy rule; and so Christ not being thy
rule, thou art ignorant of Scriptures, and knows them not; for he who is the
substance of the scriptures, is not thy rule; so thou know them not, neither
art subject to them.

Pr. He says, That God justifies them that are not sanctified.

Answ. He that is justified is sanctified, for he that justifies, sanctifies.

Pr. And another Priest says, That Christ was not the resurrection of the body.

Ans. Christ is the resurrection and the life, and the Savior of the body, who
brings the creature into the liberty of the Sons of God.

The Priests of Lancashire, their Principles.
PRiest Jacus the foreman of them said, the letter and the spirit were
inseparable.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostle, 2 Cor. The letter kills, and the spirit gives
life: And we are Ministers not of the letter, but of the spirit: so the spirit
that ends the letter, was before the letter was; and men may have letter, and
not the spirit, and deny the Ministers thereof; And the Apostle said, they were
one another Epistles written in one another hearts, and not with paper and
ink, but with the spirit of the living God, and so you are contrary to the
Ministers of Christ; and if every one which has the letter, have the spirit,
what need you teach? your teachings are at an end, for the spirit will open to
you the scriptures.

The Professors Principles at Westmerland, Edward Briggs the leader of them,
said,
Pr. IT was heresy and deceiving the people, to bid people believe in the
power of God.

Ans. Then they must not believe in Christ who is the power of God; and it is
not heresy nor deceiving of people, to bid them believe in the power of God
which is Christ, and they are in the heresy and deceiving state, that do not
believe in the power of God; and deceiving people, and keeps them all in heaps
under the power of the Devil, and so to believe in that, which is the cause of
peoples destroying and persecuting one another.

Pr. And others of the Professors said, That God had no hand in working out his
salvation.

Ans. This is contrary to scripture, for God was in Christ reconciling the
world to himself; And God is the Author of salvation, who sent his Son into
the world to be a Leader, a Captain, a Teacher, and a Redeemer, and a Covenant:
And there is no name by which men must be saved, but by this Name.

Ellet and Crabs Principle, who are Baptists.
Pr. THat it was blasphemy for any one to say, he was justified by a Christ
within him; and that if they should look to a light within, they should not
have peace an hour.

Ans. If Christ be not within you to justify, you are Reprobates, for he is
justification and sanctification both; and the light within, you looking at
that, it will not let you have peace, but let you see your works, actions,
deeds, thoughts and words which you have acted and spoken. Now the Saints peace
is in the light which is within; for the light is Christ, the Covenant of God.

Priest Fowler of Reading, his principle.
Pr. HE said, That the Scripture was the foundation of foundations.

A. Here thou have thrown out Christ who is the tried stone, and the sure
foundation, and not the scripture; but the scripture declares of it by the
Prophets and the Apostles; and no other foundation can any man lay, but what is
laid, Christ Jesus, and so thou have laid another foundation, and so art
contrary to the Prophets and Apostles, and thy work will come into the fire;
For God laid the foundation of the waters, which is not Scripture. God laid the
foundation, that all the lost state of men, the sons of Adam that be in the
transgression, that all might come to build upon him the foundation, Christ
Jesus; when wise men are turned backward, and the soothsayers and inchanters
are gone mad, and the chafe scattered, and all makers of trades of Christ and
the Apostles words, Babel, and the builders fall, the foundation of God
remains, Christ Jesus; who are built on him are sure, and does remain.

Pr. Priest Goodgroom and the Priest of Ware affirmed and said, the Scriptures
were both the writings and the thing signified.

Answ. By this the Scripture is Christ, and God, and spirit, and life, and
savior, and Devil, and Hell, and error, and blasphemy by your Principle and
Doctrine, which is all false, which is not error, nor blasphemy, nor heaven,
nor hell, nor Christ, but declares of these things. How have you led people in
the ditch ye blind guides? their wallowing in their sins in the mire, and
crying out of them, and then you tell them they shall never be made free from
them while they be upon earth, making a trade of saints words.

Prin. That Christ justified persons, secluding and seting aside the new birth
and work of sanctification.

Answ. Justification sets not aside the work of sanctification, nor new birth,
but is one with it; for justification is sanctification; for they who are
justified, it is by Christ, who is the sanctifier, and who are in him, witness
the new birth; for as many as receive him, Christ, who does enlighten every one
that comes into the world: And as many as receive him, to them he gives power
to become the sons of God. And those which hates the light which they be
enlightened withal, which is their condemnation: For this is the condemnation,
that light is come into the world; but m^n love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds be evil.

Prin. That the Letter is the Word: and denies that any were converted by a
light within.

Answ. The principle of God has been transgressed within, so comes
unconversion going from God, and the higher power added upon the transgressor,
the Law, which who had it, had the types, figures and shadows, which made
nothing perfect; but the bringing in of a better hope, which hope is Christ
within; and none is converted to God out of types, figures and shadows, out of
transgression, Adams state in the fall, and knowing the renewing of the inward
man, life and immortality come to light; but as they come to know the light
within, Christ, who is the way to God, and who is in him, is in conversion,
translation and regeneration, in a new life serving God; and the Scripture or
Letter is not the Word, Christ is the Word; And they that had the Letter,
killed him who was before the Letter was, who were the blind Priests and
Pharisees, like your selves.

Pr. that Christ ju tified sinners as sinners.

Answ. Christ justifies them as they have been sinners, and come from it, in
the faith; for by faith are they justified, and faith purifies them from their
sin; but them that hate the light which Christ has enlightened them withal,
they are condemned by it, and that is the worlds condemnation, the light, in
which light the saints witness their Justification, and see Christ the Author
of their Faith.

Lamb in the City of London, the Baptists Teacher, and some of his company,
their principles as follows.
Pr. HE affirmed, That the Scripture was the Kingdom of heaven, and that the
sc^ipture was the light of the Lamb.

Ans The kingdom of heaven is within people, as in Luke 17. And the Pharisees
had Scripture, and knew not the Kingdom of heaven within them, but were gazing
for it without them; as thou, who art gazing without, and says, the scripture
is it, when the scripture does but declare of it, and tells people it is within
them, and says, Christ is the light, and the scriptures is a Declaration of it.

Pr. Two of the Baptists said, That the light which does enlighten every one
that comes into the world is a natural light, and Christ was a natural man.

Answ. The light which does enlighten every that comes into the world, is
Christ the Covenant of God, which was before the Sun and Moon and Stars was,
which were made by him, which are natural lights; and Christ is not a natural
man, nor was not; for a natural man receives not the things of God, but they
are foolishness unto him; and the things of God, Christ did receive, and they
were not foolishness unto him.

Two Baptists affirmed, The Quakers denied the Scriptures, because they did not
speak with a book in their hands.

Ans. This is ignorance; for a man may speak the Scripture, and have never a
book in his hand; and though he do not name Chapter and Verse, which is set up
by men's wits; which the spirit that gave them forth did not set them in a frame
to please men's wills withal. And the Quakers do not deny the Scripture,
because they do not tell people Chapter and Verse, and hold a book in their
hand, but are come into that it speaks of, which are come into that which
cannot be shaken: And here the blind ignorance of the Teacher appears, who can
get no further then the Chapter and Verse, and Book in the hand; this is like
the horse which can find the pasture again when he has been there: So when he
has seen Chapter and Verse, he can find it again; this is not like them which
gave forth Scriptures, which be learned of God, and what they had received of
God, afterward recorded; which now you and the Priests fall out about, and are
in heaps, and have no unity with it nor God, nor one with another, and would
tear one ano^hers flesh to pieces about it; and here your spirits are tried.

William Greenhill Priest of Stepny who makes a trade of the Scripture, his
principle as follows.
Pr. THe scripture is the Divine word and wisdom of God.

Ans. Thou have thrown out Christ in this, and put scripture in his place, and
given the scripture his name, who is the Word, as in the Revelation, Whose name
is called the word of God, who is the wisdom of God, and this the scripture
testifies of, as in the Corinthians; John, and the Revelations.

Pr. William Stanly a Tutor to children said, That some had a priveledge to
sin, and yet were free from the condemnation of the Law by the sufferings of
Jesus.

Ans. But none have a priveledge to sin from God, but from the devil; for it
is contrary to the Law of God; for the Law does not tolerate any such thing,
nor the Son of God, who was made manifest to destroy the Devil and his works,
and to condemn sin in the flesh, so no one has a priveledge to commit sin, but
from the Devil, and it is no priveledge to sin, from God.

A book called, the Relation of the Quakers shaking, those whose names are at
it, are John Gilpin, Thomas Craster, Thomas Sands, John Archer, Edw. Turner,
Priest Walker.
WHo are like unto Jannes and Jambres who resist the truth, being men of
corrupt minds, who blaze abroad in the Nation to make truth odious, and to
posess the hearts of people, by some that turn from truth: first John Gilpin
who by truth was made to confess his sin, and had openings, and then turned
from it again, and turned to the persecutors, and this Gilpin was these men's
convert, which was most of them, all the greatest persecuters in the North,
which after John Gilpin had turned from these people called Quakers, to these
men whose names are to the book, he turned drunkard, being drunk, a warrant was
granted out for him, by a justice of peace and yet these men whose names are at
this book, styled this man one of their high converts, but according to their
works their reward will be.

John Gilpin said, While he was with the Quakers, he never found such effects
among the Ministers of England, as he did amongst the Quakeres, of the
discovery of his sin, in particular, of his Covetousnes, which had a great long
root in him. And this all these men whose names are in the book, terms it to
be of the Devil, and this is their judgment, because John Gilpen run out in
his imaginations, therefore that which discovers to a man all his sins and his
covetousness, that is of the Devil too. O! no my friends, you have wrong
judged, and you will fail at last, whom you have judged, and what you have
justified, that which discovers your sin and filth, and covetousness, that
which discovers the Devil which is the author of it, that is the light and
life of Jesus Christ, and so in stead of saying the Quakers are shaking, you
are shaking yourselves, and your foundation made known, not to be the
foundation of Jesus Christ, And the light that discovers sin; and when the true
thing did convince and work in John Gilpin, then his imaginations run out, and
you, and he, calls it delusion to hearken to the voice within, and yet you and
John Gilpin says, that he was in some measure raised to believe, that God
would deliver him and yet it is delusion, to hearken to the voice within.

Ans. What confusion is here amongst you and your convert, does any believe or
come to deliverance or faith, but who hears the light within, and who hears
the voice within, and bears witness within? does not he that believes hearken
to the witness in himself, and has he not it there? and is not faith in the
heart, and any deliverance is it known, but what is known from that within?
and thus you poor deluded creatures are glad to trust in lies, and make them
your refuge.

Pr. He says, He began to consider how he had offended God, by his neglect of
the use of external means, reading, hearing and prayer, and rejecting the
revealed will of God in his word, and hearkening to the voice of God only
within.

Ans. Is reading and praying in the spirit external means? is this your
judgment all you Priests, and teachers and great professors found in this
book? can any pray but in the spirit, and Read the scriptures, and know them
again but in the spirit, and is not that eternal? can any man know the
revealed will of God, and his word, but it must be by the spirit? is not the
word in God, is not Christ the word? his name is called the word of God, and
can any know these things but by the voice within? which voice is the spirit,
the spirit of the Father speaking in believers, the saints, which led them to
speak forth Scriptures, so when that voice was neglected, then was John
confused, as you are all now that speak against it, that whatsoever filth and
dirt you run into, you will father it upon the voice within, or the light, and
Christ within, but you are comprehended and seen, who are now flown to your
external means you tell people of, and your prayers and Reading are external,
we do believe you, who be all out of the spirit, but if ever any of you come to
know God, and true praying in the spirit, you will deny your principle, and we
do believe your means is external, and your prayers external without the
spirit of God; and this Gilpin who had been thus covetous and grievous sinner,
whom the Lord smote, that he came to be almost a distracted man, after he had
got a little ease from under the judgment, his flight being in the winter, he
goes to the Priests and professors, which be here mentioned in this book,
enemies of all righteousness, and presently turns a drunkard, and a Justice of
the peace granted a warrant to set him in the stocks, and so he passed away
about thirty miles off to Cacebie, and this is Gilpins Lord, who was convicted,
by the truth, of his covetousness, and his sin, who run into his imaginations,
whose latter end is worse then his beginning; And this is the convert of this
many persecuting professors and teachers, who to their shame have published it,
which comes a top of their own heads, and truth is clear, and filth is wiped
away, and wiping, and the refuge of lies is flying away that people shall not
make them their refuge, and those persecuting professors and Priests take
occasion to speak of one James Miler, in whom the Lord did open true
prophesies, and mighty things to him, in some things his mind runned out, and
that he condemns, and yet these wicked men will go tell the Nation of it, so
what will they have more of a man but his life, for abundance they have cast
into prison, and again these persecuting professors and Priests has published
in one of their books to the world of one Hugh Bisbrowne of buggery, who had
some time come to the Quakers meetings, but was turned from them, and durst not
meet them, for he had been judged by the Quakers, before such things were heard
of him by them, and yet these filthy men will villifie truth with such things,
that they might make it odious to the world, but the sober people see all these
things is but their envy, and again these persecuting professors and teachers
has put in their book that they have published to the world one Cotton
Crosland, and they say he was a professed Quaker, and that he knew higher
things then the Ministers, and that he hanged himself, and he was buried in a
Cross way, and a stake was driven through him, that passengers might take heed
of Quaking. This man I saw him once at a meeting, and another time in the rude
multitude he was amongst the Quakers, the first time he said little, and the
second time he spak something amongst the rude multitude, which the Quakers did
not own him, and he raised a grievous lie agianst G. F. and said, he said he
was Christ, which was on a market day among the market people.

This is the third time that ever I saw him amongst any of the Quakers, and he
told G. F. he had witness to prove it, and G. F. told him, he was Judas, And he
went away, and after a while hanged himself. And Christ in the male, and
female, if he speak he was Christ the seed, and the seed was Christ, but he did
not speak it, as a creature, and here is the Priests, and Professors Quaker,
which turned against the Quakers, and would have betrayed them, but Quaking we
own, and trembling, which you all must do, before you know your Salvation
wrought out with fear and trembling; And a many lies you have gathered up
together and stuffed up your book withal, and make them your refuge, and think
the world will refuge under them, but a lack for you, people begin to see it
was nothing but envy in you; And it was known that Gilpen was never no long
Quaker, though the Devil was made to tremble in him; And the Lord will reward
you according to your work. The witness in your conscience shall answer it in
you all in the day of your Judgment.

Thomas Collier, Nathaniel Strange, Thomas Glasseys; who calls themselves
servants of Christ in his Paper to all the Churches, called Saints, through the
immortal seed. Answer; The Churches and Saints who be of the immortal seed has
viewed your paper and your principles in it As FOLLOWS.
Pr. YOu say, You have taken upon you to speak to God, though dust and ashes,
and yet you said, you are Saints through the immortal seed.

Answ. Thou have forgotten what thou have written before in thy Preface: who
has taken upon you to speak to God, though dust and ashes, yet says through
the immortal Seed; such as be Saints though the immortal seed, are not dust and
ashes; for the immortal seed lives and abides and endures for ever.

Pr. You say, You have been bewailing Congregation-iniquity, family, iniquity,
personal-iniquity; and close-iniquity; for by your Search you have found Sion
full of unsoundness from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot, all
puterified sores, and now call upon them that tremble at the word of God, to
come to us.

Answ. You have cast them out that tremble at the word of God, and made them
your byword, and written and Printed against them, and the Lord has appeared
to their glory: and what, Saints, close iniquity, family iniquity, Congregation
iniquity, and personal iniquity, and Sion from the head to the foot all full of
putrified sores, and no soundness from the head to the foot, and now do you
call to them that tremble at the word of God, whom you have cast out whom in
scorn you have called Quakers? will you now turn Quakers? do you begin to be
ashamed?

Pr. O come and sit down in the dust, and weep bitterly before the Lord for
your abomination, you have but as it were played with God, you have not trembled
at his presence; you have been wanton before him, and have forgotten what
manner of men, and women you were; and thought no more of your prayers: O how
often have you mocked God; how does the world canker your affections, while you
have been asleep, in the lap of this delia?

Answ. Thou have even shamed thy Church, do thou call them Saints through the
immortal seed, and say they mock God, and are asleep in the lap of this delila?
and the world has cankered their affections? thou have shamed thy Church, and
called them Saints through immortal seed, and yet they must weep bitterly for
their abominations, and sit down in dust and ashes, are these like Saints,
sanctified ones, of the immortal seed? or like transgressors the unsanctified
ones; not worthy to have a name to be called Saints; for such as mocked God,
and was in abominations, must lament for it; was not sanctified, nor was not
come to know the immortal seed: but the Saints and the immortal seed, reigned
over all mockers, and such as was cankered with the world, and mocked God, and
was in their abominations, they came to reign over all that in the wisdom of
God, with which they ordered the creation to his glory, you call your selves
servants of Christ. If your people be cankered and mockers of God in the
abominations, you have labored in vain, and shows you have not profited them
at all, but are the false teachers.

Pr. Thou say you have reigning abominations, cruelty to servants and
children, exating labors; taking no time to counsel them, we have mourned
that we have had so great a hand in this trespass, and not born testimony
against our Ministers.

Answ. This has been your condition, your fruits has declared it, therefore
it is time for you to repent, and amend your lives and doings, and turn to the
Lord; for while you have time, prize it, for you that have stood against the
Light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, are not of the
Church of Christ, for none comes to it, but through the light.

Pr. Though slavish fear, had stopped our mouths, until the mouth of iniquity,
has almost devoured the poor Church of Christ.

Answ. The Church of Christ is the Pillar and ground of truth, it cannot be
devoured by the mouth of iniquity, the gates of Hell cannot prevail against it;
but through your mouth of iniquity, enmity, and envy, you have almost slain
your selves, who is against the truth turned: who has been slavish for it; but
against it mad in your blind zeal, the mouth of iniquity has been open in you
with all the world, against the truth, but with it, in a great measure it is
stopped.

Pr. The evils has been so strong that they have wrestled all weapons out of
the hands of Saints, and Ministers, that have been formed against them.

Answ. These have been pitiful weapons, that you Ministers and Saints have had
in your hands, that the evil wrestled them out they have been carnal not
spiritual; for the spiritual weapons the evil cannot wrest out of the hands of
Saints, and Ministers of God; but with them they are plucked down, his holds
and high places and spiritual wickednesses; the evil dares not come nigh the
Saints weapons, which are spiritual.

Pr. You say, We desire no longer to rest in a testimony of words, but take an
effectual course that sin and sinners may be purged, out of the house of God;
we desire the Church would set some days apart wherein they may bewail iniquity
and pollution, that Ministering Brethren would without respect of persons, from
house to house, night and day bear their testimony to fly from those
abominations.

Answ. The Church of God you cannot, which is the Pillar and ground of truth,
which Christ purchased with his blood without spot or wrinkle, or blemish; and
the house of God you know not, who talks of purging of it, who is established
a top of all the mountains; and all your abominations, and pollutions, and
respecting of persons, is out of the Church and the Law both, transgressors of
it, and it is time to begin to stir up your selves and turn from the evil of
your ways, and turn to Christ the Light, who has enlightened you, that you
may bear testimony against your selves, and your Ministers, and lightness and
abominations in your own families; and do not say it is the house of God, and
the Church of God, but amongst your selves; and we do believe it is but the
testimony of words who have denied the light, and so denied the power.

Pr. They may deliver themselves from the blood of souls, having declared the
whole counsel of God.

Answ. Can dust and ashes declare the whole Counsel of God, and cankered ones,
and pollutions and abominations, can such declare the whole Counsel of God such
be out of it, for they that come into the counsel of God declares that and come
out of pollutions and cankered with the world, to him by whom the world is
made, who is perfect, and makes them perfect who declares his perfect will and
counsel.

Pr. Another evil we thought to have spread before you, but wanting
opportunity shall now omit, and that from Chard, we have labored in vain,
that which has been brought forth has been to little purpose.

Answ. This you may speak to your shame, and show forth your own nakedness that
you have labored in vain, and that which you have brought forth has been to
little purpose, in this the Church of Christ believes you, who has been them
that has beaten the air: and why do you Print abroad that there is another
evil among you which you have not laid open, had you not been better have held
your tongues; except you had mentioned it? is not this Hams spirit who lays
open one another nakedness to the world in Print? but how can you do otherwise
who has denied the light that has enlightened every man that comes into the
world, which comes from Christ Jesus; and so wants the covering; and as for all
your dirt, and dross, and dung which is not worth mentioning in your Epistle,
and confused words which you set forth, thinking to your glory but it is to
your shame, had you been in the life that gave forth, Scripture, which the
Saints was in that was of the Church, you would have covered your nakedness,
and would not have said pollution was in the Church, and in the house of God;
but for all these things you are judged, and you and your Epistle, and your
words to be unsavory, and is judged with the life of God that gave forth
Scripture, and them that be of the house of God, and the Church of God, where
no pollution is, nor comes, nor canker; the witness in your conscience shall
answer it in the day of the Lord.

By us Richard Baxter, etc. Pastor of the Church at Kederminster. In their
Paper called the Judgment and advice of the Assembly of the Assosciated
Ministers. In it their Principles, as follows.
Pr. THat ever there should be so much to do among Christians, yea the leaders
of Christ's flock, and to bring them to so clear a duty, that after all there
labor there is no more done.

Answ. Ye have been them that God never sent, and found to be such as Christ
cried woe against, and so you have not profited the people at all, And you have
not been the leaders of Christ's flock, but been such as turned against them,
that has been your duty; so therefore be all the people on heaps.

Pr. That all men must know that we are Christ's followers if we love one
another, for he that says he loves God, and hates his brother, is a liar.

Answ. In this poor men, you have judged your own selves; for is not debate,
and strife, and vain glory, and persecution and prisoning found among you? Cain
turning against his brother Abel, and slaying and killing him, whose blood
cries for vengeance upon you? so it is a proof that you are out of the faith
that works by love, in which is the community and Love with God, and one with
another; And so in stead of making up breaches, you are wounding, and bringing
confusion, being out of the faith and life that Christ and the Apostles were
in, so in heaps about their words.

Pr. It is not our business to change men's minds, from infidels and heresy, to
the faith, but to bring the Churches of Christ to understand each other to be
true Churches, which take the holy Scriptures for our Rule of your faith and
lives, and believe it to be the infallible word of God, and this Rule is
Divine, so our faith is Divine, had we but a humane Rule, we could have but a
humane faith, proud men thrust their opinions into the Churches Creed.

Ans. Your business it is true, is not to change men form infidels and
heresy, and to bring them to the faith, so not into the unity, for you bring
no people into that, nor to the Faith, and you bring no Church to know one
another in the faith, and the Churches of Christ knows each other to be a true
Church, and you whose business is not to bring men off heresy to Faith, know
not the Church of Christ, which is the pillar and ground of truth, built upon
Christ who is the faiths author, and the scriptures which signifies writings,
as you say outward writings, paper and ink, is not infallable, nor is not
divine, but is humane, and a humane knowledge from it men get; and so writings,
paper, and ink, that is not infallible, nor the scripture is not the ground of
Faith, but Christ who was before scripture was written, that the scripture
tells you so, and says God is Divine, and the scriptures are the words of God,
which Christ the word ends, who is the author of the faith, and Abraham and
Enoch had a rule; and had faith before scripture was written, and the spirit is
the rule that leads people into all truth, so says Christ, and you that put
the letter for the ground of your faith, your rule, paper and ink, that will
come to dust, it is humane as you call it, and give it that which the scripture
does not. And as for your creed, that you have learned of your Father the Pope,
the scriptures tells you not that, nor does not teach you the word humane,
neither, so you and the Papists has creeped into the Apostles words, but be
out of the life, who are proud and covetouss

Pr. That its Heresy to say there is an other Rule of Faith then the
scripture, if any are proved to teach any doctrine contrary to Scriptures, the
Ministers and pastors do their parts to correct and restrain them.

Ans. You by your judgment have judged your selves to be corrected by the
Ministers and pastors; and are to be corrected by the true Pastors, and to be
restrained by your own judgment: who has taught contrary to the scriptures;
for the scriptures says Christ is the author of Faith: and Faith is the gift
of God, and you say scripture is the rule of it, and Abraham and Enoch and
Abell will tell you they had Faith before they had the scripture, which you say
is your rule: so have you not thrown out the true rule of Faith, and the giver
of it, and put up the words in the place? and so are ye not corrected here by
the true pastor, Christ the author of faith? and Faith the gift of God did not
say scriptures was the ground of it; but bid look to Jesus the author of it;
and the Apostles did not turn them to the ministers to correct them that did
oppose them, or did not believe them, nor receive them as they spoke, or as
went from them; And all they be in the heresy, that have not Christ the author
of their Faith, which was before the the scripture was given forth, though they
have all the scriptures, and be not in the life of them that gave it forth, in
which was the unity, and therefore you being out of this faith and unity, and
from the author of it, put the letter for the rule, be all on heaps about the
Saints words, being out of the life that they had that spoke forth the
scriptures; and then after, was written and printed; and so ye Wolves in sheeps
clothing put that for your rule of your dead Faith; and have no other, and are
killing and mangling one another about it, and so death and destruction talks
of the fame of the scriptures, and knows not the author of Faith, nor that
there had been a Faith, had not the scripture declared it, the Priests confess
it.

Pr. We deny not to teach people, young ministers to stop the mouths of
slandrous adversaries; to cure jealousies of distempred minds, we all are ready
in every Protestant Church, to give men a full account of our faith, in plain
confession: but with this protestation, that only that the holy scriptures is
the rule of faith: if any thing in our confession, be found disagreeable to
that rule, we are ready when we understand so much, to disowne it, and to
Correct it.

Ans. How do you stop their mouths in haling them before Magistrates, and
casting them in prisons, is this your stopping? is not this your work? let the
Goales witness, the houses of correction witness how you have stopped their
mouths, and convinced gainsayers, now that which is truth and speaks plainly
to you, ye call that adversaries or slanderers. Now it is not a slander to call
a Lamb, a Lamb, a Dog, a Dog, or Swine, Swine; But to say a Lamb is a Swine, a
Dog is a Sheep, that is a lie; or a Wolf is a Sheep, though he has got on a
sheeps clothing on him, and is covered with them, and therefore would be
called a sheep that he may deceive; and would not be called a Wolf, though his
fruits declare it. His reviling, devouring, having sheeps clothing, casting
into Prison, and yet is offended if ye call him not a sheep, or a Minister of
the Gospel of Christ.

Nay the truth, the Lambs, the Sheep cannot do so, but they must speak the
truth to you; and though you do devour them, and tear them, they will not tear
you again: And though you Wolves have on the sheeps clothing, which cast into
prison because they will not feed you. Did ever the Lambs do so, the Ministers
of Christ? Were not they fed in his pasture? followed him, and knew his voice,
and did not want? But how have you cured the jealousies and diseased minds all
this while? Ye have wounded them, made them sick, and filled them full of
jealousies; therefore are the people broken into heaps and sects, that is the
fruit of jealousies one of another. And how have you been ready, you called
Teachers, apostatized from the Apostles, to render to every Protestant Church a
full account of your faith in plain confession, when many hundreds have been
moved of the Lord God to come in those places called Churches, and asked you a
question, cry take him away Mngistrate, to prison with him, he has broken the
Law, neighbors? and this has showed your faithlesnesse: And many have been
moved to come to the Steeple-house, and look the Priest in the face, and he
has cried take him away, I cannot go forward, I cannot speak as long as he
stands there; and here you have showed your faithlesness again, wanting the
weapons, the shield of faith.

But you say again, they must own the holy Scriptures to be the rule of faith:
So then not Christ, not God the Author. What rule might Abraham, and Abel, and
Enoch own, was not God the author of their faith? And is he not the same now?
Had not the Pharisees the Scriptures? had not they the rule that stood against
Christ the Faiths Author, and the rule which the Saints looked at? Are not they
that are of faith, of the faith of Abraham, which was before Scripture was
written? Is the Scripture the ground of these? Nay, the ground of this is that
which was before Scripture was written, and they were in the faith that stood
in God that gave it forth, and the Scriptures; and so here you be corrected by
the Scriptures, and your Churches both. For all may speak one by one in the
true Church; but this authority you have thrown down, who are such as preach
for the fleece, and the filthy lucre, and gain from their Quarters, called of
men Masters, suing for Tithes, going to Law about earthly things, which did not
the Apostles, but rebuked such: And so you are corrected by the Scriptures, and
you are judged with the life of the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles, and
both Church and Ministers are departed from it.

The agreement and resolution of several of the associated Ministers in the
County of CORK, for the ordination of MINISTERS. Their principles in it as
follows.
Pr. TO minister the spirit it is not promised to teach any thing, but what
Christ has spoken. John makes it an infallible trial of spirits, to convince
gainsayers, and stop their mouths.

Answ. Many may have Christ's words, all that ever he has spoken; and if he
has not the spirit of Christ, he is none of his: And gainsayers may have
Christ's words, that gainsays the spirit, and the light that comes from them: So
the spirit tries spirits that gave forth Scriptures, and lets men see whether
they pervert Christ's words; for Christ says, the false Prophets would get the
sheeps clothing, therefore could Antichrist and the false Prophets try
spirits. Nay, they put them to death that were in the spirit, they did, that
had the sheeps clothing; and the spirit of Christ, who has it, can tell who
wrongs Christ's words: And why did not the Ministers of Ireland which had
Christ's words, Prophets and Apostles, stop the mouth of Edward Borough, and
Francis Howgill, but suffered them to be banished out of the Nation, or caused
them: You looked upon them to be gainsayers, which be the servants ot the Lord;
and yet you were not able to stop their mouths, though you had all the sheeps
clothing, neither were able to resist their spirit which shows your spirit;
And that you are not fit to send forth Ministers, nor make Ministers, nor try
Ministers; and the Apostle does not say, that the Letter is the only rule or
trial; but if people have not the spirit of Christ, they are none of his, and
have not Christ in them, they are reprobates. And we do witness the spirit is
come, whereby we are Ministers of that, not of the Letter: For the spirit that
once established Circumcision, the same spirit ended it again. Now the Jews
that tried by the Letter, judged the Apostle to be a deceiver. And those that
have the sheeps clothing, and have not the spirit of Christ Jesus, they are
crying lo he is here, and lo he is there.

Pr. You tell us of a Sacrament, and that the world lies in wickedness, in
gross Egyptian darkness, and false Apostles and Jezebel, making her self a
Prophetess to teach and seduce, and men loving pre-eminence, and to be called
Masters.

Answ. In this state you are called of men Masters, loving pre-eminence,
Jezebel-like, usurpt authority, setting up your selves to teach, keeping your
fasts, persecuting and banishing the righteous in the steps of the false
Apostles, spiritual Egypt in gross thick darkness, rejoicing with the world
that lies in wickedness, telling people of your Sacraments, which you had from
your Father the Pope, and the false Apostles your forefathers, who were got up
before the Apostles decease, and so you are judged with the life of the
Apostles and Christ, and them that be in it; which shall answer the witness of
God in you all. And the wickedness of the world declares your fruits, that you
have not profitted the people at all. And your Iezebels doings has declared it
self, and your loving pre-eminence, being called of men masters, which the
Apostle judged, and Christ cried woe against. These marks are found in your
foreheads, that all may read you to be out of the life of Christ and the
Apostles, that can read Scripture.

Pr. Unless some Preacher of righteousness be then living to warn the
sinful world of their wickedness.

Answ. Such as warn you and the sinful world of their wickedness, who are
the Preachers of righteousness, you banish, there is your fruits.

Pr. The purest grain has its chafe, the best needs a fan to cleanse them,
the best needs a Nathan, all flesh is liable to flie-blows. To run without
office and power argues presumption.

Ans. The wheat that is gotten out of the chafe, has not its chafe, that
comes into his Garner: And such as are cleansed, need not the Fan to cleanse
them. Them that are borne of God they do not commit sin, for the seed of God
remains in them, that they cannot. And all need not a Nathan, all are not
adulterers, and the flesh of Christ is not fly-blown, which sees not
corruption: And the Saints of Christ are of his flesh and his bone; and you run
without the power that the Apostles were in, so you judge your selves to be the
presumptuous ones.

Pr. The keep are apt to wander, ordinary Ministers receive their Ministry
from the Lord. Paul chosen immediately by God, Stephen mediately.

Answ. In the cloudy dark day the sheep wandered, who were made a prey of by
you who seek for the fleece, Ezekiel. 34. But the Lord will seek them, and gather
them, and feed them a top of the mountains; And the sheep of Christ hears his
voice, and follows him, so says Christ, so they do not wander. And they that
receive their Ministry from the Lord, are above all you ordinary Ministers of
the world made by men. And Paul was made immediately, and all the Ministers of
Christ and God that be in the spirit, it makes them immediately; But all you
since the days of the Apostles that have got the sheeps clothing, and ravened
from the spirit of God, are mediate.

Pr. Such be in the self-conceit that are against Ordinances and Sabbaths.

Answ. Every one that is in the spirit of Christ sees him who has blotted out
the hand writing of Ordinances, and triumphed over them, cannot touch them, and
such as are come to the body of Christ, sees the end of new Moons and Sabbaths.
And such as be out of the body, and does not see that, are crying up their
Ordinances and Sabbath, which the body of Christ comes to end, who is the
substance and end of them, and before they were. Now Antichrist cries up that
which the Apostle preached down, who be blind and sees not the body, and sets
up Sabbaths of their own making, and keeps Markets and Fayrs on that day, which
the Lord commanded, and call it Saturns day, which was the Jews Sabbath, which
was given to them as a sign, but the body is Christ.

Pr. Vice may be nourished with the milk of virtue, the Gospel Ministers; and
we find that the harvest is great, and the laborers are few: We conclude with
a few words to the readers of our principles and intended practices.

Ans. The Readers have viewed your practices and principles both, and tell you
that they are corrupt, the milk of virtue does not nourish vice. This was not
the Ministers of Christ's language; the milk of virtue nourishes the babes;
and the Laborers that have been sent amongst you from the Lord God, you have
banished out of your Nation: But if one come in his own name, him you, will
regard and receive; but if one come in the Name of the Lord, him you put out;
so you will not have the Lord, nor his Christ to reign, neither his servants to
labor in his Vineyard.

Pr. Ministry is like a mighty tree, whose fruit the Lord has appointed for
the healing of the Nations.

Answ. But your Ministers and the Papists has been them got up since the days
of the Apostles, that brings Nations all into heaps, and into blood, and does
not heal the Nations, but wounds, and burdens, and kills, and casts into
prison, as this your fruit declares it, who casts into prison such as you do
no work for.

Pr. To the Law and to the Testimony, pray to the Father of lights that he
would enlighten us with his truth, and show us the way that he would have us to
walk in; and pray for us who watch for your souls, as those that must give
account.

Answ. The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy: And the Law is light;
and the Law and Testimony was before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John, and the
Epistles were written, and the Revelations, which outward Books you call Law
and Testimony; which the Scripture says, the testimony of Jesus is the spirit
of prophecy; and the Law is light, Prove. 6. Are you them that are the makers
of Ministers, and Ministers, who watch for the souls of people, and yet do you
bid people pray to the Father that he would enlighten you with his truth, and
show you the way that you may walk in it? How can you present souls to God,
that does not know the way, and are yet to be enlightened, and yet to have the
way showed so you, that you might walk in it? Is this your conclusion of all
you Ministers in Ireland? Now I say, Christ has enlightened every man which
comes into the world, which is the way, and though your darkness cannot
comprehend it, and yet you pray that he would enlighten you. When John says,
he does enlighten every man that comes into the world, and that is the true
light: Have you the light to seek, and the way to seek, and truth to seek, and
yet watchers for souls? And the soul, you that are called Ministers says it
is humane; yea, the soul of Christ, the soul of man is appetite, and lust,
and pleasure, and humane, from the earth, from the ground; Is Christ's soul
from the ground? and appetite, lust, and pleasure wars against the soul, in
them that be in the unreasonablenesse. You that have the light to seek, truth
to seek, and way to seek, are in the earth, and so gives the soul the name of
that which comes from the ground. Now the soul is immortal; God breathed into
man the breath of life, and he became a living soul. It is that which came out
from God, who has all souls in his hand, that is his power; which hand goes
against him that does evil. And Christ the power of God which is immortal, is
the souls Bishop, which is immortal, from whence it has its nourishment, and
the immortal, which is able to save the immortal soul.

And as for all the rest of your ignorance and nonsense in your Book, which
comes from your confused earthly spirit, who are found in the nature, spirit
and stock of your Father the Pope, who has apostatized since the days of the
Apostles; with all the rest of your stuff, which is but fuel for the fire, in
that day of your account, the witness in all your consciences shall answer it.

John Stillom, his Book called, Margent Notes. His Principles as follows.
Pr. He calls it the Quakers adoring their own light, magnifying the light of
nature: The Church is ashamed of your doctrine and walking, says he.

Ans. The Quakers light is Christ the truth, in whom they worship God; which
light was before natural lights were; and this the Church owns, and is not
ashamed of, in which stands the Doctrine, by which light the Church is gathered
up unto God the Father of light; but the imitated Churches in the Apostasy are
ashamed of it.

Pr. Not any man knows him, speaking of Christ to be God, till he find him in
Scripture, and says, as deep things as the spirit has revealed, they are all
in the Scripture.

Ans. Many knew God, and knew Christ, and yet had not written Scripture to tell
them of those things, as Enoch and Abel; and many again has Scripture speaking
of God and Christ, and yet does not know God and Christ, and does not find him
in Scripture: As instance, the Pharisees knew not God and Christ which had the
Scripture, and had not life, until they came to Christ the Scripture speaks of
and many things the spirit did reveal which was not written in the Scriptures,
and was spoken to the Saints.

Pr. John means not that there was any substantial truth necessary to be
known to salvation, which is not revealed in the written Word; but the spirit
that ordered the Copies and mysteries of the Gospel to be contracted within a
narrow compass of lines.

Answ. Many knew their salvation as in the days of Noah, Enoch and David which
had not the written Scriptures: And though people have the Copies that speaks
of the Gospel, of the mysteries of the Gospel put together, and compassed and
contracted into lines, yet they do not know the Gospel, nor the mysteries of
it, nor the Word, though they testify of these things; and the Pharisees did
not that had Scripture; which Scripture does not tell us of written words, but
that the Word is Christ and God, which was in the beginning before words were
given forth; And Gospel and salvation, and the mysteries of it is known by the
Spirit and the Light which come from Christ Jesus, which none knows it, but by
that.

Pr. Stillom adds, not only heart rising prophecy, n^r breast-prophesie in
the mind, but written down in books. The Apostle excludes not
heart-prophesie, so he includes Scripture-prophesie; but till the day star did
arise in their minds by the reading and heeding of the Scriptures, that is
plain meaning.

Answ. The Scriptures were given forth by prophecy, and the spirit of it, and
no man knows but by the same spirit; and the Apostle did not exclude
heart-prophesie; and the Day Star does not rise in the heart by men's reading
and heeding the Scriptures in their own wills, and having them in books written
down; but as men do come to the life and spirit as they were in that gave them
forth, and heed that, with that they heed Scripture, and knows Scripture, and
with that they know the Day Star, and Christ who is the end of them; and so men
must come to take heed of the light that shines in a dark place, before they
know the Day Star arise: For the Jews had Scripture, and did not heed that;
for the spirit within of prophecy does not deny any tittle of the Scripture
without: And in thy Principle thou have confounded thy self, who says, Not
heart-prophesie, heart-rising, breast-prophesie; and yet thou say the
Apostle does not exclude heart-prophesie. And thus thou with new names, and thy
words darkens counsel and knowledge; but the children of light with truth sees
thee.

Pr. The Father, Word and spirit is to justify the word Trinity, not to make
the holy Spirit and the Saints one person.

Answ. The word Trinity is not in the scripture, but in your old Fathers book,
the Canon book, the Pope; and the Father, Son, and Spirit are one, and the
Saints are in the spirit; and who are joined to the Lord, are one spirit. And
the Scripture does not tell us of three persons; but as I said before, the old
Cannon book of thy Fathers, the great Apostate, the Pope.

Pr. The light that Adam was qualified with before the Fall, which every man
has a spark of since the fall, was and is given from the Creation by things
that are made.

Answ. The light Adam had before the Fall, did not come by the Creation, nor by
the things that are made; If it were given from the Creation, it comes by
nature. This word is contrary to Scripture; for God made man in his image, and
placed him over all the creatures, and gave him an understanding capable of his
Law, and to know dominion; but when man lost his dommion, he transgressed his
Law; and that light that he had before the fall, was of God, from him that made
all things.

Pr. The Scripture is the means of regeneration. If the blind lead the
blind, what will follow? it is proof sufficient against absolute perfection in
this life, as Adam and the Angels.

Answ. The Scriptures, them that had them, and out of the life that gave them
forth were the blind, and what followed then: And though Adam and the Angels
fell; who is in Christ the perfection of God, he shall never fall, as also
says the Apostle.

Pr. He says, It is ignorance that says, the light that makes manifest sin,
condemns sin.

Answ. That which makes, manifest a man's sin, and, he hates it, that condemns
him; And he is ignorant that sees not Christ's doctrine, and believes not in it.

Pr. To deny that sin dwells or remains in all the Saints upon earth,
has been the Quakers doctrine, the consequence whereof is to disclaim all
godly sorrow for sin dwelling in them.

Answ. It is the Quakers Doctrine to deny all sin dwelling in the Saints upon
the earth, and to know Christ who destroys the Devil the author of all sin,
and the Saints comes to witness their joy and pleasures for evermore over
their sin, and the body of it put off, and a Kingdom which stands in joy and
peace in the holy Ghost, and the godly sorrow, before they come to this; and
they do know victory over their sin, and Christ he had the godly sorrow, who
had no sin, and that many of the Saints knows.

Pr. His Word is not his spirit.

Ans. The Word and the Spirit are one, which was before the written words were
declared forth, in which word they all end, given forth by the spirit of God;
and the Word lives and abides, and endures for ever, and that is spiritual;
And so the mystery of Iniquity is found in thy Doctrine who art blind, and
reads blindly, not with the spirit which was in them that gave gave forth
Scriptures. And so thou art found a false Prophet in the steps of the
Pharisees, one of the Masters that Christ sets the woe on their heads, who art
ravening with the sheeps clothing upon thy back to deceive; but now the Lambs
and the Sheep have discovered thee, who is got up since the days of the
Apostles into their words, not into their life, with that judged. And whereas
thou art offended, because Edward Borough speaks Chapter and Verse, the spirit
that gave forth Scriptures will lead to speak it all over again without
offense, but to the evil doers.

Pr. And if your teacher cannot but be public, how will you find him in so
private a place as your beds?

Answ. The spirit that leads to speak forth publicly, or to minister to
themselves and others, the same is a private Teacher to them on their beds, as
he did David, whom the Lord instructed in the night season: And that which the
Minister of the Spirit does minister unto, is a private Teacher to every
particular in his own particular. And the annoynting which abides in people,
John says, was their Teacher, and they need no man to teach them, but as it
did teach them, and they should continue in the Son of God and the Father. And
here was public teaching and private, which thou blind can not see.

And as for all thy lies and heap of confusion shall upon thy head stand, which
thou would blind people withal; For the Son is risen, and the mist is gone,
and going; in the day of thy judgment, the witness in thy conscience shall
answer.

Philip Taverner of West Drayton, in the County of Middlesex, his Principles as
follows, in a Reply to to a Book to Edward Borough, whom he in scorn calls
QVAKER.
Pr. WHo art thou that judge another man's servant, such who Lord it over the
faith and consciences of their brethren, a spirit wholly disowned by the
Apostle. Not that we have dominion over your faith, and in this sin is that of
Christ to be understood. Call no man your Father upon earth, neither be you
called of men Master; that is, have no men's persons in admiration, as to count
them your Oracles in the things of faith.

Ans. Such as serve the man of sin, are to be judged that are the servants of
sin, that has been servant to the man of sin. We judge that man and servant
both, and such as are spoken of in the Romans, to judge another man's servant in
the truth, standing and falling to his Master, every one in his measure, such
we do not judge; but every one shall stand or fall to his Master, who are
scrupling about meats, and drinks, and days, that the life is leading them
through such things, and you that be called of men Master, its a great Oracle
amongst the people so counted, and you do both Lord it over men's faiths and
consciences both, therefore has so much blood been shed through you, and so
many cast into prison by you who are Lording it over men's faiths and
consciences, Pharisee-like called of men Master, who would have dominion over
the Apostles faith, as you who are called of men Master, would have dominion
over the Saints faith, who are admiring men's persons because of advantage, to
help you. And this people see since the days of the Apostles, how you and the
Papist have Lorded it over men's faiths, your Jayles, inquisition and prisons
may witness it, how you would Lord it over men's faith, and conscience that
cannot give you Tithes, you will cast them into prison, are you not here
Lording it over men's faiths? does not your practices show it, and so another
spirit then the Apostles that is in you, who are got up since the days of the
Apostles, and such as are born of God and begotten of him cannot call any man
father upon the Earth, which is born of the immortal seed, heirs of the world
which has no end.

Pr. We through patience and comfort of the Scriptures have hope.

Answ. Who has Christ in him, in whom the Scriptures ends, and he has the
hope has the comfort of the Scriptures, who was before the Scriptures was
given forth, Christ Jesus, who has not him, has not comfort.

Pr. The Scriptures is able to make wise unto salvation.

Answ. Not without the faith the Scriptures are not, for the Pharisees had
Scriptures, and was not wise unto salvation, and was out of the faith, and knew
not Christ the salvation.

Pr. Fear has its rice from faith and hope in God, by the means of Christ
which is made known in the Scriptures.

Answ. The Scriptures testify of faith, of God, of fear; but people receive
not hope, nor faith, nor God, nor fear, from the Scriptures, but from God, as
they did that gave forth the Scriptures, who feared him; for many that had
Scriptures, were out of the true fear of the Lord, and called Christ a devil,
and was from true hope and true fear, though they had the Scriptures given
forth from them that were in hope and fear, but their ears and eyes was stopped
to that of God in them, and such are never like to receive God and Christ until
their ears and eyes be open, to that of God in them.

Pr. If we say we have no sin we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in
us, and there is not a just man upon earth that does good and sins not, and
in many things we offend all, and the state is not attained in this life, but
that men shall be growing under weaknesses, the highest seize of Saints,
is but a spark, but the dawning of the day, that highest enjoyments is not to
the attainment of desires.

Answ. The truth it is that lets men see they have sinned, and lets them see
they have sin, that is within them, and it brings them to confess it, and
forsake it, and the blood of Jesus Christ, the Son of God, cleanses from all
sin, then he that is born of God does not commit sin, neither can he, because
the seed of God remains in him, here in the children of God are manifest, and
the children of the Devil, which makes him to roar, in whom he has no
habitation, he that is born of God which does not commit sin, nor cannot,
because he is born of God, he is not born of the Devil, nor by the will of man,
nor flesh nor blood. And Solomon says, in Eccles. 7. speaking to the just man,
that does no good under the Law, where no flesh is justified, says the
Apostle, but he that comes to Christ, the just, the end of the Law, his faith
gives him victory over sin; and the word, whereby he becomes dead to it, and
comes to the end of the Law, which faith the just lives by, by the life, and
the faith of the Son of God, and the Apostle says in the Epistle to the twelve
Tribes, in many things we offend all, Mark, in the many things, we offend all,
but we are come to the one thing, Christ Jesus, the end of the many things and
in him there is no sin. And who is in him sins not who put an end to the many
things that must end and change, and the Saints was come to the day, and the
children of the day, further then a spark; And they witnessed the night was
gone, and some again was not come to the Day Star, that was according to their
growth. And the Saints again was made free from sin, Romans 6. And had put off
the body of sin, by the Circumcision of the spirit, Colos. 2. And they was
complete in Christ, and they witnessed the Kingdom of heaven, that stood in
joy, and peace in the Holy Ghost, and so not groaning always, and the Saints
witnessed the Marriage of the Lamb and Christ in them, and their bodies the
Temple of God, and the end of their desires, and so was not always desiring,
but they witnessed their bread from above, which they that eat of it, should
hunger no more, nor thirst no more.

Pr. The Light which is in every man is but darkness, being compared with a
Revelation of Christ in the Saints, our Justification has its rise from what
Christ has done and suffered for us, not from what he has done in us,
Justification and Sanctification are ever distinct in their nature, distinct
one from the other, Justification is not Sanctification, nor Sanctification
Justification, but two things real distinct in their nature.

Answ. The light which every man that comes into the world is lightened
withal, is Christ, and this light reveals Christ, and the Saints light, and
this light is condemnation to the world which hates it. And no man knows
justification, but as he knows it wrought within, from Christ, and no man
knows the seed that was offered, the sacrifice of the whole world, but as he
knows it within, through the faith, and who are of the faith they are of
Abraham, they are of the flesh of Christ, the flesh of him that suffered, and
if men have not Christ within them, they have not justification, and though
they may talk of him without, and have him not within, such are reprobates,
that has not Christ within them, reprobate from Christ, from justification and
sanctification both, but are of the generation that caused him to suffer, and
justification and sanctification are one, not distinguished the one from the
other in their natures, but are one in nature, not two things really distinct
in their nature, but really one, for Christ our sanctification, and
justification, he that sanctifies and justifies, they are one in nature, which
is Christ, which is sanctification and justification both, and thou art rebuked
which makes two of them, and distinct, when its but one thing, the same that
justifies, sanctifies.

Pr. If the fulfilling of the righteous Law in us be Justification, then Christ
died in vain, Justification is the direct opposite to condemnation, that which
makes a change in the heart of the creature, is sanctification and
justification, faith does not save nor justify by virtue of any worth or
excellency found in it, nor merely because Christ is the object of it.

Ans. He that fulfills the righteousness of the Law in us, is Christ the
justification hereby men come to know him, that he redeems them from under the
Law, and they are led by the spirit; And they know he is their intercession,
and died not in vain: and he ends the Law, who fulfills it. And he is the
justification to every one that believes. And this is known in us, that do
believe to the justification of it, whereby a tittle of it is seen not to be
broken, whereby the body of Christ is seen, which makes free from the Law, and
Christ is the light that condemns him that hates it, that will not come to it
because his deeds are evil, nor believe in it, and that is the condemnation of
the world, that light is come into it, and men love darkness rather then light,
because their deeds are evil. And he that believes in the light is justified
from all things that the law could not justify him, and comes not into
condemnation, but lives in that which does condemn; so these are one, and not
directly opposite, that does condemn the unbeliever, and justify the believer.
And people are saved through faith, and justified; and faith is the gift of
God, and there is an excellency in it, and a worth, because it comes from
Christ, and God who is the Author of it, in which faith men please God, and are
justified and are saved through faith, and by faith, as the Scripture
witnesses.

Pr. Faith does not save nor justify by its virtue, but of the gracious good
pleasure of God which has appointed faith.

Answ. That which God has given to men which is his gift, in that faith there
is virtue, and the grace is known with which men are justified and saved, and
there is virtue in the gift of God, and so through this faith he knows the
purpose of the Lord, and his counsel, and Christ is the Author of this faith,
and no man is justified but through faith that is received, nor wise unto
salvation, but through faith in Christ Jesus.

Pr. The Ministers in England in many places, are no better then Wolves in
sheeps clothing, and the ministers taking what the States allows them of
particular persons, this is not preaching for hire, divining for money.

Ans. The Ministers which are so called, in England, has gotten the name, but
are found the Ministers of unrighteousness, and are wolves indeed in sheeps
clothing, out of the lives of the Apostles; for how are they tearing the lambs
before courts and into prisons for speaking to them whom they do no work for?
what greedy dumb dogs are these, how do they whorry the people? and where is
there any one of them, if the people does not put into his mouth, that has the
sheeps clothing, but he will tear them into his courts and dens, his prisons;
how unlike the Apostle are these who would not use his power often times to
eat, and thy self is found in the number of them; and does not the States and
particular men set you out so much a year for your preaching? and is not this
preaching for hire, and divining for money? do you not know how much a year
you must have? and is not this preaching for hire? and if they do not give you
money, you will not divine, so much a year, and yet will you make people
believe that you are not diviners for money, and preachers for hire? alack for
ye, you cannot be hid, and are not you here judged with the life of Christ and
his Apostles to be the hirelings that will fly? whose sheep are none of your
own, that care not for the sheep, except you make a prey upon them, to all
people who are in the fear of God; your lives are discovered contrary to the
Saints, let the states and the great men take away your maintenance, and we
shall find but a few diggers, threshers, and planters among you, a company of
idle men; so the judgment of the Apostle is come upon yon, that those that
would not work, should not eat.

Pr. Christ made use of the Scriptures to resist the devil.

Ans. In Christ the scripture ends, and the Devil who was out of the
scriptures, left out of the scriptures, so Christ bruised his head, who was
before scripture was; and as for all the rest of thy stuff in thy book, it is
not worth mentioning, and it will come upon thy own head, the witness in thy
conscience shall answer it.

Edward Skip Teacher, who said that he is a servant in the Gospel services, his
book called the Worlds wonder, in it his principles, as follows.
Pr. WHo says there shall be false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show
you great signs and wonders, in so much, if it were possible they should
deceive the very Elect.

Ans. Christ says false Prophets should come, Mat. 7.24. and John saw they
were come, 1 John 2, and 4. cap. they went forth from them, in the Rev. all
that dwelt upon the earth went after them, and when they had gotten a heads
they killed the Saints, then power was given to the beast over all tongues,
Kindreds and Nations, and that which whored from the spirit of God, sat upon
the beast, and all Nations drunk of her cup, and she has corrupted the earth,
and made the inhabitants drunk, and the Kings of the earth has committed
fornication with her, and the woman fled into the wilderness, and the
man-child caught up unto God, and she sits upon the waters, and the waters are
people, and nations, and multitudes, and tongues, and there has been the
mystery of Babylon, with all their merchandise, which has decayed the nations
by their lying signs and wonders, and again the Judgment of the great Whore
should come, the man-child should be brought forth into the world to rule the
nations with a rod of Iron, and she should be taken and cast into the fire,
who has sat as a Queen, and had seen no sorrow, and the beast should be taken,
and with him the false prophets that sets up the lying signs and wonders, and
wi^^ him the devil that deceived the Nations, the man of sin, that the
Apostles saw coming up before his disease, in the Thessal. These should be
taken and cast alive into the fire, and the lamb and the Saints shall have the
victory, that they should deceive the nations no more, for the elect it is
impossible they should deceive with all their lying signs and wonders which
they have got up since the days of the Apostles; And Christ said they should
come, which the Disciples saw was come before their decease, which signs the
world has been after them, which has not been possible to deceive the Elect;
for the El^ct over all that, Reigns, for Christ said they should come, to his
Desciples, which desciples before their deease did see he was come, amongst
whom thou art found, and over thee and them, now has the lamb and Saints
victory, and the Tabernacle of God is with men.

Pr. I have presented to thee my New-yeares gift, and desire thy judgment
toward it to me. And thou say, The Lord who has delivered thy soul from
under those observances that thou mights stay and direct an unstabled soul of
those horrible delusions and mysterious deceits, for false Apostles,
translating themselves into Apostles of Christ, deceitful workers, and Satan's
Ministers, transforming into the Ministers of Righteousness.

Answ. In this thou art among the false Apostles and ministers of
unrighteousness, deceitful workers, false Apostles, transforming your selves
into the Apostles and Christ's words, and minister of unrighteousness,
transforming your selves into the true ministers words, whose souls is under
the horrible delusions and misterious deceits, under the observances o^ the
world, who would beguile the soul, that is not stablished, but light is broke
forth, that few you can deceive, and thy New Years gift is judged, and proceeds
from Cain, and is his sacrifice from the earth, for the Apostles saw such as
was transforming into the false Apostles and false ministers, he brings the
saints to the light that shined in their hearts, to give them the knowledge of
the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, which you deny; to the false
transformed into their words, and judged with their spirit, which brought
people to the light within, and you bring them from it, so from that which
should give them the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus.

Pr. The Devil is called the Prince of darkness because he lives in the
darkness, as to the apprehention of divine love, an enemy to all the Image of
God, which is light and purity, and the devil transformed himself into the
likeness of God, under a fair pretense, heavenly words, selfe-denyall
actions, righteous conversations.

Answ. This is like your fruits, who has deceived the people, but is your
divine love to the devil, who is out of truth? does not Christ come to destroy
him, and his works, and there is none that can apprehend the divine love of
God, but who be in the truth? And the Devil cannot transform himself to be
like God, not in his image nor in his righteousness, that is out of truth, and
his conversation that is out of truth is altogether unrighteous, and is but in
the pretense of selfe-^enyal^, but is not the thing, though he and you may get
the words that be heavenly, and stands against the light and Image of God, and
purity it self, for all you be of the devil that does deny the light that does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, for you come not into the truth
which the devil is out of, nor into the pure conversation which is in heaven,
and purity.

Pr. Thou say, Thou have many occasions offered by the Quakers upon thy poor
weak and sinful heart; the Lord has filled my heart with moderation in
giving my own once uncomfortable experiences.

Ans. We believe thee, that thy heart is weak and sinful, and a weak and
sinful heart, is not filled with moderation, and thy experiences which are
uncomfortable, are not the experiences of the Saints, for the Saints
experiences are comfortable, and their heart is a pure heart, that is filled
with moderation, and the Quakers will torment all sinful and corrupt hearts,
for such the Lord is against, and so be his Saints; not to take his words into
their mouths.

Pr. Thou say, Thou hate hypocrisy when thou live in the light, life and
power of the first Adam, and because the Quakers say they know my conscience
better then my self, I see they are acted through delusion; I am able to to
speak this truth from my own heart, which is better known to me. I do know that
a natural man may make a large progress in the Gospel profession and
conversation, and that which the Quakers call backsliding, is my turning to my
God.

Ans. In the light, and life, and power of the first Adam, as he was in the
beginning, thou art not, in which he was in before the fall, and the Apostles
knew the state and condition of Jews and Gentiles and people, better then they
did themselves, and so does the Quake^s that be in their spirit, and this is
not delusion, and thy own heart, yet thou do not know as thou oughts nor the
truth, but first thou must come to the light that does enlighten every man that
comes into the world, which is the truth, and a natural man does not make a
progress into the Gospel, nor does not come into the conversation of it,
whilst he lives in the natural estate; and thy God thou art turned too, which
is the God of the world, as all hirelings and diviners for money, and teachers
for filthy lucre did that went forth from the spirit of the Apostles, and
prophets, and Christ, and back-slided from them, and so went from the true God,
and thou serves the God of the world for love of thy benefice, and see if thou
will not look upward, and downward, and curse thy God.

Pr. I would have all the world to observe how that the Quakers that
Antichrist has cast that blindness upon their understandings, for their
reproving men sharply, and rebukeing them, crying woe to the hypocrites, its
the devils policy to keep close to the scriptures. I used arguments to people
to look for the glorious way, and discovery of the divine light and power to be
brought forth among all the children of the most high, O mystery, Babylon of
this delusion.

Ans. Hears thy confession, for the spirit of God, where it is, does rebuke,
reprove sharply, and tell them that are hypocrites, the woe is to them, and
the Quakers ante-christ cannot blind them, they are come from under his power
and authority, but you are them that cannot fear reproof; and the Lord may
send a man as he did Philip to such a place, and he not know what he shall do,
nor whom he shall speak to, till he come to such a place, and the devil is out
of the life that gave forth scriptures, though he and you may pervert the
words, who may get them, but not own them as they speak, and thou calls good
evil, and evil good, for the children of the most high does wait for the
most glorious discovery of divine light and power, which delusion and mystery
Babylon is out of, and so the Quakers is come to that which ante-christ is
ravened from, with that they comprehend him.

Pr. And thou say, These people that thou call the Quakers, will send most
railing accusations against the pillars of the Church of Christ.

Ans. That is false, but antichrists Church and his pillars, which are waters,
which you call tongues, which is your original, that John calls waters, the
Quakers do judge according to truth, and declare it in full power and majesty,
and can make it good, which you call railing, which they deny, for a company of
greedy drumb dogs can never have enough, that will prison and pesecute men till
death, for speaking to them, and for means, such as are apostatized from the
true church, and is a false Church, who has transformed themselves into the
true Churchs words, but now the true Church has discovered you to be the false
apostatized from the true, and reigned since the days of the Apostles.

Pr. I see no conviction the Quakers has wrote by their speaking, or any
subjection of fear, or love or any such thing wrought by them, and to tell such
that be praying, reading, or in meditation, to say it is the power of the first
Adam; O mystery of deceit, the deceitful unfolding by antichrist, to say that
Christ says the hour is coming, now is, that neither at this mountain, nor
as Jerusalem shall the Father be worshipped, but he that worships him, must
worship him in spirit and in truth.

Answ. Thousands in the Nation may witness the work the Quakers has wrought,
and thousands are convinced of you to be the gainsayers of the truth, and the
ante-christ come up since the days of the Apostles, and all your praying,
reading, and meditations, is but the first Adams state in the fall, where the
mystery of deceit is, for yet you are not come to own the light, Christ Jesus,
the second Adam that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, and so
you be the ante-christs, standing against Christ the light, the truth, and so
are not come into the worship of God in the truth and in the spirit, but are
crying up at your Masse-houses, is God worshipped as the Jews did the Temple,
and Samaria the mountain at Jerusalem, which Christ says not at Samaria, nor
the Mountain, nor Jerusalem, nor the Temple, but in spirit and in truth, and so
we say, not at your Masse-houses, nor at Samaria, nor Jerusalem, neither, not
the Mountain, but God has seeked us to worship him in spirit and in truth, and
therefore you rage that hate the light.

Pr. They reckon their perfection and happiness to be deprived of all, the
spirit does neither so act or so teach, and I was kept from this temptation,
and they that are overcome by it, are brought into bondage, a vain deceitful
waiting for a power, when the Apostles says ye must pray without ceasing and
not quench the spirit, the Thessalonians, they must cease from their own
words, and wait for the immediate striving and working of the spirit, as they
fancy it.

Ans. This thou calls fancy, who says the spirit of God does not teach men,
nor so act, to be deprived of all things; Yes, I say to thee thou must be
deprived of all things before thou come to happiness; and thou art in the
bondage, and in the temptation, that has not forsaken all things, and come to
Christ the on^ thing, and thy praying and prophesying, and not waiting for the
spirit and power, for to pray withal, art in the fancy, and following thy own
Spirit, and out of the perfection of Christ.

Pr. It is blasphemy to say we must fill up the sufferings of Christ.

Answ. And so thou art unlike the Apostles, an^ have not drunk the cup of the
wrath and judgment of the Almighty, and that you must drink before you come to
know the ^eed of God come from under all the power of wickedness in thee, and
that is the world* And Christ who bore the sin of the whole world, felt it, and
was under it, and was offered, and over it all, and makes his enemies his
footstool.

Pr. The false interpretation of the enemy, he says that every man's work must
be tried with fire, what sort it is, and you shall hardly gain a speech of one
sort or other, sometimes from the Quakers, and this thou calls dumb devil.

Answ. And thus thou show where thou art, who has not known a time to be
silent, before thou did know a time to speak, and the dumb devil has been
found amongst your selves, your Priests; for when many of the Quakers have been
moved of the Lord to come to speak to you in your Pulpits, you have proved the
dumb devils, turned your backs, and have gone your ways, and spoken never a
word to them; and thy works and all men's shall be tried by the fire, and that
is not perverting scripture, as also says the Apostle, and thou never have
past through the wrath of God, but it is yet to come, and the sufferings of
Christ thou know not.

Pr. And it will be a lie and delusion, for the spirit when it sanctifies the
hearts to go about to tear their hearts out of their bodies, when David's bones
was broken, and his flesh would scarce to cleave; it is far from me to think
that this was under the apprehension of wrath; shall a man think that he
suffered for his sanctification?

Answ. The spirit of God tears out the old hearts, and so before men be
sanctified throughout, he must know suffering, and his wretched state; yet
Sanctification, that brings him peace in the end, and life. And David's
condition thou art ignorant of, and knows not; for he was sensible of the wrath
before his sins were removed, as far as the East is from the West, and he had
joy and peace; but trembling and quaking is become a mock and scoff amongst
you, for there is a trembling and rejoicing, and there is a trembling in the
sorrow.

Pr. When the Quakers are commanded many times to go, they have not that
leisure to dress them, this is a hard Master surely, not Christ, therefore by
Satan, for the Lord is not wont to do things ignorantly to deceive his
servants, and they are brought to fast from all manner of food three nights and
three days, most feeble wretched creatures contrary to the Law of nature, so
they are not capable of bearing the glory of God, so Ministers of Antichrist,
and they are made to deny their callings, and possessions. I would eat more
then I desired, because I would give no offense.

Answ. In this thou have showed thy ignorance of the Scriptures, and Christ,
for he that is on the house top, let him not come down to put on his clothes;
And they that went on his message were not to take two coats: And when they
went on his message, they did not go to dress themselves with boot-hose-tops,
and double cuffs, and ribbons, and rings, as the Priest does; and what God
does, it is in his wisdom, beyond the ignorance of mankind, and they that
receive it must be in his fear; And Christ is not a hard Master, as thou
think, because some goes, not dressing them in their apparel, which goes to
do his command; but thou who art wicked and sloathfull, has so judged with the
wrong and false judgment, and many of the Saints have fasted till they might
number their bones; and Christ fasted, and this was not contrary to the Law of
nature, and did not make them incapable of receiving the glory of God. Neither
was it Antichrist: and thou who art of him, can eat and drink more then thou
have desire, because thou would not offend others, and that is contrary to
the Law of nature. And the Saints forsook their callings and possessions, and
the world; but you Priests runs into great possessions, which you get out of
poor peoples labors; so like the false Apostles and Antichrist, not like
Christ and his Apostles.

Pr. They have a gloss put upon Christ's words to his Disciples, when he bids
them that they should take no care what to speak, it should be given them in
the same hour. And of their g^ing naked, I never knew the mind of the Lord
discovering by any of his servants, neither under the old nor new Covenant. And
these dreamers go to a place, and does not know what to say till they come to
the place.

Answ. Philip was sent to a place, and then it was told him what to say, when
he came to it: And he was not a dreamer, but thou art, who goes without a
command from God, and runs when he never sent thee, and follows thy own spirit*
And they that speak as the spirit gives them utterance, and moves them, and
takes no thought, but it is given them in the same hour; and thou that art out
of this, art in the glosses. It was the mind of the Lord for Isaiah to go
naked, and to strip himself in Egypt and Aethiopia, as many are moved of the
Lord to go naked among you spiritual Egypt and Ethiopians, and to put off
their clothes; which is a figure to you, that the sheeps clothing must be
taken off of your ravening wolves backs.

Pr. Thou say, For the present thou do not apprehend any thing more, but
that the Devil shall transform himself into an Angel of light. And there are
hardly a people to be found that cry out more against sin, and the appearance
of sin and unrighteousness, then they do, as far as I know, or have heard, to
declare them to be carried forth as Ministers of righteousnes^.

Answ. Thy apprehension is vain, and judgment false; for the Devil
transformed himself into an Angel of Light before the Apostles deceased, and
so is transformed into you who have the words, but out of the life; for the
Devil could not transform into the Apostles, while they were in the life; and
you are Antichrist, that are crying out against sin and unrighteousness, and
lives in it; but the Quakers are the sins enemy, and the souls friend, which
are the Ministers of righteousness, and declared so to be in all your
consciences, to be in the life of all the Prophets, Apostles, and Christ, and
do see that you be transformed into their words, but out of the life, with that
judged.

Pr. I am persuaded the Quakers do not tell a lie, that Satan he will either
choose to do some things, as healing some infirmity, and turning water into
wine, and the like, this is a deceitful way enough, that all the belly-gods in
England may become Quakers, this labor of mine may make thousands to refuse
their errors and delusions, because it can be done through a great light that
is in Antichrist.

Answ. The Quakers are in the truth, and out of the lie, and see you are in it,
for Antichrist is turned from the light, and the Devil is not he that turns
water into wine, and heals the sick and infirmities, nor Antichrist, but the
true Christ; where did you read that they turned water into wine, or heal the
sick? therefore thou, and you by your delusions and errors, your labor is to
deceive thousands; And thou have cleared the Quaker from being in the error or
delusion, for thou say, they dare not lie, then they are not of the Devil,
who is the ground of all error and delusion, and you Priests are the greatest
belly-gods in the Nation, for you devour up the tenthes of the N^tion, of poor
husbandmen, and so you cannot endure the power that makes to tremble, so
cannot endure the salvation.

Pr. What if one of these Quakers should be sent to a blind leader of the
people, and a man is not able to reply a word and it may be a good Scholar.

Answ. Them in scorn you call Quakers has been moved by the power of the Lord
God, to come against such as thou art, leaders of the blind, and though you
have been great Scholars, and when you have not been able to resist their
spirit, but found naked from the spirit of the Lord, you have cried to your
Rulers and Magistrates, to help take them away, cast them into prison, and
there has been your weapons, and Antichrists Court and Fort, and the wolves in
the sheep clothing, strong against them that be in the Apostles and Christ's
power, and life and doctrine, and now you are discovered.

Pr. The crucifying the Son of God a-fresh, that is, Christ without, or else in
the heart of another, not in his own that does it, and thou says thou ingages
thy affections to the seekers, because of their seize.

Answ. He that crucifies Christ a-fresh to himself, first crucifies him in his
own heart, before he crucifies him in another heart without him, and it is the
affections that thou art joined withal to people, and not with the spirit, to
the notional seize; for had thou been in the spirit, thou would not
have writ such a book as this is against the truth, or affections above, or
answered the principle of God in the seekers, or minded the life in them, or in
thy own particular, in which you might have lived in unity with God and
Scripture; but whither art thou turned now, to thy great fat Benefice? and
did steal some words from the seekers, and sell them to poor people to make a
trade of them.

Pr. Thou say thou would have all people take a right way in opposing the
Quakers, with a strong understanding in the Scriptures to reason with them.

Answ. All your understanding and your reasoning, if you get all these
Scriptures in it, yet you are not able, being out of the life that gave forth
Scriptures, not to resist the spirit of the Quakers, which is that which was in
them that gave forth Scriptures, though you may gainsay and oppose like Cain,
Core, and Baalam, but woe unto you.

Pr. I shall give my consent, if the Quakers transgress our Laws they might
have double punishment, and if you will not believe the truth that comes from
them, I hope you will believe it as it comes from the mouth of God; with speed
forsake the Quakers society, wholly, public and private.

Answ. Here is thy confession again and judgment, and thy unjustice, would
thou have double punishment inflected upon them that breaks the Law? and do
thou say that the Quakers are the mouth of God, and if you will not believe the
truth as it comes from them, believe it comes from the mouth of God, and yet
must people wholly forsake the society of the Quakers, public and private and
call this overcoming strong questions? This is the strengthening of strong
questions, overcoming you that be in the deceit, who are to be Judged.

Pr. That God is all, and in all.

Answ. The Scripture says so, God is all and in all, and through you all, and
over you all, blessed for ever, and this is not to justify any prophanness nor
wicked actions, but it is you that would not have the Lord to have no Room in
your hearts, that would not have him to be in people, nor have him there to
Reign.

Pr. I have sometime told the Quakers that I did conceive the design of
Antichrist was to bring them in the end to work all manner of uncleanness; I
now judge, they be carried from one degree to another to act righteousness.

Answ. Here thou confounds thy imagination, and has showed thou have followed
thy own spirit, and thy false prophecy is come to an end, and proved thy self
to be a dreamer, for they are in the righteousness, which comprehends thee.

Pr. Thou say, The Lord does not regain any of our age to walk so they that
are called the Anibaptists, and yet thou ownest them.

Answ. Do thou own that which the Lord does not require, and do they practice
that which the Lord does not require? and so thou have given Judgment upon tny
self, and them both.

Pr. I having also Communion with my former society, which is broken of
through the mysterious working of Antichrist, I would have spared my pen for a
few lines, but for the sake of a very few in the Nation, and I have not time to
write one line, from first to last, twice, expect not from me an army of
reasons and arguments.

Answ. Thou had been better spared thy pen and tongue both, then have written
from that which thou have written, whose Communion is with the mysterious
working of Antichrist, and there is but a few in the Nation but will see thy
work is but fuel for the fire, and abundance of stuff thou have in thy book,
which is not worth mentioning, but will fall upon thy head, In the day of thy
judgment, the witness shall answer.

Priest Tombs Baptist of Leo-Minster. His Principles as FOLLOWS.
Pr. THe words Joh. 1.9. [enlighteneth every man] are meant of a natural life
or light.

Answ. Christ that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, this
light is not natural, neither is he natural that is called the power of God;
who was before all natural light was made, Sun, Moon and Stars, and so this
light that does enlighten every man that believes in it, and is their
condemnation that does not believe in it that is above all natural, for the
light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, is that all men
might believe, that is not natural life or light, but of the Divine nature,
which is above nature, for in him was life, and the life was the light of men,
and is the salvation to the ends of the earth: and in this thou have showed thy
ignorance, and do not Preach that which people are to believe in.

Pr. Thou says the Ministers of Christ may seek what they shall have by the
year, and are not to go up and down to Towns, and eat and drink, what is set
before them, as those did, Luke 10.7.

Answ. We do believe such Apostate Ministers from the Doctrine of Christ and
his Apostles as you are who have thrown aside the Doctrine of Christ, and
trampled it under your feet, and sees up your selves in great Benefices, which
lives in a Town, does not go up and down to eat and drink such things as are
set before them; but how are you then those that Christ said he would be with
to the end of the world? and how do you then observe all things that he has
commanded? for lo I am with you to the end of the world, and they were to
observe all things that were commanded; and how are you here out of Christ's
doctrine, and are you not the wolves among the sheep, with sheep clothing,
deceiving the world, but not the sheep? And how are you them that Christ said
was to go into all nations? and Io I am with you to the end of the world, and
this is not your work as you say, and so judged out of the Apostles practices
and Christ's Doctrine.

Pr. Thou says, That in the 1 Cor. 9.14. is meant of natural food, which is to
be obtained by civil Laws, and our declaring against such Shepherds as in
Isai. 56. does not touch thee, and that thou have received the Gospel from the
Epistles of Paul, and that thou ownes not Revelations, tremblings and quakings.

Answ. The Saints did not by civil laws, or the Laws of the Nation, nor the
Ministers of Christ, get maintenance, neither does the Scripture then brings
speak they did, [read it over again] and let all sober people read it, and the
Gospel thou have received from the Epistles, the Epistles does not give thee
the power of God, and the Gospel is the power of God, here thou have showed thy
Ministry is of the Letter, and of man, and not from God, for the Gospel is the
power of God to salvation to every one that believes, Preached to Abraham
before the Epistles was written, and that's everlasting, not received from
Epistles: and Paul an Apostle, not of men, nor by men, but by the Revelation of
Jesus Christ; and thou that denies Revelation denies the Son of God, and the
grace that was brought by Revelation, and denies knowing the Father; for none
knows the Father, but whom the Son reveals him, and thou have denied the ^ear
of God, and the Lords secrets; for the secrets of the Lord are with them that
fear ^im, they are revealed to them; and thou that denies trembling and Quaking
has denied thy salvation, and the Apostles Doctrine, and denied thy self to be
a Minister of Christ; for the Apostle says, work out your salvation with fear
and trembling, and thou that denies trembling, denies salvation as is wrought
out by it; And Esa. 56. does judge thee, for thou art one that seeks thy gain
from thy Quarter, a greedy dumb dog, can never have enough, as witness thy
Eggs, and how thou did hale before the Justice for not paying of them.

Pr. Thou says, Thou do not uphold such as Mic. 3. speaks of.

Ans Art not thou one that Divines tor money, and prophecies for money,
Preaches for money? and if people will not put into thy mouth, thou prepares
War against them, as I said before, witness thy Eggs, and give thee Eggs, thou will say they are good Churchmen, and stop thy mouth with Eggs, but if not,
thou have them before Magistrates.

Pr. Thou says, If any of the Church joined to me, leave me because I take
maintenance, it will be their sin.

Answ. The true Prophets left the false prophets, and the true Apostles did the
false, as taught for covetousness, and means, and declared against them, and
such as goes out from the spirit, goes into the earth, and such as comes to the
spirit, comes from the earth: and teaching for gifts, rewards and hire as thou
Tombs do, upon whom is thy old garment.

Pr. Thou says, Thou denies an absolute perfection of degrees in this life.

Ans. In this thou have denied the work of the Ministry, which is for the
perfecting, and does none come to perfection in a degree of perfection? does
none come to Christ who is perfect? does none come to the spirit? who comes to
the spirit, comes to be perfect; for who comes to the spirit and to Christ
comes to that which is perfect, who comes to the Kingdom of heaven in them,
comes to be perfect, yea to a perfect man, and that is above any degree, and
thus thou art blind and ignorant of that which the Scriptures declare.

Pr. Thou would have it proved that they are false prophets that declare the
true Prophets words.

Answ. They that make Merchandice of the true Prophets words were the beast,
false prophets and great Whore, but they that speak freely as they had
received, was the true Prophets and true Apostles, and such in all ages was
distinct each from other, known by the spirit of the Lord, who had received
from the Lord what they spoke and declared freely, and who had got the Saints
words, and had not received them from the Lord, but spoke them forth for money,
these were distinct one from another.

A Paper I have received, the Title of it is, A form of sound words, containing
the first Principles of the Oracles of God, framed for the use and benefit of
the Inhabitants of two adjacent Parishes in the County of NOTTINGHAM. Their
principles in it as follows.
Pr. WHen for the time you ought to be Teachers, you have need that one teach
you again, which be the first Principles.

Answ. How can you teach the first Principle of pure Religion, when you deny
the light that Christ has enlighten every man that comes into the world
withal? And this may whole England witness, and so your Doctrines that you
have taught them, and commandments are such as perishes, being not men sent of
God, so have not profited the people at all.

Pr. And you say, False teachers, this age is too full of: and that you may
henceforth, be no more children tossed two and fro, and you entreat to except a
word from us your Ministers; for what profits a man to gain the whole world
and lose his own soul.

Answ. Who has tossed people more up and down then you, and carried them about
with your windy doctrines, and so the multitudes of the false teachers, the
world have been too full of you since the days of the Apostles; who is more
for gaining the whole world then you, that calls your selves Ministers? has
not and does not your fruits declare it to the whole Nation, in prisons, there
lies your fruits, for where may people see the Priests fruits but in prisons;
And how your Congregations be all on heaps, when any comes in the Name of the
Lord amongst them, and has showed that your Exhortation has not profited the
People at all.

Pr. We entreat you to take heed of that dangerous deceit, in hoping to be
saved by your own works, or in any thing in our selves.

Answ. He that believes has ceased from his own works, so not said by them,
and he that believes is saved, and this belief is within him in Christ. And the
ingrafted word is able to save the soul, and Christ the Savior revealed and
manifested within.

Pr. Out of the holy Scriptures Old and New Testament, which it the word of
God, we may learn the true knowledge of God.

Answ. The Jews had Scriptures, and did not know God nor Christ, nor did not
know themselves; And the Scriptures is not the word, but the words of God, and
so you teach Parishes, and your children to lie, as you may read in Exodus, God
spoke all these words, and said. And whosoever shall add to these words,
Revelations. and Christ says my words. And would you make people believe the
Scriptures were but a word, when they say they are words. And Christ is the
word, as in the Revelation. And so that which brings to the knowledge of God is
the spirit; And the Son reveals him, Christ Jesus, who is the light which does
enlighten every man that comes into the world, and every man that comes into
the world receiving the light, Christ will reveal the Father to him.

Pr. There is three persons, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost. And we entreat you to
take heed of the natural Popish conceit.

Answ. The word three persons is the natural Popish conceit, which is out of
thy Father the Popes Canon-books, where thou have learned it, but Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, that is sound Scripture, but thou can not take it as it
speaks, but thou must add three persons to it, so brings the plague upon thee.

Pr. There is many that have share in that salvation purchased by Christ.

Answ. Christ was the offering for the sin of the whole world. And he gave his
body for the life of the whole world. And he came a light into the world, and
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, he that dyed for the sin of
the whole world, was an offering for the sin of the world, that all through
this light might believe. And so many are condemned for not believing, that
which they should believe in condemns them.

Pr. God works faith in us inwardly by his spirit, and outwardly by his word.

Answ. Here thou go about to make the spirit and the word not one, is not
the word spiritual, and Christ called the word? who is the Author of the faith,
which mystery of it is held in a pure conscience? and is not this word of faith
in the heart?

Pr. The whole word of God in general is summed up in the Apostles Creed.

Answ. Where have thou been for the word Creed, but out of the Masse-book, and
Popes Canon-book, not out of the Apostles Epistles. And the Apostles Epistles
declares of the word, and the Saints writings, and says it was in the
beginning, and says the Letter kills, for the Jews had Letter, and did not
find the word in it, but stood against it, and you have the Letter the Apostles
words, but you do not find the word in it, it speaks of the word, the word was
in the beginning, and in the heart, before the words.

Pr. Brethren be perfect, be of good comfort, no man can be made free from sin
in this life, Gods children have sin in them.

Answ. The Devils doctrine is, that men shall not be perfect while they are
upon earth, and all his Ministers; but you that say they must be perfect and
yet must have sin, that makes them unperfect. And the children of God that was
born of God, did not commit sin, neither could they, because the seed of God
remained in them, and they were made free from sin, and had put off the body of
sin, as in Romans the 6. and John the 3.

Pr. No man is able to keep the commands of God perfectly, we break them daily
in thought, word and deed. And in all our best duties we are unprofitable
servants.

Ans. Here you show that you do not love God, for who loves God, keeps his
Commandments, and love fulfills them: and all your best duties and deeds be but
unprofitable servants, in that we do believe you. So your Preaching is
unprofitable, praying unprofitable, so you judge your selves out of your own
mouths, singing, instructing, praying, all is unprofitable, and they are the
slothful servants, who are Reprobates to every good work, but the Saints that
prayed, Preached, sung in the spirit, such was profitable, that loved God and
kept his Commandments, which you that do not love God, do not keep his
Commandments; So your fruits are unprofitable that keeps not the Commandments
of God. And there is your mark, that you do not love him.

Pr. The Law is a rule for a believers life; we must attend unto the
Sacraments.

Answ. Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness sake unto everyone that
does believe, so Christ is the rule who ends the Law to believers; And thy
Sacraments must go again to the Common Prayer Book, to the Masse-book, the
Scripture does not teach us those words, as Sacrament and Creed, but the old
Masse-book, thou art running to it, and so leaving the Scriptures, So thou art
judged with the life of God.

Pr. Who are ordained, lawfully, or called to the Ministry.

Ans. Your ordination and call is by men, contrary to the Apostles and Christ,
who says, not by man nor of man, and Christ says, pray to the Father that he
may send laborers into the vineyard, and such you persecute; And thou say
there is two Sacraments in the Gospel, which the Apostles tells us of no such
thing, but the Pope in his Masse-book.

Pr. We may not learn for to seek for happiness in this life, these words I
command thee this day shall be in thy heart to teach thy children and to talk
of them in thy house.

Ans. These words has spoken long in your hearts, therefore have you led the
world in wickedness, but the children of God finds happiness in this life,
being changed from the old in this life, for they find God, and they find
Christ, and find rest for their souls; And who is in Christ is a new creature,
and such has happiness.

Pr. This form of sound words taken out of the best and soundest Catechismes
that we could meet withal, and our mouth is opened boldly.

Ans. This is your form of unsound words, and if this be the best stuff you
can find, out of your best Catechismes, it is pitiful, durty, dark stuff,
and you had better have kept your mouth shut, If this be your Catechismes, they
are for the fire, the children of light who are come into the light comprehends
and sees the Cathchismes and you both, and you are to be Catechized, and if you
will but read over the Priests and professors Catechism, you may learn some
thing out of it.

This is a ralation of some perticulars and principles, affirmed by some of the
Priests of Bishop-rick, at a public dispute in Branspirth Castle upon the 21.
day of the 7th, month 1658.
Pr. JOsias Dorker affirmed, that immediate Revelation or inspiration is not to
be expected in these days.

Ans. Then you are from the spirit, that says so, which the spirit of God does
reveal, you are them that have ravened, the false prophets and ante-christ,
that inwardly ravened from the spirit of God, having the sheeps clothing, in
the darkness, the King of the bottomless pit has been your king, for the
King of Kings, and Lord of Lords is not known but by revelation, for none
knows the Son, but the father, and he to whom he does reveal him, that shows
that you be out of the fear of God, for where the fear of God is, God
reveals his secrets, but the fear* God is now witnessed, and the Son of God
is now witnessed, and revelations is now witnessed, in our days as it was in
the Apostles, but not amongst you, who have inwardly ravened from the spirit of
God, which has Apostatized from the Apostles.

Pr. That it is needless and also diabolical (that is to say divilish) to
expect any such thing now.

Ans. And so you be in the diabolical divilish, that expects not that now,
which was in the days of the Apostles, and be out of the fear of God, and the
spirit which does reveal, and the Son you know not, which said to them, the
Pharisees, that knew him not, they were of the devil, and so he is known by
revelation.

Pr. That they had the scripture and the Gospel (as he confessed) not from
God, but from men.

Ans. You know not the scriptures, nor no man upon the earth, but as from God
and the spirit, as they did that gave them forth, who learned them of God, and
so, who knows scripture, must know revelation and the Gospel, for they are
known not, but by the spirit which gave them forth.

Pr. That the Bible was the Gospel.

Ans. The Gospel is the power of God, which was before the scripture was
written, preached to Abraham, and many may have the Bible, but the power of
God; the Gospel, glad tidings which is to the salvation of every one that
believes; and the scripture is a testification of the Gospel, of the glad
tidings, and it is not called the power of God, and Christ is called the power
of God, and the Gospel; and many had scripture, but would not come to Christ,
the power of God, and so not to the Gospel.

Pr. That the flesh of Christ is not in them.

Ans. The saints eat his flesh, and they that eat his flesh, has it within
them.

Pr. That Christ had and has a carnal body.

Ans. And Christ's body is not carnal, but spiritual, the first man was of the
earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from heaven heavenly, and is a
glorious body, and the saints are made like unto his glorious body, therefore
the first state is carnal, the second glorious, so there is a natural body,
and there is a spiritual body.

Pr. That Christ is now in heaven with a carnal body.

Ans. Carnal indeed is death, says scripture, and it says that corruption
must put on incorruption, and mortal immortality, so Christ's body that is in
heaven is a glorious body, a and not carnal, nor of the flesh corruptible.

Pr. That Christ has a carnal humane body, united to his divinity.

Ans. And carnal humane is from the ground, humane earthly, the first Adams
body, and Christ was not from the ground, let all people read what thou say,
but he was from heaven, his flesh came down from above, his flesh which was the
meat, his flesh came down from heaven.

Pr. That Timothy retained his ministry, not from God, but from Paul.

Ans. Timothy did retain his ministry from God, and knew the gift, that which
he did retain from Paul was not as man, but Timothy was in the faith which
Christ was the author of, and he had the gift, which every good and perfect
gift comes from God, and this was not by man, nor of man.

Pr. That there it as much difference between a body and a spirit, as there is
between light and darkness.

Ans. Christ's body is spiritual, and that which is spiritual, does not differ
from the spirit, and so there is a spiritual body, and there is a natural
body, and there is a spiritual man, and there is a natural man, and each has
their body.

Pr. Henry Liver said, that they knew no such thing at prophesying by immediate
revelation or inspiration in these days.

Ans. Then thou never knew the scriptures, for none knows scripture as I said
before, but by the spirit of revelation, which does reveal the words, but by
the spirit of prophecy, mark which spirit lets see into the words, and he
that has not the spirit of Christ is none of his; and he that has the spirit
of Christ has immediate revelation, and prophecy, and the spirit of God is
immediate, and it does reveal, and the Gospel is immediate, which is the power
of God.

Pr. Richard Franckling said, they had it by scripture.

Ans. And it was the spirit that brought them to give forth scripture, which
things of God was revealed to them by it, and the scripture does not reveal the
spirit, but the spirit the scripture.

Pr. That the light which lights every man was not sufficient to lead up to
Christ.

Ans. The light Christ, that does enlighten, every man that comes into the
world, that which he does enlighten them every one withal, which they are to
believe in, is sufficient to lead up to Christ, for they that do believe in
the light, becomes the children of light, passes from death to life, from
darkness to light, and comes out of condemnation and shall never dye, and so
it is sufficient, that he that does not believe in the light, by it is
condemned, for this is the condemnation, that light is come in to the world,
and men love the darkness rather then the light, because their deeds be evil,
and so you and they that love the darkness rather then the light, because your
deeds are evil, and will not come to it, because it will reprove you, are them
that live in the form of godliness, and denies the power, and teaches people
to say, that the light is not sufficient that every man is lighted withal that
comes into the world, that all might believe, which not by it are condemned,
and the light is sufficient to lead up to him that comes from him.

Pr. That Grace was not conveyed from the Lord to any man, without the ordinary
outward means.

Ans. The Grace of God has appeared to all men, which teaches the saints, and
the grace is brought by the revelation of Jesus, as says Peter by revelation,
and the grace is the gift of God, and not attained by an outward means, by
man's will, and they that turn it into lasciviousness, the grace of God that
has appeared, are them that deny the Lord that bought them, which goes from
the grace, which is the saints teacher, which brings salvation.

Pr. That the scriptures is that only which they are to have recourse unto, to
inform the minds of people from.

Ans. Before the scripture was written or given forth, Abraham, Enoch and Abel
had that to inform their minds, and let them see Christ and the Jews had
scripture, and knew not Christ, they had the testification, and did not come to
him they testified of, and so had not life, so that which is to inform the
minds of all people is the spirit and the light which Christ has enlightened
them withal, and such their ears and eyes must be open to that the spirit of
God in themselves, before they hear his voice, which spirit informs their
minds to God, and then they shall come to know the operation of the spirit,
which many may have the scriptures, and not know that, and that which is to
teach people is the grace Christ, and God, and the light and life, and that it
is which informs the mind to know scripture.

Pr. Priest Dorker said, That the word of God was the ordinary outward means,
and that the scripture is the word, they all affi^med.

Ans. The word of God is not outward nor ordinary, but extraordinary, it is
that which lives, abides and endures for ever, and the scriptures are to be
fulfilled and that which does fulfill them is the word, and the scriptures of
truth learned of God the Father of truth, are the words of God, not a word God
spoke all these words, and said, in Exodus, and my words, says Christ; and
whosoever shall add to these words, says John in the Revelations: and so the
words are the scriptures of truth, that cannot be broken, Christ the word
fulfiles them, who was in the beginning, before the words was spoken forth, who
is and remains to the words end, who fulfills them in whom they end.

Daniell Roberts Teacher to the Baptists at Reading in Bark-shire did affirm.
Pr. THat Baptism of water, (that is to say) Elementary water does wash away
sin.

Ans. Here thou puts water in the room of Christ's blood which cleanses from
all sin, and what need of that, if water does it, outward water can but wash
the outward.

Pr. That God had committed all judgment to the scriptures.

Ans. That is contrary to the Apostle, who says, God will judge the world by
the man Christ Jesus, according to the Gospel, and that is the power, and all
judgment is committed to the Son, (mark) to the Son, and the saints shall
judge the world, and he is in them.

Pr. That the new Covenant is the words of Christ and the Apostles, and every
one that has the Bible in their house, have the new covenant.

Ans. The New Covenant is Christ the scriptures speaks of, and the Jews had
the scriptures that stood against the Covenant, and many may have the Bible,
and not in the thing it speaks of.

Pr. An other Baptist said at the same time, If they had not had scriptures,
they had not known how to walk nor order their conversation.

Ans. How knew those to order their conversation, and walk before scripture was
given forth; the life which led them to give forth the scripture, did order
them to walk acceptable to him, for the Pharisees had the scripture given
forth from the life, but being out of the life, their conversations were not
ordered by it.

Pr. Daniell Roberts affirmed, That he knew no other spirit, then what was in
the scripture, and that he carried it in his pocket.

Ans. The spirit is not in the scriptures, but in them that gave it forth, and
that the scriptures testify of; which many got the scriptures, but wanted that
which gave it forth, and so were not in unity with the scripture, nor one with
an other, nor with God, and this is wanting in all Christendom (so called) the
unity of the spirit, in which is the bond of peace, for many have the words,
but not the spirit.

An answer to Timothy Trevers his principles propounded by way of queries.
Pr. FIrst, That the light in every man, as in every man, teaches not the way
to the Kingdom of God, nor gives the hope of eternal life.

Ans. The light in every man which does inlighten every man, does teach the way
to the kingdom of God, and no other way it teaches but to the Kingdom, and
though men hate it, and will not come to it, because their deeds are evil, yet
that is the teacher in all men that gives them the sense of transgression, and
an understanding of reproof, and knowing if they come so that, they are
reproved, and there is the kingdom in men, and that is it which lets all men
see the most high reigning, and shall make every tongue to confess Christ to
the glory of God, and is that which gives every man assurance, that God has
raised Christ from the dead, who has enlightened them, and that is it which
gives every man the hope of eternal life, and in the light it is received.

Pr. That the seed to whom the promise of salvation is made, is, or has been
sinners.

Ans. The promise of God is to the seed, which has been laden as a Cart with
shaves by the sinner, which seed is the hope Christ, that purifies even as God
is pure, and here is the creature come to know its liberty amongst the sons of
God, and the seed Christ never sinned in the male nor in the female, in the Jew
nor in the Gentiles, and of this mystery was the great high professors ignorant
of, that stood at a distance from the Gentiles, that Christ had no room among
them, though they talked of him, but in the stable, in the manger, and in their
mouths, to talk of him with their lips, and such Christ calls graves and
Sepulchers, and whited walls, and the wall is not the seed, but the seed is
Christ, and not the Sepulcher, nor the grave; so this promise is not unto
seeds, as many, but to one, the seed, which is Christ.

Pr, That there is no man does possess the Kingdom of God, whilst he is in the
mortal body.

Ans. In this thou art like Nebuchadnezer, who must graze like the Ox, thy
mouth downward, who knows not the most high ruling in the children of men, and
God will dwell in you, and walk in you, and where God dwells and walks in
men, they are his temples which is holy, there is his Kingdom, his power, his
authority, and the Tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell in them,
and walk in in them, and this is the state of thousands; that be in the new
covenant, that knows the power of God, of the most high, his law put in their
minds and hearts, and they that do not know that they are the Temples of God,
and God dwelling in them, and walking in them, they are worse then the
Corinthians.

Pr. That he that does not preach the death and Resurection, and the man Christ
Jesus, that rose from the dead at Jerusalem, preaches not the Gospel,
whatsoever else he does declare.

Ans. He that preaches Christ, must preach that Christ that dyed at Jerusalem,
for he is the same to day, yesterday, and forever, and the Lamb slain from the
foundation of the world, which seed, Christ, breaks the Serpents head, and
destroys death and the Devil, that went out of the truth, and death being
destroyed, the captivated one comes out, by the power which is the Gospel, and
the prisoner of hope shows himself forth, and then the covenant of light and
life is felt, and peace with God, but the Reprobate, Devil, death, and
destruction, antichrist, Beast and false prophet, may talk of Christ without,
and he not within felt, such are then the Reprobates, and thou saying the seed
is not in all men, first know it in thy self, he is not in the man of sin,
that is to be destroyed, who has blinded thy mind, and has taken possession
of thy heart, and so first judge thy self.

Pr He that does not expect the Resurrection from the dead, of his own person,
as Christ rose from the dead, literally understood, has no true hope of
Eternal life borne in his understanding

Ans. The Saints rising is in Christ, and he is the Resurrection, they are of
his flesh, and of his bone, and of his spirit, and the Saints are of the flesh
of Christ that saw no corruption, and of his bone, and has the hope of
eternal life promised of the Father, and now the flesh of Christ, the Jews
did not know, that were the Idolaters, and fornicaters, for Christ according to
the flesh was of Abraham, who came out of all that Idolatry and generation of
Fornicaters, and in this the saints rise, live, and remain with Christ for
ever, and such come to know the resurrection of the just, and unjust according
to the scriptures, the one to eternal life, and the other to condemnation.

Pr. That Christ by his death overcame him that had the power of death, and
thereby made way to life.

Ans. But how is death overcome in thee, when thou do not see the kingdom of
God in thee, and says it shall not be whiles men are in their mortal bodies,
and how short art thou of the Holy Ghost, and the power, and the joy, and the
righteousness, which the Kingdom stands in? and Christ which overcame death,
he is the life, and the way to God the Father of life, which does inlighten
every man that comes into the world, that by the light they might see it, and
believe in it, that they might be children of light, and come to the light of
life, which they that do not believe in it, with the light are condemned.

Pr. That the unchangablenesse of Gods purpose, of his love, is the only
ground of man's obedience, and stability, or continuance in obedience, not man's
obedience the ground of his stability.

Ans. Man's stability is Christ, the light the life, the foundation of God that
stands sure, the hope in him that remains, the faith given to him of God, the
seed comes to be known, the Son of God in the male and in the female, which
abides in the house for ever, which is the heir of the promise, and there the
unchangeablenesse of God is known, he that does not change is seen, that is
appeared, which cannot be shaken, that sees an end of all changeable things,
and variableness, and turnings, and here is the obedience felt.

Pr. God has ordained to eternal life every one that are or shall be saved
before they had a being in this world, but none come to possession of this
salvation but through the obedience of the spirit.

Ans. The ground of man's belief and obedience is Christ, who does inlighten
him, to the intent that he might believe and obey the truth, and who knows the
seed, knows the election, before the world was made.

Pr. That the seed of Israel are men, and not only something in man, that the
seed of the Serpent are men, and not only something in man.

Ans. If the seed of Israel be men, then by thy account the seed of Israel is
the seed of the Serpent, for they are men; and Christ who came to destroy the
work of the Devil, and him that has the power of death; it is not said he
came to destroy all Israel, and all men upon the earth, but thou errs in thy
judgment, and in thy understanding; for I know it is the seed of the Serpent
that speaks in thee, that puts no difference between the precious and the
vile, and when Israel thought Christ had called them serpents, many of them
were converted to the faith; their outward creatures were not destroyed; thou
talks foolishly, and given up to the Devils power, and who works wickedness
and mischief, and if men be the serpents seed, as thou does say, who shall be
saved, for the Serpent and his seed must be destroyed; and if men be the seed
of the serpent, then must the seed of the serpent obey the spirit, must not the
spirit destroy him, and the brightness and breath of the Lord consume him; and
it is men whose lives Christ came to save, that are captivated by the seed of
the serpent, and redeemed and turned from the power of Satan, to God; and thou
must be threshed, and feel the weight of the Lords hand, before thou be
humbled; and what have thou to do to talk of ordination before man had a
being in the world, and would make men like thy self, and say they are the
serpents seed, which man is not so, as he is man, and we and thousands do
witness election and salvation before the foundation of the world was laid,
and are come into that which comprehends time and being, which are since time,
in which power the elect reigns where salvation is known.

Pr. The woman that the Serpent deceived, her seed breaks the Serpents
Dominion.

Ans. The seed of the woman does bruise the serpents head, where ever he is
found in any male or female, that Christ may rise in the male and in the
female, and this seed is a top of thy head, and thou have no power but to reach
to his heel, and thou art the house of darkness, and the seed is yet in Egypt,
not come forth yet, and there is a strong man must bow himself, and them that
keep the house must tremble, and has kept thy heart from the Lord God, and
has carried it a whoring abroad, and a stronger he is, then he that keeps the
house, that spoils his goods and takes possession, who comes to rule, and will
rule and reign.

Pr. That the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man in the Church
to profit withal, and not to every man in the world.

Answ. The manifestation is given to every man to profit withal, without
distinction, I will power out my spirit upon all flesh, for the spirit of truth
shall lead the Saints into all truth, and he shall reprove the world, and that
which does reprove the world, is manifest to the world.

Pr. That no man has received a measure of the spirit of Christ, but such as
do believe in Christ, and that no man does believe in Christ, but such as
Christ is revealed to in time; and that he is revealed to none, but by the
manifestation of his spirit.

Answ. The true believers that believe in Christ the revelation, knew him in
time and out of time, and the unbelievers are reproved.

Pr. Which of the people of God, Prophets, or Apostles, did direct all people
to a Light within them for their instruction and guide, before the
manifestation of the spirit unto them, or the work of Regeneration wrought in
them.

Answ. The Prophet said, I will give him for a Covenant of light unto the
Gentiles, and a new Covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of
Judah will I make, and write my Law in their hearts, and put them into their
minds; and this was in general, directed to them before they was converted,
and Regenerated, and this light was to inlighten the Gentiles, whereby the
prisoners should come out of the pit where there is no water, and the new
Covenant was held to the Jews before they were converted, that all may see who
can read but the outward letter; and the Apostle was sent to turn people from
darkness to light, and John the highest Prophet borne of woman, said, that was
the true light which did inlighten every man that comes into the world, which
he was a witness of, and shined in the darkness, and the darkness
comprehends it not; and Christ directed the Pharisees to the kingdom of
heaven in them which were not converted; read the pearl, and the lost piece of
silver, read the talent, and the pearl hid in the field, read the slothful
servant, his talent, and then read thy self how blind and ignorant thou art in
the things of God, and be silent, that thou may come to know the Lord, and his
fear, that the witness of God may stir in thee, that thou may do righteously
in the fight of God and men, least the judgment of God be upon thy head; for
thou art manifest to all that be in the light.

THE DOCTRINS and PRINCIPLES OF THE Priests of Scotland, CONTRARY to the
DOCTRINE OF CHRIST and the APOSTLES. Here all may see, The Priests of Scotland,
and their Church, and their Persecution, against the Saints, and Lambs,
Servants, and Children of God, which the Lord moved to go among them, to visit
the Seed of God, in that dark wilderness-Country, who has been as Sheep among
Wolves. Also, How pure Religion is turned upside down, and vain Religion got in
its place. And the pure Doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, which says,
Entertain Strangers, Love Enemies is lost among you; In stead of entertaining
strangers, and loving enemies, they Imprison and Persecute, and have made their
Church unsavory: And the Teachers fruits declares to be false, who are
wrestlers against flesh and blood, and strikers at creatures which Christ and
the Apostles did not. George Wear. John Heart. William Gray. William Lowry.
William Mitchell. Richard Isamaell.

FIRST, These Presbyterian Priests of Scotland, which Excommunicate and puts
out of the Synagogues, knows not the Father and the Sun, John 16. so no true
Christians; for how can they be true Christians that knows not the Son of God,
nor the Father?

Secondly, They are no Ministers of Christ; for Christ says, When they curse,
bless ye; so they be out of Christ's doctrine and teaching, not blessing but
cursing, and giving forth curses, and all the people must say Amen to their
Curses.

Thirdly, They be out of the Apostles doctrine, who says, Bless and curse
not, Romans 12.14. so are no Ministers of Christ that curses, and gives forth
their Curses, to the people to say Amen to them: and here they are shut out of
the Apostles doctrine, and Christ's, all people mark, and take notice, them they
are that curse; which the Apostle says, Bless and curse not; these are the
Cursers and not blessers, that Excommunicate you out of the Synagogues.

Hugh Archball Priest of Stravan. John Hume Priest of Lesmabaga. William
Hambleton Priest of Glasford. James Durram Priest of Glasgow. John Castaires
Priest of Glagow. Francis Ard Priest of Discert. Matthew Mackel Priest of
Bothell. Henry Foreside Priest of Lingiah. James Nesmith Priest of Hambleton.
Robert Semple Priest of Losmahaga. Thomas Garony Priest of Edenbrough. John
Burnet Priest of Hilbride.
Hugh Archballs Doctrine and Principles, Priest of Stravan in Anandale, These
are his Principles, as follow.
Pr. THat Christ has not enlightened every one that comes into the world.

Ans. Which is contrary to John's doctrine John 1.9.

Pr. That Christ does enlighten none but those that do receive him.

Ans. Contrary to John 3. speaking of them which hate the light, and are
enlightened and will not come to it, because the light will reprove them; so he
that hates the light is enlightened, and will not receive Christ.

Pr. That it is blasphemy to say, that the true light does enlighten and
condemn the world.

Answ. Contrary to John 1.9. and 3.19. that says, This is the true light that
lights every man that comes into the world. And this is the condemnation of
the world, that light is come into the world.

Pr. To say, that which reproves for sin is from Heaven, is blasphemy.

Answ. Contrary to John 16.8. which says it is the spirit that reproves, which
comes from the Father, and the Son, which is from Heaven.

Pr. He cries up a natural light, as Sun, Moon and Stars, and the light of
Christ was before these was made, and says, it is blasphemy to say, they that
did the things contained in the Law was blessed in the deed, and the Apostle
said the doers of the Law was justified; and said he would leave the Friends
that spoke to him, to the mercy of the people.

Answ. Upon which they struck bitterly with books, fists, and stones, to
destroy, but that some moderate people and Soldiers stayed the Persecution.

John Hume Priest of Lesmahaga, His Principles as follows who got into a
Steeple house, and shut the door upon him; thus he taught the people.
Pr. THat which was to be known of God, was manifest by the the things that are
created.

Answ. Contrary to the Apostles doctrine, Romans 1.19. For whatsoever may be
known of God is manifest in them, for the invisible things of him from the
Creation of the world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that
are made, even his eternal power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse.
So with that of God in them they know the invisible things from the foundation
of the world, and with that they see the Godhead.

Pr. That God was to be known by the things that were made, as the Sun, Moon,
and Stars.

Answ. But Jesus Christ said, Mat. 11 27. No man knows the Father but the Son,
and he to whomsoever the Sun will reveal him, and the heathens know not God,
nor the Jews had not seen his shape. And his servants and workmen did throw
water, stones and lime, and persecuted, and dirtted, and abused the people
called Quakers, and threw a pan full of water in a Soldiers neck, and he the
said Priest never reproved them; and these be the fruits of him, and his own
Family, in stead of gravity: well may the whole Parish be out of order, when
his own Family is thus. So he is one that is reproved by the Apostles doctrine.
1 Timothy 3. which says, If you cannot rule your own Family, how can you take
care for the Church of God?

Henry Foreside Priest of the Parish of Lingiah in Dunbarton-shire, said in his
Preaching to the people.
Pr. IF they had any Christian zeal they would stone them whom they call
Quakers.

Answ. It is the blind zeal that stones, not the Christian zeal, that have the
life of Christ; for the Christian zeal is to pray for them that persecute, Mat.
5.44. and not to stone them, and to love enemies: it was the Jews zeal that
took up stones to stone Christ John 8.59. they stoned Steven. Acts 7.5.8. and
stoned the Apostles, Acts 14.19. In this the Presbytrians have proved their
Christianity to be out of Christ and the Apostles.

Prin. If Paul and the rest of the Apostles had been alive, they would have
stoned the Quakers.

Answ. Here all may see his work to be the envious man in Cains way, Jude 11.
who would murder, and wrongs the Apostle, who never taught nor intended any
such doctrine, but said, Overcome evil with good, Rom, 12.21. and love bears
all things, 1 Cor. 13.7. Now see whose Minister this man is, that cannot bear,
but would have them stoned, and would have the Apostle as bad as himself, which
Apostle said, Christ was his example, who laid down his life for his enemies,
Romans 5.8. who suffered the contradiction of sinners, we will render evil to no
man, but say the contrary, the Lord Jesus forgive them, Luke 23.34. and the
Apostle said, they wrestled not against flesh and blood, Ephesians. 6.12. but them
and you that stone, do ye not wrestle against flesh and blood? But if the
Apostles would have stoned, would they not have wrestled against flesh and
blood? And if the Apostles should have stoned all that were contrary to their
minds, and bidden the people stone them, and told them it was Christian zeal,
what work would they have made? as the said Henry Foreside, called Minister,
does, where would have been long suffering? Gal. 5.22. and loving enemies? Mat.
5.44. and where would he have had any to have converted? and who would have
been persecutors? and who would have prayed for persecutors? ye may see what a
pit ye are fallen into, and how should they have convinced gainsayers, Titus
1.9. and loved them when they had stoned them. And this is the Presbyterians
zeal of Scotland, and not Christan zeal, who would stone, and stir up his
Congregation to do so; for Christ, who is clothed with zeal, Isa. 59 17. said,
Love your Enemies, but ye are clothed with madness and folly: And the Apostle
that was in his zeal according to knowledge said, Overcome evil with good, Romans
12.21. and vengeance is the Lords, and he will repay it, Romans 12.19. and love
bears all things; but his blind zeal cannot bear any thing, but cries stone
them out of the way, and so wickedly and devilishly calls it Christian zeal,
which is false, that is, the Devils zeal. Now the Apostles wrestled not against
flesh and blood, but against the powers of darkness, Ephesians. 6.12. but the
Presbyterians called ministers are striking against flesh and blood, whilst ye
would stone them, whilst that time spiritual wickedness lies within you. So
ye Presbyterian-Priests are as a troop of robbers that would murder in the way
by consent, Hos. 6.9.

James Dorram, called Minister of Glasgow, his principles.
Pr. THat the believers, even the real godly, are not without sin in this
life.

Ans. Here is one that is charging the elect, and laying sin to the elect that
God justifies, Romans 8.33. that in the godly there should he sin. Sin is out of
the godly, in the ungodly, which turn the grace of God into wantonness; and
what good does his preaching do them, if they must never be without sin whilst
they are upon earth, they can be but in their sin if they never preach to them:
But the scripture says, He that believes is borne of God, and he that is borne
of God cannot sin, because his seed remains in him, 1 John 3.9. But this is of
another world to him, who is called James Dorram Minister of Glasgow, Minister
of darkness, who puts no difference between the children of God and the
children of the devil, 1 John 3.10. They would have sin whilst they are upon
the earth, and it is darkness, but the Apostles said they were made free from
sin, Romans 6.22. whilst they were upon the earth.

Pr. Christ being sinlesse, separates him from all others.

Answ. Christ being separated from sinners, Heb. 7.26. who are in Christ are
separate from sinners and sin both, 2 Cor. 6, 17. But this James Dorram has
made the offering of none effect, Heb. 10.14. which has perfected for ever
them that are sanctified; And has made the blood of Jesus of none effect,
which cleanses from all sin 1 John 1.7. And he has made the everlasting
Covenant of none effect which blots out all sins and trespasses? And he has
made the faith of the Son of God of none effect, which purifies the heart, and
gives victory over the world, Acts. 15.9. 1 John. 5.5. Thou do herein preach
and hold up sin, and does not preach it down; and yet thou say thou preachest
not to hold it up, and yet thou preachest they must have it whilst they are
upon the earth; here is confusion in thy tongue, Prove. 17.20. Thou should
have preached it down, and have brought them to a Church where there is neither
spot nor wrinkle, nor blemish nor any such thing, Ephesians. 5.27. if thou were a
true Minister, but your Church is full of spots, and blemishes, and wrinkles,
whilst ye are preaching up zeal to stone people, and sin while they live, as
Henry Foreside and James Dorram does.

Pr. God be thanked the scripture speaks nothing for freedom from sin and
perfection.

Ans. Thou thankest God that thou may live in thy sin and imperfection, and
art glad of this thy false hope, but thou art a liar, thou art out of the truth
in this, for the scripture says they were made free from sin, Romans 6.26. and
they preached wisdom among them that were perfect, 1 Cor. 2.6. and he has
perfected for ever them that are sanctified, Heb. 10.14. So the scripture
speaks of freedom from sin and perfection, and be perfect.

Pr. That the condemning power of sin is taken away.

Answ. The believer does not sin, 1 John 5.1. 1 John 3.9. but he that the
believer overcomes commits sin, 1 Io. 3.8: and 1 Io. 5.5. and if the believer
commits sin, who overcomes the believer? and so he that commits sin is under
the condemning power of sin which thou say not: which thou and all other
shall witness

Pr. The believer is not in sin as the unbeliever is, he sins not as the
unbeliever does; and in an other place he says, the Law is the same to the
believer, that it is to the unbeliever.

Answ. Here any may read thy confusion, but I say unto thee, he that believes
does not commit sin, but the unbelief is sin, Romans 11.20. and Christ is the
end of the Law to every one that believes for righteousness sake, Romans 10.4.
and yet thou puts both believers and unbelievers under the Law.

Lodowick Simerell priest of the new parish of Munckland, his Principles and
Doctrines.
Pr. THat it is blasphemy to say that the light in man, which reproves of sin,
is the light of God, is perfect is the gift of God.

Answ. Contrary to scripture, contrary to Christ's words, and contrary to the
Apostles words is thy doctrine and Principles, for every gift of God is
perfect, Isa. 1.17. Isa. 49.6. John 1.3. John 4. For Christ is the gift of God,
and he will give him for a Covenant of light to the Jews, and Gentiles, which
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, which every one that does
truth comes to it, which every one that does evil hates the light, and will
not come to the light because the light will reprove him; and so, This is the
condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds be evil. So this light is
perfect, which does reprove every man of sin, and is from above, and it is the
gift of God, and thou art blind and in darkness that comprehends it not: And
the light which does enlighten every man that comes into the world, Christ
Jesus the gift of God, him by whom the world was made, this light was before
any natural light was made, Sun, Moon, or Stars; for all things that was made,
was made by the light, which came a light into the world, that all through him
might believe, for he that believes not in the light, is condemned already, and
he that does believe in the light has the witness in himself, to set to his
seal that God is true, and the spirit of truth that does reprove the world is
perfect, and of God.

The light which every one that comes into the world is enlightened withal, is
not conscience, for the light was before any thing was made, or conscience
named: So the light is that which exercises the conscience toward God, and
toward man, where it is loved, and the voice heard; but where it is hated, and
the voice not heard, the conscience is seared, and the light is their
condemnation, whose consciences is seared, which light was before conscience
was.

The Priest would not have thee and thou to be to a single person, and so is
the man that would not endure sound words, that cannot be condemned, thee and
thou was the language between God and his Saints, and one another, and you is
to many, and thou was to one, and this was the language between Jeptha and his
daughter, and between the Saints and the Kings, this shows, thou have not
learned the Accedence nor Bible, nor art come to the form of sound words.

John Castaires, called Minister of Glasgow, his principles.
Pr. THis is natural folks duty to pray to God and worship him, although they
sinfully keep themselves under a sinful necessity to sin against God through
ignorance.

Answ. This has been your work to keep people in ignorance, which you may be
ashamed of. A natural man cannot worship God, for he cannot receive the things
of God, nor a sinful man, but worship the Devil, for he that commits sin,
serves him, and he that serves sin, serves the devil, and worships him, John
8.34. And Christ said the Pharisees should receive the greater damnation, for
their pretended long prayers, Mat. 23.14. and so he did not justify them in
their long prayers, but rebuked them, and said, Woe unto them who draw near with
their lips, when their hearts were far off, Isa. 29.13. And they that pray and
worship God, must pray in the spirit, 1 Corinthians 1 Corinthians 14.15. and
worship in the Spirit, which the Devil is out of, John 4.21.

Pr. If the first Command be in force, and if it be in force negatively, it is
also in force, positively, thou shall have me for thy God, and ought to
worship me, and if they pray not as they should, let them answer for it, for it
is not sin of it self.

Ans. The children of Israel that the Commandments were given unto, knew God,
but the Heathen knows him not: here all may see what measure thou measures
withal. And further thou say, if they pray as they should not, and yet not
sin, is praying as they should and as they should not, one? by this to call
upon God with their lips, and the heart not right, and the prayers and
sacrifice of the wicked is justified, Prove. 15.8. and if any pray as they
should not, are they not condemned for it? and if in praying as they should
not, be not sin, then they do as they should.

Pr. If folks should not pray because they are incapable, then a believer not
finding himself in a good frame, may let his prayers alone.

Answ. A Believer is a babe of God, and his cry is right, his prayer is right,
and his groan is right, 1 John 5.1. And every man that comes into the world,
being enlightened, and coming into the light which has enlightened him, 1 John
1.7. in that he is to watch and pray, which leads him beyond naturals, which
will be accepted in the degree, but he that hates the light, his prayer is not
accepted, but is in the hypocrisy.

Pr. The Apostles bad Simon Magus, an old witchcarle, pray; and now is there
any reason to say we are bidding folk sing, when we bid them pray, although
they be grossly ignorant?

Answ. The Apostle bad him Repent, Acts 8.22 and he was sensible he had sinned:
and that which makes a man sensible of sin, brings him to pray aright, and
turns him from witchcraft, and so thou do put no difference between the
precious and the vile, Ezekiel. 22.26. the accepted and unaccepted.

And Henry Foreside, who would have had his People to stone the Quakers, and
calls it Christian zeal, he would have his wall up that he might live in
safety, who murders, and would be preserved in the murtherous estate, and
would have the powers of the earth to be his Executioners and pack-horses, but
the Lord is opening of their eyes, that they will not execute their malice,
though he is stirring up the people to do so; so all may see this is not the
work of our Lord Jesus Christ, but the work of the Murderer, and one that
makes himself drunk with the blood of the Saints, Rev. 17.6. till he reel again
in his madness. And Christ called them that took up stones to stone him, of
their Father the Devil, for doing his lust, John 8.44. And thou who would have
the people to stone, and calls it Christian zeal, thou have manifested thy
Father, and to be of the Devil, who was a Murderer from the beginning, but you
are the Serpents and vipers that would kill to fill the measure of your
Fathers, Mat. 23.32. and persecute from City to City, and hale out of the
Synagogues, John 16.2. that all the righteous blood, shed from righteous Abel,
might come upon you, Mat. 23.35. and you are they that kill the bodies of the
Saints, and are shedders of the righteous blood, (Mark, the righteous blood)
that the righteous blood might be upon you. And Cain slew Abel, because Abels
sacrifice was accepted, and his not, Genesis 4. So it is about the Sacrifice, and
worship, ye would murder and slay: So ye are in Cains way, a company of
vagabonds, whose Sacrifice God has no respect unto; if we were enemies, you
would not teach the people to stone us, if ye were Ministers of Christ, but
love us, Mat. 5.44. And do good to us. If the Apostles should have taught the
people to stone all that were contrary to their mind, and Christ should have
taught his Disciples to stone all that were contrary to their mind, and tell
them that were Christian zeal; but ye may see Christ and his Apostles taught
another doctrine, Love your enemies, and thou teach to stone them, contrary
to Christ and his Apostles, we do conclude it to be the Doctrine of the Devil,
and not the Doctrine of Christ, who are in scorn called Quakers. For the true
Christian zeal never taught to stone, but were stoned.

The Priests called Presbyterians summoned some people called Quakers to come
before them, and they came into the Steeple-house where they met, and James
Nasmith Priest of Hambleton bad them remove, or else he would make them remove
by Club Law, and they asked the Presbyterian Priests for their accusers, and
Francis Ard one of the Priests said, they were both accusers and Judges; now
whether this be equity, that the same should be both accusers Judges, that
summons; and when they have summoned, accused, and judged, says, they will
make them remove by club Law: whether these be not bruits, and beasts, and not
Justices, and are not fit to Judge, nor to have the name of Ministers, and
Judges that will remove people by club law; and the said Quakers could not own
them as Judges, nor does not look on them as men of equity, but would have had
them to have given them a meeting in any place, whereby the truth might be
cleared, which they had scandalized and come to light, which they refused, and
that lawful witnesses might hear, but they did refuse, and caused them to be
put in prison by the hand of a Bayliffe, by name Nasmith.

And this is the Authority of the Presbyterian Priests, who has summoned with
club Law, but it is denied by the Apostles Doctrine, 1 Timothy 3. they must not be
strikers, nor false accusers. These are the Presbyterian Priests of Scotlands
weapons, club Law, which is contrary to the Ministers of Christ, they said, We
wrestle not against flesh and blood, and they must not be strikers, Ephesians. 6.12.
and after they had violently the thrust them into prison, after their wills
were satisfied with violence, they thrust them out again, there ye may feel the
Spirit of wickedness.

And these Presbyterian Priests, (are people) petitions the Magistrates, with a
pretense, they might not be guilty of others blood; which pretense is in their
Petitions, to take away their fear, that their wicked p^ace might not be
disturbed, not regarding their blood: witness James Nasmith Priest, who would
make them remove by club Law. So their Petition is but flattery and deceit, in
pretense of not being guilty of their blood, in whose heart it is to shed
blood, as witness Henry Foreside Priest, who stirred up the people in zeal to
stone them.

Those Presbyterian Priests that set up club Law and persecution against the
Quakers, who would not have any to receive them into their houses. So this is
abominable Doctrine, contrary to the Apostle, whose Doctrine you have trodden
under your feet, who said, Be not forgetful to entertain Strangers, for thereby
some have entertained Angels unawares, Heb. 13.2.

And they say again, They have no certain dwelling places. Here these
Presbyterians with their club Law and Excommunications, which say the Quakers
have no certain dwelling places, they may inform against the Apostles, which
had no certain dwelling places, and against Christ, who had not whereon to lay
his head, Luke 9.58. and against Abraham, who had not a foot of ground, Genesis
12. but Cain built a City, the vagabond, of whose stock and offspring you are,
Genesis 4.17. and said David, Let their Children be vagabonds, Psalm. 109.10. and
so this is fulfilled upon you.

And you Presbyterian Priests with your club Law, who would club those people
scornfully called Quakers away; you would have an Order from the Justices, that
none should receive the Quakers into their houses, and stop them of their
liberty; and this is contrary to the Law of the Nations: And this is damnable
doctrine, wherewith ye poison the people, and stirs them up with madness and
folly. And in stead of teaching of them peace, you teach them strife, and in
stead of loving one another, you teach them to fight one with another.

And Henry Foreside Priest cries stone them. And James Nasmith Priest cries for
club Law. And William Hambleton Priest of Glasford said to Andrew Brown, if the
Laws were right, they would chop off all the Quakers heads: by William
Hambletons words the Law is wrong, because it does not fulfill his purpose and
envy.

Here all may see that you are doing the Devils work, hunting after blood,
whose envy, madness and folly appears to all men; what ye cannot do your
selves, ye exhort the people to do; and what ye and the people cannot do, ye
Petition the Magistrates to do, that all unrighteous blood may come upon you,
Mat. 23.35.

Alas for you, ye poor silly Priests, and mad Presbyterians! Is this your work
to set people to stone, and cry up club Law, and Law to chop off their heads?
is this the way to convert them? is not this the Popish way of converting them?
ye should go to convert them, instruct them, convince them, love them, heap,
cols of fire upon them, Mat. 5. Romans 20. Overcome evil with good, Romans 12.21.
Pray for them, Mat. 5.44. No cry you, chop off their heads, begging by
petitions that none may receive them into their houses, stone them, fall upon
them by club law, that your folly and madness may be made manifest; and yet
imprison them, and such as receive them into their houses: As for instance, ye
caused John Heart of the heads of Glasford and Jennet Hambleton widow of
Westmanies, to be imprisoned for entertaining them into their houses. Here ye
have proved your selves to be the Wolves the sheep are sent among, Mat. 10.16.
that are ravening to devour them; which is one of the marks that ye are the
false Prophets Christ said should come, Mat. 7.5. And another haling out of the
Synagogues, and Excommunicating, and ye never show for what; which practice ye
are in, which is a work of darkness.

And upon this bargain that the Magistrates would grant them an order, that
none should receive them into their houses, and that they might not have their
liberty, and their servants would be much refreshed, who cry stone them, let us
have a Law against them, and if the Laws were right, they would chop off their
heads, and make them remove by club Law; but how was these Priests the
Magistrates servants at Dunbar Fight, when they excomunicated and cursed their
now being army and Magistracy? but now they would be their servants, if they
would execute their wills upon the innocent: Surely these things cannot but
stink to all Magistrates that fear God.

These are the servants and servers of the times, that the Prophets calls
inchanters, Lev. 19.16. and for their own false ends; ye can never read that
the Apostles nor Christ did ever teach any such doctrine that the people should
be stoned, or have their heads choped off, or driven away by club law, which
shows you are Apostates, from the Apostasy, and of the Jewish nature.

The Synod at Glasgow, in the second month, did ordain concerning these
persons in Clidedale, formerly Excommunicated who are called Quakers, that no
other people in other parishes should bargain with them, or suffer them to come
within their houses, or have enrertainement for money: Upon which the people
persecuted and stoned them, and haled them out of their houses in several
places, viz. Three of them people called Quakers, were in the night time
between 10. and 11. hours, drawn by force out of an Inn, in the Town of
New-mills in Aire-shire, and stoned out of the town into the Fields to shift
for their lodging. And others, three several times were beaten, stoned, and
shamefully entreated, and persecuted in Strawan. And others at Lithmahaga. And
others shamefully abused in the Town of Kirkantillough. And others stoned at
Kilbride. And others pitifully stoned, beaten, and abused; and some blood shed
at Glasford: And at many other places much harm has been done. These be the
Priests fruits, the bloody presbytery, who would have them stoned, and their
heads chopped off; some of the Magistrates did stop the people for abusing of
them, so that the priests malice was not altogether satisfied.

Andrew Brown and John Lowcock of Glasford, were cast into prison, for asking
him a question when he was Catechizing, and admonished them when they were far
absent, and if they come before them, they will cast them into prison; this
makes them peepers and mutterers, to admonish them when they are not present,
and is this like to change them, or do they intend to change them, who admonish
them when they are out of hearing, and did Excommunicate them when they were in
prison? what an unmanly part is this wicked, divelish, envious, and unchristian
Ministry.

And John Heart went to a steeple-house to hear the priests admonishment, for
the Priest said he would admonish him, and he went to hear him, and when he
had admonished him, he spoke to him, and bid him prove himself in the doctrine
of Christ, and they who he admonished out of it, and then gave them a bill of
divorsment: but the Priests went to the Court, and got a warrant from the
Justice, and so cast him in prison, and when he was in prison, Excommunicated
him, and said he disturbed him; And here his devilish wicked art and doctrine
appears, which shows him of Cains stock, where is nothing but persecution,
murder, and envious-slayers, vagabonds, and cursed speakers that went on in
the way of Balaam, or Core; that makes merchandise of the people through their
covetousness, and feigned words to the people; And gives forth their Curses in
their Congregations, and all the people are to say Amen, to them as follows.

The Priests first curse that all the people were to say Amen to.

Cursed be all they that say Grace is free, and let all the people say, Amen.

Answ. And so they curse the Apostles, and the Apostles doctrine, and all that
witness to it, who said, The free grace of God which brings salvation, has
appeared to all men, Titus 2.11. and was the Saints Teacher; These things the
Apostles commanded to teach with all authority, Tit^s 2.15. but the ungodly men
turn this grace of God into wantonness, of old ordained for condemnation.

Ye are the raging waves of the Sea, sending and fomeing out your own shame,
whose fruits wither, neglecting the common salvation, Read Jude. Ye are like to
Sodom and Egypt, clouds without water, who run greedily after the wages of
Balaam, going on the way of Cain, and shall perish in the gainsaying of Core,
and walking despitefully against the spirit of grace; and they that turn the
Grace of God into wanttonnesse, denies the Lord that bought them, 2 Pet. 2.
Jude 11.

Ye are the trees without fruit, wells without water, carried about with
tempests, cursed speakers; teaching the people to say Amen to your cursing the
Apostles doctrine, and so willingly ignorant, that your damnation may be just,
that your madness and folly might appear to all, and so sensual having not
the spirit, waves of the Sea, wandering stars, reserved for darkness of
blackness, read Jude.

The grace of God which brings salvation has appeared to all men, Titus
2.11. So that which brings salvation and has appeared to all men ye Curse that
which is the Grace of God, which ye with your damnable doctrine, and doctrine
of Devils, curse them that witness it, 2 Pet. 2. 1 Timothy 4. upon whose
consciences the hot Iron has come, hardened them that went to the doctrine of
Devils, went to them that did not hold forth the Savior of all men, but
especially them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. These things command and teach, let
no man despise thy youth.

Now they that went to the doctrine of Devils, from the Savior of all men,
but especially them that believe, and from the grace of God which has appeared
to all men, which brings salvation; are they which have turned the grace of God
into wantonness, ordained of old for condemnation, which is the light, Jude 4.
Such be in Caines way from the command of God, Cores way from the truth, and
Balaams way from the spirit, those be the clouds and tempests upon whose heads
comes the Woe.

The Priests second curse, which all the people were to say Amen to.

Cursed be all they that say the Scripturs is not the word of Gods and let all
the people say Amen.

Ans. Here they have cursed Luke, who calls the scripture a Declaration of the
word Luke 1.1. and Acts 1.1. where it is called a Treatise; and they have
cursed their own company, who says the scriptures signifies Writings; and they
have cursed John, who did not say the scripture was the word, who said, In the
beginning was the word, John 1.1. and the scripture is words, as Revelations
the last, he that adds to the words; and Christ his name is called, The word
of God; Rev. 19, 13. And the scriptures are words, not a word, Exodus 20. and
which words Christ came to fulfill.

The Priests third Curse, to which all the people were to say Amen.

Cursed be all they that say Faith is without sin, and let all the People say
Amen.

Ans. Faith is the gift of God, and the gift of God is without sin, Ephesians. 2.8.
Faith is that which gives the victory, John 3.4. And that which gives victory
is without sin. And here they have cursed the Apostles and their doctrine, who
says, Faith is without sin, and Faith is precious, 1 Pet. 1.7. and that which
is precious is without sin. Faith is the gift of God, and the gift of God is
perfect, and that which is perfect is without sin, and gives victory over sin:
Without Faith a man cannot please God, and that which men please God in, is
without sin, Heb. 11.6. And so ye have cursed the Apostle and his doctrine, the
just and that which is pure, that by which they were healed, through Faith they
were justified, Romans 3.28. and what is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. So what
is of Faith is not sin, and what is righteous is not sin, and the Scripture
speaks of the righteousness of Faith, Rom 4.13. Faith is not of sin, but what
is not of Faith is sin, Faith gives victory over sin, 1 John 3.4. in which
Faith man is justified, and has peace with God, Romans 5.1. and it is a mystery
held in a pure conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9.

The Priests fourth Curse, to which all the people were to say Amen.

Cursed are all they that say every man has a light sufficient to lead him to
Christ, and that within him, and let all the People say Amen.

Answ. Here they have cursed the Apostles doctrine, who said God would dwell in
them, 2 Cor. 6.16. and Christ in you the hope of glory, Col. 1.27. and God is
light, 1 John 1.5. And they have cursed the Prophets, who said, I give him for
a Covenant, a Leader of the people: I will dwell in them, and walk in them,
says God, Jer 31.31. Heb. 10.16. and he says, I will send you the Spirit of
truth, and it shall lead you into all truth, John 14.17. John 16.13. And I will
be their God, to rule them and they shall be my people, Jer. 31.33. Thy curses
are but wind, for we are redeemed from the curse; and the Apostles said, the
light that shined in their hearts was to give them the knowledge of the glory
of God in the face of Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 4.6. and they that are led by the
Spirit of God are the Sons of God, Romans 8.14. and the light to guide our feet
in the way of peace, and he that has the Son has the Father also; And if any
bring another doctrine, receive them not into your houses, neither bid them God
speed, 2 John 9.30. You have here showed your s^lves in the cursed estate, out
of the Apostles rule, the same Spirit of truth that led the Disciples into all
truth, that shall reprove the world of sin, John 16.8.13.

The Priests fifth Curse, to which all the people were to say Amen.

Cursed be all they that deny the Sabbath day, and let all the People say Amen.

Answ. Here thou have cursed thy self, and all the Apostles, and all the
Saints, and their own generation; have not thou and thy own g^n^ration denied
the Sabbath day, the Jews met on, which is the Sabbath day according to the
Scripture? do not ye meet tog^t^er upon the first day? and was not Christ
crucified on the sixth day? and did not he arise on the first day? and did not
the Saints meet together on the first day? and not keep the Jews Sabbath day?
do not you work upon it your selves, and keep markets and Fairs on it? but as
it is said before, we are Redeemed from the curse.

Th^se are the particular sentences whereupon Matthew Markell, and the rest of
the Priests present with him, did Excommunicate those people called Quakers, in
the pr^^ence of many witnesses, and he required his hearers to say Amen to
every particul^r sentence.

JOHN HVMES Priest.
Pr. THey who have not the Scriptures, knows not the Attributes of God by the
light of nature, but the Scriptures declare the great mystery of the three
persons in Trinity, which they who want the Scriptures knows not.

Answ. Thy Principle is a lie, and who had not the Scriptures knew God and
Christ, as Abraham and Enoch, and the Scripture does not declare of the three
persons; nor of the Trinity, and the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God.

Pr. That the Scriptures reveal the great mystery of Election, the great works
of the Creation, and the work of Redemption.

Answ. There thou have set up the Scripture in stead of God, and before God and
the Son, for it is God that does reveal to babes and sucklings, Mat. 11.25. and
God did reveal by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. and God shall reveal, Phil. 3.15.
and the things of God are hid from the wise and prudent, Mat. 11.25. that have
the Scriptures; the Jews had the Scriptures: and God reveals his secrets to the
Prophets his servants, Amos 3.7. no man knows the Father saving to whom the Son
shall reveal him, Mat. 11.17. now the Son reveals, and the Father reveals, and
the things of God are revealed by his Spirit, 1 Cor. 2.10. the Jews had the
Scriptures, and knew not the Son, 1 Cor. 2.8. nor the Father, as in John, nor
the things of God by a natural light, as they call it; the Jews had the
Scriptures, and did not know the Election, Isa. 24. because they were from the
Spirit. So it is God that reveals the Son, and Redemption and Election, and not
the Scripture, the Scripture was given forth from them that had the Revelation
from God.

Pr. That we and the Papists and Jesuits, and Priests, do agree all together,
that the Scripture is the word of God that lives and endures for ever.

Ans. I do believe that you and the Papists and Jesuits, agree all in one; but
ye did not agree with the Apostles and Ministers of the word, for the Ministers
of the word calls the Scripture a Declaration, as ye may read Luke 1. and ye do
not agree with them that set forth the Acts, that called it a Treatise, Acts 1.
likewise ye do not agree with some of your own, who say the Scriptures
signifies writings, and writings will not endure for ever, so ye are Babylon,
and do not agree with Christ, and ye do not agree with John, Rev. 22. who says
the words; nor with Moses, nor God, who spoke all these words, Exodus 20. In the
beginning was the word, and the word is God, and the word lives and abides
for ever; but the Scripture is words, and the Scripture cannot be broken.

John Nasmith Priest of Hambleton, his Principles.
Pr. THat the soul of man is a reasonable sinful substance.

Ans. How can that which is sinful be reasonable? and if that which is unsinful
be reasonable, and sinful be reasonable both, then they are one in unity. The
Lord will take the soul for an offering for sin; does the Lord take that which
is sinful for an offering? Isai. 53. see how thou and the Prophet agrees here;
But what is that soul that the wicked is not able to kill? is it not that which
God has in his hand? and this is a lie, to say that which is reasonable is
sinful, of one that puts light for darkness. God breathed into man the breath
of life, and he became a living soul, who has all souls in his hand, and the
soul is immortal and Christ the Bishop of it is immortal, and God has it in
his hand which goes against him that does evil, whose hand is immortal, but
man transgressing the commands of God, the soul lies in death; so Christ is the
Bishop of the souls, so they that came to know Christ, their souls rejoiced in
God their Savior, Luke 1.

Pr. That the evil Spirits are both sinful and reasonable.

Answ. This is a lie, for reasonable is not sinful, and unreasonable is sinful,
2 These. 3. they have not the faith: and if the evil Spirit be reasonable, and
the good reasonable, they are both one, who then is unreasonable? If the evil
Spirit be reasonable, thou puts no difference between the precious and the
vile; thou have the Mark of a blind guide, and a false Prophet in thy forehead.

Pr. That one of them Quakers is worse then the Devil.

This is a lie with his strange wonder, for there is nothing worse then the
Devil, whose children you are; for when he speaks a lie he speaks of himself,
and he is the Father of it.

Henry Foreside Priest of Lingiah in Dunbarton-shire, His Doctrine and
PRINCIPLES.
Pr. THat God commands all every where to repent, to the end that they should
not have it to say but they were warned, but not that he would give them grace
to repent.

Ans. Here thou makes God that he does not intend that he speaks, and so thou
would make him unrighteous; though the Lord commands all men every where to
repent, Acts 17.30. who has made all Nations of men of one blood to dwell upon
the Earth, and all being concluded under sin and unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all, Romans 3.9. For both Jews and Gentiles all were under sin, and
none of them did good, no not one. And Gods intent is, that when he calls men
to repentance, they should repent, when he calls them, and many did repent; and
you are not fit men to be Ministers of Christ or God.

Now if God command all men every where to Repent, and, as thou say, does not
intend they should Repent, thou and you go about to make God unjust: First the
Lord he desires not the death of a sinner, but that he should turn from his
wickedness and live, Exodus 33.11. Now in the turning from his wickedness he
lives, but in going on in his wickedness he dies; so Repentance was Preached
from dead works, to serve the living God, Heb. 6.1. and Christ came to call
sinners to Repentance, not the righteous; for the whole needs not the
Physician, but the sick, Mat. 9.12, 13.

And as for saying, God did not intend to give them grace, though he calls them
to repentance: That is a lie, and unrighteous doctrine, for the grace of God
has appeared to all men, which brings Salvation, Titus 2.11. and so as he
calls them to repentance, he gives them grace, that grace which brings
salvation, which men are justified by; so it is saving grace that brings
salvation, and teaches to deny ungodliness.

Now they that live ungodly, turns the grace of God into wantonness, Jud. 4. and
these are the wells without water, in Cains way, Balaams way, and Cores way,
Jud. 11. speaks the high words in hypocrisy, and these are they that separate
themselves from the Apostles, sensual, having not the Spirit, Jude 19. and are
of old ordained to condemnation, who separated from the light, which turns the
grace of God into wantonness; so these are they that neglect the common
salvation, it was the charge of the Apostle to Timothy before his decease, 1 Timothy 4.2. 2 Timothy 4.7. Then told him perilous times should come, and Doctrines
of Devils, and men speaking lies in hypocrisy; he said unto them, that they
should trust in the living God, who is the Savior of all men, and especially
of them that believe; 1 Timothy 4.10. But the Devils Doctrine leads them from
their Savior and from the grace, 2 Timothy 4.1. And they that are not in the
Doctrine, are from the light, which Christ has enlightened them withal, Io.
1.9: And have turned the the grace of God into wantonness, and pernicious
ways, and draws others from it, and we do conclude that to be the Doctrine of
Devils, which says God calls all men to repent, and intends not to give them
grace, nor would not have them to repent: as thou Henry Foreside does say, for
it was the charge of the Apostle to Titus to speak sound words, and sound
Doctrine, and could not be condemned, Titus 2. and told him that the grace of
God which brings salvation had appeared to all men, which taught them to deny
ungodliness and worldly lust, and to live godly, soberly and righteously in
this present evil world, these things speak and exhort with all authority,
Tit. 1. But as I said before ungodly men that turn the grace of God into
wantonness, are of old ordained to this condemnation, and this is the
condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then light, because their deeds are evil, Io. 3.19. he that
loves the light, the light is his Savior, but he that hates the light, it is
his condemnation.

Pr. That the two parts of the Church must be profane and godless.

Ans. The Church is the Pillar and ground of truth, 1 Timothy 3.15. The Church of
the living God; for the ungodly are out of its grounds, and that which is
ungodly; the pillar and ground of truth, there is no ungodly in it, and the
Church is without wrinkle or spot, holy, without blemish, Ephe. 5.27. and the
Church is in God, 1 These. 1.1. That which is in God is in the light, and out of
the ungodly.

Pr. That God before the world was, had ordained one little part of the people
for eternal life; that sin, or do all the evil they could, they could not
loose that which was ordained for them.

Here thou go about to make Christ a liar, for he that commits sin is the
servant of sin, Io. 8.34. says, He that commits sin is of the Devil, says
the Apostle, and thou would make God partial, and have taught a doctrine
contrary to the scriptures, For God is no respecter of persons, Romans 2.11. Who
will give to every one a reward according to their works Psalm. the 62.12. And
he that works iniquity must depart cursed from Christ, Mat. 7.23. and Mat.
25.41. And he that sins after he has received the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin, but a fearful looking for of Judgment, Heb. 10.27.
And the elect does not commit sin, and who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods Elect, Romans 8.33. and the Elect is Christ, Isa. 42.1. who was elected
before the world was, he that is borne of God does not commit sin, neither can
he, because his seed remains in him, 1 Io. 3.9. And he that commits sin is of
the devil, and never knew God, ver. 6. And here is the children of God
manifest, and the children of the Devil, 1 Io. 3 10. And God hears not sinners,
and them that regard iniquity, Psalm. 66.18. Io. 9.31. Prove. 15.8.

Pr. That the great part of the world was ordained for Hell, that repent, or
do all that they are commanded to do, they would not obtain salvation,
because God had Ordained them to Hell.

Ans. Then he was asked wherefore he preached; His answer was to save the
elect: he was answered again if it was so; there was no need of that, seeing
they could not be lost; Then he was asked before he preached to them that were
ordained to Hell: he answered, to make their damnation hotter; it was answered
them again, that they had small friends of them, and they could not make is
hotter, seeing they were ordained before: the Priest aforesaid was asked, who
had the blame that men went to Hell.

His answer was, Seeing ye desire to know, I shall tell you, there is one part
of the blame in man, and another part of the blame in the Almighty, that men
went to Hell.

Ans. In this here is confusion, thou say, God has ordained them, thou
say God has done it, (then mark) then thou say, there is part in man,
and thou say before it was in God, now if it be in God, as thou say, that
he has ordained them to hell, repent or do all that they are commanded to
do, thy preaching is needless: and thou cannot add to Hell hotter or colder:
Therefore thy preaching is done and ceased: And thou say part of the blame
that men go to hell is in God; here thou would make God unrighteous, who
desires not the death of a sinner, God is not to be blamed in any thing he
does; but praised, and righteous in all his judgments, and God is not to be
blamed, for God is truth, so let God be true, and every man a liar, Romans 3.4.
thou wicked one, man's destruction is of himself, Hosea 13.9. and God wills not
the death of a sinner, but rather that he would repent, so no fault in God, who
says let the unrighteous man forsake his unrighteousness, and he shall live,
so let the righteous man forsake his righteousness, and he dies, Ezekiel. 18.22.
So my ways are equal, the Lord has no pleasure at all that the wicked should
dye, but that he should return and live, so man's destruction is of him self;
And whereas thou say, God has ordained a great part to Hell, what make thou
of Christ who came to be a Savior of the world? Io. 4.42. he does not say the
Elect only, but to save the world, and not to condemn it, and God so loved the
world (mark the words) Je. 3.19. he does not say, so hated it, that he gave
his only begotten Son into the world, that whosoever believed in him should
not perish, but have everlasting life, and he came not to condemn the world,
but that the world through him might have life, but they that hate the light
and do not believe in it, are with the light condemned; but thou say
otherwise, that he condemns a great part of the world, and he does not say he
loves the Elect only, but God so loved the world, and God was in Christ
reconciling the the World to himself, 2 Cor. 5.19. he does not say the Elect
only; and he through death has destroyed the power of death, the Devil, Heb.
2.14. and thou art to be reproved for thy judgment, for thy unbelief, for thy
righteousness, for thy sin, because of thy unbelief for thy judgment, because
the Prince of this world is judged, Io. 16. and so Christ does not say I am the
light of the Saints, of the elect only, but I am the light of the world, Io.
8.12. and says, that light is come into the world, and this is the
condemnation of the world, that light is come into the world, and men love
darkness rather then it, because their deeds are evil, Io. 3.19. So its
unbelief that shuts out, Romans 11.20. So the gates stand open night and day, and
every one that does evil, hates the light and will not come to it, because it
will reprove him, and he will not come in to the gate, for he that comes to the
gate comes to the light, and he that comes to the light comes out of
condemnation, and comes to be a child of the light, he that hates the light will
not come into the kingdom of God; And for thy saying, God has ordained a
great part of the world to Hell, let them repent, and do all that ever he has
commanded them; he that does the things that Christ commands, enters the
Kingdom; he that repents his mind is changed, and whosoever believes shall
not perish, and this command is general, Io. 10.28. through the whole world,
therefore thou with the Devils Doctrine, shuts up the Kingdom of Heaven
against others, and wilt not go in thy self, who says let men repent, and
do all that ever they can, they must go to hell, when God wills not the death
of a sinner, but rather that he should turn from his wickedness and live,
Ezekiel. 33.11. but he is merciful and judges not as thou do, whose eyes are
blinded, and hands full of blood, so I say, whosoever repents, and does the
things they are commanded they shall be saved, and that which thou say to
the contrary, we conclude to be the Devils doctrine, and whosoever resists the
thing that is commanded, that will be their condemnation, but hates the light
which was before the world was, which lights every man that comes into the
world, that all through him might believe, for he that believes in the light
shall not abide in darkn^sse, Io. 8.12. shall not come into condemnation, shall
come to be a child of light, Io. 12.36. and they shall have the light of life,
and so the light is sufficient to save them, and condemn them, that believe
not, Jo. 3.18.14. Ia. 4.12. and every one that comes into the light that they
are enlightened withal, such come into the election, and into the covenant of
God, and evil consciences thou may frighten, them that hates the light,
which is their condemnation, but the elect thou can neither save nor deceive,
thanks be to God Christ reigns, who will give to every man according to his
works, who does enlighten every man that comes into the world, not believing
is condemned, and shut out, and such turn the grace of God into wantonness,
and are ordained of old that hate the light which lights every man that
comes into the world, and such be in Cain and Balaams way, persecutors and
murderers, and turns the grace of God into wantonness.

Pr. From the words of Jude, 4. they were of old ordained; from these words he
said, That God had predestined one to life, without any cause in the creature
less or more, and the other wicked man to Hell, without any cause in the
creature less or more; and both wicked men, And before thou said part of the
cause that God cast into hell was in the man and part in God; In this 7th.
principle and doctrine thou say there is no cause in the creature, that God
casts into hell and cond^mns him, and in the other thou said, there was part
blame in man, and part in God and (...) ^s the devils doctrine, a lie found in
thy mouth, and thou have wrested, perverted, and wronged that scripture in Jude
who says, there is no part in man causes condemnation, that all may see that
you are liars, he says, they were ungodly, they turned the grace of God into
lasciviousness that brings salvation, that denied the Lord that bought them,
Jude 11. 2 Pet. 2.1. They were covetous, made merchandise of the people,
through fained words, so no covetous nor Idolater shall enter into the Kingdom
of God, 1 Cor. 6.9. and all they deny the Lord that bought them, but who owns
the light that comes from him, which does enlighten every man that comes into
the world, and none sees him, but with the light that comes from him, and they
go in Cores way, and gain-sayeth the truth, who go from the light that Christ
has enlightened them in the particular, and he that gain-sayeth the truth,
there is a fault in him, and they go in Caines way that are from the command
of God, who said if thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? and if he did
not well, sin lay at the door, now these were of old ordained unto
condemnation, which turned the grace of God into wantonness, were in Caines
way, Cores way, and brake the commands as Cain did, in Balaams way, erred from
the spirit, and admired men's persons because of advantage, which Balaam did,
and loved the wages of unrighteousness, and so these did not do the things
they were commanded, Cain he did not do the thing that he was commanded, nor
Core that offered strange fire, and his company, Number. 16. So these of old were
ordained for this condemnation, which condemnation is the light, Io. 3. light
foresees them and sees over them, and condemns them, when they arise and goes
out from the spirit of God in them, and here all may see, here was fault worthy
of condemnation, and those were they that sensually separated them selves from
the Apostles, and had not the spirit, Jude 19. in their days: which were
covetous, which went for the gift and reward, which were like raging waves of
the Sea, which were spots in feasts of charity, feasting, feeding without
fear, 2 Pet. 2. Which admired men's persons because of advantage, and spoke the
high words in hypocrisy, Wells without water, Trees without fruit, raging waves
of the Sea, foming out their own shame, clouds without water carried about with
tempests, spots in the feasts of charity, like unto Sodom and Gomorah in
filthiness, which go from the light that does convince them, so there is the
self-separation, and there is the condemnation that comes over them, the light;
and these are they that separated from the Apostles; which said love your
enemies, Mat. 5.44. Which are men gone into the world, which be in Caines way
in envy, in Cores way gainsaying the the light, they are like raging waves of
the Sea, foaming out their shame in their pulpits, so you are the men that
seperates from the Apostles, that be in Cains way, who be out of the life, and
sacrifice the Saints were in, that would murder, and Cores way that gainsayeth
the light that does enlighten every man that comes into the world, so against
the common salvation, and ye be like Cain foaming and raging in your Pulpits,
and would murder all that are contrary to you, whose Sacrifice God accepts,
and yours he does not, and God would have accepted of Cain, if he had done
well, Genesis 4. So God is merciful and a just God, but Cain he did not well;
Therefore woe went out from God against him, and so there was fault in him and
not in God, which was the cause of his condemnation: so you that be in Balaams
way; for the wages of unrighteousness, admiring men's persons because of
advantage, Ye are out of the faith that is held without respect of persons,
Iam. 2. and so separated from the Apostles, to whom Christ said, Freely ye have
received, freely give, and you will not give freely, who are rageing and
foming, without you have augmentations, stipends, gleabe Lands, or Tithes,
great sumes of money, gifts or rewards from great ^ouses, so you deny the light
that enlightneth every man that comes into the world, so gain-sayes the common
salvation, Jude 1. You gainsay the truth, that does enlighten every man that
comes thto the world, so in Cores way you are, and would have the persons of
the Saints murdered, so in Caines way, as ye confess that ye have not the
spirit that gave forth the scriptures, so in the self-separation, and ye deny
the the light that enlightneth every man that comes into the world, which is
the Lord, John 8.12. And so denies the Lord that bought you, 2 Pet. 2.1. And so
are for condamnation, who are of that stock that separate themselves from the
Apostles, sensually, having not the spirit, who are in Cains way, that would
kill and murder, and out of the Apostles way, who said love your enemies; who
are in Balaams way, for gifts and rewards, and admiring men's persons because of
advantage, to them speaking high words in hypocrisy, and out of the Apostles
way to whom Christ said, Freely ye have received, freely give, Mat. 10.6. And
out of the Prophets way, who said, come without a price, Isa. 55.1, 2. And ye
will have the price, or else you will not come, let all that can read Jude
over, and see if there was not cause in man of his condemnation, and not in
God; and so have not you proved your selves in the Doctrine of Devils, and in
lies, and would make God unrighteous, and the Apostles unrighteous? for there
was fault in Cain, fault in Balaam, and fault in Core, and fault in Sodom, and
fault in them that turned the grace of God into wantonness, which were of old
ordained for this condemnation, Jude 4. Which condemnation is, that light is
come into the world, and men love darkness rather then light, because their
deeds are evil, and so the Apostles taught that there was fault in man, as ye
may read Jude, and thou have taught there is none; so then thou art
unrighteous, who would make God and the Apostles unrighteous, like thy self,
let all that fear God judge of it, who are now come to the judgment Seat
before the Almighty God, who have been them that erred from the Apostles
Doctrine, with it is judged, and are judged, and you must have a reward
according to your works, and he that comes to life, comes out of his
wickedness, and not the wicked man enters into the kingnome of God, Rev. 21.
and the promise is to the seed, and he that works iniquity departs from the
seed, Gal. 3.16. And the Election obtaines it, Romans 11.7. Not him that wills,
nor runs, But God that shows mercy; And whereas thou say the wicked man is
ordained to life, without any cause in the creature less or more; This is just
the Devils Doctrine again, and to bring every one to hide his Talent, and none
neither to watch nor pray; for that is in the creature, that brings him to lay
a side wickedness, and to depart from sin and iniquity, which lets him see it,
and covetous and drunkenness, so through the obedience of the Spirit, and
that is in the Creature that brings him to confess his sin, and forsake it,
whereby mercy is showed; the power of God works in us says the Apostle; And
as they had been servants to unrighteousness, so came to yield themselves
servants unto righteousness, Romans 6. How comes the commands of God to be
obeyed, if there be not something in the creature that causes him to obey it?
For thou say without any cause in the creature; why were all these
expressions spoken in scripture, that they should obey all things that Christ
commanded, Mat. 28.20. And all the statutes and Ordinances spoken of in the
scriptures, if there be not something in man to cause him to obey it: but thy
intent is to make God unrighteous who respects no man's person, but gives to
every man a reward according to his works, Rev. 2 23. The one as well as the
other, and all shall appear before the judgment of Christ, 2. Cor. 9.10. He
will judge the world in righteousness, but there is something in the creature;
for every man that comes into the world being enlightened, whereby he is
capable of obeying or disobeying, and not believing comes to be condemned, and
in believing he is saved, he has the witness in himself, John 3.8. 1 Io.
5.10. For he that commits sin is the servant of sin, Io. 8.24. And there is no
respect of persons with God, but whosoever does righteousness is accepted of
him, Acts 10.34, 35. The Apostle said, He perceived God was no respecter of
persons, but whosoever does wickedly be hates the light, and is condemned, but
whosoever does the truth, comes to the light, Joh. 3.21. and so out of
condemnation, so thou teaches another Doctrine, so as I said before, The
promise is to the seed, the seed is Christ, and Christ all and in all, 1 Cor.
15.28. And all ungodly and wicked men are shut out of the Kingdom of God, where
no wicked men enters, one nor other, and man must be turned again from
wickedness before he enters, Rev. 21.8.

Pr. He being asked what he would do with Quakers, and he said if he had been a
civil Magistrate, he would have thought it good service to have cut off all
their heads.

Ans. There ye may all see if he be not of Cains stock, and what an envy
proceeds out of his mouth, and unchristian Spirit, and how would he convert
them if they were out of the way? and how would he convince them, who would cut
off their heads? has not this proved the Quakers to be in the truth, and he
out of it, and is not the command of Christ, that ye should love your enemies?
Mat. 5.44. Now ye may see, he is out of the command and example, but followed
the example of Cain the murderer, and does not his envy show as much against
the Magistrates as against the Quakers, because they will not execute his
malice, and slay them for him, and be his executioners, and was not these
Priests as mad against the Magistrates, (as they are now against the Quakers)
at Dunbar fight, and would not they have had their heads off? let their Pulpits
witness, though now they admire their persons because of advantage, Jude 16.
Who cannot hold in, but their shame must be uttered forth, who would slay the
persons of men as Cain did; so woe from the Lord God is gone out against you,
who are envious, and strives to make the people envious, but the life of God is
risen in the hearts of his people, with which they shall see you all, and the
Quakers be out of the way of Cain, who be in the light of Christ Jesus the
Savior of the soul, in which they come to have a habitation in God, the
Savior of all men, especally of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. So you that be
out of the light be vagabonds, though ye have great habitations in the earth,
for Cain built a City, yet a vagabond, Genesis 4.

Pr. It was asked him of a foreordained number to destruction, and for what
Christ wept over Jerusalem. He said as he was humane he mourned, and his
Godhead decreed them to Hell.

Ans. This is a lying doctrine of the Devil, for after many of them of
Jerusalem came to be converted, as ye may read in Acts 2. And many of the
Priests came to be obedient to the Faith, for all being gone astray both Jews
and Gentiles, Romans 3.9. concluded under sin, the pure, the eternal tendered
over them; who had stopped their ears and closed their eyes to that which was
pure of God in them, that they might have come to that which is pure, and have
been gathered under Christ's wings, Mat. 23.37. who is pure, and so have been
converted and healed, and have heard with their ears, and have seen with their
eyes. And as for the word humane, that is not Scripture language, it speaks not
that Language, and there were converted many thousands of the Jews, and they
were pricked to the heart, when that the Apostle said, that was both Lord and
Christ whom ye have have crucified, Acts 2. (mark ye) here thou may see thy
self to be a liar; for here was of the Jews and of Jerusalem, that he had wept
over; thou say he had ordained them to Hell (as he was God) which were
converted afterward; so thou would make God unequal, that the Son is not in
the Father, and divides them, that the Son should weep over them, and the
Godhead decree them to Hell, and did not Christ command his Apostles that they
should not depart from Jerusalem? and was not the mighty conversion at
Jerusalem? so has not Christ wept over Jerusalem, and after was there not a
mighty conversion there? And thou say he condemned them as God to Hell; There
thou may see thy self in the Devils doctrine, 1 Timothy 4.1. Many thousands were
converted at Jerusalem, which Christ wept over, before the Apostles departed
from thence, where he gave them command to stay, to see thy Doctrine is damnabl
and thou errs from the Scriptures, let thy mouth for ever be stopped: and are
not ye, found in the steps of them, Mat. 23. that Christ gives the mark of
blind guides to the multitude, unto the Disciples, which marks were such as the
multitude might take notice of, and I believe the multitude will take notice
of, and know you; first ye bind heavy burdens upon men's shoulders, ye are
sayers and not doers; and all their marks they do to be seen of men, Mat. 6.
they love the uppermost rooms as feasts, and the chiefest seats in the
Assemblies, greeting in the Markets stands praying in the Synagogues, called of
men Masters, they were swearers, they should scourge you in their Synagogues,
and persecute, do not ye put out of your Synagugues? Christ should send
Prophets and wise men among them, and they should persecute, and put out of the
Synagogues, Mat. 23.34. They should shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men,
and do not ye do so that do deny the light, that lights every one that comes
into the world? do any come to the Kingdom, but who come to the light, which
every man that comes into the world is enlihtned withal? may not the
multitude take notice of these things, called of men Master, stand praying in
the Synagogues, having long Robes, salutations in the Markets, uppermost rooms
at feasts, puts out of the Synagogues, and swearers, and Christ said, swear not
at all, Mat. 5.34. And be ye not called of men Master, for one is your Master,
even Christ, and ye all are Brethren, now here is the marks of the blind
guides, as ye may read, Mat. 23. Are they not a company of swearers, and will
they not swear for their own advantage? and were not the Priests always
envious, and false accusers, provoking the Magistrates against the Disciples,
against Christ and against Jesus? did not the Priests say Jesus should die for
crying against them, Jer. 26. And were not the Priests at work, when any of the
Saints were murdered, to stir up the multitude against them, or the
Magistrates? was not the chief Priests and Elders seeking false witness to put
Jesus to death? Mat. 26.39. And did not the High Priests say he had spoken
blasphemy? it was Pilate that put him to death, did not the chief Priests
persuade their multitude to ask Barrabas Mat. 27.20. and crucify Jesus, and
did not they mock him? see how the Priests were always busy for blood, that
all the righteous blood might come upon them, shed upon the earth, Mat. 23.35.
And did not the Priests give money to Judas to betray Christ? and did not the
Priests give large money to the Soldiers to tell a lie, and say his Disci^les
stole him away by night? Mat. 28.11, 12, 13. had not Paul authority from the
High Priest to persecute? Acts 9.1, 2. and so get you your Authority from the
Magistrates, and the people their Authority from you to persecute, and would
not the chief Priests have murdered Paul afterward, when he was converted?
Acts 23. Acts 2.7. did not a company come with swords and staves from the
Priests with Judas ^o take Christ? Mark 14.13. as a troop of robbers wait for a
man, so does a company of Priests murder in the way by consent, and have not
ye consented together? Hosea 6.2.

Pr. That Christ scorned men when he bad them be perfect, because he knew it
was impossible for them.

Answ. This is wickedness and impudency to say Christ scorned men when he bad
them be perfect. This is Antichrist and the Devils doctrine, for to say that
Christ did command that which men could not come to, for Christ nor God
commanded nothing, but what should be attained unto, and it will be attained
unto, and has been attained unto; Christ said, be perfect as your heavenly
Father is perfect, Mat. 5.4. he knew that they might be perfect if they come
into the Kingdom of God, for there no unperfect thing must enter, Rev. 21. and
so he did speak that which he knew people should come into, but they should
come into it, if ever they came into the Kingdom of God, what is this to thee
which cannot love enemies, for they that love enemies, shall know perfection,
and perfect love and patience have its perfect work, Jam. 1.4. the Apostles
speak wisdom to them that were perfect, but not the worlds wisdom which comes
to nothing, 1 Cor. 2.6. and the work of the Ministry was for the perfecting of
the Saints, till they all come into the unity of the faith, unto the knowledge
of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, and unto the measure and stature and
fullness of Christ, Ephesians. 4. and they should not be any more tossed to and fro
with the windy doctrines of men, nor cunning craftiness wherewith they lie in
wait to deceive, and there art thou tossed up and down with every wind, and
far off the work of the Ministry, when thou say blasphemously, Christ scorned
men, when he bad them be perfect; Christ did not scorn them, but thy doctrine,
it is imperfect, and thou and you that transgress and abide not in the doctrine
of Christ, thou and you are Ante-christs, as ye may read, 2 Io. 9.10.

Pr. When it was asked him, of the words that Peter spoke of, concerning them
that brought in damnable Heresies, and denied the Lord that bought them, he
said they did but think the Lord had bought them, but they were not bought, but
they thought they had been so.

Ans. Here thou again with thy damnable Doctrine, do go about to make Peter
and Jude liars, who speaks contrary to scripture, and perverts their Doctrine,
and the words of. Peter are thus, even denying the Lord that bought them; 2
Pet. 2.1. and the words of Jude 4. denying the only Lord God, and our Lord
Jesus Christ, and thou say the Lord had not bought them, but they thought he
had bought them, woe and misery, man, will be thy portion, that thou should so
wickedly pervert the Apostles Doctrine and the scripture, Acts. 13.10. and
bring in such damnable Doctrine, and devilsh doctrine, and speaks such lies in
hypocrisy, whose conscience is seared with a hot Iron, 1 Timothy 4. it is time for
people to turn away from you, who have so long deceived them.

Pr. Concerning these words of Ezekiel. 18.28. If the righteous man turn away
from his righteousness, his former righteousness shall be no more remembered;
and he said the meaning of that scripture was, they thought they had been
righteous, but they were not, but supposed it had been so.

Ans. Here in this thou art a minister of unrighteousness, thou go about to
make God a liar, and the Prophets, and perverts the scriptures, for if he
forsakes his righteousness and commits sin and iniquity, and trespasses, he
shall dye and not live in the righteousness, but if he forsake his sin,
trespasses and transgressions, in the righteousness that he has done and
does, he shall live; so Gods ways are equal, Eze. 18. And thou says they
thought they had been righteous, but it was not so: And the Lord by the Prophet
says it was so, that they should live in their righteousness, and dye if they
depart from it, and transgressed, here thou art a diminisher from the prophets
and Apostles words, whose name is diminished out of the book of life, read Rev.
22.19.

Pr. He denied that Christ dyed for all men, but for the Elect.

Ans. Contrary to John's Doctrine, who says, he is the propitiation for our
sins, and not for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole world, 1 John
2.2. and so it is the unbeliever that is shut out; and not believing in the
light that men are enlightened withal, with which light they might see the one
offering, who tasted death for every man, Heb. 2.9. and does enlighten every
man that comes into the world, that all through him might believe; and they
that believe not in the light are condemned, Ioh. 3.18. but beleving in the
light, shall come out of condemnation, and he is the Savior of all men, but
especially of them that believe, 1 Timothy 4.10. and the grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared to all men, which was the saints Teacher, Titus 2.11,
12. and they that turn it into wantonness, shall with it be condemned, Jude 4.
and they that set up a heap of teachers, 2 Timothy 4.3. after their own lusts and
went out from the Apostles doctrine, before the Apostles decease, 1 Io 2.19.
and have turned the grace of God that brings salvation, into wantonness, ever
since, and says it has not appeared unto all men, which brings salvation,
which is saving grace, and Christ Jesus does enlighten every man that comes
into the world, that they might believe and walk after him, and says, they
that follow him shall not abide in darkness, but shall become the children of
light, and have the light of life, Io. 8.12. Now say they that hate the light,
it is not sufficient, it is not a saving light, but they shall find it
sufficient to condemn them, and their unbelief, for not believing in it; for
believing in it, they come to have the light of life, John 8.12. and John 12.36.

Pr. He being asked who were hirelings, if they were not that did take hire?
his answer was, they were hirelings that did not take hire, and to prove it, he
brought that scripture in Philippians of them that preached Christ of envy and
strife.

Ans. Now all may see what doctrine he brings, to pervert or wrest the
scriptures, Philip. 1.15. to prove them hirelings that do not take hire, that
in the Phillyipians does not prove that they were hirelings, neither did they
take hire, so that for his purpose makes nothing, though for this purpose he
brings that scripture, but that his folly and darkness might appear, and be
made manifest by the light, for now to it his deeds are come, who is unfit to
talk of the scripture.

Pr. He said it was the clear mark of the Devil to go up and down from
place to place to preach as the Quakers do.

Ans. Now here in this he may charge all the prophets, Christ and his Apostles,
which went up and down from place to place, Heb. 11. that this is the mark of
the Devil, but this is too manifest to bring to light, and discover the
Presbyterian priests of Scotland, who lies in Dens and Corners, and fat
benefits, and there stick in the earth, and are crept into houses, who say it
is the devils mark to go up and down to preach, but this is that they may
manifest themselves to be judged by the practice of Christ and his Apostles,
that their folly might appear unto all men, Luke 9.5.8. Heb. 11. likewise the
Presbyterian Priests are turned like Ranters, who says whatsoever man does,
God has a hand in doing of it, whether good or evil, if a man commit never so
much sin, and live never so wickedly, he shall go to heaven if he be ordained
there to come; how was God grieved when David sinned? the Lord was angry, the
Lord was wrath; when the children of Israel sinned against him, it grieved the
Lord that he had made man, when all flesh had corrupted his way, Genesis 6.6. and
thou and you go about to make God the author of sin, and says God has a hand
in it, whatsoever a man does here, again you and thou be in the doctrines of
Devils, what shall we say that God is the author of sin? God forbid, Romans 6.
they that transgress the commandments (...) God, provoke him to anger, and
though God created the evil, Isa. 49.7. yet his commandment was to man, that
he should not go into it, Genesis 2.17. Genesis 4.7. Eze. 18. but when he did, he
transgressed the command of God; so he who says if ye murder, God is the
author of it, if ye persecute, God is the author of it, if ye do unrighteously
God is the author of it, you that murder, persecute, and do not righteously
are of him that kept not the command of God, of whom ye are, Io. 44. that would
persecute and murder, thou art gone out of the command of God, and joined with
the devil, 1 Io. 3.8. that went out of the truth, the devil he went out of his
estate, and the woman hearkened to him, and went out of her estate, and man to
the woman, Genesis 3. The Jews went out of their state, when they persecuted,
Mat. 27.25. Cain went out of his state, when he murdered, Genesis 4. the
Christians went out of their estate, since the days of persecution, who had
the name of Christianity; Cain went out of his state when he murdered, and
Balaam went out of his state when he coveted the wages of unrighteousness, and
admired men's persons, Numb. 22. Jude 11. Core went out ^f his state when he
gainsaid the truth, Numb. 16. Jude. 11. the false prophet, and the Antichrist
which is the beast, and the mother of Harlots went forth from the state of the
Apostles, 1 Io. 2.19. which has been since the days of the Apostles, and so
all wars and fightings and adversaries, is because of being out of the truth,
fallen out of it, Iam. 4. there is pride, and Lucifer, Isa. 14. and that is it,
that is of old ordained to condemnation, Jude. 4. and to be kept down and to be
condemned everlastingly, and there the time that shall be witnessed fit for the
fire, and death and Hell; and the false prophet, and the Dragon and the Serpent
cast into it, Rev. 20.14. but leaven is known that leavens into the new lump, 1
Cor. 5.7. the everlasting fire that burns for ever, Mark. 9.46. how are the
professions, forms, and religions fallen from the state, and lost the state,
and out of the state that Christ was in, the prophets were in, Abraham was in,
David was in, Moses, and the Apostles was in: and remains in a form of their
words, 2 Timothy 3.5. and murders them that enjoyes their life, and persecutes
them; The devil abode not in the truth, Io. 8.44. Adam and Eve abode not in
the truth, but tr^nsgressed, Genesis 3. Cain abode not in the truth when he
murdered Abel, Genesis 4. The Jews abode not in the truth, but crucified the
just, James 5.6. The antichrist, and the false prophets, since the days of
the Apostles, and the beast abode not in the truth, 1 Io. 2.19. that made the
war against the saints, Rev. 13. And here is the murderers, envious, and
persecutors warring and fighters, and their sacrifice God never accepted, Genesis
4.5. in all ages: and these are them that persecuted those that was in the
truth, whose sacrifice God accepted; to the witness of God in you all I speak;
that you may see your fall from the truth, out of the prophets life, Christ's
life, and the Apostles life; so be out of the commands, and fallen from God,
and say that none can keep the commandments* that is the word that shall stand
for ever, so ye are they that loves not God, Jo. 14 13. 1 Jo. 2.4. but are of
the beast and false prophets that makes war against them that keeps the
commands of God, Rev. 22.11. so that which says none can keep the
commandments, is fallen out of the truth, and the commandments of God, 1 Io,
2.4. Io. 8.44. And to him the truth is death and the commands of God in which
the saints live, to whom the commandments are not grievous, 1 Jo. 5.3.

Thomas Garwine Priest of Edenborough his doctrine and principles.

Pr. That the Child that is not sprinkled with outward water is in a damnable
state, and worse then an infidel.

Ans. Now here he and the rest of the Presbyterian Priests of Scotland may say
Abraham was in a damnable state, Isaac was in a damnable state, Jacob was in a
damnable state, and Joseph was in a damnable state, and David was in a damnable
state, and John the Baptist was in a damnable state, which were not sprinkled
by a Priest with outward water, nor named by the Priest, so thou and you with
your traditions, that say a Child is in a damnable state, if ye do not sprinkle
it with water; and the Apostle bids them not look at the things that are seen,
and you are in the damnable state, and the damnable doctrine, teachers of lies;
and many simple people have been deceived by you, and given over to believe
you, but God has taken the vail off their hearts: that you begin to be seen:
and their salvation shall they know stands not in elements, as though you, with
your sprinkling Infants with outward water, could bring out of the damnable
state; Oh ye deceivers, did not the Apostle say, they that were. Circumcised,
Christ profited them nothing? Gal. 5.2 ye have long deceived people with your
beggarly rudiments, and elements, and doctrines, and traditions, Col. 2.
hatched up at Schools, and never commanded of God; and say, if people will not
observe your traditions, or your elements which you call (a Papist word)
Sacrament, and perishing, they not observing it, are in a damnable state, and
worse then the Heathen and Infidels; an Infidel is an Heathen, one that knows
not God; But your generation says it is blasphemy to say any has known God,
and has seen God, and spoken to God: so they themselves have concluded to be
Heathen: The Heathen know not God: The Heathen observes traditions; and they
that know God cannot observe the traditions of the Heathen: but obeys the
Apostles doctrine, and touches not, tastes not, nor handles the traditions of
men and Ordinances which will perish, so not saving; so they that observe not
traditions are not worse then Heathen: but they that observe traditions are as
the Heathens, and be out of the Apostles doctrine in their own traditions and
rudiments, and are offended at those that will not touch them. Robert Semple
Priest of Lasmahaga: came to George Wear of Saffield to reason with him, and
he laid down these following things for his doctrine and principles: His first
doctrine and principle was to prove the lawfulness of being called of men
Master; standing praying in the Synagogues, going in long Robes, and he
mentioned Ezras Pulpit of wood upon which he stood, and read the Law to the
people; and for the rest he said nothing, for his mouth was stopped concerning
these things, being found in the steps of the Pharisees, Mat. 23. we do grant
that Ezra had a Pulpit of wood, but you prosess your selves Ministers of the
Gospel and Presbyterians, and are ye fain to run to Ezra, in the Law for a
Pulpit? now you have showed your selves what you are; and brought your deeds to
the light; but the Priesthood was made by the Law of God: so were you never;
That Priesthood changed, and the Law changed also by which it was made, and
Pulpit and Tithes ended; and Christ the everlasting Priesthood witnessed; so
thou and you have proved your selves no Ministers of the Gospel, Christ Jesus,
the power of God, and the wisdom of God, the everlasting Priesthood, who is the
end of Priests, Pulpits and Tithes, that was true in their place. So you that
have got up another Pulpit, Tithes, Temple, like Readers of the Law, and not
like Ministers of the Gospel, and Priests, are separated from the Apostles in
the delusion, and from Christ the everlasting Priesthood, Heb. 7. and are them
that Jude 19. and 2 Pet. 2. speaks of, That separates themselves having not
the Spirit that they were in who witnessed against Pulpit, Tithes, and
Priesthood, and witnessed Christ the everlasting Priesthood, which Pulpit,
Tithes, and Priesthood ye are crying up, and so Antichrist.

George Wear bad him prove his practice for sprinkling of Infants, and whether
or no they were not to believe before they were Baptized. He said the promise
was to Abraham and his seed; George answered him, it was not to seeds, as to
many, but to thy seed which is Christ. Robert the Priest said, That seed
Christ, was natural, contrary to the Apostles doctrine, Gal. 3.16. who said
Christ was the power of God, 1 Cor. 1.14, 15. and Christ the mystery, Col.
1.2.7. The first man is of the earth earthly, the second man is the Lord from
Heaven heavenly, 1 Cor. 15. the spiritual man judges all things, 1 Cor. 2.15.
The seed of the woman bruiseth the Serpents head, Genesis 3 15. and the promise is
to the seed, and the seed is Christ the power of God, And Christ the seed is
the spiritual man and so not natural, but the Priest said the seed is natural.
Now let all see in this whether he be not given up to delusion to speak lies in
hypocrisy, 1 Timothy 4.1. to delude and deceive people for dishonest gain, Ezekiel.
22.13. Which seed he and all the Presbyterians shall find spiritual to judge
them, and bruise the heads of them, and break their wicked cords and bonds of
iniquity which they have laid upon the people, Mat. 23. Eze. 34. Acts 15. The
day is at hand that their judgment is come; by that man whom God has
ordained, Acts 17.31 and to judge the world in righteousness, and to give to
every man a reward according to his works, Ps. 62.12. Rev. 22.12. who shall
give to him an account of every idle word that they shall speak in the day of
judgment, Mat. 12.36. And William Kenedie came to George Wear and promised
him that he should have a public hearing, he hearing what the Priest and the
rest of the Elders charged him withal: And when he came they would not give
him a hearing; and so found them truce breakers that are to be turned away
from, 2 Timothy 3. and such as creep into houses, and be of themselves, boasters,
proud high minded, as James and Jambres, who have a form of godliness, and
denis the power, which are to be turned away from: And after that the said
Priest did excommunicate George Wear in another parish without any hearing,
nor would not let him know for what they excommunicated him, which was a work
of darkness to make the peoples minds envious against the just: upon which
George Wear went to their meeting place to read a paper to him, to show why he
denied him; and two Priests, Robert Semple and John Hume being there, bad the
people to knock down that excommunicated (Swinger) which is in English (Rogue)
upon which the people did obey the Priest, and did beat and knocked George Wear
down to the ground; and might have murdered the man, had not the Lords mercy
been seen, so they be in Cains way, in envy; Genesis 4. Jud. 11. And George got up
again, and the priests bad the people strike him; and they did beat him, and
plucked him by the hair of the head; and the priests bad beat them away; and
they did so. And after the priest summoned George to the Court; and told the
Bailiff he would prove it by the Scripture, he must be stoned to death; now
here is the murdering Jews nature, that stoned the Prophets, and stoned the
Apostles; and stoned Steven, and took up stones to stone Christ, Mat. 23.24.
Joh. 8.59. Acts 7.58. And bloody Butchers, manslayer, no Ministers of Christ:
did not the false Prophets go always with the beast to war? Rev. 13. Rev. 16.
against Saint and the Lamb; and did not the chief priests stir up the rulers
against Christ, and had not the priests a hand to murder? and was not the
priest at the examination of Steven, and the Council gave order that he should
be stoned to death? and did not the priests stir up the Rulers and Magistrates,
though they themselves did not often do it, which had not the power, but they
stirred up the Magistrates to do it? And they came to be their slaughterers, to
execute their malice, and be their executioners; ye do not, ye may say, it is
the Magistrates which ye stir up to do it. It is not said, the priests did slay
and crucify Christ, but Pilate, but the priests had power amongst the
multitude to persuade the multitude to ask the murderer, Mat. 27. (which had
murder in their hearts) and Pilate did the thing; and did not God overthrow
Jerusalem, and destroy the power of the Magistrates there, and priests both and
has not God done it in many ages for executing the Priests malice, and their
envy against the just, and his anointed? have not ye many examples see down in
the scripture, which ye may all take notice of it? Therefore take heed all ye
Magistrates how you execute and avenge the malice and wickedness, and envy, of
any one against the just: for the envy of the envious, and the wickedness of
the wicked shall stay himself, Psalm. 34.21 and the righteous shall see it.
Therefore you that are called Christian Magistrates, execute no^, neither be ye
executioners of their madness, and envy of those who calls themselves
ministers of Christ. That would have you to slay, to stone, to stock, to
prison, and to put to death them that be contrary to them; Those be murderers,
in Cains way, man-slayers, wrastlers against flesh and blood, and not Ministers
of the Gospel, which says, love enemies; and render to no man evil for evil,
Mat. 5.44. and this differs from the Scribes and Pharisees, who loved their
own, and persecuted others, and stoned others, and drew the Magistrates to do
it, which says the Ministers of Christ, we wrestle not with flesh and blood,
but against principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses in high
places, Ephesians. 6.12. Now those Ministers that would have the persons of men
slain; are like Cain and Jezabel, the beast and false Prophets, that slew Abel,
Genesis 4. 1 Kings 21. the persons of men stoned, imprisoned, and put to death,
are as the Jews Priests, and those Magistrates that executes their malice are
as the Jews Magistrates, unchristian Magistrates. And so those are they that
are wrestling, stoning, striking, and imprisoning against flesh and blood. And
in the mean time spiritual wickedness rules among them, And rulers of
darkness in high places, where flesh and blood are wrestled against; so in
this state both Ministry and Magistracy are blind, that be out of the fear of
God; They turn their sword backward, whilst they are executing the Priests
malice, and the Priests will strengthen the hands of evil doers: and provoking
to slay, and against flesh and blood wrestling, and do not profit the people
at all, and stires up the multitude against the just; That he may keep himself
in his place for his own ends, and admiring the Magistrates persons, and men's,
because of advantage, Jude 16. and respects their persons, which shows they be
out of the faith, Iam. 2. which gives victory over the world, 1 John 5.4. and
out of the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles; now the Magistrates is for the
punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well: which
walks in the life, which he that does evil goes from; where the rulers of
darkness and spiritual wickednesses are: and this Magistrate he can see, he
turns not the sword backward, he answers that of God in every one; and is for
a praise to them that do well, 1 Pet. 2.14. so every evil, doer acts contrary
to that of God in them; now a Minister of Christ wrestles not against flesh and
blood, but against spiritual wickednesses in high place; so every one that
does evil acts contrary to that of God in him, so the higher power goes above
him, Romans 13.1. So the higher power is above him and before he was, all power
in heaven and in Earth is given to the Son of God, Io. 5.22. above all the
powers of the earth, that lights every man that comes into the world, Io.
1.9. but they who does evil, goes from the light, and so the higher power goes
against him. The Magistrates that be in the power, is a terror to the evil
doers that acts contrary to the light wherewith every one that comes into the
world be enlightened, The Magistrates be in that power which goes over him, and
is a pr^ise to them that be in the light, and the Ministers of God is to bring
from under the occasion of the Magistrates sword.

George Wear being with his friend standing in the field near Foord meeting
house, as they call it, he neither speaking nor acting any thing against any
man, but standing in the fear of the Lord with his friend; Wlliam Lowry and
John Hambleton called justices, committed him to prison, where they lay twenty
and three days; and here is his innocence preached.

The original righteousness was before the fall; The original of self
righteousness was that which fell, and is in the fall; that transgressed.

And in the Catechism which is tolerated by the general Assembly, and in the
Catechize of Scotland called, a short Catechism; They say that the word of God
is contained in the scriptures.

Ans. And the scriptures are writings; and it says, God is the word Io. 1.1.
1. Kings 8.27. Solomon says the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, and you
say he is containned in the scriptures with his writings; and you say there is
three persons; and the scripture does not speak of three persons and the Jews
had the scriptures and knew not Christ the word of God; Then ye tell people of
an outward ordinary means, by which Christ communicates the benefit of
Redemption; The word Sacraments; the scripture does not speak of three persons,
and Sacraments they are Papists words; of them ye have learned them; the means
of salvation is not ordinary or outward; but Christ is the salvation, who is
eternal, Heb. 5.9. and they that come to him come to the end of the outward,
Col. 1.27. ye say the Sacraments are the Effectual means to salvation; and ye
say again, they are not as they are themselves: (so here is confusion) but
only by the blessing of Christ and his spirit in them. How do ye differ from
the Papists? for they say he is in them; and ye say his spirit is in them and
where his spirit is, is not he? Oh blind, are ye found out? go ye home to your
Mother the Papist; where Christ's Spirit is, he is. And ye say your two
sacraments is Baptism and the Lords Supper. The scripture does not call
Baptism and the Lords supper two sacraments; which names you and the Papists
adore and worship which you have given to them; again you in your Catechize
call the first day in the week the Sabbath day; where did ever any of the
Ministers of Christ or the Christians, unapostatized call it so? are not you
come unto the breach, and guilty of your own judgment? of the third
commandment, when ye give another name to the scriptures then they give
themselves, in calling them the word, and calling Baptism and the Supper the
Sacraments? Exo. 20. Moses says God spoke all these words, when he gave forth
the commandments (mark words) and the words of Christ are spirit and life,
Io. 6.63. God is the word, Jo. 1.1. and Christ is the word, Rev. 19.13. and the
word became flesh, and dwelt among us, Io. 1.14. And them that had the words of
the scriptures, which cannot be broken, Io. 10.35. the Law and the prophets;
they knew not Christ the word before they be brought to the light that Christ
has enlightened them with, and they be brought to the spirit. Io 5 37. Io.
8.19. Can the whole world say the Lords prayer in truth, or was it taught his
Disciples, or to the world? does not people draw nigh to God with their lips
that say it, Isai. 20.13. and are not in the light which every man is lighted
that comes into the world withal; can ye say the Lords prayer, which is
forgive us our trespasses as we forgive them that trespass against us, without
hypocrisy? how do ye for give them when ye would have them persecuted, and
would have them stoned? you that be teachers of the people; and how do ye love
your neighbors as your selves? and fulfill the Law and the prophets, Mat.
7.12. to do so as you would be done by? To ye Presbyterians of Scotland, I
speak that be teachers, whose principles is to stone, chop off heads, and
persecute them that be contrary minded to you, would ye have those that be
contrary to your minds stone you to death, chop off your heads, imrpison, and
banish you, and persecute, and excommunicate you? This is the Law and the
prophets, to do as you would be done by: as others should do to you; so do
unto them: but Christ who is the end Of the Law and the prophets, Romans 10.4.
says his doctrine is to love enemies, Mat. 5.44. and says, if men persecute
you, pray for them, and bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that persecute you, and despitefully use you, you may be
the children of your father which is in heaven: who makes the Sun to shine upon
the evil and the good, and the rain to descend upon the just and the unjust,
if ye love them that love ye, what reward have ye, the Publicans and Pharisees
do so, and the apostatized Christians who are got into the forms of words,
but out of the life of the Saints of Christ and the Apostles, and there they
are saluting their brethren only, but says Christ, be ye perfect as your
heavenly Father is perfect, which you stand against; so ye are they that have
denied the one offering which has perfected for ever them that are sanctified,
Heb. 10.14. And makes the blood of Christ of none effect; which cleanses from
all sin, and the new Covenant, which blots out all sin and transgression; and
all upon the earth professors and worshippers, that call your selves Brethern,
and Christians, and offerers, of what sort soever, that have but the name,
before thou offers be reconciled to thy brother, go leave the gift at the
altar, and be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift, Mat.
5.24. then will the Lord accept thy offering, and all upon the earth that
prays; so that ye do forgive others that trespass against you, as you would
have the Lord forgive you your trespasses.

Oh how is the beauty of the Church of Presbyterians marred, and diformed! oh
how are they become Cages of unclean birds, Synagogues of Satan! oh how are
their Teachers become envyous men and murderers, of Caines stock, in whom the
eternal life is not abiding, That would stay, stone, and chop off heads of
strangers servants of the Lord God, and Sons, and Daughters, and excommunicate
and put out of their Synogogues; these things have I spoken unto you, that ye
should not be offended, Io. 16.2. they shall excomunicate you, yea the time
comes that they that kill you shall think they do God good service; these
things will they do unto you, because they neither knew the Father nor me.
These things have I told you before; that when the time comes ye may remember
that I told you of them, Io. 16 4. so the sayings of Christ are fulfilled by
you that excommunicate, and put out of the Synagogues of the Jews, ye are
like, and these are their marks; that they neither know the Father nor the Son
of God, These Temples, Pulpits, Priests, that are set up, since the days of
the Apostles, are amongst the false prophets that Christ said should come, Mat.
7. Mat. 24. and John saw was come, 1 Io. 2.18.19. and 1 Jo. 4.1, 2, 3. which
went forth from them, which all the world went after, Rev. 13.3. And these
excomunications, from you are, that none should buy nor sell, but such as
worship the beast, and receive his marks, Rev. 13.14. And it was the Beast
that would kill and destroy, and the Dragon, and the fall prophets, them that
kept the testimony of Jesus, Rev. 12. here is the patience and faith of the
Saints; that by the blood of the Lamb that overcomes, that have testimony of
Jesus, and kept the commands of God, so the Jews excomunications which had the
true Temple, true Tithes, and true Priests, which had the figure, the Type,
Christ being come the substance, Heb. 10.34. the everlasting Priesthood, Heb.
7. the everlasting Covenant, and the one offering, Heb. 10. so them that went
from the priesthood went to Christ; The Jews did excommunicate them out of the
Synagogues; now they did not know the Son nor the Father that did excomunicate,
Jo. 16. though they had the figures and Types of the Son of God. They held up
their outward things; and saw not the Son of God the substance when he was
come, so these knew not the Son of God nor the Father that excommunicated and
put out of the Synagogues; which Christ bad them that was to be put out of the
Synagogues, not be offended at those things; he told them before they came to
pass, That when these things come to pass ye may remember that I told you.
Now those are they that Christ said should come; and the Apostles saw was come,
that went forth from them; which has got up Tithes, and Temples, and Pulpits,
and priests, and the Priests are excommunicating out of their synagogues, and
these must neither buy nor sell with them, nor eat, nor drink, nor have nothing
to do with them, except they will worship the beast, or his image, and fall
down to him; and this is the worship of the Beast got up since the Apostles:
who apostatized from the true Church, and went forth from them, which all the
world wondered after and worshipped, and received his mark and his image; They
that buy and sell, and will let others do so with them, that are of them that
make war against them that keep the testimony of Jesus, and the commands of
God, and against the Saints and the Lamb; but the Lamb and the Saints shall
have the victory: But the Lamb of God, the seed of God is risen; the beast and
the false Prophet is taken, which has long deceived the Nations, Revelations
2. The old Dragon, the Serpent, the murderer, the deceiver, the devourer, the
Mother of Harlots, Babylon which has made all Nations drunk with her
fornications, which has corrupted the earth, Rev. 14. which the beasts, and
the false Prophets that deceives the Nations, and the Antichrist, the false
Prophets; say they are come but now: These are deceivers of the Nations; that
say they come but now; for Christ said they should come, and John said they
were come before his decease, whereby he said he knew it was the last time; and
in the Revelations he said, all the world went after them, and all Nations have
drunk of the wine of her fornications, and the Kings of the earth have
committed fornications with her, Rev. 17.2. (mark the word have) and the false
Prophets say they come but now, and now is the last time. And these are the
deceivers of the Nations that say so. Now are people but coming from them; and
now is the judgment of the great whore come; and now is the vials of wrath to
be powered upon her that has corrupted the earth, and now shall they go into
captivity, Rev 13. Rev. 1.4. and 18. And now shall people come to that which
the false Prophets, the beast, and the Mother of Harlots went from, all these
heads and horns, and Crowns, will turn against others with their tongues,
Language; and Babylon, that has been amongst them; and now is the seed of God
risen, which overthrows all the excomunicators upon the earth, both beast and
false Prophets and Jews both, which seed of God brings to see to the beginning.
Glory to the highest for ever; and Jews and Gentiles, beasts and false
Prophets, and is at the top of them all, and the corner stone is laid.

John Castairs, and James Durram Priests of Glasgow when the Fast was appointed
by the English, they kept their Houses, and caused their servants to work, and
took notice of all those that countenanced the English Fast, and the first day
they preached, then after they said it was necessary that a day of Humiliation
should be, and that all people should be humbled for the powers they saw now
ruling in the land, for they were giving liberty and tolleration to all sects,
and blasphemies, as Anabaptists, Independants, and said that the Baptists
denied all worship and Ordinances, as they were and ought to be according to
the Ecclesiastical Government, which Government is the true hedge of the Church
of Christ.

Lodowick Simerell Priest of Munkland he said before several persons that no
true Justice had been, or was since those enemies came to this Nation, neither
would be until the Lord remove them in his own time: Henry Foreside Priest of
Lenyey, and if Paul had been alive he would have stoned the Quakers; and it was
Christian zeal to stone them; and many friends are stoned and beat, and blood
is shed: those that stoned the Apostles and Saints, and haled them before
j^dgement-seats and Magistrates; and the chief Priests had a hand in putting
Christ to death, persuaded them so to do, and the chief Priests had a hand in
stoning of Stephen to death, and the Priest had a hand in casting Jeremy into
the dungeon, and into the stocks, and said he was worthy of death; and the high
Priest Ananias was examined of Paul, and Peter and John was examined by the
Priest, was put out of the Temple by the Priests and Rulers, and charged no
more to speak in that name, and such were these who had a form of godliness but
denied the power, and such ever stirred up the people to blood and tumults
against the harmless, and innocent in the truth; Therefore come to the light
you that have tasted of the power of the Lord God, that with it you may see and
judge how the Priests blinded the Magistrates by flattery, and so truth came to
be their enemies.

How do you receive strangers, ye Presbyterians of Scotland, and obey the
commands of God, and the Apostles commands, which was, be not forgetful to
entertain strangers; for some have entertained Angels unawares: when as ye
would have the servants of the Lord prisoned, and stocked, and stoned to death,
or their heads chopped off? so you are them that be in Cains way, vagabonds
from the Spirit of God, now a vagabond has not a habitation in God, but
wanders from the witness of God in him, like Cain who built a City and called
it after his Sons name, Heb. 13.2 Genesis 4.

I am the light of the world that lights every one that comes into the world
says Christ the Savior of your souls, every one going from the light ye be
enlightened withal, ye are vagabonds, and have not a habitation in God; and so
goes into Cains way, envious and would slay; Balaams and Cores way, which are
with the light condemned; and like unto those Jews, That haled out of the
Synagogues, That Christ spoke of that goes in long Robes, and are called of men
Master, but Christ says, be ye not called of men Master, for one is your
Master, even Christ, Mat. 23.

Christ said they that went in long Robes, loved the chiefest places in the
assemblies; should hale out of the Synagogues, and they that do these things be
gone from the light, Joh. 3.19. Joh. 16.2.

All this persuading of corrupt Magistrates to persecute them that reprove sin
in the gates, in the Steeple Houses, streets and high ways, is, because men
have a selfish end, and a private interest to themselves, both professors of
Scriptures and teachers, and them that does persecute has a selfish honor,
and an interest to themselves, and so the selfish Professors, teachers,
Magistrates that persecutes for them; they have a form of godliness, but the
witness lies slain in them, and they matter not for that rising: for in that
rising all the deeds, words and actions comes to light, and then, if the
witness of God arise in them, they will not be offended at such as reproves sin
in their gates, Markets, Steeple Houses and Streets; for all upon the earth,
while they are from the witness of God in them, they are corrupted, and they
may get the form of godliness, the form of Christ's, the Prophets and Apostles
words, and live out of the power, and be in the Religion that is vain, for none
upon the earth comes to the power of godliness, but first they must come to the
witness of God in them, and there is none upon the earth that ever comes to the
first principle of the pure Religion, but first they must come to the witness
of God in them. There Is none knows the Scriptures given forth from the power
and Spirit of God, which was in the Saints, but first they are brought to the
Spirit of God in their own perticulars. Come all you officers and Soldiers,
now after ye have ease and have overcome your enemies without; take heed least
you sit down in your ease and fullness, and fall down into the earth, and flesh,
and feastings, and fullness, and pride, and so corrupts the earth, and your
selves, and not come down to the witness of God in you; whereby the enemy of
God and of your own souls might be slain, that you might come to find rest and
peace in God, after your outward wars, and so come to the inward wars, which
takes away the cause of the outward, whereby you may all come into true
understanding, to answer that of God in every one, for them that do evil, act
contrary that of God in them, to such the sword is a terror, and a praise to
them that do well; which is led by the Spirit of God, up to God who is pure,
out of the evil: and all Magistrates swords upon the earth, should reach to
that which is pure in every one to the soul, so it takes away that which wars
against it, that breaks the outward; so comes the soul to be subject to the
higher power that's above the transgressor, which all the Magistrates and Rulers
upon the earth must give an account to; and there is none upon the earth that
comes to worship God in the spirit and in truth, but who first come to own that
of God in them; and there is none upon the earth that are like to retain God in
their knowledge, nor his Covenant, while their minds is reprobated from that of
God in them.

There all may see the Covenant of grace to all men, and the Covenant of light,
and life with the Father, he gave him for a Covenant of light to the Gentiles,
to the Heathen, I will make a new Covenant with the house of Israel and Judah
the people of God, I will write my Law in their hearts, and their minds, so
says Christ, the Covenant of God, I am the light of the world, and does
enlighten every man that comes into the world that all men through the light
of the covenant of God might believe, it is the covenant of God, that every man
that comes into the world is enlightened withal, and every one that hates the
light wherewith they are enlightened withal, hates the Covenant, and the light
condemns him, and here all men, may see the free grace of God that brings
salvation has appeared to all men, The grace of God that brings the salvation,
the turning the grace of God into wantonness, and walking despightfully against
the spirit of grace, they neglect their salvation, and bring punishment and
condemnation upon them, as its written in Jude.

Concerning election, and what is elected, the grace of God which brings
salvation has appeared to all men, to the clearing Gods Justice, and the fault
is in man for his condemnation.

There is a precious thing in these Scots, but there is a filthy, beastly durty
thing lies over.

A Book I have received out of Holland the Title of which is called A Catechism
of Christian Religion, Printed at Amsterdam by John Frederick Stationer at the
sign of the Hope 1639. The principles in it as follows.
Pr. OUt of the Law, they say, they learn they should love the Lord God with
all their strength, and mind and soul, and their Neigbour as themselves.

Ans. Now these words are said, but where these words are performed, the
commandment is known, and God is loved, and his Neighbor as himself, so
loves the Creation, the work-manship of God, but where these words are talked
of, and not done, and they say they have not power, then they be out of that
state as the Jews was in that came out of Egypt, which had the power and
ability to answer the law of God, to which the Law was committed, and God is
equal and righteous, and commands nothing but what is equal and just, and
measurable and reasonable, according to that which men may perform, and such
as he gives the Law to, he gives power, but if men transgress the Law, they
abuse the power, and such were not justified, and may say they had not power,
but that is false, that is a lie.

Pr. They say, They are not able to keep the word of God perfectly, that is to
say, to love their Neighbors as themselves, and love God; for man is prone to
evil-hatred by nature.

Ans. That which brings men to keep the commandments of God is beyond nature,
to order nature and to rule nature, and above nature, and it is to subject that
which is prone to evil, and that nature that the law goes upon; so he that
looks into the law and loves God, is turned from the evil nature, for the
evil makes the nature corrupt; man in the beginning, which had the law of God
within, the commandment, man in the fall had the commandment given to him,
and there he had power, as man had in the beginning, the Law and the power; but
they both transgressing abusing the power, so became unrighteous, not to make
God unrighteous, or a hard task-master, to lay more upon a man then he can do,
as the corrupt wills of men, and the slothful servants look upon God so to
do, as to command them to do the thing they cannot, so to make God
unreasonable, they that love the darkness, and the pleasures and the lust more
then God, and so have not regard to God and their Neighbor; for man in the
beginning lost his uprightness, by transgressing the Law, and so the Devils
seed comes to be sowed in mankind, and the Image of God lost, and the Image of
the devil is set up in man, and so comes darkness, hardness, mists, dimnesse,
and blindness, and death reigned from Adam to Moses so then came the Law by
Moses that went over all transgressors, answered the principle of God in all
men that was transgressed, and the Lord that gave man the Law gave him power
and ability, who says his ways was equal, and righteous, and they then to
love God with their strength and their souls, and their neighbor as
themselves, and such were preservers of the creation, and lovers of the
workmanship of God, but such as were transgressors was destroyers and defacers
of the workmanship of God, and not lovers of God nor their Neghbour.

Pr. That the anger of God is most dreadful for the sins wherein they were
borne.

Ans. Then you are not the believers which were borne in the sin, nor of
believing parents, if you do own the Apostles doctrine, for the unbelieving is
sanctified by the believing, else were their children unholy, but now are they
clean, says the Apostle the Minister of God, if you can believe his doctrine,
and bear it, and receive it; but if you do object and say, borne in sin and
transgression, and all by nature the children of wrath, yea I say this is the
estate the Apostle speaks of among unbelievers, Jews and Gentiles gone astray
from the life of God, from the Covenant of promise; but who came into the life
of God, and the covenant of promise are believers; the believing wife or the
believing husband sanctifies the unbelieving, else were their children unholy,
but now are they clean, he that can receive this, let him, this was the
Apostles Doctrine.

Pr. Because the Justice of God requires that the same nature of man which had
sinned, do it self make recompense for sin.

Ans. All that makes the recompense for sin, is he that never sinned, Christ,
the second Adam, and not the first, so in this your blindness and darkness
has appeared, and it is not the same nature that has sinned, that destroys
it, but it is Christ that cleanses the nature of Man that had sinned and
destroys sin it self, that is to say, the Devil that has defiled the nature
of Man, and so Christ is called the sanctification, Justification, redemption,
cleansing of man's nature, blotting out of the sin and transgression.

Pr. Salvation is not offered to all men who perished in Adam, but only to
those men who are grafted in him by true faith.

Ans. Salvation is purchased to all men that perished in Adam though they do
not believe it, for he is the Savior of all men, especially of them that do
believe, and an offering for the sin of the whole world, mark, the world, and
does enlighten every man that comes into the world, that all through him might
believe, and he that believes not is condemned by Christ the light, the life,
the sacrifice, the offering, that through death, that which in them was the
power of death, the Devil, he destroyed: and his power, and so entered into his
glory, all that believe in him have life, and all that does not and receive him
not, has not life, but are condemned through unbelief. Now if if you say that
in Adam all dyed, I say yes, and in Christ all shall be made alive to the
Justification of life, I say yes, as in Adam all dyed, as in Christ they come
to be made alive, so them that are the believers are the holy, so the believers
children; a new creation, a new generation, new creatures out of Adam in the
fall, the believers passed from death to life, that came by Adam and so in that
is a clean creation and holy generation.

Pr. All things contained in the Gospel is summed up in the Apostles Creed.

Ans. The Apostles does not tell us of a creed, but the Popes Canon-book, and
common prayer book, and many things the Apostles had to say, which was not
lawful to utter, and many things Christ had to say, they could not bear, but
the Gospel is the power of God, and that the scripture speaks of, but does
not say the Epistles is it.

Pr. God has manifested himself in his word, that these three distinct
persons are one.

Ans. The word, nor the scripture does not tell us of three distinct persons,
but it tells us of Father, and of Son, and of Holy Ghost, but indeed as I said
before the Popes canon book, and Masse-book does so, for the Holy Ghost is not
distinct from the Son, and the Son is not distinct from the Father, but they
are all in one.

Pr. Having our chief hope placed in God, being assured that nothing may with
draw us from his love.

Ans. Yet you say you are not able to keep the commandments of God perfect,
then you are drawn from the living God, and you are from the chiefest hope,
Christ, for who loves God keeps his commandments, and such have the chiefest
hope, Christ, in which the commandment ends, here the love goes forth out of
the pure heart, but is not riches your hope? and does not riches and the glory
of the world, and the fashions thereof, drew your hearts away, and your love,
and hope stand in them, and has taken up the possession of your hearts more
then God? therefore who keeps them not perfectly, keeps them not at all.

Pr. You say Christ has ransomed your bodies and your souls from sin, and by
that one sacrifice of his body he has redeemed you.

Ans. Are your bodies redeemed, and your souls that are immortal, and your
spirits sanctified, and do you glorify God in your bodies, souls, and spirits
which is the Lords? and is there not sin in your bodies, and are not your
spirits corrupted? now who witnesses redemption of the body and soul from sin,
these are out of the first Adams state, and are the holy ones and these be in
the end of the law, and that which fulfills the Law Christ Jesus, but now if
you come to say that you have sin in your bodies, and the fruits will show it
self to persecute, or envy, rage, malice, pride, or such wickedness, this
shows not the fruits of Redemption.

Pr. You say, That God in Christ has put out the remembrance of your sins, and
of your corruptions within you, wherein you must fight all your life time.

Ans. Whilst the sins you are fighting withal are not blotted out in your own
particulars, this is not the life of the Saints, they are not fighting all
their life time, but come to the kingdom of God, witnessing sin and iniquity
blotted out, and the everlasting covenant of peace and life with God.

Pr. You say, You are righteous before God through faith, though your
consciences accuse you for your trespasses against the commands of God, being
prone to evil, yet notwithstanding embrace the benefits of Christ, as if you
never had committed any sin or corruption, and this is as if you your selves
had perfectly completed the obedience.

Ans. Where the conscience accuses it is impure, and that the true faith is out
of, for the mystery of faith is held in a pure conscience, and that is it that
receives Christ, and which is not prone to evil, nor transgresses the commands
of God but you are out of the perfect obedience, and out of the faith both, and
are in the corruption, and are not the lovers of God, nor come to Christ the
end of the commandments which is loved in a pure heart, and whereas you talk
of conscience accusing and yet faith, that is your ignorance, for faith is held
in a pure conscience, the conscience does not accuse, but the unsanctified.

Pr. Not that we please God through the worthiness of our faith, for our
works, the best of them, are imperfect, in this life defiled with sin.

Ans. It is faith that brings men to please God, which Faith comes from him,
and gives victory over that, men have lived in, and not pleased God; so faith
there is a worthiness in it, it is the gift of God, by which men please God,
and have access to to him, and they are justified, and through it they
overcome and subdue mountains, and raise the dead, your best works being
imperfect, and defiled with sin in this life, then they are not wrought in God,
but out of him in the darkness, they are works of darkness, unperfect,
defiled with sin; are not the works of darkness to be condemned for the fire,
and to be out of the Law and Gospel? but the works, the Saints works that are
in the Faith, wrought in love are perfect, wrought in God, created to good
works, these are distinct from the unperfect, defiled with sin, and these good
works the Saints witnessed when they were upon the earth, which is the works
of Faith which works by love.

Ans. Infants that are baptized belong as well to the covenant and Church of
God, as they of full age, they by baptism being grafted into the Church of God,
so discerned from the children of Infidels, so this baptism succeeds
Circumcision.

Answ. Then by this all Christendom that are baptized are the Church and
grafted into the Church, Papists and Protestants and all; and how is it that
your Church is so much in confusion then? for you say they are grafted into the
Church of God, and in the Church of God there is no confusion, it is the Pillar
and ground of truth, without spot or wrinkle, and how is it there is such
killing one another in this Church, Papists, and Protestants, Lutherans, and
Calvinists so called, how is it they are not of one body broken into so many
heads, now the baptism of the spirit brings all into one body, in which spirit
is the fellowship and the unity, which spirit is the bond of peace; and
Circumcision outwardly was a figure of Circumcision within, and that it typed
forth, and baptism without typed forth baptism within, and many may run into
the outward water, that does decrease, and does not come to the body of Christ
the light, as you may read in the fifth of John; for none are grafted into
Christ the body but who comes to the light John bare witness of.

Pr. You say though Christ he in Heaven, you on Earth, and you are flesh of his
flesh, and bone of his bone.

Answ. And yet before you said your consciences accused you, and your best
works in this life were sinful, imperfect, and you could not keep the commands
of God; now this is confusion, who are of the flesh and bone of Christ are with
him, and fits with him in Heavenly places, for their conversation is in Heaven.

Pr. We are grafted into Christ by the Holy Ghost now, according to his humane
nature on earth.

Answ. Humane nature is from the ground, this is old Adam, but Christ who
according to the flesh was of Abraham, and of David, the Scripture does not
tell us of humane nature, for humane is from the ground, but Christ is from
above, and though he were a Lamb slain from the foundation of the world, yet
his nature was not corrupted, nor his flesh saw no corruption, he that is made
of the dust is humane, he that is the Lord from heaven is not humane, so you
err in your understandings that does not distinguish.

Pr. Teaching the Gospel and Ecclesiastical discipline by which the heaven is
opened to believers and shut against the unbelievers.

Ans. Christ has the key which opens to believers which does enlighten every
man that comes into the world, that through it they might believe, and they
that do not believe in the light which Christ has enlightened them withal,
heaven is shut to them, light condemns them, and they neglect the Gospel upon
whom the wrath comes, which Gospel is the power of God; and as for the
Ecclesiastical discipline it is got up since the days of the Apostles in the
apostasy, which shuts up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, that which they
should have believed in; that is the light Christ has enlightened them withal
which is the key.

Pr. And such you say that be wicked men, the Sacrament is to them forbidden,
and shut out of the Congregation.

Answ. Do you not call baptism Sacrament, and has he given them it, and did
not you say they are grafted into the Church by baptism, and cannot Judas take
the sop? but for the word Sacrament, that you may look in the old Canon Book,
the Masse-Book, and such as you like, you give your Sacrament as covetous and
proud, and lovers of gold, and surfetted with the cares of this life, and drunk
with it, and such as are in superfluity, and yet such you will give it to; and
common outward drunkards you will keep it from, now are not all those forbidden
and out of the Church of God, read and judge your selves, and amend your lives,
and repent that you may come into the spirit that baptizeth into the body of
Christ.

Pr. You say Christ has redeemed you by his blood, and renewed you by his
spirit to his Image.

Ans. And yet your works before were sinful, and you brake the command of God;
now this shows still that you have but the form, and unrenewed in spirit,
unchanged, unconverted, and not in the Image of God, and not in the
thankfulness of God out of a pure heart.

Pr. To mortify the old man is to be sorry for your sins.

Answ. A man may be sorry for the sin he has acted, but that which puts off
the body of sin is the spirit, and purifies the heart is the faith, and that
that cleanses from all sin is the blood of Jesus, and that that blots out all
sin and transgression is Christ the Covenant of God, and Christ within manifest
in the flesh, condemns sin in the flesh; so having him within, the body is dead
because of sin.

Pr. Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image, the likeness of any
thing in Heaven above, or in the earth beneath, or worship them, or bow down to
them, thou shall not take the name of the Lord in vain, etc. and remember thou
keep holy the Sabbath day, for six days thou shall labor and do all thou have
to do, but on the Sabbath thou nor thy ox, servant or stranger shall do no
manner of work.

Answ. Do you not make graven images and Pictures of things in Heaven, and of
things in the water, and of things in the earth, and so make similitudes and
representations and adore them, and set them up in your houses? and is not this
quite contrary to the commands of God? and has not the Papists been your
examples for these things, and not the Apostles? and do ye not take the Lords
name in vain daily in your streets, and markets, in your buying, and selling,
and take the Lords name in vain, when you call upon him with your lips, but
your hearts be in your covetous practices, and full of hatred, envy, pride,
voluptuousness, ambition, self-honour, and deceit? and this is taking the Lords
Name in vain, to call on God with your lips while your hearts be after this
manner, do your servants, or strangers, or cattle rest on the seventh day? and
do you not keep Markets and Fairs on that day, the Lord gave to the children of
Israel after the fall of Adam for a sign of the restoration of the Creation
that neither man, nor servant, nor family, nor ox, nor Ass should work on that
day, but rest? so it was a sign, the Apostles says the Sabbath day was a
shadow of good things to come, which was Christ, the good thing who restores
the Creation and gives the liberty to Horse, Ass, Ox, and all the Creation,
unto man and stranger and servant, and Redeemes man up into the image of God,
and renewes it, which has been lost, and so is restoring of the Creation, and
gives rest to his people and all the Creation, and destroys the Devil, death,
and all his works, Christ who is the restorer gives rest to the Creation, who
was before days was, by which all things was made.

Pr. You say, Thou shall not do no murder, thou shall not steal, nor thou
shall not covet thy neighbors goods, house, or servant, nor any thing that is
his, his wife, or ox, or Ass, etc.

Ans. Do you do no murder? that was the Law without; do you fulfill it in
Christendom? then you do not murder the just principle of God in your
particulars; do you not quench the spirit in people, and suffer it not to have
liberty? do you not do murder to the just of God in you, in your own
particulars? and so, then stop it in the general, for opening its mouth with
all your force and might? and are you not murderers there, and do you not
steal by Sea, and Land, and cozen and cheat and wrong one another? nay, do you
not steal the words from your neighbor, and the Prophets and the Apostles, and
Christ, which you never came into the life of; is not this called theft and
robbery? for you have not received it from the Lord God, as Prophets, as
Apostles, as his Son did, and servants did; so all your profession, Church and
Ministry stand in the robbery, and have not received it as they did, as the
true Apostles and Prophets did, and Ministers did, ye all stand in the robbery;
and do not you covet your neighbors goods, Oxen, Cattle, and servants, and
wife? and one getting from another goods, and getting servants one from
another? is not this out of the love in which the Commandment ends, where there
is serving one another in love; and is not all covetous Idolaters out of the
love shut, in which the Commandment ends, and has not this been the practice
in the whole Christendom, coveting men's goods, servants, cattle, and that which
is not his? is not that out of the Law and Gospel, and out of a pure heart
where the Commandment is done and known, and that which it ends in, is in
Christ, and love keeps the Commands of Christ, they that love do not covet,
and they are not Idolaters.

Pr. We are not to make any images to be tolerated in the Churches, and
Chapels, or figures of things made, for it is not seemly for God will have his
Church be taught by living Preaching.

Answ. How is it that your Churches so called, are so full of Pictures and
images of Males and Females representing a figure of Adam and Eve, the Apostles
and Christ and your houses and signs of fish in the Sea, and Lions and others
creatures upon the earth, and of things as you imagine in heaven, are not all
these your inventions, your works and inventions, you have learned of the
Papists and they from the heathen, not from the Apostles? and you have daubed
your Churches, and them flourished with your Pictures, these things you call
your Churches, but the Church is in God, which the gates of Hell cannot prevail
against, but a shower of rain, or an earthquake, or a great wind will prevail
against your Church, and the devil may come with his carnal weapons and throw
it down, but the Church of Christ the Pillar of truth is that the devil is out
of.

Pr. You say a man may swear before a Magistrate, and that this kind of
swearing is ordained by Gods word, therefore well used of the Saints, and it is
not lawful to swear by the Saints or other creatures.

Answ. Here ye be out of the Doctrine of Christ who says swear not at all, and
out of the Magistrates state the Apostle speaks of, and out of Christ's Doctrine
and the Apostles, and has broken the commands of Christ and the Apostles
Doctrine, which says swear not at all, so you wrong Christ Jesus, and the word
of God you deny, and though Abraham swear, and Jacob and Joseph swear, the
Prophets and Moses swear, David swore, and the Angels swore, and men in strife
swear by the greater, and the oath ended the strife and controversy amongst
men, yet Christ says before Abraham was I am, he reigns over the house of
Joseph and Jacob, he is the end of the Prophets, he is the end of Moses, he is
the end of men of strife, and brings peace on the earth, the Angels must bow
down to him, that says swear not at all, who was before Abraham was, and David
called him Lord, who was greater then Solomon and this is my beloved Son hear
ye him; now which of you hear him? they said in the old time perform thy vows
to the Lord, this was the old time, the day of Abraham, David, Prophets Moses,
Solomon, but Christ who was before all time, by whom all things was made, the
oath of God ends the time, and says swear not at all, so does his true
Ministers and the Apostles, above all things my brethren swear not at all,
neither by heaven, nor by earth, lest you fall into condemnation, now here were
true brethren that kept the doctrine of Christ and the Apostles, and his
commands, which swearers break which are got up since the days of the
Apostles, which are the false brethren Apostatized from the true, so now the
fruits of false and true brethren are seen, who keep the commands of Christ,
and walk in the Doctrine of the Apostles and who does not.

Pr. You say, That in the fourth Commandment God does command that the
Ministers of the Gospel, and the Schools of Learning should be maintained, and
that on the Sabbath frequent studiously, Divine Assembles, hear the word
diligently, using the Sacraments.

Ans. Your Schools, your Sacraments, your Sabbath, your Studies by men, you
have made these, since the Apostles, your Ministers at your Schools, and not by
the Lord, but among your selves Apostatized from his spirit, for the Apostles
had not Shools, and the Apostles said let no man judge you in meats or drinks,
new Moons, and Sabbath days, etc. for the body is Christ, and he brought them
off of these services to Christ, the substance, the body, who ended the Sabbath
days, and the offerings upon them, who was before days, who is the rest for
his people, and did not bring people into days, but into Christ by whom all
things was made, who was Lord of the Sabbath, and such meet on the first day of
the week, and are taught of God, and outstrip all your Teachers made in
Schools, and learnings of men, and so not of man, nor by man but the outward
Schools are of men, and by men.

Pr. You say, The fifth Commandment injoyns you to yield obedience to the
faithful commandments of them that be over you; and the Catechism.

Ans. The fifth Commandment brings that men should obey the command of God, not
of men, nor the Catechism, nor such stuff as is in this Catechism, but who
are come to Christ the end of the Commandments, the end of the Law, him by whom
the world was made, and was before it was made (is enjoyed.)

Pr. You say, The meaning of the seventh Commandment, Is that you should live
temperate, modest, and chaste, and holy in Wedlock.

Answ. Is this so, have you not broken Wedlok both with God and man, and lost
the chaste Virgin state? and so gotten up into intemperate, immodest,
unchastness, into uncleanness and filthiness, and so show by your fruits that
you neither come to keep this Commandment, nor to Christ the end of it?

Pr. You say, The eighth Commandment does not only forbid robbery but
covetousness after other men's goods, evil witchcraft, devices to seek after
other men's goods.

An. Then are you not all found in this seeking after other men's goods, and
endeavoring by force, and has not this been many of your practices both by
Sea and Land, of many people in the whole Christendom, and been found in this
witchcraft as you say as you speak of, and is not all this to be judged with
the spirit of the Lord God to be out of his commands, and out of the love of
God and Christ the end of the Law, there-repent and amend all your ways,
doings and lives, that you may return to the Lord, and find peace and rest in
the time of need.

Pr. You say, The ninth Commandment says bear not false witness against any
man, and you should shun lying, and not falcifie any man's word, nor backbite
nor reproach, and shun all careless kind of lives, etc.

Answ. How is it then there are so many false witnesses, backbiters,
reproachers, rash condemners men living in such careless kind of lives and
deceit among you? which is the devils works, this is all out of the commands of
God and the Law, and short of Christ the end of it, and the fruits of this now
has showed it self.

Pr. You say, No one that is converted unto God perfectly, observes and keeps
his Commandments.

Answ. Then no man loves God amongst you, nor are you converted neither are you
of the seed of the woman that keeps the commands of God, neither are you the
children of God that John's speaks of, that keeps the Commandments of God, that
love God, neither, are you the believers, for Christ is the end of the Law to
them that believes.

Pr. You say, There is no man in this life able to keep the Law of God, and why
then should Gods Law be so exactly and severely.

Ans. The law of God is just, is not so exact, nor so severely, but is just and
equal, and righteous, and perfect and good, and not as you look upon it exact
and severe, now Christ the righteousness of God is the end of the Law, and the
man that loves God keeps his Commandments, and comes to the end of the
commandments, that is, love out of a pure heart.

Pr. You say Christ teaches you to call God Father in the beginning of your
prayers.

Ans. Christ taught that to his Disciples which were his children, his sheep,
but that was not spoken to the world that did not believe in the light that
enlightens every man that comes into the world, for the Pharisees could call
him Father and Lord, but did not the things he commanded them, and such Christ
said were of the devil, and such their prayers he rebukes; the Disciples could
pray this in truth, so you must be born again of God, not committing of sin
when you call God Father, like him, else you are Bastards, begotten of the
wicked one children of the transgressor sons of the Sorcerer: the Prophet
speaks of children of God distinct from such that call him Father in the
transgression, applied to God which he has not begotten, the birth in the
transgression, the transgressors birth, that is a Bastard, a false conception.

Pr. You say, Forgive us, as we forgive them that trespass against us.

Answ. Is it so, do ye do so, and would you be forgiven no otherwise, but as ye
forgive others that has trespassed against you, would you have God forgive you
no otherwise who trespasseth against him, but as you forgive the trespasses
against you (mark) whether you would have as you say, and whether here be not
justice, and whether you can witness you are forgiven that does not forgive
others? whether you have the assurance within you?

Pr. You say, The particle Amen means the things sure out of doubt for your
prayers is much more certain heard of God, then you feel in your hearts, that
you unfeignedly desire the same.

Answ. Amen or so be it, for the promise is to the seed, yea and Amen; which
fetches up the seed out of time who has been in prison in time and brings it
by the power of God thither where there is no time, and there is yea and amen,
and the Lord accepts no prayer from the corrupt heart or such whose works are
sinful, their best works are sinful, for the praying is in the spirit, the Lord
accepts, and Preaching, singing, hearing, and tasting, discerning, handling,
and feeling the Lord knows the mind of the spirit where it groans, which
spirit guiding the man, it gives him an understanding of the signification of
it, and so every man being reproved with the spirit if he hears it and be at
unity with it, and turn to it, it will bring him to turn to God, and be at
unity with God, and here his prayers be acceptable to him, and so every man
being enlightened that comes into the world, every man being turned to the light
Christ has enlightened him withal, he is turned to Christ from whence it
comes, which brings him to know Christ, and to ask in his Name, who is the way
to the Father and is in the Father, who is God Immanuel Christ Jesus, and so
forth to the end.

Robert Tuchin, John Barnes, Edward Buckler, Robert Dingly, James Crosswick,
John Martine, Vincent Spark, Joshua Tompkins, Simon Pole, Tho. Clarke, William
Harby Martin Wells, Will. Bignall, Rich. Beminster Matthew Hearne: Their
Princples are as Follows who are Teachers in and about the Island of Weight,
and these 15. Priests are in the rear of the Army of Babylon against the Lamb.
Pr. THat the good tidings, which the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ brings
to sinners was first heard at Jerusalem.

Ans. The Go^pel which is the power of God which is the glad tidings to
sinners, was preached to Abraham, before ever it was heard at Jerusalem, and
the shepherds in the field received the message of the good tidings of the
glorious Gospel from the Angel, which was sent to them of the Lord; who said,
Behold I bring you good tidings of great Joy, and this was before the Gospel
was heard at Jerusalem, and all the Fathers and Prophets, that heard the power
of God, they heard the Gospel; for the Gospel is the power of God, glad tidings
to the seed, and great joy to the poor captives, and this Gospel was preached
to Adam, the seed of the woman was promised to bruise the Serpents head; and
that was, and is, the power of God, the glorious Gospel, but as for such as
knows no Gospel in manifestation, nor apparation, but only the scriptures
which does but declare of the Gospel, they show that they are without, in the
world, and has no other knowledge of the Gospel, but natural knowledge,
which is not unto eternal life, nor can edefie the body of Christ, which is
immortal.

Pr. The good tidings, which the glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ brings to
sinners, was a great mercy to the Jews, a very gracious dispensation to us
sinners of the Gentiles.

Ans. The good tidings, the glorious Gospel, is in it self a mercy to all;
but only a mercy in manifestation, and opperation to them that do receive it,
whether Jews or Gentiles, and it is a judgment and a condemnation, to all that
do not receive it both Jews and Gentiles. But as for you fifteen Priests, you
have included your selves among the sinners, showing that you are yet
unconverted to the precious faith, which brings out of all sin and gives
victory over it, and who are converted are changed and renewed from being
sinners, to be righteous, and these are not sinners of the Gentiles, (as is
manifest you yet are) but they are believers of the Gentiles, who are made
righteous in the righteousness of the second Adam, who has quickened them from
death to life, and from sin to God, but upon such that do remain sinner of the
Gentiles, and receives not the Gospel which is the power of God, the
dispensation of it is judgment, and condemnation, and this shall the testimony
of God in every man give witness to.

Pr. Dark we are since the cloud of sin overshadowed our minds, our brightest
notions are stained, our light eclipsed by nature, we are Chained up into a
Cave of darkness; taking mere notions to be things substantial, and substance
to be shadows, and as our eyes are dim and can not see much, so our sloth is
great and heedlessnes inexcusable, our ignorance of God may be charged on the
want of meditation in all men, the sins of teachers being teachers sins:
Admit the Minister be sinful, shall the people despise his doctrine? Scripture
is Scripture though uttered by Satan.

Ans. The Ministers of Christ Jesus who were called and sent of him, were light
in the Lord, and were translated from darkness to the light, and from Satan's
power to God, and the cloud of sin was not over them, for that was removed, and
they were as a City set on a hill, and were the light of the world, and their
minds were spiritual and enlightened and not over-shadowed with the darkness
nor with the cloud of sin, as it is with these 15. Priests, whose brightest
notions are stained and their light eclipsed by nature as they confess, but
thus it was not with Christ's Ministers, for their knowledge was in the spirit,
and what they knew was in and through the spirit, and they were changed in
nature, and their light which was Christ was above nature, and beyond nature,
and not eclipsed thereby, neither were they chained up in a cave of darkness
but were as candles lighted, and as a city set on a hill that could not be hid,
and they delivered forth to the world the pure truths of the Gospel of
Christ, which were not stained nor polluted, but pure and holy; And in that you
take notions to be substance, substance to be shadows; this is your great
ignorance and blindness, but thus do not the true ministers of Christ,
neither are their eyes dim, but the Lord is the light, and this promise is
fulfilled to his ministers whom he has sent; the Lord is become their
everlasting light, but to you his promise is not fulfilled whose eyes are dim
and sloth, great and heedlessnes inexcusable; as it was with the false Prophets
and Dreamers of old, whom the Lord never sent, and thus it is with these 15
Priests, according to their own confession; but the Ministers of Christ were
not so, neither were they in sin, nor in ignorance, but had received the
knowledge of God, and were known of him, and if the Minister be sinful, he is
not sent of God, but has run and never was sent, and his doctrine is despised,
and not profitable, for scripture in the mouth of the Devil, is but a
temptation, no more is the doctrine of sinful men, as taught by them, for if
the minister be sinful, he cannot convert sinners to God, nor turn them from
darkness to light, nor from Satan's power to God, which is the work of the
true minister that have received the gift of the Holy ghost; as its manifest
these men have not by their own confession.

Pr. We are presented with a necessity of acknowledging that the Light of the
moon with us is as the Light of the Sun, and the Light of the Sun as the Light
of seven days.

Ans. How does this confession of yours answer to your last? let all wise and
sober people judge, how confusion has uttered forth it self; what, your light
eclipsed, and you chaind up in a Cave of darkness, and your eyes dim, and yet
the light of the Son with you; as he light of seven days; is there any thing
in both these confessions, except ignorance and a heap of confusion and plain
contradictions, that all may see your own confusions out of your own mouths?
But who are come to the fulfilling of the promises of God where the light of
the Sun is as the light of seven days, sin and iniquity is blotted out, and
transgression is done away, and life and immortality is brought to to light,
and the glory of the Lord is revealed, and they that are in this promise, are
come out of the Apostasy, and out of the beasts kingdom of darkness, where
you yet remain as its manifest, for you be such as Christ said should come,
and as John saw were come, who went into the world and deceived nations, but
now the nations are gathering from you again, into the fellowship of the
mystery of the Gospel, which Gospel, that has been lost (I mean the receiving
of it by the Holy Ghost, and the preaching of it as the spirit of God gave
utterance) for many generations, but that gospel again is to be preached, and
it is going forth to nations, tongues, and people, and great Babylon shall be
confounded, and all her merchants shall weep and lament for her fall.

Pr. We the unworthy Ministers of Christ whose names are under written, having
waited upon God in a way of earnest prayer, have jointly agreed to communicate
our thoughts etc.

Ans. They that are true ministers of Christ are not unworthily so, nor in the
unworthiness, and being unworthy, to what purpose do ye wait upon the Lord?
for who are in the unworthiness, God does not hear nor regard, nor give his
answer to such, and ye having no answer from God, you must needs agree in your
thoughts, but have you nothing to communicate to your people, but your thoughts
which are vain? how shall thoughts convert any to God, or establish any in
him? and your prayers that are in darkness are not accepted of him; for who are
heard of the Father, are in Christ Jesus, and are new creatures, being changed
from death to life.

Pr. Our deep sense of the ignorance of our hearers puts us upon your prayers
to God, and Counsel one to another, what further course to take.

Ans. Indeed a sad complaint may be taken up concerning this matter, for
ignorance abounds, and many other grievous evils, in your Church, and amongst
your hearers, showing that your Church is not the true Church of Christ, nor
you Christ's faithful Ministers; but where or what is the ground of this
ignorance that is amongst your hearers? is not the Ministry in a great measure
the cause thereof, and does not the blind lead the blind, and have not you been
unjust and unrighteous in taking money and wages of People for teaching of
them, and yet they have not received knowledge but continues in ignorance? and
as for your prayers and council, the Lord takes no notice thereof till you
purge your selves of your iniquities, and how should you profit the people, and
bring them to the knowledge of God, while as yet your selves are shut up in a
cave of darkness as you do confess.

Pr. Speaking of your children you say; do not they come into the wo^ld with
souls naked as their bodies? nothing but filth upon the one, and nothing but
sin upon the other.

Answ. It is manifest then that you are unbelievers and have not received the
faith of Christ, but are your selves in an unconverted estate; for the Apostle
says concerning the believers children that they were holy, If you can receive
it, you may, but as for the soul that is immortal, for God breathed into man
the breath of life, and made man a living soul, and sin came by disobedience,
and that separates between man and God, who is pure, and has all souls in his
hand; but as for you who are in a Cave of darkne^s, the mystery of the soul is
from you hidden, but you confess it is by your means that sin is conveyed to
your children, yea, take it to your selves it is your work, and the Lord has
no hand in it, not in sin, nor in making sinners, and it is manifest you are
out of the power of God, remaining in iniquity, and are our of the Covenant of
reconciliation.

Pr. For sending children to us, we shall briefly offer the duty of it in these
particulars, we are to feed the Lambs of Christ as well as the sheep they are
part of our charge who are to watch over souls.

Answ. What are children now the Lambs of Christ, and were they in the last,
having nothing but sin upon their souls, being begotten and born in sin?
sinners are not the Lambs of Christ, but children of wrath, the Lambs of
Christ are such as are regenerated and born again, and as for feeding the
Lambs, how can ye do it, who are taking substance to be shadows, and shadows
to be substance? the bread of life ye know not which feeds the Lambs and the
sheep, but how many sheep and Lambs is found in your flocks? do not they by
their fruits the rather appear to be in the nature of of wolves and swine? let
their fruits witness against them, and as for your charge, who committed any
charge to you? and as for watching over the soul, the soul is immortal, which
you watch not for, but for money and hire, and casting People into prison if
they will not give it you, and causing the servants of the Lord to be
persecuted, these and such like are the fruits of the Priests of England, which
if you watched for the soul, It would be otherwise with you, but who can gather
grapes on thorns or figgs on thistles?

Pr. We should be full of affection to our selves if we desired to work upon
our hearers, and our Authority in Preaching is marred by unholy living.

Answ. We do believe you, and it is manifest to the whole nation; that your
unholy living marrs your Preaching; for unholy men have not received commission
from the Lord to Preach his word, so you have run and not been sent, and there
is no possibility of working upon your hearers by words who gives them so evil
examples by your practices, by your unholy lives: and no Authority of Gods
presence can be in your Preaching to convert sinners, till you repent and come
to live holily and like God, and this confession of yours has shamed you for
Christ's Ministers never made such a confession but they witnessed the Authority
of Gods presence in their Preaching, whereby they wrought upon their hearers,
and they answered their Preaching by a holy conversation, and did not mar
their Preaching by unholy living as ye confess ye do.

Pr. Sad one day will be the account of sleepy watchmen, blind seers, and dumb
dogs, that cannot bark to fright the wolves or warn the sheep.

Ans. Then look to your selves, for blind seers are such as does not convert
the People who speak imaginations of their own hearts and not from the mouth of
the Lord, and uses their tongues, when the Lord has not spoken unto them, and
Preaching for hire and devining for money, and seeking for gain from their
Quarter; and that cries peace to them that puts into their mouths, and
prepares war against them which does not, such are blind seers, sleepy watchmen
and dumb dogs, of whom you speak, whose account indeed will be sad one day,
and these are the wolves that must be frighted that do put on the sheep
clothing, but inwardly are Raveners and devourers, which went out from the
Apostles in the days of John, and which Christ prophesied should come, of
whose generation you are, and not of the generation of the sheep, who ever were
persecuted, and the Lord is beginning to affright you and to gather his sheep,
and this is the Lord fulfilling in his day.

Pr. Many Congregations still continue waste none compassionate to tell them of
the fire and brimstone from heaven for their sins, how many shot off a few
Pot-guns against their gross sins, and then lick them whole with ill applied
promises, but the blood of the People, shall be required at their hands.

Answ. Many Congregations are waste, and ten thousands of People are as a
wilness untilled or unploughed, or unplanted, in the way of Righteousness, and
the guilt of this will be laid upon the Teachers, who have long been teaching
and well paid for the work; and yet left whole Congregations waste, but it was
not so in the Apostles days, nor among their Churches who were in the faith of
Christ Jesus, but when the wolves in sheeps clothing entered, then began
Congregations to lie waste, which has continued for many generations, even
while the Beast, and the Whore has ruled over the Nations; all Nations has
laid waste and been void of truth to the Lord, and who is it except your selves
that does shoot Potguns against their gross sins, and then lick them whole? is
it not common to cry Peace to them that puts into your mouths, and to prepare
War against them that does not? and is it not common amongst you to apply
Justification by Christ to People that are unconverted, and unrenewed, and you
apply the promises to that birth that is not heir of the Kingdom? and this is
ill applied, and though you may cry against their unholy lives, yet your selves
being unholy, this is but hypocrisy, and sewing Pillowes under Arm-holes; and
the blood of People will God require at the hand of such Teachers and such
Shepherds.

Pr. The most faithful Messengers of Christ will acknowledge they came short of
their duty.

Answ. They that are faithful messengers of Christ, have the answer, well done
thou good and faithful servant; where did Paul, or John, or Peter acknowledge
they came short of their duty? has not thou slandered the servants of the
Lord, thinking them to be like your selves, and falsely accusing them that you
may seem Justified who are false messengers and comes in his name, when you
have no Commission from him? and you come short of every good work, but thus it
is not with Christ's true messengers, for they fulfill his will that sent them:
and it is the Lord that works in them whose they are, and whose duty they
perform by his spirit.

Pr. The best of us have stammering tongues in this great work, and often times
we do it coldly and by halves, like Pellipher we see but with one eye, like
Milkes, hear but with one Ear; like Unicorn push against sin but with one horn,
place not good Preaching in large speaking, Judge of a Minister by his brains
not lungs, by his heart not throat.

Answ. This is confessed to your own shame, who does your work coldly and by
halfes: it shows you have not the same spirit that was amongst the Apostles,
who were zealous, and faithful in the work of the Lord, and not coldly nor by
halves as you do: and they saw with their eyes and heard with their ears, and
their hearts God had opened, and they were a terror to all unrighteousness
where ever it appeared: and the way to Judge of a true Minister is not by his
brains, nor Lungs, nor throat, but whether he has received the Holy Ghost,
and whether they have the same spirit that was amongst the Apostles, and
whether the presence of the Lord be with them, and effects his own work through
them? these are the signs of Christ Ministers to Judge them by, so you have
missed the true Charecter to Judge justly, and your Judgment is false, and it
shows you are not guided by the infallible Spirit of God.

Pr. We must attend to the words of the Minister though himself be fruitless;
in which sense we may be said to gather grapes on thorns and figgs on thistles,
unsanctified Ministers may possibly convert and comfort sinners: though our
candle be in a dark Lanthorn, and the Saints know not what God is a doing.

Answ. Christ said either make the tree good, and his fruit good, or the tree
naught and his fruit naught, and none can gather grapes on thorns or figgs on
thistles, but you say the contrary and are pleading for fruitless Ministers
that they should be attended to, but the Apostle exhorted to turn from them
that had the form of godliness but not the power, and judge in your own selves
how your words agrees with Christ's and the Apostles, they appear to be quite
contrary; And unsanctified men, are not Christ's Ministers, nor Christ ever sent
unsanctified Persons, and they that run and were not sent, should not profit,
nor did not profit the People at all, could neither comfort Saints nor convert
sinners: but you are pleading for unsanctified Ministers and for sinful
Ministers, and says that People should not despise their Doctrine; Yea, the
Doctrine and words of unbelievers are despised and rejected by the Saints, and
though thou say Scripture is Scripture though uttered by Satan, yet I say
Scripture in the mouth of Satan is temptation and not edification; and it is
true your hearts are dark, and minds are dark even as a dark Lanthorn, we do
believe it, and the light in you shines in darkness, and is held in the dark
Lanthorn, and no light in you appears unto the dark world; but unholy lives and
unsanctified spirits, and you know not what God is a doing who are unbelievers,
but the Saints has the mind of Christ and knows what God is a doing; for his
spirit dwells in them, but you have shut out your selves that you are ignorant
of God and what he is doing, but Christ's Ministers their light shines among
men, and their good works are seen, but you have showed your folly and
ignorance to all the world.

Pr. But what if some what in the lives of Ministers, contradict the word they
preach; disorderly teachers are pretty well purged out, if any continue, it is
the fault of them that do not bring their wickedness to light, that such may
be rooted out, who make the offering to be abhorred, the sins of the teachers
being teachers sins.

Ans. The true Ministers of Christ, their conversations were in heaven, and
their good works and holy lives were agreeable to the word they preached on;
but disorderly teachers are not purged out; to preach for hire, is a disorder,
and to cause people to be put into prison, and to be persecuted, and to be
whipped, and to have their goods spoiled, these are disorderly practices, and
such are disorderly teachers, many of which there is yet unpurged out, but now
the Lord God is arisen to try and to purge, and to bring wickedness to light,
and to condemn the sins of teachers, and teachers for their sins, and such
shall be rooted out, whose offering is abhorred of the Lord, because iniquity
lodges in their hearts, and their lives are unsanctified contradicting in their
practices, what they preach in words, such are hypocrites whom God will judge,
and the Lord will utterly root you out in his season, you that are disorderly,
and out of the order of the true Church of Christ.

Pr. We do not thunder in our Pulpits, nor lighten in our conversations as we
might, our thundrings are no more heard by glorifying Christ then their
Halilujahs are by us.

Ans. You want the word of the Lord which is terrible, it is not in your
mouths, but the words of your own imaginations, and your words answer not to
the witness of God in the peoples consciences, but you are like the dreamers
the Apostle speaks of, whose conversations are bad examples to all that look
upon you, your unholy lives gives an ill savor, and does not enlighten any man
in the way of truth; and Saints, that are glorified does deny you, and hears
you not, excepting to give their witness against you, neither do you know what
the Saints Halelujahs are, who rejoices over the whore that has made all
nations drunk, but of these things are you ignorant, and you are shut out from
the assembly of them that can sing Halelujah to God and the Lamb for evermore.

Pr. It is treason to undertake an Embassage without commission, I sent them
not, yet they run says the Lord, not knowing why, nor whether, they can tell
no tidings for climing on high with the Ape, they do but show their own
deformity.

Ans. There is none more guilty then your selves of this treason, and out of
your own mouths will the Lord judge you, where is your commission, and what
is it? any other except such as the Pope gave to his ministers? having your
degrees in your schools and attaining from one art and office to another, till
at last you profess to be attained to the ministry, but this is not Gods way
of Commissionating, but antichrists way, and the Lord God is risen who will
confound it, for the Lord has not spoken to you, neither has he revealed his
glory to you, you have neither seen his shape nor heard his voice, neither is
the tidings you bring effectual to convert sinners, for you are climed up
another way, and enters not in at the door, and the Ape is truly your figure
for your deformity appears to the saints, and all the children of light does
see you and your original which came up in the falling away of the true
Churches, when antichrist took the Throne, and the man of sin got up into the
temple, which for many generations amongst you has shown himself to be God,
and has been worshipped as God.

Pr. The accomplices of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, who usurps the Priests office
were destroyed, a warning-peece for such as usurp the ministerial function
uncalled, and unordained, let them take heed, when they persume to vent their
illiterat, rude incoherence, and blasphemous stuff.

Ans. This belongs to your selves, ye men of unholy lives, who has usurped to
the ministry uncalled and unordained of the Lord, and by his spirit, and you
may take warning at Chorahs destruction whom the Lord shall as surely destroy
with the fire of his jealousy, for while the beast has had power over
nations, and the whore made Nations drunk, all this time has your authority
been exalted, by which you have been set up and your ministers without the life
that the true ministers were in, and without that call and ordination which
they had, for you are of man and by man and your effects not the work of the
true ministry of Christ, but are left desolate, and are desolate of the
presence of God, being your selves unlearned in the doctrine of Christ, venting
your imaginations, out of the truth, and out of the power of God, and there
stands your ministry.

Pr. Unsanctified ministers may possibly convert to God.

Ans. No, he that is unsanctified is out of the power of God, and the word of
God abides not in him, and he runs and is not sent, and it is not possible that
such can convert sinners, who are themselves unconverted from their iniquities.

Pr. That some learned Christians have been able to squees the greatest
mysteries of our Religion out of the writings of some Heathens.

Ans. This is the sum of your principles you 15. Priests, and here is the sum
of your ignorance and wretchedness discovered, and the vanity of your
Religion, whose foundation is the writings of heathens, and the heathens that
knew not God, out of their writings is your religion made up as you confess,
this is the whores Religion that sits upon the beast, that the world has long
wondered after, and not the true religion which the Apostles and true Churches
were in, and they are no Christians, no Saints, nor true Christians that goes
to the writings of Heathens to squees out mysteries, they that do so, are the
Christians in the Apostacy who are fallen from the life of righteousness, such
as you and thousands are at this day being without the spirit, and without
Christ, therefore you run to the Heathen for knowledge and shames true
Christianity, and true Christians, in reputing the heathen wiser then your
selves, who are feign to run to their writings to make up your mysteries, and
such is your religion, deceit and vanity, and the mystery thereof studied for
out of the heathens writings, this is Christianity in the Apostacy; and the
Religion apostatized from the life of true Christianity, for the true Christian
Religion, the foundation thereof is Christ, who is the mystery of God, and of
life, and salvation, and the mysteries of our true Christian Religion which we
live in, that are come out of the Apostacy, are revealed to us by the spirit
of the father that dwells in us, and is in all that are in the true Christian
Religion, who denies the Heathens and your Apostatized Christians, and are come
into the mysteries of eternal salvation, which is not squeesed by imaginations
of men, but revealed by the spirit of God, the great mystery Christ in us, and
the mystery of the Kingdom, all this is made manifest to us, and to true
Christians whose Religion stands in the power of God, and not in the tradition
of men, nor fetched from the Heathens writings, and this Religion will stand
for ever, but your Religion and mynistries, and Church will the Lord confound,
the author of whom is the heathens writings, and how then shall it stand, it is
out of the bottomless pit, and arises out of that; your Religion and
mysteries, and thither shall it be turned into the pit that has no bottom; oh
how have you blind leaders led the blind, that have been professing to teach
Christ this many years, and faith in him? and have you taken so much money of
the Nations? and do you now tell us that the greatest mysteries of your
Religion are squeesed out of the heathens writings? oh ye unrighteous men,
blind leaders, the Lord God Almighty is now risen, and the Nations can no
longer be satisfied with this Religion, but the Lord is a gathering out of your
mouths, and you must howl and lament, all the Idols dumb shepherds, and they
shall be confounded, and the souls delivered, of which they have made a prey,
for the souls of men have been the merchandise of Babylons merchants, they
have bought and sold the souls of men, they have blinded the eye of it and
trodden it down, and the immortal soul has not been respected otherwise then
to make merchandise thereof to get gain thereby, there has been many
traffickers since the days of the Apostles, that have made merchandises of
souls, but the judgment of the great Whore is come, and of Babylon the Mother
of Harlots, and the Lord God and the Lamb will plead against her, and the jaws
of the wicked shall be broken, and their hearts shall utterly fail in the
midst of them, and the Lord will reveal his righteousness from heaven, and by
his judgments shall he be known in the earth a mighty God and a dreadful, and
his dread and terror shall take hold upon your consciences, come down and sit
in the dust, for the Lords controversy is against you; he will bruise you with
an Iron rod, he will break you: as a potters vessel, and his hand ye shall not
escape, for ye are but like Briars and thorns in battle before him, and like
the stubble in which the fire is kindled, and you will be as the dross in time
of purging, and at reprobate silver, the Lord God has said it.

W. S. His Book called, A Parsons guide concerning of Tithes, and the Law of
Tithes.
Pr. ANd he says be supposes, That taking away Tithes from Ministers, but not
taking away Tithes from other men, etc.

Answ. The Law, that has set up Tithes, since the days of the Apostles, as
has the Pope, the false Church, the Whore, which the true Church set up none,
among the Apostles, and so they must be taken away from men as well as
Ministers both, for they have been set up by the Popes Law, and not by the Law
of God, since the days of the Apostles, but by the false Church, the Whore,
set up their Tenthes, and keeps People in the ninthes of the earth, withal
their images, for the true Priesthood that took Tithes, where was the
storehouse, and all the figures and Types and shadows, and took the Tenthes
of the earth, where was a storehouse, for all Widows and strangers to come
and fatherless, and be filled within their gates? but there is no such thing
among the Popes Church, not in Christendom, no such storehouse for Widows and
strangers and fatherless, but the Widows and strangers and fatherless begs up
and down at the Mass-houses doors, who sets up all his lying signs and
wonders, who has Tithes in the earth, that takes tenthes and keeps People in
the ninthes of the earth, but God has discovered them, and the false Church
that set them up, and their Law since the true Church went into the wilderness,
and the Apostles that Preached Christ, which witnessed the seed of God, which
ended all the figures and Types and shadows, and the tenthes and ninthes, and
Priesthood, and all Types, and figures, and shadows and bowings; brought to
the beginning to know the Election before the world was made, and so they
witnessed Redemption, and brings up out of the earth, into the everlasting
Priesthood, and Covenant out of the ninthes as well as tenthes, all offered up
to God, for signs was since the fall given to man, and Tithes since man was
driven into the earth: so man who comes to Christ the Church, comes out of the
earth to the beginning to reign upon the earth, and so the Papists are them
which lead the People into the earth, with all their earthly Images set up by
the earthly, such as went forth from the Apostles which has set up Tyths since
the Apostles and bring People quite into the earth with all their earthly
Images; and the Apostle brought them up out of the earth, and the Redemption
out of Types figures and shadows, and out of Tithes to the Election before the
worl^ was made, and so into the everlasting Priesthood, now the false Prophet,
Beast and Antichrist, great Whore, this woman, false Church which went forth
from the Apostles, brings People into the earth, from the life and Election
both, that none there is assured of it, but brings them into Images, and into
lying signs and wonders, and into ninthes and tenthes, and there does Nations
stick in the earth, out of the Image of God, and this has been set up by the
Beast, Dragon, Whore, false Prophets who had the sheeps clothing, out of the
sheeps life, and now with that seen, and with that judged.

Pr. And thou say, Tithes by our Law were counted an Ecclesiastical
inheritance, oblation, obvention, offerings, this was called mere spiritual as
were offered to God and Holy Church.

Ans. Here thou have drunken the whores cup, since the Church went into the
wilderness, and do men hold their estates by the Ecclesiastical Laws, ahd
ecclesiastical inheritance? indeed a Popish superstitious inheritance, and so
you may see from whence your inheritance comes now, and who has given it you,
which the Church of Christ never required any such thing, but set up since the
days of the Apostles has these things been, your oblations, obventions,
offerings, and this has been your C er, to say they were offered to God and
holy Church, and thou say, Tithes the tenth part has been given by the Law,
to the Ministers of the Gospel.

By the Ecclesiastical it has been given to Clerks and Vicars, and parsons,
and his Curates, by his Ecclesiastcal Laws, and thou say our Laymen by the
Common Law could not have had their inheritance descendable and grantable of
Tithe as of other temporal possessions, neither will they pass by the same
words in grant, as other temtemporall possessions will do. Then men do not
hold their temporal possessions by the Ecclesiastical Laws; but by that
which you call your, common Law, so all these Laws since the days of the
Apostle, the Pope, the whore, the false Church was the author of, got up since
the days of the Apostles, set up by them that went forth from the Apostles
into the earth, and there keeps people in the lying signs and wonders in the
earth, under the false Prophets, and must give them their Tenths, and put into
their mouths, and they live in the ninthes, though they have no storehouses
for widows, Fatherless, and strangers, and this is done by the corruptible
mystery Babylon, got up since the days of the Apostles, and their Church, by
us she is judged, and all their Ecclesiastical Laws and Government, with them
that be in the Law of Christ, and the Law of life, and the Church book, and his
power, that witness the judgment of the great whore is come, and the Lamb and
the Saints have victory, who are come into the power that the Apostles were in,
and these witnessed the marriage of the Lamb, Christ Jesus, in whom there is no
shadow of his turning, him by whom the world was made before it was made, who
was glorified with the Father before the world began, who ends the first
Priesthood, and his Tithes and storehouse, and redeemes men out of the earth,
up to God, from whence they have been drawn, to know the word of life, which
was in the beginning, by which all things was made, and who be in it, be in the
life, and the word of wisdom by which all things were made, and created with
which wisdom they know how to use all things again, to the glory of him that
created them, and in this men glorify God, in their bodies, ^oule, and spirit,
which is the Lords, amongst whom the blessing of God is felt, who in his
kingdom reigns, and the life and power of God dwells.

Thomas Hodges Bachellor of Divinity, Rector of Soldren in Oxfordshire, his
principle in a book called A Scripture Catechism, as follows, where he goes
about to confute Errors, who confuts himself among them.
Pr. THou say, What Godly heart without sorrow should see Christ's witnesses
prophecy in sackcloath?

Ans. In stead of your sorrowing, you are them that kills them, and persecutes
them, and prisons them, as many have prophesied in sackcloath, and ashes on
their heads in this Nation amongst you the false Church, in sheeps clothing,
since the woman went into the wilderness; so instead of sorrowing, you
persecute, and so consutes thy self, and thou art finding fault with the
Papists and Bishops of Rome, and speaking of their Errors, and found in them,
did not they set up the Tithes and the Masse-houses, and the Colleges where
thou wast made a Minister, and give you the names of Rectors and Curates, and
your means to your Colleges, and old Masse-houses? art not thou found in them
and among them, their errors, false Church, great whore, since the true Church
went into the wilderness, among them that drinks the blood of the Saints, with
sheeps clothing, having not the spirit, as the sheep had, nor in the nature,
so in the Error?

Pr. Thou say, The Scripture speaks of God after the manner of men.

Ans. The Scripture speaks of God after the manner of the Spirit, and to the
spirit, whereby men might receive him, and know him by the spirit, which
natural men cannot.

Pr. Thou Queries to know, whether the Holy Ghost be a distinct person, and the
worship of God in three persons.

Ans. Art thou going about to confute the Papists errors, and hold them up, and
justifying of them which the scripture does not, Mat. 28. but the Papists
common prayer book, and old Cannon book speaks of three persons, but the
scripture speaks of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, and thou speak of Christ,
but yet are not come to the Light which Christ has enlightened every man which
comes into the world withal, and thou speak of Adams being the Image of
God, and yet art not come to Adams state as he was in the beginning, so
therefore knows not redemption, and knows not predestination, nor election,
but found in Adams state in the fall and reprobation, thou speak of
Ordinances, and yet art a transgressor of the commands of Christ, who art
called of men Master, and an imitator of the Pharisees doctrines; thou speak
of the Church, but art found one of those that are dressed with the whores
rags, since the true Church went into the wilderness; thou speak of the
Magistrates, yet not in the higher power, which goes over all sin and
transgression, which answers the transgressed in every man upon the earth; thou
speak of Dogs, and evil workers, seducers and Heretics, who are doing their
work, as your Goales and prisons may witness in the Nation and whole
Christendom, the fruits of Dogs and evil workers, and seducers, and
heretics, which was not Christ's work nor the Apostles; Thou speaks of the
Common wealth, but yet art out of that which is the general good to all men,
Christ the light of the world, who is the saving health, all power in heaven
and Earth is given to him, in whom men have wisdom, by which all things was
made and created, to order the things by the wisdom by which they were
created; thou speaks of Soldiers, and yet art not come to John, a man sent
from God, but art one from the Colleges, the Papists houses since the Church
went into the wilderness, and men made by the will of man, who have been set
up by the dragons power, so art not come to the Light that John came to bear
witness to, that did enlighten every man that comes into the world, so art
short of rectifying solderie, who stops up the eye by which they should see;
thou speak of the error of the Quakers, who art found in the error thy
self, not come to see that which must be shaken, before that do appear which
cannot be shaken, nor come to the trembling of the Devils, not knowing the
strong man bow himself that has kept the house, who is at peace, who is the
author and ground of the error, and not he that is stronger then he that kept
the house, made the Devil tremble and shake the Earth where he has had his
foundation, yea and the heavens also; thou also speak of the first birth,
whose habitation is in the earth, and propriey there, who made me a divider of
men's inheritances, me who am the end of the Law? for the Law is just among you
to devide to every man his right, but I who am the end of the Law, redeemes you
from under the Law, and out of the earth, but you who are found in this first
birth in the earth, have set up your tenthes, and keeps people in the ninths,
your greediness of it your presence declares, thou speaks of mine and thine in
collections, so self you are found in, and your coldness incollections, the
blind and lame, Fatherless and widows, the streets in London declares you,
and the countries abroad, yet you are all Christians and baptized, and you
wear rings and scaries, and points, and others crying for bread, thou speak
of buying and selling, etc. who art arming thy self to hold up the honor of
the beast, which was simple words spoken, and as for your buying and selling
the fruits of the great whore has declared it self, made merchandise of
souls, and all other things, out of the Law of equity, which who acts in, acts
in the will of God; thou speak of good morrow, and good evening, and would
blind the world, though thou broughst scripture for it, and makes them believe
it is the Quakers error to say the contrary; the morning is good, and the
evening is good, and all is good that God created and made, as it was in the
beginning, but by transgression they come to be vile and evil, going out of
the truth, as things were created; and standing, in the truth are all blessed;
thou speak of giving of thanks, and craving a blessing, and yet you say you
must have a body of sin whilst you be upon earth, so your thanks and your
blessings, is from the unclean lips, in the mouth that blesses and curses, and
so proceeds from the bad fountain; thou speak of Christian Magistrates, and
higher powers, and thou speak of saluting and honoring, and bowing down
before men, who art not come to Christ the power of God, who has all power in
heaven and earth given to him, being not come to the light that does enlighten
every man that comes into the world, and has all power, who subjects all
Magistrates to himself, who does enlighten them to see him, and you are not
come to the Angels state, that said to John, see that he did not bow to the
Angel, but worship God, John who saw all the World worshipping the beast; in
the old time they had bowed to the Angel, but Christ is come to whom the
Angels must bow, and who is in him, has life and worship, and that is
honorable which is in the truth, for who honors God, God will them honor,
but honor to a fool is not seemly, but like snow in summer, and thou speaks of
Christ's Freemen, and thy choosing it rather then to serve Idolatrous Masters,
and these Freemen that have chosen their freedom, and cannot serve you,
Idalaters, who are spiritual Egypt, to work in the earth for you, to make you
brick to set up your building, you persecute them as Idolaters, you Imprison,
who have the form of godliness and denies the power; who will talk of the
words but deny the freedom, thou speak of, one sitting and an other
standing to serve at meat, and put yonr selves among the Pharisees, and does
not Christ serve the children at the table who is the Master? but in the world
there is the Lord-ship and exercising authority, and does not know their own
brethren; as Paul to Philmon, but Masters and servants as the Scriptures
declares is owned; thou speaks of Cains and Abels offerings, you who are the
persecuters and slayers, and prisoners of the just, offerers up of the Earth,
and are the City got up since the true woman went into the wilderness, but the
City of the living God is known again, and you are judged, and your false
Church. Thou speak of salutations and saluting enemies, how do you salute
those that you imprison till death for your Tithes? what a salutation is that?
and cause them to be whipped and imprisoned for speaking to you, this is like
Judas salutation to Christ when he betrayed him, and not the salutation of the
saints. Thou speaks of calling days by other names, then the first, second
etc. yes you and your mother the Papists Church, and the heathens, contrary to
the Jews, and true Apostles and true Christians, call them Moonsday and
Sunsday and Friday after the name of the great Idol in England, and Wensday and
Saturnsday, and this is contrary to the scripture and the form of sound words,
and contrary to the Law of God, which Judges the heathen, and every day is the
Lords; and many names you give to your Months, which the heathen is fain teach
you, thou speaks of Interpreting the word, and giving sense and meanings, and
thus with your Interpretations, and senses and meanings, you have brought whole
Christendom in heaps, your f^uits declare it to be out of the Scriptures, to
be out of the Spirit that gave it forth, so your own spirits give the meaning
in which lodges the Envy, and serve your own bellies, but it is the spirit that
leads into all truth and not you; thou speak of singular and plural, as
though thou neither knew Scripture nor accidence thou speak of the Ministers
going without gold and silver, brass, or purse or scrip, etc. yet you will not
go without augmentations, tithes and gleab-lands, amongst them you call
brethren, your baptized People, and thou speak of taking a purse, and scrip
and sword, and selling his garment to buy one, Christ did so to fulfill the
Law, and bids them put it up again, and said it was enough, who ends it, so are
out of the faith and patience of the Saints; thou speak of good men, and
calling them good; yes, I say such as be full of the Holy Ghost and of faith;
but wicked men, wolves and beasts would have this title, persecutors, warriers
and devourers, in sheep clothing, therefore is that angry which is exalted
above all that is called God, who sits in the Temple of God, that man of sin in
you all, who cannot have that given to him which is given to God, by them that
is in the deserning; Thou go about to prove the word Landlord, and would
thrust that in the Scripture which the Scripture speaks no such word; but the
Law of righteousness which comes from God, which is equal and just, and the
Prophets, to do as you would be done by; thou art speaking of the Angels that
said, nay, they would tarry all night in the street, and yet went in, the
Angels are servants, and their time is not come, and they may say nay, and yet
after see their time they must go in, thou speak of perfect, and yet in your
Doctrine say, none shall be perfect while they are upon the earth, and has
denied the work of the Ministry, so Profits People not at all, and thou say
who can understand the error of his ways, and that which thou do thou
allowest not, and sin remains in a man, then there the Devil has a habitation,
and there is death; but he that believes is passed from death, and so from the
sin, and that which gives a man to understand his error, turns him from his
sin; such as comes to know the anointing within them, that teaches them that
continues in the Son of God, and in the Father, these knows all things, but
such as be in the transgression, not denying themselves, know not the error of
their ways, as you may see your selves what you have run into, whose fruits
are come to Public view.

Pr. Thou speaks of Christ speaking in the Synagogue, and false Christ's, and
false teachers in corners and chambers and Ministers must prove by Scripture,
for with that they convince the Jews.

Ans. Christ went into the Synagogues, and the Apostles to show the fulfilling,
and he who was come to fulfill that which they had in the Synagogues, and the
Apostles showed them out of the Prophets and the Law that Jesus was the Christ,
and the Apostle was not a false Christ nor a false Teacher, who Preached in his
own hired house, nor the Saints that met in several houses, which were come off
of the Jews and Synagogue, but they are the false Teachers and false Christ's
that deny the light that does enlighten every man that is come into the world,
which Christ has enlightened them withal, and they are them that draw People
into corners, and Chambers and deserts, and say lo Christ is here, lo Christ is
there, that are gone and ravened from the light in their own selves that Christ
has enlightened them withal, and such are the corrupt trees that cumbers the
earth, whose fruits has sufficiently declared themselves, who are to be thrown
down into the fire, who will be condemned with the light which they have
ravened from, in their own particulars, and to you that is the word of the
Lord, in the day of thy visitation the witness in thy conscience shall answer
it; and as for all the rest of thy stuff, to the Papists, who would make People
believe thou wast not found among them, and their errors in this book, first
come out of the Papists work, before thou find fault with them and cry against
them, art not thou one of them that kills and takes possession? but the time is
come you are all comprehended, you and the Papists found in one bond, one cord,
one City against the elect, but he is over you all set, and the Judgment of
the great whore is come, which is got up since the true women fled into the
wilderness, and the man-child caught up to God, but now is the man child come
again to rule the Nations with a rod of Iron, and the Lamb, the bride, the
Lambs wife is known, and the mystery of iniquity is discovered, and the mystery
of godliness is revealed, and the Saints shall have victory, the beast and the
false Prophet shall be taken, and cast alive into the lake of fire, and the old
Dragon; and the everlasting Gospel shall be Preached to them that dwell upon
the earth, to all Nations, and kindreds and tongues, which is the power of God,
which brings People into unity with God and Scriptures, and the mystery of God
is revealed, and the mystery of iniquity discovered, and he that was dead is
alive again, and lives for ever more.

SEVERAL SCRIPTURES Corrupted by the TRANSLATORS.
Jude 14. BEhold the Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, in the Greek
it is, in ten thousands, (...).

Heb. 1.3. Express image of his person, gr. Substance, or Subsistence, (...).

Heb. 2.16. He took not on him the nature of Angels, in the Greek, (...), which
is by true interpretation, he does not take hold of Angels; as for the word
Nature, which is in our English Copies, there is nothing for it in the Greek.

Mat. 3.11. In Beza his Latin Testament, and our English Copies, it is
rendered, I indeed baptize you with water, and from the word with water, is the
act of Sprinkling pleaded for, in the Greek it is, I dip, plunge, or baptize
you in water, in it, (...).

Col. 1.23. In the Latin and English Copies it is thus, which was preached to
every creature which is under heaven; in the Greek it is, in every creature,
(...).

Luke 16.15. In the Latin and English Copies it is, that which is highly
esteemed among men, in the Greek it is in men, (...).

1 Cor. 15.31. In our English Copies it is, I protest by your rejoicing, etc.
Now I protest is added, for there is nothing for it in the Greek, (...).

1 Cor. 2.6. We speak wisdom among them that are perfect, in the Greek it is,
in them that are perfect, (...).

Romans 8.29. In the English and Latin Copies it is, that he might be the
Firstborn among many Brethren, in the Greek it is, in many Brethren, (...).

Mat. 28.19. In the English and Latin Copies it is, baptizing them in the name,
in the Greek it is, into the name, (...).

Mat. 6.7. In the English Copies it is, for they think they shall be heard, for
their much speaking, in the Greek it is, in their much speaking, (...).

1 Timothy 3.16. In our English and Latin Copies it is, great is the mystery of
Godliness, God was manifest in flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of Angels,
preached unto the Gentiles, in the Greek it is, preached in the Gentiles, (...).

Romans 11.2. In the Latin and English Copies it is, wot ye not what the
Scripture says of Elias, but in the Greek it is, in Elias, (...).

Heb. 1.1. God, etc. spoke to the Fathers, by the Prophets, in the Greek it is,
God spoke to the Fathers in the Prophets, (...).

Has in the last days spoken unto us, by his Son, in the Greek it is, has
spoken unto us, in his Son, (...).

Romans 15.6. That you may with one mind, and one mouth glorify God, in the
Greek it is in one mouth, (...).

Romans 1.19. In the Greek, Latin, and English Copies it is, (speaking of the
Gentiles) that which is known of God, is manifest in them, or made known in
them, though some dare say, and do say, among them.

Amos 3.6. Shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? this
is the English Translation; in the Hebrew it is, shall there be evil in (...)
^^y, and shall not the Lord do somewhat?

Heb. 5. last. Strong meat belongs to them that (...) full of age: in the
Greek it is, Strong meat belongs to them that are perfect, (...)

John 8.6. In our English Copies it is, Jesus s^oo^ed down, and with his finger
wrote on the ground, as though he heard them not, as for the words, (as though
he heard them not) they are added by the Translators, for there is nothing in
the Greek for them, (...).

John 1.14. The word became flesh, and dwelt amongst us, in the Greek it is, in
us, (...): By true interpretation it is, the Word became flesh, and pitched his
Tent in us.

Heb. 10.20. In the English Copies it is, by a new and living way, in the Greek
it is, of late slain, and living way, (...) properly signifies, recens
mactatus, lately, or of late slain, says Leigh and Pasor, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).


IF any one want Light, let him look upon the Law and the testimony whether
they speak after this meaning; If he do not this, he stumbles and suffers
hunger, and if he suffer hunger, he is not patient, but blasphemeth his King
and his God, then looks he upward and downward to the earth, and behold there
is trouble and darkness, vexation is round about him, and the cloud of error,
and out of such adversity shall he not escape, even like as in time past it
has been seen well this is the old Translation, Isai. 8.

New Translation thus. To the Law and to the Testimony, if they speak not
according to this word, it is because there is no light in them; and they shall
pass through it hardly bestead and hungry, and it shall come to pass that
when they shall be hungry, they shall fret themselves, and curse their King and
their God, and look upward, and they shall look unto the earth, and behold
trouble and darkness, and dimness of anguish, and they shall be driven to
darkness, Isai. 8.20.21, 22.

Old Translation, Prove. 23. when thou sit at the Table with a Lord, order
thy self mannerly with the things set before thee; measure thine Appetite, and
if thou will rule thy own self, be not over greedy of his meat, for meat
beguiles and deceives.

New Translation thus: When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider
diligently what is before thee, and put a knife to thy throat if thou be a man
given to Appetite; Be not desirous of his dainties, for they are deceitful
meat, Prove. 23.1, 2 3.

Old Translation, Amos 3. Cry they out Alarm with the Trumpet in the City and
the people not afraid? comes there any plague in a City without it be the
Lords doing?

New Translation thus: shall a Trumpet be blown in the City, and the People not
be afraid? shall there be evil in a City, and the Lord has not done it? Hosea
5.6.

In the first Chapter of the Heb. 3. in the new Translation it is said, who
being the brightness of his glory, and the express Image of his Person.

But in the old Translation it Reads thus: being the brightness of his glory,
and the very Image of his substance.

The 2 Cor. 2. Chapter the last verse, in the English it is, we do not corrupt
the word, but in the Latin it is, we do not sell the word for money.


