A Vindication OF AN UNDERTAKING OF Certain Gentlemen, In Order to the
Suppressing of DEBAUCHERY, AND PROFANENESS.

LONDON, Printed in the YEAR, 1692.

THE PREFACE.
THat which follows, had, for the substance of it, appeared abroad before now,
but for the strange Imprudence of a Printer, and base treachery of a certain
Licenser; who was entrusted by him (wholly unawares to the Writer) with an
imperfect Copy, which was promised to be returned home again, to have added or
altered what should be thought fit.

And whosoever shall be Offended at what is here Published, as taking
themselves to be disobliged by it, I assure them it is not written from the
least Ill Will to any Person in the World, but from the greatest Good Will; and
that not only to the best of Causes, but also to those Men who are most like
to be incensed.

Methinks I hear now our cautious Politico's asking, What ayls this Person to
be thus Busily Interposing in the Behalf of those, who must needs by their
extraordinary Zeal be Exposing themselves to the high Displeasure of some, and
the Censures of others, as a sort of Hotheaded and Rash Men? But if they will
vouchsafe to read what is here written, I hope they will see no just Cause to
Accuse him of being Over-Busy. But indeed, though the Apostle says, It is good
to be always zealously affected in a good thing: And though their cool
Wisdomships can be as Hot as their Neighbors in their own Concerns, yet it is
ordinary with many of them, to pass sly Reflections upon all Religious Zeal. But
why Zeal should not best become a Cause, wherein the Honor of Almighty God is
most highly concerned, and our Country-Mens Happiness in the World to come, and
this World too, they are too Wise to offer at a Reason.

But they will Object, That the Ill-timeing of a good thing will make it
Chargeable with Indiscretion. And who knows not this? But how can Zeal for so
good a thing as the Reformation of our Manners, be ever Ill-timed? What is
Absolutely necessary, it is impossible should be set about Unseasonably And it
Argues a mighty Distrust of the Divine Providence, to fear, from the Angering
of the Vicious Part of the Kingdom, any Evil that can be greater, than the Good
of suppressing Vice, or so great. Nay, this savours of downright Infidelity and
Irreligion. Nor seems it much less Culpable to think, That the disobliging of
Wicked Men will be a weakening of this Government. For it is so far from being
true that the Governments giving all possible Discouragement to Vice may be a
Means to endanger it, that nothing can conduce more to the strengthening and
securing thereof, nor so much neither; and that naturally, as well as through
the Blessing of God Almighty. Honest Tully has told us as much as this comes
to. The Offense which profane and vicious Men may take at the Government, is a
mere Scarecrow; For so long as they see it for their Interest to Adhere to it,
there is no Fear but they will; and they will put on a show of being Reformed,
nay and Ape a Zeal too for Reformation, rather than hazard their Preferments
under it, or their Prince's Favor: And it is certain that the Government can be
secure of such no longer than their Interest holds them fast to it, though their
Vices should be never so much connived at. But it has been much observed both
in City and Country, that those whose Conversations are none of the strictest,
did yet upon this Execution of the Laws with some Briskness, express great
liking of it, in hopes of having for the future, their Children and Servants
under better Government. And the Truth is, the Height of Viciousness, to which
the Youth of this Nation, and especially of this City, are arrived, is a most
Melancholy Subject to reflect upon; but not to be Wondered at any more, than
that bad Examples should be more powerful than good Precepts. And this presents
us with as sad a Prospect, of the Age's being still more and more Corrupted,
and of the next Ages proving worse than this, if more Time should be lost, and
the setting in great earnest on the Work of Reformation be longer delayed. And
I need not add, that the longer it is so, the Work will every Year be the more
difficult.

A Vindication OF AN Undertaking of Certain Gentlemen, etc.
THE most deplorable Degeneracy of this Nation in its Morals, occasioned by the
Encouragement, which for many years together, (for a well-known Reason) was
given to Vice, raised in the minds of serious People, very strong Apprehensions
of approaching Judgments; and accordingly very great ones came down upon us;
and Two such, as no Age has paralleled in these Kingdoms, within a few years
after the Return of King Charles. But those having produced nothing of
Reformation, they were followed with others from time to time; and these
likewise being lost upon us, at length we had all the reason in the World to
look for the heaviest Calamities that could befall us, viz. Popery and Slavery;
but when these were at the door and just entering, so infinitely Merciful was He
to us, Whose ways are not as our ways, nor whose thoughts as ours, as strangely
to surprise us with a happy Deliverance.

And the blessed Instrument thereof, with His most Virtuous Consort, being by
God's wonderful Providence placed on the Throne, never were so great Hopes
conceived as now, of an effectual Reformation,

But alas, in a short time it was too apparent, that this Deliverance came too
soon, to be much valued by such a People, as generally We were. It found us
miserably unqualified to receive it, and the Returns we have made to the Divine
Goodness for it, speak us no less unworthy of the continuance of it. For
neither has the First Part of the Deliverance, nor the many amazing things God
Almighty has since done, both at home and abroad, toward the perfecting and
securing thereof, had any visible good Effect upon us. But those Vices which
before reigned, and cried to Heaven for Vengeance, do reign still as much as
ever; and those who were filthy before, let God use never so powerful Means for
the cleansing of them, will be filthy still; as if, to speak in the Prophets
Language, They had made a Covenant with Death, and were at an Agreement with
Hell.

And whereas we have very good Laws for the suppressing of Vice, I will not say
how very few have hitherto showed, any thing of Zeal or an hearty Concern
(notwithstanding the highest Obligation) for the Execution of them: Nor from
how many nothing is to be expected, but an extreme Aversness to a Reformation.

But to come to the Business of these Papers: Certain pious Gentlemen, all of
the Church of England, laying greatly to heart these things, resolved to make
Trial, whether any thing could be done, toward the giving a Check to
Debauchery and Profaneness; and jointly agreed upon this following Method for
the Reforming of Offenders in those Two most scandalous Instances, by due
Course of Law, viz.

First, To endeavor the procuring of a Letter from the Queen (the King being
then absent) to the Justices of the Peace for the County of Middlesex,
requiring them to put the Laws in Execution against Drunkenness, Uncleanness,
Swearing, Cursing, Profanation of the Lords Day, etc.

Secondly, To endeavor the obtaining a good Order of Sessions to be made
thereon. And Her Majesty having (like Her self) most cheerfully granted the
humble Request of the Lord Bishop of Worcester, for such a Letter; and having
accordingly sent a very pious and pressing one to those Justices; and the
Justices having thereupon published an exceeding good Order, These Gentlemen,
encouraged with this good Success;

Thirdly, Made it their Request to many of their Acquaintance, whom they knew
to be Sober and Religious Persons, to give Information to some Justice of the
Peace, of all Offenses of the forementioned Nature, which they should observe
to be committed; as by the Order of Sessions they are encouraged to do.

And that all possible Ease might be given to the Informers, the Justices, and
their Clerks:

1. They Printed Blank-Warrants against the several Offenses.

2. They procured diverse Persons (to the Number of Eighteen or Twenty)
inhabiting in convenient places of the City and Suburbs, to fill up such
Warrants, as the Case should happen to be; for the Informers, who should carry
the same to the Justice; by which means he would have nothing more to do, but
to Examine them upon Oath, and Sign and Seal the said Warrants. And,

3. To ease the Justices Servant of the trouble of carrying every Warrant to
the proper Officer, the Informer was to take his Warrant back with him to the
Person who filled it up; from whom there was care taken to have it received and
executed; as will appear presently.

That the Penalties might be duly applied to the use of the Poor, and not
imbezel'd by the Constables or Churchwardens, they took this Method.

1. They directed every Person who filled up the Warrants, to keep an Account
or Register of the several Offenders Names, the Offense of each, the Time when,
and Place where each Offense was committed: And, when the Informer had brought
him back the Warrant, to insert also the Name of the Magistrate, before whom
each Conviction was made;

2. They appointed a special Messenger, and paid him well for his pains, to
Collect all the said Warrants and Registers weekly; and, after they were
sorted, to carry them out again to the proper Officers of the several Parishes
where they were to be executed; and to insert the Names of the several
Constables, to whom each of the said Warrants should be delivered, in the said
Registers.

3. They prepared an Abstract of these Registers, to be presented to the
Justices at their Petty-Sessions, for the enabling them to call every Constable
to an Account, how he had executed the several Warrants he was Charged with in
that Register; and to what Churchwarden he had paid the Penalties by him
levied.

4. A short Account was to be taken out of all those Abstracts, by which to
Charge the several Churchwardens, at the making up of their Accounts with all
the Money by them received on those Warrants, in order to their sending it to
the several Vestries once a Year.

And lastly, To awaken all good Christians throughout the Kingdom, Whether
Magistrates or private Persons, to a vigorous endeavor for a Reformation of
Manners, They set the good Example of the Justices of Middlesex, and the
following as good a one, of the Lord Mayor of London, and Court of Aldermen,
before the rest of the Nation. For which purpose they caused the Orders of the
said Sessions and Court, to be Printed in a smaller Character; and of these
they sent several Thousands throughout the Kingdom, viz. To most
Parliament Men, Mayors, Bailiffs, Justices of the Peace, Ministers,
Coffee-houses, etc. and the Printing and Postage too were wholly at their own
Charge.

And, Thanks be to God, they quickly saw-extraordinary good Effects hereof, in
the excellent Orders of the like nature, made by the Cities of York, etc. And
by the Counties of Surrey, Hertford, Buckingham, Bedford, Sussex, Gloucester,
the North Riding of Yorkshire, and diverse others, of which many have been
printed.

And there was perceived in a little time very good Success of their Endeavors
at home, by the manifest ceasing in a great measure of the Profanation of the
Lords Day; and the Awe that appeared upon many Common Swearers and Drunkards,
who either felt, or had Notice of, the Execution of the Laws against such
Offenders.

But for as much as another sort of Informers, who had been so busy a few
Years since, htah made that Name odious to inconsiderate People; and that the
restraining of Licenciousness, is ever extremely grievous to the Licencious,
'twas necessary that the Justice should be desired by the Informer to conceal
his Name from the Offender: There having been too many Instances of late, not
unknown to the Justices, of those, who, instead of amending by the gentle
Punishment of one Sin, have added more to it, by reeking their Revenge on such
as Informed against them, with great Barbarity. I say the concealing the
Informers Name, for this Reason, ought to be judged necessary; especially when
he is ready to appear, and prove the Fact to the Face of the Offender, in case
he persists in the denial of it. And Care was taken, that in this case the
Informer should adventure to appear, although the Law does not oblige to it; as
will be seen anon.

This is an exactly true, but imperfect Narrative of the undertaking of these
Gentlemen; and is it possible it should need a Vindication? Who would not now
wonder that such a Word as this should be seen in our Title Page? For can there
be a Nobler Design laid, than that which is directly and solely for the
Advancement of the Public Good? And is not that Good, which comprehends both
the Spiritual and Temporal Interest of the Public, the incomparably greatest
Public Good? And is not he a Brnte who needs to be told, that the Reformation
of Mankind, and Running down of Vice, is such a Good as contains in it both
these Interests? But this was the only Design of this Undertaking. And it has
been showed, that it was not limited to the Reformation of one City, or one
County, but it extended to the whole Kingdom. And a due Countenance from those
who are principally obliged to encourage it, must needs cause it to have in
time, an happy Influence upon both the other Kingdoms. And Then, how much
farther in the World it may by Gods blessing reach, HE only knows.

Moreover, these Gentlemen were so far from designing to serve Themselves by
this Undertaking, that, as they were not capable of getting one Penny for their
pains, so they expended in the carrying of it on, considerable Sums out of
their own Purses.

Nor can they with any Justice or Charity be censured, as designing the
Applause of the Sober and Virtuous part of the Nation, (as highly as they
deserve it) for we are wholly beholden to their Enemies for our knowledge of so
much as One of the Undertakers, or of the Undertaking it self. And those who
received the Printed Orders all over the Kingdom, were perfectly Ignorant from
whose hands they came.

And as to the foresaid Method they agreed on, for the Managing of this Design,
it as little needs a Vindication as the Design it self; and is so far from
being liable to be taxed with Imprudence, that I (for my part) must needs
profess, I greatly admire the Wisdom of the Contrivance. I Challenge those who
dare to Reproach it, to show Any Project better fitted for the Attainment of
its End, than this throughout is. It Is scarce Civil to desire them to Mend it
Themselves, since there is no Employment they can be more Averse to.

In short, it is a lamentable Instance of the Debauchery of the Age, That it is
not a piece of great Impertinence to publish a Vindication of Such an
Undertaking. But so it is, That the Clamours of Delinquents, which, where they
are readily received, shall never be wanting, served for an Occasion to Certain
Gentlemen, whose Own Conversations will not suffer them to be reconciled to the
thoughts of a General Reformation, to Calumniate it, with the Persons concerned
in it; and to do their utmost to Overthrow it. All the Tales of punished
Ale-House-keepers and other Criminals, were by Them immediately received as
Gospel, when told by such dis-interessed and unbyast people; and hereupon they
fall to Work. And no Wonder, for if the Prince of Darkness had not Now
bestirred himself, to Baffle a Design so directly levelled against his Kingdom,
this would doubtless have been the very First time of his being unconcerned
upon such an Occasion.

And First these Persons satisfied themselves a while with playing at Small
Game; and among other most Notorious Untruths, they gave it out with great
assurance, That there was a wonderfully gainful Office lately set up in
Lincolns Inn, where Hundreds of Pounds were already gotten by the Erecters of
it. And what great pity is it, provided the Tempting Wages could have
reconciled them to such Loathsome Work, that Themselves had no interest in the
Stock going there? By my consent, they should have had Shares Gratis upon that
condition; nay, could they have been hired thereby not to Hinder Business, the
Founders of the Office should have done all the Drudgery, and They should have
all the Gains, but that the Poor ran away with every Farthing.

And, by the way, the Informers too who were engaged in this Undertaking,
refused to receive a penny of the Penalties in those Cases wherein the Law
allows them the Third part. They desired no other Reward for so good a Work,
than what they are sure to have in the Other World, and would have only their
Labor for their Pains in This.

And when it appeared to every body by the Form of the Warrants, that the
Constables were to pay the Money they had Levied upon Offenders, to the
Churchwardens, for the use of the Poor, the foresaid persons found that a Lie
could do them very little Service, which was every whit as easily detected as
told.

And now from Talking they proceed to Action, and it is well known how the First
Blow was given to this Undertaking; though several Worthy Justices of the
Peace, to their Honor be it spoken, heartily interposed for the prevention of
it.

In order to it, they in the first place fell very heavily on Mr. Hartley, a
virtuous person, who had given as a Justice, all possible encouragement to this
Best of Works. He was loaded with diverse Accusations of Injustice in his
Proceedings; and those on which the greatest Weight was laid, were the Two
following, wh^^^ (...) Reader may judge of the rest. And perhaps they were both
True as to matter of Fact, whatever they were as to their Faultiness.

One was, That in one of his Warrants the Name of the Landlord of an Ale House
was inserted instead of the Tenant's who kept the House.

The other, That in another Warrant a Woman was called by the Name of her dead
Husband, after she was again Married.

Now as to the Former, it is said, That the Landlord also lived in the House;
so that 'twas unknown to many which of them was Master of it: However, the
House was ascertained in the Warrant, and the Offense against the Law, there
committed, positively Sworn to

And as to the Latter, It Is ordinary among the meaner sort, to call Women, at
least for some time after their second Marriages, by the Names of their former
Husbands: And those who had not heard of the Husbands death, might without any
great Offense presume him to be still Living. Nor was it necessary that all who
knew of his Death, should know that his Widow was a Wife again.

These are the only Objections which we find particularly assigned against Mr.
Hartley's proceedings, and therefore Unpardonable Faults no doubt! But the best
of it is, they were the Informer's not the Justice's. But can any one of those
who have made such ado with these two Trifles, make any body believe that His
Justiceship (if he be in Commission) was never so imposed on? He has had very
little Custom, or very great Luck, if it never was. But old Aesop has helped us
to a true Proverb: It is an easy thing to find a Staff to beat a Dog. But
suppose these Two were Culpable Mistakes, for want of due Caution, as those who
have made such mighty matters of them, cannot think them so in the Justice, and
scarcely in the Informers: I wish they would seriously consider, what means
that Question of our Blessed Savior; Why beholdest thou the Mote which is in
thy Brothers Eye, and perceivest not the Bean that is in thine Own Eye? O how
happy would it be for, especially some of Them, were They chargeable with no
worse Mistakes, or lay they under the scandal of nothing worse than Mistakes!

Such Little things as These, and which are as soon rectified as perceived,
would be easily over-look't for the sake of the Greatness and Nobleness of the
Undertaking, by all such as heartily desire a Reformation; nay, by those who
are but able to bear the thoughts of it: Nay, one would think too, by those
who, though they would fain have none, have so much Modesty remaining, as to be
ashamed Openly to Oppose it. Which sure none can have the impious Bravery to
do, but such as would make a true Story of the Fiction of the Giants, by
designedly fighting against GOD Himself, if they believe there is one. And as
it is eminently HIS Cause in which these Pious Gentlemen engaged themselves; so
no Christian can doubt, nor scarce a hearty Theist, whether God has a Special
Hand in all Undertakings of this nature; nor whether those who are employed in
them are HIS Instruments; Called, Spirited and Assisted by Him: I mean on
supposition, that they carry on their Work by Lawful means, and transgress not
the Bounds of those Stations in which Providence has placed them. But Malice
it self may be defied to show any one Instance, wherein these persons (the
Undertakers I mean) have not strictly kept to the observance of Humane, as well
as the Divine Laws; or acted out of their own Sphere.

It is evident by the foresaid Narrative, that there was nothing in their
Undertaking, but what they had at least Liberty from our Laws to do, nay, a
Commission (I mean a general one) from GOD to do; and the Queens Commission
too, may be easily made out of Her Majesty's most Gracious Letter, for what
they have done; could they stand in any need of it.

As to any particular Objections against any part of the Proceedings of either
the Undertakers or the Informers, the World will quickly be satisfied by a
better hand, that they are both trifling and false; and therefore I will wholly
wave them. Mr. Hartley will be also Vindicated from the other Objections made
against him in the Execution of his Office; but I cannot forbear to touch upon
Two more of These.

One was, That he played the Busy-Body in Acting out of his own Division. And
it is true, that he did So act, but not that he was a Busy-Body in so doing.
For, as he did it not but when 'twas Necessary, so he had expressly Violated his
Justices Oath, if he had refused it.

The Other was, his Convicting Offenders, without bringing Them and their
Accusers face to face. Now, besides what has been said to This already, which
shows the necessity of his frequently so doing, so the Law ought not to be
understood as being against it: For the same Magna Charta which says, That No
man shall be Condemned Unheard; says also, That No man shall be disseized of
his Goods or Life, but by a Trial per Pares, that is, by a Jury of Twelve Men;
and if in This an Act of Parliament has dispensed as to Goods, by impowering
one Justice to Convict and to Levy by Distress, it may well be construed so to
do in the Former Clause; especially when there is no proportion between the
Crime and the Punishment: I mean, when the Crime is very Great, and the
Punishment as Little; and This not to be inflicted but by a solemn Conviction
upon the Oath of a Credible person, and in some cases of Two; and the Oaths
likewise of such, as get not one Farthing of the Penalty.

This is as much as we design to say, relating to the First Blow that was given
to this Undertaking. A Second soon followed it, and this proved a Smart one.
And Gods will be done, if there is no remedy to be had. But there is little
likelihood of Any, should Good Men be so sheepish, as to conceal, or only vent
to one another, their sorrowful Resentment of fierce Oppositions to
Reformation, and such an open Contempt as is now cast upon the best of Queens,
in discountenancing a Design so well adapted to the promoting of the Business
of her Excellent Letter; and of the great Encouragement given to Licencious
public Houses; ^^ops ^^^ent ^^ar^^
of several instances of which, diverse Bishops, to their no small Trouble,
have been Ear-Witnesses.

There is an Objection which has been too often made against the Restraining
of such Houses, viz. That their Majesty's Excise will be greatly Lessened by
this means. But who is able to think it can be Grateful to such a King and
Queen as we are now Bless't with, to have Their Revenue enlarged by the Sins of
Their People? Who can be Ignorant, that there is nothing they would more
Abominate? Or that their Majesty's do not need to be told, that their Revenue
must most certainly be exceedingly diminished by the Poverty of their Subjects;
And nothing is more observed, than that that Multitudes of them do every year
bring Themselves and Families to a Morsel of Bread, by being permitted so much
Drink; expressly contrary to our Laws, which lay great Restraints upon
Drinking-houses, and Drinkers in them; not only on Sundays, but the Week-dayes
too.

Possibly some may object against the Matter of these Pages, that Advice of the
Poet:

Dum Furor in cursu est, etc.
When you see Fury ride full speed,
Get out of the way of Fury's Steed.
And censure it as too Heady an Act, now Vice is so Rampant, thus to expose our
selves to the Rage of the Vicious.

But it may be replied, That whosoever is heartily concerned at Vice's being
now so Rampant, must have the Soul of a Nit, if he fears looking it in the Face
in such a Reign as this. If he be more afraid of Debauchees and Profane Persons
in King William's and Q. Mary's Reign, than many were of Papists and Jesuits
in King James's. Or apprehends more danger in Attacquing those now, than these
then, without the Leave of a Licenser.

And as to the Governments having any Reason to be afraid of provoking them, I
add to what is said in the Preface, that Vice is a Dastardly Cow-hearted,
thing, and always sneaks when bravely born up to; having nothing to plead in
its own Defense. But could vicious Men invent any thing to say for themselves,
they are still self-condemned. Their Vices also make them too soft and
effeminate, to carry on with any Vigor a dangerous Design. Nor can they
confide in one another, in laying a Conspiracy, as having no Principle to
secure Fidelity: So that there is not the least Fear of their being too hard
for the sober part of the Nation; of which I hope there are an Hundred to one
on the side of the Government.

Were those who bear an implacable Enmity to any thing of Reformation, only
injurious to their own Souls, the Charity we have for them, might have
forbidden us to be silent, upon such an occasion as is now given us; much less
then can we have any Temptation to be shy of Offending them, when we consider
how extremely the Public, and Their Majesty's Great Affairs have suffered by
them, and are still like to suffer; and what heavy Judgments ought to be
expected from a most highly Provoked God, for the Toleration of so much
Wickedness, after as great Obligations as ever were laid upon a Nation.

Now the Third Time draws on a pace, when He, who is the Light of our Eyes, and
the Breath of our Nostrile, designs to expose his Sacred Person for our Safety,
and the Welfare of all Christendom, to such Dangers as nothing but the
Courage of a Matchless Hero could encounter: And therefore it is more than
time, that a more effectual Course than ever be taken to run down those Enemies
at home (our Reigning Sins) which may do, through God's just Judgment, our Potent
Enemy abroad more Service, than all the Preparations he has made against us.
And in Order thereunto, to take all possible Care, that none be entrusted with
the Business of Reforming others, who need as much as any to be Reformed
themselves. As also to give all Encouragement to those, whose hearts God has
inclined to give their Helping Hand to a Work of such Absolute Necessity. We
may be much afraid to think of the King's again leaving us, before this be
done, or at least a doing.

POSTSCRIPT.
ANd, Thanks be to GOD, and Their Majesty's, since this was written comes the
happy News, of this Work's being again encouraged, by a most pious
Proclamation, and that since followed by a considerable Alteration in the
Commission of the Peace for Middlesex and Westminster, by Her Majesty's special
Command; wherein are placed most of those Gentlemen, who are lately become
known to have been concerned in this Noble Undertaking: And I pray God the
Success of it may be Answerable to Her Majesty's pious Design.

FINIS.

