AN ANSWER To Doctor Burgess his Book, entitled, A Case concerning of buying
Bishop Lands which he spread before the Parliament.

Wherein he goes about to justify, that Tithes is the Ministers of the Gospels
maintenance.

In which answer it is plainly showed, how that tenths was the maintenance of
the Priests under the Law, and for the relief of Widows, strangers and
fatherless, and not the maintenance of the Ministers of the Gospel, who was in
Christ the power of God, which brings people out of the Earth. And how Tithes
was set up by God, in the time of the War, and in the time of the Law, since
man was drove from God into the earth, and the seed came into the earth? And
how that Christ (by whom the World was made) redeems men (out of the Earth, and
ninths, and ends tenths) up to God, (who is the heir of all things) who ends
the war and the Law, and brings peace on earth, and good will toward all men.

Moreover it is here showed, how the Law served but until the seed came: And
that the Ministers of Christ did not run with a storehouse to gather up tenths,
but they brought people out of the ninths of the earth, and trod out the corn,
here the election was known before the World began.

It is also shown how the Tithes that now are, have been set up by the Papists,
the Apostates since the days of the Apostles, and since the true Church fled
into the Wilderness, Rev. 12.

And this is to be delivered to each Parliament man to be read over, and they
may see that in it which they never saw before: and for all people it may be
profitable to read.

The strength of the Doctors arguing for Tithes, answered, according to the
Scripture, and overturned by G. F.

London, Printed for Tho. Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth, near Aldersgate, 1659.

Doctor BURGESS his Principles for Tithes, page 7.
FIrst, That Tithes are the proper maintenance set out by God, for the
Ministers of the Gospel, and cannot be alienated, (or taken away) without
sacrilege.

Secondly, Tithes are due by Divine Right to Ministers of the Gospel.

Page 8. That all yearly Tithes of Cattle, Fruit, and of all things else are
still due by Divine Right to Christ, and by him are given to his servants the
Ministers of the Gospel, and may not be alienated; his proof, Numb. 18.26. When
ye take of the children of Israel the Tith^^ which I have given you from them
for your inheritance, etc. Hence he charge with Sacrilege such as detaineth
either of these from the Priests and Levites, as robbers of the Lord, of Tithes.

And Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck, the tenth of the spoil to the high
Priest of God, at least in Tipe, for Christ himself is a Priest for ever, after
the same Order, who has the same Right to Tithes as Melchizedeck had.

Therefore all yearly Tithes are the proper standing maintenance set out by God
for the Ministers of the Gospel, in all settled, well-grounded, Christian Common
Wealths: which in the obedience to God, made laws for the due payment of them,
for they still belong to Christ as his Inheritance and Portion, payable to his
Ministers by way of homage, as Right from all his people.

And to put them to any other use is Sacrilege, not only in those who aliene,
(or are strangers) from them, but also in them who possess and employ them, if
they be not Ministers of Christ, and preach not the Gospel, or procure some
other, if themselves be sick or disabled to do it.

It being no other but robbing of Christ, of what is his proper due, and by God
made Holy to himself; page the ninth.

ANSWER, FIrst, All Tithes has been since the fall, since man was drove from
God, and has been out of his Image, he being drove from God into the earth; so
Tithes has been set up since the beginning, since man has been in the earth.

First, Abraham paid Tithes to Melchizedeck, the King of Righteousness, the
Priest of the most High God, out of the spoil, when he came from the slaughter,
who met him with bread and water. But it is not said that Melchizedeck took of
the spoil of all Wars, but once of Abraham; and it is not said, he took Tithes
of Abraham's substance, or of every man's substance, nor of any other man's
substance, as I may so say; Levi paid Tithes, yet in the loins of Abraham, who
afterward received Tithes; And Levi the Priest received Tithes in the land of
Canaan, and so the Priesthood made by the Command of God, had a Command
according to the Law of God, to take Tithes of the people.

And there was Tithings out of Tithes, and this was not given to Moses the
chief Magistrate (as the chief Magistrate now takes the Tenths of Tenths, which
the Pope was the first Author of: and since, them that denies the Pope, which
takes the Tenths of the Tenths) Where did you read that the chief Prophet, or
chief King among the children of Israel did take them?

So then Tithes before the Law to Melchizedeck (the similitude and figure of
Christ, in the time of the War, from Abraham) and Tithes in the time of the Law
to the Priesthood, made by the Law of God, who had a Storehouse to put it in
for his services.

And the Widows, Strangers, and Fatherless did not want, There was not a beggar
amongst them, they were all filled and satisfied.

And they that did not bring their Tithes, they robbed God, as Christ said to
the Pharisees, Ye pay Ti^he of Mint, and Annis, and Cummin, these things ought
ye to have done; (Mark, to have done) This was before Christ was offered up,
the Everlasting Priesthood, he ended the Priesthood that took the Tithes, and
disannulled the Commandment that gave them, and changed the Priesthood also
that took them, and is the end of all similitudes and figures, Heb. 7.

And in him Melchizedeck ends, who took them in the time of the War, and there
is no figure in Christ which ends the War; who brings peace on earth, and good
will toward men, and ends the offerings, and ends the Ninths and Tenths, and
Redeems man out of the earth, out of Types, figures and shadows, and
similitudes; that he may live and see where he needs no figure, shadow, nor
similitudes, and Redeems man from under the Law, and so out of the ninths as
well as the Tenths.

And so who comes to Christ comes to Substance, out of the earth, out of the
ninths, as well as the Tenths, and knows the Election before the Foundation of
the World was: for the Tenths was offered up in the time of the figure and
similitude, in the time of the War, in the time of the spoil the Tenths was
offered up, in the time of the Law, of the increase of the earth, and of the
spoil before the Law.

But the time of the Gospel, the time of Christ, the Ninths is offered up by
them that come into the power of God, as well as the Tenths; and so man comes
to be Redeemed from the earth up to God, from whence he was driven, and to
reign upon the earth, and made Kings and Priests, and the War comes to be
ended, and figures, and the Law comes to be ended, Christ is the end of the Law
for Righteousness sake to every one that believes.

For Ninths and Tenths in the time of the War, and in the time of the Law, was
in the times of the figures; and since man has been drove into the earth from
God, that God by his Law Commanded they should offer up the Tenths: but who are
Redeemed again out of the earth, and come to Christ the Substance, and is come
up into the Image of God, and is come into the Gospel which is the power of
God; comes out of the Ninths of the earth, and offers up all, and so comes up
into Christ, the Image of God, the end of the Law, the Heir of all things.

And so while the Priesthood was standing, Levi who w^^ to receive Tithes
before he was offered up, and so they ought to pay him, but when he was offered
up, it was finished; so when he was offered up, people were to come to the
substance and to seek those things that are above, and not the tenths in the
war, which Melchisedeck the figure received, nor the tenths in the Law, which
the first priesthood received, but must offer up the ninths, and all, to Christ
who is the heir of all things (him by whom the World was made, glorified with
the Father before the World began) who redeems man out of the earth, and so man
comes to preach the Gospel, the Word, which was in the beginning, and so comes
into that which ends all things, that is Christ, who is the Heir of all things,
who redeems his Church; and who are of his Church, are of the Election which
was before the World began.

And such as preaches the Gospel, the Kingdom of God, was to go without bag,
that Christ sends forth, and he never set up a law that they should take the
Tenths; for it was the Priesthood that was before Christ that took the tenths;
therefore read this what it signified, that Christ sent forth his, freely,
without bag (his Ministers) and the other Priests must have the Tenths, made by
the Law of God, and had a commandment to take them, and he sent out his freely,
and Melchisadeck had tenths in the time of the war; but Christ who ends the
Law, ends the war, and destroys the Devil and his works, which is the cause of
all war and strife, sends forth his Ministers freely, reely you have received,
freely give again.

Now the Jews Law was standing when Christ sent forth his Ministers, by which
the Priesthood was made, and the commandment was not dissanulled till Christ
was offered up; so Christ did never claim (to the Jews) that Tithes was his
inheritance, for he who redeems man out of the earth, is the heir of all
things, for Tithes was offered up in the time of the law, and war, Melchizedeck
and the law brings people to offer up the tenths; and that was according to the
principle of God in them, But Christ brings them to offer up the ninths, as well
as the tenths, the ninths of the earth, and so comes out of the earth quite, to
the substance Christ Jesus, and such knows the election before the world
began, and Christ the heir of all things.

So he is not called the heir of tenths, he is not called Melchizedeck, neither
is he called the first Priesthood that took the Tithes, but is called the
substance of all Types, figures, shadows, and similitudes, and is the heir of
all things, and ends the Priesthood that had the tenths, and is an everlasting
Priest, after the order of Melchizedeck, who was glorified with the Father
before the World began, before the tenths was.

So he ends the figures, and all figures, and tenths, and Tithes, that redeemes
people out of the ninths; and so the Church of Christ which is his body, of
whom he is the head, in whom he is in the midest, who was in the beginning with
the Father before the world began, seeks not after the tenths, who redeems out
of the ninths, who brings to the end of the law, and end of the war, and all
types and figures, and shadows, and similitudes to Christ the substance, and
such witness peace on earth, and good will toward men, and the Kingdom come
which stands in joy, and righteousness, and peace in the Holy Ghost, and his
will is done in earth, as it is in Heaven.

So till Christ was offered up, Tithes was to be paid, and they robbed God that
did not pay Tithes; while Tithes was kept back, there was not meat in their
house, and so God kept back from them; you keep back the tenths, cannot I keep
back the ninths, and cause the earth not to give her increase; so bring in your
Tithes, and see if I will not cause the windows of Heaven to be opened, and
pour you forth a blessing, that there shall not be room enough to receive it.

And the Tithes of the land was the Lords, it was not to be given to Caesar, it
was not called Caesar's, the tenths was the Lords, and he gave them back to the
services, for which he appointed them; and this was the State, when man was
drove into the earth in the time of the law.

Now the ninths is the Lords as well as the tenths, and all the spoil in the
war is the Lords, as well as the tenths, to Melchideck, the figure; so in the
time of Christ who ends the war, all is offered up unto the Lord, all the
spoil, the ninths, the time of Christ, the end of the law, and Priesthood that
took the tenths, the ninths is offered up, and they come out of the ninths of
the earth, so to Christ the substance, who redeems out of the ninths, and such
comes to reign upon the earth, as I said before, and be made kings and Priests:
And there is more to be spoken of these words hard to be uttered.

And Christ never told people they robbed him, that did not bring him the
tenths, who was the everlasting Priest, though the Jews law was yet standing
before he was offered up; he spoiled principalities, and powers, and triumphed
over them openly, and put down Priest and its authority, and tenths and its
authority, and brought people to the beginning, out of the ninths to the
Father, and to fit with him in Heavenly places.

And the Church never told people that it was robbery if they did not give them
tenths, and Christ's Ministers never said it was robbery, though the Jews law
was standing, when they went to preach freely without a bag, when Christ the
power of God sent them forth, which power opened the hearts of people to give
them, that they should not want, and they trod out the corn.

And the Jews law was standing, and the Priests, and tenths, before Christ was
offered up, and Christ's Ministers, and preachers of the Gospel never complained
to the Jews, or went to the Jews, which had the Law of God, and command of
God, which gave the tenths, that they should (by the commandment) give them the
tenths, but they preached Christ freely, by whom the world was made, the wisdom
of God, the Savior of the world, that ends all types, figures, and shadows,
and changeable things, and other Priests, and redeems out of the ninths, to
live in the word, and power of God, that lives and abides, and endures for
ever, which all things are upholden by, by the word, and power, which gives
every thing its being, and increase, and meat in their due season.

And these preached Christ, and followed him which was the substance, and never
looked down to the time of the war, for tenths, nor to the time of the law for
tenths, but preached him that was the end of the war, and law, and brought
peace on earth, and good will toward men; and these sat in heavenly places
with him, and minded not earthly things, but were Redeemed out of Ninths as
well as Tenths, and knew the Election before the World began, and come into
Paradise, and to know Paradise, and to know the Garden whence man was drove out
of, into the earth, out of the Image of God, out of the earth, into the Image
of God again, and so in the Garden; so, do they follow Christ who lives in the
Ninths of the earth, or not? Christ never claimed the Tenths in the time of the
War, nor in the time of the Law, though Melchizedeck that figure, and Priests
had them; but Christ is the end of all figures.

And the Jews Law was standing in the days of the flesh of Christ when he was
upon the earth; but when he was offered up it was finished, who went to his
Father where he was before the World began, who says, follow me who is the
Captain of Salvation.

The young man in the Gospel which had kept the Law, he would offer up the
Tenths; but he must offer up the ninths, that is a hard thing to sell his
possession, he is a rich man, he would be willing to pay the Tenths; well this
is but a touch of what might be spoken concerning these things.

The Church of Christ which is the Election in Christ, according to the
foreknowledge of God, before the World began, which are Redeemed from the
earth, and reigns upon the earth, as Kings and Priests; that witness the end of
the War; and before War began, and before the fall was: in the Image of God, in
the Dominion over all the Creatures, in the Wisdom of God, in the Power of God,
and the end of the spoil, and to the end of the Law, and Priests that took the
Tenths in the Law, and witnesses the disannulling of the Command and
Priesthood both: such be in Christ, such be the Church, and such does not claim
Tenths, that be in Christ, the Heir of all things, (mark that word) that
Redeems out of the Ninths, for as I said before in the time of the Law, and the
War, the figure, like unto the Son of God, was Tenths paid, but in the time of
the Gospel Ninths given up, yea, all is given up to the Lord, and the earth is
the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

And them that believe in Christ be in the Wisdom of God, and so the Church
never claims the Tenths which was in the time of the War, or Law, who are come
into the Gospel, the Power of God, which ended the War, and Redeemed from under
Law; and they never told people that they were robbers of Christ, that did not
pay him the Tenths, and that it was his inheritance, which was the first
Priesthoods, and Christ ends the first Priesthood which had the Tenths: and
ends the War, and Redeems people out of the Ninths to himself, who is the Heir
of all things: Glory to him for ever.

And so Tithes does not belong to Caesar, but to God, and so does Ninths too,
for since man was drove from God, the Commandment was, Thou shall offer up the
Tenths: but as men shall come to be Redeemed from under the Law to God, they
come out of the Ninths of the earth and offer up all to God (for the Law served
until the seed came) and so can say, all is the Lords, and comes out of the
earth again, and reigns upon it, which is Gods footstool, and Heaven his
Throne; so mark, men being drove from God into the earth; Ninths in the time of
the Law, and in the time of the War, and the first Priesthood, and Melchizedeck
the similitude, after that Order came, Christ, who Redeems men again to God out
of the earth, as he was drove from God into the earth, fell from his
Righteousness and Image, by transgression and disobedience; so by the obedience
of Christ who is the Image of God, is man again brought to God, out of the
earth: so out of the Ninths, and ends the first Priesthood that had the Tenths,
and the Law by which they were made, and the Commandment disannulled that gave
them, and ends the War, and the Tenths, and the similitudes; he who is after
the order of Melchizedeck, Priest of the most High God, who yet lives, who
ends in Christ, who is the Heir of all things; and many more things I have to
speak, which is as yet hard to be uttered, to this.

And Levi paying Tithes in Abraham, and Christ who came to end the Levitical
Priesthood, is yet a Parable to all, but who believe in Christ, who was before
Abraham was, or Melchizedeck took the Tenths of the spoil which was since the
fall, for Christ ends the War, who is the Heir of all things (Mark, all things)
which is more then Tenths, and takes all, and reconciles all things in Heaven,
and all things in earth, in one, that destroys the Devil and his works, and
his things, and so does not reconcile to those things, the Devils things, but
destroys him and his things, and he that destroys him, and his things and
works, reconciles all things in one: Things in Heaven and things in earth, so
does not reconcile to uncleanness but destroys that which causes it, and so
brings into Unity with God, and one with another, who is the Word, and Power,
who is called the Sanctification, and Justification: and more is to be said in
this, which as yet is hard to be uttered.

So Tithes was due by Gods Law to his Priesthood, which was made according to
his Law, which had a Command according to his Law to take them, and Christ is
the end of the Law to every one that believes, and those that believe are his
Church; Mark here, Whether those that are the Believers goes into the Tenths?
And whether or no they are come to Christ who Redeems out of the earth, and so
are come out of the Ninths of the earth to God, through his Image Christ Jesus,
who is the brightness of his Glory, and the express Image of his Substance?
Christ Jesus who was with him before the World began, as I said before.

Well, seeing that Christ ended them that had Tenths in the time of the Law,
and War, and ended the War and Law, by which they were made that took them, and
the Commandment that gave them, to them, and ends the War, before the Law, and
is the end of all Wars: who puts the fire, and the sword in the earth: and
destroys the destroyer, that causes Wars: and brings peace on the earth, and
good Will toward men: and his Ministers preached the Gospel and the Kingdom of
God, which has no end, (Mark, the Kingodm of God, there is more in that) that
followed Christ, that they preached: and asked not for Tithes, for Tenths of the
earth: that was Elected before the World began, that was Redeemed out of the
Ninths, that witnessed the Kingdom of God that stands in Righteousness, Peace,
and Joy in the Holy Ghost, and that sit in heavenly places in Christ Jesus; And
you may read what they witnessed in the Hebrews, among them that stuck in the
Figures, Priests, Tithes and Offerings, which told them that the one offering
was offered up, the end of their offerings and Priesthood both, that could not
continue because of death, and Christ was come, the end of all similitudes, he
remains a Priest for ever after the order of Melchizedeck; and the Priesthood
was changed that took the Tithes, and the Law was changed, and the Commandment
disannulled: so when the Priesthood was changed, and the Law changed that gave
them, and the Commandment disannulled, and men come up out of the Ninths to the
heavenly gift, and did partake of the power of the World to come, and yet these
things was but as milk among Babes.

Before Christ was offered up, they ought to pay Tithes, but when he was
offered up, then they ought not, the Commandment disannulled, the Priesthood
changed, the Law changed also, Was ended, peace on earth, and good will toward
men: Election known before the World began, and men Redeemed to God from the
earth, who had been drove from God into the earth: who had lost his Image by
transgression and disobedience, who is brought into the Image by the obedience
of Christ, who blots out the transgression, and finisheth sin, and reconciles
for iniquity, and brings in Everlasting Righteousness, (Mark, Righteousness
lasts for ever) that Redeems men out of the Ninths, and ends the War, in whom
Melchizedeck the figure ends, and lives not in the Righteousness of the Law of
works, of the Priests that had the Tenths, and Command, that Commands the
Tenths, but lives in Christ, and by him, and under him, who is the Treasure of
Wisdom and Knowledge, that ends the Command, and Law, and Priesthood, and War,
and Figures, and in him does Melchizedeck end, Christ who is the end of all
things, and here is the Saints life, and the Churches head, that the gates of
Hell cannot prevail against, who is the sum of all things, that ends Ninths,
and Tenths.

And his Church is Redeemed out of the Ninths and reigns upon the earth, and
preaches the Gospel, the Kingdom of God, (Mark, Kingdom) and preaches the
Substance, the end of the similitudes, the end of the first Priesthood; the Law
is changed that he was made by, and he also, and the Command disannulled that
gave him Tithes, and here the peace on earth, and the good will toward men is
known; for Christ is the Peace and Redeemer, and now he is come to reign, and
does reign among his Saints, who ends all similitudes and likenesses, and in
him is no shadow, nor turning, nor winding, nor variableness, who is the Image
of God, glorified with the Father before the World began.

For since man went out of the Image of God, and his Righteousness, has been
the Wars, the first Priesthood, and the Tenths in the War, and the Tenths in
the first Priesthood, and Figures, which Christ the Image of God ends the War,
and Priesthood, and figures, and similitudes, and Tenths, and brings men up
into the Image of God, and his Righteousness, and Redeems people out of the
Ninths, and so to the end of the Tenths, and War; being come out of the fall
up to God again, where peace is, redeemed out of the earth, and reigns upon it,
and there is the end of that at present; and so much for that at the present.

And Tenths was paid from the Principle of God within them, for man
transgressing the Principle of God within him was drove from God, but when the
Law came which went over all transgressors, and transgressions, and answered
the just Principle of God in every man, the Tenths was offered up in the time
of the War, and Law, from the Principle of God within, and so is the Ninths
from the Spirit of God within, the power of God, the Gospel, and where life and
immortality is come to light, all is offered up to God: And man come up out of
the earth unto God from whom he has been drove.

And from the Principle of God within, he did offer up the Tenths according to
Law; for death reigned, man transgressing the Law of God within him, when he
fell, went from the power.

The Devil went out of truth, tempted man out of truth, to sin, and so to
death, and death reigned from Adam till Moses, and so the Law came by Moses,
who saw the first transgression upon the earth: and so the law was added
because of transgression, which is called the higher power higher then all evil
doers, to which power every soul must be subject.

And Moses saw the blessed state of the creatures before transgression, before
the Devil and man went out of truth, and so man had the power within him before
the transgression, the power within him, the law within him, and so the law was
added upon him, called the law of works, because of transgression, and that
served tell the seed came; and Moses saw the Prophet of God, he knew that the
seed of the Woman should bruise the head of the Serpent; Christ Jesus should
destroy the Devil and his works, the salvation of mankind.

And Moses the Prophet, God gave him that wisdom, to make the pattern, the
figure, and Moses saw the time it should stand, and before it was; and the
Prophet God should raise up like unto him, whom the people should hear, who
should come to end it.

Now he that can read this, and see this, and hear this prophet which should
end the pattern, types, figures, and shadows, may read something; and he that
has offered up the ninths of the earth, and is come out of the ninths, by
Christ the substance, redeemed out of the earth, and witnesses sin and
transgression finished, and the bond of iniquity broken, and Christ reconciled
to him, and everlasting righteousness brought in, he witnesses the end of
tenths, and may speak something of what the tenths figured forth, and
offerings, and Priests, that witness the seed, and is in the seed Christ, that
has bruised the head of the Serpent, (the Devil that causes war) he may say,
a stronger then he is come that keeps the house, and that the strong man has
bowed himself, and that the keepers of the house has trembled, and the earth
shaken also, and that which is to be shaken, shaken, and that which cannot be
shaken is appeared, and Christ is in him, and his body is dead because of sin,
and he is the Temple of God, and Christ is in him the everlasting Priest, and
Christ reigns, and the first covenant is ended, and the law of works which went
upon the man which was under types, figures, and shadows, to which his soul
must be subject; but Christ is come, the end of the Law to every one that
believes, the Bishop of the soul, Christ the power of God, and the everlasting
covenant is within again, and he is come into a greater state then Adam was, in
the beginning, he is come into the second Adam, into that which cannot depart
from God, and all that be here, need not say, know the Lord from the greatest
to the least, but are calling every one his neighbor, under the vine, and
fig tree, according to Zacharias prophecy, and the branch is brought forth,
and stone upon stone, and ingravening is taken away.

Concerning Tithes since the days of the Apostles.
And as for Tithes, since the days of the Apostles, the Pope was the first
Author of them; for as Christ said false Prophets should come, inwardly
ravening Wolves, having the Sheeps clothing, that is the outside in Mat. 7.24.
chapter, which John saw was come in his first Epistle, in chapter the 2. and
fourth, which went forth from them into the World, and in the revelations, all
that dwelt upon the earth, went after them, and Christ who said they should
come, bid they should not go after them, and John who said they were come, told
the Saints that they needed no man to teach them, but as the same anointing did
teach them which was in them, and as that did teach them they should continue
in the Son of God and in the Father.

So those that Christ said should come to his Disciples, the false Prophets,
and Antichrists, John saw was come (one of his disciples) which went forth from
them into the World; and in the Revelations, all that dwelt upon the earth went
after them, and when they had got a head in the World, they turned against the
Saints, and killed the Saints, that kept the Testimony of Jesus. Mat. 7.24. 1 John 2.4 Rev. 13.

And so in the eleventh of the Revelations, the witnesses were killed, and in
the twelfth, the dragon was wrath with the woman, and she fled into the
Wilderness to be kept a time, and times, and half a time, to be fed, and the
man-child was caught up to God, and the dragon made war with the remnant of her
seed; so here is the true woman, the true Church fled into the Wilderness, and
the Dragon gave his power to the Beast, in the thirteenth of the Revelations,
the Least made war with the Saints, that kept the Testimony of Jesus the spirit
of Prophecy, the true Ministers, and killed them, and overcame them, and when
he had overcome the Saints, power was given to the Beast, over all kindreds
tongues, and peoples and nations.

So he had power over the naturals, Hebrew, Greek and Latin, called the
Original, Orthodox men, and killed the true Ministers which kept the testimony
of Jesus, the spirit of prophecy; then he having power over all kindreds,
tongues and Nations, then deceit spread it self over all nations, the true
Church being in the Wilderness, and the man-child caught up to God; and then
came up the Beast and his names, marks, and horns and images, who was in the
Dragons, the Devils power, and compelling to worship, and set up his lying
signs, and wonders, and has power over the tongues, to order them, here he has
his Schools, and colleges, to order them as he will, the naturals, that
killed them that was in the spirit.

And then the Whore got upon the beast, the false Church, the false woman, the
Whore, in the Dragons power: after the True Church was in the Wilderness, and
all Nations drunk her cup of Fornication, before they could be married; and the
Kings of the earth drunk her cup of Fornication. Then did the Kings of the
earth make Nations to bend, and the sheeps clothing to be put upon them, for
she has reigned over the earth: This fenced city, this false Church, this
Whore, where all the blood has been shed about Religion, Church, Ministry, and
Scriptures, in the whole Christendom, among them called Christians, since the
days of the Apostles, and Christ who wrestled not with flesh and blood, struck
not at creatures, did not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them; and the
Apostles that followed him, wrestled with Principalities and powers, and
spiritual wickednesses: and brought the creature into the liberty of the sons
of God.

And Christ destroyed the Devil, and his works, and death, which had its
authority in men, and yet saved men's lives; he did not cause any to be put in
Prison, neither did he put any in Prison, though they Blasphemed against him,
nor the Apostles neither, but destroyed the Devil and his works, and death,
where he had his Authority, which caused men to Blaspheme, and saved the man:
and the Apostles wrestled with spiritual wickednesses, and rulers of darkness,
which caused men to Blaspheme; and brought the creatures into the liberty of
the sons of God, and such came to know the Redemption of the body.

But this false church, this great city, this woman, this whore which has made
all Nations drunk with her Fornication, the Kings of the earth, wrestleth with
flesh and blood, destroys men's lives (if any one come within her city which is
fenced) though they have the sheeps cloathings, yet destroying men's lives,
stocking, whipping, and imprisoning, killing, racking, cutting off ears,
wrestling with flesh and blood; d^^^^ing the blood of the Saints, killing the
creatures in^^^^^ (...) wrestling with principalities, and powers, and spi^^^
(...) wickednesses, and rulers of darkness, in high places, and so follows
not Christ and the Apostles, who are the inwardly raveners that went out from
them, which is the Whore, for a whore goes from something; the children of
Israel when they went from their God, they whored; so when these went from the
Apostles, they whored, and all Nations has drunk the Whores cup.

And so the Inhabitants of the earth which has drunk the Whores cup, have the
sheep clothing, but not the sheeps Nature, (which never worried, swine, nor
dogs, nor goats, nor lions, nor bears) so instead of saving men's lives,
destroyed them, and instead of bringing creatures into the liberty of the sons
of God, has killed the creatures; and this is like neither Christ nor the
Apostles, but quite contrary, out of their power, in the Dragons power,
devourers, murderers.

And so this Whore sits upon the waters, and the waters are Peoples, Nations,
Tongues, and Multitudes, as you may read in the Rev 17. and 18. chapters. Now,
Mark, Nations are waters, and Peoples are waters, and Tongues are waters,
Orthodox men which are called the Pillars of the Church, she suffered them to
live, this false church, this Whore which has drunk the blood of the Martyrs,
Prophets, and Saints; so killed the true Ministers, and so these are them that
have set up their Schools and Colleges, to to make Ministers, and their
Tenths, since the days of the Apostles, who was not of man, nor by man, but by
the Will of God.

And again, the Judgment of the great Whore should come, this false church, and
the mystery babylon confounded, and the Beast taken, and false prophets, and
the old Dragon, and cast into the lake of fire, and the man child brought forth
to Rule all Nations with a Rod of Iron, and the Lamb and the Saints shall have
the Victory; and the Lambs Wife known again, and the Everlasting Gospel preached
again to all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations, to all that dwell upon the earth.

What may the Tongues say, have we not had the (...) all this while? and the
Beast, and the Dragon, and (...) prophets, and the Beasts names, several
images, and (...), that is in the Nations, who has power over all Kindreds,
Tongues, and Nations? I say no. you that are inwardly ravened, went forth from
the Apostles, into the World, you went from the power, and so from the
Everlasting Gospel, which must now be preached again to you; and this is hard
to be believed with the Tongues, and false church, the Whore, as it was among
the Jews at the first, Going forth of the Gospel.

And so now the Gospel is going forth to all Kindreds, Tongues, and Nations,
and Life, and Immortality, is come and coming to light, and the Everlasting
Gospel preached again freely, without a Bagg, or Storehouse for Tithes, which
the first Priesthood had. And the thirst is risen in people, and to that which
they ravened from, is people come and coming, and the Lamb and the Saints shall
have the Victory; the Bride and the Lambs Wife is witnessed and shall be
witnessed, the True Church is known again, he that was dead is alive, and shall
live for evermore.

So all these names, and marks, and horns, and Images, and several Crowns, in
the whole Christendom, is among the inwardly raveners, and how should they be
otherwise, when they ravened from the Spirit of God, in which stands the Unity,
and Fellowship, and Bond of Peace.

So they have set up Tithes, which ravened from the Spirit of God, from the
Apostles; they could not set them up among the Apostles, but went forth from
them into the World, and set them up there, and the old Mass-houses, East, and
West, which they call Temples, or Church, with a cross on the end of it; they
went from the Power of God the Cross of Christ, whose bodies were not the
Temples of God, but the synagogues of Satan, the Murderer: who has killed one
another about Church, and Ministry: and prisoned till death for Tithes, and
haled before Courts, and Sessions, and Assizes: the chief Magistrate in many
places has taken the Tenths, of the Tenths, which the Pope was the first
Author of, set up in the World by the beasts, and Dragons power, and the great
Whore, and false church, when the True Church went into the Wilderness; But as
the true Church comes up again, all these things are fathomed, seen, and felt
over, which has got up since the days of the Apostles; and this is but a
touch of what might be spoken concerning these things.

And so Tithes has been set up by the laws of men, which they have invented,
since the days of the Apostles; among them which went from the Apostles, for
the Apostles witnessed the end of the Law of God, and Commands and Priesthood
that took them, as in the Hebrews 7th. chap.

And so these that have taken Tithes in the whole Christendom by the Law of
men, and invention, has not gone according to the Law of God, for they were to
have a Storehouse, and all the Widows, Strangers, and Fatherless, were to be
filled, and eat, that there might not be a beggar among them: and this
provision the Law made, when Tithes was the Lords, the Tenths, and he would
make the Ninths serve Levi the Priest, and give him enough, and all Widows,
Strangers, and Fatherless; for men was in the unreasonableness till the Law
came: in false measures and weights, but Christ the end of the Law Redeems men
out of the Ninths and the Law answers the reasonable Principle of God in every
man, which is Just, Holy, Good, and Perfect, so the Law goes over all, and lets
see the first transgression, and goes over all transgression, and that is the
Higher power to which the Soul must be subject, whether in the hand of King, or
Supreme; and this is not like the Heathens Inventions, or Statutes.

Now the Apostles witnessed the end of the Commandment, that gave Tithes, and
the Law, by which the Priesthood was made that took them. Therefore, they that
went forth from the Apostles into the World, set up Tithes, where there is no
Storehouse for the Fatherless, Widows, nor Strangers, in the whole
Christendom; but Priest goes away with all, and and it may be, Pope or chief
Magistrate has the Tenths, of the Tenths; and Widows, and Strangers, and
Fatherless, crying up and down the streets, and Steeple-house doors for bread,
at the old Mass-House doors, that it is a shame to see them.

Though men talk of the Gospel, and of the provision of the Gospel, yet they
are not come to the provision of the Law, that provided to them all, in
practice, and life.

And what haling before Courts, and casting into Prisons daily by the Priests
and Impropriators, for Tithes? And what cries the people? We must give you
Tenths, and we must be in the Ninths; Are you Ministers of the Gospel, and no
Storehouse to relieve the Widows, Strangers, and Fatherless, that there might
not be a beggar amongst us? And you cry you have a Law to give it you; but cry
the people it is not like the Law of God, that Widows, and Strangers might be
filled as well as you; you are them that went forth from the Apostles into the
World, from the Gospel, and Law both, of God.

The Apostles preached the Gospel, and brought people out of the Ninths, to
offer up the Ninths, and all, to the Lord; and so it shall be now, as the false
prophets Beast, and Dragon is taken, and the Judgment of the great Whore is
come, and the Everlasting Gospel preached again to them that dwell upon the
earth, which was among the Apostles.

People shall come out of the Ninths of the earth, not only the Tenths, but
all to the Lord, for the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof.

These that has set up Tithes since the days of the Apostles, are them that
are inwardly ravened, that went from the Apostles into the World, which now by
the power of the Lord God, are comprehended and fathomed.

So Tithes to Melchizedeck in the time of the War, and Tithes in the time of
the Law, and all the Tithes of the land was the Lords, and he would make the
Tenths of the earth give the Priests, Levites, Strangers, Widows, and
Fatherless enough, and fill them, that there should not be a Beggar among them,
and the Ninths would give the other enough; and those were offered up according
to the Principle of God in people, which answered the Law of God; and the
Commandment that commanded them.

Now Tithes since the days of the Apostles, set up by them that went from
them, inwardly ravened, has been invented, and not set up by the principle of
God within; So here is Priests, and Impropriators, Kings of the earth, and Pope
has got them; and Widows, and Strangers, and Fatherless starving abroad; and
yet these Priests will be called Ministers of the Gospel, that takes Tenths and
keeps people in the Ninths, which they have invented, and their mother, the
great Whore, the false church, and calls them a Gospel maintenance, which are
not like unto the Apostles, but contrary to the Law and Gospel both; and all
people are nor blind that they cannot see.

For the tenths was offered up in the time of the war, and law, but the ninths
comes to be offered up in the end of the war, and law, and types, figures, and
shadows, by such as comes to the Kingdom of God; for they that preach the
Kingdom of God, and the Gospel, does not take the tenths of the earth; and this
is but a touch of what might be spoken concerning these things.

And so Tithes is not the Ministers of the Gospels homage, as thou Dr. says,
in thy ninth page; for Tithes is not the Ministers of the Gospels homage, who
brought people out of the ninths; but it was the first Priest-hoods, which
Christ the second came to end, and redeems out of the ninths, up to God, out of
the earth, for ninths and tenths has been since man was drove from God, into
the earth; but the tenths has bin the Popes homage, and held up by his laws,
in the whole Christendom, provision for his Church, since the days of the
Apostles, that the true Church went into the Wilderness, and his Ministers, and
the inheritance that he has given to his Teachers, that has got the Sheeps
clothing, that went forth from the Apostles, inwardly ravened, and set up
first by his law, and persecute people if they would not give them, and put
them into prison till death, and hale them before Courts, which is not the work
of the Ministers of the Gospel, as thou may read in the Acts, and Epistles.

And thou say in the same page, that to employ Tithes to any other use, then
to maintain Ministers of the Gospel is sacrilege, for they are due by God, and
holy to himself, so to give them to any other then Ministers of the Gospel, or
to such as set Ministers to preach, because they are fick themselves, and
cannot preach, it is sacrilege to put them to any other use.

So then thou have made all the impropriators robbers, and the Pope, and all
the chief Magistrates, and Kings that take the tenths, robbers, and the great
men that takes the Tithes, robbers; now I say they have no more due to them,
then the Ministers, nor they, then them, but is quite contrary to the Ministry
of the Gospel, to keep people in the ninths, that they might have the tenths,
and having no storehouse for them, that all the strangers, fatherless, and
widows, might be filled, as well as the Priests, Deuteronomy. 14 and Mal. 3.

But if you had storehouses, and did fill all the Fatherless, and widows in
the whole Christendom, yet we which are Ministers of the Gospel must deny you,
and the first Priesthood that took them; we that are one with the Apostles,
that brings people out of the ninths, that they may be redeemed out of the
earth, up to God, for since men was drove into the earth from God, was tenths
set up by the command of God, which Christ the Savior of the World, redeemes
up to God again, out of the earth, for tenths was a figure in the time of the
law, and Christ, who was made under the law, redeemes from under the law, ends
the law, and the figures, and the war, and brings people to reign upon the
earth, and such be elect before the World was made, of his Church, of his body,
he is the head.

Now Tithes which been invented by the inwardly raveners, that went out from
the Apostles, by the beast, false Prophets, and false Church, since the true
Church went into the Wilderness, and since the true Ministers has been slain
by the Beast, and their blood drunk by the whore, and so deceit spread over all
nations; and as the Apostles was to go with truth into all Nation, so the
beast, false Prophets, and great whore, and old dragon taken and cast into the
lake of fire and their flesh burnt, and the everlasting Gospel shall go forth
again to all nations, tongues, and people, to all that dwell upon the earth,
and so truth shall spread it self over again.

So mind these three states, and what age you are in, that you may decern the
time, and seasons which be in the Fathers hand, how that people shall come out
of the ninths, and tenths, which has been invented by them, that were inwardly
raveners, that went forth from the Apostles, and how that people are coming to
that which they ravened from, whereby the power of God, the Gospel is felt, and
life, and immortality is come to light, and the thirst is risen among people,
who shall have the waters of life freely and the marriage of the Lamb, the
Church is known again, the manchild is brought forth to rule all nations, with
a rod of Iron, for they have been waters, and tongues, and multitudes, and that
which has been called the original among the inwardly raveners, the tongues,
but not called so by John, nor any of the Apostles.

For all the earth was of one language before Babel, and Pilate set the
languages over Christ, and Luke does not call that the original, for Pilate did
not know the Scripture, and the Beast, and the whore has been upon the
tongues, which has killed the Saints, and John in the Revevelations did not
call that the Original, for John saw well that tongues were waters.

But they had the Original which was killed by the beast, and the whore, and
this has been the language since the beast, whore, and dragon has reigned,
and the true Church has been in the Wilderness, and the true Ministers
killed; but I shall tell you, in the beginning was the word before beast, false
Prophets, dragon, great whore, Pilate and Babylon, was; and Abides when they
all end, when they are not, so that I declare unto you that which was in the
beginning, the word of life that you might have fellowship with the Father, and
the Son, and with us.

And who are in this, are out of ninths, and tenths both, in which all figures,
ends, types, and shadows, ends, and by which word, all inventions of men are
thrown down.

And so taking away tithes, is but robbing, as they call it, the Popes Church,
the false Church, which set them up, but not according to the Law of God; which
was not according to the Law of God, nor Gospel, and have not given them;
according to the Law of God, had they done it there had not been a beggar in
Christendom, for the Law made that provision, but the Gospel is above the Law,
which redeemes people out of the ninths, opens the heart of people.

So they are pitiful poor, and silly, that are talking of the tenths, in this
the day of the Gospel; the Lambs power, and his marriage, and the coming up of
the true Church out of the Wilderness, judging the false Church, and great
whore which is got up since the days of the Apostles, which has fulfilled
Christ's words, and Christ's words must be fulfilled, as in Mat. 24. who says
every tree that bears not fruit, must be hewn down, and cast into the fire,
which scripture is fulfilling, to destroy the false Prophets, and yet save the
creature, who wrestleth with the power of darkness, and spiritual
wickednesses, and not with flesh and blood, such have spiritual weapons; but
they that ravened from the spirit of God, lost the spiritual weapons, and so
got Caines, which has guarded the great whore, which has killed the Saints
with Caines weapons, Cain killed Abel. and built a City, and so who ever comes
into this great City, where nin^^^ and tenths, and inwardly raveners are, false
Prophets, great whore, the false Church, old Mass-houses, they must look to
have their flesh and blood wrestled against where the dragons flag, and the
whores golden cup is holden forth.

Now look over whole Christendom, you may see what has got up since the days
of the Apostles; and what a fenced City here has been, and how it is fenced,
and how the blood of the Martyrs has been drunk in it (which keeps the
Commands of God, and the Testimony of Jesus, which has the Spiritual) weapons
and how many this great Whore has put to death by her weapons, this false
church, the Lord open your understandings that you may see to the days of the
Apostles, who said, that the ages should come that God would show forth the
exceeding Riches that was among them, as you may read in the Ephesians the
second chapter; And these ages are come, so here is a distinction betwixt the
Ministers of the Spirit, and the ministers of the great Whore, which ravened
inwardly from the Spirit of God, which has had the sheeps clothing, which
beast and great Whore has been in the Dragons power, killing, and murdering,
which City has been filled with violence, and blood.

But the power of God over all this is gone, over all this is felt, to the
days of the Apostles, what state they were in, and what state has been since,
with that we see to the beginning, with the Word of God, which was in the
beginning.

Doctor page the seventh, Thou say thou shall not muzzle the mouth of the Ox
that treadeath out the Corn.

Answer. We say so, where he gets out Corn, not to muzzle his mouth: but let
not the Ox eat where he does not tread out the Corn, let him not transgress;
all this is nothing to Tithes; for we do not read that the children of Israel,
the Priests, was to take Tithes of any, but of the children of Israel, not of
the Gentiles; and we do not read that Christ set up a Law, or the Apostles,
that they should take the Tenths of the Gentiles. but man being drove from God
into the earth; A Virgin shall bare a Child, which by interpretation is
Immanuel, God with us, and I will give him for a light to the Gentiles and for
a new Covenant to the house of Israel, and to the house of Judah; and many of
the prisoners have showed themselves forth, man drove from God, man brought to
God again.

Doctor, Let him that is taught in the Word, communicate to him that teaches
in all good things, Gal. the sixth chapter.

Answ. We say yes, let him that is taught, do it, but he does not say, he that
is not taught; Therefore this condemns all the Priests since the days of the
Apostles, who would have from them they do not teach, contrary to the Rule of
Scripture, and Doctrine of the Apostles, and cast into Prison those they do not
teach, these serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own bellies, and teach
for filthy lucre, which they ought not, who would have all good things
communicated to them, from them they do not teach.

So he that is taught in the Word, communicates to him that teaches in all
good things; Mark this just Rule, He that is taught, he that teaches: so every
one maintain his own Minister, that will have one. And be not deceived, God is
not mocked, for that which you sow, that you shall reap: sow to the flesh, you
shall reap corruption, sow to the Spirit, life Eternal; and they that are
inwardly ravened cannot sow to the Spirit, but sows to the flesh.

Therefore you may look in whole Christendom, what a Field of corruption there
is to be Reaped, and what unreasonable Ministers there is, that will bring this
Scripture, and say, That he that is taught in the Word, let him Communicate to
him that teaches in all good things, when they never taught him; has not
taught him in the Word, yet will have good things Communicated to him; whether
these be not unreasonable wolves in sheeps clothing, who will take treble
Tithes of him, and hale him before Courts, if it be a hundred or two hundred
miles, and then cast him into Prison: and then bring people the Scriptures for
a Cloak, and denying the light within, which they should fee withal.

So such are transgressors of the Doctrine of the Apostles, which takes of them
which they have not taught in the Word, neither do they preach the Word which
was in the beginning, which ends the Priests that had the Tenths, and wresteth
the Scriptures: and this is nothing to Tenths, and no where Tithes is Commanded
in the New Testament, but only as Christ said, ye ought to do it before he was
offered up: but when he was Sacrificed up, it was finished, and the Priesthood
that took them, the Law, and Command, they Triumphed over them.

And Ananias, and Saphirah makes nothing for Tithes, and Christ being hungry,
they fed him, etc.

And Christ sent forth his Disciples without Bag, But what did Judas Bag
signify? That Steward, that Betrayer? Are not all such as invented Tithes, and
so greedy after the Bag, of the substance of Judas, that will cast into Prison,
and betray the innocent in Courts, and take treble of them, going with Judas
Bag, and eating and drinking damnation to themselves? mind what Judas his Bag
figured forth, that betrayer of the Just; and mind how all the Ministers in
whole Christendom goes forth now with gold, and silver, and purses, and Tenths,
and yet they say that Christ sent them: and will not go without it, and have
great Parsonages: And mark, who betrayed him, but him that had the Bag; and if
Tithes had been Christ's inheritance, why would he not take them, when upon the
earth?

Doctor, If we sow unto you Spiritual things, it is least if we reap of your
carnal things.

Mark, Here is to you, to you that we sow too, to you, not to them they did not
sow too; now these will take the Compulsion, and Law, and go to the powers of
the earth, and take treble Tithes, and cast them into Prison, that they have
not sowed Spiritual things too.

Now if we sow unto you Spiritual things, it is the least to Reap of your
carnal things. I say yes, this is to them that are sowed to: so I say as I said
before, let every one maintain his own Minister: so the Apostle says, have I
not power to eat? have I not power to drink? for when Christ sent forth his
Ministers, what was set before them, that they might eat, and bid them enquire
who was worthy into what Town soever they went; but did not make a bargain with
them for their lives time, and compel all to give them means which did hear
them, and did not hear them, which they did not sow too, nor Minister too.

He that plants a Vineyard, eats of the fruit of it, keeps a Flock, eats of the
milk of it: (Mark here) he has threshed, and plowed, and planted, and
labored, and gotten a Flock: But mark, how Christendom lies like a Wilderness,
sow Spiritual, reap carnal, keep a Flock, eat of the milk, shall not muzzle the
mouth of the Ox that treads out the Corn, so they need not go to the powers
of the earth; but the Flock will give them milk, and the Vineyard give them
fruit, and reap carnal, the Ox meat, and there is no allowing to Magistrates
which has made no Vineyards, nor sowed Spiritual things, nor gotten out the
Corn, where they have sowed Spiritual.

Now they reap corruption, which sow to the flesh, though they may have taught
the people 40 years, yet they say, the people are carnal; and so run and tell
the Magistrate with a Petition, that the people are carnal, so these Teachers
were never sent out by the Father to plant Vineyards; but by the will of men,
and so shames themselves and the people both, which are called Christians.

And though the Apostle said, have I not power to eat, have I not power to
drink, yet he did not say, have I not power to take augmentations, and Tithes,
and gleabe lands, and stipends, and to take treble Tithes of them, and cast
them into Prison, that they did no work for, which they have not planted, yet
these will use their power to eat; but the Apostle said, he would not use his
power, but keep the Gospel without charge, and so lose not his glorying; so you
have lost your glorying, and so have brought a great charge upon the people
since the days of the Apostles, who are out of the Gospel, the power of God;
for if you had been in it, you had brought glad tidings to the Nations; And had
not been like Lucifer, that makes the World as a Wilderness, and opens not the
Prison houses, but puts them into Prison; and this may you and Christendom read
Isaiah the 14th chapter.

Doctor. So they that sacrifice at the Altar, were partakers of the Altar, and
they that Ministered at the Temple, lived of the Holy things; they that preach
the Gospel, lives of the Gospel.

The Altar and Temple is down, and the Holy things about it, and the Priests,
and the Tenths, and the Sacrifices, and Offerings, and they that preach the
Gospel; they live in that which brings people out of the Ninths.

And had you trodden out the Corn in the whole Christendom, the Wheat had been
up before now above Corruption: and had you sown Spiritual things, life
Eternal had been reaped, and a harvest before now; And had you been them that
preached the Word, you would have been Communicated unto, by them you had
taught, so that you would not have needed means of others, by such cruel
doings: And had you kept the Apostles Doctrine, and Christ's, freely received,
and freely give, you had been like the Lillies: out of the Gentiles steps, and
oother things would have followed, and them that would not have received you,
shake off the dust of you^ feet against them, like the Apostles; and had you
planted Vineyards, you might have eaten the fruit: and gotten a Flock, you
might have eaten the milk: then you need not have ravened up and down to
Magistrates with Petitions, to make them your pack-horses croaking under them,
like the frogs.

Now Christ has Redeemed people out of the Ninths, if he would have lived in
the Ninths, he might have had a hole, and a nest; but he had not whereon to lay
his head; read the Parable; and if you had preached the Gospel, which opens
peoples hearts, you need not carry the Bag, nor provided, but have been as the
Lillies; and Christ might have had a Storehouse, to have put his head in, if
he had had the Tithes; but he ends Storehouse, Ninths and Tenths, and brings
people to God, to the power from which they were droven.

Doctor. The Labourer is worthy of his hire, Matthew. 10. Luke 22.

We say yes, he that hireth a man is worthy to give him his wages, and the
workman is worthy of his meat: he that sets him at work, is worthy to give him
his meat. But would not Priests, and Professors say, it was unrighteous for one
to come and bring these words to him, and would have money and meat of him,
which never set him on work, nor hired him? Would they not say, he was a
Minister of unrighteousness, not according to Law, nor Gospel, that sues him at
the Law, and casts him into Prison, and takes treble of him whom he never
hired, nor set at work? Is not this the Dragons power, and the Ministers of
unrighteousness that do so? And is not this Gods power that says, the labourer
is worthy of his hire, and the workman of his meat? and it is a just thing to
give it them; so to take meat and hire of them that did not set them at work,
is not this lying, and bringing the Scripture for a Cloak? And saying, they are
Ministers of the Gospel, and cast into Prison till death them that do not give
it them, are not these Usurpers?

And what did Aunanias and Saphirahs keeping back part signify? and the liar
that lodges in the earth, which was overt^^own? Now apply that, and know the
application; for none of the scripture does uphold the Tithes of the Pope, got
up since the days of the Apostles, but speaks of things in their place.

And whether or no these actions, and doings, does not show the false Prophets,
going with Sheeps clothing upon their backs, and how men are covered with
fig leaves? but now in the light openly seen.

And the Levites, and Priests, and Widows, and strangers, and fatherless,
that was to be fed with the tenths, had places to lay their heads in, but
Christ, which redeems out of the ninths, has none.

And the Apostle gave forth an order to Timothy, and Titus, what Ministers
ought to be, must be proved, and tried, they must be blameless, and not
self-willed, not soon angry, not given to wine, no strikers, not given to
filthy lucre; so then they must first be proved, and then they must Minister;
for after his discease, he saw that grievous Wolves would enter in, which would
be covetous, and teachers for filthy lucres sake; and the Apostles saw the
perilous time coming on, that men should be lovers of themselves, and covetous,
this he told Timothy, etc. therefore gave an order to prove them, and to try
them as you may read, the first Epistle to Timothy 3 chapter, but what strikers
are got abroad? blameable men, covetous, greedy of filthy lucre, unpatient,
brawlers, brawling in their pulpets.

And so if Monasteries, Abbeys, Nunneries, Mass, evening songs go down; why not
Tithes? Did not he that set up one, set up the other, by the unrighteous law?
And why should the Priests, they which be of the Jesuits tribe, wear black
coats, but you may say people people begins to see us, and we will go change
our coats, take the means, and deny the work? and when the one falls, why does
not all with it? When the Jesuits fall, why does not Schools, and Colleges,
Tithes, and Mortuaries, and Glebe-lands, Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, the
old Mass-houses, and the Cross? Have not these the Merchants of Babylon made*
Merchandise of people souls, of their bodies, Beasts, Sheep, and all they had?
And is not this the whore seeing Christ came the substance of all true types,
figures, and shadows, who made all things new, ended the tenths, and Priests
both, and all fell down with it, when the Law fell, and command fell? And has
not all these been the blind guides, which has been in the Tithes? and the
blind leaders, which has run at peoples, flesh and blood, and creatures? Who
should have run at the powers of darkness, and wrestled with that, and brought
the creatures into the liberty of the Sons of God.

And has not all these that destroys men in prison, and haleth them before
courts, whom they do not work for, have been charmers for their own bellies,
and for filthy lucre, and covetousness, and tenths of people, and keep people
in the ninths, and worries the Lambs, like briars, and thorns, and with their
unclean feet usurp the place of the Apostles, who were preachers of the Gospel,
that has been in the chair of Judas, of covetousness, betraying the just?
which of them all will prepare themselves to preach, without bag, or lucre, in
hunger, and thirst, and fasting, and tents as the Apostles did? and be like the
lillies, not take thought what to eat, or what to drink; or to put on, or what
to speak, as Christ commanded?

So the reformed Church, the Church indeed, is out of all these gleabe-lands,
Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, and you that go about to reform Churches, it
is but to change color; for the true Church is a Church of it self, which
Christ says, he is the head of, without spot or wrinkle, and blemish,
purchased with blood and such things; for they are got up since the true Church
went into the wilderness, and are not agreeable to Law, nor Gospel; and do you
not believe that all the Bishops Lands, first set up by the Pope, that it was
all given for the worship and service of God? The Papists did believe it, and
the Bishops and Priests in England did believe it: and the same set up Tithes,
and do you not believe it, that the Priests, and Professors does believe, that
the powers of the earth does give them that, for the worship and service of
God, which was first set up by the Papists, and not yet plucked down, but
upholden?

For was not that first given to the Church, this false church, this false
woman, the whore, since the True Church went into the Wilderness and denied by
the Church in the days of the Apostles? Heb. 7. has not all these that went
forth from the Apostles, that inwardly ravened, offered the strange fire? and
been in the worship of the Dragon? out from the Worship of God, in the Spirit,
not like to worship him in the Spirit when inwardly ravened, so swallowed up in
the earth, Core like; for their offering is but as the cutting off a dogs neck,
or as if they slew a man, being inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God, which
should offer up the Spiritual Sacrifice, in which Spirit God should be
worshipped.

All the whole body of these in Christendom, both maker, and Minister, and
setter of them up, which has been of men and by men, of them owned, and heard,
has not these made up a great City, fenced with the weapons of them that are
inwardly ravened, who hangs out Cains Flag, who are from the Spirit of God, and
turns against them that has the Spirit of God, and kills them? and which
makes the Word of God of none effect, which has set up the Tongues, for the
Original which was in the beginning, before the many Languages was.

And how are all Nations drunk with the Whores cup, and sick, and vomit, and
spewing out that which is naught? first transgression, inwardly ravened, then
sick, and then vomit and spew, and then go among the false physicians; for none
comes to the True Physician, but they that come to that they were ravened from,
and there they find the True Physician.

Did not Doctor Burgess take Tithes, and gleabe Lands, and Easter reckonings,
and Midsummer dues? Is he against the Bishops lands, because the Parliament
has taken them away? Would he not cry them up to be for the service and
worship of God, if the Magistrate would set them up again, and give them thanks?

And was not Tithes, gleabe Lands, Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, old Mass
houses, Schools, and Colleges, and their Mortuaries, and their Tenths, set up
by the Law of men since the days of the Apostles, The Magistrates Tenths, out
of the Tenths? now was not this set up by the Law of men? And as men come into
the fear of God, and deny themselves, and know the Churches state, as it was
among the Apostles, by the power of God, throw down all these things again, set
up by the Law of men, since the false church has been up, Beast, Dragon, and
false prophets, and the True Church in the Wilderness: do you think she shall
not come out of the Wilderness again? And the Man-child Rule, who was dead, and
is alive, and Lives for evermore?

And another thing Doctor Burgess mentions; They sold their Lands, and laid
them down at the Apostles feet.

Where did ever any of the Priests, and teachers (got up fince the days of the
Apostles, made by the will of men) any of their hearers do so to them, as they
did to the Apostles, which was in the power of God, which opens their hearts,
and as I said before, brought them out of the Ninths? They must come into the
power which brings people out of the Ninths before they do so, for the Law
brought up Tenths; and I will make the Tenths of the earth serve the Strangers,
Widows, and Fatherless, and Priests, that must change, and could not continue,
because of death, which the everlasting Priest ends them, which everlasting
Priest remains, which brings people out of the Ninths; and there the Mystery of
God is known, which ends all types, figures, and shadows, and parables, in
which they all end.

For these that say they are Ministers of the Gospel, and have the Gleabes,
Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, and Tenths, and have the Augmentations
provided for them, how do these plant Vineyards, and tread out the Corn, and
Plough, and Thresh in hope, to be made partakers of their hope, and sow
Spiritual, and keep carnal? None of all this need be, if they were such
Ministers, that planted Vineyards, and sowed Spirituals, and taught the Word of
God which was in the beginning, which opens the hearts of people.

Thou say in thy seventh page, that Gleabes is not to be sold from the
Churches, but they must be employed for the maintenance of the Ministers of the
Gospel.

Answ. Yes, for they are set up by the Popes, both by the old Mass-houses, and
the Gleabes, and maintains them idle, with other things given to them, and
keeps them from laboring, threshing and ploughing, who has ravened from the
Spirit of God, and went forth from the Apostles, so from the Spiritual weapons
they should work withal, but only the earthly tools set up earthly Temples,
and Schools, and Colleges, to make Ministers, which is not the Temple of God,
the old Mass-houses East and West, with a cross on the end of it, which were
made by men, and not by the W^ll of God.

But them that witness their bodies the Temple of God, and comes to the power
the Apostles were in: denies the old Mass-houses, which inwardly raveners have
invented, and denies them that are made by the will of man, they do that are
made by the Will of God, and preaches forth freely, as they have received
freely; Though they have power to eat, and power to drink, yet in many places
they will not use their power, them that plant Vineyards, and eat of the milk
of the Flock, and keeps the Gospel without charge: but why do the Ministers
made by the will of men, say that the people are carnal, in their Petitions,
and in their writings, and yet will have means of the carnal people, and
Petition the Magistrate for means from them, and sue them in Courts for it?
they should eat of the milk of the Flock; but is not this to show that they
wrest the Scriptures, and make it serve their own ends?

And since the True Church went into the Wilderness, they set up their
Steeple-house to be one; and since the True Cross, the power of God has been
lost, they have set up a wooden one, on the top of it.

And since the True Ministers has been lost, which were made by the Will of
God, they have set up Schools, and Colleges, to make Ministers in their own
wills; and since the Power of God has been lost, which is the Gospel, they
have put the four Books Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John, for the Gospel; the
false prophets, that inwardly ravened, that got the sheeps clothing, have put
that for the Gospel, and went forth from the power of God; the Gospel being
inwardly ravened.

And since the Word of God has been lost from man, they have put the Scripture
for it, the Words of God; as in Exodus God spoke all these Words, and every
Word of God is pure, says the Prophet; and he that adds to these Words,
says John in the Revelations and my Words says Christ; not the Word of God so
the Words of God are the Scriptures of truth learnt of God; but Christ is the
Word, which was in the beginning, before the Words were spoken: who comes to
fulfill the Words of God, in whom they end.

And since men has ravened from the Spirit of God, which should offer
Spiritual offerings; they invented these Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, and
such like: but now are they discovered.

And the cry has been in this great City, by Beast, Dragon, and false
prophets, great Whore, and the teachers under her, and professors; prophecy is
ceased, Revelation is ceased; And how should they say, Revelation was standing,
or Prophecy standing? When they are inwardly ravened from the Spirit of God,
which does inspire, and reveal, And to hear the voice of God; there is no such
thing now, cry people; Now how should they hear the voice of God, who are
inwardly ravened? So no Ministers made by the will of God now, but by men, by
Schools, and Colleges.

But who are come to the spirit of God, they ravened from, knows revelation,
and inspiration, and hearing of Gods voice, and not of men, nor by men are they
made Ministers, but by the Revelation of Jesus, as the Apostles witnessed, and
are come to that, which has gotten the great Whore, Mystery Babylon, Beast,
Dragon, false prophets, betwixt them and the Apostles, with the power of God,
and are come over them with the power, that the Apostles was in; Glory in the
Highest for ever.

And so when they inwardly ravened, and went from Christ the Everlasting
Priest, they set up other Priests made by men, and heard them, instead of
Christ; and when they inwardly ravened, and went from the Apostles, from the
anointing within, which did teach them, and needed none other to teach them,
but as the same anointing did teach them, to continue in the Son, and in the
Father: so not in the Peace, Christ the Peace, but are such as destroy, and
worry one another about Easter reckonings, Midsummer dues, Tithes, and
Stipends, and Augmentations, and worry their Hearers for Tenths; such are like
them that Micah spoke of, in the third chapter, That brings people all on
heaps, that must be ploughed up like a field, out of the Apostles Power and
Doctrine, out of the Prophet Micahs Spirit.

The first Priesthood, was a type of the everlasting Priesthood Christ Jesus,
the law without, a figure of the Law within, the first covenant was a figure of
the everlasting covenant, which first covenant, stood in types, shadows, and
figures, for the bringing in of a better hope; so we witness the better hope
come in, and the end of the other; and the offerings in the first Priesthood
was a figure of Christ, the everlasting offering, who offered up himself
through the eternal spirit, and ended the other.

Circomcission without, a figure of circumcision within, and the law written in
Tables of stone without, I will write them upon their hearts, and stone, upon
stone, and the engraving, and will cut out the graving thereof, says the Lord,
and Christ is called the stone.

And the Temple without was a figure of Christ, who was the Temple of God, and
the Saints were made the Temples of God, in whom he would dwell and makes his
abode.

And Jerusalem without, of Jerusalem which comes down out of heaven; and the
blood of bulls and goats, a figure of the blood of Jesus Christ the Son of God,
which takes away sin, which the blood of bulls and goats could not; and the one
offering which perfects for ever them that are sanctified, which the other
offerings could not, which this offering does, and they need no more.

So Christ, the Tenple of God, said, The Temple should be thrown down, and not
one stone left upon another; who ends the offerings, ends the first Covenant.

Now mind the six days of leavened bread, and the seventh of rest; and mind
the tenths in the fall, man drove from God, in the earth, the Law of the first
priesthood, and war; and mind the everlasting priesthood, that redeems people
out of the earth, ends the war.

And the Sabbath was given for a sign to the children of Israel, after the
fall from the righteousness, and the image of God; the man servant, the maid
servant, Ox, and Ass, and all within his gates might rest, not bear a burden,
not gather meat that day, nor make a fire throughout all their congregations;
now mind the state of the creatures, how all was oppressed, Ox, Ass, and
servants; and the Lord gave his Sabbath for a sign, so the Jews Sabbath is a
day, the sign, of something, of rest, of Christ the rest to the whole creation,
Ox, and Ass, and servant and stranger.

So he was accused of them, that had the sign, to be a Sabbath breaker, so new
moons, meats, and drinks, and and holy days, are shadows of good things to
come, but the body is Christ; so who knows Christ the body, sees before new
moons was, meats, drinks, or Sabbath-dayes and witnesses the end of the
shadows, and can say, that the good thing is come, so the Christian Sabbath is
Christ who was before days was, before the World was made, glorified with the
Father before the World began:

And who is in him, need not go forth to gather his meat, nor to make a fire
nor bear a burden, for Christ is his rest, and much more, is to be said in
this which is hard to be uttered.

And the Saints meet together on the first day of the week, and many things I
have to declare, which as yet is hard to be uttered, but the day is dawning,
the dew of heaven is known, the morning star is broken forth; and the Lord is
risen, and Christ is come to reign, he that was dead, is alive, and lives for
evermore, and the Lamb and the Saints shall have the victory.

So seeing Doctor, thou that would keep up Tithes, and down with Bishops
laws, he that set up one, set up the other, and all power, Easter-reckonings,
and Midsummer-dues, must come down together, if thou deny thy self interest,
and wast in the power of God, with which thou might see, what is got up since
the days of the Apostles, and with which power, thou might see, what power
they were in.

This from a lover of thy Soul, and all your Souls, and Eternal good, who is in
that, and lives, and reigns in that, which was in the Beginning, G. F.
The Doctor said, He did not take notice of every false report upon his own
person, but upon the Ministry it self.

But who has been, and are the greatest reporters even the Priests, the false
Ministers, who have got up since the days of the Apostles.



THE END.

