A Vindication OF THE DIVINES OF THE Church of England, Who have Sworn
Allegiance to K. William and Q. Mary, From the Imputations of APOSTASY and
PERJURY, Which are Cast upon Them upon that Account, in the Now Published
History of Passive Obedience. By One of those DIVINES.

It is impossible but that Offenses will come, but woe unto him through whom
they come, etc. Luke, 17. 1. Licensed August 27th. 1689. I. Fraser.

LONDON, Printed for Brabazon Aylmer at the Three Pigeons over against the
Royal Exchange, Cornhill, 1689.

A Vindication OF THE DIVINES OF THE Church of England, etc.
I Should hardly have thought it much worth any ones while, to Concern himself
about the now Published Book, Entitled, The History of Passive Obedience, were
it not to prevent Atheistical and Debauched Persons making use of it, to the
Scandalizing of weak and inconsiderative People against Religion; and the more
hardening themselves in their Contempt thereof, by seeing so great a Body of
the Ministers of this Church, so exposed to the World for Apostates and
Perjured Wretches, as they are in this Book.

But it seems to me to be absolutely necessary, for this Reason, to take, at
least, the Design of this Book into Consideration, which is all I intend to do.
And the apparent Design of it is, as I now intimated, to make the World
believe, That the Generality of the Divines of the Church of England are fallen
under the Guilt of most Shameful Apostasy, and consequently, of Perjury too, in
the Oaths they have Taken to King William, and Queen Mary. Had this History
come abroad some considerable time before the First of August, I confess I
should not have passed such a Censure upon it, but had been obliged to hope,
That 'twas piously and charitably intended to prevent our Clergy's Scandalizing
their People, and Violating their own Consciences: But since it comes thus
late, the Exposing of those who have taken these Oaths, it is most evident, is
at least the principal Design of it. And how well such Work as this does become
Christians, and Protestants, and Members of our Church, who, to justify their
Refusal of these Oaths, and to commend themselves to the World as Stanch-men,
and steady to their Principles, are content to sacrifice to their own
Reputation, the Good-Names of all but a very inconsiderable Number of their
Brethren, I leave to their own Consciences and serious Thoughts; if ever they
are at leisure to think seriously, or are capable of making sedate Reflections.

All those of the Clergy that have taken these Oaths, are as expressly as can
be, without running the most Apparent Danger of the Law, blackned with Apostasy
from the Doctrine of the Church of England subscribed by them; and very many of
the most Eminent of them by Name, with basely deserting that Principle, which
they have heretofore published to the World in Print, and been Zealous
Maintainers and Avowers of, viz. That of Passive-Obedience, or Non-Resistance
of the Higher Powers, upon any Pretense whatsoever.

But I can scarcely desire a more easy Task, than to show that these New Oaths
are no whit repugnant to the Asserting of the most Absolute Passive-Obedience;
and that those who have skrewed up this Point to the very highest Peg (as I
ever thought some have done it much too High, through their Non-attendance to the
Constitution under which we live) may Lawfully take these Oaths, without
recanting any thing they have Preached or Printed upon this Argument: And own
William and Mary, without Fear of Contradicting what they have held about this
Matter, as not only de Facto, but de Iure too, their King and Queen: For,

First, Can a Prince who is Justly provoked by another Prince, to whom He owes
no Allegiance, gain a more unquestionable Title to His Crown than that of
Conquest, when reasonable Satisfaction has been first Denied Him? And will the
highest Asserters of Passive-Obedience, affirm it to be due from Those, who are
under no Obligation of Allegiance?

Now this was the Case of the Prince of Orange: For,

1. He was no Subject to King James.

2. King James had given Him very just Provocations. Surely his making so great
Advances toward the setting up of Popery in his Kingdoms, and the bringing in
of a Foreign Power consequently, and the overthrowing of the Laws, and quite
Changing the Government, must needs appear to all impartial Persons to be just
Provocations, since He was so very nearly Concerned in these Actings, by Reason
of His PRINCESS'S and His Own Right of Succession, to the Government of these
Kingdoms. But what more Sensible Provocations could the Prince receive, than
was King James his giving Him so great Reason to believe, that 'twas his Design
to Deprive His Princess of Her Title of next Successor to the Crown, and for
ever to Exclude the immediate Line?

3. The Prince having Demanded in His Declaration, Satisfaction from King
James, and promised to Referr His Cause entirely under God, to a Free
Parliament; and that He would make no worse use of His Army in the mean time,
than for His own necessary Security, he would by no means yield to any thing of
Compliance; but betook himself to the most Vigorous Opposition of Him, he could
possibly make. And when he found himself forsaken of the best Part of his Army,
and that the Prince grew much too strong to be Encountered by him, instead of
yielding to His Demand of a PARLIAMENT, he Revoked that Summons of one, which
before the Princes Landing, He was persuaded to send forth; and leaving those
who had to the last adhered to him to shift for themselves, as well as they
could; away he Fled, both a First, and a Second time Fled, Flung away the
Seals, and leaving no Representative behind him, left the Nation without
Government: Not to mention Here his putting himself wholly into the Hands of
the Greatest and most Formidable Enemy, his three Kingdoms, and all Protestant
Nations, have in the World.

Now, What was this but a plain Conquest? 'Twas such a Conquest in all its
Circumstances, as has ever been acknowledged to give an unquestionably Just
Title as far as concerns the Conquered Prince. I give this Limitation, because
I am aware 'twill be Objected, that though King James was Conquered, the Nation
was not, they not liking his Cause so well as to side with him; but generally
Received the Prince of Orange, as a Glorious Instrument, which they hoped God
Almighty had raised up, to bring them Deliverance from the Evils they Suffered,
and the much Greater they saw very near Approaching them. And those that now
refuse to Swear Allegiance to Him, were observed to be as forward as others, in
Expressing their Affection to Him; at least many of them. In Answer hereto, it
must be acknowledged that the Nation was not Conquered: But all that follows
from hence, is, That the Prince would not have acquired a Right to the Crown
against the Nations Consent. He had a very Justifiable Plea against King James,
but not against his Subjects, had He gone about to make Himself their King,
whether they would or no; since, having had no Contest with them, He could
notbe said to have made a Conquest of them. And, as He never Claimed the Crown
by the Right of Conquest (which He could not have done Prudently, nor Justly
neither, in Regard of the Engagement He was under from His Declaration, as well
as because He had no occasion given Him of Conquering the Nation) so their
Consent He had, if an Assembly of the Three Estates may be called the Nation:
And I need not say, that He had more than their bare Consent too. And as to the
Collective Body of the Nation, if it be divided into Forty Parts, I believe I
shall be thought sufficiently modest should I say, that He had the Consent of
no fewer than Thirty Nine of them.

And as King James had no Wrong done him, since he must altogether blame
Himself, for being disabled to hold his Crown, and for ought that appears to
Us, for leaving the Nation without Government; so the Princess of Orange being
Crowned with the Prince, and She giving Her Consent to His being Crowned with
Her, suffered no Wrong neither; and She lost nothing of the Honor, and nothing
but the Trouble of a Crowned Head. Nor did Her Royal Sister receive any injury,
or met with the least unrighteous dealing, since her being put one remove
farther from the Crown, was first Consented to by her self, for His sake to
whom (under God) she was obliged for her being in a Capacity (a Moral Capacity
I mean) of ever wearing it.

Now whether the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, with the freely Elected Commons
of England, did light upon the very Best Method, for the Settling of the
Government, and Satisfaction of all Parties, as it is not material to Enquire;
so I doubt it is impossible for Us that are in an inferior Station, to
Determine: But I dare affirm, that the much greater Part of the Nation, and of
the Members of the Church of England too, do think they did, from the general
great Satisfaction that has been in all places Expressed therewith. But as for
those who do not approve of this Method as the most desirable, if they cannot
make evident Proof of its being unjust, I am sure their refusing to Acqui^ss in
it, would be a Notorious Contradiction to the Doctrine of Passive-Obedience;
since 'twas pitched upon by those whose Business alone it was to adjust this
Affair; and to whom also they entirely Referred it, in their Voting for Persons
to be their Representatives in the Convention, which was Summoned for no other
purpose. And nothing is more evident, than that it is inconsistent with all
Government, for private Persons not to Rest Satisfied with the Decisions of
those, whose Office it is to judge in the disputable and difficult Points that
Relate to it.

If the Compilers of this Goodly History will Object to us, That King James his
Subjects, ought to have stood by him against the Prince of Orange; and
therefore since it was through their Default that he was Conquered by Him, they
ought not to fetch an Argument from thence, for their owning the Prince as
their Rightful King. I Reply,

First, Why then did not themselves stand by KING James? Why did themselves so
silently Look on, and see HIM Conquered? Why did they not at least mind their
People of their Duty, and on Pain of Damnation Excite them to it? Suppose there
were Hazard in the Case, ought that to Discourage the Ministers of Jesus Christ
from the Performance of a necessary Duty? Nay, how came it to pass, that so
many of their Party, did seem no less than others, highly to Approve of the
Prince's Enterprise, and to wish Him Success? If they will ingeniously
Acknowledge, that these were inexcusable Faults in them, Why don't they make
their Repentance as public as these Faults were? And believe it, very Heinous
ones they are, if they are Faults.

Secondly, Do they think that our not siding with King James, which has
brought upon us these New Oaths, is a Contradiction to our Doctrine of
Passive-Obedience? I have ever thought, that this Doctrine makes it a Duty to
Suffer, not to Act; and should we think that we are bound to stand by our King
in wrong Doing, and an unrighteous Cause (as we must verily believe His was,
since we believe the Prince's was very Righteous) we must be Asserters of as
Unlimited an Active-Obedience to our Kings, as these Gentlemen are of a
Passive: And when we do so, we will give them leave to call us Apostates with a
Witness: Apostates from Christianity it self, as well as from that one Doctrine
of Passive-Obedience: And to Accuse us of bidding adieu to our Baptismal Vow,
as well as of breaking an Oath of Allegiance. Of which more anon.

Secondly, Another Argument for our owning William and Mary, as our Rightful
King and Queen against King James, shall be taken from the Circumstances he is
brought into; or rather into which he has cast himself: Which Circumstances
are such as make it absolutely necessary to the Preservation of our Religion,
Liberty and Property, to the saving us from utter Ruin, and from a Deluge of
all manner of Miseries, zealously to stand by the present Settlement. We know
upon whom King James has cast himself, and in whose Power he has been, ever
since he left this Kingdom. We know that all the hopes he can now comfort
himself with, of Re-gaining his Kingdoms, if by this time he despair not of it,
are from the Assistance of the most Iesuited Prince in the World but one, and
the most Barbarously Cruel Tyrant, and who has not his Match for horrible
Perfidiousness, that we know of, under the Cope of Heaven. We know that, if by
his help he should at last have Success, the Protestants of the Kingdom of
France, as fearfully Deplorable a State as he has brought them into, cannot be
more Miserable, than will be these three Protestant Kingdoms. Nay, we know too,
that then this Monster must be our King, and that King James can scarce
reasonably hope for so great an Honor, as to be his Viceroy. These things I
say, that Humanly speaking, we know there is no avoiding; and that without
Miracles from Heaven, no means can save us from being the greatest Objects of
Compassion, in all the World. And what shall we call those, who having so
scaring a Prospect of things before their Eyes, shall refuse the only Humane
means for their Preservation, in hope of Miracles? Which only Means no man can
be so blind as not to see, is Faithfully Adhering to King William and Queen
Mary. I need not add, that we know too, by sad Experience, the strange
Wilfulness* of King James his Temper, and that the Jesuits have gotten him so
perfectly under their own Power, as to be the sole Masters of his Judgment and
Conscience; That he has been all along Acted by such an implicit Faith in
their Counsels, that his continual Experience of the Foolishness of them, could
never make the least abatement of his confidence in them. And therefore, what
Wise Man can hope, from the greatest Security he can possibly give us, that our
condition may be so much as Tolerable under him, should he return to sway the
Scepter in these Kingdoms, though the King of France had no Hand in it?

Those that so insist still on the perpetuity of the Obligation of their Oath
to King James, are inconsiderative to Amazement, of the Prior* Obliligation
they are under, to their* Religion, and to the Community of which they are
Members: Which no After Obligation can by any* means Cancel. And it is the
absurdest thing imaginable to suppose, that that for the sake of which
Principally, we are obliged to Swear Allegiance to our Kings, viz. the Safety
and Welfare of the Community over which they are placed, ought upon the
Account of this Oath to be dis-regarded. As it is not a less Profane thing, to
think our selves bound to give them Assistance, in such a Cause, as their
Success wherein it is Morally impossible should not End in the utter Ruin of
our Religion. Those that Propogate the contrary Doctrine, I will not stick to
say, make Idols of their Kings; and they are the People to whom the World is
chiefly beholden for Arbitrary and Tyrannical ones. And for my part, I must
needs Profess, that I could not with a safe Conscience Swear Allegiance to the
best King that ever held a Scepter, while I thought my self obliged by that
Oath, to prefer his Personal Interest before his Political, before the
Apparent Interest of Religion, or of the Community.

I can be sure of nothing, if I am out in this notion, That no Oath can bind
any longer, than the Obligation thereof is consistent and reconcilable with the
Salus Populi; the Well fare (the Spiritual and Temporal Welfare) of the
People; which is the sole End of all Government. By Salus Populi I cannot be
thought to mean the Welfare of any Party; I mean the Welfare of the Whole,
or of the Generality of the Community. And every private Subject, who is
capable of making a true Judgment in any Case, is easily able to make a
Judgment, when the Safety of the Community is in Eminent Danger. And though I
know that Maxim* Salus Populi est Suprema Lex: The Welfare of the People, is
the Highest Law; may be liable to be abused to most Villainous Purposes, and
likewise that it has been very greatly abused in our own Nation, yet it is
therefore never the less True; but as Evident a Principle as any in Nature. Nor
is it capable of being abused to worse purposes, than has been the Gospel of
the Grace of God, or the Apostles Doctrine of Christian Liberty. Those that
will mis-understand and abuse this Maxim of Government, shall dearly Pay for it
either in this World, or in that to come* if not in both; but Wise Men will not
sooner part with it, because it may, or has been the occasion of great
Mischiefs, than our Good PROTESTANTS will throw away their English Bibles, in
Regard of the Mischief which the Papists tell them has been done by them. And
I could adventure to Appeal to any unbyassed Person, that competently
understands the nature of Government, in general, Whether this Great and
Unrepealable Law alone, would not, in our present Circumstances, divest King
James of his Title to the Governing of these Kingdoms; would not perfectly
dissolve our Obligation to him, and transfer the Right to Those who now Reign
over us. And methinks, though Providence alone, be a very fallible Topic to
Argue from, yet the very many Amazing Providence, by which these Princes have
been brought to the Throne, and have carried them through many Extreme
Difficulties here, and are now a displaying in Scotland, but especially in
Ireland, should add Strength enough to other Arguments to Convince our greatest
Unbelievers of their Right to be our Sovereigns; and that they have the Broad
Seal of Heaven for it. And I wish, that those, on whom such Astonishing
Appearances of the Hand of God can have no Influence, would consider those
Words of the Prophet Isaiah, Chapter 26. 11. Lord when thine Hand is lifted up,
they will not see; but they shall see and be ashamed, etc.

And thus have I kept to my Resolution when I first set Pen to Paper, to write
no more Lines than needs must, upon this Argument. And the little that has
been said, as I am verily persuaded, is a sufficient Vindication, even of Their
taking the New Oaths, whom I cannot Vindicate from having gone too far in their
Doctrine of Passive Obedience.

Nor shall I have the least Controversy with these my Brethren, though they
should never change their Minds about that Point; since having transferred
their Allegiance, they must needs also transfer their Passive Obedience to
Those, of whom we are mighty secure, they will make no such Advantage of their
making it so Absolute, as King James was preparing himself to do.

FINIS.

