CANONS AND JNSTITUTIONS Drawn up and Agreed upon By the General Assembly or
Meeting of the Heads of the QVAKERS; From all Parts of the Kingdom, at their
New-Theatre in Grace Church Street, in or about January 1668/9.

George Fox being their President.

London, Printed, Anno Dom. 1669.

An Introduction.
THere has been some time spent in the Inspection of this Quakers Synod: And
although all the Particulars of that Days Procedure cannot be obtained; yet so
many of them as will render that Party or Sect of men for ever Infamous and
Ridiculous with all Intelligent and Observant men, is with great difficulty
obt^^ned.

They had proceeded unto many other Insolences (besides what they have laid
down in these their Canons and Institutions) in the stating of their
Government, had not some of them feared the Magistratical Justice. However the
rest showed their forwardness thereunto, by the Proposals were made to
introduce either A New Scripture into the world, or The Old one with many and
great Additions; this was urged once and again from a twofold Topic: the first
was, That many places in the Old Testament did refer to several Books, which as
yet were never extant; and the Supplement to the New was insisted upon, by
others, who said there was, amongst others, An Epistle to the Church of
Laodicea to be ^dded to the Canon, and put into the Revelations. But it seems
these things proved not so ripe as they purposed; and whether they were
rejected, or left for another time, there must be new information of; not
knowing as yet, if they intend to subjoyn the said Epistle to the Church of
Laodicea by way of Appendix, or not.

Several Penances were done that Day, and performed after a very carnal way,
however styled by them The Condemnation and Judgment of the Spirit.

The Faults were various: Some for being too busy with Women; some for
disorder in their Meetings, as keeping Hats on when others had them off, or
when their Friends prayed etc. and others for want of zeal.

Some credibly report, that before many of them can make their peace with their
Brethren, they were forced to bow down themselves, and by a willing subjection
put their heads between (their President's for the time being) George Fox his
Legs, who was President at that Days Solemnity; and whose Name is inserted as
Primate and Metropolitan of the rest.

The business of Civil Matters took up a considerable part of their said Days
Work; and I cannot learn that they went further than the Widows Bed and the
Dead man's grave. How much the Prerogative Court would take cognizance of that
affair, concerning Wills, Testaments and Legacies, is best known to themselves.

But that of Marriage, in the way and method by them instituted and explained,
will be of very great concernment to all Widows, Maids and single persons of
the Female sex (who have not wholly cast off that Modesty, Shamefacedness and
Bashfulness, which has ever been esteemed as their Ornament, Virtue and Grace;
whilst they must have a Jury of Witnesses to their first Conjunction, which
their Third Canon makes the Ratio Formalis of Marriage;) to look to themselves;
and to consider whether it would more defile the hands of the married persons
that the Minister joins in holy Wedlock, than the eyes of these 12 Spectators
at their first doing together (as they call it) would.

It may now be seasonably considered, how much these sort of men have fallen
from their first Principles, Mode and Way, by resolving all things thus
formally; when at first their Religion seemed a Chaos, and Darkness covered the
face of their Deep, and the very Ratio Formalis of their Religion was to cry
down Forms; which later practice of theirs, if it succeed no better than it
has yet, will undoubtedly break them and their Forms also; many of their own
Party falling off by reason of it.

That of Doctor Smith the Physician, who was convened before one of their
Private Courts, has given his eminent dislike of their way and proceedings, by
leaving behind him Ten sheets of paper, filled with the many Cheats, Frauds and
Insolences of his quondam Brethren the Quakers, of whom he had been for
fourteen years, by which he had the most considerable opportunities to look
into the Arcanaes and Secrets of their Mystery of Iniquity: And although Forty
pound was proposed to him in whose hands the Manuscript lay, by some of their
Party, that the Book might never see the light; yet it is hoped it will be
printed, and be as a standing Testimony against them, when they and their
Institutions shall evanish and come to nothing.

Canons and Institutions Agreed upon at a General Meeting OF THE QVAKERS. 1669.

Friends fellowship must be in the spirit, and all Friends must know one
another in the Spirit and power of God.
I. IN all the Meetings of the County, Two or Three being gathered from them to
go to the General Meeting, for to give notice one to another, if there be any
that walk not in the truth, and have bin convinced, and go from Truth; and so
dishonoreth God: that some may be Ordered from the Meeting to go to exhort
such; and bring into the next General Meeting what they say.

II. If any that profess the Truth, that follow Pleasure, Drunkenness, Gaming,
or is not faithful in their Callings and Dealings, nor honest nor just; but
runs into Debt, and so brings a scandal upon the Truth: Friends may give
notice at the next General Meeting, if there be any such; and some may be
ordered to go and exhort them, to bring in their Answers at the next General
Meeting.

III. And if any go disorderly together in Marriage, contrary to the practice
of the Holy men of God, and Assembly of the Rightous in all ages, who declared
it in the Assemblies of the Rightous when they took one another (all things
being clear) and they both being free from any other. And when they do
together, and take one another, let there not be less than a dozen friends and
Relations present, according to your former order; having first acquainted the
Men's Meeting; and they have clearness and unitic with them: And that it may be
recorded in a Book, according to Word and Commandment of the Lord: And if any
walk contrary to the Truth therein, let some be ordered to speak to them, and
give notice thereof to the next General Meeting.

IV. And all that be Widows (which have children) and do intend to Marry; let
Querie be made what she has done for her Children; if there be no Will made,
then let such part of her late Husbands Estate be set out for her children, as
is equal according to truth; and what they can do afterward, let them do also;
and where there is a Will made, let those Legacies and Portions be improved and
secured before Marriage for the Children of the Deceased, with what more they
can do for them; and then when these things are done, let them be recorded in a
Book at the next General Meeting.

V. And also all Widows in all your several Meetings, let them be taken notice
of, and informed and encouraged in their outward business, that there be not an
hindrance to them in their inward growth; and so carefully look after them,
that they may be nourished and cherished and so preserved in the Truth; that
Love may be increased, and if they have many Children to put out Apprentices or
Servants, that may be a burden to them to bring up; then let Friends take care
to ease them, by putting them forth as may be meet: Let all this be looked into
by every Meeting, and Notice thereof given to the next General Meeting, and
then some ordered to see that all things are done according to Truth and
Rightousness.

VI. And all such as marry by the Priests of Baal, who are the rough hands of
Esau, and fists of wickedness, and bloody hands, and who have had their hands
in the blood of our Brethren, and who are the cause of all this banishment of
our Brethren, and spoiled so many of their goods, casting into prison, and
keeps many hundreds at this day; And such as go to them for wives or
husbands, must come to Judgment and condemnation of the Spirit, that lead them
to Baal and Baals Priests, also, or else friends (that keep their habitations)
must write against them and Baal both: For from Genesis to the Revelations you
never read of any Priest that married people: but it is Gods Ordinance, and
whom God joins together, let no man put asunder: And they took one another in
the Assembly of the Rightous, when all things were clear: therefore let all
those things be enquired into, and brought to the General Meeting, and from
thence some ordered to go to them and return what they say at your next
Meeting; and all this before they or any of them be left as heathens, or
written against: let them be three or four times gone to, that they may have
Gospel order, so that if it be possible they may come to that which did
convince them, to condemn their unrightous doings, that so you may not have a
hoof in Egypt.

VII. And also such as wear their hats when Friends pray, and are gotten into
the old rotten principle of the Ranters, who set up the wearing thereof in
opposition to the power of God, and therein uphold it, which is condemned by
it, and the power of God is gone over it and them; who have Ranted from the
Truth, and have stopped many who were coming into it, th^^ the very world may
say you are in a confusion, and divided, and gone from your first principle,
who said you were of one heart, and one mind, and one soul. And therefore that
spirit must be cut off by the sword of the Spirit of the Lord, that they may
come to them which did at first convince them: and notice may be given to the
General Meeting of all things, and from thence must be ordered to go and exhort
them, that err in such things, to come to the first principle that did at
first convince them; that they may come over such things, and Friends must
stand up in the Noble Seed of God to judge the world and all the fallen Angels.

VIII. And in all your Meetings let notice be given to the General Meeting, of
all the poor, and when you have heard that there is many more poor belonging to
one Meeting than to another, and that Meeting thereby burdened and oppressed;
let the rest of the Meetings assist and help them, so that you may ease one
another, and help to bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the law of
Christ, and so see that nothing be lacking, according to the Apostles words,
then all is well. For the Jews outward, though they were as the stars of
heaven, and as the sand on the sea, yet there was not to be a beggar amongst
them, according to the law of God: and amongst Christians in the first Ages,
there was a Men's Meeting set up at Jerusalem to see that nothing was lacking,
which was the Gospel Order according to the law of the Spirit, and thus
continued as long as they lived, in the like power and Spirit of God: But when
the Apostates came in, and the true Church fled into the Wilderness, who was to
continue there 1260 days, and the Witnesses prophesied in Sackcloth 1260 days,
and the Beast was worshipped just so long 1260 days, and then all things went
out of order, every thing was wanting in the time they worshipped the Dragon,
and the Beast and the Devil made the world like a Wilderness. But now the
Judgment of the Great Whore is come, and of the Beast, and with them the False
Prophet and the Dragon, who shall be cast alive into the Lake of Fire. And the
True Church come up out of the Wilderness, and the Manchild which was caught up
into Heaven, come down again to Rule all Nations with a Rod of iron; and the
Marriage of the Lamb is come, and the Lamb and the Saints shall have the
Victory. And the everlasting Gospel is and shall be preached again, as was
amongst the Apostles; the Gospel order shall be set up, as amongst them; and a
Men's Meeting, as was at the first Conversion, to see that nothing be lacking in
the Church, then all things is well: so there is not to be a Beggar (now
amongst the Christians,) according to the Law of Jesus, as there was not to be
any amongst the Jews by the Law of God.

IX. And also all men that hunt after women, from woman to woman; and also
women whose affections run sometimes after one man, and soon after another, and
so hold one another in affection, and so draw out the affection of one another,
and after a while leave one another, and go one from another, do the same
thing: These Doings make more like Sodom than Saints, and is not of Gods moving
or joining, then they are to be parted, for Marriage is Gods Ordinance, Gods
command, and one to another, and in that they feel the Power of God.

X. And that notice be taken of all evil Speakers, backbiters and slanderers,
and foolish talkers, and idle Jesters; for all these things corrupt good
manners, and is not according to the Saints and Holy ones, whose words are
seasoned with salt, ministering Grace to the hearers.

XI. All such as are Tale-carriers, and Railers, whose work is to sow
dissension, are to be reproved and admonished; for such do not bring people
into the unity of the Spirit, but by such means do lose their own condition.

XII. And all such as go up and down to cheat, by borrowing and getting of
Money of Friends in by-places, and have cheated several; all such are to be
stopped, and judged: as there is a Woman, tall in her person, freckled in her
face; and also one John Harding, who are for judgment, and to be condemned.

XIII. If there happen any difference between Friend and Friend, of any matter,
if it cannot be ended against the next General Meeting, let half a dozen
Friends from the General Meeting be ordered to put a speedy end thereto; That
Justice may be speedily done, that no difference may rise or remain amongst
any: And let your General Meeting be once in every quarter of a year, and to be
appointed at such place, as may be most convenient for the most of Friends to
meet in; so the house may be cleansed of all that is contrary to Purity,
Virtue, Light, Life and Spirit and Power of God; so that Friends may not be one
another sorrows and troubles, but one another Joy and Crown in the Lord.

XIV. And all Friends see that your children be trained up in the fear of the
Lord, in Soberness and Holiness, Rightousness and Temperance, Meekness and
Gentleness and Lowlines and Modesty in apparel and carriage; and see to exhort
your Children and Family, and teach your Children when they are young, then
will they remember when they are old, according to Solomon, and so they may be
a Blessing to you, and not a Curse.

XV. And that Ftiends do buy convenient burying places, as Abraham did, who
bought a place to bury his dead, and would not bury them amongst the Egyptians
and Canaanites; and Jacob was brought out of Egypt, and Joseph and they were
buried in their Grandfathers and great Grandfathers burying place. And so
Friends to buy decent burying places for your Meetings, and to keep out the
Spirit of the Sodomites and Egyptians and Canaanites, that corrupt the earth,
and let them be decently and well fenced, that you may condemn all the world in
all things.

XVI. And also that Friends buy convenient Books for Registring the Births and
Marriages and Burials, as the Holy men of God did of old, as you may read
through the Scripture; that every one may be ready to give Testimony and
Certificate thereof, if need requires, or any be called thereunto.

XVII. And also that all the Sufferings of Friends, and all kind of Sufferings
of Friends in all the Counties be gathered up and put together, and sent to the
General Meeting, and so sent to London to Ellis Hooks; that nothing of the
Memorial of the blood and cruel Sufferings of your Brethren be lost, which may
stand as a Testimony against the Murdering Spirits of the World: and be it to
the praise of the Lords everlasting Power of the Lord in the Ages to come, who
supported his, and upheld his in such Hardships and Cruelty, who is God over
all blessed for ever, Amen.

XVIII. And let enquiry be made concerning all such that pay Tithes, which make
void the Testimony and Suffering of all our Brethren, who have suffered many of
them to death, by which many Widows and Fatherless have been made, which is
contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles, and the Doctrine of the Martyrs, and
contrary to the Doctrine of the Rightous in this present Age. All such are to
be enquired into, and to be exhorted.

XIX. And let Query be made concerning all Prisoners that are poor, that they
may be Relieved, and so encouraged in their sufferings; and also that care be
taken for their Wives and Families, that they do not suffer for want of supply,
and outward things; and let enquiry be made how many there are in all your
several Counties. Let diligent Enquiry be made into all these things, at every
Meeting, and at every Quarter Meeting is to take care accordingly.

G. F.
Dear Friends:
Be faithful in the service of God, and mind the Lords business; be diligent,
and bring the power of the Lord over all those that have gainsaid it; and all
you that be faithful, go to visit them all that have been convinced, from house
to house, that if it be possible you may not leave a hoof in Egypt; and so
every one go seek the lost sheep, and bring him home on your back to the Fold,
and there will be more joy of that one sheep, than of the Ninety nine in the
fold.

G. F.



Copies of this to be sent abroad amongst Friends at their Meetings.
ALl Friends every where who are gathered in the Name of Jesus Christ, keep
your Meetings as you did in the beginning, betwixt the 10. and 11. hours, when
the Priest is in the heat of his Worship, and so all you, be in your Meetings
feeding on the bread of Life, when the Priest and his Company are in his and
their Dishes and Pleasures; and you then to break your Meetings, as you feel
the Power to order you, about the third or fourth hours, when the Priest is in
the heat of his Worship, and so you may go when he is in his heat, and sits
over his dishes, and go away in his heat; and this was the practice of Friends
in the beginning: therefore do you continue in it. Keep your Meetings on the
First day, and your weekly Meetings in the Name of Jesus that never changes.

And Friends all take heed of sleeping in Meetings, and sottishness and
dullness; for it is an illsavory thing to see one sit nodding in a Meeting, and
so to lose the sense of the Lord and shamefacedness both; and it grieveth the
Upright and watchful, that wait upon the Lord, to see such things; and for the
Priests, people and others that come into your Meetings, to see you that come
together to worship God and wait upon Him, to have Fellowship in His Spirit,
for you to sit nodding is a shame and unseemly thing. Therefore be careful and
watchful, and let it be amended, and mind the light and power of God, Christ
Jesus in you, and that will condemn all such things, and lead you out and above
all such things, and make you watchful over one another for good.

Let this be read in all your Meetings.

G. F.

FINIS.

