THE CHRISTIAN JUDGES, SO CALLED, Their Words Judged By the Holy Men of God,
and Christ, and his Apostles, and by the HEATHEN.

Herein you may see, that your Words and Carriages have been contrary to the
People of God of old, and the Prophets, Kings and Judges among the Jews, and
Christ the King of Kings, and his great Apostles, and the Heathens Governors
and Officers.

And here you may see the Carriage and Words of the Holy Mon of God, and of
Christ, and his Apostles, and the Heathens Rulers.

By George Fox.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

THE Christian-Iudge, SO CALLED, Their WORDS Judged by the holy Men of God, and
Christ, and his Apostles, and by the Heathen.
ACHAN, that took the Babilonish Garments, and Two Hundred Shickles of Silver,
and the Wedge of Gold of Fifty Shickles weight; Joshua, the Judge of Israel,
who searched the Tribes, and found Achan was the Man: now Joshua, the Judge,
did not say to Achan, Sirrah, nor Thou Rascal, nor Knave, nor Rogue, or
Whoreson, as many Christian-Magistrates, so called, will say: But Joshua said
unto Achan, My Son; mark his Pure Language, and Savoury Expression, and
Gracious Words; My Son, I pray thee, give Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and
make Confession unto him, and tell me what thou have done, and hide it not from
me. And then Achan confessed, That he had sinned against the Lord God of
Israel, and thus and thus have I done, abovementioned. And then Joshua the
Judge said, Why have thou troubled Israel? God shall trouble thee this day; the
Lord and they stoned him with Stones, and burnt his Goods with Fire: And there
was no Unsavory Word given to him, as we read, either Sirrah, or Rascal, or
Knave, or Whoreson, who was worthy of Death, Joshua 7.

And Moses, the Judge of Israel, in Numb. 15. the Man that gathered Sticks upon
the Sabbath Day, whom they put in Ward until it was revealed of God what they
should do to him; and Moses (the Judge) and Aaron's Language was not Sirrah or
Rascal, but The Man shall be put to Death, says the Lord; and the Congregation
stoned him without the Camp. So you may see, here was no Unsavory Language
given to him.

And Moses, in Exodus 16. at the Rebelling of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, when
Moses gave Sontence according to the Word of the Lord, If these men dye the
Common Death of all men, or if they be visited after the Visitation of all men,
then the Lord has not spoken to me, etc. And now Moses, the Judge, did not
say, These Rascals, or Rogues, or Sirrah, or Whoreson, as many that profess
themselves Christians will do now.

And in Levit. 24. the Man that they put in Ward till the Mind of the Lord
might be showed concerning him, which had Blasphemed the Name of God, and
Cursed; and then the Lord said, That he should be stoned to death; and the
Sentence of Moses was, That all that heard him, they should lay their Hands on
his Head. And so there was no Sirrah, nor Unsavory Speeches given to him, as
are used among some now.

And in Genesis 20. when Abraham was brought before Abimelech, the Heathen, who
was a Ruler, he gave him no Unsavory Expressions, as you may see throughout
the Chapter.

And in Genesis 26. When Isaac was brought before Abimelech, he gave him no
Unsavory Expressions, nor did not call him Sirrah and Knave in his
Examination, nor his Father Abraham in his Examination, as many do now that are
called Christians; and Abimelech, do not you look upon him to be as a Heathen?

And in Genesis 39. when Joseph was cast into Prison by the Heathen, Potiphar,
we do not read that he had any Railing Language given to him.

Neither did the Heathen, Pharaoh, when Moses and Aaron went before him, give
them any Bad Language, as Sirrah, and Knaves, and the like, as in Exodus 5.

And Job, who was a Judge, when Elihu spoke to him and his Friends, and said, I
know not to give flattering Titles to Man, let me not respect any Man's Person,
in so doing my Maker will soon take me away: Now Job did not say, Sirrah, hold
thy Tongue, nor gave him any Unsavory Expression, Job 32.

And also, see the Language of David and Solimon, and other Officers in Kings
and Chronicles, the Savoury Language they used to such as were brought before
them.

And also Mordecai and the Jews, who were brought before Ahasbuerus, see his
savoury Language to them, as in Esther, and also in the Book of Nehemiah 6. and
other places.

And such Officers that were friendly to the Jews, and some were not, yet they
did not call them Sirrahs, nor Knaves, nor Whoresons, and the like.

And Isaiah and Jeremiah, who prophesied to several People; and Jeremiah, who
was cast into Prison and Dungeon, there was no Sirrah or Knave given to him by
the King or Officers, Jer. 37.

And read Isaiah and Micha, and the rest of the Prophets, who prophesied to
People, to Rulers and Magistrates, and see where it can be found that they had
any Bad Languages given to them, as Sirrah, and the like, either by Rulers of
the Heathen, or of the Jews.

And Nebuchadnezar, a Heathen, in the Examination of the Three Children, and
his Sentence upon them to the Fiery Furnace, there was no such Language given
them as Sirrah, and Knave, and Rascal, nor Whoreson, in all his Fury and Rage,
but called them Men, as you may read Dan. 3.

And Daniel, when he was brought before Darius, in Dan. 6. in his Examination
and Sentence, had no Sirrah or Unsavory Expressions given him, neither by the
King nor Officers (when he was sentenced to the Lions Den, to be cast amongst
them) as many give now adays, who are called Christians, and yet some of these
were Heathens.

And in Acts 6, 7. Chap. Steven, in his Examination and Sentence to Death, had
not the word Sirrah or Knave given to him by the Council of the Jews in their
Sentence to Death.

And in Acts 4. when the Apostles, Peter and John, when they were brought
before the High Priest and Rulers of the Jews, and had Sentence given upon
them, Not to preach in the Name of Jesus, they called them. These Men, and not
Knaves, nor Sirreh, nor Whoreson, as many that call themselves Christians do,
below the Heathen, and have more fouler Language, and Unciviller, and
Ungracious Expressions then they.

And again, Acts 22. when Peter was put in Prison, and James put to Death,
there were no such words as Sirrah, nor Rogue, nor Whoreson, by them that
prisoned Peter, and put James to Death.

And in Acts 16. when Paul and Silas were cast in Prison by the Magistrates,
there were no such words given to them in their Examination and Sentence; they
called them Men, not Rogues, nor Sirrahs, nor Knaves, nor Whoresons: And when
the Magistrates had done contrary to the Law, they feared. And so see how short
are many of the Christian-Rulers to this Example, who fear not to cast Innocent
People in Prison, and give them Names beside, contrary to the Jews and Heathen.

And in Acts 19. Demetrius, when there was an Uproar about their Gods, he
called the Apostle, Paul, and not Sirrah, nor Whoreson, Rogue and Rascal: And
this Demetrius had much command among the Tradesmen.

And when Paul was brought before Ananias the Priest, and the Council of the
Jews, who professed the Scripture, and lived out of the Life of them; when Paul
told them, He had lived in all Good Conscience toward God until that day; and
they could not abide to hear speak of living in a good Conscience, as the
Professors of the Scripture, that live not in the Life, cannot abide to hear
speak of living in a good Conscience now adays: and Paul was not called Knave
and Sirrah by Ananias, nor Whoreson and Rogue, Acts 23. Acts 22. Chap. when
Paul was brought before the chief Captain, in all his Examination they called
him by his Name or Man, and not Sirrah, and they were Heathen.

But Acts 24. the Jews, that denied Christ, and professed Scripture, but out of
the Life, which were his Accusers before the Magistrates, they called Paul once
A Pestilent Fellow, when they accused him before Felix their Governor, as the
accusing Professors of Christ will do now; who live out of the Life, to us that
live in the Life: but Faelix gave Paul no such Language, as you may read in the
Chapter.

And in Acts 25.26. Festus nor Agrippa gave Paul no such Language as Sirrah,
nor Rascal, nor Knave, nor Whoreson, Rogue, nor Jackanapes, in all his
Examinations and Confessions, but heard him patiently, who told him, He was
sent to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God; and
he did not rage against Paul, and say, It was Delusions, and a Natural Light,
and Jack in the Lanthorn, as some of the Priests do now.

And Christ, the Judge of the World, that gave his Sentence upon the Sloathful
Servant, that hid his Talent, he called him Unprofitable Servant, etc. and not
Sirrah, though he had spoken hard words of Christ, and called him Hard Master,
yet Christ did not call him Sirrah nor Whoreson, Mat. 25.

And in the same Chapter, when Christ gave his Sentence on them that did not
visit him in Prison, and Sick, and Naked, did not cloth him, and Hungry, and
did not feed him, in their pleading with Christ, When saw we thee so? Inasmuch
as ye have not done it unto my Brethren, says Christ, ye did not unto me; and
in Christ's Sentence of them into everlasting Punishment, there were no
Aggravating Words, as Sirrah, and the like.

And also, the Servant that the King had forgiven his Debts, that would not
forgive his Fellow Servants his Debts, but took him by the Throat, and cast him
into Prison, and said, Pay me that thou owe me; and then the King cast this
Servant in Prison again, whose Debts came upon him again, and there was no
Sirrah.

And Christ's Sentence upon the Man that had not on his Wedding Garment, was,
Friend, and not Sirrah, as in Mat. 22.

And also Judas, that betrayed his Master, Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life, and
sold him to the Priests, in Christ's Sentence upon Judas, his words were
Friend, and not Sirrah nor Whoreson.

And so here ye may see through along the Scriptures, both from Christ, and the
Heathen, and Jews, in their Examinations and Sentences, how they gave no such
Names as the Christians do in their Sentences and Examinations upon People,
when they came before them, as they do now adays, who call them, Sirrah, Rogue,
Rascal, Whoreson, Jackanapes, and the like.

And so, Christians may see through all the Scriptures, from Genesis to the
Revelations, that when any Persons were brought before any Kings or Rulers,
they did not say, Sirrah, Thou Rascal, Thou Whoreson, Thou Knave, Thou Rogue,
Thou Jackanapes; we never read such foul-mouth Language in all their Courts,
that they did give any such Language when the Prisoners came before them.

And also, we never read when any came before the Jews, or Heathen, or
Magistrates, in any of their Courts, that they said unto any Person, Sirrah,
etc. Put off your Hats, you ill-bred Clowns and Saucy Fellows. Now you say, The
Scripture is your Rule, you that profess Christianity, you may see more corrupt
words proceed out of your Mouths, then either out of the Jews or Heathens, if
you will try your Practice and Words by the Scriptures: Do not the Scriptures
tell you, That no Corrupt Communication should proceed out of your Mouths, and
your Words should be Gracious?

And Railing Rabshakeh did not give the Jews such Language as, Rogue, Rascal,
Sirrah, Whoreson and Iackenapes.

And Railing Cursing Shimei did not call David by any such Names as, Sirrah,
Rogue, etc. when he Cursed and Railed against him; neither did David give him
any such Names, nor Solomon when he put him to Death, as you may see in the 2d
of Samuel and the 16th.

And now I Query, Where and whence the Christians have got all these Bad Names,
seeing neither God, nor Christ, nor the Prophets, nor the Judges, nor Kings and
Rulers, nor Heathen, ever gave any such Names, as the Scripture testifies of,
either amongst the Jews, Christians or Heathen?

George Fox.

THE END.

