November. 20. 1677.

IMPRIMATUR,

Guil: Jane.

A VINDICATION OF THE FRIENDLY CONFERENCE, BETWEEN A MINISTER AND A PARISHIONER
Of His inclining unto QUAKERISM, etc. From the Exceptions Of THOMAS ELLWOOD, in
his pretended Answer to the said Conference.

By the same Author.

Job 21. 34. -- In your Answers there remains falsehood.

LONDON, Printed by Sam. Royoroft, for R. Clavel, at the Peacock at the West
end of St. Paul's. 1678.

The EPISTLE to the People called QUAKERS, from the Author.
I Suppose that many of you are acquainted with a little Book, called A
Friendly Conference, between a Minister and a Parishioner of his inclining unto
Quakerism; However you esteem of the Arguments, yet I hope that some of you
have the charity to believe, that no by end, no indirect purpose whatsoever,
induc't me to the publication of it. No, the searcher of all hearts bears me
witness, that I was moved to the undertaking from the truest Principle of
charity and kindness, to discover to you your miserable mistakes, the Sanay
bottom upon which your Tenants are founded, and the real danger your poor
Souls are in, by your obstinate persisting in so desperate a schism.

Though (Blessed be God) this Book has had its wished effect upon some, yet
others have loaded it with all the calumnies they well could invent,
misrepresenting both its design, and argument; And more openly one Thomas
Ellwood in a late virulent Pamphlet, Nicknamed Truth prevailing and detecting
Error --, venting therein not only his spleen against me, but against the whole
Constitution and Government of the Church of England, as it is now happily
established by the Supreme Authority of this Nation. In Communion of which
Church our Pious Ancestors both lived and died, and your selves too were both
born and baptized.

When I found such an immodest and fantastic Title, I began to suspect, what
afterward was confirmed to me, (viz.) that He had placed the empty Name of
Truth Rampant in the Title page, but nothing of the thing in the Book it self.

Had I not understood, with what mighty applause my Adversaries Book was
received among you, I had not given my self the trouble of this Vindication,
but answered him in silence, as in all probability I shall do, for the time to
come.

I had drawn my Vindication much larger than now I present it to the World
(being very unwilling to allow My Antagonist any one Paragraph in his whole
Book) which I found had swelled the Volume too big; wherefore I delayed the
publication hereof in order to contraction, fearing otherwise that my Book
would be too large for the Busy to read, and too dear for the Poor to buy.

This Book had sooner seen the light, had not some of my Sheets as they were
sent to the Press, unfortunately miscarried: And though it come somewhat late,
yet I hope not unseasonabby or less welcome to you.

You will find me often complaining of the Dishonesty of my Adversary in
mis-stating My Book in many places of it; and also of his disingenuity in
pretending to answer it, when in truth He has passed by the most material
passages of it. If therefore you would impartially judge between us, then
compare the Books together, and you will easily discern whether He has done me
right. Next compare his Book with this reply, then do you judge, whether or no
I have done him right.

I had been much larger upon the Subjects of Inspiration and Tithes, Had not T.
E. been taken particularly to task by two other Pens, which you will find me
mentioning afterward.

You will find that I generally make use of T. E's own Authors, but how
honestly He has represented them, as some others of your own party, from whom
he has taken them, will appear in its place.

I know not what opinion you may have of me, but if I know my own Soul, it is
your Eternal interest and welfare, that I have been aiming at, as well in this,
as my former undertaking; that I may show you, how ridiculous and Nonsensical
your Tenants are; and if I sometimes search into your Wounds till they smart,
it is more that I may be faithful to you, than any ways for to please my self.

You will find that sometimes I mention the sayings and actions of some
Quakers, yet conceal their Names, which I do for this only reason, that I may
show not my unkindness to your Persons, but Opinions.

I wish you would seriously consider, with what woeful mediums and artifices
your Leaders divert you from the truth, and hoodwink you in your errors. For
when any has attempted your Conversion, then must they be traduc't with
Slanders, and Calumnies: As such an one is, or was a Presbyterian, or an
Army-Chaplain, etc. -- Thus do they accommodate themselves to the passions, and
uncharitable humors of Men, and take Sanctuary in Dunghils and Puddles: as if
they thought your Religion better defended by Dirt than Arguments: accordingly
T. E. threatens me with an Adjunct dolus latet in generalibus.
in case I set not my Name to my next: But what he means, I know not, having (I
thank God) no particular guilt, that in the least makes me concerned at it. I
am sensible that I have Infirmities as well as other Men, yet I can modestly
say, that I do not indulge my self in any thing which I know to be ill. But I
wonder why the publishing of my Name must excuse me? And seeing he knows me so
well (as he makes his Reader believe) why has he not the Charity, and
Christianity, to inform me what this Adjunct is, that I may amend it?

But let him publish his Adjunct when he pleases, My Comfort is, that neither
He, nor his Master, can go any further than God is pleased to suffer them: only
let me advise T. E. (for his credits sake) not to take his Adjunct upon Trust,
as (it seems) He did his Ancient Authors, lest He come off with as muchshame in
the one, as he has done in the other.

How much better had He been employed, had he gone about to have healed, and
not (as He does) to widen our unhappy breaches? nay rather than you shall want
an Argument for Schism, he will make suspicion a ground thereof: I must confess
he puts in where I have great ground to suspect -- But then there is difference
between ground to believe, and ground to suspect; for be the ground never so
great, it is still but in order to a suspicion.

One thing I do assure you, that I have not said that thing in this following
Tract, which I thought not the very truth, (so far as my judgment did guide
me.) With this integrity I have proceeded, and can with the greater hopes
expect God's blessing on my labors.

Had I thought my Name would have been any satisfaction to you, you should have
had it before, however you must not wonder, that you want it now, being so
rudely threatened to it.

God open your Eyes, is my Prayer to Heaven for you --

Yours --

The Contents.
THE Introduction page 1 Chap. 1. Of the present Ministry of England, and the
cause why some People are not profited by it, inquired into p. 6 Chap. 2. Of
saying [You] to a single person p. 59 Chap. 3. Of Titles and Civil Respects p.
78 Chap. 4. Of Confession p. 111 Chap. 5. Of Perfection p. 120 Chap. 6. Of
Swearing p. 160 Chap. 7. Of Taking Texts p. 264 Chap. 8. Of Humane Learning,
and Divine Inspiration and Revelation p. 268 Chap. 9. Of Tithes p. 293 The
Conclusion p. 331
A VINDICATION OF THE Friendly Conference, etc. From the Exceptions of THOMAS
ELLWOOD.
The Introduction.
MInister. Neighbor, I am glad to see you: I hope you have well digested our
late Conference about the erroneous Tenants of the Quakers, and continue as
well satisfied, as you seemed to be at our last parting.


Parishioner. I cannot deny the satisfaction, I then received; Only I have been
a little amused, since the publishing of it, by an Answer to it, lately extant
under the name of Thomas Ellwood.


Min. I hope you remember the Caution I gave you, Not to conclude every thing
unanswerable, which you cannot answer your self: your education and employment
not qualifying you for finding out the fallacies of every Sophister.


Par. I have not forgot your Counsel; therefore am I come on purpose to consult
you in several passages of that Book.


Min. I have perused it my self, and find nothing in it fit to be made an
occasion of scruple; as I doubt not but (with the Divine Assistance) to make
clear to you, before we part.


Par. Seeing you did not Print your Name with your Book, T. E. conceives that
omission disingenuous (not to say dishonest) and asks, if you were afraid or
ashamed openly to avouch it? Preface.


Min. The concealing of my Name imports no such thing, seeing there are other
causes which may make it proper.


Par. But you write your self a lover of truth; therefore, since truth seeks no
corners, what should induce you to conceal your Name? ibid.


Min. Though truth seeks no corners, yet may truth notwithstanding have a
Friend in a corner. But will it sollow, That because I conceal my Name (for
reasons best known to my self,) I conceal the truth even then, when I publish
it to the world? or that I am not a lover of it? or that my Book is not the
truth? No sure: But it is this Quaker that conceals and darkens the Truth by
deceitfully jumbling things thus together without distinction; as if there were
no difference between an Author and his Book, between Truth and a lover of it,
and all this, merely to cast a mist before you.


Par. Indeed I do the more wonder at him, because he confesses that men are not
strictly tied in all cases to affix their names to whatever they write. ib.


Min. And well you may, for here he contradicts himself, and has made his
Objection as ridiculous as it was fallacious; for if they be lovers of the
Truth, then are they tied (by his Rule) in all cases to affix their Names.


Par. But he tells his Reader, that in matters of controversy (especially where
one Man shall charge another) the Opponent in point of honesty, is obliged to
give his Name, as a Caution and Security to make good his charge.


Min. It Is not the Author's Name, but reason and truth, wherein consists the
worth and credit of a Book: These secure all men from suffering injury from the
Contents thereof. If truth be spoken, who is slandered? The guilty know they
are not, therefore need not the Author's Name for Caution: And for my part, I
have laid no charge to any party, but what I am ready to make good, when need
shall require; and until I fail of that, no Man can accuse me of dishonesty.

But there are two things which I shall offer to your consideration: First,
Whether a bare Name be a sufficient caution and security? Secondly, Whether he
has not involved the Author to the Hebrews, and his own party in this
accusation of dishonesty, being guilty of the same Omission? As for the first,
what if the Name of Thomas Ellwood be fictitious? Or suppose it be the true
Name of mine Adversary; still without the mention of his habitation, to direct
me where to find him, it looks like an illusion, and a designed piece of
mockery, while his Person lurks and skulks as much as my Name, yea and more;
for it seems he could be readily informed both of it and the place of mine
Abode. But for that malicious Charge which in diverse places of his Book he
brings not only against the Clergy, but the whole Constitution of the present
Government, being most notoriously false (as will be made evident) and the
place of his abode not being affixed with his Name, where then is our Caution
and Security?


Par. But to your other particular; How can the Author to the Hebrews be
included in this charge?


Min. Because a great part of his Epistle is controversial; and further he
taxes some particularly with the enormous crime of Schism, and Separation from
the public Assemblies of Christians; Heb. 10. 25. Not forsaking the assembling
of our selves together, as the manner of some is; Then he shows in the next
verse the great mischief of the sin of Separation, as bordering upon, and
bringing them into the danger of final Apostasy, or the sin against the Holy
Ghost, for which there remains no more Sacrifice, v. 26. Is not here a dreadful
charge, though no Author's name for caution? and yet his honesty was never
questioned.


Par. Did the Epistle to the Hebrews come T. E. himself seems not ignorant of
this; and therefore (as must in reason he supposed) calls him the Author to the
Hebrews. p. 96. C. 104.
into the World without the Name of its Author?


Min. Yes, it did: For it was long disputed among the Ancients who he was; Some
affirming St. Luke to be the Author, some Barnabas, others Clemens Romanus: At
last, it being (for good reason) concluded that it was St. Paul, His Name was
affixed to the Title of it.

But whoever was the Author, happy was he in this, that Ellwood lived not in
his days, for had he found out the concealed Author, who and what he was, his
name, place, etc. by a parity of reason (a phrase of his) and according to his
impertinent and malicious threats against me, did he not put his Name to his
next, after so fair a warning, he must not have thought much, if Ellwood should
have given the World his Name, with such an Adjunct, as so unmanly a dealing
did deserve.


Par. But to let that pass, what Quakers do you charge with this Omission?


Min. In a certain Book entitled [Some Printed in the Year 1671.
Principles of the elect People of God, in scorn called Quakers] I find several
points undertaken by several of them; Some of them indeed subscribe their
Names, but most of them do not; And I observe, and so may you by consulting the
Book, that some of those who have not affixed their Names, bring the most
railing accusation against us, and particularly the second of them, who charges
us with going in the way p. 6.
of Cain, to envy, murder, persecute, and a great deal more of such like
slanderous and abominable stuff: Now where must we find out the writer of it?
The third Quaker and others are not wanting in this railing Divinity, which it
seems, is a Principle of the Quakers.


Par. I remember the Book very well, and do wonder, you mention the third
Quaker in it, when he has set the first Letters of his Name, and subscribed
himself G. F.


Min. G. F? Who Is that? It may be another Whom he compares me to in his Preface.
Guy Faux with his dark-lanthorn, or any other person whose Name begins with
those Letters. This therefore being no sure indication of the Writer, makes
nothing for the Caution and security required.

So that if these Quakers be innocent, then Ellwood is an accuser of his
Brethren; And it will concern you to observe also, that for all the confidence
the Quakers have in that Spirit by which their Teachers speak and write, here
must needs be some mistake, yea dishonesty, either in these writers of theirs,
who omit to subscribe their Names to such virulent Treatises, and consequently
in that Spirit by whose instigation they published them, or else in Ellwood and
his Spirit* that accuses all such of dishonesty who do so; Here then you may
see, that there are contradictions and delusions among the Quakers and the
Leaders of them.


Par. Truly this is so reasonable an Advertisement that I cannot object against
it, and shall therefore seriously consider of it.


Min. Having now given you an account as well of the Logic, as Ingenuity of my
Adversary, from his Preface, Let us examine the Book it self.


CHAP. I. Of the present Ministry, and the cause of some People's not profiting
under it inquired into.
PAR. T. E. tells his Reader, that you lay the foundation of your discourse
upon that Question which I told you was propounded by a Quaker in one of their
meetings, Whether any among them could affirm, that he had received any
spiritual advantage by his long frequenting the Steeple Houses? And whereas in
your Answer you affirmed, that the Ministry is not to be judged from the
effects it has upon careless and indisposed hearers;


Min. What then?

Par. The Question (says he) is not concerning careless and indisposed hearers,
but in general terms, Whether any among them impartially consulting his own
Conscience, could affirm that he had received any spiritual advantage by his
long frequenting the Steeple Houses? So that drawing it from any to careless
and indisposed hearers only, you rather avoid the Question, than answer it.
page 2.


Min. Those non-proficients, who have forsaken our Assemblies, had they not
been careless and indisposed hearers of us, they had better profited by us;
This therefore is a true Character of them, and reaches all those to whom the
Question was propounded, being such as had left their lawful Pastors, and
forsaken the Orthodox Faith, and Church, wherein they were Baptized and brought
up; Or other giddy persons resorting to them to gratify their itching Ears. My
reply then being as comprehensive as the Question, how was it avoided, when it
was fully answered?


Par. This however is observable (says he) that we have an implicit
acknowledgment of the Peoples not profiting under the present Ministry.


Min. Does he suppose then that my words take all the People into the charge of
non-proficiency?


Par. He seems so to do in saying, that you acknowledge that the people are not
profited, as also by his way of connecting it to his following discourse.


Min. Your observation is very reasonable, in that he brings both this and the
next passage which he cites out of my Book, under the same acknowledgment, and
cry's out that I have given up my cause, p. 4. But do you not remember what was
before charged upon these very words, as if they were so scant and particular
as to avoid the Question? and is this same clause now made so large by him, as
to include all the People? This puts me in mind of the famous Thief Procrustes,
who used his Captives with so much cruelty, that what Stature soever any of
them were of, they must be fitted to the length of his Bed; If they were too
short, then they must be racked; if too long then must so much of their Legs be
chopped off, to fit them to it. Thus must a clause of mine be one while shortened;
otherwhile lengthened, according to the torture he has designed it: Yea this
Quaker seems to be more cruel than ever Procrustes was said to be, while he
practices both kinds of tyranny upon one and the same Limb.


Par. But to proye this acknowledgment of yours, he says that it is more freely
confessed by you afterward in these words, Alas, it is our hearts grief that our
People should come into the Church, as Beasts into Noah' s Ark, etc. p. 3.


Min. This is a sophistical and usual trick of his, to stretch out an
indefinite proposition to a General, making me to accuse all the People, when I
did no such thing, but expressly explained my s^ and affirmed that, If you and
others have not profited, I can instance in those that have, etc. Conf. page 7.


Par. What do you mean by an Indefinite Proposition?


Min. It is such as in the terms of it expresses neither a particular, nor a
general, but may mean either [all] or [some] as the sense is determined by what
goes before or follows after. And this of mine being thus plainly determined by
that which follows in my Discourse, and by the whole tenor of it, I have just
cause to complain of the injustice of this Quaker in judging me, before he
hears me out, forgetting what the Wise man says, Prove. 18. 13. He that answers
a matter before he hears it, it is folly and shame to him.

Moreover this way of construing words and sentences will necessarily impose a
false and blasphemous sense upon many texts of Scripture. Gal. 3. 1. 1 Cor. 3.
3. and 6. 8.
Take this instance. He came unto his own, and his own received him not, John
1. 11.

Now according to T. E. this is an implicit acknowledgment that Christ had not
a People among the Jews to receive him, whereas the contrary is manifest: The
meaning of it then must be, that some or most of them did not receive him. So
that you see the Quaker makes a fine tool of an Indefinite to work withal,
purposely leaving out the restrictive term [some,] slily to engage
inconsiderate Readers to understand it of all. By this piece of craft he would
make them believe that I accuse all Ministers too as scandalous, in that idle
passage of his, The Priest himself pleads guilty, ac^owledging p. 15.
the scandalous lives of Ministers. Where he sets down Ministers indefinitely;
but according to his construction you may see he would have it understood of
all; or else, what means that ridiculous insultation of his, babemus
confitentem reum? although my words expressly restrain the sense by a note of
particularity, where I say not all, but some Men for a Conf. p. 11. and p. 12.
corrupt interest will intrude, etc. As also that I hope these scandalous
Ministers will prove but few, when compared with such as truly thirst after the
honor of God in a faithful discharge of their duty. Here you may have a full
view of the Quaker's honesty.


Par. But (says he) however the Priests have fed the People, it is evident the
People have fed the Priests well, for they are grown fat and wanton, etc. p. 3.


Min. But while such a number of the Priests are so slenderly provided for; And
while the People are so wanton as to kick at their Lawful Pastors; it may be
easily inferred, who is the better fed of the two.


Par. Next he comes to enquire into the causes, why the People are not profited
under your Ministry. We read (says he) of some in former times, who did not
profit the People at all; and the reason thereof is also given, etc. In the
23d. of Jeremiah, verse. 30. the Lord by the Prophet says, Therefore behold, I
am against the Prophets that steal my Word every one from his Neighbor*
Behold, I am against the Prophets, says the Lord, that use their Tongues, and
say, He says: Behold, I am against them that prophecy false dreams, says the
Lord, and do tell them, and cause my People to err by their lies and by their
lightness, yet I sent them not, nor commanded them; therefore they shall not
profit this People at all, says the Lord, v. 32. Here the very Ground and
Reason why that Ministry did not profit, nay why it was rendered incapable of
profiting the People at all, is most plainly given by God himself, viz. He sent
them not, nor commanded them. p. 4.


Min. That this Scripture does not reach his purpose, will be evident, if we
consider, 1. That this non-proficiency of some of the People does not infer
that we are not sent, seeing it may proceed from other causes. In the careless
hearers of Jeremiah it proceeded not from any corruption in his Doctrine, which
was Divine, nor of his Life, which was Holy; but from the hardness of the
Peoples hearts, Jer. 6. 7.
in that they would not bearken. In the hearers of the false Prophets, it
proceeded from their dreams, lies, and lightness, which they taught, and to
which the People trusted. Chapter 28. 15.
2. That this Scripture is ignorantly and injuriously applied to the present
Ministry, appears in that those false Prophets persuaded the People (and that
to the ruin of that Nation Chap. 14* 13.)
that Jerusalem should not be destroyed, that they should neither see Sword nor
Famine. Chap. 23. 17.
Which was an Errand upon which God never sent them. Besides, they were a
company of Fanatic Enthusiasts* who cheated the People by false pretenses to
extraordinary inspirations; I have dreamed, I have dreamed was their canting v.
25.
note.

Not to profit the People then] is in the true sense of this Scripture, not to
secure them from the Captivity and Calamities hanging over that Nation.

Now let us examine how truly this Scripture is applied to the present
Ministry; Do We come with any new Errand to the World, or pretend to
extraordinary inspirations to confirm it, as those did? Or do We Preach peace
to impenitent sinners? No; the contrary is well known. So the words do rebound
upon the Quakers themselves, while in their strange doctrines and
misconstructions of Holy Scripture, they are guilty of the same fault with
those lying Prophets in saying, The Lord says, when he has not said; and in
their presumptuous pretenses to Revelation to confirm it; as also in opposing
the true Ministers of God, as those Fanatics opposed Jeremiah.


Par. But he denies your Ministry, when he says, Has God sent thene, or do
they send one another? That they are Ministers of Man's making common experience
shows. page 6.


Min. I answer; The Ministry in general is distinguished into Ordinary and
extraordinary. Thus it was under the Law, and under the Gospel too: Of old the
Priesthood belonged to the head of every Family, challenged by a right of
primogeniture: But when the House of Israel multiplied into many Families, it
pleased God for the more advantageous settlement of his Church, and the better
Government thereof, to devolve the Priesthood upon Aaron; and to call him to
the same in an extraordinary manner, by a Commission from Heaven to Moses for
his Consecration; and to settle that Priesthood successively upon his Posterity
without any further need of an extraordinary* Call to the Priests of succeeding
Generations. Such too was the Evangelical Ministry; For Aaron's Priesthood
being antiquated, The Apostles were called to their Function in an
extraordinary manner even by Christ himself, and by the visible descent of the
Holy Ghost were accordingly qualified for the discharge of it: Yet even in the
Apostles days this Extraordinary Call ceased; For Timothy and Titus were
Ordained by imposition of hands, and were Tit. 1. 5. 2 Timothy 2. 2
commanded so to Ordain others, by which means the Ministry was by the Divine
Ordinance to descend to all Ages in an orderly succession, though not in one
Family as Aaron's did.

These things thus premised, do determine our present case as follows. He
that is sent according to the order appointed by God in Holy Scripture (though
by the Ministry of men) is not a Minister of man's making but of God's: Lev. 8.
2.
But both the Priests of the Law, and the Priests of the Gospel, though
consecrated and Ordained by the Ministry of Men, were sent according to the
order appointed by God; Therefore they were not Ministers of Man's making, but
of God's, and by him truly called and sent.

Were Timothy and Titus Ministers only of Man's making, because they were
ordained by imposition of hands? And if many of the people did not profit by
their Ministry (as many of the Cretian's did not by Titus's;) was the Tit. 1.
10, 11, 12.
fault think you in their not being sent?


Par. No sure.

Min. Do you suppose T. E. himself could be ignorant of a truth so obvious?


Par. Methinks he should not.

Min. What then should he mean by saying, We send one another, and by that
common experience, which (he says) shows that we are Ministers of Man's making?


Par. What can he mean by it, but your going to the Bishop for Orders, as
common experience shows you do?


Min. Truly his words stand very fair for this meaning; and therefore not only
you, but doubtless his whole Fraternity, and many others do so take it, and
through ignorance may be corrupted by it, and made to believe, We are not sent
by God, because ordained by the Ministry of Men.


Par. Indeed I cannot deny but this passage brought me under some scruples,
till you gave me this satisfaction.


Min. If T. E. could not be ignorant in so plain a Case, what can be his design
here? Whatever a Man pretends to mean by any of his expressions, yet to set
them down in such terms as will impose upon vulgar Readers, and engage them in
error, can surely be no upright dealing.


Par. No, how should it? But if (says he, speaking still of the Ministers of
England) they ministered by the command of God, they would do it as of the
ability which God gives; but this Divine Ability they rely not on, nor indeed
expect; but School-learning, and humane Ability acquired by study and much
reading, these they trust to, these they depend on, etc. p. 7.


Min. Whether this impudent charge against a whole Order of Reverend Divines be
more foul or false, is beyond my skill to determine; while so great a number of
them have by their humility and devotion made the contrary apparent. I am sure
he can charge no such thing upon the Doctrine of our Church. Where does he find
any such self-confidence taught or encouraged in our Articles and Homilies, or
practiced in our public and solemn Forms of Devotion? No where, I am sure, but
the quite contrary, It Is the healthful Spirit of God's grace that we daily pray
Common Prayer Book. Pr. for the Clergy. See the Collects sor the 5. Sund. after
Epiph. for the 5. Sun. after Easter. and for the 1, 9, and 19. Sund. after
Trin. etc.
for. And these are as great assurance, as men (whose lives are not openly
scandalous) can give one another of the integrity of their hearts. This Quaker
therefore accuses us of a Crime visible to God only; and thereby strikes at his
Prerogative, who alone is the searcher of hearts. But if there be any of the
Clergy guilty of too great a measure of Confidence in their own Abilities; yet
as this is best known to God, and hard for us to judge; so you are also to
consider, that, after they are Lawfully Ordained, it is not some personal
faults of theirs, that can make void their Ministry, much less justify the
accusation this Reviler brings against the whole Ministry of the Church.

And as for human Learning (which, he says, we trust to;) Is not he himself a
Pretender to it in his Book, and equally liable to the same censure? But more
of this in its proper place.


Par. But he tells us of another great reason, why the People are not profited,
viz. the disagreeableness of the present Ministry to Divine Institution, p. 9.
which Institution, he tells us in the foregoing page, is generally urged to be
the words of Christ to his Apostles, Mat. 28. 19. Go ye therefore and teach all
Nations, etc.


Min. It concerned the credit of his party to leave out the later clause in
that Commission, instituting the holy Ordinance of Baptism; for had he not so
done, he would have fallen foul upon his Brethren, who most impiously reject it,
contrary to the Universal practice of the Church in all Ages, since its first
Institution. But wherein does our Ministry disagree with the Divine Institution?


Par. Before the Apostles were to go forth to teach, they were to receive the
Promise of the Father; and to tarry in the City of Jerusalem, till they were
endued with Power from on high p. 8.


Min. That this Promise related to the extraordinary effusion of the Holy
Ghost, is very manifest from the visible effects of that effusion, which were
miraculous, and did not continue in the Church, but are actually ceased long
ago; and therefore cannot (without presumption) be expected in these latter
Ages of the Church, by virtue of this, or any other promise in holy Scripture.
But if the Quakers expect the Spirit in that manner as the Apostles had it,
then according to the condition of that Promise, why go they not to the City of
Jerusalem to receive it? (in the mean time we shall be happily rid of them.)
However if they lay claim to the whole Promise, why do they not make it
evident, as the Apostles did, that they are endued with Power from on high, by
working miracles, healing all diseases, raising the dead and the like? When do
these new Lights speak with new Tongues? for according to Ellwood, similar
causes should have similar effects. But for as much as the contrary is evident,
that the Quakers are not endued with this Power, with what confidence can they
lay claim to this Promise?


Par. You told me that the strong grown Christian measures the goodness of the
Ministry from its tendency to Conscentious obedience, that is, the performance
of all duty in its latitude, both to God, to man and to our selves, Now if the
performance of all duty to God, to man and our selves be the tendency of a good
Ministry; how can that Ministry be good, which denies that all duty to God, to
man and our selves can be performed in this life? p. 10.


Min. The words immediately subjoined do show, that by [latitude] there, I
meant not the Perfection of an unsinning State, but the Universality of our
Obedience to God and Man together with our selves (as it there follows) that
is; a sincere respect to all the Commandments of God, which Zacharias and
Elizabeth were commended for, Luke 1. 6. Though Zacharias' his imperfection was
plainly discovered in ver. 20, 22. Where you may read, he was struck dumb for
his unbeleif: but more of this subject when we come to his Chapter of
Perfection.


Par. But he tells us, the poople may plainly see the reason of their
not-profiting under your Ministry, because it designs to seat the Religion even
of the grown Christian in the rational Powers, p. 12.


Min. The rational Powers are the Understanding and the Will (as any smatterer
in ordilearning could inform him;) For these are they which distinguish a man
from a beast: And Religion being the most Rational thing, where can it be more
properly seated than in the rational Powers? That Religion which is not seated
there, is but a zeal without knowledge, such as seduced the Jews to reject
Christ and the Samaritans to worship they knew not what. So that Ellwood's
Religion (it seems by his own confession) has no seat in his understanding.
Here he has discovered the true ground of the Fanaticism of himself and his
party, and has showed in this frantic passage of his, that whoever will be a
right Quaker must in the concerns of Religion lay aside his Understanding,
Reason, Wits and Judgment.

Rational Arguments are the proper Mediums by which the word of God works upon
our Wills and Affections. Therefore says God by his Prophet Isa. 1. 18. come
let us Reason together; and the Apostle prays Phil. 1. 13. that the Philippians
love may abound more and more in all Judgment; and Christ says Ioh. 17. 3.
this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.


Par. But take his reason, The people of God (says he) in Ages past had their
Religion seated in their hearts; and this he proves from the good Ground in the
Parable of the sower, which by our Savior is delared to be Them, which Luke 8.
15.
(not in a wise and knowing head, not in the rational powers, as you speak,
but) in an honest and good heart having heard the word keep it. ibid.


Min. The Quaker here has brought an instance directly against himself: For by
[honest heart] in that Parable is not meant the Passions and sensible
Consolations, which is plain from verse. 13. where it is said, some received the
word with Joy, and wanting root in time of temptation fell away. Therefore the
Heart being there distinguished from the lower Faculties, must consequently be
meant of the Higher, that is, the rational Powers, acted by mature
Deliberation, constant resolution and sincere endeavors. Through the ignorance
of this, both good men and bad have often mistaken their Condition and estate
toward God, good men being sometimes discouraged for the want of these
Consolations, and bad men by the strange raptures of these fanciful joys
commonly encouraging themselves with a false conceit of being in the Truth and
a good estate; and therefore may be truly resembled to Isaiah's hungry man, who
dreameth he eats, but he awaketh and his soul is empty. Isa. 29. 8. which
place do I never read, but it puts me in mind of the Quakers, as a true Emblem
of them.


Par. But he tells us, that the Prophet David speaking of the Righteous, says,
that the Law of his God is in his Heart. p. 13.


Min. Where said I any thing to import the contrary? But then does not the same
David Ps. 119. 34. 1 King. 3. 9
say, give me understanding, and I shall keep thy Law? And did not Solomon beg
of God a wise and understanding heart? When the Scriptures speak of the heart
with a relation to Religion, they mean the Spirit, the inward man, the rational
Soul; and therefore are far from setting it in opposition to the rational
Powers, which are the faculties of it, and in which the very nature of the
reasonable soul consists. Men of understanding, in Job, 34. 10. are in the
Hebrew tongue (and accordingly noted in the margin) Viri cordati.
Men of heart: Mercerus upon the place gives this reason, Quia cor (...) (...)
(...). M^c.
because the heart is the seat of wisdom. In Prove. 6. 32. He lacks
understanding, is in some Readings, C^et vel d^ficit co. d^.
He lacks Heart. You know the decree against Nebuchadnezzar. Dan. 4. 16. Let
his heart be changed from man's, and let a beast's heart be given to him: Now
do you suppose it was the real heart of an Ox, or Ass, or of any other brute,
that was given to him? No; heart there signified his rational Powers, the use
of which he was to be deprived of. And this is evident from ver. 34. And at the
end of the days I Nebuchadnezzar lift up mine eyes to Heaven, and mine
understanding returned to me

I wish the Quaker be true at heart himself; for I can hardly believe him such
an Iguar^, as here he makes himself; And it is well, if his design be not the
advancing some other interest than that of Quakerism; And I wish those
miserable deluded people, whose true good only (as the Searcher of all hearts
knows) engaged me in this Controversy, may seriously consider of it.


Par. His next cause, why the people are not profited by your Ministry, is the
evil lives of Ministers. p. 14.


Min. Here most injuriously and craftily does he pass by, what he might have
found in my book sufficient to convince (if not him, yet) any sober man. Where
I assert, that the efficacy of the Divine Ordinances depends not on the
worthiness of the Minister; Friendly Conference, p. 14, but upon the Power of
God, p. 15. that is, upon his blessing and grace, that the excellency of the
Power (as the Apostle has it) may be of God, and not of us. And why did he
pass by that note I made of St. Paul's rejoicing, that Christ was preached, though
it were from a principle of strife and envy? And if no benefit could come to
the people by such men's doctrines, what ground had the Apostle to rejoice?
Seeing men's respective duties to God and their Neighbors are taught them from
the Pulpit, why takes he not notice of that unanswerable Appeal I make to their
Consciences in these words? Will you tell the great Judge at the Great day, that
your non proficiency was occasioned by the scandalous life of your Minister? Or
will an impudent upbraiding your Minister with his faults excuse you in the
neglect of your duty? Conference p. 16. Now judge whether ever this Quaker
designed a sober and honest Answer to my book, as in the fear of God, when not
only here, but all along, he passes by what is most considerable, and wherein
the strength of my Argument lies. At this rate he might easily answer any book
whatsoever.


Par. I observe that he speaks of Ministers (as you say) Indefinitly; and
therefore cannot tell whether he means All, or some; for he does not explain
himself, as you used to do.


Min. Then may you take notice of a Jesu^tical trick of this Quaker's
(frequently used by him) to play fast and loose, in such shifting and ambiguous
terms. If he mean that some Ministers only are scandalous; why had he not the
honesty to express it, to free the innocent? But then I suppose, he foresaw
that his Argument would have been hissed at as ridiculous and impertinent, in
accusing the Ministry it self, and denying its efficacy merely for the Personal
failings of some Ministers, as if Iudas's faults had made void the doctrine
both of himself and his fellow Apostles: On the other side, if to avoid this
absurdity he purposely orders his discourse, that ignorant people may believe
All Ministers are scandalous, this is after the rate of his modesty, and that
which (blessed be God) the world knows to be a foul and malicious slander.


Par. You told me that in a settled national Ministry, consisting of great
numbers in holy Orders, it cannot be expected, but that some men for a corrupt
interest will intrude themselves into those sacred Offices; which is not to be
charged upon their Function, seeing there was a Judas among the chosen Twelve:
From hence T. E. infers that you palliate and extenuate the crime. p. 15.


Min. Whose crime? that of the scandalous Ministers? Will any man endued with
common sense say that the import of that passage was to palliate or cloak their
Crimes, when it contains a relation of so great a Crime as that of Intruding
for a corrupt interest into sacred Offices? No; Any one (that is not blind) may
see that there I am doing quite another thing, that is, excusing the Church and
Government from the blame of such an inconveniency, as indeed is unavoidable.


Par. But he wonders that you should say these scandalous Ministers should
intrude themselves; seeing all men that know any thing of them, know that
according to the Constitution of your Government, none can intrude themselves
into the Ministry, but must be admitted and have letters of Induction from the
Bishop, p. 16.


Min. That there is due care taken to prevent scandalous men from intruding
into the Ministry, is as freely confessed by me, as it is truly intimated by this
Quaker (to the honor of our Church) though against his will; yet as the Church
may unavoidably and unblamably receive some into her outward visible Communion,
who afterward may prove Apostates; So may she, when all is done, as
unavoidably admit some men into holy Orders, who may afterward prove
Hypocrites. For whereas Christ's Government of his Church is partly visible and
partly invisible; His invisible Government of the Souls of men, being that
which he exercises by his Grace and holy Spirit, is his own immediate work,
because he only is the Searcher of hearts. His outward Government of his Church
is that which he excerciseth by subordinate Ministers and Pastors; who, not
seeing men's hearts, can act only according to that outward Polity which he has
settled in his Church; and consequently the Bishops in admitting Ministers can
and are obliged only to act by prudential rules of Probation, following the
Apostolical directions in 2 Timothy 3. and Tit. 1. according to the best of their
knowledge and conscience. Now if any so ordained prove Hypocrites (as they may
after the severest inspection;) Yet are they regularly received, and duly
ordained, and therefore true Ministers according to Christ's own Institution;
the Church having herein done her utmost, and all that God requires in this
outward Administration: And the Gospel preached by them, being not theirs, but
God's, and his blessing upon his own Ordinance, are sufficient to convert and
save the souls of men; though these, while they preach to others, may themselves
become Castaways. 1 Cor. 9. 27.


To say that upon our admission we must have letters of Induction from the
Bishop, is a gross mistake; For letters of Induction are given by the
Archdeacon; and the intent of them is not to certify our Ordination, but only
to give us possession of our Benefices.


Par. But he speaks cautiously, and adds [as I think they term them.] ibid.


Min. He is fallen very flat on a sudden. Is his confidence come to I think? Here
he either dissembles his ignorance, or not; If he dissemble, (let his design be
what it will, for which he does it;) who is the hypocrite then? If he do not
dissemble, but is truly as ignorant as he seems to be; how is such a man
qualified to censure the constitution of a Church?


Par. Now then the question (he says) naturally arises, Why would the Bishop
admit such hypocrites into such sacred Offices? ibid.


Min. The answer as naturally follows (in his own words;) Why? He knew them not
to be such, ibid. Which is indeed an answer unanswerable.


Par. But then, alas! may the people well say, we are now in worse case then
before; for how shall we be assured, they are not most of them such? Here they
are all at a loss. ibid.


Min. Why should not such Ministers (whose lives are free from scandal) be
thought sincere good men, rather than Hypocrites, seeing Charity (as himself
confesses p. 23.) uses to think the best? Thefore you may discover here an
unchristian artifice and wheedle of this Quaker's, to bring the People into a
profane contempt of their Pastors, and to make them suspect the most Pious
Clergyman for an Hypocrite.

Neither are the people at a loss, though the Minister were an Hypocrite; while
(as has been ptoved) the efficacy of God's word depends upon his own blessing,
etc. and not upon the Minister's merit.

By this Argument of his the Church of God ever was and will be at a loss,
unless the sincerity of her Teachers were made known by Revelation: Therefore
are not the Quakers themselves all at a loss? For what assurance have they of
the sincerity of any of their Speakers, who may have drifts and designs much
different from what they pretend to? It Is well known that Jesuits have
personated Quakers, and have been Speakers in their Meetings. Dr. Good * Dr.
Good's Dialog. p. 9. 8.
tells us that it is upon record at Bristol, that two Franciscans gave notice of
the coming of Quakerism into that City; and that himself heard a Popish Priest
brag, that he had been a Speaker in their meetings. Now who is at a loss here?
Not that the Emissaries of Rome care more for the Quakers, than other
Sectaries, among whom they trade and lurk; but by this wicked craft, they carry
on their business, which is to undermine the Protestant Religion, and this
excellently constituted Church (the grand object of their Envy,) by throwing a
bone of Division, and raising Enemies in the bowels of her; well knowing that
an Army is more effectually destroyed by a Mutiny among themselves, than by the
fiercer assaults of a foreign Enemy. So indeed does Religion suffer more by
separation and Divisions among the Professors of it, than by the opposition of
the very Infidels. I pray God this may be seriously considered by all good men,
to avoid all schismatical meetings; and by the Quakers themselves, to be at
length convinced, whose journey-men they are.


Par. Next he blames you for saying, that by fruits Math, 7. 16. is not meant
the outward Conversation of false Prophets, but the ill consequences of their
Doctrines, p. 16. 17.


Min. It Is true, I both said it, and proved it: And why takes he no notice of
any of my Arguments, which I suppose, he would not have passed by, had he known
how to have answered them? Did I not prove my assertion from the deceits of
Hypocrisy, and the outward sanctity of some Heretics, whom I mentioned, and
the Sheeps clothing (the guise of innocence) mentioned in the text it self?
Look into my book again, and judge whether Ellwood have dealt ingennously with
me. I shall only add thus much, that as an ill life makes an ill man; so it is
false Doctrine that makes a false Prophet: And that as the outward show of
holiness did not argue those old heretics true Prophets; so neither did the
ill life of Judas prove him a false Apostle. Hence it follows, that by men's
outward Carriage we cannot distinguish between a false Prophet and a true. And
as for the 21, 22 and 23 verses, which he cites to prove the contrary, it is
very evident that they relate to the final condemnation of false Prophets at
the last day by Christ; and not to their discovery here by us.


Par. If those wise and great learned men, who admit these scandalous
Preachers, cannot by the ill consequences of their Doctrines discover those
corrupt interests for which they do intrude themselves, how alas! should the
ignorant vulgar do it? p. 17.


Min. You have started here a piece of elaborate nonsense. It Is indeed an hard
task which he puts upon the Bishops, and it is confessed it would have required
all the wisdom and learning they have, to discover the corrupt interests of
Intruders by the consequences of their Doctrines before their Admission, that
is to say, before they preach any Doctrine at all.

What grave conclusions would this shufler make by this preposterous form of
putting Consequents before Antecedents, Cart before the Horse! But for the
prevention of their preaching false Doctrine after their Ordination, all
security that may be is taken of them by their subscriptions to sound and
orthodox Articles of Religion, according to which they are bound to preach; and
there are Laws also to restrain them.


Par. Seeing T. E. taxes the Constitution of your Government, in relation to
your Admission into the Ministry, I should be glad to understand the form and
manner of it.


Min. To satisfy you, that all care imaginable is taken by the wisdom and piety
of our Church, to prevent the admission of scandalous Persons into holy orders,
and to promote the honor and ends of our sacred Function, You are to
understand, First, that there are certain times appointed for Fasting and
Prayer, to invoke God, to guide the Bishops and Pastors Collect for Ember week.
of his Flock, faithfully and wisely to make choice of fit persons to serve in
the sacred Ministry of his Church; and this is according to the primitive
Practice Acts 13. 3. Then due care is ordered See the Preface before the
Offices for Ordination.
to be taken for the examination of the Abilities of such persons as come to be
ordained. Then Certificates and Testimonials must be produced concerning their
Life and Conversation. When they are presented to the Bishop for Ordination, he
in most solemn manner charges the Archdeacon to take heed, whom he presents
etc. And if the people have any thing to object against any of them, they are
required to come forth in the name of God, and to show what the Crime or
Impediment is. That they may not miss opportunity to do it; there are (as is
well known) four set Sundays in the year appointed for Ordination.
After Prayers, and the reading of such Scriptures as are chosen for the
occasion, the Bishop in a solemn speech publicly exhorts them in the name of
our Lord Jesus Christ, to have in remembrance into how high a Dignity, and to
how weighty an office and charge they are called, that is to say, to be
Messengers, Watchmen, and Stewards of the Lord, etc. Then he bids them have it
printed in their remembrance, how great a treasure is committed to their
charge, that is, the sheep of Christ which he bought with his death, and for
whom he shed his blood. And if the Church or any member thereof take any hurt,
etc. by their negligence, he reminds them of the greatness See the form for
Ordination of Priests.
of the fault, and the horrible punishment, which will ensue. And that they may
be excited to the greater care and diligence, they are put in mind not only of
the end and excellency, but of the difficulty also of their Office, as well to
show themselves dutiful and thankful unto that Lord who has placed them in so
high a dignity, as also to beware that neither they themselves offend, nor be
occasion that others offend. Next he tells them, they cannot have a mind and
will thereto of themselves, for that Will and Here judge with what honesty T. E.
charges the Ministry of Eng land with denying the Divine Ability.
Ability is given of God alone, and therefore that they ought and have need to
pray earnestly for his holy Spirit. And be their Learning never so great, and
their Testimonials never so credible; yet are they not to be ordained, till
they have given engagement, in the presence of God and the Congregation, for
the faithful exercise of their duty and Function, by solemn promises, and
positive answers to several See both offices for ordering Deacons and Priests.
Questions propounded to them by the Bishop: First, Whether they trust, that
they are inwardly moved by the holy Ghost, to take upon them that Office to
serve God for the promoting his Glory, and the edifying of his Church? to which
each of them answers, I trust so. Then he enquires of them, Whether they
unfeignedly believe, that the holy Scriptures contain all Doctrines necessary
to salvation? And (for the time to come) Whether they are determined to teach
nothing as necessary to salvation, but what they shall be persuaded may be
proved from thence? Whether they will be faithful always to minister the
Doctrine and Sacraments and discipline of Christ, as the Lord has commanded,
etc. Whether they will be ready with all faithful diligence to banish and drive
away all erroneous and strange Doctrines contrary to God's word; and use both
public and private Exhortations as well to the sick as to the whole within
their Cures, etc. Whether they will be diligent in prayers and reading the holy
Scriptures, and in such studies as help to the knowledge of the same, laying
aside the study of the world and the flesh? Whether they will be diligent to
frame and fashion themselves and families according to the doctrine of Christ,
and to make themselves wholesome examples and patterns to the flock of Christ?
Whether they will maintain and set forward, as much as in them lies, quietness,
peace and love among all Christian people, etc. And lastly, Whether they will
obey the Godly admonitions of their Ordinary, and other chief Ministers, to
whom is committed the charge and Government over them? To all these they answer
and promise, They will so do, the Lord being their helper.

Then are they by Prayer and Imposition of hands, according to the Apostolical
rule and practice, ordained into their respective Functions.

Now judge what reason this bold man had to besplatter so wise and pious a
Constitution; and by Consequence to affront the King and Parliament, who have
so conscientiously established it by Law. But let me advise you to read the
Office it self, where you will be still more fully informed.


Par. I have given you great attention, and I must freely confess (from what
you have already told me) that this form of your ordination is a most solemn,
serious and pious service, far beyond what I ever knew or imagined of it; And
now I begin to blame my self, for taking things so much upon trust, and for
believing every tale that others have told me, as if this Church were an enemy
to the power of Godliness: For not weighing things impartially, I became very
much prejudiced against it; and when I heard others rail, I learnt by their
example to do so too.


Min. Therefore, I hope, hereafter you will be more just to examine things
before you censure them; And for this end I have been so express in
particulars, lest you should neglect to read, and still go on (as many do) to
speak evil of those things which you * Jude 10.
know not. Here you may note, how unjust and disingenuous our Adversaries are,
who designedly conceal the excellency of our Constitution, while they
exasperate ignorant people against it. And I hope hereafter you will beware of
them.


Par. Your counsel is very reasonable; only I am thinking it will be said, that
the faults of scandalous Ministers are the more aggravated by their walking
contrary to such principles and engagements.


Min. The Sin of these men will lie at their own doors. I am not justifying any
such; but or Mother the Church of England, from whom, you see, they learn no
such thing. And though there be some bad, (as there ever were, and will be in
the purest Churches, after the greatest care is taken,) yet does it detract
nothing at all from the honor of those other of the Clergy, who give all
faithful diligence to live up to their excellent Principles, and to Act
according to their Promises and Engagements.


Par. Whereas you affirmed to me, that they who make the Efficacy of the divine
Ordinances to depend on the Worthiness of the Persons concerned Fr. Conf. p. 14.
in them, are worse than the Papists, and cnotrary to the Ancient Fathers: The
Reason, T. E. tells us, is obvious, the Papists and you jump together, and as
with one voice endeavor to subject the people to the Clergy, how corrupt how
scandalous soever. p. 17.


Min. Then may you see, how dishonestly this Quaker shuffles in words of his
own, to pervert mine; the drift of my discourse being there to subject the
people to the divine Ordinances. But why does he pass by the ancient Fathers,
who were no Papists, and yet generally St. Aug. de doctr. Christiana l. 4. c
27. And de Sermon. Dom in Mo^te l. 2. c. 37. And Contra Epistol. Parmen. l. 2.
and elsewhere St. Chrysostom. by Theophyl. on Mat. 23. 2.
held the abovesaid Doctrines, and yet by the very Arguments which this Quaker
opposes? For our part, we expect no other subjection from the people, but what
God himself has for their own good been pleased to command, and make their duty.

So far as his objection concerns scandalons Ministers, I shall have further
occasion to speak of it hereafter. But if this be all the Quakers have to say
against Obedience due to their lawful Pastors; how will this justify their
Disobedience to, and separation from the good as well as bad?


Par. He continues the discourse, and laments the condition of the people in
these words, Alas poor people! miserably enthralled to their own servants, whom
good or bad they must keep, etc. p. 18. And he makes this note in the margin,
Minister a servant.


Min. If one would believe the Quaker here, he is full of pity to the people;
but I am sure he is much more full of mistakes, (and Charity must be mightily
stretched to excuse them from being wilful.) you are therefore to consider,
that there is a twofold notion of Service: There is a service of Subjection,
and there is a Service of Love and Friendship. To the first the Apostle has
reference, in that Exhortation Col. 3. 22. Servants, obey in all things your
Masters, etc. To the second, he refers, in that other Exhortation Gal. 5. 13.
-- by love serve one another. In this latter notion of it, viz. in Acts of
kindness, we are ready with St. Paul to preach our selves the peoples servants
for Iesus's sake; For in this sense, that is, in the offices of Love, a
Superior may not inproperly be said to serve his Inferior, as that great
Apostle showed himself ready to do.

In the first notion, it implies Dominion and Authority in those whom we serve,
and a Power to command and control; and consequently requires subjection and
Obedience in him that They are Ministers of God, Ministers of Christ, not of
the people. SeeMede's Disc. on 1 Cor. 4. 1.
serves. And in this notion also a Minister is a servant, but then it is to him
whose Minister he is: A Minister of State is a servant, but it is to the Prince
that employs him; So a Minister of Religion is a servant, yet not to the
People, but to God whose Ambassador he is. The Apostles were Ministers, and did
the people think them their servants? The Church is compared to an Army; and
are the Leaders and Officers in an Army, Servants to the common Soldiers?
Ministers are by their Office to direct and rebuke; and if they were servants
to the people, would it become them so to do? Angels are Ministering Spirits,
and are by God appointed to serve the necessities of the Church; This does not
suppose that they are our servants, to be controuled by us.

But the Quakers methinks should be more modest than to expect from the Clergy
a service of Subjection to the people, While (if the Author of the spirit of
the Hat may be trusted) Fox and others of them arrogating to themselves the
Ministerial Function and Power, do crush the tender ones; as he terms it, p. 12.

However you see the Arts, T. E. and such as he, make use of to encourage the
people to contemn their lawful Teachers; and in the mean time, as scrupulous as
the Quakers are to call any man Master, you see how they take upon them to be
really so themselves. Does not this piece of Ambition directly oppose the plain
doctrine of holy Scripture, which says concerning the relation of Ministers to
the people, that They are over them in the Lord, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 12. and so
commands them to esteem them very highly. v. 13. And again, that They have the
rule over them Heb. 13. 17. and commands them to obey them, and submit
themselves, etc. And calls them elsewhere 2 Timothy 2. 11.
Teachers, Fathers and Pastors? But the Quakers it Ephesians. 4. 11. 1 Cor. 4. 15
seems, are for inverting this Doctrine, and making the Hearer and learner a
Master over his Teacher, a Son over the Father, and the Flock over their
Shepherd.

Now therefore to retort his own words, p. 29. What I pray does this bespeak,
but pride and arrogance? And as a little before, Is it the humble, meek, gentle
Spirit of Jesus? or the haughty proud exalted Spirit of Lucifer?

Here you see the ill Consequences of his Doctrine; And by applying the rule of
our Savior, you may know, who he is by his fruits, that is to say, a false
Prophet.


Par. Though I have great ground to suspect a man for a Fornicator, though I
know him to be Covetous, though I fear he is an Idolater, etc. must I
notwithstanding (says he) acknowledge this man to be a Minister of Christ, and
have recourse to him for teaching, etc. God forbid. p. 19.


Min. This Quaker, lest he should not have enough against the Clergy positively
to accuse them of, judges it needful here to supply that defect with fears and
suspicions. Though both the Proverb and right Reason affirm, that Suspicion is
no proof; yet observe here, that even Fears and suspicions are by this Quaker
made warrantable grounds, both for Censure and separation. But I pray,
consider, what confusions and distractions this principle tends to, how ready
an Expedient it is to pick a hole in the Coat of the best man living, to
incense the vulgar, and justify any villainous enterprise. What jealousies will
not malice and Prejudice suggest, of the Holiest man on earth? The suggestion
of fears and jealousies was the first artifice, that was used to foment the
late Rebellion, and to hasten those fatal effects of it both in Church and
State, which this Nation since has felt. The same Trade, you see, is still
driven on by this Incendiary and his Fellows, in order to the same Effects,
from which God deliver this Church and Nation.


Par. You told me, that the Scribes and Man. 23. 2.
Pharisees were got into Moses's Chair, etc. Here first (says he) it may be
worth our noting, that the Scribes and Pharisees were got into Moses's Chair,
not into Aaron's: Now Moses was the Civil Magistrate, the Judge or Ruler; But
Aaron was more properly the Priest, p. 19.


Min. For the right understanding of this text, We must consider What Moses's
Chair imports; and Who the Scribes and Pharisees were. Moses was not only a
Civil Magistrate, but a Prophet, and type of Christ Deuteronomy. 18. 15. And we are to
consider him here, not as a Magistrate, but as a Prophet. Him the Jews ever
esteemed, as chief of their Doctors. They call Io^. 9 23, 29.
him Master, to this day; and glory not a little in his Discipleship: And
indeed the Scriptures Deuteronomy. 18. 15. and 34. 10. Number. 12. 6, 7, 8.
do artribute to him a higher mode of Prophecy than ordinary. Now the great and
principal work of a Prophet, was to teach and instruct the people: This is
evident from the Scripture; 2 Pet. 2. 1. False Prophets and false Teachers do
there explain one another. And Prophesying is put for Expounding and teaching
the will of God, 1 Cor. 13. 2. and 14. 1, 3. And he that expounds and
declares another's mind and meaning is called his Prophet, Exodus 7. 1, 4, 16:
And Christ's great work in the exercise of his Prophetical Office, was to teach
the people and to reveal his Father's will. We may therefore safely conclude,
that Moses's Chair, is the Chair of Doctrine; For it was the custom of those
times for Teachers to sit, while they taught; as several of the Jewish Doctors,
and also the ancient Commentaries under St. Ambrose's name on 1 Cor. 14. 29,
30. do inform us. In conformity to this Custom Christ himself taught sitting;
and the ancient Philosophers did the same, as Grotius notes upon the place,
where he quoteth Seneca calling them Cathedrarii, that is, Chairmen.

That Moses's Chair is thus to be taken, will further appear from the Persons
sitting in it. Christ's discourse is not concerning Judges and Magistrates, but
Teachers, as appears from ver. 4. where we read, They bound heavy burdens etc.
that is expounded the Law with intolerable strictness by adding their
Traditions to it; see Acts 15. 10, 28. and accordingly the Jews called a thing
forbidden by the Doctors Ligatum, viz. a thing bound; and a See ver. 9, ^0, etc.
thing permitted Solutum or loosed. Christ mentions none, but Scribes and
Pharisees, excluding Sadducees, who yet were members of their Sanhedrins, as
well as the other. And if he had spoken concerning their Sanhedrins, the
Priests would no doubt, have been mentioned especially the high Priest, who was
a Chief member of them in our Savior's time. Now that the Scribes here
mentioned did succeed the Prophets in their office and Employment, is clear
from the Scripture. Behold (says our Savior) I send you Prophets, Wisemen and
Scribes, Mat. 23. 34. Where the one does expound the other. In 1 Cor. 1. 20.
Wisemen and Scribes are conjoined; For such as were educated in the Learning
and wisdom of the Law, and professed it, were called Scribes. Ezra is called a
Scribe, chapter 7. 12. to which sense Christ alludeth Mat. 13. 52. In ancient times
many were educated in Schools and Colleges to be Prophets; But when the gift
of Prophesy ceased among that people, then they remained Scribes only;
accordingly Maimonides says, that the Reason why Baruch was so discontented,
was because he had spent so much time under Jeremiah, to obtain the gift of
Prophesy, yet was constrained to go without it: So that he was called Baruch
the Scribe only. Wherefore the true notion of Scribes is this, They were
Students, Learned men, and Teachers * (...) Luk 5. 17.
of the Law to the People, as the Prophets were of old, but without the gift of
Prophecy; Succeeding them in their Office, but not in their extraordinary
Mission and Supernatural Endowments: Hence our Lord says, that they sat in
Moses's seat.

As for the word [Pharisees,] that denotes their Sect, and way of Religion
only, most of the Scribes being of that sect as is probable, because it was so
much in vogue with the people. -- From this Scripture thus explained it will
follow.

1. That Persons without an Extraordinary mission, and Supernatural Endowments,
may be true Successors of them that had both, as the Scribes were of the
ancient Prophets.

2. That men may be God's Officers, though they have not that Immediate mission
from him; For if the Scribes were not God's Officers, they did not sit in
Moses's Chair, in Christ's sense; This is so obvious, that even Heathen
Magistrates are called God's Ministers, Romans 13. 4.

3. That whatever Such as have the Office and Authority to Teach, (though bad
men) do teach, by virtue of their Office.
jure Cathedrae, (as Grotius expresses it) keeping themselves within the Sphere
of their Authority, They ought to be obeyed in.


Par. You said that our Savior has given By an eternal document I mean a
standing rule in the Church.
the people an Eternal Document, when such Teachers as live not answerably to
their Doctrine fall to their share. An eternal Document! What Is that? p. 20.


Min. I told you in our Savior's own words, Whatsoever they bad them to
observe, that to observe and do, but not to do after their works. Mat. 23. 3.


Par. Nay hold there (says he) we have had too much of that already; England
has not yet forgot, since the Scribes and Pharisees of Rome sa^e in the Chair
here, etc. ibid


Min. Had it been a Turk, Jew, or professed Atheist, that had accosted me with
this reply, I should have received it without any surprise at all; But seeing
this Quaker pretends to Christianity, is it not strange that He should fall
foul upon Christ himself? Had it been a Document of mine own framing (though
never so reasonable;) I should not have wondered to see him exercise his
Sophistry upon i t: But it being a Document of our blessed Lord's, and
delivered in no other but his own express words, and in his own sense; Methinks
the Honor and Authority of the Author should have deterred him from this
Confidence, and persuaded him to have been more sparing.

How would the barbarous Jews have hugged themselves, and how much innocence
would they have pleaded, if in the days of Christ, they had been furnished with
this Quaker's Argument? For had it been broacht then, much louder had the
Crucifige's rung in Pilat's ears. Might not they have argued at Ellwood's rate,
Have not thou commanded us to observe and do, whatsoever the Scribes and
Pharisees bid us? We are now set on by them; It Is they that bid us Crucify
thee; Then from thy self we have an authority to execute this command of theirs.

So that I must answer my Antagonist in Isaiah's Dialect, 2 Kings 19. 22. Whom
have thou reproached and blasphemed? and against whom have thou exalted thy
voice, and lifted thine eyes on high? even against the Holy one of Israel.


Par. I must confess that the Consequences from this gloss are very odious;
therefore, I pray, give me now the true sense of the text.


Min. I cannot do it better than in the words of St. Chrysostom an Author, whom
this Quaker pretends to have a very good opinion of, and whose Authority he
misquotes against me with so much triumph. p. 120, and 188. Let us here him
therefore descanting upon this Document by Theophilact, The Lord speaks of
those, who fit in Moses's Chair, that is, of those who teach what is in the
Law; those Theoph. in loc. The like exposition we read in St. Aug. de doct.
Chr. l. 4.
therefore who teach the Divine Law we ought to hear, tho they do it not
themselves: Further he objects, (as Ellwood here) But must we do all things
they say, tho they be evil things? We answer, says he, First that he that
teaches will hardly be so audacious as ever to exhort to things directly evil.
Secondly, If we grant that any one should exhort to evil life, then he speaks
not from Moses's Chair, nor out of the Law. And this I hope the Quaker will
grant an eternal Document, that All that an evil Pastor commands us from God's
Law (and by virtue of his Office,) we ought to do; This was our Savior's sense
in that text, and mine in quoting it.


Par. There is one thing which I must not forget; He tells his Reader in these
words, Our Godly Martyrs (by his leave) held not this Document to be eternal,
as Smithfield can amply witness. ibid.


Min. This is a passage I must not brook, that he should be so arrogant to call
them Their Martyrs, as if the Martyrs were Quakers, and it were the Quakers
Cause for which they suffered, The Crow must not adorn himself with the
Peacocks feathers; nor the Quaker challenge a property where he has none at
all. In honor therefore to the memory of these pious Souls, I shall (God
willing) undertake to vindicate their reputation from so foul, so false an
intimation; and show,

1. How far they were from being any thing like the Quakers, or in the least
inclinable to them.

2. That they did not oppose Christ's words (as Ellwrod here does;) but held
this Document to be eternal.

First I hope to make it evident, that They were as contrary to the erroneous
and nonsensical tenants of the Quakers, as to those of the Papists, by whose
cruel hands they were murdered. And this disparity will appear both in their
Doctrines and Manners.

Mr. Fox tells us, that Mr. Rogers, Protomartyr in Queen Mary's bloody
Persecution, Martyrology vol. 3. p. 129.
speaking of the Ministry, declared, that the similitude between Them and the
Apostles, was not in the singular gifts of God, as doing miracles, etc. but
They were like them in Doctrine, etc. Now he being Vicar of St. Sepulcher,
Prebendary of St. Paul's, and Divinity-Reader there, could not be admitted into
the said Preferments, but by taking Oaths and subscribing to several
Ecclesiastical Constitutions. And must He be put into the Calendar of the
Quakers Martyrs?


Par. It Is well if you can agree upon the Persons; For T. E. speaks of the
Martyrs in general, and not here of any in particular.


Min. You say well: But what if I pitch upon Cranmer, Ridley, Latimer, Hooper,
Philpot, Bradford and Tailor?


Par. These T. E. will own to be Godly men, and worthy Martyrs. p. 305.


Min. Good.

Par. What makes you smile?

Min. Cranmer was Archbishop of Canterbury, Ridley Bishop of London, Latimer
Bishop of Worcester, Hooper Bishop of Gloucester, Philpot Archdeacon of
Winchester, Bradford Prebendary of Paul's, and Dr. Tailor Parson of Hadley: And
would it not make any man smile to hear this man call those Reverend Prelates,
etc. the Quakers Martyrs, who were such constant Defenders of the Protestant
Religion, and of the Doctrine of the Church of England, both by their Sermons,
their Pens, and their Lives? However take this by the way, that in calling them
Godly, he justifies their Practices; and in calling them Martyrs, he owns the
Cause for which they suffered; The cause makes the Martyr.
and so by consequence makes the whole design of his Book a Contradiction to
himself here. So that he has brought himself into this miserable Dilemma and
necessity, either to reject these Godly Martyrs, or to recant his book.

For further instance, These Martyrs, who were so learned, so well skilled in
the Fathers, and so excellently grounded in the Principles of Faith and
Holiness, that they confirmed them with the Sacrifice of their Lives, These
very men were so far from concluding all Oaths unlawful, that as they could not
be admitted into their Offices and Places, but by taking Oaths; so likewise did
they administer Oaths to the subordinate Clergy, and Ecclesiastical Officers,
according as the Laws, did then oblige them. These were Dispencers of both the
Sacraments, were Receivers of Tithes; They never scrupled to give Civil Titles
to men, nor to say [You] to a single person, as is evident from all their
Conferences and Disputations; They wore Foxes Martyrol vol. 3 p. 493, 503, 667.
etc.
Gowns, and were in all such things as the present Clergy. Yea that very Form
of Confession (in our Service Book,) against which Ellwood writes a whole
Chapter, was composed by some of these, whom he calls their Godly Martyrs.


Par. I see already, that he had better never have mentioned these Godly
Martyrs.


Min. He knows, what reputation they have among all Protestants, and therefore
he would Gull the common people with this plausible Cheat, by endeavoring to
persuade them, that these Martyrs were Patrons of their Cause. Therefore think
it not tedious, if I give you a further account of their Principles and
Practices.

Cranmer one of the Compilers of our Liturgy, ibid p. 48.
was so far from abandoning the two blessed Sacraments, that he calls them the
Seals of God's promises and gifts; and also of that holy fellowship, which we
have with Christ and all his members.

Ridley another of the Compilers of our Li- Liturgy, was so constant to the
Devotions of it, that Mr. Fox tells us, Martyrol. vol. 3. p. 432.
he constantly used the Common Prayer in his own house both Morning and
Evening. And that he, being told out of St. Cyprian and St. Augustine, that
Communion of Sacraments does not defile a man, but consent of Deeds,
acknowledged it to be well spoken if well understood; which was meant (says
he) of them, which suppose they are defiled, ibid p. 434.
if any secret vice be either in the Ministers or in them which communicate
with them. Baptism (says he) is given to Children; the Lords Supper is, and
ought to be given to them that are waxen. And he tells us, that he wished the
Bishop of Winchester, to be stiff in the defense of the Sacraments, against the
detestable errors of Anabaptists. And (that you may see his judgment of the
Continuation of the Lord's Supper) he says * ibid p. 489. ibid p. 491.
[Do this, etc. Luke 22. 19.] was not a Commandment for a time, but to
persevere to the world's end.

Hooper in his Exposition on the 3d. Commandment tells us, that to Swear or
take an Oath before a Lawful Judge is the work also: of this Commandment, and
sets forth God's Glory: for as Paul says, All controversies are ended by
the virtue of an Oath, So have we examples in Paul Romans 9. And in the same
Exposition, he not only owns the Holy Sacraments (as he rightly styles them,)
but he expressly calls them both Vows and Oaths; and further tells us that
therein we Swear and promise to live after God's Will and pleasure. Pray,
Consult the Preface to his Exposition on the Ten Commandments, and you will
find how contrary his Doscourse is to the Quakers notion of Perfection.

Do you not remember what character T. E. gives of Philpot?


Par. Yes; He tells us, He was a Godly and Learned Martyr p. 275.


Min. Truly Ellwood is so far in the right, for a Godly and Learned man he was.
But then let us see how He and the Quakers agree in their notions and
principles of Religion; and what property the Quakers have in this Excellent
Martyr. Bonner taunting him as an Anabaptist, and as one that denied the
Lawfulness of Swearing before a Judge, he replied thus, Martyrol vol. 3. p. 561.
My Lord, I am no Anabaptist, I think it LAWFVLL TO SWEAR before a Competent
Judge. He being accused by the said Bonner, before one of the Sheriffs of
London, that he denied Baptism to be necessary to them that were born of
Christian Parents; and that he denied Fasting and Prayer, etc. smartly answered
to this ibid.
slander, Is not your Lordship ashamed to say before this Worshipful
Gentleman, that I maintain these abominable Blasphemies which you have
rehearsed? So that you see to deny the Ordinance of Baptism (as the Quakers do)
in the judgment of the Learned Philpot is an abominable Blasphemy. And in
vindication of Infant ibid. p. 606.
Baptism He has writ a very learned Tract never to be Answered. And concerning
the other Sacrament of the Lord's Supper; At a Conference with several of the
Nobility, he said thus, I do protest to your Honors, that I think as
reverently of the Sacrament, as a Christian man ought to do; and that I
acknowledge the Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Christ ibid p. 556.
ministered after Christ's Institution, to be one of the greatest Treasures and
comforts that he left us in the earth. And being required by the Archbishop
Martyrol v. 3. p. 576
of York to give a definition of the Church, he gave it thus, It is a
Congregation of people dispersed through the world, agreeing together in the
word of God, using the Sacraments and all other things according to the same.
So then those that deny the use of the holy Sacraments (and consequently the
Quakers, who do so) are, according to this Pious Martyr, no members of the
Church of Christ.

Bradford (whom Ellwood styles an Eminent Martyr, p. 275.) in a Conference with
the Archbishop of York and the Bishop of Chichester, would not by both their
entreaties be ibid p. 295.
moved to sit in their presence; neither would he be persuaded to put on his
Cap, till they overcame him by their great importunity. The ibid p. 298.
same Bradford charge the Papists with Sacrilege in robbing the Laity of
Christ's Cup in the Sacrament. Now if he were living, of how great Sacrilege
would he accuse the Quakers, who not only take away the Cup, but utterly deny
both the Sacraments? And herein are the Quakers far worse than the Papists.
Again as to his Judgment of an Oath; In a certain ibid p. 284.
Conference he says thus, I was thrice Sworn in Cambridg, when I was admitted
Master of Arts, when I was admitted Fellow of Pembrook Hall, and when I was
there, the Visiters came thither and Swear the University; Again I was Sworn,
when I entered into the Ministry, when I had a Prebend given me, and I was
Sworn to serve the King a little before his Death. Tush! Herod's Oaths (quoth
the Chancellor Steph* Gardener.
) a man should make no Conscience at. But, My Lord, (said Bradford) these were
no Herod's Oaths, no Unlawful Oaths, but OATHS ACCORDING TO GOD's WORD, as you
your self have well affirmed in your book De vera obedientia. Do but compare
his Letters Recorded by Fox, with Ellwood's Chapter of Confession, and see
whether Light and Darkness can be more contrary.

Tailor speaking of the Common Prayer Book, gives this character of it, There
was (says he) set forth by the innocent King Edward, the whole Church Service,
with great deliberation and the advice of the best learned men in the Realm,
and Authorized by the whole Parliament, and received and published gladly by
the whole Realm, which book was never reformed but Martyrol vol. 3. p. 171.
once, and yet by that one reformation it was so fully perfected, according to
the Rules of our Christian Religion in every behalf, that no Christian
Conscience could be offended with anything therein contained, I mean of that
book reformed. And the Common Prayer Book was the last Present he made to his
Wife; and that which ibid p. 175.
he used also during his inprisonment. This may satisfy you, that this Godly
Martyr was no ibid p. 172.
Quaker. Of an Oath you may see his opinion, where he says, The Oath against
the Supremacy of the Bishop of Rome was a LAWFUL OATH, and so was the Oath
made by us all touching the King's or Queen's Pre-eminence.


Par. I perceive after all this, that all those excellent men, whom he
acknowledges Godly Martyrs, were of the Church of England.


Min. Did you ever doubt it? Surely it was never questioned, till this Quaker
invaded our Right in them.


Par. But how do you prove your other Particular, that they held the
afore-mentioned Document to be eternal?


Min. First you shall hear, what Latimer says, As long as they minister the
word of God or his Sacraments, or any thing that God has Ordained to the
Salvation of Mankind, wherewith God has promised to be present, to work with
biid p. 478.
the Ministration of the same to the end of the world, They be to be heard, to
be obeyed, to be honored for God's Ordinance sake, which is Effectual and
Fruitful, whatsoever the Minister is, though he be a Devil, etc. And he cites
Origin and Chrysostom as of the same opinion.

Hear also what the Learned Philpot says to this Point. He being engaged in a
Disputation with the Archbishop of York, and being asked [what the opinion of
the Donatists was?] replied, That they were a certain sect of men, affirming
among other Heresies, that the Dignity of the Sacraments depended on the
Worthiness of ibid p 576.
the Minister, so that if the Minister was Good, the Sacraments which be
Ministered were available, or else not. Here you may infer, that this tenent of
Ellwood's in the opinion of this holy Martyr is no less than Heresy: And you
may know too from whence both he and his Brethren had it, even from the long
since exploded Donatists. At another Disputation with the Bishop of Worcester
and others, He told the Bishop that he knew Rome. To this the Bishop answered,
that he was sorry that he had been there; for he supposed, the wickedness which
he saw there made him do, as he did. Philpot replied No, My Lord, I do not do,
as I do for that cause; for I am taught otherwise by the Gospel, not altogether
to refuse the Minister for his evil living, so that he bring sound Doctrine
ibid p. 546.
out of God's Book.


Par. I wonder, why you take no notice of Tindall, whom T. E. calls a faithful
Martyr p. 275.


Min. I shall give you two or three instances, whereby you may understand, his
Principels were far from Quakerism. In a supplication to the King and Estates,
he exhorts the Lords Temporal, that they would fall before the King's Grace,
and would humbly desire his Majesty to suffer it to be tried, who of right
ought to succeed, etc. And that all the Lords Temporal be Martyrol. vol. 2. p.
368.
SWORN thereto, etc. Next I find this Confession of his, We be all Sinners an
hundred times greater than all that we suffer. And in one of his Letters he
gives advice, that the ibid.
Scripture may be in the Mother Tongue, and LEARNING set up in the UNIVERSITIES.

That these Martyrs aforementioned were ibid p. 369.
Godly men, T. E. himself confesses. From which confession of his you may
reasonably make this Inference, That men may be Archbishops, Bishops,
Archdeacons, Prebendaries and Parsons; may encourage University-Education;
sons may live and die Conformable to the Doct rine and Discipline of the Church
of England; may Administer both the Sacraments; may hold it Robbery and
Sacrilege to deprive the People of [but] a part of the Lord's Supper; may
defend Infant Baptism; take Oaths; daily confess themselves to be miserable
Sinners; may say [You] to a single Person; give and receive Titles of Honor;
may take Tithes; and (agreeably to Christ's Doctrine) affirm it unlawful for
any man to divide the External Unity of the Church by separating from that
particular Congregation, whereof he is a member, for the faults or ill life of
the Preacher; And yet, even in Ellwood's judgment, be GODLY Men. Now if these
were Godly Martyrs, why must we be accounted Ungodly, for retaining the same
Doctrins and Constitutions? I heartily wish the Quakers would be of the same
Religion these good men were of; for then they would be of our Religion too;
and then (but not before) I should acknowledge them Their Martyrs.


Par. Whereas you told me, that a man is to look at the water, not at the
Conduit through which it is conveyed. Conf. p. 15. To this he answers, But if a
man see the Conduit besmeared with mire and dirt, will he choose (or is it
reasonable he should be tied) to drink the water that issues therefrom, etc? p.
21.


Min. The outside of the Conduit may be defiled, and yet the pipes and water in
them may be clean. Man's evil actions do not hinder his speaking well, nor does
the wickedness of the Sower infect the seed; as was determined in an old
British Council under Saint Patrick. Splem. T. 1. p. 56.



Par. To your instance of Judas he says; he was bad enough, but will you say,
that after he had transgressed and fallen, he should (if he had lived) have
continued in the Ministry? p. 22.


Min. This is an idle query, far remote from our present business, started on
purpose to avoid the question, which was not to enquire, whether Judas should
have continued in his Apostleship after his horrid treason, (had not the divine
Vengeance pursued him to death?) but the question was, whether Judas was a Good
man or Bad, during the exercise of his Apostolical Function, before that
Treason was committed? That he was both an Apostle and a Bad man, is Acts. 1.
17, 18. Io^. 6. 7. and 13. 18.
certain, and page 21, 22.
confessed by my Adversary. Therefore it is clear enough (what I before asserted)
that an Ill man may notwithstanding be a true Minister of the Gospel. Here you
may see, that I am not pleading the Cause of Judas, or any like him; For I wish
such were ejected: But till this be fairly done by just Authority, we may not
allow the people to separate from them, seeing our Savior never caused his
Disciples to separate from Judas, though he knew him and declared him to be a
Devil. Ioh. 6. 70, 71. Now that the people are not tied and fettered (according
to T. E's. expression) to Ministers incorrigibly ill, but may have remedy by a
Judicial way of Proceeding, appears from the 26. Article of this Church; And to
my knowledge, some accordingly have been Ejected from their Offices and
Benefices.


Par. As for Nicholas the Deacon (whom you mentioned) his Office was to serve
tables, to take care of the widows, etc. he was chosen to be Overseer of the
poor, etc. however it appears not, that he was a public Preacher. ibid.


Min. If I rightly understand this Quaker, the Offices of a Deacon and an
overseer of the poor are according to him one and the same. Then probably his
next work will be to quarrel with our Magistrates, or rather with the Laws of
the Land, that the Overseers of the poor are not ordained into their Function
by Prayer and Imposition of hands, as the Deacons were Acts. 6. 6. But why
might not he be a Preacher as well as his Colleague St. Stephen?

However this I must ask, If the Quakers plead, that his Deaconship did not
qualify him for a public Preacher, How dare they (men and women, every one at
their pleasure) take upon them to preach, being neither Priests nor Deacons?
Does not this contradict and make void their pretense of the Spirit's Moving
them?

And whereas T. E. says, that neither the Scriptures nor Eusebius say He
continued his Deaconship after his Defection; I answer, neither do they say he
was cast out of his Deaconship, which was my Adversarie's part to have proved:
but he saw that be could not make that out; whereupon he says, that it appears
not he was a public Preaocher, concerning which I have said what is sufficient
already.

But whatever the Preacher is, the people are accountable for all the
instructions they hear, concerning their respective duties both to God and man.
How will Ellwood deny this?


Par. Ay but, (says he) might his Parishioner well have replied, Those
discourses made little impression upon me, when I considered from whom they
came etc. p. 23.


Min. Ay Indeed? Is this the Quaker's Divinity, to say this would have been
well replied, That the Sermons of his duty to God and man made little
impression upon him? No pretense, I am sure, can justify this Reply; But it is
too apparent, the contrary Command of our blessed Savior lately explained to
you, has made little impression upon this Quaker, whereby the people are
straightly enjoined not to disobey their Teachers (though Scribes and Pharisees)
nor to plead their ill life to excuse their own disobedience, (as this Quaker
here encourages the people to do, having (to this end no doubt) aforehand
corrupted that text, as you have heard;) but in quite opposite terms, Whatsoever
they bid them concerning their said duty to God and man, that to observe and
do, though not after their works. This Quaker in the mean time forgot that heavy
sentence of our Savior's, Mat. 5. 19. Whosoever shall break one of these least
Commandments, and teach men so, shall be called the least in the Kingdom of
Heaven, that is, excluded from the Privileges of it.

I am confident, he cannot think, this Plea, which he teaches the people, will
hold good at the last Day; For while Goodness is Goodness, and Truth is Truth,
whoever speaks it; God will then demand an account of it from all that heard
it. And whatever profane men, and promoters of Satan's Kingdom may talk and
vent at this distance from that Day, Yet they will then find Ellwood's Plea
insufficient to answer these Questions, If you Discerned the actions of your
Teacher to be EVIL, why then did you not avoid them? His Example did not compel
you to be Bad: And if you Discerned his Instructions to be GOOD, why then did
you not follow them? Why did you not consider what they were, rather than from
whom they came? To these questions they will then be as speechless, Mat. 22. 12.
as he in the Gospel, that was found without his Wedding Garment; And it will
not be Thomas Ellwood, that will then be able to open their mouths.


Par. You have said enough to convince me both of the weakness and naughtiness
of this Plea, which he has taught the people, and by which they encourage
themselves to slight their Teachers and their Doctrine for the least failing
they find in them.


Min. This will neither justify the impiety of these men, nor the Separation of
such as have already left the Church, on that pretense of the Teacher's not
following his own directions, which is as absurd and preposterous, says St.
Augustine, Hom. 50.
As if a Traveller should think, he must go back again, or leave the way,
because he saw the Mil-stone with its inscription showing him the way, but not
moving in it at all it self.

But there are too many that rejoice at the faults of Ministers, where they
find them; and invent and impute them, where they find them not; that they may
have a pretense for their Separation. To which purpose rightly says St.
Augustine in the same place, Men seek not so much with Charity whom they may
Commend, in order to their Imitation; as with ill will whom they may Carp at,
in order to their [own] Deception: Some cannot find out Good men, being ill
themselves; and others fear to find such, because they would still be evil.


Par. The true Ministers were always Examples of Goodness, (he says) but too
many of these Ministers are Examples of evil. p. 24


Min. Has not the Quaker forgot himself here? For [too many] is an implicit
acknowledgment, that many are not Examples of evil, and therefore after all his
Exclamations may be Good men.


Par. When you cannot clear them of your own Profession, (says he) you fall
upon the Quakers, whom if you can render as bad as your own, you think you have
done something, etc. p. 24, 25.


Min. I never endeavored to clear those of mine own Profession that are
faulty, but the Innocent, and to justify the Profession it self from unjust
Cavils. I ever thought it a method as Ungentile, as Improper, to defend Truth
by Personal Reflections. A Zealous Turk and a profane Christian makes me think
no better of Mahometanism, nor worse of Christianity. But seeing the Quakers
themselves have been the first Aggressors in this way of arguing, and do place
so much of their strength therein; it was proper for me, (only in general terms
not naming any particular persons) and indeed I was engaged to confnte it, by
letting them see, how much it reflects upon their own Faction, and makes all
such objections void. However, that the world may know it was no groundless
intimation of mine, being thus put upon it, I desire Sir James Whitlock's case,
as it was lately managed in Chancery, and two Books, the one called [The
Quakers Spritual Court;] the other [The Spirit of the Hat] written by a Quaker,
may be examined.

By this time, I hope, I have removed your scruples occasioned by the Quaker's
first Chapter, which in his Preface he tells his Reader, is Offensive. As great
a truth as ever he spoke; For I have sufficiently proved it so to be, that is,
offensive to God, to Truth, and all Good men. But let us now proceed to the
examination of his second Chapter.


CHAP. II. Of saying [You] to a single person.
Par. IN his second Chapter T. E. says, you seem offended with their using the
wrd [Thou] to a single person.


Min. I only vindicate the use of [You] to a single person; yet must I tell
him, that to take up a word or phrase (though lawful in it self) in contradiction
to an innocent custom, and in an affected singularity as a mark of distinction
from their Neighbors, this is justly offensive: And to make it a necessary
duty to say [Thou] to a single person, and a sin to say [You;] when God has
neither commanded the one, nor forbidden the other, this is adding to the Word
of God, and is rank Superstition and Pharisaism, in enslaving the Conscience,
and placing Religion in pitiful niceties; Superstition being an impiety, which
represents God so light, or so froward, as to be either pleased, or angry with
things indifferent, and of no moment. Superstitio est impietas, qua Deum ita
levem, aut iracundum quis cogitat, ut rebus nihili placari eum putet, iisdemve
ad iram Commovtri. Mori Enchir. Eth l. 2.



Par. But T. E. says, that they lay not the stress of their Religion upon
words. p. 27.


Min. A good hearing; Then may a good man, without any violence to Religion,
say as well [You,] as [Thou] to a single person. But if he spoke as he thought,
why do they and he contend so much about a word, and divide the Church, and
separate themselves from it for a thing they dare lay no stress of Religion
upon? So that he has in those words done little credit to his Cause, and his
whole Party, in making them all Schismatics.

Yet can we think, that he has here truly represented his own Party, or cleared
them of Superstition, while we observe their strict and demure use of words and
phrases to the enslaving of their own Consciences? As if to say, [I thank you
for your kindness] or the like, were not as good sense and as lawful, as to
say, [I receive thy love;] Or to say [Such a one is dead] were not as pleasing
to God, as to say [He is out of the body;] Or to say, [I cannot consent to such
a thing] were not as proper, and as Religious, as to say [I am not free,] which
is a phrase they have very ready to oppose good Laws and good Counsel.

And if you mark the Quakers, you cannot but observe, that in the affected use
of their distinguishing phrases, tones and gestures, they really esteem
themselves more religious than their Neighbors, whilst indeed (if they
understood it) they are the less Religious, by how they are the more
superstitious and schismatical.

But I believe, that in many of them much of this proceeds from want of
knowledge, who now (I hope) will by one of their own Teachers be at length
convinced of their great error in laying so much stress of Religion upon words
and phrases.


Par. You must be cautious how you reflect upon the Quakers for the use of
their phrases, seeing many of them are taken out of the holy Scriptures.


Min. Though the holy Scriptures ought to be remembered and frequently used in
our Converse, for our mutual instruction; Yet I would not have you so ignorant
and superstitious, as to think that God in revealing his will there, designed
that our duty should consist in the continual use of those very forms of
speech, but in a due regard to those truths and Commands contained in them.

As for the style of the Scriptures, you are to understand, that it was ever
accommodated to the particular dialect of that people to whom they were
written, and therefore varied accordingly; as we find it does in the different
proprieties of the Hebrew Tongue in the old Testament, and of the Greek in the
new: And if this had not been observed by the Apostles in their Preaching, how
could they have been understood by men of so many different Languages, as we
find they spoke to Acts 2. seeing every language has its peculiar phrases and
proprieties of speech?

Therefore God's complying with those national customs of speech then, is a
rule to us to do the like now; Otherwise a man would be a Barbarian to those he
converses with.

Now the word of God is never so much abused, as when the phrases of it are
plausibly used, while the sense of it is p^rverted and applied to evil
purposes, to maintain schism, faction and the like; and this we call Canting;
an Instance hereof we have in Corah and his company, who even in an Act of
Rebellion could cry; The Congregation is holy, and the Lord Numb. 16. 3.
is among them; their sin being much aggravated, by their gainsaying Authority
in holy language.


Par. Yet, says he, we know there is a form of words, and we desire to keep to
it. ibid.


Min. Here is one instance (among many in his book) of this Quaker's Canting,
in his demure and impertinent bringing in a Scripture phrase, nothing at all
belonging to the subject in hand, but quite to another matter. However one
thing I like well, that sound words in the opinion of a Quaker may be contained
in a form. But if he allude to that form of sound words, which St. Paul gave to
Timothy; That, you must know, was no such thing as a Gang 2 Timothy 1. 13.
of phrases, but a Creed or short Summary of Christian Religion, by the use of
which he might be enabled to withstand the opposition of Dr. Hammond in Ioc.
growing heresies. And therefore to bring in this to the subject in hand, to
make the sense of these words to imply a Grammar or Dictionary to direct the
Conscience in the use of words and phrases (as his brethren no doubt do
understand him) is a thing which sure He, upon more serious thoughts, will be
unwilling to defend, and therefore he had done faithfully to have interpreted
his meaning.

If by sound words he mean an entire and plain Confession of Faith, or a
summary of those things that are necessary to be believed unto Salvation, I
know no such thing subscribed by the body of them; for that would fix them to
something, when indeed they are yet fixed to nothing. This miserable defect is
far remote from the uprightness and ingenuity of the Apostles, in giving their
Hearers an account of their Fundamental Principles in a (...).
short Form, to let men see to the bottom of their Religion.

It Is true indeed, some Quakers have pretended to set down in their books the
heads of their belief. But then, 1. No man knows whether the rest will
subscribe to them, while they have been so different from one another even in
Fundamental Points. 2. That crowd of Scripture texts which they quote, has been
generally so erroneously misinterpreted and misapplied by them, that even where
they write little else but Scripture words, we have reason to suspect their
meaning. Therefore when you were so inclined to Quakerism, would you have
turned to you knew not what? to a dangerous Religion you cannot see to the
bottom of? What kind of Religion is this of the Quakers, whereof their Leaders
either can not, or dare not give any entire and intelligible account? Do not
these Teachers use this as a piece of Craft to reserve to themselves a liberty
to preach what Doctrine, yea what heresy they please? I pray God draw their
Followers out of their snares, and grant all unstable people Grace and
Discretion to keep off from them and their meetings.

As for that which we and the Universal Church of Christ embrace under the name
of the Apostles Creed, as the Mark and Badge of a Christian, the Quakers
tenants are such as give us little reason to think they will own it; while some
have held one Heresy, some another; Some have denied the Holy Trinity, Some
have pretended Equality with God: One of the Heads of 'em pretended to be the
Messiah; Another of their chief men affirmed himself to be the Judge of the
world, and to see men's hearts; and has been by some of his Party called the Son
of God: Others have affirmed, that Christ in the flesh, and all he did and
suffered was but a Figure, and nothing but an example; See perfect Pharisee.
Others, if not most of them, think they have no need of outward Teaching, by
reading, and hearing the Holy Scriptures read and applied; And that the Holy
Scriptures are not the word of God; That there is no mediate Call to the
Ministry, etc. so far are they degenerate from the Christian Faith. See perfect
Pharisee.
Now what fault finds T. E. with us for saying [You] to a single Person?


Par. I do not see that he blames you for putting the singular and plural
number together, as unlawful in it self; but for the pride and flattery, which,
he says, first put Inferiors upon paying a Plural respect to the single Person
of every Superior, and Superiors upon receiving and at last requiring it. ibid.
and which are still cherished thereby. p. 28, 29.


Min. As for the pride and flattery he speaks of, you must consider, that the
best actions are liable to such imputations; Even Almsdeeds, Fasting and
Prayer in the Pharisees proceeded from vainglory; But then did their pride
lessen the value of those good Actions in others, who constantly performed
them? or make Alms-deeds, Fasting and Prayer unlawful? And is it unlawful for
an honest Man to use an innocent expression of respect, because ill Men may
abuse it to pride and flattery? I hope he will not say that those, whom he owns
for Godly Martyrs, used it from such evil principles.

But whether, think you, is there more pride in our useing it as a testimony of
respect, or their saucy denying it to Superiors, even to the King himself, in
an affectation of singularity, and in opposition to a lawful custom?


Par. Truly I know not how to clear them, but T. E. tells us, that in the best
times, and with the best Men [Thou] and [Thee] were inoffensive language. ibid.


Min. It was custom that made them so: But what were those times and Men which
he calls the best?


Par. Those under the Commonwealth of Rome, before it was turned into an
Empire. p. 28.


Min. What? those the best times, and best men, in the very height of Paganism
and Idolatry? Did our Common-wealths-man here remember, that Christ was born
and lived under the Roman Empire, and paid obedience to it? Or did he consider
that afterward many of the Emperors themselves proved zealous Patrons of
Christianity? yet did neither alter their Dialect, nor the imperial Government,
as inconsistent with the Christian Religion.


Par. I doubt he was a little inconsiderate here; but he says that [You] to a
single person (with other Titles, etc.) seems to have its rise with the Roman
Empire. ibid.


Min. Suppose it had, what is it the worse for that? but how does he prove it?


Par. From Symmachus his Epistles to the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinian,
wherein his Style unto them is Vestra aeternitas. ibid.


Min. had those Epistles been written to Julius Caesar the first Roman Emperor,
there had been some tolerable sense in his inference; But is it not strange,
that this instance of [vestra, y^ur] in the Epistles to Theodosius and
Valentinian should make the Custom seem to have its rise with the Roman Empire,
when these Epistles were not written till near four hundred years after the
Empire was begun? Has not our Wise Quaker here shot very wide of the mark?

Besides, those Epistles, by his own confession, were written to two Persons,
Theodosius and Valentinian: And that they were written to them both together,
appears in St. Ambrose's answer to them; With what sense then could he say
[Thou] or [Thine] to two together? So that T. E. brings an instance here to
prove nothing, but himself ridiculous; for I thought he had disapproved only
our saying [You] to one, not our saying [You] to two, unless he could twist
them both into one: He says, that by a Figure I make one Man two. p. 46. Now
let me ask, By what Figure he makes two Men one?

But had he made search, he might have found, that it was customary to use one
number for another long before the Empire began. The Ishmaelitish Princes
usually spoke of themselves in the plural number. Haec est consuetudo linguae
Ismaeliticae, ut Reges de se loquantur numero plurali. Aben. Ezra.
Nay among the Romans themselves, this Custom was of a much ancienter date than
their Empire: For Terence, who lived 100 years before it began, has this
expression, Profecto nescio quid absente nobis turbatum est domi, E^nuch. Act
4. sc. 3.
that is, Truly I know not what disturbance there has been at home in our
absence: Phoedria speaks there of himself in the plural number: This was used
by Cicero very frequently both in his Orations, Epistles and his Books of
Offices, as I could give variety of instances, if it were doubted by any: See
Walkers Particles p. 46^.
Now Cicero dyed, when the Empire was scarce begun.


Par. But he complains of hard usage; and says, how often have many been abused
and beaten for this harmless word, etc. ibid.


Min. I know not what usage they have met withal for their incivility and
rudeness to Authority, and for the contempt of Laws; But that any have been
beaten for the use of the word [Thou] is what I never heard of: However I
observe, that Ellwood all along makes it his business and study, to promote
schism and mischief, by exasperating his Party, and heightning their prejudices
against us and the truth, by all the idle calumnies he can invent.


Par. But he goes on; What Spirit is that which thus rages? Is it the humble,
meek gentle Spirit of Jesus, or the haughty, proud, exalted Spirit of Lucifer?
ibid.


Min. What Spirit (think you) is that, which is so far from being inoffensive
(as the Christian Spirit is) that it disturbs and disquiets Neighbourhoods and
Societies in matters purely indifferent, and wherein the stress of Religion
does not lie?

I acknowledge that the Spirit of Jesus is an humble and obliging Spirit, and
should be most truly glad to see the Quakers conform to it. For our Blessed
Lord complied with all the innocent Customs of the People among whom he lived.
Did they stand in the Synagogues when the Scriptures were read? Christ did so
too: Did they sit when they Preached? He did the same: Did they eat Bread and
Wine after the Paschal Lamb? Christ did so too; though God never commanded it:
Did the Jews observe the Feast of Dedication, a Feast of their own institution?
Christ did so too: Did they lie upon Beds when they ate the Passover? (though by
the Original institution it was to be eaten standing) Christ conforms to the
Custom, and did so too: Nay he accommodated the two great Sacraments of his
Church to their Customs; And that Prayer which he taught his Disciples, was for
the most part of it compiled out of the Jewish Liturgies. So that we have all
the reason to conclude, that if he had lived among us, He would have suited
himself to the present innocent Customs both in speech and behavior: For he
used both the Jewish Language and their Phrases; He used both the Hebraisms and
Hellenisms of those times. He delivered his Whereof there are great numbers in
their Talmud.
Parables in positive Assertions; a thing more exceptionable than [You] to a
single person. So unwilling was he to quarrel with innocent Customs, or to make
innovations, where necessity did not compel him. All which show that the Son of
God was far from a Spirit of crossness and contradiction, and from all
Principles of schism and faction.


Par. You must give me leave here to put in a question of my own; If Christ
taught sitting, and instituted one of his Sacraments sitting, why do not you
imitate our Savior's posture in the performance of those services?


Min. You must know that sitting when he taught, and when he instituted and
administered the Holy Eucharist, was not one and the same posture; for when he
taught he L^k. 5. (...). Joh. 8. 2. (...).
sat in a Chair, as the Jewish Doctors used to do; but his posture at the
Sacrament was Mat. 26. 20. (...).
leaning or lying along on one side; In which posture, though he being the Lord
himself, did in his state of Humiliation, eat his Last Supper with his
Disciples, and gave them the freedom to do the like; yet that being contrary to
our National Custom, and Christ being now Glorified, this posture of leaning or
lying along would be very irreverent among us, in the celebration of that B.
Sacrament, the great Pledge of his Love, and Memorial of his Death.

But one thing I will take the boldness to affirm, That we conform more to our
Savior's example in doing as we do, then if we performed those Services in
Christ's own posture.


Par. This is strange!

Min. It will not be so strange to you, if you well weigh and consider this
truth; That Conformity to our Savior consists not in doing the same Natural
Actions which he did, but in following the same Moral Rule, by which he did
those Actions: Now his Rule was to conform to all present Constitutions and
Customs in themselves indifferent; And this in order to the promoting of Love
and Peace: The Rule of Charity was his constant and general Rule in all his
Actions; Particularly in this last instance, our Savior did not institute a
posture, but only express a compliance with a Jewish Custom: He therefore that
for peace and love conforms to all present lawful Customs and Constitutions
(though far different from the same natural Actions our Savior did) most truly
conforms both to the example, and the meek and gentle Spirit of Jesus.


Par. You may remember, that when I produced this Argument from the Quakers,
viz. That God Thou Would Adam, and Adam Thou Would God; you stopped my mouth by asking,
whether the Discourse was in English? And by saying that if the Translators had
put [You] instead of [Thou;] this shadow of an Objection had disappeared. He
says it should have been [not appeared;] but this remark I pass by as
inconsiderable, and nothing against your Cause: Only he has this to say against
the answer you gave me, that the Hebrew is not defective of Numbers, but has
the singular and the plural as distinct as the English; If therefore the
Translators had used [You] for [Thou] instead of one objection there would have
been two. p. 30.


Min. He needed not to have so gravely told us, that the Hebrew is not
defective of numbers; for who knows not, that no Language can be without
them? But by this Rabbi's good leave, neither is the Hebrew defective of
Figures, especially one common both to Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, called
Enallage Numeri; by which is justified the use of the Plural Number, when the
signification is singular; See Dr. Ham. on Mat. 27. 44.
of which I could produce abundance of instances out of the Holy Scriptures;
Take these few; Iud. 12. 7. He was buried in one of the Cities of Judah: The
Hebrew text in the Latin version is rendered word for word Sepultus Civitatibus,
etc. buried in the Cities. So Genesis 3. 8. They hid themselves among the Trees,
etc. according to the Hebrew it should be [Tree] in the singular number;
hereupon Menochius notes, Arbor ponitur pro [Arbores] per Enallagen Numeri.
Josh. 24. 19. He is an Holy God, etc. See Buxtorf's These. Gram. linguae sacrae.
p. 423, 434, 455.
Where [Holy] (in the Original) is in the plural, and [God] in the singular
number; for it is not unusual for Adjectives and Verbs in the Hebrew to be
joined with Substantives in the plural number.

Pray consult Job 18. 2. where you will find Bildad speaking thus to Job, How
long will it be ere YOU make an end of words? And Daniel speaks thus (Dan. 2.
36.) This is the Dream and WE will tell the interpretation thereof: So that you
see in these instances (long enough before the Roman Empire I wot) that both a
good man was spoken to, and a good man spoke of himself in the plural number:
Holy Daniel of himself says [We;] and upright Job receives the Title [You] when
he was far from being an object of flattery, and Bildad a miserable comforter
driving on a quite contrary extreme. Nay God Almighty speaks of himself in the
plural number. As Genesis 1. 26. Let US make man, and in OUR Image; And so Genesis 3.
12. and 11. 7. Isa 6. 8. And the first time that God is named in Scripture, he
is, in the Original, expressed in the plural number, Genesis 1. 2.


Par. Those instances in Job and Daniel I never observed before, and must
confess they are very convincing: But as to Genesis 1. 26, etc. I have often heard
that the plural number there represents the three persons in the Blessed
Trinity.


Min. This is an answer that perhaps Ellwood will not thank you for, because
the Quakers (at least many of them) deny the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity;
to such a pitch of Blasphemy and Herefie are they already arrived: However
these Scriptures will bring the Quakers into this Dilemma; Either to
acknowledge the Doctrine of the Blessed Trinity, or else to confess, from the
example of God himself, that it is neither unlawful nor improper, to speak of a
single person in the plural number: If so, then is it as lawful to speak to a
single person in the same number; for if God say [WE] and [US] of himself, it
would not have been improper to say [YOU] to him, seeing one is but the
Relative of the other. Therefore though we should suppose [You] to be only
plural, this way of useing it would be sufficiently justified by the instances
already given: yet after all this, you are to consider, that while [Thou] is
singular, [Ye] plural, Custom (the only Lawgiver in these Cases) has so far
prevailed, that [You] is become either singular or plural, as some Pronouns
Buxtorf. p. 21.
are in the Hebrew. Therefore the Translators might (if they had pleased) have
warrantably used it instead of [Thou.]


Par. But T. E. likes not that your discourse should lean so much upon Custom.


Min. of this I said sufficiently in the Conference; but let me ask you
further; Is there any one general rule of speech appointed by God? Or is it
arbitrary, in the choice of men in each particular Society?


Par. I never heard that any one Dialect was ever commanded by God; for if so,
he would not have divided it, as we read he did Genesis 11. Therefore I suppose it
is arbitrary according to the consent of each Society.


Min. Custom then being the expression of that consent, must be the standard of
speech in every Society. And in this Case the World will subscribe to the
determination of Horace. Hor. de Art. Poet.
Multa renascentur quae jam cecidere, cadentque
Quae nunc sunt in honor vocabula, si volet usus;
Quem penes arbitrium est, and jus and norma loquen-
(di.
Much phrase that now is dead, shall be revived,
And much shall dye, that now is nobly lived,
If Custom please; at whose disposing will
The power, and rule of speaking rests still.


Words may be compared to Coin, which is worth just so much as it goes for.
Yea, they may by Custom be turned into a quite contrary signification to that
which formerly they had. As for Example; Tyrannus a Tyrant formerly signified
the best, now the worst of Princes. Magus did in ancient times signify a wise
man, now a Magitian. And though [Kn^ve] denotes now a dishonest person, yet it
did formerly signify no more than a Servant.

Ellwood confesses that he lived in the Country when he wrote his Book: Now if
Custom does not alter words, and is not the rule of speech; Why should he take
it ill, if I say he was a Villan Villanus qui in villa habitar. Spelman's
Gloss. p. 557.
? seeing the word, till custom fixed an evil signification to it, meant no more
than an inhahitant of the Country, or one that dwelt in a Village.

And if the Apostle plead Custom in the use of Garments and habits, in being
covered in the Assemblies, or uncovered: Surely it is as good a plea in the use
of words and phrases. Now whereas Controversies about indifferent things can
never be determined by any reason drawn from the nature of them; and the peace
of the Church notwithstanding requires their determination one way or other;
the Apostle in the Controversy aforesaid betakes himself to Custom as his last
Refuge, ver. 16. If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such CUSTOM,
neither the Churches of God: The reason is be cause men may dispute about
indifferent things to the Worlds end, and yet be no nearer peace Private
persons therefore in things of this nature, must be overruled by the Custom of
the Church.


Par. There Is one thing that I wonder at in him, that he should say, You
confess that in Religious Offices [Thou] is the fittest word to be used. ibid.


Min. I suppose he has taken this upon trust, as he has done his Authors: For
you may remember T. E. did well to name no page, as conscious of the
misquotation.
that my words were these, It Is only in Civil matters that we say [You] to a
single person; but in Religious Offices, we say [Thou] to the greatest
Personages upon earth Conf. p. 18.
: Yet from this very passage, has this Quaker the confidence to infer, that if
it be high enough for God and Spiritual affairs, I see not how it should be too
low for Man and Temporal affairs. p. 30. Did I either say, or did my words
imply, that it was too low for man, when I said that in Religious Offices we
use it to the greatest Personages upon earth? Is this an honest way of
answering Books, by making a false quotation, in order to a false inference? As
for the different use of it in Temporal and Spiritual affairs, that is a thing
in it self wholly indifferent, as I gave you sufficient account in the
Conference, which he no where denies, but takes it for granted, and therefore
is the more schismatical in contending.


Par. But he leaves it at last to the consideration of every uuprejudic't
Reader whether that Dialect which God is pleased to accept, that wherein he has
been pleased to deliver himself, that which all the Holy Prophets, our Blessed
Savior, his Apostles, and all good men in the best times, is not fitter for a
Christian' now to use, than that which depends only upon a Custom sprung up out
of the putrefaction of corrupi times? p. 31.


Min. By these last words of his, he has spoiled Quakerism, which we may
impeach as sprung up out of the putrefaction of corrupter times, than those-he
mentions: In the midst of wars and figtings (as a Quaker confesses Spirit of
the Hat. p. 3.
) when the Throne was usurped, when Religion and Property were invaded in the
heat of our civil broils and distractions, up starts the Quaker.

As for the dialect he contends for; you must know, that God did not accept of
it for its own goodness as better than any other, but so that he would have
accepted another as well as it; And when himself and the best men used it, they
did it in compliance to the Customs of speech at that time. Yet the Dialect at
some times varied (as has been proved) and yet was no less accepted of by God;
To show, that he designed not to bind the Conscience to any particular form of
speech.

But will he not (think you) allow the Primitive Christians to be as good men,
as the Heathen Romans before their Empire? Of those ancient Christians, who
lived under the Empire (at which time Ellwood confesses [You] to a single
person was used) Justin Martyr, who lived in the time of Antonius the Emperor,
gives this account; The Christians (says be) are not distinguished from others
by their Country, speech nor any peculiar Customs: They inhabit not Cities
appropriate to them alone, nor do they use a DIALECT differing from other men,
nor is their manner of living unlike to other men; They follow the CUSTOMS of
their Country in Clothes, Diet and other things, Just. Mart. Epis. ad Diogen.
p. 446, 497.
etc. This shows that the Primitive Christians were nothing like our Quakers,
in the singularity of Garb, Tone, Phrases and Behavior, wherein they affect to
be unlike other men, even in the most innocent Customs. I wish they would
imitate these Primitive Christians, and follow that good old rule, vivere
moribus antiquis, loqui verbis praesentibus, To live after the ancient manners,
but to speak after the present Dialect.


CHAP. III. Of Titles and Civil Respects.
Par. IN T. E's. third Chapter of Titles and Civil Respects, he briskly charges
you with dealing injuriously and dishonestly with the Quakers, and moreover
adds, that we have befooled our selves. p. 31, 32, 33.


Min. This Quaker is a right Conformist to the humor of his Party, and a true
Practicant here of this Uncivil tenent of theirs, against Civil Respects. His
first work is to render me suspected and ridiculous, that men's ill opinions of
me may give advantage to his feeble reasonings: But I am willing to put my self
upon my Trial; How does he make good his charge?


Par. Whereas I told you in the Conference, That possibly I had been faulty in
suffering my Servant to call me Master; He accuses you for inferring; that the
Quakers have brought this tenent of theirs [against the civil Title of Master,
founded on Mat. 23. 10.] to this strange result, that a child must honor his
Father, but not call him Father; that a Servant must obey his Master, but not
call him Master; which tenent (he says) is your own, not theirs, as their
writings and practices sufficiently evidence. p. 32.


Min. I made not the interence from your words immediately, but from the
Quakers way of alleging that Text, utterly beside the scope and intention of
it; For the words just before my interence were these, In the same notion that
we are forbidden to call [Master,] we are likewise forbidden to call [Father.]
And seeing that that Text and the next before it forbidding to call Father and
Master, concern not temporal but such spiritual Titles only, as imply a
Mastership and Dominion over the Conscience; it follows, that while the Quakers
extend the Text from Spiritual to Temporal Titles (as they have done all along)
they make even that of a Natural Father to be equally forbidden by it, that
being but a temporal Title no more than any other. So that the practice of
those Quakers, who receive of their Children the Title of Father, evidently
contradicts the result of the Quakers Tenent against Civil Titles, as it is
founded on the said Text.

And whereas he tells his Reader, that this is contrary to their universal
practice, and a foppery fastened on them. p. 42. You shall hear what See the
Foot out of the snare p. 17.
one John Toldervy says as to this point, having been desirous to draw Coll.
Webb (his Master) to Quakerism; he, after his return from his errors, gives
this following relation, I took him by the arm and bad him sit down William
Web, not bowing, not pulling off the hat, not Master, for then I denied that
Title to him, though related to him a Servant, as afterward I denied all
Relations, from the words of one, He that lives in the Light will see no
difference. Which shows that it was not his private opinion only.


Par. His other instance of dishonesty, wherewith he charge you, is this;
that in our discourse we should fasten on the Quakers the absurdity of applying
that place in Luke 10. 4. [Salute no man by the way] to themselves in a literal
sense: ibid.


Min. Surely he will not deny that it has been a known custom among the
Quakers, to pass by their Neighbors unsaluted. Besides it is well known, that
when we used to bid them Good morrow, Good speed and the like; they frequently
reproved such salutations in the words of this Text. Might not the Quaker with
equal modesty deny, that ever his Brethren used to Quake and Foam, as deny a
thing so generally known as this is? Have the Quakers forgot, that James Naylor
(before whom they sung their blasphemous Hosanna's) thus applied this Text;
That he did so, appears by a p. 31, 32.
Book called The Perfect Pharisee, subscribed by Five Ministers of Newcastle.

Now if some, or many of the Quakers be laughed out of this absurdity, must my
honesty be taxed, because they vary from themselves and one another? But would
it not (think you) have been more honest in him and ingenious to have said,
Truly it was our former practice so to apply that Text, but since we saw the
folly and weakness of it, and that Spirit we trusted to did deceive us, we have
left it off. I pray God they may henceforth learn to suspect that delusive
Spirit which they have trusted so long, and leave off the rest of their errors,
not only for the ridiculousness of them, but for Conscience sake.

But here I must desire the Quakers to take notice that Salutation (which is an
outward and civil respect) is by this Quaker implicitly granted to be lawful
and commendable; while he insinuates the denying it to be an absurdity, p. 32.
and while he passes by the Reasons and Mat. 10. 12. Romans 16. Phil. 4. 2^. 1
Cor. 16. 19. 2 Cor. 13 13. Conf. p. 27.
Quotations I gave to prove it. Therefore he has done very ill, while his
Conscience convinced him of the duty of Civil Respects, to write so rudely
against them, as he has done in this Chapter: But now let me hear wherein we
have befooled our selves.


Par. Because I professed my sincere and cordial respects to you at our first
meeting; He thinks that by my objecting against civil respects afterward, I
contradicted my self, and that the decorum was ill observed there; Was this
(says he) a fit person to represent the whole body of the Quakers, and dispute
against respecting persons? Nay does it not look like a design laid to
mis-state our Principles and misrepresent us to the world? p. 33.


Min. Indeed he seems here wonderfully transported with his own conceit: But
that he may not hurt himself with too much mirth, let us consider the Case:
Pray, what were the respects you professed unto me? Answer for your self.


Par. My inward respects: And therefore I called them sincere and cordial.


Min. Were those the respects which afterward you objected against?


Par. No; I was not such a Brute, for inward respects are nothing but Love,
which is the fulfilling of the Law; But it was outward Respects and Titles only
I then scrupled at.


Min. I believe you: For any man of common sense may easily see this
distinction in the Conference; For in my reply, I told you p. 3.
that I accepted the expressions of your affection.

If your Controversy had been against the same respects which before you had
so heartily professed, this indeed had been some indecorum; but seeing it was
against a different thing, I doubt the Quaker has brought the indecorum upon
himself, and in the result a great deal of shame too, both on himself and his
whole party; for while he inveighs thus against all respects, without
distinction, and against your unfitness to represent the body of the Quakers
upon this very account: From hence it plainly follows, that to represent the
Quakers bearing any sincere and cordial respects to their Neighbors is a grand
Indecorum, a design laid to mistake their Principles, a misrepresenting them,
yea the whole body of them to the World. So that I see, a man had need be
cautious, how he represents a Quaker, either as good natured, kind, or
affectionate; For if he do, beware he meets not with my fate, to be called a
fool for his pains.


Par. I doubt it is the Quaker that has here besool'd himself; Yet do not you
take notice of that Heavenly expression of his after it? But our confidence is
in the Lord our God, whose truth we are engaged to defend. ibid.


Min. Here you have more of his Canting, that old art of deceiving, which has
ensnared so many weak people, and brought true Religion into suspicion and
contempt: Is it not strange that after so injurious and ridiculous a passage,
he should have the impudence to pretend confidence in the Lord, etc. and go to
him to patronize his folly and dishonesty? I mention not this to discourage any
true seriousness among Christians (I wish there were more of it) but to
convince you, that all is not Gold that glisters.


Par. I must confess I have been apt to be carried away with fine words and
pretenses, but could never suspect so much deceit and delusion in them as you
have discovered to me: But I hope this will be a fair warning to me to take
heed hereafter whom I trust.

But as for that exposition you gave me of Saint James chap. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4. as
not accusing civil respects, but such only as violated justice in their public
consistories, he dislikes as not being the Apostles drift. p. 34.


Min. First observe here that T. E. overcome by truth has wittingly passed by
Acts 10. 34. [God is no respecter of persons] as nothing to his purpose, though
all along objected by the Quakers against Civil Respects; And he says nothing
against the account I gave you of the words: I wish the Quakers by these and
other instances may at length discover that Spirit of error, they have been so
long led by to pervert the Scriptures.

Now as for that exposition I gave you from Dr. Hammond of that passage in
Saint James, it is sufficiently defensible against the Cavils of this confident
Quaker: I need not now trouble you nor my self with a recital of all the
reasons he gives for that interpretation, but refer you to the Annotations
themselves: Only I shall ad two or three instances more of the word (...)
Assembly, in the Text, being used for a Court of Judicature, 1. Mac. 7. 12.
Hist. Seld. de Jur. Not. and Gent. j^xta Heb. lib. 4. cap. 9.
Susan. v. 41. Luk 12. 11. when they bring you unto Synagougues, and unto
Magistrates and Powers, etc. Acts 22. 19. -- they know that I imprisoned, and
beat in every Synagogue them that believed on thee. Moreover in the following
verses the Apostle interprets his own meaning, and chiefly v. 4. where it is
clear, that by respecting of persons he means only corruption and partiality in
Judgment; Are ye not (says he) partial in your selves, and become judges of
evil thoughts? This is agreeable to the Law Lev. 19. 15. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. Thou
shall not have respect of persons in judgment; And it is to the Law that Saint
James refers expressly v. 9. but if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin,
and are convinced of the Law as transgressors; making this no new prohibition,
but only a recital of an old one. If then civil respects were not forbidden by
any precedent Law, neither are they forbidden here: But by the Law they are so
far from being forbidden, that they are enjoined as a duty, and practiced by
the best of men; of which I gave you several instances in the Conference, which
T. E. unfairly passes by. Take these over and above, Lev. 19. 32. Lam. 4. 16.
Deuteronomy. 28. 50. 2 Kings 3. 14. But what reasons does T. E. give of h^s dislike of
that exposition I gave of Iam. 2. 1, 2, 3, 4?


Par. Because the Epistle of Saint James was written to the dispersed believing
Jews, thereupon he bids his. Reader consider what consistories or Courts of
Judicature those poor scattered believers could then have. p. 35.


Min. That they had such places in the Gentile Cities may be confirmed from
Epiph. haer. 30. Ebion. Canar. lib. 1. Tom. 2.
Epiphanius and Eusebius. Ecc. Hist. Lib. 5. cap. 16. ibid. Sam. Veti^'s variae
Lect. lib. 2 c. 10. p. 146. And Dio. cap. 37.
Ensebius; And there were Jews at this time in all the eminent Cities of the
Roman Empire, who had Officers and Judges of their own, and by the Joseph.
Antiq. lib. 16. c. 6.
Rescripts of Augustus, they were allowed to use their own Laws and Customs;
all which privileges they retained till their Rebellion against the Romans,
but afterward they were restored by the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius.


Par. But were not those the unbelieving Jews?


Min. Let it be considered that the Primitive Christians were by the Romans
long esteemed a sect of the Jews, and so they had a share in all the
privileges of that People; Nor were the foreign Jews so malicious against the
Christians, as those in and about Jerusalem, Acts 13. 15. and 28. 17, 31. So
that the believing Jews might have justice administered in those Courts
belonging to their Nation, or else might have private Consistories among
themselves, which we may believe they would rather choose, because St. Paul had
forbid them to go to Law before the Unbelievers, and advised them to end their
questions among themselves, 1 Cor. 6. 1, 2, 3. So that it is the Quakrs old
disease of ignorance which makes him wonder, how they should have any Courts of
Judicature in their dispersion.


Par. To that Law you mentioned of both parties sitting or standing to avoid
partiality, etc. T. E. answers, Whence had they it? If given them by God, we
should have found it among those Laws which they received from him; If it was
not from God, but an invention and tradition of their own, it is altogether
improbable that the Apostle of Jesus Christ would have reference thereunto. p.
36.


Min. What thinks he of the Feasts of Purim, and that other of Dedication,
which our Savior countenanced by his presence Job. 10.? These were no
institutions immediately received from God, but of the Jews own making. Pliny
tells us of a vain Painter, who being to draw a Goddess, made it exactly like
his own Mistress; such is the fancy of this Quaker, who being about to
describe Jesus and his Apostles, thinks they are altogether such as himself;
and since their practice is unknown to him, he fancies They were as much for
innovation and novelty as himself: And hence it is that he is for throwing away
all Laws and Traditions. Christ and his Apostles were not so; They were not for
throwing away any Traditions, that promoted either piety or morality; and none
but one of T. E.'s. capacity will question it. Our Lord would Mark 11. 16.
not suffer a Vessel to be carried through the Temple (to teach us Reverence to
the place of God's Worship) which was an Ancient Tradition, and is recorded in
the Talmud. Tract. Mass. Jevamot. c. 1. 1 Timothy 4. 4, 5.
So likewise Saint Paul orders the Christians to receive their meat with
thanksgiving; which Custom has been religiously observed by the Ancient
Christians. Nec Cibi sumantur nisi Oratione praemisia, nec ^ecedatur a mensa
nisi referatur Creatori gratia. Hieron. Ep. 22. ad Eustoch. and Tert. Apolog.
cap 39. Which arose first from a Jewish Tradition. Talm. tract Berach. cap. 1,
etc.
Which I note the rather, because the Quakers so brutishly neglect this piece
of universal Religion. Again this very Apostle James, chapter 4. 15. commands the
Christians to say, If the Lord will, we will do this or that: which is known to
be a Tradition of the old Rabbis, recorded also by Ben. Syra. Why then may not
St. James as probably relate to this Custom, which is founded upon so much
equity, and which is but an instance of that Divine precept, Deuteronomy. 1. 17. in
the Rabbinical way of illustration?

This seditious passage of his would set Christianity at odds with all the
Civil sanctions in the world, and make it indeed inconsistent with all
Government, because every Magistrate does not receive his Laws immediately from
God.


Par. If this Law (says he) was but a sanction of their own, the Jews were so
superstitiously zealous for the Traditions of their Forefathers, that it is no
way likely that they would so positively violate a Law of their making. Ibid.
And he goes on to tell us, that this was a thing See Drus. Quaesl. Heb. l. 3.
they were seldom guilty of, for they too often preferred their own Traditions
even to the Law of God. p. 37.


Min. What his fideles Iudaei, his poor scattered believers, who, as he had
just immediately before said, were then coming off not only from the Traditions
of their Elders, but even from the whole Jewish polity? I assure you he wrongs
them as much as he contradicts himself.


Par. You told me that if St. James had forbidden Civil respects, he had
contradicted what our Lord plainly allows in Luke 14. 8, 9, 10. when thou art
bidden of any man to a wedding, sit not down in the highest room, lest a more
honorable man than thou be bidden of him, etc. Now for the understanding this
Scripture, T. E. tells us, that it must be considered in what time, and to whom
those words were spoken. For the time, it was under the Law, before the one
Offering was actually offered up. That was an Outward state, the People of God
was then an Outward National People, their Religion and Worship was much
outward and shadowy, their Wars were outward, their Ornaments were outward,
their Honors and Respects to one another were outward. And in this State many
things were indulged to the Jews, many things permitted and connived at, partly
because of the hardness of their Hearts, and partly by reason of their
Weakness. But this State was to last but till the Time of Reformation; and when
the Time of Reformation was fully come, these things grew out of use, etc. p.
37, 38.


Min. Was Christ's time then no time of Reformation? What though the Levitical
Priesthood, it is Rites and Sacrifices, being Types of the Sacrifice of Christ,
were to continue till they were fulfilled in their Antitype, and then to expire
of themselves; though that D^spensation was in this respect reformed after;
Does this prove that whatsoever in reference to the Moral Law, or to good
manners, he found less perfect, he might not, or did not in his own person
reform before his Offering up? Does this prove that Christ was no Reformer?
What though the Reformation was not so general till the more plentiful effusion
of the Spirit, does this prove it was not actually begun, and set on foot,
before Christ's death, both by his Doctrine, and visible effects of it, upon
both Jews and Gentiles Mark 1. 15. Mat. 11. 5. and 8. 10, 13. and 15. 28? Were
all Christ's Sermons, the calling of the Twelve Apostles, and the Seventy
Disciples, and sending them forth to Preach, His healing of Men's Bodies and
Souls together, Was all this no method of Reformation? He disproved the corrupt
Traditions of the Elders, whereby they made void the Commandments of God, He
reformed the imperfection of Moses's Law in the case of Divorces, and reduced
Marriage to its Primitive institution, Mat. 19. Denounced eight Woes together
against the Scribes and Pharisees, He asserted and cleared the Moral Law (in
his Sermon on the Mount) from the false Glosses the Jewish Doctors had put upon
it; and advanced the Law of Nature (whereof the Moral, Law is the transcript)
to the highest pitch; And was not all this sufficient to make Christ a
Reformer? He is our sole Lawgiver; and what the Apostles taught after his
offering up, was his own Law, which himself had delivered before his death, and
which the Spirit was promised to bring into Jo^. 14. 26.
their remembrance. If therefore Civil Respects were so vain and evil a Custom
as T. E. makes them. p. 41. is it likely that so severe a Reformer should not
only Connive at them, but expressly allow them, as he does Luke 14. 10? As
Ellwood implicitly grants he did, not denying it, but using an absurd and an
odd circuit of words to shuffle it off. Though therefore the Pharisees ambition
and affectation of the chief Seats was rebuked by our Savior; yet it is
evident the distinction of persons and places, and such good manners as are
founded thereon, were none of those things which he disliked, or designed ever
to remove. What though the State of the Church in the time of the Law was in a
great measure Outward, and the Legal Ceremonies of the Levitical Priesthood
upon Christ's death expired? What though a more inward and Spiritual Worship
According to those Scriptures T. E. quotes, 2 Cor. 5. 17. Romans 2 28, 29. Joh.
4. 21, 22, 23, etc.
was enjoined under the Gospel, and the Spirit of God to that end poured out
more plentifully than ever? Did this prove that to Christians all outward
things are vanished, and such things as no way belonged to that Priesthood? Are
their Bodies vanished too? What then will become of that injunction, Glarific
God in your Body -- 1 Cor. 6. 20. Are we now divested of all outward capacities
and concernments? Until he can prove this, he must allow Christians such
outward Customs and usages, as are agreeable to this present State; such (among
the rest) are Civil Respects, being suitable to that distinction, which
Providence and the State of this World have made of persons and places, in the
various relations which we find in all Civil Societies: He that is an enemy to
this distinction, is an enemy to all Government, which cannot subsist without
it; for we must distinguish between Rulers and Subjects, Governors and
Governed, both in Common Wealths and private Families. What madness then is it
to think, that Christ meant to take away Civil Respects and good Manners,
things that are so necessary to uphold this distinction and essential to it, as
the due acknowledgment and proper expressions of it? Therefore he abolished not
those decentCustoms of them, which are upon Record in the Old Testament, or any
where else; But all quotations out of the Old Testament to this purpose must
needs be still in force.


Par. You have thus far given me very good satisfaction in this point; and if
you have any thing further to add to it, I pray go on to clear it, not only to
me, but to all others who do ignorantly scruple it, as I have done.


Min. The great duty of a Christian is Universal Friendship, but as Friendship
is amicitia parium a^t imparium, of Equals or Unequals; So the signification of
that Friendship requires different expressions; since the state of the World,
and the constitution of Societies necessarily infers a distribution of persons
into several ranks higher and lower; the foundations of which distribution are
these following,

First, difference of Age calls for different behavior, Lev. 19. 32. Thou
shall rise before the hoary head, and honor the face of the Old man. The face
of the Old man here is the gavity of his person: So that respect to men's
persons is not Job 32. 4.
always evil, but often times a duty. See also 1 Timothy 5. 1. Intrea^an old man as
a Father.

Secondly, Difference of sex, 1 Cor. 11. 3, 4, 5. And the Ordinance of Marriage
makes Man the head of the Wife, and requires expressions of subjection from the
Woman to the Man, as T. E. himself acknowledges in the example of Sarah obeying
Abraham, and calling him Lord.

Thirdly, All domestic and civil relations, implying superiority and
inferiority, as not only Husband and Wife, but Parents and Children, Masters
and Servants, all which T. E. acknowledges: Why not then between Magistrates
and Subjects? seeing Magistrates are Fathers of their Country, and every Ruler
is properly a Master; for Christ himself calls Nicodemus a Master of Israel,
Job. 3. 10.

Fourthly, Different occupations and employments, some being honorable and
others mean, make one rankof menhigher than another. Exodus 11. 5. Iud. 16. 21.
Acts 17. 5. where you have mention of the baser sort.

Fifthly, By reason of the necessity of public Offices for civil
Governmenment, some men must needs be public, some private persons; Public
Persons must have an eminency above private; And Kings in Scripture are looked
upon as Sacred; and the Jewish Rulers and Judges frequently styled Gods, Exodus
22. 28. Ps. 82. 6. Io. 10. 34. which is a much higher Title of respect, than
any we give in our addresses to them; therefore it was boldly done of T. E. to
quarrel at the Title of M^st Sacred Majesty, and Dread Sovereign, as he does p.
46. seeing all these are essential to the Title of King, which the Quakers own,
and are willing to give him. Pray read these places, Ps. 21. 5. 1 Chr. 29. 25.
Dan. 4. 36, 37.

Sixthly, Nearness to, or distance from such as are Eminent Persons, thus they
that are near the Kings Person gain an eminence by it. Est. 1. 14. Ier. 52. 25.
And so the Civil Law looks upon men as more eminent, as they are nearer the
Emperor: And we do find abundance of these reckoned up in Scripture, Dan. 3.
27. and many other places. And the Scripture speaks of different Ranks of
Nobility, and freely gives them their usual titles without any scruple. Thus we
read of Princes, Genesis 17. 20. and 2 Samuel 19. 6, etc. of Dukes, Exodus 15. 15.
Ios. 13. 21. Genesis 36. 15, etc. of Lords Dan. 5. 1, 9. Ezr. 8. 25. Neh. 7. 5.
And in the New Testament, Mark 6. 2 1. where it is said, that Herod made a
Supper to his Lords, etc. Note here, that St. Mark writes not like a Quaker; He
does not say, He made a Supper to his Lords, as they call them; Nor like
Ellwood, who is so demure, that forsooth he dare not name Titles and Civil
Respects without this same reserve [as they are called. See Title of his third
Chapter.]


Seventhly, By civil virtues and great exploits Men justly gain an Eminency and
Renown, and become famous. See Ruth 4. 11, 14. Number. 16. 2. and 1. 16. 1 Chronicles.
5. 24. and 12. 30. Ezekiel. 23. 23.

Eighthly, When persons have larger privileges and immunities granted to them
in the Commonwealth, they gain an eminency by them: thus Noblemen are
constituted by that the Lawyers call Dominium Nobilium, whereby they have jus
praecedentiae, a right of precedence; and Locus potior decernendi; and other
things of like nature; Therefore they have Ornaments allotted to them, which
they call (...), and Titles to adorn them, whih are no other than certain marks
of their civil valuation. For it is past dispute, that as some Men are of much
more value to the public than others (viz. Able Commanders, Judges, etc.) So
public Governors have power to determine the rates both of Men and Things, and
to signify the value they set upon one Man above another by giving him a
higher place and a title.

Ninthly, These privileges being propagated to posterity and made hereditary
(for Patrum conditionem liberi sequuntur, as the Law speaks) make different
Families in respect of superiority and inferiority; These advancements
descending to their Children, being encouragements to civil virtues, and great
actions; And it is hard to conceive how these things can be otherwise in this
World, without Nulla Universitas potest subsistere, nisi eam Ordo servet and
sustinear. Bodin. de Re pub. l. 3.
danger to that order which is necessary to the subsistence of each civil
Society.

These things and the like must necessarily distinguish persons into several
ranks and classes, as Servius Tullius distributed the Roman Citizens; and this
the Scripture freely acknowledges, for we read also of Nobles Exodus 24. 11.
Ier. 27. 20. and the Sons of Nobles Eccl. 10. 17. The Title of Honorable Isa.
3. 3, 5. Mar. 15. 43. Acts 13. 50. and 17. 12. The word (...), by which the
Scriptures express men of worth, was used by the Greeks as a Title to salute a
Gentleman.

For seeing there are different ranks of Men downwards from the King to the
Peasant, therefore as you see it is agreeable to holy Scripture; so all sober
men will acknowledge it is agreeable to Reason also, to give to each rank such
distinct Titles as are proper to express that difference.

And with what reverence and outward civil respects the Primitive Christians
behaved themselves to their Governors, may be seen in Justin Martyr Apol. 2.
And what is any where said, that true piety is the Fountain of Honor or the
like, is meant in a Religious sense, and concerns the inward man, and is not at
all intended to exclude those civil distinctions among men, in reference to
their outward capacities; To suppose otherwise were very ridiculous.


Par. The case is still clearer to me, and you have made T. E's. way of
reasoning appear sufficiently absurd.


Min. I shall make it more apparent before I have done, by giving you a List
both of his Absurdities. and Self-contradictions contained in this one
Paragraph we are now upon.

First Absurdity, in implying that Christ's death put an end to his Moral
documents, this of Luke 14. 10. being one.

2 Absur. that all Political Government is now at an end, and God's People must
be now no more an outward National people.

3 Absur. In making the use of the Sword unlawful, now in the time of
Reformation, in contradiction to Romans 13. 4. where it is said that the
Magistrate bears not the Sword in vain, hereby condemning two good Centurions,
him in Mat. 8. 9, 10. and Cornelius Acts 10. 1, 2. who was after Christ's
death. By this Rule neither foreign invasions, nor intestine Rebellions must
be opposed, nor prevented by any outward means; But we have no reason to trust
the Quaker here, seeing diverse of his Brethren bore Arms and Offices in the
late Army, yet at the same time professed Quakerism, and I can name the
persons, were there occasion for it.

4 Absur. In going about to prove outward things connived at by Christ, and
indulged to the Jews for the hardness of their hearts, by that very Text in
Mat. 19. 8. which is an express and plain instance of his forbidding and
reforming those arbitrary divorces which Moses suffered.

5 Absur. in saying in such general terms that the State of the Church in
Christ's time was Outward, and Worship Outward, and in that notion afterward
to vanish; as if after Christ's death, the Church were not to retain any
Outward State, or Outward Worship; And consequently that all vocal Prayers, all
gestures of Devotion, all Outward Ordinances, yea the very notion and being of
the visible Church must vanish together.

6 Absur. in making no difference at all between the State of the Church under
Christ's time, and under Moses's contrary to these Scriptures, Heb. 1. 1. and
2. 1, 2, 3. and 3. 1, -- 7. making the Doctrine of Christ no Gospel.

Ellwood's self-contradictions in this passage are these,

1 Contrad. His putting Outward Respects among those things, which he says were
indulged by our Savior, to continue till the Reformation, and yet venturing to
contradict himself in the exposition he gives of Mat. 23. 10. wherein he
affirms that civil titles are there forbidden.

2 Contrad. His saying, Outward honor went off after the death of Christ, in
contradiction to his own acknowledgment of the Epithet (as he will have it) of
Most Noble, given by St. Paul to Festus, who being a Heathen had no Christian
virtue to qualify him for it, according to the Quakers principles.

3 Contrad. His putting Outward respects among other things, that were to cease
at the time of Reformation, in contradiction to what himself had implicitly
yielded concerning the lawfulness of salutation p. 32. which is an outward
civil respect.


Par. But T. E. has another distinction, and bids his Readers consider to whom
this in Luke 14. 10. was spoken; They were Pharisees, of whom (T. E. says)
there were several ranks and degrees, there were chief Pharisees, and inferior
Pharisees; and they took place one of another, etc. Nay there were seven ranks
among them, as Goodwin tells us, etc. p. 40.


Min. The Quaker is out again; Where did he ever read of inferior Pharisees?
Indeed in ver. 1. it is said one of the chief Pharisees, but in the Greek it is
(...), and signifies one of the Sanhedrim, as appears from Luke 24. 20. Io. 3.
1. Acts 3. 17. For though Goodwin tells him that there were seven ranks among
the Pharisees, he does not tell him, that they took place of one another by
virtue of higher or lower ranks; for there was no such matter, one Rank looking
on themselves to be as good as another: Hence the learned Scultetus says
Pharisaeorum septem non classes aut ordines, sed genera fuisse liquet. And we
may note by Ex Talmud Exercit Evang. lib. 1. cap. 24.
the way, that they who go about to explain Scripture upon pretense of their
having the Spirit, do (if they want the ordinary means, viz. Learning
sanctified by the Spirit) soon baffle themselves, and demonstrate they have no
true Spirit in them.


Par. But what was that to his Disciples (says he?) He puts them in mind of
their Equality. p. 41.


Min. Was there ever so gross an absurdity? As if the Savior of the World, who
came to Disciple all mankind, should allow that to one sort of Men, and
prohibit the same thing to another. But to let that pass: Did ever Christ
establish such an equality, as to take away all superiority and subordination?
How comes then the Quakers to allow that of Master and Servant p. 43.
Christians indeed are in reference to Almighty God all Equals, as to the
capacity to Salvation, Gal. 3. 28. But I must ask your Leveller here, what is
this to their Civil Capacity? which cannot be put off, while we are in these
bodies.


Par. But he concludes his Comment on Luke 14. 10. thus, The words of the
Apostle James may be understood a general prohibition of that vain Custom of
respecting persons upon any occasion whatsoever. ibid.


Min. I showed you before how this Quaker contradicts himself; Now I shall show
how the Quakers contradict one another: In a certain pamphlet called a Treatise
of Oaths, subscribed by thirteen Quakers, in the name of the rest, and
dedicated to the King and Parliament, you will find this expression, We do with
all due RESPECTS present you with our Reasons, p. 3. Now does St. James give a
general prohibition against all Respects, both inward and outward, none
excepted? Why then do the Quakers contradict their own Tenent? For according to
T. E. the most sincere and cordial respects are unlawful, and contrary to the
Quakers Principles (as you have heard) and it is a vain and evil Custom (as he
says here) to give them upon any occasion whatsoever. Why does he rail against
me and tax my honesty? Why did he not rather tell his Brethren, that they did
not observe their Decorum? and that They were not a fit Company to represent
the Body of the Quakers? Yea, does not this passage look like a design laid to
mistake their Principles? Why does not T. E. tell them as much? yet he finds no
fault with his Brethren for that which he condemns in Us; And therefore is
deeply guilty of that partial respect, which both the Scripture and right
Reason do every where condemn.


Par. I cannot imagine what should hold the Quakers unsatisfied in this matter,
unless it be this weak scruple, that they may respect men but not the persons
of men.


Min. Is not respecting men and the persons of men all one? Can you make a
difference between a man and his person? Do the Quakers understand, what the
word they are contending for signifies? Does it import any more, than honor,
favor and kindness? To honor a man is to respect him; to favor a man is to
respect him; to be kind to a man is to show respects to him; Are these sins?

As Respecting persons relates to partiality, either in dispensing of the
Gospel, or the distribution of justice, so far it is a great sin; But as it
relates to honor, civility, humanity, and kindness; it is in that case so far
from being a sin, so far from being prohibited, that it is expressly enjoined
and commanded us, Lev. 19. 32. And it was reputed a sin in Israel, that they
respected not the persons of the Priests, and favored not the Elders, Lam. 4.
16. So that we are to respect persons in one sense, as we are not to respect
them in another.


Par. To your Exposition on Mat. 23. 10. T. E. I observe, agrees so far, as to
say, As little learning as you are willing to allow the Quakers, they are not
ignorant that Christ did condemn the use of the word Father, as it implied an
implicit faith in them to whom it was given; And also the word Master, as it
denoted the chief, or head of a sect and party. p. 43.


Min. I would have you to observe also, how the Quaker is come down from the
conceit of his Revelations so far, as at last to yield that Learning may be
made use of to the understanding the true sense of Scripture; which Concession
has taken away the force of his Eighth Chapter.


Par. But he tells us, that in that Text Christ condemned also the use of those
Titles [Father and Master] in every sense, where there is not a true relation,
that is (as he explains it) by Nature or Law, which he calls a direct untruth.
ibid.


Min. As much learning as the Quaker thinks he has, it has failed him here;
seeing this sense which he has added, is neither agreeable to the occasion and
scope of that Text, nor is consistent with other places of Scripture, wherein
you will find Titles without either of these sorts of Relation: I mentioned
some in the Conference, which he unhandsomly passes by, as those of St. Stephen
and St. Peter, giving even their Persecutors the Title of Fathers, Acts 7. 2.
and 22. 1. and of our Blessed Savior, who gave the Title of Friend to the
Traitor Judas, Mat. 26. 50. Now which of these were due either by Nature or
Law? Did our Savior contrary to his Nature speak an untruth? Or did he not
rather in this passage intimate to us, that a Title of Civility is no Romans 12.
21.
untruth to whomsoever it is given, though to an enemy?

One thing let me ask you concerning St. Paul, Whether think you, was he a
Married Man, or no?


Par. No, the contrary appears from 1 Cor. 7. 7.


Min. How comes Ellwood then (who acknowledges no Title due but by Nature or
Law) to tell us, that he exhorted his Son Timothy and his Son Titus thus and
thus p. 24? So that T. E. has either spoiled St. Paul's Reputation, or his own
Comment.


Par. But St. Paul's piety was above such a reflection: He was their Father in a
holy sense, in a spiritual relation, having begotten them through the truth.


Min. You are in the right: but then this is no thanks to our Quaker, who has
excluded this of St. Paul's out of the Catalogue of his lawful Titles.

I will ask you another question concerning David, who brought in and used
Musical Instruments in the service of God; who, I pray, was his Father?


Par. Why? who, but Iesse?

Min. Yes, I shall find another Father for him in Scripture; which sure T. E.
never dreamt of, viz. Old Iubal, for he is said to be the Father of all that
handle the Harp or Organ: Genesis 4. 21. Now how does this Title hold by Nature or
Law? Could all the Musicians in the World be Iubal's natural Sons?

I must ask you one question more; What relation was there between Abraham (the
FATHER of the faithful) and the rich Glutton, that he should cry, Father
Abraham, Luke 16. 24? Where was there any such relation, as Ellwood talks of?


Par. I know that after death there can be no relation by Nature or Law: But
why do you fetch an instance from Hell?


Min. If that will not serve, I will fetch you one from Heaven: Abraham
replied, Son remember, etc. v. 25.


Par. That was a Parable.

Min. Suppose it were; Did Christ use to deliver Parables in such terms, as
were opposite to his own Commands?


Par. But is it not an untruth to call them Masters, and our selves their
Servants, who in strictness cannot challenge that relation?


Min. Is it an untruth to profess a Duty? Are we not commanded to be subject to
one another, 1 Pet. 5. 5. In honor preferring one another, Romans 12. 10. And
that each esteem other better than himself, Phil. 2. 3?


Par. But T. E. thinks, many do not intend to do any service for those they
call Masters, and so it is flattery.


Min. Let the flattery be laid aside, not the innocent phrase, which expresses
a Christian duty, viz. That we be ready to serve one another in all Offices of
Civility: By Love (says Gal. 5. 13.
the Apostle) serve one another; which a Superior may do to an Inferior.


Par. But Titles (says he) without relation we disown and reject, as being
indeed Titles of flattery, which we dare no more make use of, than that good
man who said of old, Job. 31. 21, 22. Let me not, I pray you, accept any man's
person, neither let me give flattering Titles unto man. p. 44.


Min. I suppose he brings not this quotation out of the Old Testament to
disprove all Titles, because he acknowledges that they were then allowed and
used, outward honor having not then passed off. And it is evident the good man
in Job 31. speaks not against all, but flattering Titles only.


Par. You told me that St. Luke dedicating his Gospel to Theophilus salutes him
with the Title of Most Excellent; And though Festus was a Heathen, yet St. Paul
addresses himself to him with the Title of Most Noble. These (says T. E.) are
not Titles, but Epithets. p. 45.


Min. They are Epithets of Honor, and what are those but Titles? A Term of
Honor is a Title, in what part of speech soever it is expressed: What does the
Quaker think of [Right Worshipful, and Right Honorable?] Does not every body
know these to be Titles? and yet these are as much Epithets, as this of [Most
Noble, or Most Excellent.] And then what has this wise Quaker gotten by this
subtle distinction?


Par, Be it Title, be it Epithet; I observe T. E. is not well pleased with it;
for he says, that the same Luke did afterward, and to the same Theophilus,
dedicate his Treatise of the Acts of the Apostles without any either Title or
Epithet at all, but barely [O Theophilus;] and yet this was written after the
other, in his riper years, and when he had made a further progress in the
Christian Religion; And none, I hope, will think so good a man went from better
to worse. ibid.


Min. You will find in p. 245. of his Book, how nettled he is, that I affirmed
that the Quakers faith is as uncertain as their Teachers fancy, and that poor
deluded Souls do receive falsehood, railing, nonsense, and blasphemy, as if
they came from the Spirit of God, etc. I hope you see that I have already
convicted this Quaker of falsehood, railing, and nonsense: Now I shall charge
him with Blasphemy also; For St. Luke was inspired with the Holy Ghost when he
writ his Gospel; And suppose he might at other times be guilty of an idle or an
evil word, and afterward grow wiser and better; Yet the Holy Ghost could not,
being infinitely perfect: So that in truth it is not St. Luke but the Holy Ghost,
who is implicitly accused by this Quaker, at least of weakness and
nonproficiency, when he gave that Title, or Epithet to Theophilus. St. Basil
says, it is a great blasphemy to affirm that there is one idle word in the Holy
Scriptures Hexamer. Hom. 9.
I pray God, my Antagonist may repent this rashness.


Par. As for Paul's address to Festus, calling him Most Noble; he tells us that
[(...)] might have been rendered most excellent. p. 46.


Min. I grant it, for (...) signifies both; So that it was as much as if he had
said, If it please your Excellency.


Par. He says that St. Paul had reason to use it to him, for in Justice and
Courteous deportment he excelled all other Magistrates that Paul had been
brought before. ibid.


Min. Does he commend him for Courteous deportment? that is Civil Respects (as
they a^e called.) But he was so far from being either Civil or Just to St.
Paul, that (to please the Jews) he sought to deliver him to them, by
endeavoring to persuade him to go up to Jerusalem to be judged among them, by
their Laws, to the end he might fall by their Witness and Verdict. Acts 25. 9,
10, 11. But let us consider when, and upon what occasion he gave him this
superlative Title.


Par. That is mentioned, Acts 26. 24. It was in reply to Festus saying with a
loud voice, Paul, thou art beside thy self, Much Learning has made thee mad.


Min. I pray, do you remember, what answer a Quaker lately gave to one, who
urged this example of St. Paul for Civil Titles?


Par. Yes, he said, Perhaps Noble was his Christian Name: But why do you remind
me of this?


Min. To let you see that Ellwood's evasion is no less ridiculous; For he might
as well have said (as his Brother Quaker did) that Noble is the Christian Name
of an Heathen, as that St. Paul gave this Epithet to Festus for his justice and
courtesy, when he called him Mad man. However you may hence infer, that call
but this Quaker Mad man, tell him that he is besides himself, and then for the
courtesy, perhaps for the justice thereof (even in his own sentence) you will
merit the Epithet of Most Excellent.


Par. You told me that Paul and Barnabas said Sirs, etc. Acts 14. 15. The
place, T. E. says, is misrenderd'; It ought to be Men, etc. p. 47.


Min. The Greek word is not (...), but (...), which (as he says) Beza did
rightly translate, viri. Now let me tell our Critic, that the Greeks ever
distinguished between (...), which only signifies the humane nature in common,
and (...) which denotes manliness and courage. (...), Multi quidem Homines,
pauci viri. Herod in Polymn.
Homo ab humo, denoting mortality; vir a viribus, denoting prowess and courage;
according to that excellent saying of Seneca, Non sentire mala non est Hominis,
Non far Sen. de Consul.
non est Viri. This may suffice to justisie our Translators.

But though it be (...) here, yet we find that Mary saluted him whom she took
for the Gardener, Ioh. 20. 15. by the title of (...), in Beza's Latin Domine,
in English Sir or Master. The like did the devout Jailer to Paul and Si Nomen
non occurrit, Dominos salutamus. Sen.
Barnabas, Acts 16. 30. Yet did neither Christ, nor the Apostles, reprove them
for it, being the usual civility of that Age.

But suppose my Argument had mist the mark it aimed at (which it has not;) yet
it cannot be denied to have hit another, namely, a vindication of human
Learning, even from my Antagonist's own practice, who by the help thereof
appeals from the Translation to the Original: I hope he will not say that he
did it wholly by the Spirit; If he do, believe him not.


Par. I shall not be so ready hereafter to believe pretenses, as I have been;
But to your other instance of Saint John writing to the Elect Lady, etc. T. E.
answers, Who 2 John v. 1.
she was, and in what relation John stood to her, or how far her temporal power
might extend, does not appear. ibid.


Min. He is in the right, The relation he stood to her in does not appear;
therefore a Title may be given, where there is not even so much as an
appearance of any relation.


Par. Lady (he says) signifies no more than Mistress or Dame. ibid.


Min. Mistress, Dame and Lady are all expressed by the Latin word Domina, and by
the Greek word (...); though in common usage they be distinguished: But suppose
it no more than Mistress or Dame, the Quaker will gain little by the plot; For
Saint John was her guide and Instructor, and surely that great Apostle stood in
no relation of servitude to her, and had no temporal Office under her; If so,
then you may collect from hence, that (according to this Quaker) its lawful
(without the appearance of such relation he talks of) to call a Woman Mistress,
but not a Man Master.


Par. I pray you, seeing T. E. trades so much in Beza, Has he no note upon this
place?


Min. Yes, having translated it Domina, he adds thisingenuous Note; For ne
ither does the Christian Religion reject such lawful Titles, as far as it is
just and equal; So that it is as if he had written TO THE LADY OF EMINENT
DIGNITY Neque enim ab ejusmodi honestis Titulis Christiana Religio abhorret,
quatenus quidem justum ac fas est. Perinde est igitur ac si scriptum esset,
Eximiae ac praestanti dignitate Dominae.



Par. St. John writing to Gaius (T. E. says) He does not call him Rabbi or Mr.
Gaius, but simply says, The Elder to the well beloved Gaius. ibid.


Min. I never heard that Gaius was one of the Rabbis, or a Person of Quality
above the Common people: If so, no wonder, St. John gave him no Title.


Par. But he concludes his remarks upon St. John thus: If therefore the Priest
will have it that John gave the Title of Lady in Complement only, let him prove
it. ibid.


Min. By his good leave, the Priest neither writ, nor thought any such thing:
The Priest believes that St. John gave the Title in truth and sincerity, as
answerable to her Quality. But is this ingenuous of the Quaker from a
supposition of his own making, to put me upon proving what I never affirmed?


Par. You said, Sarah was commended not only for obeying Abraham, but calling
him Lord: To this he answers, Abraham had a Lordship or Power over her, as he
was her Husband; here was Government and subjection, for Lord or Master (which
imports the same) was a relative title to it. p. 48.


Min. If he means, the Husband has such a Despotick power over his Wife, as to
make her stand in the same relation to him with his Servants, This will not be
granted; for the subjection of the Wife is of a more ingenuous sort. Indeed the
Jewish Doctors affirmed Men to have a real Lordship over their Concubines,
because they took them without the solemnity of Law; as our Quakers do their
Women, who yet are still in worse circumstances; for thereby their children are
incapable of inheriting their Fathers Estates, and themselves of having any
advantage by Dower or Alimony. Let this suffice for a Caveat to Women, how they
adventure on Quakers.

As f^ his reflections upon the Government and Polity of our Church, with which
he concludes his Chapter of Civil Respects; I shall in his own terms tell you,
that it is an old and overworn objection, long since baffled and confuted by
the Learned pens of the incomparable Mr. Hooker and Bishop Sanderson; and of
late by the Author of the Friendly Debates, and by Mr. Falkner in a good Book
called Libertas Ecclesiastica; to which I shall refer you for satisfaction.

Now I shall leave it to the consideration of all sober men, Whether of these
two is more Christian, To add a Title to a Name, or an Adjunct, A Title to
express our Civility and Charity, or an Adjunct to express malice, revenge, and
bitterness?


CHAP. IV. Of Confession.
PAR. T. E. tells his Readers, that from contending for empty Titles, you come
to Confession of sin; and that (in his own opinion) not without reason, because
you defend such vain, flattering and untrue words as (he says) Titles are. p,
50.


Min. I doubt not but the unprejudiced Reader, who has observed how this Quaker
has proved himself truly guilty of that whereof he unjustly accuses me, will
judge it more reasonable for him, than me, to come to Confession, if his pride
would suffer him; but he is so far from it, that he writes against it, as if he
were one that needed no repentance.


Par. Yet he owns it the duty of every humble Penitent to confess his sins. p.
51.


Min. Either then T. E. is no humble penitent, or neglects his duty.


Par. But (he says) the question is, whether a constant course of Confession be
a duty? ibid.


Min. No good man ever made a question of it; Indeed those Heretics, the
Pelagians and Donatists did: And you shall hear what answer they had from the
Holy Fathers of the Church; Confess always (says St. Augustine) for thou have
always matter to confess. Aug. in Ps. 99.
He is taught that he sins daily, who is commanded to pray daily for the
remission of his sins, says St. Cyprian on the Lords Prayer, who lived 250
years after Christ. Therefore thou must daily say this Prayer (says St.
Ambrose) that thou may daily ask pardon for thine Offenses? Ambr. de Sacram.
lib. 6. c. 5. See also Tertul. de Orat. 132. and August. de Temp. Se^m. 126.


And that the public Prayers of the Primitive Christians had always a Form of
Confession in them, is what all the Ancient Liturgies do manifest. This is
according to the practice of the Servants of God in all Ages. David was far
from the temper of a Quaker, who professes that he will declare his iniquity,
and be sorry for his sin. Ps. 38. 18. And confesses that his sins are more in
number than the hairs of his head. Ps. 40. 15.

The lower a Christian is in his own thoughts, the higher he is in God's
favor. Let then this Perking Pharisee tell God, that he is not as other men
are, and that he has no sin to confess, unless he belie himself; God grant, I
may follow the example of the humble and penitent Publican in my Prayers to
God, to be merciful to me a sinner.


Par. But T. E. says, a constant course of confession implies a constant course
of Sinning. ibid.


Min. I answer, 1. Confession of sins past implies no such thing: Some Authors
report, that St. Peter rose betimes every Morning to weep for the denial of his
Master. 2. A constant general confession of our being sinners implies no wilful
course of sin, but the quite contrary in them that do it sincerely, viz. a
constant sight and sense of it, a constant sorrow for it, a constant desire,
and endeavor to reform it. This we deny not, that such Confession implies
daily need of Mercy; but then this is no more, than what becomes the best of
men, while even such do find themselves not yet delivered from all infirmity.
Bradford, whom the Quaker himself acknowledges an Eminent Martyr, used in his
confession to say, Thou art Heaven, and I am Hell. We are sure the Quakers have
the disease of sin, as well as others, but alas! not the same hope of Cure,
because they will not see the need they have of a Physician. Mat. 9. 12.



Par. Now the question is, Whether it be our Duty from day to day, etc. to
confess that we are still guilty of those sins, which by God's Grace we have
forsaken, and which God has forgiven us? ibid.


Min. It Is our Duty, no question, to confess our sins, after we are persuaded
that we have forsaken them, and have obtained the pardon of them.

Confession is a general Duty commanded in Scripture, without limitation: Does
not David confess his sins, Psalm. 51? Which (as appears by the Title of the
Psalm) was after that Nathan had already assured him from the mouth of God,
that his sin was pardoned; Elsewhere he confesses and begs the pardon of 2 Samuel
12. 13.
his sins long since committed and reformed, viz. the sins of his youth; Psalm.
25. 7. Remember not the sins of my youth. Now let the Quaker speak out, and say
in his Style to David, This confession of thine is an untruth which I am sure
is no Man's duty.


Par. Some among the Corinthians before their Conversion had been Fornicaters,
Idolaters, Adulterers, etc. Paul says to those Corinthians, Ye are washed, etc.
Had it been the Duty of these Corinthians, after they were thus washed to have
said, we are such still? We are Fornicators still, etc. This would have been
the way to have made them liars still. p. 52.


Min. What a pitiful piece of Sophistry is this? Might they not for all that
have said in reference to the time past, that they had sinned by Fornication,
by Idolatry, etc. Have pardoned sinners no reason to grieve, and accuse
themselves any longer, than till they think, they have gained their pardon? Yes
surely, they have a new occasion, a greater reason than they had before, a
higher instance of the goodness of God, to engage them to renew their
repentance, than they had at first to lead them to it; while they sadly
consider, how good a God they offended, a God so Good, as upon their
Reformation to forgive them.

But then let Ellwood show, where the Church of England makes any public
Confession in the Present tense? They run in the Praeter-perfect tense; as, We
have erred and strayed, etc. We have offended, etc. and in the public they are
always General. Now where is the untruth? May not the most perfect Man in the
World say all this?


Par. But you still call your selves miserable sinners.


Min. That he and all may see, it is our judgment only thus to confess, I shall
here (in Ellwood's own form p. 115.
produce a very authentic Witness, Basil Surnamed the Great; Who advising to
Confession of sin has these expressions, Though thou know no wicked thing
by thy self, thou ought to say thus; I truly, O Lord, am not Constir.
Exercit.
worthy to speak to thee, because I am a grievous sinner; for there is none
free from sin but God alone.

We are all in the construction of the Law Miserable sinners; and should be
found so, if God should Arraign us at his Tribunal, and try us by the rigor of
it: David has told us as much, Psalm. 103. 2. Enter not into Judgment with thy
Servant, O Lord, for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified, The least
obliquity from, or falling short of the absolute perfection of the Divine Law
being enough to render us Sinners, and to make matter of Confession.

He that has but once offended may ever after justly deserve the name of
Sinner: A regenerate Man is conscious of having committed sins, though he be
not guilty of the present Dominion of any; The fact done cannot be undone. A
Heathen could say, Ne non peccaram, Mors quoque non faciat Ovid.


But after all this I must ask our confident Quaker, 1. How he is infallibly
certain, he has obtained to an absolute unsinning state of Perfection? For he
must grant that he ought to confess, and ask pardon, till he be infallibly
certain of his being pure from all sin, and without all spot and blemish, as
pure as Adam before he fell, as the Angels in Heaven, and the Spirits of just
men made perfect; for he must grant that he ought to confess and ask
forgiveness of all, even the least Moral weaknesses, and all defects of
Obedience, whereby he falls short in the smallest degree of the absolute
perfection of the Law, until he is thus sure his performances are without all
defect, and himself without all infirmity. And is T. E. indeed sure he is so?
and does he know the hour and minute when he first arrived to this state, and
might take confidence to conclude of his absolute perfection? But if neither we
nor he himself be sure of this, or of the possibility of it, I think it is very
safe for us to continue the Confession of sin, yea and for him too, lest
perhaps he should be mistaken, and in some small degree be yet imperfect. For
as there is little danger of his displeasing God by any excess of humility in
the continuance of such confession, though he were really arrived to such a
perfection; so on the other side in the Case of our State toward God, there
being a great deal of danger in our mistaking, I think it is good for him to
consider of it, and for us to go on in our course of Confession till we be sure.

2. I must also ask him, how he infallibly knows, that all his sins are for
ever pardoned? for I suppose he will grant that he ought to confess and to ask
forgiveness, till he be sure of a pardon.


Par. He will say, he knows they are forgiven, because he has forsaken them.


Min. That indeed is the best ground of hope (if he have it;) but not such as
to make Fear or Confession needless: For seeing First, according to his own
assertion p. 68.
the state of the best and most perfect Men here is not immutable, but that
they may fall from it: Secondly, seeing perseverance to the end is a necessary
condition of final pardon, and salvation; it will follow, that though T. E.
were perfect, yet it were not at all improper for him to confess, and ask
forgiveness of his former sins, because (according to his own Principles) he is
not sure, but he may fall into sin again, which may cause his pardon to be
revoked: And as there is no danger of displeasing God (as is said before) in
any excess of humility in these Confessions; so the practice of this humility,
and the fight and sense of our former sins is a very expedient, and indeed a
necessary means to preserve us from falling into sin again. For this is that
(says St. Bernard) which makes it necessary for us to be solicitous with fear
and trembling, and always humbling our selves under the Mighty hand of God,
since though we can know in part what we are, yet it is utterly impossible Sermon
1. in Septuages.
for us to know, what we shall be. Finally then, since our sin is certain, our
pardon conditional, our Enemies vigilant, and we frail; whatever Ellwood thinks
of himself, We think, we ought to call and esteem our selves Miserable sinners,
till God upon our perseverance has sealed our absolute pardon.


Par. Is there but one Lesson (says T. F.) for all degrees? p. 53.


Min. Yes, there are several Lessons for several States of Men, but this Lesson
suits them all. This Confession, like those of the Primitive Church being
designed for the public (where are Men of all degrees, Children, young men and
Fathers) is made in such general terms, that all may join in it: The
particulars we leave to every Man's Conscience, and to his Closet to supply: But
since we all agree in this, to live together in a miserable, sinful World; and
we all have sinned, and (as T. E. acknowledges) we all may sin; therefore it is
not unreasonable, we should all agree to confess that we are miserable sinners:
If this will not suffice; Let Ellwood use his captious question to St. Paul, O
Paul, do thou say thou art the chief of sinners? thou wast so at thy first
coming into this School; What? No proficiency, no improvement? No going
forward? After thou have spent thy Age in this School, if we measure thee by
thine own Confession, thou art not one step nearer thy Iourneys end; no whit
better, than when thou came first in, and therefore worse. p. 53.



Par. But to conclude this Subject, T. E. tells us, It is not the duty of any
Man, to propose to himself a constant and common Course of Confession, because
whosoever does so, must first propose to himself a constant and common course
of sinning. p. 54.


Min. That which is lawful and fit to be used (as I have proved Confession to
be, till we have persevered, and be absolutely perfect without all infirmity)
is lawful to be proposed to Men's practice; and may be so, without any proposing
to our selves a common course of sinning, because the proposal of this course
of Confession most properly proceeds from a concontrary cause, viz. from the
consideration of our infirmity and mutability, from humility, a pious fear Romans
11. 20.
, prudence and sense of duty. Therefore the Quaker's Pride and Scoffing shall
not make us out of love with the Medicine, that God has provided for us. It
may shame us (says Tertullian Tert. de poenit.
) that we sin again, but to repent when we have sinned should not shame us. We
have another kind of Judge than Ellwood, who sees our hearts, and will account
with him for his malicious censure of our Penitence, and of the devout and
Orthodox Constitutions of our Church: So that my Adversary has taken much pains
here to prove himself not only weak but wicked. And truly I am apt to believe,
that in this abuse of Piety, and so necessary a Duty, as Confession is, T. E.
is too much a Socinian to please all, even of his own party, or any Man that is
considerate; And I wish the Quakers would at last open their eyes, to see by
what seducers they are led, that at length they may withdraw from them, and
make choice of more upright, more orthodox, and safer Guides.


CHAP V. Of Perfection.
Par. WHAT Ground T. E. has lost in his Four first Chapters will surely be
regained in his Fifth of Perfection, a Doctrine which (he says) has not met
with opposition from the hands of most sorts of Men, since the time it was
first Preached in this later Age of the World. p. 54.


Min. If the oldest things in Religion be best; then the newest must needs be
the worst: But if it will not make the Quaker too proud, I will tell him, that
his Doctrine of Perfection is of greater Antiquity then he is willing to allow
it; For it was Preached before the latter Age of the World: And if it please him
to look again into Goodwin's Antiquities, and particularly into that instance
he gives me of the seven sorts of Pharisees, he will find that one sort of them
were called quid debeo facere and faciam illud, from their boasting of a
perfect power to keep the Law; And that Author thinks, that the young man
mentioned Luke 18. 21. was of this Order: So that Elwood might have learnt,
that the Pharisees were Quakers in this Point, yet Hypocrites in Christ's
account: And upon a further search into this Controversy, I find this Doctrine
much ancienter than I thought, when we first discourst it; For the Gnostick
Heretics, and particularly that herd of them called the Valentinians, did
exalt themselves, calling themselves Perfect, says Epiphanius. After them the
Epiph. haer. 31. Anno. 193.
Novatians called themselves Cathari, i. e. Pure. But those who call themselves
pure (says the same Epiph.) are confuted by their own words; for whosoever
does call himself Pure, does perfectly condemn himself, that he is Impure. Next
after Haeres. 59 Anno 440.
them the Pelagian Heretics held, that a Man may be without sin: Which the
Holy Augustine confutes by many of the same Arguments, which this Quaker
derides me for using. Epist. 89.
And Celestinus the Pelagian used such false Mediums, as his Friend Ellwood has
stolen from him to justify this Doctrine: and this may be seen in that Book
which he writ against him. Aug. de perfec. Instit. Edit. E^asin. Tom. 7.


Now will this bold Quaker tell these Orthodox Fathers, who opposed this notion
of Perfection, that some through ignorance mistook it, others through interest
reviled and gainsayed it, as foreseeing it destructive to their Trade and
profit, etc? As he tells his Reader, p. 55.


Par. I perceive then this Doctrine of Perfection was condemned for Here^ie by
the Holy Fathers of the Church: But did not the Quakers first broach this
Opinion in these later Ages?


Min. Quakerism it self cannot plead the prescription of One Age. But this
Doctrine was Preached by the Popish Friars as a Foundation for their Merits and
Works of supererogation: The wild Anabaptists about 140 years ago pretended
also to Perfection: And it is the Socinian Doctrine, that we may perfectly
fulfill the Law of God. But all Orthodox Protestants ever opposed these Men, as
much as I do the Quakers herein; who may go and boast, that they have the
Pharisees, the old Heretics, the wild Anabaptists, and the Socinians on their
side in this matter; whilst we (by Gods Grace) do, and will hold the constant
Doctrine of the Catholic Church.


Par. You have said enough to make me aware of this Quaker; who wonders that
you should own Perfection, and yet deny it to be an unsinning State: Therefore
he asks, What kind of notion you have got of Perfection, who would be perfect,
yet a sinner? ibid.


Min. Seeing I believe, you sincerely desire to be informed; and withal T. E.
(as you cannot but observe) is so unconstant to his own assertions, and
confused in his notions of Perfection; and the right fixing the notion of
things being necessary in order to the clear proceeding in affirming, or
denying any thing concerning them; I will digress a little to state the Case,
and that in three particulars: By which many of my Adversarie's objections will
fall without taking any further notice of them. We shall therefore consider,

1. What is meant by Perfection; and what is to be granted or denied concerning
it.

2. Whether the best of Men can attain such a Perfection, as that they need
not, or ought not to acknowledge themselves sinners and Offenders?

3. What is the result, tendency and consequent of asserting, or denying such a
Perfection.


Par. I shall be very glad to have a just account of these particulars.


Min. I begin with the first. It Is very evident that Perfection or being
Perfect, is taken in different senses in Holy Scripture, sometimes in a
Positive sense, and sometimes in a Comparative.

A positive Perfection is that, which includes such a compleatness, wherein
nothing is wanting or deficient to the answering and coming up to those
measures, by which it is to be judged and examined. Now the measures by which
the Perfection of Men must be judged of, are of two sorts,

First, The Capacity of our Nature taken in its best and sinless estate, and
the holy and perfect Law of God, to which it is in every respect exactly
conformable; And hence the first sense of Perfection is, when a Man is in a
state of enjoying as great good and satisfaction, and as high purity and
freedom from all stain of evil, as either the Nature of Man can arrive unto, or
as the perfect Law of God does require. This was our state in Paradise, and
will be in Heaven; This is the Perfection spoken of 1 Cor. 13. 10. and probably
Ephesians. 4. 13. Heb. 12. 23. and elsewhere.

The second Measure by which a Man's Perfection is to be judged of, is the
capacity of our Nature since the ^all, and the terms which the Gospel Covenant
prescribes, and the Mercy of God accepts: Hence the second sense of
Perfection is, when a Man lives as holily as ever he can in this frail estate;
sincerely striving to do all Christian duties, and to avoid all sin; and
supplying his failings by Faith and Repentance; So that God accepts him upon
the terms of the Gospel as perfectly righteous, in and through Christ: This may
be called Evangelical Perfection; and is spoken of Heb. 10. 14. and 13. 21.
Iam. 3. 2. And this is often expressed by the Perfect heart; And in this sense
[Perfect] is opposed to [Wicked] Job. 9. 22. and is explained by being upright.
Psalm. 37. 37. And this may be consistent with some failings.

That there are two measures of Perfection, appears by that instance I gave you
of St. Paul; who acknowledges himself Perfect according to one measure, and yet
not perfect according to another, Phil. 3. 12, and 15. compared. So according
to this second measure, and God's gracious acceptance, Asa's heart is said to
have been perfect all his days, 1 King. 15. 14. yet came he far short of a
sinless perfection; For the high places were not taken away, ibid. And he was
sinfully passionate against Hanani, 2 Chronicles. 16. 10. Who did but his Office in
reproving him for relying on the King of Syria, ver. 7 And being lame on his
feet sought not to the Lord, but to the Physicians, ver. 12. Now let Ellwood,
ask, what Notion the Holy Ghost has of Perfection, who records Asa both perfect
and a sinner? Therefore upon the account of this second sense of Perfection,
the Hebrew word for perfect is by our Translators often rendered upright, and
made use of to express the necessary qualification for obtaining God's favor,
Psalm. 15. 2. compared with ver. 1, 5. and Psalm. 18. 23. Elsewhere it is expressed
by a heart that is sound in God's Statutes; and made to be a ground of sure
hope and confidence in God's mercy. Psalm. 119. 80. Yea, the Hebrew word
signifying perfection is translated sincerity, Ios. 24. 14. which T. E. seems
to deny, p. 72. This for the Positive sense of Perfection.

The next sense of Perfection is Comparative, by which is meant such a
Perfection, as is not exactly complete in it self in respect to the first and
highest Measures, but only more complete than some other, to which it is
compared; And this applied to our case, consists in outdoing the lower sorts of
Christians, and coming up to the higher measures and degrees of knowledge and
practice; and in this sense Perfection is taken, Heb. 6. 1. 1 Cor. 11. 6.

Now to apply this threefold distinction of Perfection: The attaining a
comparative perfection is not only desirable, and useful, but possible; nay
it is actually arrived to by some, though not by all, who notwithstanding may be
true Christians.

The attaining an Evangelical perfection is not only possible, but also
absolutely necessary to all true Christians.

But an absolute Perfection in the first sense (about which the dispute lies)
though it be the Crown we aim at, yet is not attained by any in this life:
which is my next particular, of which I shall now give you an account.


Par. As you propounded it before, it was this, Whether the best of Men can in
this World attain to such a perfection as they need not, or ought not to
acknowledge themselves sinners and Offenders?


Min. To which query I reply by laying down these propositions.

First, That there being two Measures, by which we may judge of our Perfection,
Namely, the perfect and exact Law of God, and the Terms of the Gospel Covenant;
the first of these is the Rule of our Duty; the second is the condition of our
acceptance, which are not one and the same under the Gospel: The Covenant of
Grace as a Covenant requires not the first sort of perfection in order to our
acceptance (though the Law does still call for it;) For if it did, Salvation
were impossible for us in our fallen and frail estate: Yet still the Gospel is a
dispensation of purity as well as grace, nor is it the design thereof to cancel
our Obligation to obedience, but rather to advance it; and therefore it rejects
not any Moral duty, nor allows any thing that is Morally evil; For as it cannot
be, that any thing Good or Evil should cease to be so under the Gospel; So it
is unsuitable to the design of that Doctrine that establishes God's Kingdom,
to discharge Man from the obedience which he owes as a Creature. Whence it
follows,

Secondly, That all, even the least evil is a sin, because the transgression of
a Law, as well as the grosser Acts of sin; All evil thoughts, irregular
desires, and disorderly passions, and also the omission of the due exercise of
good thoughts and desires, as well as of good words and actions, are breaches
of God's Holy Law now, incur His displeasure, deserve His wrath, and need His
pardon: for Man's present inability to keep the Law in the rigor of it, does
by no means excuse him of his duty to keep the whole Law; because his weakness
is the effect of his own sin and fall, and he is accountable for it.

Thirdly, The Perfection of Practice in avoiding all evil, and performing every
Duty, which God requires, ought to be endeavored after: yet such an Absolute
sinless Perfection in the whole course of our lives is not attained in this
life, nor was it ever actually attained by any mere Man since the fall; which
though I formerly proved to you in the Conference, yet will I now take more
pains with you to confirm it.

Perfection is opposed to Moral imperfection, and signifies a state and
condition absolutely sinless in rigor of Law, such as comes up to the first
Measure, and our primitive Capacity before we Fell: Thus the word ought to be
taken in this Controversy; And now I shall tell you how far we dispute against
it, and this I shall do both Negatively and Affirmatively. First, We do not
deny it to be desirable, for it is the matter of our highest aims and hopes;
Nor (Secondly) As wholly and for ever impossible to us, for we believe we shall
attain it, when we reach the Heavenly Mansions; Nor (Thirdly) As impossible for
God to effect now in our present State, who can do every thing which implies
not a contradiction; Nor (Fourthly) Do we discard sincere endeavors after it;
For we constantly maintain; That sincere endeavor to perfect Holiness, and to
live without all manner of sin, is the Condition of Salvation: For what Divine
ever affirmed it lawful to allow our selves in any sin? That therefore we
Assert is as follows;

We maintain (First) That the absolute perfection here explained, is not the
condition of Salvation; seeing even Babes in Christ (who are far remote from
it) may be saved. (Secondly) We maintain, that it is not the ordinary condition
of Christians, but is to be reckoned (though not among the (...), things simply
impossible, if God were pleased to use His power, yet) among the (...), things
that do not actually come to pass in this World, which they that please may
call Morally impossible, that is, so difficult that Men will not actually
arrive to it in this lower State, wherein it has pleased God to set us: And
the Grounds of our Assertion are these.

First, The many expressions of the Saints of God in Scripture, who testify of
themselves, that they were not absolutely sinless in rigor of Law; and the
constant experience of the People of God, since the Scripture times. Secondly,
The inconsistency of such perfection with the present weakness of Man's Nature,
and the many deplorable circumstances, which are the consequents of his Fall.
Thirdly, The end of Gospel Institutions, which are plainly designed for an
Imperfect State, and of no use, if it were otherwise, in the forementioned
explained sense. Fourthly, Abundance of Scriptures commanding 2 Pet. 3. 18. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 1, etc.
us to grow in Grace; therefore we can never be past growing in this life: We
must abound more and more. These and many others suppose plainly, that we come
not to our (...), to our ultimate perfection in this life. Fifthly, Those
Scriptunes which show the danger of standing upon terms with God, and the
misery we are in, if God should deal with us in rigor of Law: Enter not into
judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no Man living be justified,
Psalm. 143. 2. If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord who shall stand?
Psalm. 130. 3, etc. Sixthly, Those Scriptures which show our need of Mercy at
death and judgment: The Lord grant unto him, that he may find Mercy of the Lord
in that Day. 2 Timothy 1. 18, etc. Seventhly, We may confirm it, with respect to
the times of the Old Testament, from Lev. 16. 6. and Heb. 9. 7. where Aaron
(the Saint of the Lord Ps. 106. 16.
) with his Successors is enjoined yearly to offer a Sin-offering, as well for
himself, as for the errors of the people; Which shows plainly, that the Saints
in the Old time had not attained to an unsinning perfection. And with respect
to the New Testament, the same is proved by the description of the Gospel
Righteousness consisting in having sin pardoned. Romans 3. 6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 1. 7. 1
Ioh. 1. 8, 9. So that after all this,

Fourthly, We ought not to be discouraged as to our final estate; because this
unsinning Perfection is not the terms of our acceptance with God, nor will the
want of it cause our final rejection: For to assert this, would make void the
Covenant of Grace, which admits repentance, proposes forgiveness, and accepts
sincerity; because though it be (as I said) the design of the Gospel to
prohibit all sin, and to allow none; yet if through infirmity a Man fall, it
provides a Remedy, 1 Ioh. 2. 1. And upon performance of the conditions of our
acceptance, secures Salvation.


Par. I see not why Men should require more, than God is pleased to accept, and
we in a capacity to perform: So that you need enlarge no further in the proof
of these; Only let me understand, What is the result, tendency, and consequent
of denying the Quakers absolute unsinning State, and asserting the Evangelical
Perfection; which was your Third particular.


Min. We deny the Quakers absolute Perfection, not only as unattainable, and
inconsistent with the condition of fallen Man, but as it is apt to deceive some
Men into a Groundless pride, to make them neglect the means of remission,
despise the mercy of the Death of Jesus Christ, and rely on their own Merits;
as it confounds the Covenant of Works and Grace, and as it stands as that
two-edged sword, Genesis 3. 24. keeping the way of the Tree of life, and making
them despair of ever attaining everlasting Glory, when they once find
themselves deceived. But then there are no ill Consequents (as is falsely
pretended) by our denying this absolute unsinning righteousness, or perfection.

First, It Is no discouragement to Christian care and diligence, and the most
vigorous endeavors, that any Christian can use; while he attains at present an
Evangelical Perfection, and peace and reconciliation with God, and the favor
to be owned as his child, and an heir of Glory, and of that State of absolute
Perfection in Heaven, yea and of a greater degree of Glory, according to his
growth in Grace here.

Secondly, It Is no Doctrine of looseness, or encouragement to sin; since that
Grace, which tenders remission of sin to the sincere and penitent, will never
accept the slothful and careless: And it is sufficiently proved, that the Gospel
gives no allowance to sin, but promises greater rewards to greater degrees of
Piety.

Lastly, The asserting this Evangelical Perfection has many good consequents:
For it directs to the performance of many considerable Duties, which else would
have no foundation; as the seeking of God's pardoning Mercy, and acknowledging
that we deserve from Him much worse than we receive, a recourse to the Merits
of Christ, and applying them to our selves in the Sacrament of the Lord's
Supper, the practice of Confession and Godly Contrition, with the exercises of
Mortification, the duty of Humility and many other, which will have no place in
Ellwood's unsinning State.

These are our Reasons (and it is left to you and the World, whether they be
weighty or no;) why we deny one kind of Perfection, and assert another.


Par. I must confess with all thankfulness, that the account you have given me
of Perfection is clear to me in all its senses, whereby I do not only apprehend
the true State of the Case, but do perceive, the Quakers are in love with the
Name [Perfection,] but never well considered what it meant: And I hope, when
they see, how fully you hold an Evangelical perfection, and the reasons why you
deny an absolute ^nsinning Perfection, they will submit to your sense thereof.


Min. But that T. E's. fallacies may not hinder a wished compliance; pray, do
you mention, what in your opinion are the most considerable of his reflections
on our last discourse.


Par. The grand text, which the Quakers used to produce in favor of their
notion of perfection, is that in Mat. 5. 48. Be ye therefore perfect, even as
your Father which is in Heaven is perfect* Which place, you told me, St. Luke
rendered, Be ye therefore Merciful, as your Father Luke 6. 36. Conf. p. 31.
also is Merciful. And from the Context you told me, that our Lord there aims
only from God Almightie's example to press Charity and Mercy to the highest
degree, etc. To this T. E. replies, Did he consider what he writ? or how he
should be able to maintain it? He is got so high at the first step, that the
Quakers had need help him down again. The highest degree of Charity and Mercy
is applicable only to God Almighty, etc. p. 56.


Min. I hope you take notice, that here is not one word in vindication of his
Brethren. Is it not a wonder, that his Answer was not, Here the Priest deals
dishonestly with us? And that the Quakers never applied that text to such a
sense? But you see he leaves the Argument, and makes it his business to play
the Jack Pudding by telling his Reader, that I am got so high at first step,
that the Quakers had need help me down again. But by his good leave I shall
need no such favor from them, being without their help able to vindicate my
own expression; therefore I would desire T. E. to consider, that the word
[Highest] is to be limited by the persons we are speaking of: As Eccl. 5. 8. He
that is higher than the Highest regards, etc. Highest there signifies the
Highest among Men: So Christ presses Charity and Mercy to the Highest degree
they can be acted among Men: And is this vying perfection with the Creator? He
only set them the Divine Charity for a Pattern, which is the Highest Charity in
it self; and pressed them to come as near it, as their Nature was capable of, by
exercising it in the highest kind, namely, by forgiving Enemies, and in
imitation of the Highest Example. St. Luke called Theophilus Most Excellent;
will the Quaker say, he had set him so high, as to make him excel God, or at
least to be Equal with him? Or was he got so high, as to stand in need of the
Quakers to help him down?


Par, I fear, this was rather a wilful than ignorant mistake of your
Adversarie's: And do very much wonder, that having learnt from you the
distinction of Equality and Similitude, he should tax you with the neglect of
it, ibid.


Min. I shall here enquire how a dear Friend of his understood this
distinction; I mean George Fox, who blasphemously affirmed that he was equal
with God; as it was attested by the Oaths of credible Witnesses at Lancaster
Assizes: see the forementioned Book called The Perfect Pharisee, p. 3. Where
it is also proved, that James Naylor with no less blasphemy said, that he was as
Holy, just, and good, as God himself. Thus the Quakers talked of old, though
now Ellwood has learnt (from the Book he opposes) this Distinction, and says,
They desire their Charity and Mercy may be real, true, sincere, of the same
nature, kind, quality with God's; but expect it not in the same degree, etc.
ibid. But this is far short of their former boastings: And therefore they who
are so inconsistent with themselves, must not complain that their Principles
are mis-stated while they have no fixed Principles, nor standing Rule of Faith:
For every Body knows that the Quakers are not now what they were formerly; Nor
do they know themselves what they will be the next year: The Wise man says, A
fool changes as the Moon, Ecclus 6. 11. So that I cannot but think of the
witty Apology of Cleobulus, How the Moon came and desired her Mother to make
Causin. parab. hist. l. 2. c. 14.
her a Coat fit for her; to which she replied, Alas! how can I do it? for thou
art sometimes full and round, sometimes small and horned, again only half full,
etc. This is my task in this Dispute; while T. E. has set up a Notion of
Perfection, so different from the usual opinion of his Brethren.


Par. Indeed the Proverb is, They never chose well, that change so often; yet
if T. E. bring the Quakers nearer to Truth, I would not have you discourage
him: And I fancy he has yielded much of his Cause in the definition he gives of
Perfection; Which (he says) is to aim at, and press after a State of being in
this life delivered from sin, and by the mighty Power of God preserved from the
act, commission, and guilt of sin; this, he says, is that they mean by
Perfection, p. 57.


Min. Not heeding the Tautologies of this description, we will come to the
definition it self: where I must desire you to take notice, that after all his
boasting of an unsinning State, p. 55. though he blames me for interpreting
Perfection in several places of Scripture to mean no more than sincerity, p.
70. here he defines it to be only the aiming at and pressing after such a
State. Now consider, I pray, that he that is aiming, has not hit the Mark as
yet; he that is pressing after such a State, has not yet attained to it; This
is not that absolute Perfection, which the Quakers used to pretend to: And St.
Paul concluded that he was not already Perfect, because he had not already
attained, and was but pressing toward the Mark, Phil. 3. 12, 13, 14. Perfectum
est cui nihil deest: He that is strictly Arist. Phys lib. 3.
perfect, wants nothing; but he that is aiming and pressing after, would have
something that he wants.

Finally, Ellwood has brought his Perfection to signify no more, than sincere
Endeavors to be free from Sin; and thus much we yield and press. We are
perfect Travelers (as says St. Augustine) not perfect possessors; and our
Perfection is capable of increase: For no Man is perfect (says St. Bernard)
who desires not to be Bern. Epist.
still more perfect, etc. But if this be all the Quakers Perfection, they are
but like their Neighbors; and is it not unreasonable, that T. E. should
dispute against his own definition? I wish he and his Brethren would stand to
this sense of perfection; for then we should be agreed as to this point: but I
fear from what follows, the Quaker thinks that he had overshot himself; and his
Brethren perhaps will charge him to have betrayed their Cause.


Par. I doubt as much; for p. 59. he infers not only a possibility of living
without sin, but in the next page he is expressly for an unsinning State,
affirming that the commands for it are plainly produced: Now indeed one would
think, if God command us to be perfectly free from all sin, there might be
some, who in this life are truly so; because he commands no impossibility.


Min. This is an usual fallacy with T. E. especially in p. 96, 97. to argue
from the Precept to the Performance; and falsely to suppose, that some Men are
actually and absolutely perfect; because we are commanded to endeavor and
press after our being so: But St. Augustin's Answer to Celestinus the Pelagian
on the same occasion, will suffice to show the sophistry of this pretense;
Those exhortations, by which we are commanded to be Perfect, do not so much
show what we Are, as what we Ought to be. The Law indeed still demands Perfect
Obedience, though we are utterly unable to perform it; and this most
righteously, because it is not God, but our selves who are the causes of our
own inability; It is the effect of our own sin; and therefore both our
Obedience to the whole Law, and all our primitive Righteousness, which we had
before the Fall, are by the Law justly required of us. But then the Gospel
Covenant in Jesus Christ, who has satisfied the rigor of the Law for us,
requires no such thing, as necessary to Salvation, of us; though it requires
our utmost endeavors after it; as has been said.


Par. I produced the instances of Noah, Ioh, and David, who had actually
attained this State of Perfection; But in regard you proved, that as to matter
of fact they were all guilty of sin; I was satisfied that their Perfection
could not mean an unsinning State, or a State of freedom from all sin: But T.
E. is not so persuaded, but replies, that to blemish Noah's Perfection you
object, that he was drunk and uncovered in his Tent; And that he walked with
God before this, and after this also; and while he was in his sin, he did not
walk with God, etc. p. 61.


Min. I suppose your design was to find out the Truth, as his is to cavil, and
darken it; Therefore he will speak absurdly rather than say nothing. If it was
ill done in me to m^ntion the failings of Noah, Job, and David (as he
suggests;) Does not he also blasphemously accuse the Holy Ghost for recording
it? However this I am sure of, that this instance shows Noah's Perfection to be
such, that he needed pardon, and that his life was not all of a piece, not free
from all stain of sin; And the Quaker's rare discovery amounts to no more than
this; Noah was perfect, while he did not sin, that is, while he was perfect, he
was perfect: wonderful!


Par. I would have you answer this more fully; for I perceive he is not a
little pleased with this Device, but relies much upon it; And for Job, he
conceives that it cannot be fairly inferred, that he was not delivered and kept
from sin in the precedent and subsequent parts of his life, p. 64. And of David
he says, that he was not a Man after God's own heart, etc. while he was guilty
of sin; and that when he was after God's own heart, he was free from it, p. 69.
And he grows mighty big, and thinks, if it be possible to attain the State of
Perfection, it is not impossible to retain it; for the same Divine Power that
brings a Man to it, is equally able to preserve him in it; and if it he
possible for a Man to be preserved in this State an Hour, it is not impossible
to be preserved a Day; if a Day, a Year; if a Year, an Age, p. 68.


Min. The notion this Quaker has got of Perfection will amount to no more than
this, that a Man may be perfect at Morning, fall at Noon, and be Perfect again
at Night. This perfect Man of his minds me of Mercury in Homer; Who was born
in the Morning, invented Music at Noon, and stole Apollo's Oxen at Night. I
thought perfection had been a State and Condition absolutely sinless, and
inconsistent with Relapses into sin. I Am sure, I may more justly argue thus;
The Saints have sinned Once, and therefore may sin Twice, and consequently Many
times; They have the same Enemies without, and propensities within: And for all
T. E.'s fallacious Argument, it is not so probable, that a Good man shall
abstain from sin a whole Year, as it is, he shall abstain from sin one Day,
much less an Hour; because the mind cannot be so long fixed and intent to avoid
the innumerable occasions of Falling: I can keep awake one Night, but not many;
not therefore a Week, or a Year, or an Age: yet by Ellwood's Argument, we may
stand in a Posture for ever.


Par. But cannot God's mighty Power keep us as well as Age, as an Hour from sin?


Min. We are not disputing what God can do, but what he sees fit to do, and
what he actually does: Let him prove de facto, that God uses His irresistible
Power in this Case; and that actually He has so preserved any Man. I doubt the
Quaker must be forced here to leave the Scriptures, and go to the Popish
Legend, to prove that Bonaventure never committed any sin in his whole life;
which story has as little of Truth in it, as Ellwood's Argument has of solid
Reason. Finally, if T. E. can go no higher than to prove, The Saints are
perfect, only while they do not sin; And that the Divine power can preserve
them from sin for an Age together; All this may be said of Sinners, who yet are
no more perfect, then is his Discourse.


Par. But T. E. says, If in this life freedom from sin be not attainable, when
and where is it? As Death leaves, Judgment finds, p. 91.


Min. It Is true, as death leaves, Judgment will find us, as to the general
State of Regeneracy or Unregeneracy; but this is far from being true concerning
all perfections or imperfections of Body or Soul, and many other things
relating to the State of the whole Man: The Body, which dying is Gorruptible,
will not be such when raised again; The Assaults of Satan, and Allurements from
various objects, both men and things in the World, after departure hence, have
no place. He that to the time of death lived by Faith with respect to things
above, will then have a more present sight of another World, and the State of
Happiness, and of the Glorious Majesty of God, and our Savior: Nor will his
State then be (as here it is unto death) subject to weariness and dullness, and
such imperfections, whereby he is here often indisposed for constant vigorous
actions, and such complete perfection of holiness, as by his Original strength
Man was able to exercise before his fall, and which therefore in the strictness
of the Divine Law is still required of him, and the least defect whereof is
therefore sinful, and has need of that Pardon purchased for us by Jesus
Christ. Now, as to that State of absolute Perfection without Spot, and that
Prize of the High Calling which true Christians press after, and hope assuredly
to arrive to hereafter, there is a great Accession in order hereunto, when the
person, whose heart was truly Upright, becomes freed from all the imperfections
and infirmities of this Low estate, and out of the reach of all temptations and
assaults of Enemies, and all allurements to evil; and where he is affected with
the fullest sense of the highest Good, which are the most powerful motives to
determine his Actions; and his Soul (and in the Resurrection his Body also)
shall be fitted and strengthened to the most constant and vigorous actions of
complete Perfection, and act under the higher supplies of Influence from God,
together with the Advantage of the Heavenly Society of God, Angels, and Saints,
in that State where God will fulfill all Promises which relate to Happiness. And
when perfection in knowledge and Incorruption, and the most excellent State of,
Soul and Body, both with respect to their Actions, Capacities of enjoying
perfection of State, and the being immediately possessed of the Highest Good,
are none of them fully enjoyed in this life; what pretense can reasonably be
made against the then entering into the most absolute Perfection of Purity?


Par. Your instance of Job's confessing that he had sinned, T. E. says, speaks
of the time past not present, p. 62.


Min. He might in this Confession mean some sin or sins newly committed (either
in thought or word, through weakness in this present State of Imperfection;)
And this would require the Praeter-perfect tense, as well as sins committed
long since. But one thing here I would have you to take notice of, That
according to Ellwood's own sense which he gives of this passage, Here is Job a
perfect man (one therefore whose sins were all pardoned and forsaken, yet)
confessing his sins; yea and in the next verse begging the pardon of them too,
in these words, Why do thou not pardon my transgression, Job 7. 21.
and take away mine iniquity? I hope therefore T. E. will no more declaim so
much against Confession of sins though past and forsaken. But that Job was then
a sinner, when he spoke those words, T. E. may be sufficiently convinced by
that confession of his own mouth, which relates too to the time present, Chap.
9. 20. If I say, I am perfect, my own mouth shall prove me perverse.


Par. This is very plain.

Min. Therefore I have not stained Job's Perfection, as T. E. vainly charges
me; but only recite what the Holy Scriptures have recorded of Him.


Par. But against your instance of that saying of Job's, Behold I am vile, Job
40. 4. T. E. quotes Authors to prove the word [vile] there not properly to
signify wicked, but only mean, small, and of little account, ibid.


Min. But in this place the word is used with respect to sin, as by the
circumstances of the place it is manifest; it being said in answer to the
Expostulation of the Almighty, in whose dreadful presence Job sees, and
confesses himself Vile and Base by reason of his sinfulness: Hence, Job 42. 6.
I repent, and abhor my self, etc. What should he repent of, if he had no sin?
And for what did he abhor himself, but for his sin? And doubtless, when Job had
the Divine Purity before his eyes, nothing made him think himself so vile and
mean, as his sins.


Par. But, says the text, in all this Job sinned not, p. 66.


Min. In that particular carriage, in All this, he sinned not, that is, he
cursed not God; he charged not God foolishly: But does the Text say, that he
had never sinned? or that he had no sin in him? But I pray you mark, that here
he wholly passes by the account I gave you in the Conference, of the word
[Perfect] not always meaning an absolute unsinning State, but frequently no
more than sincerity, as you have it sometimes in the Margin of the larger
Bibles, Genesis 17. 6. Deuteronomy. 18. 13. This was very unfairly and disingenuously
done of him.

You have more reason to believe the Saints Confessions of their own State,
than this Quaker's incoherent Arguments; And what can be more full than Holy
David's confession of his being actually a sinner, and liable to commit more?
Psalm. 19. 12. Who can tell how often he offends? O cleanse thou me from my
secret faults. See Psalm. 38. 18. and 51. 1, 2, 5, 9. and 130. 3, 4. We know but
in part, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. 13. 9. If our knowledge be imperfect, our other
Graces bear a proportion to it, and are imperfect likewise. What can be more
plain than that saying of St. Paul? Not as though I had already attained,
either were already perfect, Phil. 3. 12? And therefore when he says, ver. 15.
Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, etc. it must needs refer to some lower
degree of Perfection, and not to an absolute unsinning Perfection: Otherwise
the Apostle cannot be freed from a contradiction in saying He was perfect, yet
he was not perfect. For sometimes the same word (even in all Languages) has
diverse significations; And I could herein give many instances in the Holy
Scriptures; take one for all; (...) signifies liberality, 1 Cor. 16. 3. And yet
in ver. 23. of the same Chapter it signifies Grace. However this cannot be
denied, as being evident in express words, that St. Paul confesses himself not
to be already Perfect: It is clear then, that St. Paul was not Perfect; And if
not He; what Holyer Man will T. E. find for an example of Perfection, than St.
Paul was; who in a vision was rapt up into the third Heaven? Is T. E. the Man
think you? But this plain Confession of St. Paul T. E. very unfairly here lets
slip, and says nothing to it; very unkindly endeavoring to shut (not his own
only, but) all men's eyes to the plain and open Truth, and attempting to shift
off the matter by mere evasions.


Par. But he has one shift left; that by Resurrection of the dead, ver. 11. is
not meant the Last and General; which he endeavors to prove by two reasons
(1.) Because the Apostle would not seem so dubious of obtaining that. (2.) He
would not have told them that he had not attained That while he was alive,
which could not be attained, till he was dead: this is the sum of his reasons,
p. 71.


Min. I must therefore ask this bold Interpreter; What Resurrection is then
meant?


Par. He answers, The First Resurrection, mentioned, Rev. 20. 6. which the
Apostle refers to, Col. 3. 1. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things
which are above, p. 72.


Min. The First Resurrection is the raising up a Sinner from the Death of Sin
to Newness of life; and this is Conversion. Has not therefore the Quaker mended
the matter well? Was St. Paul, so long after his Conversion (which we read of
Acts 9.) dubious, whether he should attain Conversion? After so great
proficiency in Holiness; yea after that he had (according to T. E.) attained to
Absolute Perfection; Would He tell them, he had not yet attained the First
Resurrection? How effectually does T. E's. self-contradictions baffle his
newcoin'd sense? But I would desire him to consider, that the Resurrection of
the Dead is often taken for the better part, that is for the Resurrection to
life, as Luk, 20. 35, 36. they which shall be accounted worthy to obtain that
World, and the Resurrection from the dead -- are equal unto the Angels, etc.
And thus it signifies in this 11 ver. He labored, if by any means he might
attain to that better part of the General Resurrction, Namely, the endless life
of Glory: Now is it any absurdity for St. Paul to press after this? or to tell
them, that he had not yet attained the full measure of his Perfection, and the
end of his Hope, but was only in the Race, etc? Theophylact also notes, that it
is not the ordinary word for Resurrection, but (...), which St. Paul here uses
(says he) to signify his lifting up to meet the Lord in the Air, which is
only the portion of Blessed Souls: We conclude therefore that [Perfect] in ver.
12. must signify the absolute unsinning State of Perfection, which the Saints
shall have in the next World; this St. Paul had not attained here in this
World; Hence it necessarily follows, that [Perfect] in ver. 15. must mean some
lower degree of Perfection.


Par. Now you have made me sufficiently sensible, that it is the Quaker, and
not the Priest, who was as well out in his notion of the Resurrection, as in
that of Perfection. Now he comes to examine your interpretation of 1 Ioh. 5.
18. whosoever is born of God sins not, that is (say you) lives not in a
wilful course and trade of sin, though not wholly without sin. And whereas you
affirmed, that otherwise St. John would contradict other plain texts of
Scripture, viz. 1 King. 8. 46. Eccles. 7. 20. Prove. 20. 9, etc. T. E. to avoid
the force hereof, has this notable device; The words of the Apostle (says he)
are not contradictory to these; The one speaks of Man in a Natural State, the
other of Man as begot and born of God, p. 73.


Min. But those texts speak of All men in general, Spiritual as well as
Natural, otherwise there would be no sense in them: for instance, while he
interprets 1 Kin. 8. 46. [there is ^to Man that sins not;] to signify only
a Man in his Natural State, as he is a Child of wrath; He mak^s the sense run
thus, There is no Child of wrath but sins; or There is no sinner that
sins not: thus he makes the Scriptures as ridiculous as his own Canting: I
hope a Spiritual Man is a Man still; and therefore from the testimony of this
Scripture, Such an one sins.

As for Prove. 20. 9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? you may note, that he makes the latter part of this verse to be only a
repetition, as having no other sense than that same, which he has given of the
former part: These words, [Who can say -- I am pure from my sin?] must signify
nothing, if they oppose T. E's. assertion. And that threatening in Ezekiel. 18. 24.
against a Righteous man committing iniquity (he says) implies there was a time,
when he did not commit iniquity; but does not consider, that by committing
iniquity there is meant his falling into gross sins, as appears by the words
immediately added, And does according to all the abominateons that the wicked
man does: this implies indeed that there was a time, when the righteous Man did
not commit gross sins, but not that there was a time when he lived without all
infirmities and moral imperfections. And as for Job 9. 20. [If I justify my
self, my own mouth shall condemn me; If I say, I am perfect, it shall also
prove me perverse.] This he would evade by an impertinent discourse of
self-justification; while the Translators meant no more than (in the sense of
the Original) If I say I am just, or (as Olimpiodorus expounds it) If I dare to
say, I am righteous, etc. and the latter partof the verse is express enough, If
I say I am perfect, etc. If Job was perfect, as the Quaker pleads, what reason
can be given, why he should deny it, and disclaim the Grace of God in him? why
might he not say, he was so? But do you not take notice, that he has passed by
the plainest pl^ce of all, viz. Eccl. 7. 20. [there is not a just Man upon
Earth, that does good and sins not?] I hope he will not say here, that by a
Just man is meant a Natural man, or a Child of wrath, etc.


Par. I am very much satisfied with these Scripture-proofs; yet must I not pass
by his note on Iam. 3. 2. [In many things we offend All.] This (says T. E.)
does not prove, that the Apostle himself was an offender, any more than that
other saying of his concerning the Tongue, ver. 9. [therewith bless we God, and
therewith curse we men,] can prove that the Apostle himself was a Curser, p. 76.


Min. This is very strange! does [All] in the former place signify Nothing?
Does St. James say, We All curse? but he says, We offend All; to include
himself, and exclude so false a Gloss; which is thus noted in an Ancient
Council, wherein St. Augustine was present; In many things we offend all -- And
why is [All] added, but that this place may Corc^l. Milevitan. Can. 7.
agree with Psalm. 143. 2. In Thy sight shall no Man living be justified, etc?
Which Council also shows us, that the Pelagians (not T. E.) were the first
Authors of this exposition.


Par. But I assure you, that T. E. is not a little proud of it; For he brings
it over again, to evade the exposition of that Scripture we have been
discoursing of; If we say that we have no sin, etc. Its evident (says he) that
the Apostles, in condescension to those to whom they writ, did many times
include themselves, as in the condition of others, etc. p. 77.


Min. Ellwood ^ollows the Pelagian Heretics in this also, who thus of old
expounded this place: Whence the Holy Fathers of the aforesaid Conc. Milevit.
Can. 6.
Milevitan Council, having produced this of 1 Ioh. 1. 8. If we say we have no
sin, etc. add -- Whosoever thinks this place is so to be taken, as if it were
spoken out of Humility, and not in truth; Let him be accursed. To which curse
you see T. E. has entitled himself. Moreover if the Apostles do say [We]
sometimes in condescension, yet it follows not that they always use it in that
sense; In 1 Ioh. 1. 3. says St. John, That which we have seen, etc. and Chap.
2. 1. We have an Advocate, etc. Surely He does not mean here to exclude
himself. Why therefore must [We] be necessarily so taken here? there is but one
reason for it; it is because otherwise it would contradict T. E's wild opinion,
to which all Scripture* must vail and stoop.

But, O ye people called Quakers, take heed of this exposition, for it will
utterly overthrow your Arguments against saying [You] to a single Person; since
the Apostles might as well change the Numbers, and say [You] for [Thou,] as
change the Persons, and say [Ye] for [We:] yea I persuade my self, that if you
should hear men say [We,] when they meant [Ye;] you would accuse it as a
greater untruth, than to say [You,] when they meant [Thou:] And your Champion
Ellwood loses more on one side, than he gains on the other; for while he would
prove the Apostles no Offenders, he proves them no Quakers; while he would show
they were Perfect, he makes them (according to your strict way of reproving
others) to be manifest Liars, in saying [We,] while they mean [Ye.] Thus while
he defends one point, he confutes himself in another; Ea enim mendaciorum
natura est, Lact. Inst. l. 5. cap. 2.
ut cohaerere non possint.

By all this is manifest that 1 Ioh. 5. 18. means not an absolute Perfection;
which further appears, and that most evidently in this, that this is asserted
of all that are Born of God; Now Babes in Christ are born of God; But I hope,
T. E. will not say, that Babes in Christ are absolutely Perfect; for he that is
so, and has overgrown all imperfections, certainly is past a Babe.


Par. Yet I see T. E. is so taken with his opinion of Perfection, that he
resolves to pull down all that seems to oppose it: And because our Lord taught
his Disciples to pray, forgive us our Trespasses; he throws away the whole
Prayer saying, That it does not appear, that it was intended to be a standing
Rule for them to pray by as long as they lived, p. 81.


Min. Here E^wood outstrips Pelagius, who had the same Quarrel at praying for
forgiveness; yet he durst not say, that it was not used by the Apostles, or
unfit for strong Christians, only he said, The Saints need not say it for
themselves, but for others who were sinners: Yet for this he was accursed by
the aforesaid ^an. 6.
Council of Milevis. Sure I am, that our Lord taught his Disciples this Prayer
in that Sermon, which contains the most perfect Doctrines of Christianity, Mat.
5. 20. And when they had arrived to greater proficiency, he renews his
injunction to them to use this Prayer, Luke 11. And no doubt, the Apostles used
it themselves, as well as taught it to the Church, where it was used all along,
in all public Offices; whence it was called the Daily Prayer by St. Cyprian,
St. Hilary, and St. Augustine: Y^a the Ancients taught the most perfect
Christians Constir. Apost. l. 7. c. 25. A^g. ^om. 42.
to use it three times a Day. As for the Quakers pretenses, that the s^t being
come on them, this Prayer would be usel^ss, because the Spirit would teach them
what to pray f^r; which he would prove out of Ioh. 16. 13, 24. p. 82 I pray
read those places, and you will (...), that as there is not one word thereof
reaching them what to pray for, so there is no ground for us to build such
pretenses upon. And that so much mistaken place, Romans 8. 26. (objected by him)
Our not knowing what to pray for as we ought, Is (says St. Chrysostom, and the
context confirms it, which there are treating of Afflictions, and our need of
patience, ver. 25. immediately before, and ver. 28. immediately after this
passage) that in our afflictions we should never wait with patience, ver. 25.
if the Spirit did not help our inf^rmities to bear up under them; but we should
immediately pray to be delivered (as St. Paul did, 2 Cor. 12. 8, 9.) though it
were not best for us; and indeed we often ask amiss, and know not what to pray
for as we ought, especially when we consult the flesh. Therefore the Holy
Spirit here is asserted as only an Internal Intercessor (for externally to
intercede for us is Christ's Office) and that not by dictating words, but by
stirring up in us holy desires, and by giving us a sense of our wants, and
patience with faith, submission, and devotion. In this consists the Spirit of
Prayer, and is not only consistent with, but assisted by a Form of Prayer, and
of fit expressions: And what is all this to the rendering the Lord's Prayer, or
any public or private Forms of Prayer useless? or to countenance extempore
Prayers in God's public and ordinary Worship? or men's fathering the
impertinences and disorders of such effusions upon the Spirit of God? yet Oh!
what strange Castles in the Air does this Quaker, and other Separatists attempt
to build upon this mistaken passage?


Par. But what is the reason, T. E. charges you with mis-stating the Case in
declaiming against the Impossibility of sinning? p. 83.


Min. This he does very abusively as here, so in other places, page 85, 95. but
let him know, it is no mis-stating the Case at all; because all that I have said
there is concerned in it, while all is too little to oppose the presumptions of
many Quakers, and all such Perfectionists, as look upon themselves, as out of
danger.


Par. I perceive, he makes it his business, to represent your denying
Perfection in his sense, to be a discouraging men from striving against sin and
Satan, which is the main thing he urges, p. 83, 84, 99.


Min. We say indeed, that our victory over these Enemies shall not be so
complete, as never to be disadvantaged by them any more in this World: This
whole life is a warfare; This World is a wrestling place, and our Enemy is in
the Field (as my Adversary confesses;) And we tell Men, that while the Battle
endures, the conquest is not absolutely completed; for if it were, what need
were there of more fighting? the warfare then were ended: This whole life is a
Race, 1 Cor. 9. 24. And while we are running, we are not yet at the Goal. To
tell men of their being absolute Conquerors, while our Adversaries are in Arms,
is to make them secure, before they are safe: No Man can boast, till he put his
Armor off, 1 Kings 20. 11. And it is the Evening that Crowns the Day. Yet we
teach, that if Christians be watchful, and use God's Grace aright, they shall
not be mortally wounded in the Battle, but gain ground of the Enemy more and
more, and get the upper hand in this life: The House of Saul in them (as I may
so speak) shall grow weaker and weaker, and the House of David shall grow
stronger and stronger; and they shall be absolute Conquerors at the last.

We do not deny, but that Christians may and must get a comfortable conquest
over their Corruptions, and proceed forwards toward a total overthrow: And
this is encouragement sufficient, that (if they be faithful) they shall daily
be on the winning and prevailing hand: as men in wrestling with the distempers
of their Bodies, are not discouraged, if they know, they may daily get ground
of them, and arrive at a comfortable State of health, though they know, they
can never arrive at the most perfect State of health in this life. A Scholar is
not discouraged in his Studies, though be knows he can never be free from all
ignorance; yet because he may make a very great progress in Learning, and daily
be on the improving hand, he seeks as much learning as he can attain with a
comfortable vigor and industry: A Christian may much more comfortably pursue
Perfection, because he is assured he shall one day compass it, that is, in
Heaven; There it is, where we shall find our selves s^ved to the uttermost,
according to Heb. 7. 25 which is absurdly applied by the Quaker, p. 96. to this
present State. So that we may comfortably labor after such acquests and
perfections, as are not attainable here below, because our growing endeavors
here shall be rewarded with those perfections hereafter; Witness the Apostles,
who pressed forward toward the Mark, and to attain the Resurrection of the
dead, etc. And who seeks not to grow to a State of Manhood in Divine
knowledge, though that which is perfect comes not in our present State here,
where we know but in part, 1 Cor. 13. 9, etc? Moreover it is themost pressing
encouragement, that can be expressed, to Christians, in this life to their Duty,
and assault their Spiritual Enemies with all their might, and in that vigor to
abound more and more, when they are told, that they shall not only receive the
Prize, an Incorruptible Crown of Glory, but also an higher degree of Glory,
according to the higher degrees of their increasing vi^tues, and their growing
valor, and holy ^ortitude in this life, 1 Cor. 15. 41.


Par. But it is in God's Power to free men wholly from sin here; And to say,
that a Man cannot be perfectly cured of sin in this life, is to reflect upon
the Ability of the Physician: at this rate T. E. argues, p. 86.


Min. We do not question God's Power, but His Will in this matter; because we
do not find any promise for us to expect, that He should make use of his
Omnipotence to this purpose. Hear what Tertullian answers to an old Heretic,
who made this very objection; verily nothing is difficult to God; but if we
shall so abruptly apply this Maxim to all our own presumptions, we may feign
what we will of the Terr. adv. Prax. Cap. 10.
Almighty, as if he had done it, because he can do it. God is the Physician of
our Bodies, as well as of our Souls; And yet it does not reflect upon His
Ability at all, that we are troubled with many Bodily Diseases; Only it shows,
that we are not to enjoy our perfect health and happiness here on Earth; thus
our Savior cured no diseased Bodies to an Immortal State, exempt from all
bodily infirmity, in that they dyed after notwithstanding.


Par. I confess you never pleaded, that the Enemy should overcome, as T. E.
falsely suggests, p. 88, 89. But he reflects upon your saying I have a false and
treacherous heart, p. 90. and makes it an absurdity to suppose by that saying,
that a Regenerate man has such an heart, p. 91.


Min. Solomon says Prove. 28. 26. He that trusts in his own heart, is a fool:
Now that which is not to be trusted, has a least some degrees of falsehood
remainning in it. Solomon says elsewhere, Keep thy heart with all diligence;
And our Lord bids us, Watch and pray, Prove. 4. 23. Mat. 26. 41.
etc. Now surely that which has need of so much keeping, and watching, is not
to be trusted without it; otherwise it would not need it. From this disease we
shall not be wholly free, till in Body and Soul we become immortal, says St.
Augustine. And all orthodox Christians In Psalm. 19.
did ever hold the Flesh and its inclinations (though in some degrees
mortified) to remain even in regenerate men: Every Man has Flesh in him opposed
to the Spirit, to keep him in exercise in this State of Trial, as is evident,
not only by Gal. 5. 17. but by the experience of all truly humble Christians;
who will abhor all presumptuous boastings, while they find, that though the
Spirit be willing, yet the flesh is weak; though the Spirit be sincere, yet the
flesh is treacherous; because (says the Apostle) these are contrary the one to
the other. And the fleshly part in Man is in the Holy Scripture frequently
called the Heart; so that T. E. had no reason to fall so rigidly upon this
passage in the Conference.


Par. I will only mind you of one conclusion, which he draws from Romans 8. 1.
[There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, etc.] If there be
no condemnation to them (says he) there is no sin committed by them; for
wheresoever there is sin, there is also condemnation, p. 97.


Min. A strange Conclusion indeed! which if true, would damn T. E. and all
mankind: This is Socinianism in the highest degree. What? No redemption? no
pardon for Penitents? Has Christ's death done no good to the avoiding of
Condemnation? then woe be to all the World. But T. E. has found a better way to
Heaven, (viz.) by being so perfectly free from sin, that God cannot justly
condemn him: And hence in this whole Chapter he avoids all mention of Christ's
Merits, and Satisfaction, and of Remission of sins, etc. Laying the foundation
of his Title to Heaven, upon a perfect freedom from sin in this life, p. 92.
The Popish Doctrine of Merits is short of this, which takes in Christ's Merits
to their own, as giving value to them: but T. E. being in a greater degreee
ignorant of God's Righteousness, goes about to establish his own, Romans 10. 3.
But let him know (if this be his opinion) that a possibility of not sinning
will not serve his turn, but an actual and total freedom from it; If he commit
but the least sin, he must be condemned according to his own Position. For
wheresoever there is sin (says he) there is also condemnation. God grant that
he may not be dealt with according to the measures of his own Principles, but
that he may rather see his error to his Conversion, than feel the sad effect of
it to his Condemnation.

The rest of his discourse on this subject is spent in artifices, to render me,
and my Doctrine odious: but upon the Principles I have already laid down (in
the stating of this Case of Perfection) they will appear neither to need, nor
deserve an Answer.


Par. But there is one thing, which must not be omitted: T. E. thinks you, and
others, who set your selves in opposition to this truly Gospel Doctrine of
being perfectly delivered and preserved from sin, to be as the Evil Spies, who
discouraged the heart of the Children of Israel, that they should not go into
the Land which the Lord had given them, etc. p. 98, 99.


Min. The Quaker has brought this comparison to his Disadvantage; Did the Good
Spies Ioshuah and Caleb ever tell the Children of Israel (as T. E. does the
Quakers) that they should get such a perfect victory over those Canaanites, as
that no remainders of them should be left to disturb and vex them any more? No
such thing; but the Scriptures tell them the contrary, just as we do to
Christians concerning their Spiritual Enemies; See Deuteronomy. 7. 22. -- thou may
not consume them at once; and in matter of fact it is evident they were not
wholly driven out, or consumed. It Is the Quakers therefore, and not Ours, that
is the discouraging Doctrine; For ^f a perfect freedom from all sins and
infirmities here, be taught as the necessary condition of obtaining Heaven
hereafter; then all humble Souls sincerely thirsting after Righteousness,
standing upon their constant watch, and yet finding imperfections, wants and
infirmities in themselves, will (if they believe this Doctrine) be driven into
inevitable despair. There are sins of Omission, as well as of Commission; How
many accidents may hinder us from performing our Devotions with that vigor,
intentness, and exactness, as the purity and sublimity of the Precepts do
require? The very Constitutions of our Sunt and quaedam non humanae simpliciter
naturae, sed huic and nunc inevitabilia, ob Corporis concretionem in animam
transeuntem, aut adultam consuetudinem, etc. Grot. de jore belli. l. 2. c. 20.
Bodies, the influence of the Clime and Season, may hinder the performance of
our Duties with an exact Bonum non nisi ex integro, malum ex qualibet part.
perfection. And therefore we flee to God for Mercy in the performance of our
best Services; See Nehem. 13. 14, 22. So that they do most effectually keep Men
from coming to Heaven, who build this fools Paradise of imaginary unsinning
Perfection for them to dwell in on Earth; wherein they grow so proud, and
conceited, that they sit down on this side Jordan, and fancy they have no need
of Joshua to conduct them into the true Land of Promise; In effect they deny
the Gospel, despise the death of Christ, rely on their own Perfection, and (I
fear) tumble into Hell, while they vainly dream of Heaven.


CHAP. VI. Of Swearing.
Par. NOW we are come to T. E's. Chapter of Swearing, which is so very long,
that it consists of no less than 104. pages, therefore I shall only propound to
you the most material passages in it.

He begins with a reflection on that short digression, which you made upon the
two Covenants, and very gravely tells us, that you tread in an unbeaten Path,
p. 101.


Min. Had he been acquainted with Authors, and not taken things upon trust, he
would not have accused the account I gave off the two Covenants as a peculiar
Notion o^ my own, when the same has been asserted by the greatest Clerks in
Christendom: I could fill a Page with Citations of such Authors (if it were
needful) as concur in the same Notion: I shall only name two (viz.) Dr.
Hammond in his Practical Catechism, and the excellent Author of the Whole Duty
of Man, in the Preface of that same Treatise: which when T. E. has consulted,
he will be be satisfied, that I have trodden in no unbeaten Path: But seeing T.
E. will have it my own Notion, and there being so much matter before us upon
this Subject of Oaths, which in the Conference was primarily intended, I will
pass on to that, and examine my Adversaries Objections and extravagances on
this Subject.


Par. He would gladly clear R. Hubberthorn from that impertinence and
dishonesty, where with you charged him; in acknowledging Oaths lawful in the
times of the Old Testament: yet alleging Hos. 4. 3. Zech. 5. 3. (Texts out of
the Old Testament) to prove them unlawful now; which (he says) you call his
proofs, though he do not so himself, and hints, as if they were only set in the
Title Page of the Book, p. 106.


Min. However they were at first in the Title Page, See Hubberthorn's Works
Printed together.
I found them in the Book it self. And if they be not Proofs, what are they
then? So here is an implicit acknowledgment of a Quaker's bringing Scripture to
prove nothing.


Par. He thinks you mistake the Case; for they are not (says he) brought
against that which was then lawful, but against that which was then unlawful,
namely, the wrong use and abuse of Oaths, ibid.


Min. Wonderful ingenuity! I thought the question had not been, Whether
perjury, but whether any Oaths were lawful? Now to what end is a quotation
brought, but to prove the Subject in hand? In a word then, I desire the Quakers
to take notice, that these Scriptures (viz. Hos. 4. 3. Zech. 5. 3.) do not
reprove all Oaths as unlawful.


Par. You told me, that an Oath is an Act of Natural Religion; but he tells us,
that all acts of Religion are not acts of Natural Religion, as in the case of
Circumcision, p. 110.


Min. It Is very true, that all such acts of Religion, as owe their original to
a Positive Command, and have no reason in the nature of the thing to put
mankind upon the observation of them, as in the case of Circumcision, these are
not acts of Natural Religion; for T. E. may read the definition of Natural
Religion in Bishop Wilkins's Discourse upon that Subject, page 39. That is
Natural Religion, which Men might know, and should be obliged unto by the mere
Principles of Reason improved by consideration and experience, without the help
of Revelation. Now an Oath came into use among men from the mere Principles of
Reason improved by consideration, without the help of Revelation. So that if an
Oath be an Act of Religion, it must be an act or part of Natural Religion. For
the first that ever required an Oath was Abimelech a Gentile, Genesis 21. 23. He
required Abraham to swear; And Abraham said, I will swear, ver. 24. Yet we read
not, that either Abimelech's requiring, or Abraham's consenting to it, was by
any positive command from God: So that T. E. must grant, that Men were led to
bind their Covenants by a solemn calling of God to witness, and that by the
light of Nature, of which more anon. But when I say, an Oath is an act or part
of Natural Religion, I do not insist, that it is by Natural Religion commanded
primarily, simply and per se toward God; but subordinately, implicitly and by
consequence, as a necessary medium for the public good in this state of
things: For the Law of Nature, that commands the end, must also command the
only means; So that the use of an Oath is commanded by the Law of Nature ex
hypothesi, or from a supposition that it is necessary for the public good;
just in the same sense, that Magistrates are commanded by the same Law to make
Penal Laws against Vice: But if we were perfectly innocent, neither the one nor
the other would be commanded. You may remember I told you in the Conference,
that if there were that truth in men that their bare testimony were infallible,
and of sufficient credit, Conf. p. 61.
then there were no need at all of an Oath. So that we are commanded by the Law
of Nature to use Oaths only upon just and necessary occasions. And thus I
assert (what I did before in the Conference) that an Oath (rightly taken) that
is (as every honest man will understand me, and as I interpreted my self) duly
circumstantiated, and taken in truth, in judgment and in righteousness, is an
Act of Natural Jer. 4. 2.
Religion, and understood plainly by the light of Nature to comprehend a great
deal of Religion in it, as having God for the immediate object of that appeal,
which therein is made to Him, and by which so many of the Divine Attributes are
acknowledged and glorified, as I showed you in the Conference. And an Oath
being such, and so needful to the ends of justice and charity, it remains (as I
said) that it is not made unlawful by the Doctrine of Christ, who has
prohibited nothing, that has so much of Morality and goodness in it.


Par. But T. E. (lest he should not be understood) has put in a Marginal Note
in order to the explaining what Natural Religion means, viz. The word Natural
has diverse acceptations, for there is Pure Nature, Corrupt Nature, and the
Divine Nature, ibid.


Min. These may be the senses of the word [Nature;] but would any but a Natural
have brought in these to expound Natural Religion? Let us apply it thereto, and
then there is Pure Natural Religion, Corrupt Natural Religion, and Divine
Natural Religion: Rare distinctions! Besides, how comes the Divine Nature to be
a sense of the word [Natural?] Is Natural ever used for the Divine Nature? or
are the Saints, who are partakers of it, any where called Natural men? One
would suspect T. E. was not in his right mind, when he put down this lamentable
Note.


Par. T. E. tells us, you enumerate many attributes of God, which are
acknowledged by an Oath; to which (he says) no other answer need be given, than
that the Divine Attributes are acknowledged by speaking the truth without an
Oath, p. 112.


Min. Having mudded the Waters by his Captious-exceptions, he thinks to escape
undiscerned, and to put off the whole force of my reasoning, Conf. p. 57, 58.
with this fallacious and slight reply, but we must not part so.

What though a Man may believe the Attributes of God in his heart, while he
speaks the truth, yet does he so openly, and so solemnly acknowledge them, as
he that immediately calls God to witness by an Oath? Speaking truth is not so
particularly directed unto God; but an Oath rightly taken, or duly
circumstantiated is so direct an application to God, and we do so particularly
ascribe a Divinity to that we swear by, that Lactantius affirms, Socrates his
swearing by a Goose and a Dog was an acknowledgment of those Creatures being
his Gods. And Tertullian plainly gives this Lact. de sal. sap. cap. 20.
reason, why the Primitive Christians would not swear by the Genius of the
Emperor, lest they should thereby own them to be Gods. And hence Authors
generally make solemn Oaths Apolog. cap. 32.
to be Acts of Religion, and One sort of the worship of God. So Sanderson, De
juram. praesec. 1.. 2
Pareus, In Romans 9. 1.
Cbemnitius, Loci com. de Lege Dei.
etc. But none can say thus of speaking bare truth; and therefore the
difference is very great; that being an Act of Moral virtue, but this an Act of
the incommunicable Worship of God; that being directed to a Man, this to the
true and Living God.


Par. But T. E. has a way to avoid this by telling us, that God is more
Glorified by having redeemed a People from perfidiousness, treachery, and
falsehood, etc. who can now speak truth every man with his neighbor. ibid.


Min. Though the price of our Redemption be of infinite value; yet if men
improve not the Grace, which was purchased for them, this fault (which is in
them, and not in Christ's Redemption) will spoil the Quaker's Argument. Are all
Men, are all Quakers themselves purged from hypocrisy, etc.? If they be not,
T. E. has said nothing to purpose against the use of solemn and Legal Oaths.


Par. He tells us now, that from Reason you are come to Consent of Nations,
your second Medium to prove swearing an Act of Religion; and here he bids his
Reader observe, that you have wholly let go your hold of Natural Religion, ibid.


Min. You may remember, my words were these (which I suppose he durst not cite
for fear of exposing himself) I shall resume the Method proposed, and prove,
that an Oath is an Act of Religion, out of the Light of Nature and Consent of
Nations, etc. And is not that, which Conf. p. 59. Omni autem in re consensus
omnium gentium lex naturae putanda est. Cic. Tusc. qu. lib. 1. (...).
Heraclitus See Grotius de jure bell. and pa. l. 1. c. 1. p. 12.
can be proved an Act of Religion out of the light of Nature, and by the
Consent of Nations, an Act of Natural Religion? what better way, nay, what
other way to prove it? Is this letting go my hold of Natural Religion, when I
prove it by an instance of Religion evident in the Light of Nature with special
precept or institution? What mark will T. E. assign us to distinguish it from
an Act of Positive Religion, according to his own distinction, p. 110.? So that
you see here how unfairly he deals with me, which surely he would never have
done, had he thought, that the Books would ever have been compared together.


Par. As to those instances, which you gave of Aristotle, Cicero and Seneca,
affirming an Oath an Act of Religion out of the light of Nature; He carps only
at your Quotation in Seneca, who says, that Religion is the chief Bond of
fidelity in the Militia; where he observes that Seneca does not say, that an
Oath is the chief bond, but Religion; and that you would persuade your Readers,
that by [Religion is meant an Oath, p. 113.


Min. Had T. E. read the place in Seneca, surely he would not so grossly have
abused himself; The whole Sentence is this, Even as the first bond of fidelity
in the Militia is Religion, and the love of the Ensigns, and the wickedness of
running away, and then afterward other things are easily required and
commanded to those who are bound by an Oath: Nothing Ser. p. 369.
plainer, than that he calls that Oath, with which Soldiers are bound,
Religion; And so do many other Authors. If T. E. have none but Rider by him in
the Country, or his Capacity extend no higher; let him look [Religio] there,
and he will find these words, viz. Cic. in Flacoum, Religioni suae consulere,
i. e. fidei and Sacramento militari. And I think it makes much to my purpose,
that the Romans did not call an Oath barely Religious, but Religion it self, as
I could prove by more instances, were there occasion for it.


Par. Well, he is resolved to attack all your instances together, and
accordingly charges you with saying, those testimonies do signify the
universal Consent of Mankind in this Point. Do they so? (says he) What, three
men (one Greek, and two Romans) to represent all Nations, and signify the
Universal Consent of Mankind! etc. ibid.


Min. He cannot be ignorant, that my words were not applied only to those three
men's testimonies, but were a reply to your general question, Why I alleged the
testimonies of Heathen Authors to prove a Christian duty? I answered you, that
those testimonies do signify the universal Consent of Mankind, etc. That is,
the Testimonies of Heathen Authors in general. Wherefore I said [Those] not
[These,] as Conf. p. 60.
he most falsely and injuriously cites my words, when he has got a little
further off, page 116. As if I had meant the testimony of these three alone,
when I plainly spoke of all those testimonies, which might be produced from
Heathen Authors, of which these three were the most eminent and plain; And
since other Proofs and Examples are so numerous, I thought these might suffice,
otherwise I could have cited three hundred as well as three; but indeed this is
the first time a Man was ever required to bring in an induction of all Authors
in the World to prove the consent of all mankind. I could fill a whole Volume
with the religious manner of the Gentiles taking Oaths, being in solemn Cases
accompanied with Sacrifices and devoting themselves to the justice of their
Deities, if they did offend Live. l. 1. and l. 21.
. And so the Samnites and Arcadians custom was to take their Oaths in the midst
of their Divine Worship A^ex. ab Al. lib. 5. c. 10.
. At Rome a Magistrate could not enjoy his place longer than five days without
taking an Oath, as Livy witnesses. Among the Athenians the Judges took an Oath
to judge according to Law, and so did they in Egypt, as Alex. ab Alex. tells
us, lib. 3. cap. 5. But if Names delight my Adversary, let him read for brevity
sake that Author lib. 5. cap. 10. who shows all Nations used to swear by what
they accounted their Gods and esteemed most sacred, where he reckons up the old
Grecians, Athenians, Thebeans, yea (which will stumble T. E.) the Scythians,
the Massagetes, Cappadocians, Persians, Egyptians, Ethiopians, Armenians,
Africans, Indians, etc. all agreeing to Take Oaths; only differing as much in
what they swore by, as they did in their opinions of their Gods; all agreeing
in this, that an Oath was a Religious Act, and only to be appropriate to the
most Sacred thing, and that which they did most highly venerate. Surely T. E.
is not a Stranger to that famous Story of Marcus Attilius Regulus, who took an
Oath of the Carthaginians (whose Captive he was) that, if they would give him
his liberty to return to Rome, he would either send them the contracted Sum for
his Ransom, or deliver up himself into their hands again; and because he could
not effect the former, he did the latter, which cost him his life. And does not
1 Kings 18. 10. sufficiently prove my Assertion? where good Obadiah speaks thus
to Elijah, As the Lord thy God lives, there is No Nation or Kingdom, whither
my Lord has not sent to seek thee: and when they said, He is not there, he
took an OATH of the Kingdom and Nation, that they found thee not,


Par. But T. E. tells his Reader, that to she^ the rashness of your
inconsiderate assertion, he will give you some instances to the contrary. The
first (says he) shall be of Solon, one of the Sages of Greece: A good man
should have that repute, as not to need an Oath: It is a diminution of his
credit to be put to swear, p. 114.


Min. Solon's saying, as it is recorded by Diogenes Laert. (the best preserver
of these Antiquities) has no more than (...) In vit. sol. p. 40.
(...), that is, Account Honesty surer than an Oath; And how does this prove an
Oath to be no Act of Religion? Samuel says, Obedience is better than
Sacrifice; 1 Samuel 15. 22.
but will* T. E. bring that to prove, Sacrifice was (...) Act of Religion in
Samuel's time? And that Solon did not dislike Oaths, is plain from what
Plutarch reports in his Life, That when he had given Laws to the Athenians, He
caused the Senate and all the People to come into the Marketplace, and bind
themselves by an OATH Vit. Solo^is.
to observe them.


Par. I see T. E. has lost one of the seven Wise men of Greece at the very
first reincounter* but to him he adds Sosiades (another of those seven Wise
men;) whose saying was, Abstain from an Oath, ibid


Min. Had he told us where to have found that saying, that the occasions and
circumstances of itmight have been considered, he might have expected a fuller
answer than now can be given: Why may not this relate only to vain swearing?
But this I must tell him, that no such man as Sosiades was ever reckoned among
the seven Wise men of Greece. Had but T. E. consulted his Friend Rider, he
would have informed him, that Solon, Thales, Periander, Cleobulus, Chilon, Bias
and Pittacus were the seven Wise men of Greece; but mentions no such Man as
Sosiades: However if he was a Wise man of Greece, he was the Eighth, and Tho.
Ellwood deserves to be reckoned the Ninth for the discovery.


Par. His next instance is in Cherillus, whose saying was, No Oath ought to be
used, neither a just one, nor an unjust one, ibid.


Min. To this I answer, if Cherillus thought all Oaths bad in themselves, how
comes he to account some Oaths just? and if the saying be taken in the Quaker's
sense, it is contradiction in its very terms: So that this Quaker's Author will
come off as poorly as another Cherillus, who (as Rider tells us) presented
Alexander the Great with a Poem, that had only seven good verses in it, the
rest being stark naught; whereupon the Prince ordered, he should have seven
Pieces of Gold for the good Verses, and a buffet for every bad Verse: If T. E.
were so served, that is, if he were to have a piece of Gold for every good
Section of his Book, and a Buffet for every bad one, I persuade my self he
would find, that he had purchased his Gold at a very dear rate.


Par. Next he Quotes the saying of Epictetus, Refuse an Oath, if possible,
altogether; if not, by things obvious, ibid.


Min. This is a Quotation little to his purpose, it being evident, that he
speaks not of solemn Oaths, especially in Judicature, where it was never the
custom to require Oaths by things obvious, but always by the Name of the Gods;
And to confirm that Epictetus was not against Oaths on a serious occasion,
Arrianus his Auditor, who writ this Enchiridion, and Simplic. proaem. Comment.
also larger Discourses from Epictetus's own mouth, brings in the Philosopher
solemnly swearing in his Lectures; one instance may suffice, (...), etc. And
verily by Jove and the Gods one Creature were enough to make a modest and
grateful man sensible Lib. 1. cap. 16.
of a Providence.


Par. But T. E. says, Plato is more positive, Away (says he) with an Oath
altogether, ibid.


Min. Plato is a large Author, and if T. E. had told us whereabouts he said so,
we might have considered the occasion and truth of this saying: Indeed
hetorbids the using the Names of their Gods lightly (...) plato de legibus lib.
11. p. 917.
or without a necessary occasion: But what makes this against solemn Swearing
(upon a due occasion) by the True God? And if he say any where, Away with an
Oath altogether, he must not be understood otherwise than of Common swearing,
for these reasons. First, He was three times listed a Soldier in the Athenian
Wars, among whom it was the Custom to bind their Soldiers with an Oath at
their entrance into the Service. Diog. Laer. vit. p. 191. collarcum Alex. ab
Al. l. 1. cap. 20. in fine.
Secondly, we find him frequently swearing by Jove, and by God, whenever he is
earnestly pressing any thing. (...), and (...), being as familiar in his Apol.
pro Socrate, Critone, Phaedo^e, etc. as Verily, verily in the Gospel, of which
I will engage to give 100 examples. Thirdly, He advises, that a Law might be
made, that no Judge should execute his Office, unless he was sworn. (...) De
legib. lib. 12. p. 948.
And though he thinks it inconvenient to administer Oaths in some Cases, and to
some peculiar persons that are presumed to have great t^mptations to Perjure
themselves; yet you may and that he allows Oaths (as to Judges, so) to several
other persons, if you consult his 12th Fock of Laws. Let it be lawful (says he)
for Strangers that cannot agree among themselves, to take, and administer
Oaths, if they please, as it is the Custom of these times. (...). Id. ibid. p.
949.
So that it Plato any where forbid serious Oaths, he is strangely inconsistent
with himself.


Par. Menander (T. E. says) is little less positive, So avoid evil swearing, as
not to swear in things just and true, ibid.


Min. The Greek is this (...). But neither this, nor T. E's English do at all
oppose solemn Swearing in necessary Cases; for it is vain and common swearing
to all truths in discourse, that brings men to such a custom, that by degrees
they learn to swear any thing true or false; and therefore to escape this evil
Custom, we should resolve to avoid all swearing to what we ordinarily say: And
this same Menander, to make men careful of solemn Oaths when they did take
them, says, When thou swearest falsely, think not to conceal it from the Gods.
apud Stobaeum.


Par. But T. E. says, Plutarch tells them, It was unlawful for Jupiter' s
Priests to swear. ibid.


Min. I suppose he means, that it was their privilege to be exempted from an
Oath; For they who write upon that matter do tell us so (viz.) that it was the
peculiar privilege of the Flamen Dialis to be excepted; which plainly implies,
that other sorts of Men were obliged to the taking of Oaths; Nay not so much as
the Pontifex Max. wax excepted; and if the Flamen Dialis was to be chosen to
any peculiar office, he was to swear by Proxy. Alex. ab Alex. lib. 5. cap. 10.


By the Law of England a Nobleman is not obliged to give evidence upon Oath:
Does this argue, that the Law looks upon an Oath as evil? Nay Noblemen
themselves are not exempted in all Cases; for they cannot take upon them the
execution of a Will without taking an Oath. Stat. 21. H. 8. 15.
In an old Council held at Berkhamstead Anno 700. cap. 17. It is ordained, that
the word of a King and Bishop (without an Oath) shall be irrefragable: Will T.
E. hence argue, that an Oath was not then accounted an Act of Religion in this
Nation? He himself seems to reckon the wearing of Black in mourning for the
dead among the religious actions of the Heathens, page 117. and yet that also
was forbid to Jupiter's Priests. Aul. Gell. lib. 10. cap. 15.
So that you may see, how glad the Quakers are to take hold of any twig to save
a linking cause; but it will not do.


Par. He tells us further, that Fimicus said to Lollianus, Neither take an
Oath, nor require one, p. 115.


Min. I suppose here is some mistake, and that he means some other person; for I
never heard or read of such a man as Fimicus; and therefore am not so well
prepared to answer the objection. But himself having stated [Oath]
indefinitely, may relate to an Oath in Converse, as well as to such as are
tendered upon a serious and solemn occasion.


Par. His last instance is out of Polybius, who says, In the better and simpler
Ages of the World Oaths were seldom used in Judicature; but after that perfidy
and lying increased, the use of Oaths increased, ibid.


Min. If Oaths were seldom used in Judicature, does it necessarily follow that
they were never used in Judicature? Polybius writ his History 200 years before
Christ's time; So that we must look to the very beginning of the Roman State
(whose History he writes) for these better and simpler Ages; Let us go back as
far as Numa, Successor to Romulus (which was the best and simplest Age of that
State:) He (says Livy) Had endued the Breasts of all with that Piety, that
fidelity and an Oath without the fear of Laws and punishment did rule the whole
City Ea pictate omnium pectora imbuerat, ut Fides ac Jusjurandum, propulso
legum ac paenarum meru, civitatem regerent. Live. hist. lib. 1. Dec. 1.
In those Ages there were fewer Men and fewer Causes, and therefore fewer
Oaths: but neither Polybius nor any other can say truly, that in any Age they
were wholly useless. And indeed this Quotation is so far from being to the
Quaker's business, that it is directly against him, it proving that Oaths were
then Used, though but seldom.


Par. Yet T. E. bids his Reader judge by these instances, whether the more
virtuous and honest sort of Heathens did esteem an Oath to be an Act of Natural
Religion (that is) whether they accounted it of a Religious nature in it self.
ibid.


Min. Where does any of those Instances deny it? The strictest of them and the
most positive cannot with any reason be interpreted to signify any more than
either a Dehortation from that falslhood which was the occasion of them, or a
Caution against evil swearing, that is, against false, irreverent, and needless
Oaths. Is this to consute my Assertion? Let us try in a parallel Case:
Excommunication is an Act of Religion; Now if I should bring many who say, it
must not be used Lightly, and some who forbid to use it at all inslight manner,
many who say, a Good man needs not to be excommunicated, and some, with
Polybius, who tell us, that in the best and simplest Ages of the Church it was
seldom used, but when Heresies and impieties increased, the use of
Excommunication increased also: Does this prove Excommunication to be no Act of
Christian Religion? All this is true, and yet all Christians continue the use
of it, and the Quakers have something like it, page 26. Let any Man judge, if
T. E. reason well, or have got the victory.

That an Oath (duly circumstantiated) is an Act of Natural Religion, and of a
Religious nature in it self, I proved before, in that it glorifies God in the
acknowledgment of His Attributes: For to make any action of a Religious nature,
it is sufficient that the Attributes of God are Glorified in the thing that is
done, notwithstanding the occasion of the Action be but rare and accidental;
and though it be no prescribed way of the constant Worship of God, but
secondary and occasional in the designation of it; yet it is real, when thus
occasioned and performed with reverence to the Divine NAME.


Par. From instances of Particular Persons, he gives one of a Nation in
general, namely the Scythians, whose Ambassadors treating with Alexander the
Great, thus deliver themselves, Think not that the Scythians confirm their
Amity by Oaths; They swear by keeping their Word: That it* is the security of
the Greeks, who Seal Deeds and call upon their Gods. We are bound by our very
promise. p. 115, 116.


Min. This is one of the fairest Quotations I see in his Book; and to this I
have much to answer. First, This very saying declares, that it was (however)
the custom of the Greeks to seal Deeds, and to swear by calling on their Gods;
yea that swearing is a Calling upon God, which overthrows all his Greek
Authorities before produced. Secondly, The Ambassadors say not, they never
swore; only they confirmed not their Amity [or Leagues] by Oaths. In other
Cases the Scythians did swear by their King's Throne, by the Wind, or their
Sword. Alex. ab Al. lib. 5. c. 10.
And indeed they worshipped their Sword, and so might well swear by it. The
Scythians hanging up a Sword are wont to sacrifice to it as to Mars Clem. Alex.
protrept.
. Mars is the God of this people, and instead of an Image they worship a Sword
Solinus de Scythis.
. Thirdly, One instance (especially of so barbarous (...) Chrvsost. in
Oratione, Christum Deum esse.
a Nation as the Scythians, who were without Towns or Houses) does not
overthrow a Law of Nature; nor does the exception of some few rude people make
a thing to be no Act of Religion, which the more knowing and more General Part
of Mankind observe as such. I hope T. E. will not deny that Incest is against
the Law of Nature, yet there were some whole Nations Persae. Medi, Indi, and
Aethiopescum matrib^s and aviis, cum filiabus and neptibus copulantur. Hieron.
in Jovin. lib. 2.
that allowed it. Justice is (says T. E.) a part of Natural Religion, p. 117.
yet among the Spartans it was commendable to steal Plutarch in vit. Lycurgi.
. And the old Spaniards account Robbery not only Lawful, but Glorious Plut. in
vit. Ma^ii.
. To Worship the Supreme God is confestly the Main of Natural Religion, yet the
Chinese Semedo hist. Chin. p. 18.
and Tartars Jo. Plano Carpinilib. hist. de Tartar. cap. 3.
were sunk so much below the principles of Natural Light, that they gave no
worship at all to Him, whom they accounted so. So that if it were true (as it
is not) that the Scythians did never swear, it will not at all follow (...)
Andron. Rbodius.
from thence, that Swearing is no part of Natural Religion; since the
Generality of Mankind has used it as such. And now after so many discoveries of
Ellwood's Untruths and Sophistries, I may justly retort his own question here
upon himself, Might he not have come off with less shame, if he had used more
modesty? p. 116.


Par. That Oaths were used among the Heathen, and by many of them reputed
Religious, T. E. at length denies not; but this (says he) does not prove, that
Oaths were Acts of Natural Religion, ibid. And tells us, It is evident, that
the Heathen borrowed many Ceremonies from their Neighbors the Jews, p. 117.


Min. You have been showed that the first Oath that is mentioned, was tendered
by Abimelech (an Heathen) to Abraham, and accepted of and taken by him, before
any positive Law was given about it. So that to these things I answer (First)
All real acts of Religion used by the Heathen, must be Acts of Natural
Religion, because they were under no Positive Commands. Romans 2. 14. (Secondly)
Though All, that some particular Persons or people among the Heathen did
account Religious actions, were not really so; yet that which is so, not only
in the suffrage of the most sober Heathen, and such an universal Consent of
Nations, as I have proved, but also was used as an Act of Religion, by
invocation of God as Witness, not only by Abimelech, but by the Holy
Patriarchs, before (I say) any Positive Law was given about it, must needs be
an Act of Natural Religion, as being dictated by nothing else, but the
Universal Law of Nature. This is so plain, that I hope, T. E. himself will be
so ingenuous, as to consider of it.

But I have now a great complaint to make against him, That whereas (you may
remember) I gave you the Definition of an Oath, and told you, it was a
religious appeal unto God, the seareher of all hearts, as a Witness of what w^
Conf. p. 57.
assert or promise, and the Avenger of Perjury; T. E. wholly passes this by; it
being indeed for His interest so to do; while he well considered, How absurd it
would have been for him to have denied, either that a Religious Appeal to God
is an Act of Religion, or that (being granted to be so even in the Nature and
Definition of it) it is an Act of Natural Religion: So that the passing this by
is plainly yielding the Cause.

Another thing I complain of as a grand Omission is, that all this while he has
given us no definition of his own, nor any such express description of an Oath,
as to make us understand what he means by it: This is an Omission very
injurious to Peace; for as he may state the Case, we may be as much against
Oaths (in his sense) as himself.


Par. I have often thought of this, yet (though I cannot excuse T. E's. passing
by your definition) if you mind, he has given one himself, though he does not
call it so; For he says An Oath is but the mode or manner of speaking truth, p.
118.


Min. A false Oath is an Oath; but a false Oath (sure) is not a mode of
speaking Truth: I suppose then he means, an Oath is a manner of asserting any
thing, whether true or false.


Par. And he tells us further, that The manner of performing this has been
various; sometimes by a bare affirmation; sometimes by an additional
asseveration; sometimes by calling God verbally to witness; sometimes by an
Imprecation on the Party himself; sometimes by putting the Hand under the
Thigh; sometimes by lifting it up to Heaven; sometimes by laying it upon the
Breast; sometimes by laying it upon the Altar; sometimes by laying it upon a
Book; sometimes by Kissing the Book, etc. p. 118, 119.


Min. Did ever Man tie unequal things together at this rate? Calling God to
Witness, this is an Oath in the true nature and formal reason of it, and has an
Imprecation either expressly added to it, or implied in it: but all the rest
that follow, are neither various ways or modes of speaking Truth, nor essential
to an Oath; but only modes, [or Signs rather] of Calling God to witness; and
variable arbitrary Ceremonies of expressing an Oath. But the Oath it self, you
must understand, is (in reference to Truth) the Confirmation of it, Heb. 6. 16.
not a mode, nor ceremony of speaking it. As a vow is a Confirmation of
virginity, and neither a Ceremony nor a mode thereof. But among all these which
he has given us as modes or ways of expressing Truth, he has not showed us,
which of all these is an Oath.


Par. He tells us, an Oath is made up out of them, p. 119.


Min. He cannot mean, that it is made up of them all conjunct: For the first of
these, viz. a bare single Affirmation, being single excludes all the rest; The
second, viz. an Additional Asseveraton, stops there and goes no further; And
those various Ceremonies of putting the Hand under the Thigh, lifting it up to
Heaven, and the rest, cannot be supposed to have ever been used together in the
same Oath; therefore an Oath cannot be made up of all these conjunct: If so,
then it can be but made up of some of them; but T. E. has not told us which of
them he meant; neither what mode of speaking Truth an Oath is, nor of what
modes it is made up.


Par. But T. E. has one scruple which troubles him often, to which I pray,
answer once for al^. Consider (says he) now, I pray, What act of Natural
Religion is that, which, the more truly Ex malis moribus bonae nas cuntur leges.
Christian men become, the less need they have of it. And here he thinks he has
Bishop Gauden of his side* Who lays the necessity of Oaths upon men's evil
manners. Yea, he says* You confess Conf. p. 61.
as much yourself: Which (as he thinks) plainly shows, that an Oath is not an
Act* of Natural Religion, p. 120, 121.


Min. That evil manners make Oaths more necessary, I did and still do consess;
but all T. E's. inferences from thence rely on this false and rotten
foundation; That no acts of Natural Religion can be founded upon men's evil
manners. Repentance is an act of Natural Religion; yet the more truly Christian
men become, and the more free from sin, the less need they have of it: But here
in this passage of T. E's. we must distinguish between him that needs an Oath,
and him that takes it; for the Holiest man may need a bad man's Oath to assure
his testimony, etc. Ellwood confesses that Justice is an Act of Natural
Religion (p. 118*) and one part of it is called Distributive, which in all its
Penal Acts depends wholly upon the ill manners of Men, as much as Oaths. The
like may be said of Mercy, as to that part of it which forgives injuries, etc.
And yet the more truly Christian men become, the less need there would be of
either of these. Yea St. Paul says concerning the Law, that it is not made for
a righteous man, 1 Timothy 1. 9. (...), says Demonax in Lucian: And Constantius
the Emperor, If it were possible all men could be Philosophers, there would be
no need of Compulsion by Laws; for that which now they forbear out of Fear,
they would then hate out of Judgment Orat* pro Themist.
And much more I might cite to this purpose; but shall I therefore argue from
hence, that Justice and Mercy, etc. are no moral virtues? Or that Oaths, like
many other good Moral Acts, and Acts of Natural Religion, some in their own
Nature, some in their immediate ends, are nothing else but Remedies against
evil; Especially seeing T. E. himself (p. 118.) calls both these, viz. doing
Justice, and showing Mercy Moral and eternal Precepts? Why then should he here
exclude a duly circumstantiated Oath, which in its primary designation is an
Act of Justice, as I told you in the Conference?


Par. But your second Proposition, That an Oath is an Act of necessary justice
and charity toward men, and that in order to the ending of strife by Evidence,
T. E. answers, that Evidence is necessary, but not an Oath; for Evidence may be
given by a plain affirmation, etc. And that an Oath is therefore superfluous,
p. 122.


Min. I answer, that a bare Affirmation indeed is an Evidence, but not so well
assured: And he wilfully passes by the Answer I gave you to this in the
Conference, which methinks might satisfy a Reasonable man, viz. That
Conscience does not dread all sins alike, etc. and that multitudes who fear not
a Lie, yet do dread the solemnity of an Oath* and the horror of Perjury. Conf*
p. 62.
In opposing this he opposes himself, for he seems to grant it page 119.
However he opposes common sense; for all men are more apt to believe those
that are upon their Oaths, than if they were not.


Par. But he says, that you must either deny, that there is in any man that
truth, which may make his bare testimony of sufficient credit; or yield, that
there are some men, from whom there is no need at all of an Oath, p. 124.


Min. His consequence is not good; I grant there are some men, whose reputation
may give great credit to their bare testimony: But in a case, where my life,
credit, or estate is at stake, such an one (seeing he is not infallible) must
not take it ill, that I require the utmost assurance that may be had, viz. his
Oath; for I see his fact, Fronti nulla fider.
but not his heart. By what certain mark shall we knowmens Integrity? And
though some men may be satisfied concerning this or that man's veracity; yet
others, who may be concerned in his Testimony, may not be so: And if some men
be believed in public Evidence without an Oath; others, who are privy to their
own Integrity, may censure this as partiality, if their Evidences be not so
taken also; However ill disposed men will readily make it occasion of censure
and Contention. And though I say not, All Oaths are infallible; yet this I say,
that they are the highest and best security we can have in this World; and
higher assurances we must not expect.


Par. He abuses you also for saying in the Prophet Darid's words Psalm. 116. All
men are Liars. p. 124. And tells us, that David indeed in his great Affliction
let such an expression drop; but he quickly recalled himself, and confessed it
was spoken in haste: [Haste] I perceive he takes for rashness, and therefore
says, You caught up the word at a venture, ibid.


Min. He has done so, I am sure; and has accused me here as rashly as he
fancies David accused all Mankind. David said it in his haste, that is, when
Saul was in pursuit of him, in fuga in his flight, says Gejerus, and Dr.
Hammond on the place: When he was in haste, that is, hotly pursued by his
Enemies, he then sound there Ego dixi inter fugiendum. Chald. Paraphr.
was no Truth in man; and therefore must rely on God, and not on the Arm of
flesh. But suppose David had been guilty of this imperfection, and had spoken
in haste according to Ellwood's sense; Was St. Paul in haste too, when he said,
Let God be true, but every man a Liar, Romans 3. 4? The meaning whereof is, Every
man is fallible; Yea the best man may depart from his Integrity, as T. E.
himself confesses. p. 68.


Par. But T. E. says, If Felons cannot be held without Fetters, must True men
therefore wear Shackles? p. 125.


Min. Till honest men (occasionally suspected) be known to be such, they are
laid in the same Irons with Felons; and since Honest men live among Knaves in
this World, and sometimes Knaves do appear in the dress of Honest men, there it
is prudent to use the same Bonds, Seals, Witnesses, Oaths, etc. to oblige the
one, as we use to bind the other. But if T. E. can inform us of any certain
visible Mark, whereby we may be sure such a Man is Honest, and will not deceive
us, by my Consent we will take his bare word; but the World never knew such a
Mark as yet. All men are not actually liars, but all Men may lie sometimes; and
we cannot tell when they will do so, and when not: So that we will lay the
strongest obligations upon them we can, in weighty Cases; and then we have done
our part. I know that the strongest Bond and best Security may fail, but he
that takes the best and most likely, acts with most prudence and safety. To
conclude, it were happy, if there were no sickness; but so long as we either
are sick, or are in a possibility of being sick, Remedies are and will be good:
and so Oaths are and will be Good and needful, so long as any Men can, or any
men do deceive; and so long, till we know by evident Tokens those that cannot
deceive us from those that can; which Art as yet we are so far from having
learned, that we are generally Cheated by those we put most confidence in.


Par. If Hypocrisy and Wickedness (says T. E.) be reasons of demanding an
Oath, does not he, that in conformity thereunto takes an Oath, acknowledge
himself to be Hypocritical and Wicked? p. 126.


Min. I answer, that supposing these were the reasons, it only follows, that
those that demand an Oath look upon him as fallacious (for ought they know:)
but the Juror does no more acknowledge himself to be an Hypocrite, than he,
that Seals a Bond for the performance of such and such Covenants and
Conditions, does by that acknowledge himself a Knave. When an Honest man
therefore Seals, or Swears, etc. it is (First) Because it is legally demanded
of him; and (Secondly) Because it is both necessary and just in order to the
satisfaction of the Parties demanding it. He hereby only acknowledges he lives
in an Evil world, and so must be dealt with, as one that may be an Evil man;
but he does not acknowledge that he really is one.


Par. But Evil men (says he) will not make any more Conscience of false
Swearing, than of false speaking. p. 127. And for this he cites Bishop Gauden,
ibid.


Min. As for Bishop Gauden, he speaks of those who have got a custom of
Swearing, which is another case. But for the Quakers objection, that Men
leavened with hypocrisy and swayed with malice and Interest are not to be
trusted, when they do Swear: I answer, that Experience shows, that Evil men
will say much more, than they dare swear to ina Court of Judicature; Many dread
Swearing, that do not stick at Lying. But if we grant that some are so wicked,
that they will both lie and forswear; what then? it is to no purpose to require
an Oath of them, says the Quaker: I answer, yes; for why should a man's
wickedness privilege him from the duties of Society? this is the way to
encourage more to be wicked: We know a Knave's Bond is little better than his
his Word, and yet we take his Bond as the best assurance we can have. If we had
a Madman, who would be likely to break all the Cords we have to tie him with,
shall we let him run loose? Nonne debui facere quod possum, si non potui totum
quod volui Aug. Hieron. Epis. 28.
? We will bind an Evil man with an Oath (that Bond of the Soul, Number. 30. 2.)
hoping that partly for fear of Hell and the Curse due to Perjury from God, and
partly from dread of the outward Penalty from Men (as T. E. notes) he will not
forswear himself: If he do, let him look to it; we have done our best to be
safe; And it is not in this Case alone, but in all others, There Is no fence
against them, who fear neither God nor Man.


Par. But T. E. thinks his Argument safe under the Testimonies of the Ancients;
and first brings in Chrysostom saying, He that does not stick at Lying, will
not fear Swearing, p. 128.


Min. If St. Chrysostom's words must be taken in T. E's. sense, they make Oaths
as insignificant during the Law, as in the times of the Gospel; that reason
being as good then, as now. And though I might urge, that the Learned have
doubted, Whether the Homilies he Quotes were St. Chrysostom's or no; yet I
shall take it as granted, and reply further.

First, That it is true of Common discourse, where rash Oaths spoken without
any solemnity, do as easily fall from Common Swearers, as Lies from Common
Liars; But in Judicial Oaths Experience shows, that Men have a greater dread
upon them: And that this whole Discourse is to be understood only of Common
Swearing, viz. to show that a Man is not one whit more to be Credited in his
Discourse for the Oaths he mingles with it, I thus prove. (First) These are
Homilies, which were Popular Sermons; and were not directed to the Magistrates,
who had the power of giving and requiring Oaths. (Secondly) In all the genuine
Homiles of St. Chrysostom about Swearing, He plainly speaks only of private
men's Swearing among themselves, which he calls (...) superfluous Oaths. Hom. 5.
ad pop. Antioch: And there tells the people, he would not give over Preaching
against it, till they had left this evil Custom of Common Swearing; And advises
the Masters and Mistresses of such Servants as swore in their Families, to make
them go Supperless to Bed. (Thirdly) In all probability St. Chrysostom would
not dare (being a Patriarch of Constantinople) in the Imperial City to inveigh
against the Oaths then used in the Emperors Judicatories; or if he had, his
many and bitter Enemies (who laid other frivolous things to his Charge) would
surely have deeply accused him for this, which yet is never mentioned: So that
this can be meant of none but private Oaths in Communication.

Secondly. If T. E. apply it to public Oaths, he shall see the weakness of
such arguing by a familiar instance: Suppose T. E. be to lend 100 l. of some
Orphans under his Care, Will he not expect and require a Bond? I believe, He
will; and I ask Why? The Man is either one that fears God and is Honest, and
then his Word is good without a Bond; or he does not fear God and is a Knave,
and then his Bond is of little value: Would T. E. or any wise Man with such
plausible Arguments be wheehled out of a prudent care of the best security he
could get? I speak not this to derogate from the Fathers; but in their Popular
Discourses (it is sufficiently known) their Arguments are rather Rhetorical than
Logical, and must not always be used as Authority in Dispute; but as to this
Quotation, it is applied by T. E. to a purpose contrary to the Author's
meaning, and that makes it degenerate into a mere fallacy. But of St.
Chrysostom more hereafter.


Par. Next T. E. brings in Isidorus Pelusiota writing thus, Obey His voice,
that forbids to Swear at all. p. 129. He brings in also Erasmus, the
Scythians, Antipho and Sophocles also out of Stobaeus, p. 130.


Min. Isidore of Pelusium imitates his Master St. Chrysostom, and is also to be
interpreted of private Oaths, which inredulous Men rrequire of one another in
ordinary Communication, and take familiarly, which no doubt are great sins: And
that he means it not of Magistrates requiring public Oaths is plain, because
that was always Lawful before Christ's time; and (whatever T. E's. opinion be)
Isidore affirms, That the Son of God did not add any new Doctrine over and
above what was in the Law and the Prophets. Lib. 1. Ep. 107. ad Tim. Lector.
But to teach public Oaths to be unlawful, had been a new Doctrine, never
heard of before: Christ therefore and Isidore only do forbid private and
needless and common Swearing, which were forbidden in the Law and the Prophets,
had they not been ill interpreted by the Pharisees.

To his lesser Authorities I reply, That not one of those he cites were against
solemn Swearing, and therefore they (saying much the same, that the two
preceding Fathers had done) do confirm us in the belief, the Fathers spoke of
ordinary Swearing; for these do so.

First, Erasmus his opinion may be known from the very place cited by Ellwood,
viz. his Comment on Iam. 5. 12. Where after he has inveighed against those that
Swear by God in light or trivial matters, and those that Swear after the Jewish
Custom by Heaven, by the Earth, etc. He immediately adds the words quoted by
this Quaker, Whosoever dare be bold to lie without Swearing, he dares do the
same, when he Swears, if he list. What kind of Swearing is here meant, the
very words immediately before this Sentence sufficiently evidence. But if it be
not plain enough, let T. E. consult Erasmus's Annotations on Mat. 5. 37. where
are words to this effect, I suppose that Christ did only mean, that the Perfect
[or grown Christians] (for of these he speaks) ought not at all to Swear upon
the account of Those things, which make the Common people great Swearers:
Otherwise (says he) in a Cause of Opinor Christum simpliciter sensisse,
perfectis (nam de his loquitur) Omnino non esse jurandum pro rebus hisce pro
quibus vulgus dejerat. Alioqui in causa fidei aut Pietatis etiam Christus and
Apostoli jurant. Eras. Annot. in Mat. 5. 37.
Faith, or Piety, even Christ himself and the Apostles SWEAR. And again, Many
hard questions might be easily solved, if we understand that Christ did not
simply [or absolutely] forbid these, but only forb^d them to be used in that
common manner, people were wont then to use them in. Hac autem ratione multarum
questionum nodi dissolvi poterunt, si intelligamus Christum non simpliciter
haec vetuisse, sed veruisse eo more fieri, quo vulgato more hominum fiebant.
Sic vetuit irasci, sic vetuit salutare quenquam in via, sic vetuit ditescere,
sic vtuit resistere malo, sic vetuit appellari Magistros, sic vetuit vocare
Patrem in terr^s. id. ibid.
If T. E. read on, he may see Erasmus's opinion in more things than this,
wherein he will find Him, as much as any, opposite to the Quakers Tenants.

Secondly, That the Scythians did Swear also in some Cases, I have proved
before.

Thirdly, Antipho (in the same place of Stobaeus) inveighs against those who
will not believe a serious Oath, saying, When any despises a Man Swearing, that
never was convict of False-Swearing, he seems to me to despise the Gods, and to
have formerly been guilty of perjury himself.

Fourthly, Sophocles (in Stobaeus also) says, The Mind is made more cautious
by the apposition. of an Oath; for th^n a Man must take heed of two things,
lest he injure his Neighbor, and offend against the Gods. If the Quaker read
the other Sentences in Stobaeus, he must needs see these, which plainly show
that they were not against Serious Oaths: And therefore though they say, The
Oaths of wicked men are of little value; yet they never meant to exempt wicked
men from public Swearing on great occasions. Yet I will tell T. E. one thing,
now I think of it, The Civil and Canon Law, I am sure (and I think our Common
Law) which all allow public Swearing, knowing that the O^th of an ill Man is
of little weight, do give the Parties liberty to except against a notorious
wicked Man, so that he shall not be allowed to Swear or give Evidence. L.
quoniam c. de festib. Vid. Heersback Christian. Jurispr. in g. Praecept. p.
261. and Decret. Gregor. l. 2. Tit. 25. cap. 1.
And thus T. E's Argument every way falls to the ground.


Par. Now he comes to tell us, that the abolishing of an Oath would not
derogate; Nay, he adds, the continuing of Oaths does derogate from the Honor
of Christianity, etc For it (says he) mounts far above all other Religions, and
leads them that sincerely embrace it, to a Perfection beyond what ever was
attainable in any of them, yet in them Oaths were attainable, etc. And he
brings in Bishop Gauden saying, The Primitive Christians did so keep up the
sanctity and credit of their Profession among Unbelievers, that it was security
enough in all Cases to say, Christianus sum, I am a Christian. If any urged
them further to any Oath, for matter, or manner, or authority unlawful, they
repeated this, as the only satisfaction they could give, etc. p. 131, 132.


Min. To these I answer, First, That T. E. minces my Argument, which was this,
Seeing therefore that the ends of Justice and Charity are so much served by the
Religious use of an Oath; would not the abolishing of it derogate from the
honor of Christianity? for while the Apostle says, An Oath for confirmation
is the end of all strife; if you take away an Oath, you take away that which
was ordained by God to be the most effectual means of ending it, and so make
Christ not so much the Prince of Peace, as Discord, by making him the abolisher
of that which was designed to compose it Conf. p. 62, 63.
. Now had the Quaker found my Argument really faulty, why did he not strike at
the foundation of it? which is this, An Oath for confirmation is an end of
strife: by which omission he has rendered his other reasonings impertinent and
vain. I grant it would be for the honor of Christianity, to take away the need
of an Oath; but to make a Law against it, while the necessity continues, this
is not for its honor.

2. Though Oaths were attainable under Judaism and Heathenism, it does not
follow, that they are Useless now. Justice in punishing, and Government by Laws
and Magistrates were attainable too, the Jews and Heathens being thus kept in
order; but must We therefore throw these away?

3. Would All sincerely embrace Christianity, I know with T. E. that it would
make them upright, just and true, so that they durst not speak a falsehood, and
so there would be no need of an Oath. But if T. E. let Oaths alone till this
come to pass, I promise him, I will not then dispute for them. If men were what
they are not, than might we spare, what now we cannot be without.

4. As to Bishop Gauden's words, I see no Argument producible thence against
us; For the Bishop does not say, that the Primitive Christians refused to take
Any Oath whatever [indefinitely] (for then he need have gone no further;) but
only such an Oath, as for matter, or manner, or Authority was unlawful. And
which of Us does plead for such an Oath? But to give you further satisfaction
in this point, I shall hereafter prove, what the Bishop speaks of the Primitive
Christians, viz. that they did not refuse any Oaths, but such as were unlawful
upon some of these accounts; but did swear by Gods Name, as we do, in necessary
Cases.


Par. But still T. E. replies, How great a derogation is this from the Honor
of Christianity? p. 133.


Min. So he may argue, are Rods and Axes, Prisons and Fines, Houses of
Correction, and places of Execution; it is very sad that Christianity has not
set its followers above the need of these things; but he will scarce persuade
our Governors to throw away these Instruments of Government, which help to
keep the seditious in some awe. A man may lament it, that these things should
be necessary; but since they are so, they must be retained. I remember Seneca
cries out in a Rhetorical strain, O how base a Confession is this from Mankind,
of their public fraud and villainy, that our Seals shall be of more credit than
our Souls Oturpem humani generis fraudis ac requitiae publicae confessionem,
Annulis nosiris plus quam animis creditur! Sen. de benef. l. 3. c. 15.
! yet Seneca never intended that Bonds, and Sealing of Deeds should be taken
out of the World, considering what men were.

And truly if Oaths were taken away, and other like Securities at T. E's.
Motion, we should soon find such a flood of Cheating and Lying break in upon
us, as would derogate ten times more from the Honor of Christianity, than
solemn swearing does; which indeed does not dishonor it at all, though the
occasion of its being used in Public Courts is some disgrace. But though the
occasion be Evil, yet Swearing is Good; and would be of use in Dedicating our
selves to God, Psalm. 119. 106. and in Consecrating our voluntary Oblations,
Numb. 30. 2. and in other Cases, though the use of them in Judicature should
cease; for we can offer nothing more acceptable to God than a just Oath Nihil
Deo gratin^ (...) possu^ quam jure (...). Aug. in Ps. 19.
, says St. Augustine; And when Christians take Oaths with all due Reverence,
and are careful not to satisfy or break them for the whole World, I think they
honor their Profession, and do not disgrace it, whether in Judgment or on
other grand occasions.


Par. But T. E. wonders, that from the Apostle's words, Heb. 6* 16. [An Oath
for Confirmation is to them an end of all strife] you should conclude, that an
Oath [is] ^ined by God to be the most effectual means of compesing it, whereas
you should rather have said [was] ordained, if you had intended to deal fairly.
p. 134.


Min. Is he angry then that I quote Scripture aright? Had the Apostle said that
an Oath for confirmation [Was] an end of strife, than had I indeed ddeal^
unfairly. But if the Holy Ghost^speak in the Present tense (as may reasonably
be concluded He does, because [(...) Swear] in the same verse is of this tense)
let not the Quaker blame me for speaking here so too.


Par. But he has another rare Criticism, St. Paul does not say [WE] swear, but
[MEN] swear, nor [to Us] an End -- but [to Them] an End, so that he speaks of
Men under the Law, and Men in a carnal state, p. 135.


Min. If T. E. had looked back to ver. 13. and read the Antecedent which lies
there, he would have seen the impertinence of his long Criticism; the words are
these, [For when God made the promise to Abraham, because HE could swear by no
Greater, He swear by Himself:] and then ver. 14. 15. the Apostle repeating the
Promise and the certainty of it adds, v. 16. [For MEN verily swear by the
greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to THEM an end, etc.] Here the
Antithesis lies; not between Saints and Carnal Men, nor between Christians and
Jews, Them and Us; But between God and Men, between Him and Them; the sense
being, God did act in this Oath more humano, He confirmed it by an Oath, as Men
use to do, only with this difference, that God could not swear by any Greater
than himself, whereas Men always do swear by a Greater: yet the event is the
same; for God's Oath by Himself put the promise out of all question, even as
Men's swearing by a Greater, to confirm what they say, is to Them an end of all
strife.


Par. But T. E. infers from 1 ^or. 3. 3. that the Apostle in this place does
not by [Men] intend Saints, true Believers, the New Testament Church; but such
as were under the old dispensation. Nor are you or any else to take advantage
from the Apostle's speaking in the Present tense (Men [do] swear, etc. and an
Oath [is] to them, etc.) from thence inferring that he spoke this of the
Christian State: Because on other occasions he expresses himself in the same
tense, as in Heb. 8. 3. and 9. 3. p. 136, 137.


Min. To the first I answer, it does not follow from 1 Cor. 3. 3 (...).
. that [Men] here in Heb. 6. 16. should exclude those of the Christian Church,
unless T. E. could prove, that [Men] in other places of Scripture did always
signify Carnal and bad Men only. What does he think of that saying of our
Lords, Luke 12. 35, 36. Let your loins be girded about, and you Lights burning;
And ye your selves like unto MEN * (...).
that wait for their Lord, etc.? What means 1 Cor. 16. 13. Quit you like men? I
am sure our Translators do take [MEN] in a quite contrary sense to T. E.
sometimes; For in 1 Cor. 14. 20. the Greek is (...) [be ye perfect,] vet they
read [be ye MEN,] taking [MEN] for Perfect mer.

To the second I answer, That his shifts to evade the force of the particle
[is] in the present Tense (which he pretends St. Paul uses in this Epistle for
things that had been among the Jews, but are not applicable to the Christian
State) are very wretched. The Apostle said truly, there is a High Priest, and
is a Holiest of all; for at that time there were both in being, and he could
not speak truly in any other Tense: but does it follow from thence, that
always, when he uses [Is,] it is of things only applicable to the Jewish
State? In this Chap. ver. 20. He says, Christ [is] entered into the Heavens;
and Chap. 4. 12. For the word of God [is] quick, etc. and Chap. 11. 1. Faith
[is] the substance, etc. What nonsense and Blasphemy would it make ^to say
here, [Is] only was applicable to the Jewish State, when these things were true
then, and will be so to the end of the World, to Jews and Christians all alike?
And when this was the plain and common sense, what reason has T. E. to make
[Is] stand for [was,] but only that he may impose his own absurd Notions on the
Holy Scripture? As he does again, p. 139. Where he impudently puts his false
opinion into the middle of a Text of Scripture merely to force it to his own
sense, The Law (in which Oaths were, says he) was given by Moses, but the Grace
and the Truth came by Jesus Christ, Joh. 1. 17. Whereas the Gospel and the Law
do not oppose each other in this matter, us I shall prove immediately: But it is
plain he mak^s no scruple of abusing Scripture; for in the same place, reading
some exhortations in the Gospel to Truth, Sincerity, Love, etc. from these
precepts he infers, that Men (he means Quakers, I suppose) now are really
endued with all these virtues: though it is a plain fallacy to argue from what
we ought to be, to what we are; yet this is a common way the Quakers have of
profaning Holy Scripture, to take Christ's Precepts and turn them into
Affirmations, applying them as Encomiums to their own misled Party; being
herein like the Jews, who delighted much in hanging the Precepts of the Law in
Phylacteries about them for ornament and ostentation, but took no care to live
up to them in their Conversations: See the Quaker in this posture, p. 147, 148.


Par. Now (says T. E.) you are come to your Third Proposition, viz. That an
Oath is a part of that Moral and Eternal Law, which our Savior professes, he
came not to destroy, but to fulfill (...). Conf. p. (...).
. p. 149.


Min. This is a cunning and malicious untruth, for though he be come to it, I
am not yet come so far; for the last words objected by the Quaker were out of p
63. But the Figure [3] in the Margin of my Book noting the third Proposition is
placed, p. 68. Yet to color over the Matter, he begins with the last words of
these four pages, and first sets upon the Conclusion, p. 68. and then runs back
presently to the beginning, p. 63. But I perceive his Treachery, viz. he would
make his Reader believe, that All I say to prove Oaths not evil in themselves,
is said to prove them part of the Moral and Eternal Law; But I desire you and
others to observe, that I am yet upon the proof of my second Proposition, That
Oaths are a piece of Necessary Justice and Charity; only foreseeing that some
would object, that Oaths are evil in themselves, and so could not be Necessary:
I first prove they are not evil in themselves. Secondly, in page Conf.
66. I go on to answer a second objection, viz. That Oaths are part of the
Ceremonial Law, and so could be no parts of Justice and Charity: Which having
disproved as a Transition to my third Proposition, p. 68. I make that Inference
(the way being now Clear, and Oaths proved necessaryry Parts of Justice and
Charity, as also neither Evil in themselves, nor Ceremonial) Therefore they are
parts of the Moral Law, the next thing to be proved: This is the very truth;
and now where is T. E's sincerity? where is his honesty, so apparently to
prevaricate?


Par. But here he makes himself much sport, that you should bestirr your self
not a little to prove that, which (he says) he never yet heard any deny,
Namely, that all Oaths are not Evil in themselves, which you gravely infer
from their having been once confessedly Lawful. What else is this, but to
mis-spend your Time, and bestow many a doughty blow upon your own shadow? p.
141.


Min. T. E. could not be better pleased with my expressions, than I am with
this answer. So that I shall reply upon him with his own words, Did he consider
what he writ? If He thinks that page 56.
All Oaths are not Evil in themselves; let him give an account, why he produced
the testimony of Heathens against them, nay the Testimony of a whole Nation, as
he pretends. He will not say, that the Heathens had any Revelation to forbid
all Oaths: So that they could not be evil in their sense, but as they were evil
in themselves. Why does T. E. commend their zeal for refusing all Oaths, seeing
they could not be evil to Them? Did not he mis-spend his Time in producing
these testimonies? Has not he lost here his Argument to save his Jest? and made
one part of his Book inconsistent with another?

But further to prove Oaths Moral, I shall desire to know of the Quakers,
whether they account the third Commandment Moral.


Par. I think none of them will be so absurd as to deny it.


Min. Than an Oath is Moral; for [Thou shall not take the Name of the Lord thy
God in vain] is (according to both the Ancient and Modern Divines) Thou shall
not forswear thy self. The Syriac version has it, Ne jures per Nomen Domini
Dei tui cum mendacio, Thou shall not lie, when thou swearest by the Lord thy
God. Now it is a known Rule, that every Negative supposes an Affirmative: If we
are commanded not to swear falsely, it implies that we may swear truly upon a
just occasion. Wherefore says St. Augustine, No body can speak falsely, who
speaks not at all; so he that does not swear, cannot forswear. Falsum loqui non
potest, qui non loquitur; sic pejerare non potest, qui non jurat. Aug. in Sermon.
Dom. in Mont. lib. 1. p. 1123.
So that if the Quakers make All swearing vain, they will make the third
Commandment insignificant.


Par. If [taking the Name of God in vain] be no more than [thou shall not
forswear thy self;] Will not those who take the Name of God lightly, wantonly,
and irreverently into their mouths, be encouraged by this exposition?


Min. When we come to give an account of Scripture, we must do it as it is; and
must not by consequences of our own make our selves wiser than God: yet I must
tell you, though [to take the Name of God in vain] be only an Hebrew phrase to
forswear; yet is there here no encouragement Juramentum vanum est, quando quis
jurat non necessaria de causa; falsum quando pejerat.
for wicked men to use God's Name lightly and irreverently; for every time they
so do, they are guilty of the vice of swearing, and so are included in the
breach of this Commandment.


Par. But T. E. tells us, Some things are forbidden, because they are Evil; and
some things are Evil, because they are forbidden, ibid.


Min. [Some things are forbidden because they are Evil] implies that All things
that are Evil are not forbidden, this is so false and irreligious a Principle,
that it needs no other consutation than the very naming of it: And [some things
are Evil, because forbidden:] here he should have given an instance, where any
thing is so, imm-diutely and directly. It was so of old, I confess, during the
continuance of the Ceremonial Law; but he should have instanced where it is so
now in the times of the Gospel.


Par. You have another far-fetch (s^ys T. E.) by which you would prove Oaths
Moral, and that is, because they are not Ceremonial. And to prove that they are
not Ceremonial, you say, They were used by the Patriarchs before the Levitical
Law was given. Whereupon T. E. asks, Was nothing then Ceremonial, that was used
by the Patriarchs before the Levitical Law given? p. 142. And this question
pleases him so well that he is at it again, p. 150.


Min. To both these places I answer, When the Quakers say, Oaths are
Ceremonial, they mean, they are a part of Moses his Law, and T. E. plainly
says, p. 134, they were appointed to them under the Law; and Hubberthorn
accounts them Levitical Ceremonies; so that I may justly disprove their being
Ceremonial in this sense, because they were used by the Patriarchs 400 years
before the Levitical Ceremonies were given. So that T. E's. inference is not so
natural as he dreams it is, when he says, can any thing be more naturally
inferred, than that I account whatsoever was used by the Patriarchs, before the
Levitical Law was given, to be a part of the moral and eternal Law, p. 142.


Par. Was not (says he) Circumcision in the Flesh used before the Levitical Law
was given? ibid. Were not Beasts sacrifiecd long before the Levitical Law was
given? will you thence conclude that Circumcision, and these Sacrifices are
parts of the moral and eternal Law?


Min. I answer, Neither were they properly Levitical Ceremonies; for first,
Circumcision (says Christ) is not of Moses, but of the Fathers, Ioh. 7. 22.
And though it be not Moral, yet there is a great difference between that and
Oaths: Circumcision has no reason in it self, why it should be observed, nor
could the Light of Nature ever have taught it Men, without a Positive
institution, which is recorded, Genesis 17. But Oaths have a reason in their own
nature, and the Light of Nature led men to use them long before any Law was
given about them: T. E. confesses, the Patriarchs used them; let him show what
Command they had for so doing (as is evident in the Case of Circumcision) and
then Oaths and Circumcision may fall together; but this is impossible,
Therefore though Circumcision be Ceremonial, Oaths are not so.

Secondly, As to Sacrifices, they are believed by all Divines to have had a
Positive institution, viz. as to the offering things slain; some think God
taught this to Adam, others to Noah; and no Man will say that Sacrifices are
Levitical Ceremonies: I grant that Sacrificing slain Beasts being Typical of
Christ was Ceremonial; But Sacrifice as it is the oblation of something to God
in acknowledgment of His being Lord of all the World, is a part of Natural
Religion as well as Oaths; Mortification, Romans 12. 1. Alms Heb. 13. 16. and
Praise ver. 15. are called Sacrifices in Gospel Times, and are Eternal Duties;
And the Fathers hold, that under the Gospel the Kind is altered, but there are
Christian Sacrifices still; as I could largely prove were there any need for
it. Wherefore an Oath does not agree with Sacrifices, as they were instituted,
and as they pointed to Christ's Death; but as they are an acknowledgment of
God's Sovereignty and Bounty, so they are a part of Natural Religion, and no
Ceremonies, and of the same nature and duration with an Oath, both being Moral:
And indeed Oaths were never instituted, but supposed; and* where they are
spoken of in the Law or Prophets, are only restrained to due circumstances, and
set among Moral Duties, Deuteronomy. 6. 13. Isa. 45. 3. Ier. 4. 2.


Par. Thus you have made way for your third Proposition; but T. E. will quarrel
still at his old rate: And whereas your first Argument to prove Oaths not
Ceremonial was, because they were not Typical; this knowing man bids you prove
that all the Ceremonies of Moses Law were Types, and tell him what they were
Types of, sporting himself about Aaron's Breeches, and the places Anointed in a
Priest's Consecration: p. 145.


Min. If he had more knowledge, he would show less Mirth; For St. Paul affirms
that which he doubts of, Heb. 9. 9. and 10. 1. and Justin Martyr, Origin and
St. Ambrose of Old, with many Modern Authors of great Note, have very Learnedly
showed the Antitypes in the Gospel for every Type and Ceremony of the Law; And
are These fit to be the objects of T. E's scorn and laughter? Even by Aaron's
Breeches was typified that Modesty, which those ought to show who meddle with
Holy Things. This Moral thereof T. E. is (methinks) as far from practicing, as
he is from understanding: Again, Exodus 29. 20. The blood was put on the Tip of
the Priests Ear, to show, they should be ready to hear the Commands of God; on
the Thumb, to show they should lift up holy Hand in God's service; and on the
Toe, to note an holy Conversation in the Ministers of the Gospel.


Par. T. E. may now, if he please, laugh at his own folly: but the next attempt
of his is to find out an Antitype for an Oath, which must typifie something,
though other things do not; For he says, This Truth-speaking, this True
Witness-bearing, this pure Language under the Gospel, is the Antitype of an
Oath, p. 148.


Min. A Pure invention of the Quakers! As if all that swear, before Christ
brought in Truth, were perjured. Just now an Oath was a Mode of Truth, and now
it is a Type of Truth; Can any thing be a Mode and a Type of the same thing?
Alms is a Mode of showing mercy, but sure is no Type of showing mercy; Trying
Malefactors before a Judge is a Mode of doing Justice, but no Type of doing
justice. Indeed an Oath is the calling God to Witness to a Truth spoken, as
Prayer is the Calling on Him to supply our wants; Now how strange would it be
to say, Prayer is a Type of the supply of our wants without Prayer? yet it is
as absurd to say, an Oath is a Type of Truth-speaking without an Oath; Besides,
thus Type and Antitype would have always gone together, or else it was false
swearing; And was Christ the Antitype actually slain with every Sacrifice that
was a Type of him? Surely his Cause is bad, when he is put upon such absurd
shifts as these to defend it.


Par. But T. E. comes now to your third Proposition indeed, viz. That the
reason and usefulness of an Oath being perpetual, it must be an Eternal duty,
and so not repealed in the Gospel. To this he has nothing to reply more than
what relies on his old baffled suppositions, viz. That Lying and Hypocrisy
cannot be the ground or reason of what is Eternally good, p. 151, 152.


Min. I never affirmed they were the Reasons, but the Occasions they may be;
The Reasons of an Oath ought rather to be said to be, God's Omniscience, and
His being the supreme Judge of the World, a Lover of Truth, and Avenger of all
Perjury and Lying; for the Belief of this makes men require an Oath (in matters
of moment, wherein Prudence directs them to the greatest security that may
possibly be had) and causes those who take it to fear to prosane it: As the
reason of Justice in punishing is, that every man may have his desert, Ut qui
non reddit agendo, reddat patiendo; but the occasion is Evil doing. As for the
usefulness of an Oath, when T. E. has found out as good, and great a Security
as this is, we will then debate, whether Oaths may be laid aside. At present he
says Lying, Hypocrisy etc. are taken away, at least (de jure of right) it
ought to be so, p. 153. But then T. E. must stay till his [de jure] be turned
into [de facto:] The Quaker de jure ought not to lie and wilfully to mistake
and abuse my words, but de facto he has done it. Would God, all things were as
they ought to be; for if we were what we are not, we might omit some things now
not to be spared, as I told you before.


Par. T. E. has now followed you to your fourth Prop^sition, wherein by the
Examples of St. Paul and an Angel who swore in the New Testament, you undertook
to prove, that All Oaths are not forbidden by Christ. And here I wonder at him,
that he falls not upon all the instances you gave of St. Paul's swearing, as in
this Case (I think) he ought to have done.


Min. It Is no wonder to me to find this Quaker omitting any material passage in
my Book: But as to those instances I gave you, they are the truest and plainest
way of interpreting Christ's meaning: for if St. Paul swore in those writings
which were dictated by the Holy Ghost, it is plain demonstration, that all Oaths
are not forbidden. For the Apostle (says St. Augustine) doubtless knew the
Command of our Lord, and yet be swore Aug. in Galat.
. And I hope all men will believe that St. Paul and the Holy Ghost are safer
interpreters of the sense of our Savior than T. E. and his Spirit. Now it is so
plain that St. Paul did swear, that St. Augustine says, They are not to be
heard, who fancy these are not Oaths which the Apostle used ib. ibid.
.

Now let us examine, why the Apostle's words [God is my Witness, etc. Romans 1.
9.] should not pass for an Oath.


Par. To say barely and simply God is my Witness, is not an Oath (says T. E.)
For then God must swear by Men, when he says (Isa. 43. 10.) Ye are my
Witnesses, etc. Moses by Heaven and Earth, and St. Paul by the High Priest,
when they say, They are Witnesses; yea the Quaker by John and James if he say,
They are his Witnesses. p. 155, 156, 157.


Min. I grant first, That every appeal to God is not an Oath; To appeal to God
as a righteous Judge against the injustice and cruelty of men, without relation
to his attesting and judging of a Proposition, is no swearing by Him. Secondly,
That the citation of Witness is no swearing. And Thirdly, That in some Cases
men do not swear, when they affirm or say, that God is a Witness; thus much I
can grant the Quaker: For when I comfort my self against false accusations of
men, I may say, God is a Witness to my innocence, and yet not be said to swear
by Him; or when I say, God is a Witness of Men's secret wickedness, I do not
swear by Him: But then Divines and Lawyers agree, that to take God to Witness,
and to appeal to God as the Judge of the truth of what we say, and the avenger
of the untruth, is swearing. In which respect this passage of St. Paul's is
accounted an Oath; which he thought necessary, as being the greatest assurance
he could give the Romans of his charity and zeal for them; God is my Witness,
etc. that without ceasing I make mention of you always in my prayers Romans 1. 9.
Juret, qui adhibet Deum testem. Aug. de Sermon. Dom. in Mont. l. 2. p. (...) 124.
and in Psalm. 109.
, wherefore St. Augustine says, what signifies [by God] but [God is Witness?]
and what means [God is Witness,] but [by God] Sermon. 28. de verb. Apost. To,
etc. To call God to Witness is to swear, says the same St. Augustine; and so
Chrysostom Chryl. H^mi. 11 Act. 9.
; so all the Schoolmen, so our Modern Divines, so both Jews and Heathens
define an Oath. But does it at all follow, that because it is no swearing to
Call a Creature to Witness, therefore it is none to call the Creator to Witness
See p. 160.
? To Petition God is Divine Worship, is it therefore Divine Worship to Petition
the King? No, let the Quaker know, It Is Essential to an Oath, to Call somewhat
to Witness, that we believe to be a God.


Par. Now T. F. comes to your next instance [Rom. 9. 1. I say the truth in
Christ, I lie not, my Conscience also bearing me Witness in the Holy Ghost.] To
this He answers, To speak the truth in Christ is not an Oath, etc. p. 157. If
Paul should have sworn as often as he spoke the Truth in Christ, he would have
been a very Common swearer, p. 158.


Min. It Is very true, that every time we speak the Truth in Christ we do not
swear; but as the phrase stands here, it can be accounted nothing else but an
Oath; Which will be more evident to this great Critic and Judge in
Translations, if he observe, that in Greek it is [(...)] which he knows may
justly be Translated [by Christ;] for he is not ignorant, I hope, that in St.
Mat. 5. 34, 35, 36. where we read -- By Heaven -- by Earth -- by thy Head --
(Per Caelum -- per Terram -- per Caput tuum, as Beza has it) which are plain
swearing: yet there the Original is the same Preposition as here -- (...) And
Ephesians. 4. 17. where we read [And testify in the Lord,] Beza has Obtestor per
Dominum, the Greek being (...), and I am sure there are very many instances in
Scripture, where [(...)] is translated [by] and where it is used in swearing;
So that if we read it [I say the truth by Christ, etc.] as we may do; then it
will admit of no dispute. I shall only add, that this [I say the truth in
Christ, I lie not] was appointed by an Old English Council to be the Priests
and Deacons form of swearing before the Altar. Council. Berkhamsted. cap. 18.
Spelm. Anno. 700.


As to the second part of the Sentence, St. Paul swears not by his Conscience,
which was not his God, but only professes the agreement of this Protestation
to the sense of his Soul, and to the testimony of the Holy Ghost, with which he
was inspired, unless we translate [(...)] by the Holy Ghost, and make it
another Oath, viz. by the Holy Spirit.


Par. Though T. E. did not consult his Greek Testament in this instance, yet in
your next he did; For whereas you propounded 2 Cor. 1. 18, [but as God is true,
etc.] to this he replies, The particle [as] is not in the Greek, but put in by
the Translator, ibid.


Min. What then? Who knows not that the Jews did always leave out [As] in their
Oaths? and yet always it was to be understood; I suppose T. E. will grant [As
the Lord liveth] to be an Oath, yet [As] is never in the Original, but always
put in by the Translator, as he may understand by [as] being printed in a
smaller Letter, Iud. 8. 19. and 1 Samuel 20. 3. 2 Samuel 15. 21. 2 Kings 3. 14,
etc. And whereas T. E. would have us read it in Tomson's Traslation, [Yea God
is faithful,] He must know that if he leave out [As] it will be an Oath still;
For Ier. 5. 2. Though they say, the Lord lives, surely they swear falsely:
where the Prophet says, they did swear, who only said, The Lord lives without
[As.] Surely it is as much an Oath in this instance of St. Paul to say [God is
Faithful,] as in the other to say [the Lord lives;] All the difference is,
they whom Jeremy mentions swore falsely, but St. Paul truly. And indeed it is
but an Hebraism to leave [as] out, for it must be understood, or else it is not
a full sense.


Par. I observe that T. E. finds himself pincht by this instance, for he allows
the words of St. Paul to be a solemn asseveration, ibid.


Min. A solemn Asseveration here is a Religious asseveration, which makes it
amount to an Oath: However I thought the Quakers had allowed of no
Asseverations beyond [Yea] and [Nay,] but accounted them as bad as Oaths: So
that this evasion will help him but a little.

But do you not observe how close he crowds together the remaining instances?
And though St. Paul solemnly appeals to the Omniscience of the God and Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ as a Witness, who knew he did not lie, 2 Cor. 11. 31.
This is no Oath with T. E; No nor that 2 Cor. 1. 23. where he plainly Calls God
to Witness, and (knowing it to be true) offers up his Soul to suffer by God's
Justice, if it were not as he said, This is no swearing with T. E. neither; but
he only says it, but cannot prove it; So that till he can prove these are no
Oaths, I shall take it for granted.

But I gave you one instance Gal. 1. 20. [Behold before God I lie not,] which
is so plain an Oath, that the Quaker (according to his own expression) was not
hardy enough to venture on it, nor so much as to mention it in his Book. Now if
St. Paul did swear, though but once, when he writ by the Holy Ghost (though it
was not in his riper years, when he had made a further progress in the
Christian Religion See T. E. 4 5. 46.
) it must necessarily follow, that All swearing is not forbidden by Christ
under the Gospel.


Par. Now T. E. comes to produce some Probabilities, that the Apostle did not
swear.


Min. Probabilities are not good Arguments against matters of Fact; But pray,
let us hear what they are.


Par. First he thinks it absurd, that the Apostle upon no greater occasion than
recounting to the Corinthians the manner of his escape out of Damascus through
a Window into a Basket, should take a solemn Oath by God, that he did not 2
Cor. 11.
lie, p. 160.


Min. Certainly he is not so stupid, as to think as he writes here; For nothing
can be more plain, than that the Oath I mentioned in the 31 verse, relates to
the precedent passages in the Chapter. There were false Apostles at Corinth,
who had brought the Apostle's Credit so low among them, that he is forced to
commend himself, ver. 5, 6. and to show that he was not inferior to those
false Apostles, either in any Legal Prerogative, or in the Service of Christ,
or in any kind of suffering for his Ministry; So that here was sufficient
occasion to require the solemnity of an Oath, to give the greater assurance to
the Corinthians of his Commission for Apostleship, which they then called into
question, and required him to prove that he had received it from Christ, 2 Cor.
13. 3. And in Galatia too, some of these deceivers had wrought the like evil
persuasions in the people. He saw some there Gal 1. 7.
who did not believe, says St. Augustine Sermon. 30. de verb. Apest.
And the Apostle knowing their salvation depended upon their believing his
Doctrine and Commission, uses the solemnity of Oaths to Convince them; being
compelled thereto by their Unbelief, and by his Desire to preserve them from
Apostasy and Damnation; And sure this was a sufficient occasion.


Par. He supposes you have given him advantage, by saying, That the Pharisees
taught, that it was lawful to swear at any time by God's Name, so that they
swore nothing but truth, etc. which you acknowledge Christ prohibited. And
further he says, Bishop Gauden makes the Lawful Call of Authority, one of the
due circumstances which are necessary in a Lawful Oath, and that your self
should say, The Use and Lawfulness of swearing, which remains, is, when a Man
is called by lawful Authority to declare his Conscience, in order to the ending
of any Controversy, wherein his evidence may be concerned. Now then (says he)
let us consider, If Paul had sworn, who called him to it? Who required it of
him? Nay, what lawful Authority had the Corinthians over him to require an Oath
of him? etc. p. 160, 161.


Min. As to the First, it will not advantage his Cause at all, unless he could
prove that I ever said, that St. Paul swore either by the Creatures, or by God
in ordinary converse. For the sum of what I said was, that swearing by the
Creatures, though faslly, and by God at any time in ordinary Converse, if but
truly, was allowed by the Pharisees: and that against the first of them, viz.
swearing by the Creature, See Fr. Conf. p. 77, 78.
Christ opposes that prohibition, Mat. 5. 34 35, 36. But I say unto you swear
not at all, neither by Heaven, etc. Against the later, viz. swearing by the
Name of God in our ordinary converse, he gives this precept, ver. 37. Let your
Communication be yea yea, nay nay, etc.

Secondly, If Bishop Gauden makes the lawful Call of Authority one of the due
Circumstances, which are necessary in a lawful Oath; it does not follow, that
he allows no other circumstances. Nor

Thirdly, Do I any where in all my Book say, there is no other use of an Oath,
but in Iudicatories, as he here suggests cunningly, making two Propositions of
one, and so perverting the sense of my words, which were these, viz. the use
and lawfulness of swearing remains (i. e.) continues; Or more plainly, Oaths
continue lawful, though not in Common Converse, yet) when I am called by lawful
Authority to See Fr. Conf. p. 84.
declare my Conscience in order to the ending of any Controversy, wherein my
evidence may be concerned. If I had said, the use and lawfulness of swearing,
which remains, is when, etc. as he quotes it; then indeed he had had some show
of reason to imply here, and expressly to say, p. 164. that the only Lawful Use
that I give of swearing now under the Gospel is in Judicatories, etc. But
seeing no such inference can be deduced from them as they are set down in the
Conference, Where is T. E's sincerity? Where is his honesty thus to pervert my
words? Is this the way to prove himself an adherent to Christianity, which he
tells us, p. 131. has made it is Adherents so upright, just and true, that they
dare not speak a falsehood, though others dare swear it? I confess indeed that
the Main Use of an Oath is in Judicatories, but not the only use; for we may
swear in a very weighty Case, when we cannot otherwise be believed, and when it
will be very prejudicial to them that hear us, if they do not believe; So St.
Augustine of his own practice, When I see I am not believed* without an Oath,
and that it is very inexpedient to him that believes me not, weighing this
reason, and taking good consideration, I say with great Reverence [Before God]
or [God is Witness] or [Christ knows it to be so in my Soul. Aug. de verb.
Apost. Ser. 30.
] Oaths are useful likewise in Dedicating our selves to God, etc. (as I told
you before.) And for my part I shall subscribe to the Opinion of Bishop Hooper
(whom Ellwood himself calls a Godly Martyr) That the two blessed Sacraments (as
you have heard See p. 46.
) are both Vows and Oaths, being therefore called Sacraments; That on God's
part they are Seals, but on our part Oaths of Allegiance and Fidelity.

Now then let the Quaker consider, how impertinent his Queries of St. Paul are,
p. 161. Who called him to it? Who required it of him? etc. That the Apostle had
sufficient occasions to swear, I have showed you before; Nor can the Quaker
prove from any thing I have said, that I confine All Lawful swearing to
Judicatories.


Par. But he says, If in these instances Paul had sworn, he had not sworn
judicially and legally, but in his ordinary Communication, which kind of
swearing is acknowledged to be forbidden by Christ, p. 164.


Min. T. E. is out again; Is writing Epistles ordinary Communication? It was in
his Writing that St. Paul swore, and not in his Ordinary Writing neither, but
in that which the Holy Ghost dictated. And St. Augustine notes, the Apostle
might better weigh his expressions when he was Writing, than if he had been
speaking. It Is true, St. Paul swore out of a Court of Judicature, but not
without a great Necessity. And I think it is a good Argument, that he would have
been much more ready to have done so in a Court of Judicature, if there had
been occasion, and he legally called to it. Certainly he would have scrupled no
more in taking an Oath than in tendering one, as we find he did, 1 These. 5. 27.
I charge you by the Lord, Where the Greek is (...), that is (as in the Margin)
I adjure, or I swear you.


Par. Whereas you told me, that in every one of these instances St. Paul makes
a most solemn appeal to God as Witness of what he affirms, and judge of his
sincerity; he answers, If to appeal to God, be to swear by God, then by the
same reason to appeal to Man, or any other thing (in the same tense) is to
swear by that Man or thing, that is so appealed to, p. 163.


Min. Every Appeal to God (as I granted before) is not indeed an Oath; but then
surely, When we Appeal to God in a most solemn manner as Witness of what we
affirm, and Judge of our sincerity (as St. Paul I told you in these instances
did) it cannot be interpreted less than an Oath. If this be not swearing, I See
Fr. Conf. p. 70, 71.
know not what it is; And indeed I wonder why the Quakers inveigh against us
here in England for swearing, when according to Ellwood's Principles (if St.
Paul swore not) there is no such thing among us.

As for his old fallacy, that [to appeal to God is not an Oath, because to
appeal to Man, or any other thing is not to swear by that Man or thing] it has
been sufficiently baffled already, and is as much nonsense as to say, It is
not blasphemy to say God is Mortal, because it is not blasphemy to say, a Man
or a Horse is mortal.


Par. But because you said, those mentioned Forms used by St. Paul, were as
positive Oaths, as any other used in the Bible, here he takes advantage of your
calling an Oath a Form, and seems to wonder that you will not have it therefore
a Ceremony, ibid.


Min. Here Is another fallacy; Do I in any part of my Book make [form] the genus
of an Oath? or suppose I had; Are all forms Ceremonies? The Apostle recommends
to Timothy a Form of sound words (of which you have had an account) that is,
sound Doctrine; Will therefore this Quaker accuse the Apostle of calling the
Christian Doctrine but a Ceremony? He himself says, p. 118. there is Justice
and the manner of doing Justice, there is Mercy and the way of showing Mercy,
there is Truth and the manner of speaking Truth. So say I, there is an Oath,
and there is the way and manner or form (which is all one) of expressing an
Oath; Of these forms I produced several both out of the Old and New Testament.
Now I may as justly accuse T. E. of making Justice and Mercy to be but
Ceremonies, as he accuse me in this passage of making an Oath to be no more.


Par. Reason will not help the Quaker, and now he flies to Authority to prove
that St. Paul did not swear, which he introduces with this formality, But that
he and all may see, it is not our judgment only that Paul did not swear, I here
produce two very Authentic Witnesses to clear Paul from swearing. The first is
Basil, surnamed the great, who himself refused to swear at the Council of
Chalcedon. --


Min. I must interrupt you a little, and tell you, that though I do acknowledge
St. Basil a very great and good Man; yet I must not prefer his single suffrage,
before the determination of a General Council, especially that of Chalcedon
consisting of 630. Bishops. It seems the Council required an Oath, and Basil
(he says) refused it; Now whether He or the Council was greater, or more
Authentic, let any man of sense judge. But what if I tell you that the Quaker
or his Spirit has wronged St. Basil, and that this relation is false?


Par. Surely it cannot.

Min. If he refused to swear at the Council of Chalcedon, it was Ellwood that
Conjured him up; For Basil surnamed the Great was above threescore and ten
years in his Grave, before that Council sat* He dying in the Reign of Valens
the Emperor about the year of Christ 378, and that Council called in the year
451. This is affirmed not only by Helvicus, See his Chronelogy.
but Baronius and several others: But if this will not satisfy T. E. he may
consult his Friend Rider, who says as much almost as this in his Dictionary.


Par. I know not what to say to this, and can the less excuse him, because I
suppose, he pretends to write by the dictates of the Spirit -- But to let this
pass; St. Basil's words, as they are cited here by T. E. to prove, that Paul
did not swear, are these, There are some speeches which have the Forms of
Oaths, and yet are no Oaths at all, but rather Remedies to persuade. He
instances in Joseph and the Apostle Paul, of which last he says, The Apostle
willing to show his love to the Corinthians said, By the Glorying of you which
I have in Christ Jesus our Lord, etc. 1 Cor. 15. 31. p. 165.


Min. In the first place I must desire you to take notice, that in St. Basil's
opinion, there is an Oath, and the Form of an Oath. Secondly, observe, that
this is none of the instances which I gave of St. Paul's swearing, and so does
not oppose the Examples I brought: yet here must I tell you, that St. Augustine
(who was as Authentic a Witness, and as glorious a Light as ever shone in the
Church of Christ since the Apostles days) not only says, this very phrase is an
Oath, but proves it too (which is more than St. Basil does) by the Greek
particle [Nn] here used, which (says he) every one knows is the common
particle of swearing among the Greeks; (...), ubi dixerit Graecus, jurat. Aug.
verb. Apost. Ser. 28, 30.
Nay Erasmus (whom T. E. quotes against Lawful Oaths, p. 130.) produces St.
Augustin's opinion (as well as I do) to prove this an Oath; And immediately
adds, There Is no reason why we should wrangle, and deny that the Apostle swore
here, seeing that elsewhere, NOT IN A FEW PLACES HE PLAINLY SWEARS. Citat hunc
locum and Augustinus Epist 89. Rursum copiosius Sermon. de verb. Apost. 28.
ostendens hoc loco jurasse Paulum, idqque liquete ex Graecis exemplaribus. Nec
est quod tergiversemur, and negemus Apostolum jurasle, quum alibi non paucis
locis palam juret. Erasm. Annot. in 1 Cor. 15. 31.
Thirdly, T. E. confesses (and that truly) that St. Basil in the same place
affirms Ioseph's words, By the Life of Pharaoh, were no Oath; yet in this, I
suppose, the very Quakers are hardly of his mind. But more of St. Basil
hereaster.


Par. The other Witness is Gregory Nazianzen, in his Dialogue against swearing,
thus. B. But Paul also swore, as they say. A. Who said so? O what a vain
ja^gler was he that said it! quoth he; [God is my Witness,] and [God knows,]
Those words are not an Oath, but a certain Asseveration, etc. ibid.


Min. Observe here the fraudulent dealing of this Quaker; for whereas the Title
of Nazien's Poem here cited, is (...) Iamb. 20. p. 224. A Dialogue against
Common or frequent swearers, the Quaker cunningly changes it into -- against
swearing -- as if it were against All Oaths in general; But what says this
Dialogue? Why, the Person with whom he discourses, says; B. They say (that is
the Common swearers of those times) that Paul swore. A. asks. who said so?
(...), he was a trifler, or it was but a trifle; that is, Their Authority was
not very valuable. But to the Matter.

I reply, Gregory Nazianzen does not disapprove of all Oaths in this piece of
Poetry, but he is arguing against Common Swearing; And whereas these Common
Swearers alleged the Examples of God and St. Paul, both taking Oaths,
Nazianzen denies, that God did ever swear (which I doubt T. E. cannot fully
agree with him in) and then denies, that St. Paul did swear.

Now it being so plain, that God did swear (as also in my opinion, that St.
Paul did swear) I cannot reconcile Nazianzen to Reason, if he mean absolutely;
and therefore his sense must be, that God and St. Paul never swore as these
Common Swearers do, and that it was (...) a trifle to allege their Examples,
considering they never swore at all, as Customary Swearers do: Let any Man read
the whole Dialogue, and he will be convinced, this is the design of it. But I
shall more fully prove, that Nazianzen is not of the Quakers side, when we
speak to p. 286. where T. E. quotes him again.


Par. Next he comes to your last instanc^ of the Angel swearing, Rev. 10. 5, 6.
And seeing he cannot deny the Fact, he catches at your expression, that we need
not fear to imitate any thing that is done in Heaven, etc. for (says he) this
was not done in Heaven, but on Earth, p. 166.


Min. I did dot say, that the Angel was in Heaven, when he swore; and the
Quaker must know, that by [Heaven] it is an usual Trope to understand the
inhabitants of Heaven, as in that of the Lords Prayer (which I there cited)
[Thy will be done in Earth, as it is in Heaven] we mean -- by men, as it is by
Angels; So that my meaning plainly is, We need not fear to imitate any thing
done by those of Heaven: Now this Angel came from Heaven, verse. 1. and was a
good Angel of Heaven; wheresoever He stood therefore makes nothing to our
purpose, it being sufficient that a good Angel did it. And in St. Ambrose's S.
Ambr. in loc.
Opinion, This Angel was Christ himself; wherefore an Oath cannot be supposed
unlawful, having even in Gospel Times so notable a President of one who did
actually swear.


Par. But T. E. says, We must not imitate the Angels in all things, for one of
them offered Incense, which is abolished by Christ, as the concurrent judgment
(he says) and practice of all Parties confirms. p. 167.


Min. If all the Christians in the World were divided into three parts, two of
them do use Incense (in their worship) at this day: I do not mention this to
justify the practice, but to show with what confidence the Quaker prattles, as
if it were the concurrent judgment of all Parties. Besides, there is a vast
difference between Types and Ceremonies, which cease of themselves, when the
substance is come, and such things as are under a positive prohibition;
Circumcision, abstaining from blood, and things strangled, were Ceremonies, yet
were they connived at, in the early times of Christianity: But had they been
under a positive prohibition, it had been a damnable sin afterward to have
allowed them in any case: So the using of Incense in Divine Service is
Ceremonious, but had it been as expressly forbidden, as the Quakers pretend all
swearing is, the Angel had fallen into sin, (and consequently from his State)
by using it. So that the Quakers instance here comes infinitely short of the
case.

However I shall add, that the Apocalypse, or Book of Revelation is mystical,
one part whereof describes the things of Christianity allusively to Moses's
Tabernacle, and Solomon's Temple; on this account the offering of Incense is
there introduced, to signify that which it is a symbol of; but the Angel's
Oath is no symbol of any thing, therefore not only allowable but useful in
Gospel times.


Par. You said, that if there were that truth in men, that their bare testimony
were of sufficient credit, then there were no need at all of an Oath, and yet
(says he) would you fetch an instance from Heaven of swearing? If there were
not truth enough among men, do you think there is not truth enough in Angels
neither, to make their bare testimony of sufficient Credit? p. 176.


Min. God and the Angel did swear merely in condescension to the weaknesses and
infirmities of men, to give us the highest assurance either of God Almighty's
Mercy, or Justice; therefore whenever they swear, it was wholly upon our
account.


Par. T. E. tells us, that he would go directily to the two Texts in Matthew
and James, but for a passage or two which lie in his way: The first is, that
you should say, that every Oath implies an Execration, that is, a cursing or
betaking ones self to the Devil (as Rider expounds the word) which makes an
Oath more unsuitable to the nature of the Gospel, etc. p. 169.


Min. If an Execration be not implied in every Oath, then is the Oath it self
excuseable, the fault will only lie at my door, for making such an assertion:
But if every Oath does really imply an Execration, and the true notion of an
Execration is a cursing or betaking ones Soul to the Devil; then an Oath was as
unsuitable to the Law, as it can be to the Gospel: so that the Quaker's
Argument will fall every way to the ground.

Neither does Rider say, it is a Cursing and a Betaking -- but Cursing or
Betaking -- For there are Execrations which are a betaking our selves to the
Justice of God, in case we falsify: And such are the Execrations employed in
the Oaths we take.

Now that such Execrations are understood in every Oath, was the Opinion of
Plutarch, and the incomparably Learned, and no less Judicious Bishop Sanderson,
whom before I quoted. St. Augustine is of this judgment also; For (says he)
what we mention in swearing, we bind it over to God, namely to suffer if we
falsify Aug. de Verb. Apost. Ser. 130.
. And the same is affirmed by Cornelius a Lapide on Romans 14. 11. by Fuller in
Miscel. lib. 2. cap. 2. by Grotius de Iure Belli, and many more.

If need were I could quote several forms of Heathen Oaths, and of Christian
Oaths out of our own Historians, where the Execration has been expressed, Ita me
Diespiter ejiciat ut ego hunc lapidem, in his beloved Polybius; -- But I need
not instance in a thing so generally known as this is.


Par. But whereas you added, that Execration is implied and understood even in
those Elliptical forms of swearing used by God himself; this (he says) he
cannot brook that you should thus charge God with using an Execration (that is,
wishing a curse upon himself) which how great a blasphemy it is against God,
will appear, if we consider that it tends to make the most high God acknowledge
some other Being superior to himself; for he who execrates (or wishes a curse
upon) himself, does thereby own a power above himself, which is able to bring,
or execute that curse upon him. ibid.


Min. I hope you are sensible that the notion he has of [Execration] is utterly
false, that indeed no such thing is implied by it, as to betake ones Soul to
the Devil; so that it is no wonder to see the Quaker throwing down the Jack
Straw which himself has made.

Had he consulted Bishop Sanderson, he would have found sufficient reasons
given by him for this Assertion: However I must tell T. E. that God in swearing
(as in some other things) follows the manner of men, and his Oaths are
Elliptical in the Hebrew tongue, as well as men's, in which something must be
understood to make up the sense, and that which is so understood, is an
Execration. Of this we have a plain example in Psalm. 95. 11. So I swear in my
wrath [If] they shall enter into my rest; (for so it is in the Hebrew, as both
you and T. E. may be informed from the marg.) [If] what then? somewhat must
necessarily be understood: Let Vatablus here teach the Quaker how to fill up
the sense: If (says he) is a particle Vatab. in loc.
of swearing among the Hebrews, and they understand [let this or that happen to
me.]

The Children of Israel (you know) had grieved God forty years in the
wilderness; had in the highest affront to His Majesty set up a filthy Idol,
most ingratefully murmured against him, and brought up an evil report on that
good Land whither he was carrying them, wherefore He swear in his wrath that
[if] any of them entered into his rest (that is, possessed the Land of Canaan,
except Joshua and Caleb) etc. Now in the [If] here consists the Ellipsis, and
the sense must be made out by our supposition, which will run after this
manner: If they enter into my Rest, if ever they have any thing to do in the
Land of Canaan, then let that Calf they made be thought their God, and have the
honor of bringing them out of the Land of Egypt: I have sworn they shall never
enter my Rest, which if they ever do, let me be accounted a liar, and for ever
forfeit the honor of my Veracity. Here Is now the Execration: And does the High
God in this acknowledge some other Being superior to himself? etc. Now I would
know what evil this can be to God, who (it is true) can incurr no evil, because
he cannot falsify? Suppose a True Man, that knows the thing he speaks to be
right, should (sor the confirmation of them who doubt) say, If I be a liar, let
me suffer as a liar? Here Is an Execration: Now what Christian precept does it
oppose? or which way is it unsuitable to the nature and purity of the Gospel?

St. Paul did execrate himself conditionally, Romans 9. 3. I could wish my self
(says he) were accursed from Christ, for my Brethren, my Kinsmen according to
the flesh, etc.

So that T. E. needed not to have made so many black inferences from my words,
unless he intended to give thereby a clearer and fuller demonstration of his
own impertinencies, and wrangling disposition.

But to retort his own words with some little variation. By this you may see
what horrid absurdities that wisdom which descends not from above, but is
earthly and sensual, runs (not the Learned Rabbis but) the unlearned Quakers
into.


Par. The other passage of yours which lies in his way, is this; you said, that
the laying on of the hand, and kissing of the Book, were no essential parts of
an Oath, but only decent and comely Ceremonies. p. 170.


Min. As for laying on of the hand, kissing the Book, etc. however they may be
serviceable to affect the mind with so solemn and serious a business; yet
indeed are they but so many circumstances, and concern not at all the nature of
an Oath. For if to appeal to God as witness of our hearts and actions, is not
an Oath, (as T. E. tells us) surely then to lay the hand on the Book, and kiss
it, cannot pass for Page 156, and 163. (...)
swearing, even in the Quakers own account.


Par. He wishes here that the Magistrates in all Counties would read this, and
reflect upon those many great Fines, and sore Imprisonments inflicted by some
of them, upon many of the Quakers, even to the loss of life, for not complying
with those things which are by you asserted to be no essential parts of an
Oath, but bare Ceremonies. ibid.


Min. Do the Quakers then suffer for such things as are merely indifferent? who
do they think will thank 'em for it another day? or will it not be said to them
at the great day, Who required this at your hands? It Is the Cause which makes a
Martyr: And it is not barely suffering Fines, Imprisonments, or Death it self
that God accepts, for there are sufferers of all Opinions: Filthy Mahomet has
not See Turkish Hist. p. 284. Mat. 5. 10.
wanted those that have died for him. Christ (it is true) says, Blessed are
they which are persecuted, but then he adds, for Righteousness sake. And though
I give my Body to be burned and have not Charity, it profits me nothing, 1
Cor. 13. 3.

Kissing then and laying the hand upon the Book, being by all sides accounted
no essential parts of an Oath: My wonder then is, what the Quaker here aims at,
unless it be to prove his own Party cross and peevish, who it seems do
obstinately suffer for that, wherein our Savior's prohibition is no ways
concerned.


Par. However he hopes that the Magistrates for the future will be induced to
exercise more moderation and gentleness, and not to expose their honest
Neighbors to so great sufferings for mere Ceremonies, when the sum and
substance is effectually answered by their speaking the plain and naked Truth
in the presence of God. Ibid.


Min. We can speak no where, but in the presence of God: what security is this
to the Magistrate? every liar speaks in the presence of God: For where can he
flee from his presence? Psalm. 139.



Par. I suppose T. E.'s meaning is, That if the Magistrates will dispense with
their kissing of the Book, etc. they will assure them, that what they speak is
the plain and naked truth, as they are in the presence of God.


Min. This either is his meaning, or else he plainly equivocates; wherefore let
us take the Quaker in the best sense, and suppose that he equivocates not, yet
here must I tell him, that speaking thus in the presence of God is the sum
and substance of an Oath. This reminds me of a passage which happened some few
years ago: The King and Council order, That all persons in any Military
Employment should be obliged to take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy,
otherwise to quit the Service. An ignorant Soldier (who was a Papist, as the
story goes) consults his Confessor whether he might take the Oaths? who told
him, that he might take the Oath of Allegiance, but not that of Supremacy: But
it seems this Soldier understood him quite wrong, and when he came to swear,
took the Oath of Supremacy, but absolutely refused the Oath of Allegiance, for
which he was casheir'd. No less ignorant are the Quakers, who it seems do not
really scruple the sum and substance of an Oath, but at the form and manner
of taking it. To speak thus in the presence of God, i. e. to appeal to him as a
witness of their sincerity, is what (it seems) they dare yield unto: but to lay
their hands on the Book and kiss it, (though T. E. calls it a mere Ceremony)
yet is it so enormous, that they will rather suffer Fines, Imprisonments (nay
what not) than they will do it: Now how ridiculous this is, let all of even
common sense and reason judge and determine. However if the Magistrates will be
content to take the Quakers Oaths, without kissing of the Book, I am willing
that they have my suffrage (if it might signify any thing) for a dispensation.


Par. At length T. E. is come to those two notable Texts, Mat. 5. 34. Swear not
at all; and Jam. 5. 12. above all things my Brethren swear not: These (says he)
stand like two immovable Rocks, against which all the contenders for swearing
have hitherto been sp^t: These two Bishop Gawden confesses to be not able
Texts, which seem to stand as the Angel of the Lord against Balaam, etc. p.
170, 171.


Min. If big swelling words be true Arguments, I must then acknowledge my Book
baffled to all intents and purposes: But I must desire the Quaker to take
notice (as fiercely as he lays about him) that Bishop Gawden does not say that
these Texts do really stand, etc. but seem to stand -- that is, not to knowing
and considerative men, but to such as T. E. who takes a Bush for a Bear; which
makes me recall a saying which I heard from the mouth of that Reverend and
Pious Prelate: Alas (said he) our Dissenters may be truly compared to boggling
horses, which start and boggle at that which will do them no harm at all. --

But now that he has got to those Texts, let me enquire of you, whether you
have compared the account I gave you of them, with T. E's reflections together?


Par. I have so, and do find that he has not dealt fairly with you; for whereas
you compared Mat. 5. 34. with Titus 3. 2. showing that the words would not
admit a general interpretation, but must be limited to a particular sense; he
takes no manner of notice thereof: yet because you said, That our Lord must not
be supposed to have forbidden all manner of Oaths, because of St. Paul' s and
the Angel's swearing; This he conceives is sufficiently disproved and enervated
already. p. 172.


Min. I hope you sufficiently see that this is a mere Bravado; and also, that
not only here but all along, the most considerable passages of my Book are
omitted. Now I desire to know where he undertook to disprove that the Angel
swore? He pretends indeed in the place where he is treating about it, to excuse
the action, as if it were done in conformity to the Law, because another Angel
used a Censor: But how come our Savior's words to be a general prohibition? If
so, the Angels had been included, and consequently (as I before noted) had
fallen from their state, had they transgressed it. So that you may see, with
what pitiful shifts the Quaker goes about to evade the Truth, and will persist
in his Error, though indeed an Angel stand in his way.


Par. But T. E. says, that you meanly beg a concession that an Oath is morally
good, etc. Ibid.


Min. I begged no such thing, but proved it from the nature and end of an Oath;
as I have done even now from the Third Commandment.


Par. Why then did you make way to hook it in, under the notion of
indifferency, as T. E. tells us? whereupon he triumphs not a little, and says,
You come down a pace, who from calling it an act of Natural Religion, a part of
the Moral and Eternal Law, are come already to talk of its being indifferent.
p. 172, 173.


Min. He abuses my words and their apparent sense: This I said, That our
Savior in the Sermon on the Mount, forbad nothing that is morally good,
nothing that is either indifferent or expedient, etc. My true meaning was, (and
my words express as much) that our Savior is so far from forbidding any thing
that is Moral, that he forbids nothing that is Indifferent or Expedient.


Par. Yet herein (he says) you may see your self at a loss too, if you observe
that our Savior in the same Sermon forbad the use of a Trumpet in giving alms.
Ibid.


Min. Commend me to this for a spruce Notion indeed! Christ here (says
Grotius) speaks Metaphorically, and by this we are forbidden to make
proclamation when we bestow our alms: So that it is not a Trumpet which Christ
forbids, but vainglory and ostentation under that Metaphor: And if vainglory
and ostentation be indifferent, I shall confess T. E's Argument to be good,
otherwise a perfect fallacy.


Par. But (he says) that in taking it for granted that an Oath is expedient,
you again beg the Question. Ibid.


Min. Was not its expediency sufficiently proved even by your Confession? That
it had Fr. Conf. p. 68.
been made an Instrument of establishing such happy Leagues and bands of Amity,
and that Contention and Strife were ended by it? If this be begging the
question, I know not what begging the question is.


Par. However you said that Christ's words must be taken with a limitation, as
not forbidding all but some Oaths only. T. E. will allow of no such limitation.
Ibid.


Min. Why not a limitation in swearing as in other things? Christ in this
Chapter forbids not all anger, but anger without a cause, verse. 22. Not every
looking on a Woman, but looking on a Woman to lust after her, verse. 28. Not all
divorce, but divorce for every cause, verse. 32. And so doubtless not all kind
of swearing, as may be fully proved from the very Text which plainly contains
these two exceptions.

First, That we must not swear at all by the Creatures, for so the words run,
Swear not at all neither by heaven nor by earth, etc. there is no full stop
after [swear not at all] they are but half the sentence, and the Quakers do
unmannerly interrupt Christ here in the middle of his Speech, and will not hear
him out, nor take his words together, the whole sentence being, Swear not at
all by Heaven, etc. Now what work may be made with any Scripture if we thus
break it off in the middle? Have I any power to say any thing, says Balaam?
Numb. 22. 38.
thus may we prove him dumb. There are some standing here, which shall not
taste of death, says Christ -- stop there, and you may Mat. 16. 28.
prove them immortal.

Besides, if that part of the sentence [swear not at all] be full sense, and
forbid all Oaths whatsoever, what need was there of adding any particular
exceptions, seeing they were provided against in that one general? As if the
Law should say, Thou shall not kill any man at all; What need were there to
say, not a Merchant, not a Farmer, not a Judge, not a Priest, not a Quaker,
etc? This would be a mere tautologie, of which I hope the Quaker will not
accuse our blessed Savior. Wherefore many of the Ancients did expound this to
a prohibition from swearing by Creatures, and particularly St. Hierom on the
place, which I doubt will not please T. E. very well.

A second limitation is taken from the next words, But let your communication
be yea yea, nay nay; which is the Positive precept, as the former is the
Negative, and is the remedy of the evil custom of swearing in communication,
which shows that our Lord is both forbidding and prescribing matters relating
to our ordinary converse, it being strangely incoherent to say, Swear not, no
not in judgment, etc. but let your ordinary discourse be yea and nay.

I showed you before, that Titus 3. 2. [speak evil of no man] was as general a
prohibition Confer. p. 74.
as this, yet could not bear a general interpretation; but this the Quaker
passes by: however I will give you another like Text, in Lev. 18. 6. an
Israelite there is commanded, Not to approach to any that is near of kin to
him. Yet was that restrained to such degrees of Consanguinity and Affinity, as
are afterward mentioned, and to such as bear the same Analogy, as Iunius and
Tremelius note upon the place. Why then may not our Savior's words be
restrained to what follows after, according to that plain account which I have
given you?


Par. But you said, that Our Savior is not here repealing the Law of Moses,
but the false Glosses, which the Scribes and Pharisees had put upon it: this he
calls a fond conceit. p. 174.


Min. As fond a conceit as he takes it to be, I must tell him, that the famous
St. Augustine was guilty of it, and so were most of the Learned Doctors of the
Church.


Par. But I desire to be satisfied, whether any of T. E's Authors were not
guilty with you of this fond conceit?


Min. Yes, I do assure you, the famous Origin, whom himself cites p. 185. is of
the Orig. cont. Cells. l. 7.
same Opinion; and so likewise St. Hierome on the place says no less; yea, and
St. Chrysostom also affirms, that this swearing by Creatures, was a corruption
brought in by the Pharisees, being absolutely forbidden by the Law of Moses,
where he commands to swear only by the Name of God.

But then I must tell you, that Beza whom he so often quotes, is guilty of this
fond conceit. Omnino (...), (i. e.) per ullam rem Creatam, ut apparet ex
proxime sequentibus, quas Christus damnat, formulis: Ex quibus liquet,
indirectas jurandi species, non ipsum jusjurandum legitime conceptum,
^eprehendi, ac proinde ^niversalem particulam a nonnullis temere hoc loco
^rgeri. Beza Annot. in loc.


Now I would know why T. E. would use the Authority of such men, that with me
are guilty of so fond a conceit, as he fancies this to be? hereafter sure he
will be wiser.


Par. But he thinks he can oppose all this from Bishop Gawden, whom he calls an
Earthen Pitcher, He (it seems) says, our Savior gives many singular Lessons
or Precepts of more eminent Diligence, Patience, Charity, Mortification,
Self-denial, Sincerity, Conspicuity, Perseverance and Perfection of Obedience
required now under the Gospel, above what either the letter of the Mosaical Law
seemed to exact, or by the Pharisaical Interpretations were taught to the Jews.
p. 175.


Min. Methinks it does very ill become this Quaker, to call Bishop Gawden by
that contemptuous name of Earthen Pitcher. For (if I be not very much mistaken)
there is scarce one sip of Learning with which he flourishes this Chapter, which
he has not drunk out of this Pitcher. The Jewish Doctors say, If we drink out
of a pit, we must not throw dirt into it afterward; which this Quaker has
done against all rules of gratitude and manners.

However let me tell you, that I see nothing in Bishop Gawden's Assertion which
I cannot subscribe to, yet hold to my own.


Par. He labors in this place to prove, that Christ did forbid more than was
forbidden by Moses, even solemn swearing; therefore the Text is not to be
restrained to the Pharisees Glosses; and so (he says) he does in other
instances. page 175, 176, etc.


Min. Because he forbad more than Moses, does it follow, that he contradicted
Moses? and then will he not contradict himself, when he says, He came not to
destroy the Law? v. 17.

But the question is, whether such a Law be taken away? the answer is, that
more is required by Christ than Moses: Is refining and elevating a Law, an
abolishing and repealing of it?

The Ceremonial Law pointed at Christ, and deciphered all his Offices, and the
Evangelical purity, which upon the offering up of Christ, gave place to its
antitype of its own accord, without any further need of an express repeal.

But the Moral Law is improved and advanced; which having been obscured by the
Pharisees Glosses, and traditional Expositions, it was no superfluous and
needless thing (as T. E. suggests) for our blessed Savior to clear and
vindicate it.


Par. You said enough before to make it very reasonable, that Christ did not
herein forbid All Oaths whatsoever. Yet T. E. spends two or three pages to
prove from the particle [But] here in the Text, that our Savior excludes all
manner of swearing, p. 177, 178, 179.


Min. Not only the Particle [But,] but the whole Sentence is to be interpreted
by what goes before and follows after. Had our Savior said [But I say unto you
swear not at all,] and there stopped; And if [Them] in the Text be only
applicable to Moses (as T. E. would have it, p. 179. forgetting in the mean
while his second Chapter;) Then the Particle [But] had been of more force. But
whereas our Savior mentions swearing by Creatures, and in Communication,
immediately after [swear not at all;] T. E's arguing here from the Particle
[But] is idle and impertinent; And it is plain, the Quakers interpretation of
this Text (and not the Priests) will render the words of our Savior Christ
superfluous and vain.


Par. Now let us examine T. E's notes upon the words of St. James, Chap. 5. 12.
[But above all things my Brethren, swear not.] Here he grants that the Apostle
did forbid only such Oaths as our Savior had forbidden, p. 181.


Min. Having showed you that our Savior forbids not All Oaths whatsoever, this
Text of St. James must needs fall short of the Quaker's purpose. By the by, it
will be worth your noting, that he writ to the Jews (who had been strangely
accustomed to swear by the Creatures, and in their Communication) to be the
more careful and watchful over their words.

But I cannot but wonder that T. E. should say, that Christ forbad Oaths (which
are confessedly lawful during the Law;) when himself has told us, that the time
when our Savior lived was under the Law, and that in this state many things
were indulged to the Jews, p. 37, 38. If so; surely Christ in the time of the
Law would not contradict the Law. And therefore if St. James (as T. E.
acknowledges) forbad Oaths no further than Christ forbad them, this Sophister
by his own distinction has quite spoiled his Argument.


Par. But I observe that T. E. stands much upon the first and last words of the
Text [But above all things, etc.] And says, That he might be sure to leave no
Oath unforbidden, he closes up his Sentence with these comprehensive words,
Neither by any other Oath, p. 182.


Min. As to the first part [But above all things,] Let St. Augustine be the
Expositor, Why above all things? (says he) Is to swear, worse than to steal, or
to commit Adultery, etc? -- these are evil in themselves, so is not swearing,
This T. E. himself grants, p. 141, etc. Aug. in ver. Ap. Sermon. 30.
Why then must we avoid Oaths above all? Not that they are worse than any other
sin, but because we most easily slip into them, having gotten a Custom of them.
So that these words [above all] strike at that irreverence toward the Majesty
of God, which indeliberate swearing (as that in common talk) makes men
continually liable unto. The Apostle then is speaking here of customary Oaths,
not of solemn and judicial.

As to the other Clause [Nor by any other Oath,] I said enough in the
Conference to prove it referred to the Head, to Jerusalem, and other such like
Oaths, which Christ had particularly mentioned; But the Quaker has past over my
Arguments, having had little or nothing to object against them. But I now add,
that in all Examples of a General Rule, the Greater instances should be named
particularly, and the Lesser comprehended in a General Phrase; whereas if the
Quaker's Exposition be right, the lesser Oaths [by Creatures] are named
particularly, and the Greater [by God's Name, used in Judicatories] are at the
most but hinted at under a General Phrase of -- [any other Oath;] which is
against the Rules of Speech, and very absurd. [Swear not by lesser Oaths, by
Heaven nor by Earth, nor by any other Oath, i. e. not by God's Name in
Judgment:] this is the Quaker's interpretation.

And indeed it is very odd, that Christ and his Apostles (if they intended to
prohibit All swearing by God's Name) should never give one plain word about it,
when as they do mention Oaths by Creatures, which are not so ma^erial. To
conclude, St. James must be limited to Communication as well as Christ, as is
plain from the very words; And so St. Augustine and Antiquity did expound him,
whose practice (being the next enquiry) will be an excellent Commentary on both
these Scriptures; For if any of those Primitive Fathers did practice, or allow
solemn swearing, they did not surely think that it was forbidden by Christ, or
by St. James.


Par. But before we come to enquire what thoughts the Ancient Fathers had of
Oaths, I must know what you will answer to this objection, If Men would use
themselves to speak Truth, would not this be enough to give Credit to what they
say in all Cases? If their yea be yea, and their nay nay, that is, if their
Promise be Performance, and their words be Truth; will not this answer all ends
in Humane Society? Then farewell all swearing? p. 183, 184.


Min. Might not all this have been said against Oaths before and in the time of
the Law? Might not Abraham's Servant thus have answered his Master requiring an
Oath of him, when he sent him to fetch a Wife for his Son Isaac? Might not he
have said, Have I been * Genesis 24.
so long in thy Pious Family? Have thou thought M^ worthy to rule over all that
thou have, ver. 2.
And now dare not trust me in this matter, without an Oath? Will thou make no
distinction between the virtuous and the vicious, the True Man and the False,
the sincere and Hypocrite, the Good and the Bad? Will Thou (who have given us
so many instructions Genesis 18. 19.
to fidelity) enjoin a sincere and upright Man to wear the Badge of Hypocrisy,
an Oath? Thus Abraham's Servant might have argued with his Master at T. E's
rate, p. 126. But he was better instructed, than to make this a Plea for
Disobedience. And does not T. E's way of arguing blasphemously charge God with
folly, who not only used swearing himself, but in necessary Cases enjoined it
to be used by Men? Thus (to give you one instance) in Exodus 22. 10, 11. God
enjoins that If a Man deliver unto his Neighbor an Ass, or an Ox, or a Sheep,
or any Beast to keep, and it dye or be hurt, or driven away, no Man seeing it;
Then shall an OATH of the Lord be between them both, that he has not put his
hand unto his Neighbors Goods; and the Owner of it shall accept thereof, etc.
Might not the Quaker at his wild rate have said, This was a needless
injunction; seeing that in the 20th Chapter a little before this, God had
delivered the Decalogue or Ten Commandments, whereby he had sufficiently
provided against All Lying, Hypocrisy, etc? So that if we pursue T. E's
Argument to the end, it will charge not only the Holy Men of Old, but God
himself (you see) with impertinency and folly. This however I will confess,
that to speak the Truth is Security enough, but then an Oath is still necessary
(in some Cases) to assure us (as much as is possible) that it is the Truth they
speak; For we cannot see into Men's Hearts, and therefore hereby we provide
against the worst.


Par. Now let us hear whether Antiquity be of your side; For T. E. would have
us believe the contrary: And accordingly tells us that Polycarpus (who lived in
the time of the Apostles) being required by the Magistrate to swear by the
fortune of Caesar, refused, giving this only Reason, I am a Christian, and was
therefore burned to death, p. 185.


Min. Polycarp refused not simply to swear, but to swear by the Fortune of
Caesar; And who goes about to justify an Oath, taken by a Heathen Goddess, for
such was Fortune reputed among the Romans? Sed te nos facimus fortuna D^am,
Caeloque locamus. Juven. Sat. 10.


But upon what account the Oath by the Fortune or Genius of Caesar was refused,
as not consistent with Christianity, we learn from Origin (which will serve to
answer what the Quaker says of him, p. 186.) We swear not (says he) by the
Fortnne of the Emperor: For whether fortune be only what happens, we swear not
by that which is not at all, as if it were God, lest we should place the power
of an Oath upon such things which ought not to be: Or whether the Genius or
Demon of the Roman Emperor be that which is called his Fortune, even so we had
rather dye than swear by a wicked and perfidious Devil. Orig. cont. Cel. l. 8.
Edit. Cant. p. 421.
Hear also Tertullian as to this point? But we also do take an Oath, but not by
the Genii of the Caesar's. And then goes on, Do ye not know, that Genii are
called Devils? Devils we are wont to Adjure, that we may drive them out of Men;
not to swear by them, that we should conferr on them the Honor of Divinity.
Tert. Apol. cap. 32.
One thing I wonder at, that the Quaker did not leave out [by the fortune of
Caesar.]


Par. That would not have been honest.

Mir. Yet I must tell you, that he has left out as considerable a passage in
this story. For Eusebius, in the Book and Chapter which the Quaker quotes,
writes, that the Proconsul urged and said, Swear, and I will let thee go,
blaspheme and defy Christ. Lib. 4. (...). 15.
So that Polycarp was Burned to death, not barely for refusing to take an Oath,
but such an Oath, as indeed was a Renunciation of Christianity.


Par. If T. E. get no more by his other instances, than he has got by this of
Polycarp, he had better have let them alone. However his next is of Basilides.
Basilides (a Roman Soldier) who led Pontamiena to execution, and by her
constant Martyrdom was turned to Christ) being required to swear, refused it
utterly, etc. for which he lost his Head. ibid.


Min. To this I answer that in all probability, the Oath tendered to Him, was
the very same that Polycarp and the Christians in that Age refused to take;
Whereupon the Centuriators tell us, that He refused to swear [More Ethnico] in
the Heathen manner, by the Pagan Gods. Cent. Magd^burg. Cent. 3. c. 6.
To make this appear more probable, let us consider (First) the sense of the
Church concerning an Oath, when Basilides suffered; Which we may learn from
Tertullian beforementioned, who wrote his Apology in the time of the
persecution of Severus, in which persecution Pontamiena suffered Martyrdom; and
from Origin, by whom she was instructed in the Principles of Christianity; and
from Clemens Alexandrinus, who was Catechist in Alexandria, when Basilides made
his Profession there, as is noted by Eusebius. Eus. l. 6. c. 4, 5.
Now Clemens speaks sharply against swearing in many places, as Paed. lib. 3.
c. 11. Strom. lib. 5, etc. and describing his [Understanding Pious Christian]
he says, He is no swearer in what he affirms or denies, but will add, [I speak
the truth:] Yet he says, (...), etc. He that uses an OATH Piously, is not
addicted to swear, and is rarely brought to the use of an Oath. Where it is
plain, that in the opinion of Clemens, a pious Christian may use an Oath, and
that where he speaks against swearing, he means irreverent, needless, and
customary swearing, or swearing by the Heathen Gods. (Secondly,) Let us
consider what opinion Eusebius (the Relater of this passage) had himself of an
Oath. And here I must needs say, that he speaks as largely against swearing as
any other Ancient Writer; yet he declares that wonderful Vision which appeared
in the Heavens to Constantiue the Great, to be of undoubted certainty, because
he himself heard it related by Constantine, who confirmed what he spoke by his
OATH Eus. de vit. Constant. lib. 1. cap. 22.
Whereby it appears that both Eusebius, and that Pious Emperor doubted not, but
a weighty occasion would require and allow the solemn use of Oaths. Now is it
likely, that Eusebius would record Basilides a Martyr, for obstinately refusing
that thing, which himself counted lawful? But suppose the Case were as my
Adversary relates it; yet Basilides being but a new Convert to Christianity,
and consequently not well knowing in the Controversies therein; Of what
validity is such an One's Authority?


Par. You have made it appear already, what kind of Oaths Origin was chiefly
against; yet T. E. will have him to be against All whatsoever; And brings him
in saying, that Christ did manifestly forbid to swear at All, p. 186.


Min. Though the Quaker tells us not whence this passage is taken, yet we may
note it is taken out of those Homilies on St. Matthew, which bear Origen's
Name, but are much doubted of by Erasmus; So that it is a Question whether this
be Origin, or some Impostor: But suppose it be Origin; He (First) in those
undoubted Books against Celsus, maintains, That God the Father did not by the
Gospel of Jesus bring in Any Commands contrary to the Law of Moses; Orig. in
Cells. l. 7.
And so he could not think, Christ prohibited solemn swearing contrary to Moses
(as T. E. affirms.) Secondly, It Is plain Origin meant, that Christ had forbid
to swear at all on slight occasions, because he himself on a weighty occasion
does swear: God is Witness unto, or upon my Conscience, is his Oath; contra
Celsum lib. 1. So that if such expressions of the Fathers as T. E. quotes, be
not taken with a limitation to some kind of Oaths in Communication, etc. we
must unworthily fancy that they contradicted themselves as well in words as in
deeds.


Par. Now he is come again to Basil surnamed the Great, who says, In the Law
the Lord seems to allow an Oath to a perfect man, which in the Gospel is
altogether forbidden, etc. ibid.


Min. This Phrase [the Lord seems to allow an Oath in the Law] does plainly
import, that an Oath was not really Lawful then: Now does the Quaker imagine
that St. Basil did think an Oath was but seemingly allowable during the Law?
This will render him more ignorant than the Quakers are themselves, who confess
an Oath really allowable then. So that if we make sense of St. Basil's words,
His meaning must needs be this; Oaths in Converse are seemingly allowed by the
Law (though not really so;) In the Gospel they are not seemingly, but plainly
forbidden. And that Basil meant Oaths in Communication, we may be sure from
those Ecclesiastical Canons he made: Of which the 10th Canon is, That He who
had sworn with due Circumstances, should not be forced to retract his Oath. And
the 29th Canon says, They who use to swear they will do evil things, ought to
be cured by all means, by teaching them (First) Not to swear Lightly,
(Secondly,) Not to persist in their evil purposes: Whence the famous Balsamon
in his Notes on these Canons concludes, that St. Basil was not against lawful
Oaths. Bevereg. Pandect. Tom. 2. Canon. S^ Basil: ad Amphiloc.



Par. Next* he brings in his other Authentic Witness Gregory Nazianzen, Who in
his Dialogue (framed between A. and B.) against swearing, discourses thus. B.
What if I use an Oath unwillingly, but to free me from danger? A. Let another
allow thee that. B. What if we be drawn by Necessity to give an Oath? A. Why
did thou not rather dye? for surely thou should rather dye than do it. And
that he speaks here of All Oaths, even the most solemn, T. E. bids us observe
what he says a little before. B. But what will thou say to me of the Old
Covenant? surely it does not prohibit an Oath, but requires a true one. A. No
wonder, at that time only it was prescribed in the Law concerning Murder; but
now it is not Lawful, for any Cause, so much as to smite or beat, etc. p. 186,
187. This is so considerable a passage, that not only T. E. but thirteen of the
Grand Quakers (in the Book beforementioned called a Treatise of Oaths) do
mention it as a great Argument, p. 64. to show that the Practice of Antiquity
is clearly against you.


Min. You may observe here, that T. E. does falslly and dishonestly again Call
this Tract of Nazianzen's a Dialogue against swearing, when the Title is, A
Dialogue against Common swearers; And a little after, where Nazianzen says,
(...) i. e. Then it was forbidden to murder, but now even to strike; T. E. to
make Gregory speak like a Quaker, turns the last words, but now it is not
lawful, for any Cause, so much as to smite or beat. Where he puts in one half
of the Sentence out of his own head; and it would make one think (who saw not
the Cheat) that Nazianzen thought it unlawful for a Father or Schoolmaster to
whip a Child for his faults, or for a Magistrate to punish a Malefactor by
stripes. -- But to come to the Matter; I will make it appear that Gregory
Nazianzen believed the Lawfulness of Oaths upon weighty occasions (First) From
his own words in this very Dialogue against Common Swearers. And (Secondly)
from his own Practice.

In his Dialogue He has these words. Forbear to multiply Oaths, especially
commonly, and great Oaths, and on every occasion: -- And a little after, Swear
not to all things, nor always, that is, Playing, Eating, when thou art crossed,
or when thou art blessed -- etc. B. When then, and on what occasion do you
allow us to Swear? A. When there is a necessity. B. Very well! But when will
you call it a necessity? when I may free a good man? A. Yes. B. Or when I may
deliver my self from a base Opera Greg. Naz. Vol. 2. Iamb. 20, p. 224. Edit.
Paris.
aspersion? A. And then it is lawful.


Par. I see already that Gregory (that Authentic Witness, as T. E. calls him)
is against the Quakers, and not against You in this matter; and yet what the
Quakers cite out of him relates to false and unlawful Oaths to free our selves
from danger, which the Holy Father will not allow, nor You (I believe) neither.
It seems he positively declares Swearing in cases of necessity to be lawful;
But can you prove that he ever swore himself?


Min. That may easily be proved from one of his own Poems, which is Entitled
[(...), i. e. OATHS or PROMISES BY OATH, Ibid. Carmen 17. p, 92.
] wherein he solemnly Swears by by his Savior to avoid such and such Sins, and
to perform such and such Duties of Christianity. The Poem begins thus.

(...),
(...), etc.
I Have Sworn by the Word, who is my God most Great, et. Joh. 1. 1.

The Beginning from the Beginning, etc.
And a little after,

(...)
(...), etc.
I Have Sworn that I will never entertain
Dishonorable thoughts of God, etc.
Then the Holy Man goes on.

(...),
(...).
IF I, complying with bad times, Deny
The Unity of the Glorious Trinity.
Here you may observe he follows the Hebrew form of Swearing, as he does all
along, till he comes almost to the end of his Poem; The Particle ['E^, i. e.
If] being used by him above twelve times; And after all comes the EXECRATION
(whereby T. E. may learn that his Authentic Witness did not think that This
makes an Oath more unsuitable to the Nature of the Gospel. p. 169.)

(...)
(...).
Let Others then Christ's Mercy soon obtain;
But let My Labors fruitless be and vain.
I told you before that, an Oath may lawfully be used in the Dedicating our
selves to God; here you see Gregory uses it to that purpose, as it were crying
out to all (says Billius Billius Annot. on the Poem.
) that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. il. 1.
Be ye followers of me, as I am of Christ. For I have SWORN (that I may speak
in the words of the Psalmist Psalm. 119. 106.
) and am steadfastly purposed to keep the Righteous Judgments of Christ. Now
what do you think of the Quaker and his friends? You see Nazianzen is
pointblank Contrary to their pretenses.


Par. I cannot tell what to think; Well may the poor ignorant people be deluded
by them, little imagining there can be so much Deceit under such serious
pretenses and demure Countenances: But if this be their way of managing their
Cause; and their Principles be such, as are not to be defended but by such
woeful tricks as these; Then farewell Quakerism,


Min. What I have said of Gregory Nazianzen may serve also to clear St. Basil
further in this point; for such was the intimacy and correspondence between
these two, that Gregory tells us in the funeral Oration he made for St. Basil,
that they were but as one Soul in two Bodies. Naz. Orat. 32.
Now if St. Basil did so concur in all things with Nazianzen, is it possible,
that the one should differ from the other in a Point, which (in the opinion of
Hubberthorn) is no less than Antichristianism?


Par. I see his Quotations thus far have done his Cause more hurt than good:
But what do you say to the testimony of Epiphanius, that we must not Swear, no,
not by the Lord himself, nor by any other Oath, for it is an evil thing to
Swear at all. p. 188?


Min. The Quaker (and those other Thirteen, from whom he has this passage) did
very cunningly in not mentioning the Occasion of that discourse, which would
have spoiled the Argument. Epiphanius is writing against one Elxai a Judaizing
Heretic, who commanded his followers to Swear by Creatures, (viz.) Salt,
Water, Earth, Bread, etc. Now Epiphanius says: This Heretic is condemned by
the Law and the Gospel both, since the Lord says both in the Law and in the
Gospel, Thou shall have no other Gods but Me, and thou shall not swear by any
other Name, and Swear not neither by Heaven, nor by Earth, nor any other Oath,
but let your Communication be yea yea, nay nay, for what is more than this is
of the Evil one: And I suppose the Lord spoke of this before, (because there
were like to be some who would say, we might Swear by other names) first, that
we might not Swear neither by the Lord himself (that is in Communication) nor
secondly, by any other Oath (on any occasion whatsoever) for it is (not as T.
E. translates it, an evil thing to Swear at all, but) of the evil one to swear.
These are the words, and this the sense of Epiphanius, and if you will compare
them with T. E's Citation, you will see how he alters the words, and adds as he
sees occasion: But when all is done, the occasion being to confute an Heretic
swearing by Creatures, and the words of Epiphanius no more than the words of
Scripture, which we have proved must be taken with Limitation, it follows they
are nothing to T. E's purpose.


Par. Chrysostom is again produced by him, who says: It is not lawful to Swear,
neither in a just, nor unjust thing, etc. ibid.


Min. The places, which T. E. cites, are out of those popular Discourses that
bear St. Chrysostom's Name, but are suspected to be none of his by very learned
men; yet suppose they were genuine, you have had already a sufficient answer
given you to all T. E's pretenses from hence. See p. 189.
I shall now further add, that St. Chrysostom's discourse being directed to
private persons, must therefore be limited to private unnecessary Oaths, for
had his discourse been against the Oaths used in the Imperial Courts, The
Emperor doubtless would have called him to an account for his Doctrine, which
he was so far from doing, that he advanced him to the Sea of Constantinople.

But we may more clearly perceive his meaning by comparing all passages
together. He tells us, how exceeding customary the Sin of Swearing was in his
time; that the people used to take the Gospel to Swear by, and to put one
another to Swear at the Holy Altar; and declares, that the like excess of
Swearing was not to be found in any other City, as in that of Antioch, where he
then lived: * Ad pop. Antioc. Hom. 5. and 16. Hom. de juram.
And therefore for the beating down this profane and irreligious practice, he
speaks so zealously and vehemently against Swearing, and expresses himself in
such large and general terms, that they who do not weigh one passage with
another, may think that Oaths were universally disallowed by him: But to put it
out of all dispute, that this was not the sense of that Father, we find him of
an Opinion, that it was the Son of God who Swore by himself to Abraham: Hom.
11. ad Heb.
And that he made use of the same Oath in the Gospel, when he said, Amen Amen;
and expounding the words Heb. 6. 16. Rev. 3. 14.
of the Apostle, he says: By an Oath is determined the dispute of all matters
of Contention, and that not of this, or of that, but of All.


Par. Did our Savior swear, when he said Amen Amen, or Verily Verily? If He
did, whom did he swear by?


Min. He swore by himself. However, whether it be really so or no, yet it was
so in the opinion of St. Chrysostom (as I have told you) and of several other
Fathers, which shows that they were far from thinking All Oaths forbidden by
Christ, while they held He allowed them by his own Example.

And indeed what can be more plain, than that our Savior swore in Judgment as
much as any Persons among the Jews in his time were wont to do? For in their
Courts the Parties did not speak the words of the Oath, but the Magistrate did
Adjure them by the Living God to tell truly; And then the answer they made to
this adjuring, was accounted an Answer upon Oath, and they were reputed to have
sworn, and to be obliged by the name of the Living God to speak the Truth. Now
the High Priest according to this Custom, says to our Savior Mat 26. 63. I
adjure thee (...)
[or (as in some translations) I cause thee to swear] by the Living God, that
thou tell us whether thou be the Christ the Son of God. Our Lord being thus
Adjured or taken sworn, Answers ver. 64. Thou have said, or (as St. Mark more
plainly Chap. 14. 62.) I am etc. Which Confession he made according to the
Rules of Court then; and accordingly they proceed to sentence him for
blasphemy, as they impiously accounted this his Testimony concerning himself.
See Grotius on Mat. 26. 63.
And if the Quakers themselves were to Swear in Our Courts, they shall never be
required to Name the Name of God; for the Magistrate (or his substitute) names
the Oath, and the Parties Sworn stand silent, only showing their Consent by
Kissing the Book; Yet the Answer they make to such Questions as the Judge then
puts to them, are Called their Oaths, and they said to Swear the things. Now
sure Christ would have Reproved the High Priest for Adjuring Him, and giving
Him an Oath, rather than have Answered, if it had been Unlawful; And I hope T.
E. and his Brethren will Venture to do what our Blessed Lord has done before
them; nor will they think, He broke his own Laws.


Par. Now T. E. crowds in a company of Quotations together, as that of Justin
Martyr, Christians ought not to Swear at all; Then Chrysostoms and Origens
sayings against Oaths (but of these two you have given me a satisfactory
account before;) Next that of Lactantius: A Good man will not swear falsely,
lest he mock God; nay he will not so much as swear at all, lest at one time or
other he fall, even by Custom into Perjury. Last of all That of Hierom, The
truth of the Gospel does not admit an Oath. p. 190.


Min. As for Justin Martyr, His words are falsely cited by T. E. for he is
speaking of Christ's Laws and says: Concerning not swearing at all, and always
speaking truth, he thus commands, Swear not at all etc. This is not what the
Quaker alleges, That Christians ought not to swear at all; nor does it sound
to T. E's sense, but relates to speaking truth in Communication without an
Oath; Yea in the same Apology, he says: The Christians need not die for
Christ, if they would dissemble, for we might (says he) do that which the
Proverb says, I swear with my Tongue, but my Heart was not made to Swear: So
that it seems Christianity would allow them to Swear, but not to Equivocate in
Swearing.

As for Lactantius, His words do plainly relate to common and Customary
Swearing, as appears by that Reason he gives, viz. -- lest at one time or other
he fall, even by Custom, into perjury.

Lastly, that of Hieroms must be meant of flight Oaths or Oaths by Creatures;
for St. Hierom himself swears on Great Occasion, God is my Witness to my
Conscience: Ad Paulin. Ep. 153. et Ad Eust^ch. Epi^. 22.
And He relates, that he being in a Vision was dragged to Christ's Tribunal, and
scourged for too much delight in Tully; nor (says he) was I dismissed, till I
promised upon OATH to amend Ad Eustoch. Ep. 22.
And to show that he was wholly Contrary to T. E. and his Brethren, He plainly
says, Consider that our Savior has not here forbidden to Swear by God, but
by Heaven, by Earth, by Jerusalem, and by thy Head. Comment. in Mat. 5.



Par. From the Ancients T. E. comes down to Bishop Tailor, who says, Our
Blessed Lord would not have his Disciples to swear at all (not in public
Judicature) if the Necessity of the world would permit him to be obeyed. If
Christians will live according to the Religion, the word of a Christian were a
sufficient Instrument to give Testimony, etc. p. 191.


Min. As for this Citation, you see the Doctor himself here confesses, the
Necessities of the world will not permit the precept to be obeyed in that
sense. Should I say, It were a happy thing, if men were never cold, hungry, or
sick; for then there would be no need of fire, food, and physic: Will T. E.
bring this saying of mine to prove, That I am (as cases stand) against the use
of these? Yet thus he abuses the good Bishop; who Took diverse Oaths himself,
and Required them from others by Virtue of his office. And in his Exposition of
the Third Commandment, The Second duty is To invocate Gods Name directly, or by
consequence in all solemn Adjurations, and public Oaths. Holy Dying Chap. 4..
8. p. 164.


By this time, I hope, I have satisfied you, that to Refuse All manner of
Swearing is a New Doctrine, and contrary to the Primitive Christian Faith; Yet
to confirm this Truth, I shall give T. E. a few more undeniable Evidences in
this matter.

Clemens of Alexandria, who (was Elder than any of T. E's pretended
Authorities, and) lived Anno Christi 192, says clearly, A Christian ought not
to Swear to his affirmations, but to profess he speaks Truth, and to live So
that he may be believed -- but there where Judgment requires it, He does
Rightly Swear to the Truth: Stromat. 7.
Which is more direct to our purpose than all the Quakers put together are to
his.

To him add the old Author of the Apostolic Constitutions (which some say, was
this Clemens) It is said, Swear not at all; but if you shall swear, take heed
it be a just Oath. Lib. 7. c. 4.


Tertullian follows, who showing why the Christians would not Swear by the
Emperors Genius adds -- But WE DO SWEAR (though not by the Genius of the
Emperors, yet) by their Safety (he means, by God the Author of their safety)
which is more excellent than all the Genii in the World. Apolog* Cap. 32.
The Practice of Origin and Hierom you have had before.

St. Athanasius says, Christ forbid to swear at all; Athan. in Passion. et
Crucem Dom.
yet that he did not thereby mean to exclude solemn and necessary Oaths, we may
learn from his Apology to the Emperor Constantius (to whom the Arrians had
falsely accused him;) where he often clears himself by Oaths, saying God is
Witness, and Christ is Witness; and in another place, We speak this before God,
for WE CHRISTIANS have this Oath; where he plainly calls that an Oath, and an
Oath used by Christians.

St. Ambrose allows an Oath, where we can be certain of the truth of what we
swear. In Psalm. 118. Sermon. 14.
Let T. E. see his Comment on Heb, 6. where he tells us, that Christ swore in
the Gospel, when he said Amen Amen, [or verily verily] I say unto you. And upon
the 16 verse he has these words, If we must believe for the future the Oaths of
Men, of whom the Prophet says, All Men are Liars, How much more ought we to
believe the Oath of God, who is Truth, and can neither be deceived nor deceive?
T. E. may now abuse this Holy Man, and say, I do not believe all Men are Liars,
whatever He may be; and I would gladly hear in what sense he will own himself
to be a Liar. This Man has been over hasty [with David,] and has caught up the
word at a venture; let us see whether he (who is so much for Confession) will
as fairly confess his Error, p. 124, 125. I am sure these impertinent words of
T. E's might as justly have been said against this Ancient Father as against
Me. -- But to let this pass;

The third General Council of Ephesus imposed an Oath upon Nestorius and
Victor; And so (says T. E. p. 165.) did the 4th General Council upon some
body, whose Name was Basil. And are not all these Fathers, and two General
Councils, Competent Witnesses of the practice of the Primitive Church, and
their sense of our Saviors words?

But further, it is attested by Dio in the Life of Antonius, and appears from
Tertullian, that the Christians did Take an Oath, when they were Listed
Soldiers under the Heathen Emperors; And their form of swearing was By the
Safety of Caesar, etc. And this was in the best and earliest days of
Christianity; but afterward when the Emperors became Christian, the Soldiers
Oath was enlarged, but never taken away; For Vegetius records the form which
the Christian Soldiers used to take to Christian Emperors. They swear by God,
by Christ, and by the Holy Ghost, etc. Veget. instit. rei militar.
And what Christians ever scrupled this? Who ever reproved the Emperors for
requiring or the Soldiers for taking this Oath? And not only in the Camp, but
also all proceedings in Judicature were managed by the use of Oaths, as I could
prove at large, if it were not too tedious, or in the least doubted by Men of
Learning and Understanding.

Thus I hope you see with what sophistry T. E. has managed what he produces as
Arguments, and with how great disingenuity he has Cited his Authors, who are
so far from being of his opinion in this Point, that they are evidently against
him, and (to use his own Phrase, p. 175.) have laid him flat. Now therefore let
us pass to his next Chapter.


CHAP. VII. Of Taking Texts, etc.
Par. COncerning the Question of taking Texts, it is mavelous to Me, that it
should become a Question, seeing there is no appearance of Reason to doubt
either its Lawfulness or Expediency.


Min. As little as there is; and though at our first Conference this was but an
Occasional Transition; yet T. E. thinks it of such moment, as to make it the
main Subject (you see) of a whole Chapter. And indeed if the question be
stated, we shall find very little work upon this Subject.


Par. Pray then do you state the Case.

Min. To take a Text then, and to compose a Sermon thereon, is to pitch upon
some portion of Scripture, to expound the same, and from thence to raise such
observations, and remarks, as (in the Preacher's judgment) tend most to the
instruction and edification of the people.

So that the Question will be this; Whether thus to pitch upon a portion of
Scripture, to explain and to recommend the knowledge and practice thereof to
the people, be displeasing to the Majesty of Heaven? If it be, Then are the
Quakers in the right, and we truly are faulty: But if it be not (there being
the Breach of no Law to make it a sin;) Then you and others may take notice,
that it is not God's Cause and Quarrel, that this Quaker is defending, but the
contradicting and turbulent Spirit of his own Party.


Par. You told me, that St. Peter in Acts 2. and St. Paul in Acts 13. took
Texts, etc. To this T. E. replies, that if you and your Brethren have no better
warrant for singling out a Text, and composing your Sermons out of it, than
these Scriptures afford, your practice will appear to be very weakly grounded,
p. 196, 197.


Min. The Quaker (I perceive) opposes the Lawfulness of taking a Text, etc.
because not warranted by an express Command from Scripture; which has been the
sottish mistake of these later Ages, as if Nothing ought to be done without a
Scripture-command; These Men would do well to explain their great Principle,
what they mean by Scripture-warrant, and to answer the Learned Discourses of
Mr. Hooker upon this Subject, which none of our Sectaries hitherto have been so
hardy as to undertake.

As to the present practice of Preaching upon Texts, I have showed the
expediency of it already, produced Scripture Examples (and could produce more,
if there were occasion;) And now I shall produce Church Presidents; Though
indeed none of these are necessary in a Matter left to the Conduct of Prudence;
and (I hope) you remember that the main of my Answer to this Scruple was this,
that the Apostles and We act under different Circumstances, they might
sometimes speak by the sole Authority of infallible inspiration; We take Texts
to Fr. Conf. p. 86.
show that we have no other doctrine to deliver, but what is taken out of the
written word of God, etc. this was the chief thing he should have replied to;
yet he does by this, as by the weightiest Passages in the Conference, Answers
it by silence.


Par. Pray produce your Church Presidents.


Min. I shall instance in Basil the Great; He took Texts and Preached upon
them, as may be seen in those Homilies on the 15th Psalm, quoted by this Quaker
against me. The same practice appears by the more Ancient Homiles of Origin
(another of his Authors) on Leviticus, Numbers and St. Matthew; And most
plainly by St. Augustine in his Sermons on the words of our Lord and the
Apostle; where that Holy Father singles out a verse or two, out of the Epistle
or Gospel appointed for that Sunday, and Preaches on them. And if T. E. please
to read his 30th Sermon De verb. Apost.
, he will find that he takes for his Text the words of St. James, Above all
things, my Brethren swear not. Where he may learn (besides That Texts were used
in those early times) how different his judgment is from the Primitive Fathers,
in the point of swearing, etc. Since St. Augustin's time, Examples are infinite
for the taking of Texts, though not prescribed by any Canon of the Church; For
though All of us pitch upon a Subject, yet do we not always name a Text, as
appears by the Church Homilies, which are so many orderly Discourses upon
certain Points.


Par. As for your instance of our Savior's Preaching on a Text, Luke 14. 17.
He denies not the Fact, but says, it was in the time of the Law, and suitable
to that Ministration, p. 200.


Min. By this shuffle, he will make all the examples, which our Savior set
before us in his Holy Life, to be no presidents for our imitation; Or as if it
were Lawful to expound Texts of Scripture under the Law, but not under the
Gospel; Or as if to expound Texts under the Law, were peculiar to that
Ministration.


Par. But T. E. has another charge against the Priests, that they take Texts to
get Money by, etc. p. 204.


Min. A virtuous Man may Marry a Woman with a good Portion, and yet be far
from making Money the End of his Marriage: But I shall pass by this, for the
same reason I did before, when I met with it in Hubberthorn, Because it is
Railing, not Arguing.

I shall only now desire you, and all sober Men to judge, whether a Methodical,
orderly and regular Discourse, be not more profitable for the people, than a
loose rambling overall points without any method, coherence, or visible scope,
according to the wild practice of the Quakers.

This may suffice to vindicate our Taking Texts, since it was practiced by
Christ and His Apostles, Used by the Primitive Fathers, and is the Custom of
this Church, being also found to be the safest way to prevent wandering from
the Scripture Rule, the easiest to be understood and remembered, and the way now
used throughout all Christendom, except in the Quakers Confused Assemblies;
Where there is No Order, and therefore it is no wonder that Their Preachments
are immethodical, roving, and as hard to be Understood, as they are to be
remembered.


CHAP. VIII. Of Humane Learning, Divine Inspiration and Revelation.
Par. IN the beginning of T. E's Discourse of Humane Learning, He mainly
insists on these three things. First, he brings a Charge against You in making
it Necessary to the interpreting of Scripture. Secondly, Whereas you charged
Hubberthorn for saying, Peter was unlearned, when he opened the Scriptures; T.
E. tells us, that the Scripture says it expressly, Acts 4. 13. And (Thirdly) to
your Query, Whether there was not difference between Peter the Fisherman, and
Peter the Disciple? He says, there was, When He was a Fisherman, he was
carnally minded; but afterward, being a Disciple, he became spiritually
minded, etc. p. 205, 206.


Min. To these I shall give a distinct Answer, and in as few words as the
matter will bear. And I must tell you that T. E. has here egregiously
falsified my words, falsified the Scripture, and abused both St. Peter and
himself.

First, I say he has falsified my words in saying, I make Humane Learning
necessary, etc. [Humane] is a word of his own shuffling in, and never so much
as named in the page he quotes, nor in all my Discourse to you upon that
Subject. I know that St. Peter was a true Interpreter of Scripture; and that he
had not his Learning by Humane means, but by inspiration.

Secondly, He has falsified the Scripture in affirming, that it says expressly,
that St. Peter was unlearned, etc. Which is an express untruth. For he may as
well say, that the Scriptures expressly say, that our Savior was a Wine-bibber,
etc. Indeed the Scripture tells us in the place he quotes, that the High Priest
and others perceived that Peter and John were unlearned and ignorant Men, etc.
But was all Gospel which They either said or perceived? Were all the
perceptions and opinions of the Jewish Council express Truths? This is to make
the Scripture own whatsoever it relates of wicked and mistaken Men.

Thirdly, T. E. has abused St. Peter in saying, He was carnally minded; This
being a calumny which He cannot prove; For doubtless St. Peter was a Good Man,
when he was a Fisherman.


Par. But methinks his greatest oversight is this; that He having endeavored
from Acts 4. to prove St. Peter and St. John two express Ignoramus's, he should
so soon contradict himself, and tell us, that our Savior before his Ascension
opened their Understandings (which was an immediate Luke 24. 45.
and inward Operation of his Spirit and Power upon them) that they might
understand the Scriptures. p. 207.


Min. You may see, what shifts an ill Cause brings a Man into. It seems he
opened their Understandings before his Ascension, and yet they were unlearned
and ignorant after his Ascension, as if they had Lost and not Gained by it.

And he is not too in his Notion of the opening of their understandings, which
he calls an immediate operation of his Spirit and Power: For that it was not;
Our Savior opened their Understandings by his convincing Arguments, thus it is
written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer, ver. 46. And if Christ had then
inspired them with that immediate and inward Operation of his Spirit and Power;
How comes he in the 49th verse to command them to tarry in the City of
Jerusalem till they were endued with Bower from on high; intimating that as yet
they had not received it?


Par. After a great many repetitions of the word [Humane] which was never put
in by you; He brings a heavy Charge against you, That you make Humane Learning
all in all; and Not a word of the Spirit of God, p. 211.


Min. This is a notorious Calumny: and if it were as he says; Why does he so
often cite the 103. page of the Conference, where I say, The Spirit helps us
to understand old Truths already Revealed in Scripture; and that We pray for
his Assistance therein? Indeed I did not so often mention the Spirit in that
Discourse, because it was not the Matter of our debate, being denied by neither
side; But Learning is that which the Quakers deny, and that which I am now
defending; And to oblige the Quaker, I will now put in the word [Humane,] since
Tongues are ceased; Which yet is far from excluding the Spirit of God; Should
I say, that Plowing and Sowing are necessary to procure Corn, I do not thereby
deny God's Blessing to be necessary; For indeed Both are necessary, They as
natural means, This as a Divine efficacy to make them prosper. Even so, I say,
humane Learning is necessary in these Ages for the right interpreting of
Scripture; But then this Assertion is far from denying the Assistance of the
Spirit, which sanctifies our Learning. So that this is a malicious conclusion
he draws from my words.


Par. But he thinks that you have contradicted your self in asserting the
necessity of Learning to the interpreting of Scriptures (i. e. the hard places
in the Scriptures, for your preceding words show that to be your meaning;) When
as you afterward affirm, That the necessary points of Religion are not hard to
be understood; And he is so pleased with this, that for fear the Reader should
not take notice of it, he repeats it over and over, as p. 212, 215, 234, 268.


Min. I find He is so tickled with this invention, that when he has nothing to
say, He fills up his pages with a repetition of this seeming Contradiction.

But I must tell the Quaker, that he deals here most injuriously with me; For
these two places of mine, were not spoken upon one and the same occasion, nor
do they belong to the same Subject; For in the 90th page of my Book, I am
speaking of Preaching and Interpreting Scripture to others; In p. 92. I am
discoursing of private Christians understanding so much of Scripture, as is
necessary to their own Salvation: which they may attain without humane
Learning, otherwise none but the Learned can be saved. Now the Quaker
disingenuously wrests all my Discourse to Preaching, p. 213, 214.

But let us see what consequence there is in his Arguments; an Unlearned Man
may know what is necessary to his own Salvation, therefore He may be a Preacher
unto others. Rare arguing! Is every Man, that can write his own handwriting,
fit to be a Writing-master? Or every Soldier, that can handle his Arms, fit to
be a General? Or every Clown, that can draw a Bill or Bond, fit to be a
Counselor or a Judge? A little knowledge with an honest Heart and good Life
may do a Man's own business; but surely it requires more to be an interpreter of
Scripture, to Preach, to defend the Faith against Heretics, to instruct,
exhort, comfort and and reprove in due season. Methinks T. E. might have been
more ingenuous, than to sport himself with his own impostures, and so falsely to
represent the passages of my Book, having done by it, as Dionyfius did by
Apollo's Statue, Whose Silver Mantle he took off, and then clad it with his own
Course Cloth, and when he had so done, laughed it to scorn.


Par. I observe that T. E. goes on at this rate, picking up three passages
spoken on different occasions, to raise this observation, that Learning is only
necessary to the understanding of those things which are least necessary, p.
215.


Min. Suppose it did follow from my words, that it is a Minister's Duty to
Apply things that are plain, and make them more plain; this is no
inconsiderable employment. St. Peter thought it his duty to be a Monitor, and
to put the Churches in remembrance of things they knew, 2 Pet. 1. 12. And it
requires Skill and Learning to manage even the plainest things to the best
advantage of the people.

And though I said the Difficult places of Scripture were least necessary, I
did not say they were unnecessary (which would have been blasphemy to assert;)
For there is not that Place, but the understanding of it may be useful, nay
necessary too, when such as T. E. pervert them, to the overthrowing of the
Faith of some. 2 Timothy* 2. 18.



Par. Now he tells us, that he passes on to your second observation (on 2 Pet.
3. 16.) not finding any thing further in your first that is remarkable, save
that in p. 94. you again acknowledge, that those passages in Scripture that are
of the greatest Concern, are written in such a plain and familiar style, that
the weakest and most illiterate, or unlearned, etc. shall not be able to excuse
the neglect of them, etc. p. 216.


Min. It Is T. E's old subtilties to call what he cannot answer Minute and less
material passages, Preface to his Book.
and here he says he does not find any thing further that is remarkable, when
indeed he has left unanswered the most remarkable passage of all, even that in
page 91. of my Book; My Argument there was this, If St. Paul' s Epistles were
hard then, in those days of primitive light and purity, and extraordinary
inspiration, and even to those that were acquainted with the Original
Languages, wherein they were written, and with the peculiar Proverbs and
proprieties of them; If they were hard then to those who well understood the
rites and customs of the people, to whom they were particularly written; and
who might be easily informed of the particular occasion, and by that means of
the true scope of them: How much more difficult must they needs be to us at
this distance, etc. This had been worth the Quaker's pains to have answered,
and ours to dispute about. So that I have no reason to take any further notice
of him, when thus he skips over the main of my Arguments. But neither you nor
any other can remain unsatisfied of the Necessity of humane Learning, if you
will peruse a Treatise Printed Anno Dom. 1663.
on that Subject, written by Mr. Reyner of Lincoln.


Par. But methinks he yields the Cause, For he tells us, that it is not their
manner to deride Learning, or any way to undervalue it, which in its place is
good and serviceable, p. 217.


Min. I doubt His Party will scarce thank him for this Concession, who for many
years made it a great part of their Religion to decry it. One (whose Name is
not affixt to his works) says, that the Original of Tongues was in the days of
Nimrod that Heretic. Principles of the Quakers, p. 51.
Though I must tell that Learned Antiquary, that Nimrod was rather an Atheist
than Heretic. But I pray, wherein then is Learning good and serviceable?

In Natural, Civil, or Humane Affairs, p. 218.


Min. If so, why does he make use of it himself in a Controversy of Religion?
And why does he pretend so much to esteem that Learning, which the Translators
of the Scripture made use of in that Work? p. 264.


Par. T. E. has one objection against humane Learning, etc. Which to me seems
very considerable, and to have more in it, than the whole Chapter besides. If
(says he) want of Humane Learning were the Cause why the Scriptures are
wrested, How comes it to pass, that they are wrested by those that have Humane
Learning? p. 219.


Min. Seeing you look upon this objection as considerable, you shall have the
fuller Answer to it.

Let us look back into former Ages, and we shall find that No Heretic was
famous for Learning in the two first Centuries. Montanus was for Inspiration,
as are the Quakers, and as horrible a Wrester of the Scriptures as they are,
Calling himself the Paraclet or Comforter that was for to come. Manes was a
Persian slave, void of all ingenuous literature and education, and He broached
the Manechaean Heresy. Ar^ius was a Man of plausible eloquence, but of no
great Learning. And I would have T. E. show us any one of the Heretics, that
did come near to the profound Learning which was in those Glorious Lights of
the Church, Justin Martyr, Irenaeus, Clemens Alexandrinus, Athanasius, Basil,
Nazianzen, Chrysostom, Hierome, Ambrose, Augustine, Eusebius, Theodoret, etc.
These Holy Fathers were some of them admirably skilled in Languages, all of
them in Histories, Laws, Rites and Customs, yea in most of the Liberal
Sciences, all which they got by Education: And he must be a Stranger to
primitive times, who knows not, how God made use of the Learning and Eloquence
of these Orthodox Fathers, to confound Heresies, is they did arise up in the
World. It the Heretics with their little learning did wrest some places of
Scripture, these Hero's did rectify such abused places, by which they both
baffled their Adversaries, and confirmed the Truth; So that the Heretic got as
little by those attempts, as Ellwood has by this Allegation; Which gives us but
an opportunity to set an higher value upon Learning, seeing God has been
pleased to use it as a means to secure His Holy Word in times of old: -- but to
go on;

We may observe, that when by the furious inundation of the barbarous Nations
into the Roman Empire, Learning fell into decay and when Arts and Sciences were
discouraged and neglected, at the same time all manner of Corruptions crept
into the Church; and as ignorance increased, Errors multiplied; So that most of
the present evil opinions of the Church of Rome, had their original in those
Unlearned Ages, from about 700 years (...) Christ, till about (...) after;
About the Midnight of which darkness, there was scarce any Learning left in the
World; It is wonderful (says Sabellions) what a General oblivion of Arts had
seized on Men's minds. Ennead 9. lib. 1.
These were the unhappy times, which bred and nursed up Invocation of Saints,
Worship of Images, Purgatory, with all the Fanatical Visions and Revelations,
Miracles, etc. Then began Shrines, Pilgrimages, Relics, Purchasing of
Pardons, and the Popes attempts for an Universal Monarchy: To serve which ends,
Scripture was wrested; Fathers, Councils, and Records corrupted and forged;
while the World was a sleep, and for want of Learning discerned not the Cheat,
which is now so gross and palpable. And it is well worth our Notice what the
Learned Hottinger observes (viz.) That the Canon of the Council of Vienna; Anno
1312. Commanding the study of the Oriental Languages in Europe, was the happy
dawning of the blessed Reformation; For while ignorance overspread the World,
the Pope carried the Bell away, and had it generally at his Devotion. And Canus
confesses that their Doctors for 300 years together, understood neither Greek
nor Hebrew; And Lelius Tifernus Anno 1470. had much ado to get leave to read
Greek in the University of Paris; for as Epen^aeus tells us (Com. ad 2 Timothy 3.)
In that Age to understand Greek was suspected, and to have skill i^ Hebrew
almost enough to make a Man accounted an Heretic: In those times they could
wrest [Ec^ duo gladii Luke 22. 38.
] and [Deus fecit duo Luminaria Genesis 1. ^6.
] to prove the Pop^ above the Emperor. But as soon as God restored Learning,
the Reformation immediately followed; Which the wisest Papists foresaw: Hence
Platina relates, that Pope Paul the second (who lived about forty years before
Luther) was wont to Call all that studied humane Learning, Heretics,
frequently admonishing the Romans not to bring up their Children in Learning;
Hence that famous saying of Ludovicus Vives his Vives de Causis lib. 2.
Master to him (which might very well fit the Mouth of George Fox) The better
Grammarian thou art, the worse Divine thou will make. And he that considers
what opposition was made against Reuchlin, Erasmus, and other Restorers of
Learning, by the illiterate Monks of that Age, will discern, that the Popish
Church did strive as much to hinder the setting up of Learning, as the Quakers
strive to pull it down: And its well if T. E. and the Grandees of his Party
(for all their big words against them) be not carrying on a Design for that
People, who hold Ignorance the Mother of Devotion.


Par. But T. E. will have the Cardinals, Jesuits and Popish Priests in latter
times to be Learned men. p. 219.


Min. Some of them I confess were so, but it was the Excellent Learning of the
Protestant Divines which forced them to it; as we may gather from Andreas
Vesselius Hebrew-professor at Lovain in the time of Pope Paul the 5th, who has
these words, We wonder at the Heretics skill in Tongues, and all Learning, and
they deride our Contempt of these things; Let us wash off this blot, and join
to Philosophy the knowledge of Tongues. De rat. Stud. Theol. lib. 1. cap. 19.
Yet (blessed be God) the Learning of the Protestant Churches has ever outvyed
Them; In so much that of late the Popish Champions could never wrest one single
place of Scripture, which has not been rescued from their false Glosses by the
Learning of the Protestant Divines assisted by God's Spirit. But what
Lamentable abuses might have been put upon Scripture, and what easy Victories
would they have had, had all Protestants been as illiterate as the Quakers are?

By all this it appears, that Learning has been the means, by which God has
Vindicated His Word from Wresting; And that Ignorant persons have been the
greatest Wresters of it: Of which if more Proof be requisite, let us look back
to the unlearned Anabaptists of Germany (in the last Century) the Progenitors
of our Quakers Thomas Muntzor, John of Leyden, Knipperdolling, etc. with Heiman
the Cobbler, Theodore the Butcher, who attempted to set up Christ's Kingdom by a
bloody Rebellion, and Abusing of Scripture: Yea this is confirmed to us by the
Miseries of this Church in our late unhappy times; when any Mechanic took
upupon him to preach, and expound Scripture so long, till they put more Thorns
about our Saviors Doctrine, than the Jews ever did about His Head; And divided
this poor Nation into innumerable Sects and parties, under which it groaneth;
And broached as wild Errors, as ever were heard before. So that St. Peter did
truly observe, that Unlearned men do wrest the Scriptures.

Perhaps T. E. may pick up some men of Learning, who out of base ends, peeks,
and prejudices have wrested the Scripture: but this is so far from proving
Learning Unnecessary, that it shows it to be the more Needful; for if Thieves
wear Swords for to rob and kill, ought not Honest men so much the rather wear
them in their own defense.?


Par. You have satisfied me abundantly, so that we shall find little more upon
this point worth the taking notice of: Only T. E. has found out a way to make
Tongues unnecessary, for illiterate men may speak by interpreters p. 221. Yet
afterward he tells us, that Tongues were given to the Apostles, to enable them
so to express themselves in every Nations proper Dialect, that they might
understand what was spoken to them. p. 223.


Min. It seems then, They were requisite, and They were not requisite; They
were requisite to enable them to Preach intelligibly to all Nations; And yet
not requisite, seeing this might have been done by an Interpreter. The fallacy
then, which he pretends to be in My Argument, will manifestly appear to be in
his own.

Besides, What a ridiculous Method is this, which he prescribes of an
Interpreter? For if the Preacher understand not the Language of that people
whom he is to instruct, the Interpreter must, who is to know two Tongues at
least, that he may interpret one by the other; And since Interpretation of
Tongues 1. Cor. 14.
was a Miraculous Gift in those days, as well as Speaking with Tongues, the
Quakers way is not easier at all, it being indifferent, whether the Miracle be
wrought by the Preacher or by the Interpreter:

Now if Skill in Tongues be Learning, then were the Apostles Learned in that
point; Theirs came by Miracle, Ours by Gods Blessing upon our Study and
Endeavors; And though we come diversely by it, yet the Skill is the same: And
though T. E. seems to separate the Gifts of Tongues from the Gifts of the Holy
Ghost, p. 222. Yet we know, They both came together; Neither can we be so
absurd, as to fancy, the Spirit gave the Apostles words without Sense, or that
he taught them like Parrots to talk without understanding.

Now because this Knowledge, and Skill to express it, is not in this age given
to any man without means, namely, Reading and Study; Therefore it is that we
press a necessity of Learning in the Ministers of the Gospel.

If it be enquired now, of what use Tongues were to the Apostles, I shall grant
that they were given to them (who had knowledge without Study) to enable them
to speak properly to all Nations in their own Dialect. Now though Tongues be
not necessary to us for this purpose, yet are they necessary for other purposes
(viz.) To enable us to compare the Original with the several Oriental Versions,
to fit us for the reading of Ancient Historians, Expositors, and other Authors
of such Sciences as are useful handmaids to Divinity, Which are generally
written in Greek and Latin, without the knowledge of which Tongues we cannot
know the signification and proprieties of words, the sense of phrases, the
variety of Customs, the History of times, the exposition of the Holy Fathers,
the practice of the Primitive Church, the frauds of Heretics, etc. The
Apostles needed the Tongues to express themselves, having notions by
inspiration: We need them as well to inform us in the Notions of things, as
properly, pertinently and Methodically to express our selves, even in our own
Country (this will serve to answer another of his objections.) And so Tongues
were and are Necessary for the Apostles and for us, for those times and these
times; And None wholly illiterate either then were, or now are fit to preach
the Gospel.


Par. You told me, there was great reason why illiterate men were at first
chosen, etc. T. E. says, The Reason holds good still. p. 225.


Min. Are We and They then in the same circumstances? Surely different Times
require different Dispensations. But here I must ask, Why the Comparison
between Gods raining down Manna in the Wilderness, and the ceasing thereof when
that People was settled in See Fr. Conf. p. 100.
the Land of Canaan, with the extraordinary and ordinary State of the Church,
was omitted by this Quaker? But I must confess, he has provided himself a brave
Salvo to call any thing a Minute passage, which he knows not how to answer.


Par. Though he takes no notice of the Comparison, yet he does of the
Inference; for he thinks, You are to blame for inferring from thence a
Necessity of Humane Learning in Ordinary times. p. 226.


Min. A more senseless remark cannot be made; Unless Humane Learning had been
an extraordinary thing, and acquired only in an extraordinary manner.


Par, However he says that Teaching of the Spirit had no dependency upon
Tongues; it was before them, and was to continue after them ibid.


Min. This is false, for they were given both at one time: But if he mean, that
the Ordinary teaching of the Spirit was to continue after them, I say as much:
But then his not distinguishing between the Ordinary and Extraordinary teaching
of the Spirit, has here run him into some gross Absurdities for two or three
pages together.

First he supposes All Christian Believers to 1. Absurd.
be the Apostles successors, as if there were no difference between the
Preacher and the Hearer, between Priest and People, when the Apostles selected
their successors from out of the company of Ordinary Christians: And the
Distinction has been ever kept up in all Ages since.

Secondly, The Quaker pleads alike for all Believers, as if they had All the
inward and 2. Absurd.
immediate Teaching p. 229. and takes those places 1 John. 2. 20, 27. Ye know
all things -- and need not that any man teach you etc. without Limitation.
Hence it follows, that the Apostles taught in vain; And so not only Ministers
pains are in vain, but the Quakers own Preachments; for if All were and are
immediately taught, what need was or is there of any of these?

Thirdly, The Quaker seems to fancy, that if the Spirit be not with Believers
in this immediate 3. Absurd.
Manner, He is not with them at all. p. 230. and that Christ has left His
people comfortless; as if the people in Canaan, where they plowed and sowed,
were not fed by Gods Providence, as well as in the Wilderness. We know that it
is the Spirit, that blesses our Learning, and to as useful purposes
(considering our Circumstances) as if we had that Immediate Teaching, which the
Quakers do but dream of.


Par. He would make his Reader believe, that you are of opinion, that the
Apostles received the knowledge of the Gospel by Tongues. p. 231.


Min. He wrongs me infinitely, I put in Miracles and the rest. Immediate
knowledge and Tongues are by me usually reckoned together, because the Apostles
received them together; and they were Miraculous effects of the Spirit, both
temporary and extraordinary, and both fitted to that Season; And Immediate
Teaching is as little to be expected now, as the Gift of Tongues, which was not
so Miraculous as immediate teaching; it being a greater wonder, that ignorant
men should be acquainted with All Heavenly Truths, as speak All Earthly
Languages.

Methinks, when Quakers talk of this Immediate Teaching, it is as some do of the
Philosophers Stone; for while they boast of it, they should show us One man
that Actually has it. And for all their pretenses, we see some of them do not
depend upon it, but make use of Humane Means, and do read and study, and when
they falsely quote an Author, can pretend they were in the Country, etc. And we
all know, that the Quakers being generally devoid of Learning, their
discourses, and writings are fuller of tautologies, soloecisms, confusion and
darkness, than any other sort of people whatsoever; Whereas if they had the
Immediate teaching as the Apostles had, their Notions would be clear, their
discourses Methodical and Argumentative, as those of the Apostles were. And we
see they are so far from it, that even T. E. a pretender to Learning as well as
to this inspiration, is often detected of gross ignorance, impertinence, and
self-contradiction, in this little Tract. All the Knowledge therefore, that we
expect now, must be attained only by Gods blessing upon our due use of Means.
It Is certain, that the best Quaker of them all, did he not read, study,
converse etc. would be as ignorant as a Barbarous Indian; and till they can
give us an example to the contrary, this pretense of theirs must pass for an
absolute imposture.


Par. But T. E. thinks, that He has caught you in a contradiction, because you
say, that Necessary Truths are already Revealed in Scripture; yet you confess
that you want the Assistance of the Spirit to help you to understand them p.
236.


Min. He forgets that here He does contradict Himself; Before, I made humane
Learning All in all, now (it seems) I make the ordinary assistance of the
Spirit Necessary. -- But to the point; If it be a contradiction to pray for the
assistance of the Spirit, for the understanding of what is Revealed, Then is
His Worship guilty of the same contradiction; for he tells us p. 237, 238. that
the Doctrines contained in the Holy Scriptures cannot be comprehended or
understood by the Wit and Wisdom of man (in his highest Natural seize)
but only and alone by the Openings and Discoveries of that holy Spirit, by
which they were at first Revealed. So that I must retort his own words * p. 236.
, If it cannot be understood, it is not Revealed but Veiled. My wonder is, that
this Quaker quarrels not with the last book in Scripture; seeing it is the
hardest to be understood, yet called The Revelation of Jesus Rev 1. 1*
Christ. And I must tell the Quaker, that whatsoever is made public is
revealed, whether every body understand it or no.


Par. As for* New Revelations, he thinks it is a phrase of your own, not used
by them. p. 237.


Min. It Is well known, that I am not the inventer of it; And though T. E.
disowns the phrase, yet you see he defends the thing; and if we must not call
them New Revelations, we must then call them New Impostures.

Have not diverse Quakers stripped themselves stark naked, and said the Spirit bid
them deliver such and such a Message in that posture? Must not then this be a
New Revelation in their own sense?

I shall be glad to hear that all Quakers were really become (as their Champion
Ellwood pretends they are) of another mind; It would be very well, would they
at last renounce all revelations, which are not contained in the Scripture, and
search out the sense* of what is already Revealed, which they may do with the
ordinary assistance of Gods Spirit, and His blessing on the use of means, so
far as is needful to their own Salvation.

Thus far I shall agree with T. E. that Outward means without the Spirit of God
will not make us savingly to understand the Scriptures, Provided that he will
add, that the Spirit will not help those, who neglect to use the means, so far
as their condition and capacity do extend unto.

Now as for those that expect New Revelations, or immediate Teaching (that is a
Teaching without means) such do render the Scriptures useless altogether: For
he that has immediately the same Truths from the same fountain, from whenee
the Scriptures do flow, will not value the Scriptures at all; for who will
value a Copy, that has the Original? It Is the conceit of this Teaching, that
has made many of the Quakers despise the Scriptures; What need have such (says
one of them) of Scripture-teaching without them, when they have received the
same Spirit within them? G. Batemans Anto Mr. Legard p. 21.
Another, whom I could name, said to a Credible Person, That it had been better
for him, had he never read the Bible.


Par. But you affirmed the Scriptures were a Perfect Rule; this sticks in his
teeth: And whereas you proved it by 2. Tim. 3. 17. He confesses the Scriptures
to be profitable, but hopes the Priest will not say, Every thing that is
profitable, is a perfect and sufficient rule. p. 247.


Min. It Is well, if My Gentleman put not on a false Vizard, for this is the
foundation-Principle of all Popery, to deny that the Scripture is a perfect
Rule; And under this sconce all their other Errors do take Sanctuary;
wherefore the Papists call the Scripture a Leaden Rule, a dead Judge, merum
putamen sine nuel^o, a mere Nut-shell without a Kernel. That the Fathers are
clear in this point, as well against the Papists as their Frieud Ellwood, may
be seen in the Confe^nce P. 105. which he passes by.

That the Scripture is a sufficient Rule, the Apostle proves sufficiently 2.
Tim. 3. 15, 16, 17. Does not St. Paul say there, that they are able to make us
wise unto Salvation through Faith? Which they could not do, were there not a
Rule in order to that Salvation: For the main use of a Rule is to direct us in
the way we should go in.

The Apostle proceeds to enumerate the several particulars, wherein the
Scriptures may by us be profitably made use of; They are profitable (says he)
for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, for Instruction, Which contain all
the intents and purposes of a Rule.

To show that the Scripture has all the Perfection that a Rule can have, the
Apostle adds, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good Works. Let this Quaker therefore beware how he digs up Foundations;
especially considering, how many places there are which make the Law of the
Lord Perfect, etc. Which for brevity sake, I must omit.

I expected that T. E. in this Chapter of Learning would have showed us his
greatest skill and accuracy, but I find my self deceived his pages being filled
only with pitisul shifts and evasions; Lest therefore I should weary you, I
must desire you to pass to the next and last Chapter of his Book; especially
considering, there is a Tract now in press called [Christianity No Enthusiasm]
which answers all his pretensions to immediate Teaching.


Par. I shall only then desire you to take notice, that he concludes this
Chapter with the Testimonies of Tindall, Jewel, Bradford, Philpot and
Bullinger, all which argue a Necessity of the Spirit in order to the
interpreting of Scripture.


Min. I have seriously considered their words, and do find that they either
speak of the practicable See Jewels Treatise of the H. Scriptures p. 36 and the
First part of his defense, etc. p. 62 63, 65.
knowledge of the Scriptures, which is ouly to be had from the Grace of the
Spirit, or else of the Ordinary teaching of Gods Spirit in the use of means.

But where does he find that any of these relied on immediate Inspiration, or
disputed against the use of Humane Learning in Divinity? Or do you think that
the Quaker observed His decorum in giving Philpot the Reverend Title of a
[Learned Martyr] in this Chapter against Learning. p. 275? But to show that T.
E. has abused the Learned and Pious Philpot; And that I maintain No notion of
Learning different form Him; Let us hear his own words, I confess (says he)
that Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God, and I acknowledge
that God appoints an Ordinary means for men to came unto knowledge now, and
not miraculously, as He has done in times past; yet we that be taught by Men,
must take Fox^ Martyrol. Vol. 3 p. 376.
heed that we learn nothing, but that which was taught in the Primitive Church
by Revelation.


Par. One thing I wonder at (viz.) That T. E. should not say [Bishop Iewel] (he
having been Bishop of Salisbury) as well as [Bishop Gauden] and [Bishop
Tailor;] but barely styles him John Jewel a zealous defender of the Protestant
Religion. p. 273.


Min. You will the less wonder, if you consider that the design of Ellwoods
Book is to blind and delude the ignorant Common people (for he can hardly
fancy, that men, whose Reason has been improved by Consideration and education,
can be imposed upon by so many apparent fallacies.) Now should He have called
him Bishop Jewel, then would the most Vulgar have made this Remark (viz.) that
a man may be a Bishop, and yet a zealous defender of the Protestant Religion.

But if T. E's design be to prove, that Gods people cannot be without the
assistance of His Holy Spirit, he needed not to have gone to Bishop Jewel,
Archdeacon Philpot and the rest; He might have brought as plain Proofs, and
with more Authority from the Book of Common prayer, from the Articles and
Homilies of the Church of England. And if I say any thing to the contrary, I
will submit to the severest puninshment for so high a Cirme.


Par. I should give you no further Trouble upon this point, but for one odd
passage which I had like to have forgot. He says, The Faith which They have
received, is the same with that of the Primitive Christians. p. 245.


Min. Then let me give you a Testimony or two of their Opinion in this matter.

Eusebius (in his Ecclesiastical History lib. 5. c. 9. tells us of one
Pantaenus (who lived in the Second Century) that He was a famous Learned man,
and Moderator in the School of Alexandria; And that of Old disputation and
exercise in Holy Scripture did flourish among them, being instituted by such
men as excelled in Eloquence.

The same Eusebius informs us, that Origin persuaded to the Study of Liberal
Sciences, affirming them advantageous to the knowledge of Holy Scriptures,
being of an opinion, that the exercise of Philosophical Discipline was very
necessary and profitable.

It was an unhappy Project of Julian the Ap^state to extirpate Christianity by
destroying All Schools of Literature and Education; for by this means (says
he) if we suffer them, We are beaten with our own Weapons Propriis pe^nis
config^ m (...) ex ^st is enim li b^s arma capinnt; etc. Theodor. l. 3. c. 8.
And the Christians complained of this as a very great grievance; Which shows,
that they both used Learning and highly valued it also.

Saint Augustine allows the knowledge of Philosophy and other Heathen Learning
to be useful in order to the expounding of Scripture, and compares it to the
Israelites spoiling of, the Egypt^ians to adorn the Tabernacle Hist. Trip^rt.
lib. 6. c. 17.
; And says that Saint Cyprian, Lactantius, Victorinus, Optatus and Hilarious
were rarely furnished with these spoils De doct. Chr. lib. 2. c. 40.
.

Saint Hierome was brought up in Learning from his Youth: And before he set
upon explaining the Scripture, he Learned the Hebrew Tongue Hieron. Ep. 4.
(long after he was a man;) And hehighly commended the Mother of Rusticus (who
was designed for the Ministry) that she brought him up in All kind of Learning
ibid.
. And he advises Ministers, that they be long in Learning what they are to
teach unto others ^ee Ep. 8. p. 76.
.

I could produce infinite Testimonies to show How Learning was encouraged by
the Ancient Christians; And for this kind of Inspiration which Ellwood talks
of, it was never pretended, from the time of the Heretic Montanus, till St.
Francis pretended to this point of Quakerism, and other Fanatical Popish
Friars, and Monks, the Modern Enemies of all ingenuous Education.

So that I hope the Quakers Champion has been so far from putting you out of
Conceit with Learning, that he has raised your esteem and opinion of it.


CHAP. IX. Of Tithes.
PAR. T. E. begins his Chapter of Tithes with railing, and says, that he is
got to the Priests Dalilah, the very darling and minion of the Clergy, p. 277.


Min. But rather (if the Quaker please) Tithes are that which an English man
calls Property, and I hope will be ever esteemed so, for all his Billinsgate
Rethorick: But to wave their (for I dare not encounter my Adversary in scolding)
I must remind you, that the first thing which you proposed to me upon this
Subject, was an Argument of Edward Buroughs in his plea to the King and
Council, who said it was a denying of Christ to uphold any part of the first
Priesthood, that gave and received Tithes, etc. to which I answered, that if by
the first Priesthood be meant that of Aarons, than had he presented to the King
and Council a Notorious falsity in affirming it to be the first, there being a
Priest before him, to whom Levi himself paid his Tithes, Heb. 7, 9. Or if by
the first Priesthood he meant that of Melchizedeck's, the falsity was no less
Notorious in saying, that Conf. p. 132, 133.
Priesthood is ended, which Christ exercises for ever, Heb. 7, 17.


Par. This indeed I told you was a great scruple to me, and your answer was no
less satisfactory: and I expected that T. E. here would have showed his art,
but I found my self deceived; for he has left Buroughs in the lurch, and
given the World an occasion to look upon him as a mere Cheat and Impostor.


Min. Its strange that he should pass by so considerable a passage, and the
very first thing insisted on; but you will wonder indeed, when I tell you (that
if a certain letter may be credited, subscribed by Isaac Pennington) Edward
Buroughs was an occasion of his convincement (He should have said seducement.)
Of all Quakers, one would have thought E. B. should not have been deserted: Is
it not strange that T. E. who abounds with Sophisms and Fallacies, should not
have one le^t him at such a pinch as this, when the credit and reputation of
His Patriarch Buroughs was so emi^tly concerned? I pray God he may lay it to
heart, and that in order to his own eternal good, that this Buroughs, who was
the unhappy Instrument of his Apostasy from the Protestant Religion established
in the Church of England, had not that Inspiration which we have been
discoursing of, and of which the Quakers so vainly boast.


Par. I see one thing very plainly, that where T. E. has not the wit to answer
any of your Arguments, he has however the cunning to pass them by: For He has
skipt over four pages, and the first thing that he enquires into is, whether
Tithes were due to Melchisedeck, that which should make them due (says He) must
be a command, p. 277.


Min. You know that Abraham built an Altar to the Lord His God who appeared to
him: Genesis 12. 7.
Now according to T. E. that was a superfluous service, not a due to God,
because we do not read that any where He had commanded it.


Par. I suppose that T. E. is sensible that Melchizedeck was a Type of Christ,
and that if Tithes were due to the Type, they are No less due to the Antitype;
wherefore he produces three Arguments to prove that Tithes were not his due:
First, Because Moses says expressly, that he gave him Tithes: And that the
Apostle uses the same Phrase: Now to give imports one thing; to pay another,
p. 278.


Min. That the Phrase imports no such things will appear, when we observe the
very same in other Scriptures: As for example, My son (says Joshua) [Give]
glory to God, does Jos. 7. 19
this imply that [Glory] is not God Almighties due, any further than Man is
pleased to give it to him? (Secondly) The Apostle, who gives the best account
of the Phrase, has it in these words, (...) He Tithed Abraham. Now since T. E.
pretends to understand Greek, and this passage being in my Book, How came he to
pass it by? this I am persuaded, had he not found it true, it would not have
escaped his lash; wherefore do I suspect, that here He offers an Argument
directly against his own knowledge and Conscience.


Par. His second reason is this, Had Tithes been due to Melchizedeck, then must
Abraham have paid Melchizedeck Tithes of all his substance, p. 279.


Min. We know nothing to the contrary, but that he did so; and I can affirm the
one, as well as He deny the other.


Par. But the main is behind: We do not read (says He) that He gave him Tithes
of his own Estate; but that which he gave him the Tenth of was the Spoils, ibid.


Min. This was answered in the Conference also: It not being material out of
what he paid His Tithes, but whatever they were, Abraham paid them as a Tithe,
and Melchizedek received p. 135.
them as a Priest.

But seeing he insists so much upon this, I shall add, That the Spoils were in
strictness his own Estate, having obtained them with the hazard of his Life, in
a just and righteous War. But if it were not so, that they were not his, than
will an eternal infamy ly upon the Father of the Faithful, and the Priest of
the most High God, in disposing and receiving of that which (in right) belonged
to other Men.


Par. But (Thirdly) (says T. E.) which seems to me a mere trifle, the occasion,
etc. seems altogether accidental, ibid.


Min. That is, accidentally Abraham metwith an occasion and opportunity to
discharge His duty.

As mere an accidental passage, as the Quaker would have this to be, yet the
Apostle draws a solid Argument from thence; and whoever reads the 7th Chapter
to the Hebrews will find, that the Apostles design there is to prove the
Priesthood of Melchizedeck's above that of Levi's, from a threefold Argument.
(First) He received Tithes of Abraham, or he Tithed him, v. 6. (Secondly) He
blessed him, and without all contradiction the less is blessed of the better,
v. 7. (Thirdly) The Apostle proves it the greater and the more blessed
Priesthood from the duration of it: For thou art a Priest for ever after the
order of Mechizedeck, v. 17.

Now if the account that Ellwood has given of these two great Men be true,
then has the Apostle quite lost his Argument; therefore let us compare T. E's
Discourse, and the Apostles together.

Is Melchizedeck's Priesthood greater or better than that of Aarons, because
Abraham gave him Tithes? that cannot be: For Tithes were none of his due,
neither did Abraham pay them duly, Nor was there in those days any public
worship, wherein He could perform any outward Priestly Office (As if
Melchizedeck was a mere Cipher, bore the Name of a Priest, but did not the Work
and Office of a Priest.) It Is true Abraham gave him Tithes, but he did not pay
him Tithes: And when all is done, it was but an accidental business, and will
not bear an Argument. With what dint of Argument might a Jew (upon Ellwoods
Principles) implead Christianity it self? What, Melchizedecks Priesthood above
Aarons, because Abraham gave him Tithes? that is false even from Christian
Principles: Did not Jesus himself say, that it Acts 20. 35.
was more blessed to give than to receive? Abraham was the giver, Melchizedeck
was but the receiver; wherefore the Priesthood in Abraham's loins was the
greater Priesthood, the more blessed Priesthood. So that if we pursue the
Quakers Argument to the far end, with Tithes it overturns not only the Epistle
to the Hebrews, but indeed the very foundation of Christianity.


Par. You have given me very good satisfaction, as to your Ministry, in your
reply to T. E's first Chapter; I shall therefore pass by His Canting
expressions, that you are made Priest after the Law of a carnal Commandment,
which I suppose, related to the bloody Sacrifices under the Levitical Law: But
then whereas you asserted, that maintenance in general to the Ministers of the
Gospel is just, rea sonable, and established by a Divine Authority; He quite
contrary to my expectation grants it p 284.


Min. Maintenance it seems then is due: Now I would know, what could possibly
have been set out for that maintenancce less obnoxious to exception than Tithes
are.


Par. Nothing that I know of, but Men of Corahs temper would have quarrelled
with it. But as for those Scriptures from which you urged this Maintenance, The
Apostles intent 1 Cor. 9. Gal. 6. 6.
(He says) is not to set out what the Maintenance is, as who they are, from
whom it is to be received, Namely, such as receive their Ministry. ibid.


Min. I answer (First) Nothing can be more plain, than that the Apostles drift
in these Scriptures is, to oblige the People to set forth a maintenance for
their Ministers, and those instances of the Ox treading out the Corn, etc. show
the equity and reasonableness thereof. (Secondly) The question being whether
the Ministers of the Gospel ought to be provided for out of men's Estate, for
their work and labor in their Ministry; This I perceive is fairly yielded: But
then did T. E. consider, How this very thing has been opposed all along by his
own party, and how miserably they have abused that Text, freely have ye
received, freely give? However we may fairly infer from his own words, that
they who are fed by us, taught by us, planted, etc. ought not to withhold our
maintenances from us. But then (Thirdly) The next Question will be this;
Whether those who withdraw themselves from the public Ordinances, are for that
reason excusable in withdrawing our maintenances? If this be so, T. E. has
found out a right expedient, to make all indifferent Men turn either Atheists,
or Schismatics in point of interest. But then I must desire their Friend
Ellwood to take notice, that if they be not fed, taught, and planted by us, the
fault is in themselves, and for which we ought not to suffer. (Fourthly) The
Fallacy and Cheat lies here, that the Quaker does not distinguish between the
first Donors of Tithes, and the present payers of Tithes, who are considered in
the Rent or Purchase for the Tithes they pay, which I made plain to you at our
first Conference, and shall (I hope) make more plain before we part.


Par. He is got into a fit of railing again, an says, though Christ deny them,
yet if Man will grant them, it will serve your turn as well, p. 287.


Min. Where (I wonder) does Christ deny them? Had the Quaker proved this, He
had most effectually done his Work: But He is so far from proving this false
Assertion, that when I am challenging the Quakers for about four pages
together, to prove Tithes a sin, that is to say, the transgression of any Law,
Humane or Divine, T. E. is not so hardy, as to make any manner of p. 151, etc.
reply; though he could not but know, that it was the most considerable passage
that I had.


Par. You may be sure T. E. was wise enough to pass by those passages: For I
suppose He knew neither how to answer your Argument, nor vindicate the
Reputation of his own Party, whom you had rendered both ridiculous and
dishonest, in the application of that Text, The Priests Jer. 5. 31.
bear Rule by their Means, to Tithes or other Estates, when i related to the
Prophets who prophesied ^falsly, and by their [Means] or by reason thereof, the
Priests than usurped an Authority: Now it seems the Quakers in their gross
Ignorance took [Means] there for Estates, etc. and T. E. not knowing how to
excuse this, puts it into the Catologue of Minute passages.


Min. I would now know of T. E. wherein consists immediate teaching. Had I
nothing to object against the Quakers but this very passage, comparing it with
the Notion of Inspiration, its sufficient to prove them very Cheats, and to
draw any serious Man from their ways, making a plain discovery what that Spirit
is, by which they are guided and directed; and that this Text has been so
abused, see that Tract (before mentioned to you) called some of the Quakers
Principles, put forth by Isaac Pennington, and the second Quaker there has this
passage.

But to return to his Gospel maintenance, which (He says) is expressly set down
by Christ, eat such things as are set before you; eat and drink such things as
they give, p. 276. According to this Rule Tithes are a Gospel-maintenance,
which have been expressly set before us, expressly given us. And if Tithes were
not Melchizedeck's due before such time as Abraham gave him them; yet when they
wete so given him, they were without all dispute, which will sufficiently make
good our Title to Tithes (could we lay no other claim unto them) wherefore it
was that I said before, that if they were not due by a Divine appointment, yet
are they now due by a voluntary dedication of them.


Par. It Is from those words that He infers, that though Christ deny them, and
Men give them, it will serve your turn.


Min. Could a more malicious and uncharitable interpretation be put upon my
words? Ananias and Saphira (without any positive appointment) dedicated the
Money, which they raised upon the sale of their Est^e, to the use of the
Church: Might not Ellwood have replied upon St. Peter, and the rest, Though
Christ deny that Money, yet if Ananias and Saphira give it, it will serve your
turn?


Par. Now T. E. takes notice of my query, how the dedication of Tithes
appeared; and says the Answer, O! you need not scruple the point, ibid.


Min. The Interjection [O] is put in by himself, as before, p. 32. to put more
Emphasis upon my words, than ever was intended by me, and to make more room for
his scurrility, as if the strength of my Argument depended upon that single
passage: but let us pass by his Immoralities to his Arguments.


Par. He says you ground your claim upon the famous Charter of King Ethelwolf.
p. 288.


Min. This is false, The Church was possessed of Tithes long before his days:
but it was the solemn dedication of them (whereby all Disputes concerning them
was taken away) that I grounded upon that Charter.

But What concerns King Ethelwolfs Charter, etc. you will find answered in another
Book entitled The Right Of Tithes, etc. which is a fuller answer to all the
main passages of this Chapter, than I could conveniently make, without swelling
this reply much bigger than I am willing to publish it.


Par. I shall then only propound his chief objections. T. E. spends some Pages
to prove most gross corruptions in that Charter.


Min. Some Corruptions there might be, even as there was in Asa's Reign, who
tho He suffered the High places to remain, yet nevertheless His heart was
perfect with 1. Kings 15. 14.
the Lord all his days. So there might be some great defects in Ethelwolfs
Charter: Yet having no Idolatrous design, but an honest zeal, that those whom
he esteemed Ministers of Christ might be provided for. And what can be more
uncharitable than to make a damnable Idolater of him, for doing something, tho
it were in an ill manner, through invincible ignorance.

Magna Charta, or the grand Charter of England, runs thus. Henricus Dei gratia
Rex Angliae etc. Archiepiscopis, Ducibus etc. Sciatis quod Nos intuitu Dei, and
pro salute animae meae, and animarum Antecessorum, and successorum Nostrorum
etc. That is, He grants this Charter upon this seeming pretense, that it was
for the good of his Soul, and for the Souls of His Ancestors and successors.
Now shall we argue that this was Idolatry, and therefore Magna Charta was ipso
facto void? And that the English Subjects ought to quit all the Privileges
that they claim by it?

Now suppose the obliquity as great as T. E. pretends in Ethelwolfs Charter,
yet the dedication of the Tithes being to God, no blemish therein can alter
their property.


Par. To prove this you instanc't in the case of the Censers, which the 250 men
offered, which because offered to God, you proved from Numb. 16. and 37. they
were not to be alienated to Common use: But to this He answers, that there was
a particular reason why the Censers were to be kept. Yet tho they were thus
taken up, they were not permitted to be used, or employed in that service, to
and for which they were dedicated, but being wrought out into broad Plates, the
property of them was altered, before they were allowed to be used. p. 296.


Min. Here I must tell my Adversary (in his own Dialect) that He treads light,
as if he meant to show us a pair of heels. If the question were, why they were
made broad Plates; Then we should find an answer. v. 40. to be a memorial to
the Children of Israel, that no stranger which is not of the Seed of Abraham,
come near to offer Incense before the Lord, etc. But this is not the question,
I ask why they were hallowed: Here Is the point, which is plainly resolved ver.
38. for they offered them before the Lord, therefore they are hallowed.

But was there ever a more gross absurdity than to say their property was
altered, because allowed as to their use, by being wrought out into broad
Plates? A Noble man turns a Mansion House into Tenements, or into an Exchange,
is not His property to that house the same which it was before?


Par. But He tells us that Tithes, and other such like Oblations are alienable,
and in this Nation have been legally alienated to common uses p. 298.


Min. I confess that Henry the Eighth did alienate them: And so did He also
establish the Six bloody Articles, to show himself as ill a friend to
Protestants as to Tithes: But is not this a wise Argument, to prove that
Sacrilege may de jure be committed, because de facto it has been committed?

Seeing the Quaker talks so big against Idolatry, I must bespeak him in St.
Paul's Language: Thou that abhorrest Idols, do thou commit Saledge? Romans 2.


But T. E. (forsooth) to culver with the Impropriators, thinks to engage them
all against me; as if I put them into the same predicament with the First
alienators, which is a gross mistake: And (God knows) I covet nothing from
them, but do truly pity the circumstances that they are in, as I do all other
men, who are enriched with the spoils of the Church.

However if all things were as He argues; Sacrilege would be as much a Virtue
as a Vice, and Ananias and Saphira may be put into the Calender of the Quakers
Martyrs, who do justify that thing for which they suffered. And now that I
maintain Ananias and Saphira, I wish T. E. would read Mr. Medes 37th Discourse,
which fully states both their sin and punishment; and then I hope He will
blush, for being engaged in so bad a cause.


Par. To Prove that Tithes were not Popish, You produced Protestant Martyrs
that received them: You instanced in Cranmer, Ridley, Hooper, Bradford and
Tailor. These (He confesses) were Godly men and worthy Martyrs; but He thinks
they had not so clear a sight into all the abominations and superstitions of
Rome, because they lived but in the daybreak of the Reformation; and that
there were diverse things which they took no notice of, that are plainly
condemned, etc. this is the sum of p. 305, 306, 307.


Min. It seems then a man may be Godly, may be a worthy Martyr, may enter into
a Crown of life, as He tells us these did; yet in this life come short of
perfection: for it seems these Martyrs were so far from being perfect, that
they took no notice of diverse things plainly condemned, and left the
Reformation it self imperfect. Compare this with his Chapter of perfection, and
see what consistency there is between them. Besides they lived a good while
after the Reformation was begun by Martin Luther. Neither was there any thing
of Moment fit to be reformed, which they left unreformed; being wonderfully
endowed with Piety, Wisdom and Learning for the work they had to perform:
Neither wanted they courage nor opportunity to do it. However the Quaker should
have told us, what those many things Dolus latet in ge neralibus.
are, which were allowed by them, and since plainly condemned by others. I
suppose by these [others] He means such as himself, or other factious and
schismatic Spirits, who love to oppose any thing which has the stamp of
Authority upon it; who would be always altering and reforming, till they bring
all to confusion and ruin.


Par. But to come even with you; as you produced Martyrs that took Tithes, He
instanceth in other Martyrs that denied them, namely Wicklif, Swinderby, Brute
and Thorp, and produces Fox's Martyrol. 57 for his authority. p. 308.


Min. Then let us search Fox for two things, first whether these did deny
Tithes; but especially whether they were all Martyrs, to parallel the Martyrs
which I named, because He says I oppose the Martyrs one to another. p. 309.

As for Wicklif, I do believe indeed that He Martyr. 2. vol. p. 602, 603
denied the jus divinum of Tithes, but then He held them in the nature of Alms.
Nay He was so far from denying Tithes altogether, that He was a receiver of
them, being Parson of Litterworth. I believe He looked upon Tithes as due only
upon civil sanctions: and the Quaker represents me of the same opinion, and
very idly tells his Reader, that Tithes were wont to be claimed as of Divine
right; but that I am not hardy enough to venture my cause upon that Title p.
277. Therefore He is the more ridiculous in bringing so improper a testimony
against me.

But suppose he had altogether denied T^th ^s, yet was he no Martyr: For Fox
tells us that Mart. 1. vol. p. 583
He quietly departed this Life at Litte^worth. Indeed by order of the Synod of
Constance His bones were buried 41 years after his Death* ^d Fox has drawn an
E^figies of the manner of it; p. 605.
But for my part, I ever took a Martyr to be one that Seals his Testimony of
the truth with his blood. --


Par. I believe T. E. has the same notion of a Martyr: For He says the blessed
Martyrs Sealed their Testimony with their blood. p 306.


Min. I pray then what blood was left in Wicklifs bones, after they had been
buried 41 years?


Par. But what does Fox say of Swinderby?

Min. He tells us, that He was articled against for affirming that Tithes
purely be alms, and in case that Curates be evil men, the same may be lawfully
conferred to other men. But withal that 1. vol. p. 607.
He retracted this before theBishop of Lincoln, and sets down the very words of
this retractation. But for his being a Martyr, Fox says, whether He dyed in
Prison, or whether He escaped their ibid.
hands, or was burned, there is no certain relation made. And for Brute, I
confess that He also was against the jus Divinum of Tithes: but then He was not
against Tithes as due by the positive laws of men; for he said, by the
traditions of men Christian people are bound to pay p. 620. p. 633. p. 653. p.
654. p. 669. p. 708.
them. And He too made a submission before the Bishop of Hereford: Neither was
he a Martyr; For Fox says, what end he had I find it not registered:

Thorp too was against Tithes, as claimed by Levitical precepts, etc. but then
as Alms he was not against them, if Fox may be credited, who is so far from
recording him a Martyr, that He says expressly, His end was uncertain.

Now I hope you see, what juggling here is, and how unfaithfully and
dishonestly He Cites his Authors, when those Men are no more against Tithes,
than, as He pretends, I am my self: And whereas He says I oppose the Martyrs
one against another, You see that never a Man of these was a Martyr.

But to the point in hand, I must tell you Sir Edwin Sandys s Survey. sect. 39.
that (if my Author fail me not) in Italy (if not all of it, yet in that part
where the Pope is Sovereign) the People pay no Tithes at all. To this I shall
add another remark of Sir Thomas Herberts, that in the Isle of Socotora, where
the Pope was never owned and received, even there (says He * Herberts Travels
into Africa and Asi^, p. 31.
) the Christians have a Patriarch of their own, whom they Reverence, and other
of the Clergy to whom they duly pay Tithes, their Feasts and Fasts like ours,
etc. They use the Cross in Baptism, and the other Sacrament in both kinds.


Par. But to go on (says T. E.) from Divine right, youbetake your self to your
last and surest refuge, making Tithes but a temporal right, p. 309, 310.


Min. I am sure he goes on to falsify; for I said no such thing: To say they
are a temporal right is one thing, to say they are but a temporal right is
another. All that I aimed at (as my words do testify) is that we have the same
Title to our Tithes, that other Men have to their Estates; enjoying them by a
National consent in positive and established Laws.


Par. Yet he has a way to evade this, by telling us, that he claims his Estate
in a natural and civil capacity, without relation to a Ministerial Function, p
311.


Min. This will pass for an Argument, when He can prove that the Ministers of
the Gospel ought to be reputed Outlaws, and what is set apart for such, ought
to be exposed to the rapine of every Sacrilegious Ruffian.

And if humane Laws be a good plea for other Men, I do not know why they should
be a bad plea for us, and this may serve to answer several of his pages, where
he beats the Air with a repetition of a company of vain and empty words.


Par. After you had at large proved, that the continuation of Tithes in the
Church is no sin, because restrained by no Law, Humane or Divine; and though T.
E. durst not there encounter you, yet he pays you off for concludingthus, If
the Quakers can prove from the Laws of God or right reason, that it is not
lawful for every one to do what he will with his own, and consequently that he
may not settle Tithes Lands, or Moneys upon the Clergy; then they do something
to the purpose, etc. Well then (says He) that I may do something to the
purpose, I will prove both from the Laws of God and right reason, that its not
Lawful for every one to do what he will with his own: He may not employ it to
an evil use, etc. Hemay not make an Idol of them, its not lawful to lay out his
Money in Beads, Crosses, Crucifixes, and so He goes on. p. 320, 221.


Min. Our Quaker is very true to his Method, to leave his Argument (which here
was to prove the settlement of Tithes upon the Church to be a sin) to catch at,
or play upon a Word or Phrase, to exercise upon it his abusive wit and
sophistry. I persuade my self that every honest Reader does take my words to
signify no more than this; that where I have a free Estate, I have a power to
keep or alienate it: Wherefore says St. Peter to Ananias, Whilst Acts 5. 4.
it remained was it not thine own? and after it was sold, was it not in thine
own power?

This however I cannot but take notice of, that if the Quaker can but spit his
malice against me, he cares not, though it fly in our Saviors own Face, whose
very words I used, and to whose plain sense I referred, when I mentioned them
to you: See Mat. 20, 15. Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine
own? Is thine Eye evil because I am good? But it seems Ellwood can tell our
Savior another story, and will prove from the Laws of God and right reason,
that it is not Lawful for every Man to do what he will with his own, etc.


Par. But I pass by this profanation, He supposes, that if Ethelwolf had an
ample power of disposing what he pleased, or that the People had by consent
joined with him in the Donation, every Man according to the interest that he
had; yet neither could He, nor they grant more than belonged to themselves, p.
323.


Min. Suppose I grant it, what then?

Par. To make a grant of the tenth part for ever is (in his understanding)
utterly repugnant to reason, p. 324.


Min. Is it reasonable wholly to pass an Estate from them and their Heirs for
ever, and yet repugnant to reason to grant but a part of that Estate for ever?


Par, He has a way to evade this too: For he says, that it must be considered
that by the Profits of the Land is not understood the natural only, but the
artificial product thereof; not what the Earth of her own accord, without the
help of Man brings forth; but what by the painful labor, toil, care, sweat,
and great charge of the diligent and industrious Husbandman is dug, and as
it were torn out of her Bowels. ibid.


Min. I will propound you a Case: Suppose you were seized in Fee-simple of an
Estate valuable at 100 l. per an. Might you not out of that Estate charge 10 l.
per an. for ever, to such and such uses?


Par. This I fancy T. E. himself will not question.

Min. Then must I tell him, that 10 l. per an is not the natural product of the
Land, not what the Earth of her own accord brings forth: but must be fetched
from the Indies; and must be procured by the labor, toil, care, and charge of
the diligent and industrious Husbandman, etc. Now I must ask, why it should be
thought more unreasonable for the Husbandman to pay such things as the Ground
it self brings forth, than to pay such a sum of Money, which must be brought
from the remotest parts of the World?


Par. Believe me, I am not able to answer you: But (says T. E.) if Ethelwolf' s
consideration be taken away (which it seems was for the health of his Soul) why
should the charge continue? p. 326.


Min. You have the parallel Case of Magna Charta already, by which the English
Subjects do differ from the Subjects of France; which by this reason ought as
well to be void as Ethelwolf's Charter?

But then what is all this to the present payers of Tithes? If the Clergy must
not gain by the Charter, why must the Laity have the advantage of it, who have
a valuable consideration for what they pay?

But let us seriously consider of the Case: If the Clergy must not have the
revenue they are in possession of, who must? Will T. E. find out the Heirs of
Ethelwolf, and of that People who joined with him in the Donation? But suppose
he cannot, or suppose the Case worse than He states it, that Tithes had been
set out for the worship of the Devil, and the original proprietors, nor any
claiming under them in being: what is fit to be done in such a Case as this?


Par. In such a Case the supreme Authority of a Nation ought to proceed to a
reformation, and change them from a bad use to a good.


Min. Had the Original of Tithes been never so ill, yet we see that our Laws
have so reformed the Church, that they are notnow used to any such Idolatrous
ends and purposes. Were not those Censers that we have been discoursing of,
though Consecrated by wicked Men in so rebellious a manner, wrought out into
broad Plates for Gods own Altar?

Surely the Quaker fancies, that whatsoever has been abused to Idolatry, etc.
cannot be reformed to a pious use afterward: If so, then must Tithes rot in
the Fields, and no Body meddle with them. Suppose the whole Turkish Empire
(through Gods mercy) should be Converted to Christianity: May not the Mufti
himself, p. 21.
and those whom T. E. calls Emaums, together with all the Mosks and Revenues
now belonging to them, be reconsecrated to Christianity? Is Idolatry of that
contaminating nature, that no reformation can purge it? how then came Aaron to
Officiate in the Priests Office, after he had made the Molten Calf, and said,
These be thy Gods which brought Exodus 32. 4.
thee out of the Land of Egypt?


Par. But if Tithes (says T. E.) were a suitable maintenance, the Clergy now
does nothing for the People which can deserve so great a compensation, p. 329.


Min. That is, If his Worship may be Judge. But what I wonder do the
Impropriators for the People, which deserve so great a compensation? Besides,
it is all one to the People, whether they pay Tithes or no. As I shall show you
anon.


Par. You said that our only work is to explain the written word of God, and to
apply the same. From these words he concludes, that what you do for the People,
is not suitable to the reward of Tithes, p. 329, 330.


Min. Does not this Quaker (think you) instruct the People very graciously? As
if Tithes were of more real value to them, than the word of God explained and
applied?

But I must not let the abuse pass, which he has put upon me in this
Quotation. He so states my words, as his Reader must understand him, that I
make explaining and applying the word of God, the sole and the only work of a
Minister.

In the place He quotes I am treating of Infallible inspiration, together with
those extraordinary gifts which the Apostles had, and that they are now ceased:
and that we take Texts to show, that we have no other Doctrine to deliver, but
what is taken out of the written word of God, then I said, our only work is to
explain and apply the same: [only work] related to the particular which I was
there discoursing of, and not to the general Office of a Minister. Here you may
see how unconscionably the Quaker states my words, contrary to their plain
sense and meaning.


Par. I perceive he would flatter the People into a conceit, that you receive
the Tithes from their kindness and courtesy.


Min. Indeed the People do pay us our Tithes, but they do not give them; to pay
is one thing, to give another.

Should I tell T. E. that a certain Gentleman pays me a Rentcharge out of his
Estate, who reading this Quakers Book, may tell me that I do nothing for him,
which deserves so great a compensation; And though I owe the party all the
civility and kindness imaginable, suitable to his real worth and quality; yet
should I tell him, that I have no obligation at all to him, upon the account of
the Rentcharge he pays me, for it was none of his benefaction, but the
kindness of an Ancestor, who charged the Lands therewith, which if he had
dislik't, he might have let them alone. So the People pay us our Tithes; but
than it is no thanks to them, nor burden neither, seeing they must have paid
them, or what is as valuable, to some body else.


Par. You called Tithes a Freehold, this Nettles him extremely, because that
proves them a distinct property: But he desires you to show those Laws, to
produce those Statutes, that have Tithes a Freehold to the Clergy, p. 331.


Min. Who ever before this Quaker required a Statute to prove a Freehold? I
thought the Representives of Freeholders, with the concurrence of the King and
Peers had made those Statutes which he calls on me to produce: I pray who elect
the Parliament Men that serve for the County?


Par. The Freeholders.

Min. And did you never see Clergymens Votes entered at one of those Elections?


Par. Yes many a time.

Min. That very thing proves them Freeholders. So that you see T. E. is no
better a Lawyer than a Divine: For he should have gone to the Common Law, and
not to the Statute Law, to prove a Freehold.


Par. I find however, that He has consulted some Statutes for the payment of
Tithes, and discovers a Fundamental error in them, Namely, that Tithes should
be due to God and Holy Church; now the reason of the Law (says He) being taken
away, the Law it self must cease, p. 335.


Min. The Reason of the Law will prove a fundamental truth: For Tithes are due
to God and Holy Church, either by a Divine Right, or at least by a solemn
dedication of them:


Par. But this scurvy word [property] vexes him; For He says nothing less will
serve your turn, p. 336.


Min. No, nothing less will serve my turn.

Par. But then he enquires, where its vested: in whom (says He) does it lie?
is it in the Person of the Priest? no such matter: For a Man may be a Priest in
Orders, and yet have no power to demand Tithes, etc. So that the property (if
there were any) would lie in the Office, ibid.


Min. What Office does He mean by Office?

Par. He propounds the Question himself: And what is the Office? ibid.


Min. But how does He resolve it?

Par. Thus: It was to be sure a Popish Office, when Tithes were first paid to
it in this Nation, ib.


Min. Is this an Answer to a Question? What was then that Popish Office?


Par. That He does not tell us: but I suppose He means the Office of a Priest;
For He says, the Priest has nothing to do with Tithes, until by Presentation,
Institution, and Induction he is invested with Office. ibid.


Min. Wonderful Learned Nonsense! Yet I must tell him, that neither
Presentation, nor Institution, nor Induction, nor these altogether, invest a
Man with the Office of Priest. In short, he confounds himself by distinguishing
between the Person and the Office, as he calls it: and because this property
does not belong to either of them apart, therefore he concludes there is no
property at all, whereas the property belongs to the Person, as qualified by
Holy Orders, and put into actual possession by Institution and Induction.


Par. He thinks he has a clever Argument to prove you have no property in
Tithes: For (He says) to manifest the emptiness of your plea, you have no
property, until the Owner, by setting it out for you, has made you one. p. 337.


Min. Suppose a Landlord sets a Farm for 10 l. per an. Has He not a property to
such a Sum, though not to any particular Coin, till such time as he has
received it? So we have a property to a tenth, though not to such a particular
Sheaf, until such time as it is Tithed and set out for us.


Par. There is one argument more, which He seems wonderfully fond of: with
which He fills up many of his pages, (viz.) that you have the Tithe of the
Husbandmans labor, toil, sweat, care, charge, diligence, nay in one place He
thinks you lay claim to his understanding. p. 325.


Min. Whoever reaps the Tithe of T. E's. Understanding, will not find himself
much enriched by it: And I must tell the Quaker, that if Lands could bring
forth without labor, toil, charge, etc. and Tenants pay no more than they do,
the argument would look with more show of reason; but as the case stands, its a
perfect fallacy.

There wanted not those who suggested such stuff as this to the people, in the
days of the Prophet Malachi, as if they were squeezed and impoverished by the
payment of their Tithes; wherefore God calls on them to try, whether they
should be losers by it. Bringye (says He) all the Tithes into the storehouse,
that there may be meat in my house, and prove me now herewith, if I will not
open the windows of Heaven, and pour ye out a blessing, that there shall not be
room enough to receive it. So certainly those that pay their Tithes in a
conscientious regard to God, as consecrated to his Worship Da decimas and in
hoc ditescas. A Jewish Proverb.
and Service, may be sure to be no losers, and that God will open the windows
of Heaven, and give a blessing to their labor, toil, care, and diligence; will
bless their crops and their cattels, when in the mean time all sacrilegious
Robbers do trouble their own Houses, are Enemies to themselves and Families,
depriving themselves of Gods blessing, which only makes rich, being not unlike
to the Eagle in the Fable, who stole a Coal from the Altar, and carrying it to
her Nest, set therewith both her Young, and Nest on fire.

Tithes have been long settled in the Nation, and the Church's right to them
being antecedent to any Proprietors of Land, who bought their Estates liable to
such an Encumbrance, and consequently, had a proportionable deduction in the
purchase-Money, and so no injury to them; and if so, why should they grumble at
the payment of that which was never reckoned to them in the purchase?


Par. Yes (says T. E.) they purchased all that was not excepted out of the
purchase. p. 344.


Min. But Tithes were excepted out of the purchase: For every body knows that
they were excepted by the Law of the Nation, and therefore it would have been
impertinent to have excepted them in the the Body of the Purchase-Deed. But it
any Lands are to be sold, which are exempted from the payment of Tithes, than
to be sure the Purchaser shall hear of that in both his Ears, and for such a
convenience must pay to a Farthing.

A Friend of mine was lately concerned in the purchase of a little
Meadow-close, the strict Tithe of which was computed at 5s. per an. but the
Parson was bound up by a Modus or Composition of 2d. per an. payable at
Candlemas. Possibly you will say my Friend had a convenience here, that he paid
but 2d. instead of hay worth 5s. by the year: but then I must tell you, that
its no convenience at all, for his exemption from the Tithes in kind (to my
knowledge) cost him 5l. extraordinary in the purchase.

This is not a particular, but the general case of all England: For in matters
of contract and bargain the common rule is, tanti volet, quanti vendidi potest,
every thing is valued, for what it may be sold; and where men meet with
conveniences, they are made to pay for them; and where they meet encumbrances,
there they do call for proportionable Deductions: And the Landlords case
descends to the Tenant, who pays more or less, according to the Nature and
Quality of the thing He holds.


Par. But T. E. says, that it is questionable, whether a Tenant pays less Rent
in consideration of Tithes. p. 345.


Min. Suppose then two Farms of equal value in themselves. One pays Tithes, the
other pays none, and both these belong to one man: Now is any man so senseless
as to question, wether the Landlord does not value the Farm as highly which
pays Tithes, as the other which is exempted? T. E. may lead the Quakers by the
Nose (as He says I do my Parishioners) and persuade them that the Moon is made
of Green Cheese, and that two and three make not five, as thus to dispute
against demonstration, and question that which every body knows to be
unquestionable.


Par. However He Will undertake to demonstrate, that the abatement, which he is
supposed to have in his Rent, is not proportionable or answerable to the value
of the Tithes he pays. ibid.


Min. I perceive the Quaker begins to sneak, an abatement it seems there is,
but not such an abatement as is proportionated to the Tithes: But let us hear
his demonstration.


Par. Suppose (says He) a Landlord lets a Farm for 90 l. a year, which if it
were Tithe-free would yield an 100 l. The Tenant to pay his Rent, defray all
Charges, etc. must raise three times as much as his Rent comes to, which will
make 270 l. the tenth part of which is 27 l. So that if the Tenant should have
10 l. abated in his Rent because of Tithes, than does he pay 17 l. more than is
allowed in his Rent, p. 345, 346.


Min. Calls He this demonstration, when He has so stated the Case, that no
certain estimate can be made of the Tithes of such a Farm? A Farm of that value
consisting in Tillage may be worth (as He says) 27 l. per an. or a Farm of that
value consisting in Pasturage may not yield seven shillings a Year to the
Parson, for it may be eaten with Horses, and then T. E. tells us, that very
little, if any thing at all, is recoverable for Tithe, p. 340. Now is it likely
that a Landlord would take ten pounds for that which is worth 27 pounds, or
above 10 l. in consideration of a Tithe, when the Tenant pays not above seven
shillings, or nothing at all? and indeed the one is as probable as the other.
But to pass by his Case so fallaciously stated: I will ive him a real Case.

There is one, whom I could name, that sent to my self to purchase the interest
which He had in a certain Prebendal Lease, to which there belonged a Farm,
rented at 30l. per an. I made choice of two Neighbors to view the particulars
of that Farm, and to inform me, whether in their Judgment the Occupant had such
a Tack, as he might be able by his labor, toil, charge, etc. to maintain his
Family, and pay me my Rent: The Method they took to satisfy me herein, was to
know what rates other men in the same Village paid for their Farms, which being
computed and compared together, they found, that this Farm was not worth above
the annual Rent of 25l. according to the Rates that other men paid for the
Grounds they held of the like nature. This was objected to the Seller, who
returned this answer, that it was a mistake that this Farmer paid more than his
Neighbors: true it was, that he paid more Rent, but then he had a recompense
for it, being discharged from Tithes, which privilege the other Neighbors had
not, who accordingly had an abatement in their Rents. So that one Neighbor was
no better than another: He that paid Tithes had less Rent to pay, and He that
had no Tithes to pay was no better, seeing He paid the value of them in his
Rent. And had I gone on with the purchase, I had received no benefit by that
exemption, which I must have bought. And I do persuade my self there are
thousands of the like cases to be found.

But suppose a Quaker enjoy a Farm of 90l. per an. Rent, and the Landlord abate
10l. a year in consideration of Tithes. Or be it questionable whether He abate
any thing upon that consideration. I Will tell you what is not questionable, that
the Quaker will pay nothing, and will pay this neither to the Landlord nor
Priest, and so the one of them shall be sure to be Cozened by him.

Now if a Quaker which Farms 90l. per an. should say, Its true Landlord, I
should have paid thee 100l. but that thou deducts me ten pounds upon the
Consideration of Tithes: truly Tithes I dare not pay, but for the ten pounds I
have brought it to thy self, etc. But I would have T. E. to name me one Quaker
that ever did thus, then I shall have a better opinion of his Morals, than I
have of many of that Fraternity.


Par. However T. E. thinks that there is a great deal of difference between a
Landlord and a Priest in their dealing: The Landlord does not take, or desire
the whole increase and profit that is made upon his Farm. ibid.


Min. Nor the Priest.


Par. T. E. says the Landlords take no more for the Rent of his Land, than it
is supposed the Tenant may make double so much to himself. But when the
Merciless Priest comes etc. like the Sabeans and Chaldeans, He falls on, and
sweeps all away together. p. 347.


Min. Is not this a modest Quaker think you? If the Landlord do allow a part
upon the account of Charges: Tithes are part of that Charge which it seems is
allowed by the Landlord, and therefore no loss to the Tenant.

How compassionate does he make the Landlord? (would to God they were all truly
so) and how cruel and merciless does he represent the Priests? Now to show that
this is downright malice and envy, Let it be considered, that the greatest part
of the Tithes of England (to the great dishonor and sin of our Nation, may it
be said) are impropriate, and that the greatest Landlords in the Nation have
gotten away the Tithes from the Church. Now as kind as he makes them, do they
use the People better than the merciless Priests? do they say in T. E's
Language to the People: Neighbors though I claim the tenth part, yet seeing
you have been at the pains and charge to get it for me, I Will deal page 347.
no worse with you, than I do with my other Tenants, take one part, and leave
you two: so divide the Tithes into three parts, I Will be content with one of
them, and do you keep the other two for the pains and charge you have been at
in procuring it. Now is it usual with Impropriators thus to bespeak the People?
If not, then must He account for those soul slanders, which He has wickedly
cast upon the Clergy: As if they were merciless and cruel; Nay they only so.
From my heart do I pray to God to bring him to a sense, and to forgive him so
great a wickedness.


Par. I remember you acquainted me that the King has a great Revenue out of the
Tithes; namely, the First Fruits and Tenths, which you are disabled to
discharge, if your Tithes be withdrawn: so that the Quakers are in this point
as well Enemies to the King as the Clergy; and consequently to the Government
it self, which is supported by it. Now I do not find that T. E. answers the
Argument, but catches at a Phrase, that you should call the First Fruits and
Tenths one of the fairest Flowers belonging to the Crown. Herein (He says) you
are like the Crow, which is said to think her own Bird white, though others see
it to be black. And that no Flower can be fair in an English Crown, which was
taken out of a Popes Mitre, p. 355.


Min. Was there ever so dull a comparison? Does he call the First Fruits and
Tenths my Crow? if (forsooth) they must be a Crow, is it mine or the Kings? And
though it be plain that my words related not to the Kings Prerogative, but
Revenue; Yet seeig the Quaker will have it so, I shall tell you, that its very
true that this Flower stuck once in the Triple Crown, but then it was stole
from the English Diadem.

I confess the Pope did challenge the Supremacy over the Church and Clergy. The
firstfruits and Tenths, was a Homage, whereby the Clergy did own and
acknowledge that Supremacy: The Kings of England did themselves that right, as
to take the Supremacy to themselves, and the First Fruits and Tenths as an
acknowledgment thereof.

That you may understand what is included in the Supremacy, I shall acquaint
you with a Case. It was disputed in the Popish Schools, Whether a Clergy man
could be guilty of Treason against a Temporal Prince? and resolved in the
Negative, because Treason supposes a relation between a Sovereign and a
Subject: And a Clergyman being Subject to the Pope only, therefore could he not
be guilty of Treason against a Temporal Prince.

Now you see I hope what was included in the Popes claim to Supremacy, and upon
what account the First Fruits and Tenths are now paid, which if the King should
part withal, even in Ellwoods sense; He would part with the fairest Flower
belonging to His Crown.


Par. The Quakers used to call Ministers Hirelings for receiving their allotted
maintenances. And therefore in their usual way of railing, used to charge you
with selling God's word to the People. To this you said, that they may as well
say the Judges sells Justice, because they have an honorable allowance from
the Exchequer: He thinks the Parallel will not hold; you pretend to be
Ministers of Christ, whereas they pretend no higher, than to be Ministers of
State, p. 356.


Min. I thought that every Magistrate had been a Minister of God: St. Paul had
ill luck, that he had not our inspired Ellwood to correct him, when he said, He
is the Minister of God to thee for good, etc, and bears not the Sword in
vain. Romans 13, 1. 4.


We are Ministers of God, Magistrates are Ministers of Justice, and
consequently Ministers of God too: They are dispensers of Justice, we of the
word of God; may not then they with equal reason be said to sell Justice,
because they receive their maintenances, as we to sell the word of God, because
we receive our maintenaners? Is not the Analogy the same? Thus you see with
what pitiful shifts the Quaker eludes the truth, and deludes his ignorant Party.


Par. You have made me sufficiently sensible of T. E's many tricks and
fallacies, I shall peruse that Discourse (however) you referr me to, where I
perceive this Chapter of Tithes is handled at large: So that I shall give you
no further disturbance about this Subject: Now let me mind you, that whereas
the Quakers (to make Magistrates as useless as Ministers) used to declaim
against going to Law upon any occasion whatsoever, T. E. in contradiction to
his Brethren says, In civil Cases it is no injustice for a Man to recover his
due by Law, 361.


Min. Has the Quakers received some new dispensation from Heaven? If not, how
comes it to be lawful to go to Law now in civil Cases, when twenty years ago
the same thing was denied by them as unlawful? The Spirit then by which the
Quakers pretend to be inspired, either differs from it self, or is not the same
Spirit which the Quakers so lately pretended to.

Is not this enough to make you abandon for ever all thoughts of Quakerism,
when you find their Religion is not fixed, when we know not where to to have
them, nor how long to keep them in one mind?

One of them told me very lately, that I accused the Quakers falsely in saying
that they neglect to crave a blessing upon their Meat, which is now frequently
practiced among them. I am glad to hear of any Reformation among them, and
would to god they would leave off the rest of their fooleries: but if this be
their minds now, formerly they talked at another rate: what (said they) we
crave a Blessing when we go to meat? that is stinting the Spirit to a Meal, to a
Breakfast, a Dinner, or a Supper. That is, must the Spirit just come, when the
Stomach comes? And if the Quakers say Grace now at Meals; yet herein do they
take away the Reason of their Dumb Meetings. This is to show you what a
shifting People they are, and how unconstant they are to their own Assertions:
but to the case in hand:

It seems then T. E. will allow it now lawful to go to Law in civil Cases (how
unlawful soever it was before) and I suppose He was wary enough in asserting
this; because He cannot but be Conscious, that going to Law is a thing
frequently practiced by the Quakers. But then here I must desire them to take
notice, that as dishonorable as they say Oaths are to Christianity, yet they
will make their Appeals to Sessions and Assizes, bring Actions, etc. though
they know there can be no proceedings in any Court, but that both Witnesses and
Juries must give their Evidences and Verdicts upon Oath. If then it be truly
so, why will they be any occasion to bring a disgrace and reproach upon
Christianity?

Notwithstanding the Quakers talk so loudly against Oaths, many of them (to
have the benefit of Wills and Administrations) have taken Oaths, as I am able
to make out. An Attorney of great account and practice, told me lately, that
two Quakers (Clients of his) took their Oaths in an Answer to an Exchequer
Bill, and very formally too, put off their Hats, and kissed the Book. The late
Bishop of Lincoln, being either as Plaintiff or Defendant, concerned in a
Chancery Suit, a Quaker at a Commission, came very formally to swear against
him: One of the Commissioners (from whom I had the account) ask't him, How it
came to pass that he being a Quaker would swear? He told him, Thou know that
among Huntsmen it was never thought amiss to kill a Fox or Badger, by any
means; such being allowed no fair play, etc. leaving it to himself to make the
application.

You see then that it is lawful to go to Law in civil Cases, to engage others to
swear, and sometimes to swear themselves: As it interest and envy ought to take
place, though contrary to the Principles and Honor of Christianity.

God knows I mention none of these things out of any envious Principle, but to
discover to the Quakers the danger that they are in: From which Good God
deliver them for His blessed Names sake.


Amen.
The Conclusion.
Par. IN the conclusion of T. E's Book, having first falsely told His Reader,
that He had given a particular Answer to the most material passages in yours:
He gives you a warning from writing any more against the Quakers, for if you
do, you may expect him on your Bones again; For He says, that He no way
doubts, but that the Lord will enable him, or some of his Servants to vindicate
his truth, p. 363.


Min. God no doubt will take care of his truth, but if He enable T. E. to
write, we may be confident that it will be a Recantation of what he has
already writ. However let not him think that his idle Threats will discourage
me in duty of doing good.


Par. His main Business here, is to present His Reader with a collection of
some of your Phrases, which He calls Virulent Expressions, and which He says
your Academical Education has bestowed upon you. p. 364.


Min. Whether my Expressions were Virulent or no: This I am sure, here is a foul
and impudent Slander, in charging my Academical Education therewith: but
wherein does this Virulency appear?


Par. His first Instance is this, the Spirit of Quakerism and the Delusions of
it. ibid.


Min. This mind's me of an old Woman who corrected Her Maid for swearing,
because She called a Hen a Jade: Is not the Quaker think you, sadly put to it,
when (for want of matter) He falls upon such innocent expressions as these? I
must confess I could not forbear smiling, when I found not only a Fanatical
Jesuit, for a woeful bitter expression, but the whim in the pate put into his
Catologue: Pray do you remember upon what account it was spoken?


Par. Yes: For to vindicate Scripture from the idle fancies of some: You
supposed a Man troubled with a Vertigo in his Head, should say he was confident
the Earth turned round, you asked, whether it was the Earth or the Distemper in
the Brain that occasioned that misapprehension; so (said you) every Fanatic
will tell you that he has the Scripture on his side, in behalf of his opinions,
where is the fault? in the Scripture? or in the Whim in his Pate? Conf. p. 95,
96.



Min. You see then, how that expression concerned all Fanatics in general: and
is it not very pleasant, that (to prove me virulent) He should take [Fanatick]
to himself and Party?


Par. You said the Quakers were Cheats and Impastors, ibid.


Min. Its true I said it, but not before I first plainly proved it. You know
the Quakers pretend to immediate Teaching, and that they speak and write by the
infallible dictates of the Spirit of God: if so, then must all their works be
as authentic, and of equal Authority with the Scriptures themselves. Now
having discovered their gross ignorance in the interpretation and applicacation
of that saying of Jeremiah, The Priests hear rule by their means, How could I
be true to the Souls of Men in saying less? Had T. E. cleared his Brethren from
the imposture, He had effectually convicted me of virulency: But he is so far
from clearing them in this point (though their credit lay at stake) that he
sneaks off without taking any notice of it, as was observed before.

Should I forwarn a Traveller from coming in such place, and tell him that the
People there are Thieves and Robbers, if they were honest Men, or I know
nothing to the contrary, my fault would be very heinous; But if I knew them to
be such, it would be a breach of Justice and Charity to hide it from the
Traveller. Alas, what I said of the Quakers were not bitter expressions, but so
many sad and serious truths, and spoken out of a Principle of the truest
charity and kindness, to prevent their running headlong into eternal ruin and
destruction.

But if no such expressions can proceed but from a malevolent, crusty, waspish,
and virulent Principle, then let me ask my Friend Ellwood, whether there is not
such a People in the World, who use to call Ministers Dumb dogs, Hirelings,
Serpents, Baals Priests, and what not? If he will be pleased to consult the
works of His weighty Friend Hubberthorn, He may there collect a large.
Catalogue indeed of expressions, truly virulent and bitter: Or let me tell him
of another, whose memory (I suppose) is much dearer to him, I mean Ed.
Buroughs, who in his Works has these expressions, Reprobate, Child of
darkness, a Stranger to the Life, in the Sorcery and Witchcraft, Dragon,
Diviner, and many more such p. 29. 32.
like.

He that had seen no more of T. E's Book than the Conclusion, would (at the
first blush) take him for such a gentle, sweet, and humble Quaker, that one
would imagine that the Royal Society had been trying some Experiment upon him,
and that they had taken out the very Spleen out of his Side: If this be so in
truth, Those Gentlemen must excuse me, if I tell them in plain terms, that they
have proved themselves no good Artists, in that they have left the main matter
behind: Therefore I shall give you some of his expressions, and do you judge
whether they be Virulent, or no: The Author of that book, partly through
Ignorance, but principally through Envy: in the first page of his Preface. Ay
but might the Parishioner have said, He told me that I must not be covetous,
yet of all my acquaintance I know none more Covetous than He: He told me I must
not be drunk, yet have I seen him so often: He told me I must live chastely, yet
He himself was incontinent, and so he goes on, p. 23. The whole Book shows him
big with envy, p. 25. Bishop Gauden was as hold, and no less blind than
himself, p, 171. His envy and evil nature p. 210. My greedy Adversary, p. 286.
This Priest like a saucy and unthankful Son, p. 279. And when the merciless
Priest comes, p. 347. To omit diverse others, in this very conclusion, This Man's
malevolent Tongue. So that I shall not imitate him in concluding with a saying
of Cornelius Tacitus's, but with a much better Author, namely, St. Paul in Romans
2. 2. For wherein thou judge another, thou condemnest thy self, for thou that
judge do the same things.


FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 4. Line 20. read controversial, p. 18. l. 19. r. people, ibid. l. 24. r.
ordinary, p. 27. l. 30. r. ingenuously, p. 32. l. 1. r. bespatter, p. 33. l. 3.
for or r. our. p. 47. l. 2. r. discourse, p. 52. l. 1. dele sons. p. 56. l. 32.
r. Mile-stone, p. 59. l. 3. r. word, p. 60, l. 24 after how add much, p. 75. l.
33. after times add did express themselves by, p. 76. l. 7. r. fightings, p.
80. l. 24. r. ingenuous, p. 82. l. 20. r. mis-sta^e, p. 107. l. 10. r. (...),
p. 114. l. 31. after is add not, p. 120. l. 4. dele not, p. 129. l. 7. r.
Scriptures, p. 134. l. 25. r. Ecclus. 27. 11. p. 140. l. 11. r. Corruptible, p.
147. l. 21. r. abominations, p. 150. marg. r. cap 3. p. 160. l. 3. for 104. r.
94. ibid. l. 22. d. ^e, p. 166. marg. r. (...), ibid. for and r. et, p. 167.
marg. r. Sen. Ep. 96, p. 170. l. 11. r. (...), p. 173. marg. r. (...). ibid. r.
(...), p. 183. l. 15. r. (...), p. 184. l. 1. after But add to. p. 188. l. 12.
d. his, p. 192. l. 22. after before add p. 169, 177. p. 193. marg. r. in 9.
Pr^cept. p. 197. l. 4. for satisfy. r. falsify, p. 199. l. 6. for you r. your,
p. 204. l. 19. after Law add (...), p. 207. l. 14. r. hands, p. 211. l. 9. d.
To etc. p. 212. r. (...), p. 219. l. 18. r. sense, p. 223. l. 25. r. (...), p.
224. l. 30. r. not, p. 225. l. 33. after Ceremonious add but, p. 227. l. 12. r.
a Curse, p. 238. l. 28. r. Ancient. p. 250. l. 17. after Oaths add i. e.
against solemn Oaths taken with due circumstances, p. 251. l. 8. r. falsely,
ibid. l. 12. r. (...), p. 252 l. 11. for yet r. tha^, ibid. l. 20. r. (...),
ibid. l. 22. d. by, ibid. l. 25. r. (...). p. 259. l. 23. r. slight. p. 265. l.
28. and p. 266. l. 8. r. Precedents, p. 275. l. 21. before In r. Par. p. 277.
l. 16. r. from about the year of Christ 700, till about the year 1400.; -- p.
286. l. 4. r. It Is certain, that the best Quaker of them all, had he not read,
studied, conversed, etc. would have been as ignorant as --


