A few QUERIES FOR Thomas Moor the Elder, Thomas Moor the Younger, John Horn,
or for any of them, or any other to answer.
1. Does not Christ remain in the Heavens until the restitution of all things?
And whether any man shall be restored into the state Adam was in before he fell,
while upon the Earth? Answer. 2. And if he remain in the Heavens til all things
be restored, by what does he restore? Is it by his Light, Power and Spirit
within people, seeing that man and woman their inward man must be renewed, and
fin is in man that defaceth man and woman? 3. And is not the same that did
descend, did ascend, that rose, that death and bonds could not hold? 4. What is
it that Christ does restore? Is it some thing within man from Christ? 5. And is
Christ ascended above all Principalities, Thrones and Dominions? And does he
reign now until he has made his Enemies his Footstool? 6. By what does he
judge, fubdue, put down, condemn and rule? Is it not by his Power within, and
Word within, and Light within, seeing darkness is within? 7: Do thou own the
body of Christ that suffered at Jerusalem, to be risen? And did that flesh see
any corruption? Or was his blood corruptible? 8. Does that body remain in the
Heavens til all things be restored? Is not Christ the flesh the Saints must
eat, and the blood the Saints must drink, that is to say, the blood of Christ?
9. And did not some sit in Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, in the Apostles
days, and were of his flesh and bones? 10. And whether does Christ bring his
Church above all Principalities and Powers, into the Heavens, to be of his
body, and he to be their Head? 11. The body that came to do the will of God, was
not that Christ's body? Is he risen, or no? Was he offered up, or no? 12. Did
Christ's body end the outward offerings in the Law, and before the Law? and was
not part of the Tithe a Heave Offering? And can thou either pay of receive
Tithes, and own Christ come in the flesh, and he offered up? 13. Did he end the
Priesthood that took T^thes? Did he end the Law by which the priesthood w^^
made that took Tithes? Did he end the Commandment that gave Tithes? 14. Wast
thou made a Minister by Christ? Have thou received a gift from him that
ascended on high, for the Work of the Ministry? Or is the Work of thy Ministry
from Books? 15. Have thou heard God's voice, and Christ's voice immediately
from Heaven, yea or nay? 16. Have thou the same Spirit that Christ and his
Apostles had, yea or nay? 17 Do thou bring people out of the state of Adam
and Eve, out of the fall, up to the state they were in before they fell, and so
to the measure of the stature of Christ that never fell? 18. Shall any man be
perfect here upon the Earth, and made free from the body of sin and death, and
come to the state that Adam and Eve was in before they fell, yea or nay? If
not, which of these three states do thou keep them in, that is to say, the
state of Adam and Eve in the fall, with his sons and daughters, or in the state
of Adam and Eve before they fell, or in the state of Christ that never fell!
19. Whether thou keep the people in the perfect state, or in an imperfect
state? Answer. 20. Art thou a Papist? And do thou own a Purgatory to be
cleansed in after death? Or where must men be cleansed if not upon the Earth?
Is there any repentance in the Grave? Does the tree lie corrupt as it falls
corrupt, yea or nay? 21. Was all the types, figures and shadows given to man
after he fell? And is Christ the end of all? Or is there any shadow in him? 22.
Does man leave all the shadows, that comes to live in him, to wit, Christ? 23.
Is Bread, Water, Wine, Christ? Or are they to put people in remembrance of
Christ, or a show of his death till he come? 24. And was people to take this
till Christ came within them, or to take it to the end of the world? If so, how
were they to dye with Christ, and come into death with him, of whose death they
took the Bread and Wine in remembrance? 25. Whether or no to dye with Christ,
and be in death with him, is not a nearer thing then to take Bread and Wine to
put them in remembrance of his death? 26. Must people be buried with Christ
while they are upon the Earth, after they are dead with Christ? Answer. 27.
Must people arise with Christ while they are upon the earth? and if they be
risen with Christ, or do rise with Christ, then are they not to seek those
things that be above? 28. Are not figures, shadows, types, bread, water, wine,
are not these things below? And if so, what are these things we are to seek,
that come down from above? 29. Whether the Scriptures be the Word of God, or
the Words of God? Or what the word Scripture signifies? 30. Art not thou one of
them that keep people always under teaching, that they may be always paying
thee? if not, how many have thou brought to that state that they need no man to
teach them? as in 1 John 2.11. 31. Wast not thou one of them that sprinkled
children for money, and so called it Baptism, and bad them repent afterward?
32. Do the Scriptures say, Baptize and teach, or Repent and be baptized? Or
does it say, Teach and baptize, or Baptize and teach? 33. Whether or no the
honor that the Pharisees sought was not a civil honor, as people seek now, that
stood in some outward things? and what was the honor that came down from above?
And what is the honor that God will lay in the dust? 34. And what is the honor
that Peter speaks of, which was to all men? whether was it putting off the hat?
whether Daniel and the three children put off their hats to Nebuchadnezar? 35.
Whether Thou to a single person is not the pure language, according to Bible,
Accidence, or Grammar, yea or nay? 36. Is the Church of Christ such a people as
are redeemed from the Earth, without spot, wrinkle, blemish, or any such thing?
37. Are they that plead for spots, wrinkles, blemishes, and the body of death
for the term of life, Ministers of Satan, or Ministers of Christ. 38. Art not
thou one of those fools that the Apostle had to deal with in 1 Cor. 15. that
was questioning with him with what manner of bodies the dead should rise, not
understanding the corn of wheat? 39. What are those shadows that fly away when
the day appears? Or whether the day be attainable while men are on the earth,
yea or nay? 40. Whether John was a true Witness that came to bear witness of
the true Light that came to enlighten every man that comes into the world, and
to as many as receive him, he gives power to become the sons of God? 41.
Whether any come to Christ, or be the sons of God, but such as come to the
light that John came to bear witness of, John 1.? If John was a true Witness,
are not you all false Witnesses that have, and do bear witness against Christ
that enlighteneth every one that comes into the World, who say the Light is
not sufficient? 42. What is that that gives the knowledge of the glory of God
in the face of Jesus? Is it in man, or without man? 43. Is the Grace of God
sufficient to teach and bring salvation? And if so, what will become of the
Hireling with his club and bag? 44. Whether all men be not enlightened that
through the Light they may believe, and so become the children of Light? 45.
And whether all be not enlightened before they be children of Light and
believe? who not believing in the Light, is not the Light their condemnation?
Joh. 3. 46. Whether or no has every man the Spirit of God? or whether that
Spirit be not the Spirit of God, that reproves the World of righteousness and
judgment, etc. and leads the Saints into all truth? And whether that be
sufficient, yea or nay? And if this be sufficient, what are those Leaders that
cause people to err? Whether were not they such as are Hirelings, that preach
for wages, and divine for money, and bear rule by their means, and seek for the
Fleece, and their gain from their quarters, and handfuls of Barley, and pieces
of bread, and such as are called of men Masters, and stood praying in the
Synagogues, which Christ cried woe against? Matthew. 23. Jer. 5. Ezekiel. 34. Micha
3. Jer. 23. Ezekiel. 12.13, 14. 2 Pet. 2. Isaiah 5.6. 47. Did God make thee an
Overseer of the Flock or men? If God did, whether is it better to obey God, or
man? Can thy mouth be opened by God, and stopped by men? 48. Art not thou the
Hireling that is fled because thou were an Hireling, and leaves the flock when
the Wolf comes, and so cares not for the flock, and manifests that the Flock is
not thine own? If God did make thee an Overseer, then thou art disobedient to
him, and let thy flock go whither they will. 49. Whether thy Religion and
Profession be not a Religion for Summer, and while the Sun shines, whose flight
is in the Winter, and flies from it in a storm and tempes^? 50. And what is
that Religion that is not worth suffering for? Is it not below the Monks that
will suffer for a Relic or an Image, and not in love, but in envy, which all
suffering is nothing that is not in love? 51. Is not this the day that God is
making the wise men and Diviners mad? Is not the Sun set and gone down upon you
Prophets and Diviners? the darkness is come upon you that may be selt: What
now, have you no vision from God, that you are all silent, and your mouths
stopped? What, are all your Seers ashamed? and what are ye Diviners confounded?
What, are your lips all covered, that you have no answer from God? Read Mich.
3. And see what a day you had of eating the flesh of Gods people, and fleying
off their skins, and crying peace when people put into your mouths: And now is
not the day of the Lord come upon you, that has been told you before? 52.
Whether is that Light that John came to bear witness of, John 1. a made Light,
a created Light, or a natural conscience? 53. Have you not been treacherous to
God, ye that call your selves Ministers, and treacherous to all your promises,
to your selves and others? or was not all your Ministry for your mouths and
bellies? And have you not betrayed both mouth and belly?
IT is not much above a hundred years since all were Papists in England and
Germany; and so when there was dissent from the Pope in England, and the King
turned from him, and then set up the Common Prayer Book, then the Jesuits
turned Common. Prayermen, and so Common Prayer men continued a good while; and
so then when Common-prayer-men went down, and the Presbyterians went up, then
the Priests turned Presbyterians; and when the Baptists and Independents went
up, then many of the Priests turned Baptists and Independents, and then
Presbyterians, Baptists and Independents josled one against another about the
Church-Faith and Directory; in the mean time crept up Common-Prayer-men from
under them, and got over them, and throws down both Church-Faith and Directory,
and then a great many of Baptists, Independents and Presbyterians turned
Common-Prayer-men again; and all this while they kept out black Coats; for the
Pope has several Tribes, white Friars, gray Friars; black Coats are Jesuits;
so when the Jesuits turned from the Pope to the Common-Prayer-men, and them
that set it up, they kept the black coat to distinguish their Order and Tribe;
and so when they turned from thr Common Prayer to the Presbyterians, they kept
black coat; and so when they turned Baptists and Independents, they kept black
coat: And though I Jesuit turned from the Mass to the Common Prayer, and so a
Presbyterian, a Baptist, an Independent, I was but subject to the Higher Power;
and so if they set up Popery again, I am ready, I kept my black Coat, and my
Tithes, that distinguish my Order all this while; for you know there are white
Friars and gray Friars; black Coats are Jesuits, and that is my Order that I
had from my Father the Pope.

G. F.

THE END.

