CONCERNING Daily Sacrifies and Offerings.
THe Priests under the Law daily offered Sacrifices; but Christ our High Priest
need not daily, as those Priests, offer Sacrifice for his own Sin, and then for
the Peoples, ( Heb. 7.16, 28.) For Christ did once offer up himself, who is
made, not after the Law of a carnal Commandment, but after the power of an
endless Life, who is set down at the Right Hand of God, and so cannot be
offered as an Offering and Sacrifice any more, who abolished the changeable
Priesthood, with all its Offerings and Sacrifices, by the Sacrifice and
Offering of himself once for all.

And so it is said, I am come to do the will of God; to take away the first,
namely Priesthood and Covenant-Offerings, and establish the Second, by the
which Will we are Sanctified through the Offering of the Body of Jesus, (Mark)
Christ's Body is offered up once for all, Heb. 9.10.

And so Christ is Entered into Heaven it self, not that he should offer himself
often, as the Highpriests did, for then must Christ often have Suffered, but
he has put away Sin by the Sacrifice of himself once for all; so Christ was
once offered to bear the Sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall
he appear the Second time without Sin unto Salvation, as in Heb. 9.25, 26, 28.

So here you may see Christ is not often offered up as a Sacrifice, or an
Offering for the Sins of the whole World, then had he often Suffered: But after
Christ had offered up one Sacrifice for Sins for ever, he sat down at the
Right Hand of God; And by this one Offering Christ has Perfected forever them
that are Sanctified. So here you may see, it is one Offering, and one
Sacrifice, once for all, not offering Christ many times, nor often.

And in Hebrews, 12.12, 14. The Priests under the Law, they offered Offerings,
but Christ offered up himself, who had power to lay down his Life, and take it
again, so it was not Priests that offered Christ up; for after Christ had
offered up one Sacrifice and one Offering for Sins, by which Offering and
Sacrifice He perfected forever them that are Sanctified, and sat down at the
Right Hand of God, who ever Lives to make Intercession for his People.

And Christ says, Offerings and Sacrifices thou would not, but a Body have
thou prepared me, to do thy Will; by the which Will we are Sanctified through
the offering up of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all, as before, and so he
did not often offer up his Body as a Sacrifice for all, for then must he often
have Suffered, as before; but now once (mark once) has he appeared to put away
Sin by the Sacrifice of himself, and not by offering or sacrificing of himself
often; for as it is said, Christ having somewhat to offer, that is, he offered
up himself, his Body, once for all Sins, and the daily sacrifice, and made an
end of the daily Sacrifices, as in Dan. 9. Wherein you may see he caused the
daily Sacrifices and Oblations to cease, when he was cut off, not for himself,
but for the People, who by one Offering and Sacrifice of himself, ended the
daily Offerings and Sacrifices. And therefore all are to look unto him the one
Offering and Sacrifice once for all.

David says, The Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit, and a broken and
contrite Heart, and these are the Sacrifices That God will not despise, Psalm.
51.1^. And David said, Let my Prayer be set before thee as Incense (mark as
Incense) and the Lifting up of my Hands as the evening Sacrifice (mark as the
Evening Sacrifice) Now here you may see, David saw beyond the outward Offerings
and Sacrifices, for he desires that his Prayer might be as Incense, and his
lifting up hands as the Evening Sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2. And Solomon says, That
the Sacrifice of the Wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the Prayers of
the Vpright-hearted is his Delight, Prove. 15.8.

Here you may see, you that are Wicked, your Prayers and Sacrifices are not
accepted, And to do Justice and Judgment is more acceptable to the Lord then
outward Sacrifices, Prove. 21.3. So here you may see, it is not offering
Sacrifice only with a company of words, nor outward things, but a practizing
Judgment and Justice.

And Christ says to the outward Jews, that were in their outward Offerings and
Sacrifices, and their long Prayers; Christ said unto them, I will have Mercy
and not Sacrifice, and bid them go learn what that means: For the Lord said,
I desired Mercy, and not Sacrifice, and the knowledge of God more then burnt
Offerings, Mat. 9.13. Hos. 6.6. So here you may see Mercy and the knowledge of
God is beyond outward Offerings and Sacrifices.

For as the Apostle says, Christ has Loved us, and has given himself an
Offering and Sacrifice for us to God, for a sweet smelling Savor, Ephe. 5.2.
So you may see Christ has given himself an Offering and Sacrifice for us to
God, and the Saints now do not offer up Christ, who has already offered up
himself (mark himself) but they are to present their Bodies a Living Sacrifice,
holy acceptable to God, which is their reasonable Service. This the Apostle
writ to the Church of Christ the Romans, which same is the Duty of all
Christians.

And the Apostle says to the Church of Christ the Hebrews, by him (namely
Christ) Let us offer the Sacrifice of praise to God Continually, that is the
fruit of our Lips, giving thanks unto his Name, and do good and Communicate,
for with such Sacrifices God is well pleased: For even Christ our Passover is
Sacrificed for us, as in 1 Cor. 5.7.

And Peter, in his General Epistle, told the Church of Christ, that they were
built up A Spiritual Household, a holy Royal Priesthood, to offer up Spiritual
Sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, (mark by Jesus Christ to God.)

Now all the true Christians are a Royal Priesthood, and a spiritual Household,
and with the Spirit they are to offer up spiritual Sacrifices; these are they
that are accepteble to God by Jesus Christ in the new Testament and new
Covenant; so the Apostle did not say they should offer up Jesus Christ, but
Offered Sacrifice to God by Jesus Christ; for Christ had offered up himself
once for all.

And you may see how the Jews, when they forsook the Lord, they joined
themselves to Baal Peor, and did Eat the Sacrifice of the Dead, which was
forbidden of the Lord, and provoked him to Anger, that his Plague broke out
upon them, as in Psalm. 106.28, 29.

G. F.


