A Distinction between the Phanatick Spirit, and the Spirit of God; and the
Fruits of each Spirit AS FOLLOWS. The Fruits of the Phanatick Spirit is,
Rage, Fury, Madness, Foolishness: And the Fruits of the Spirit of God is, Love,
Joy, Peace, Gentleness, Righteousness, true Judgment; and gives the true
Distinction, and the true Understanding. And an Antidote, which is to stop and
lay the Poison, which has been received and drunk in by People.
FRIENDS,
ARe not the Phanatick people such, as from the Spirit of God be degenerated,
and so blasted, and such, as be full of fury, that worships and falls under bad
Spirits, and lives in the invented Worships, and in their imaginations; and so
with it Phanatick, and in it full of fury, mad, rage, blind zeal, that
persecute, and murder, and kill, and banish all that stand in his way, and
falls not to that Spirit; against such his fury goes, and madness, who is like
a blasted withered Tree, that the life is gone out of; which has not the same
spirit that the Apostles had, and Christ; which thousands of Christians,
Professors and Teachers, it is the Testimony that they bear, and have born to
people in this age and generation, That they have not the same Spirit and Power
that the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles had; being full of rage, fury and
madness, that would kill and slay, and persecute all before them, that follow
not what their mad, blind, furious, blasted knowledge and wisdom has set up,
which the spirit of God does blast, and all their Religion and Worship. And so,
are not all these Phanatick that are so full of Fury and Rage, that do confess
they have not the same Spirit that the Prophets and Apostles had? And are not
all they Phanatick that persecute with fury and rage about Church, Worship and
Ministry, seeing the Apostle said, They wrestled not with flesh and blood; and
their weapons were not carnal but spiritual? Are not all these carnal weaponed
Professors, Teachers, Pastors, Elders, Disciples, Fanatic, with their carnal
Weapons, which wrestle with flesh and blood with carnal Weapons, and have not
had the spiritual, which the Apostles had? And are not they again Fanatic,
that in their fury and rage, have persecuted thousands because they could not
put into their mouths, and give them filthy lucre, prisoning such persecuting
such, which they do no work for, in their mad fury, and foolish rage? Again,
are not they Fanatic, that be not in the spirit the Prophets and Apostles were
in, and do not give heed to the Spirit of Christ which should save men's lives,
nor give heed to the Apostles Spirit, the Spirit of God, which had spiritual
Weapons; but give heed to seducing spirits, the spirit of the Devil, who was
murderer from the beginning; and so in fury, rage, with carnal Weapons, Cains
Clubs, wicked Fists, unholy hands, and the Jews whips, will persecute, prison,
and banish about Church, Worship and Religion? Is not this contrary to the
Apostles Spirit, and Christ's Spirit? And is not this the Fanatic spirit? And
will not the Spirit of God blast this? And are not all they that are gone out
of the Spirit of the Apostles, gone out into Fancies, Whimsies, and
foolishness; and there he rages in his foolishness which he has invented, out
of the Spirit in which God is worshipped, in which the spiritual Weapons are
found. All them that dwell in the Spirit of God, are not Fanatic, but have the
spiritual Wisdom and Understanding; which Spirit of God was before the spirit
of Fanatic was, foolish, mad rage, fancy, fury, which the Spirit of God is out
of, and blasts it: And who are they that rage in the Temples, rage in the
furiousness, foolishness? And what Spirit do they fall down to, and worship?
And when had they a command of God to do so, to persecute, or to stir up any
people to furiousness, which shows the folly of that Wisdom, these that bears
this Testimony to the World, that they have not the same spirit and power that
the Prophets and Apostles had, yet they be teaching the Prophets and Apostles
words, and be maintained as Teachers of the Spirit, and confess they have not
the same spirit, but are full of fury, foolishness, and rage, persecution and
madness against such as are in the same spirit and power that the Prophets,
Christ and the Apostles were in; these be the Fanatics: But the man of God is
moek, (and not furious and foolish, which is Fanatic) and his body is the
temple of God: All the Fanatics in the Pulpits, their Temples, their rage, and
their fury appears, does it not? Was it not the Priests that raged in the
invented temples, which fell before such like spirits to raging? And are not
Jews, Gentiles, and Apostate Cristians raging in the temples? the Jews raging
in that which was commanded, and the Apostate Christians in that which they
have invented? And are not they Fanatic that will set up Temples, Tithes,
Priests, which Christ came to end; and invent others which they have no command
from God for? And is not a furious, foolish, mad, persecuting spirit, Fanatic,
that would have honor before his humility? And does not the furious, foolish
spirit, worship the furious, foolish, devilish spirit, out of truth? Or does
any foolish, furious, which is a blasted spirit, in that spirit, worship God in
the spirit? Are not all in the Phanatick spirit that are not in the same power
the Prophets and Apostles were in? Can they live out of a raging spirit,
foolish spirit, furious spirit, Phanatick, heady, mad zeal, that be out of the
spirit the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles were in? Are they Phanatick
spirits that are in the same spirit that the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles
were in? Will not they that be out of it, call them so? And was not Saul in the
Phanatick spirit when he run up and down with his Packet of Letters against
the Christians that separated from the Jews Temples? And are not all the
Priests and Professors in Christendom, the furious, foolish, mad raging
Phanatick spirits, against those that separate from their Diana, who run with
their Pacquets of Letters from Court to Court, and from Session to Session, to
Parliaments and to Kings, to have people prisoned, whipped, banished, put to
death about Church, Worship and Religion, and Maintenance, which have not the
spiritual Weapons? Whether the people of God (in scorn called Quakers) the
elect before the World began, who are come into the meekness and patience
(before Phanatick was) which wrestles not with flesh and blood, and carnal
weapons, who lift up their hands against no man, whether these be Phanaticks?
or those that be full of rage, madness and fury, that persecute and prison so
many for maintenance, for whom they do no work? Whether this be not the
Phanatick spirit that works in the Apostate Christians, with their Racks, and
prisons, and Banishments, Judas company, with swords and staves against Christ;
and the Jews company, with their stones against Stephen, that denied the
Temple, and witnessed the substance? Is this the Spirit of Christ, the Prophets
and Apostles, or the Phanatick spirit; judge your selves, who are the Phanatick
spirits, and where they be? Is not the Phanatick spirits furious spirit, a mad
spirit, a foolish spirit, a blasted spirit? Are not they that be inspired with
this, inspired with a Phanatick spirit, who are madly, and ragingly carried on,
not meekly, nor in the faith that works by love, that overcomes the fury, mad
and foolish? And are not all they that have not the same spirit that the
Prophets and Apostles had, (which had the spiritual Weapons) inspired with a
Prophetical fury, mad, foolish, blasted spirit, who madly, ragingly run on with
their carnal weapons against them that have the spiritual weapons? And are they
which cry down deceit and wickedness in Rulers, Magistrates, Professors,
Priests and people, which was the work of the Prophets and holy men of God, who
had the Spirit of God, are they Phanaticks that cry against such things now,
which be in the same spirit that the Prophets and Apostles were in?

Has not the furious, foolish, Ragingly, madly run on, the Phanatick spirit
amongst Protestants and Papists since the Apostles days, since they lost the
Apostles spirit, that meekness, patience, and temperance and love is lost
amongst them?

But the fruits of the Phanatick spirit, which is Fury, Rage, Persecution,
madness, and Foolishness, is found amongst them, and may be gathered, so that
it is not the people called Quakers that are the Phanaticks, but the foolish
mad furious Priests and professors, that have not the same Spirit that the
Prophets and Apostles had. Are not they the Fanatic spirits that holds up the
corruptions in Magistrates, Teachers, Priests, and Professors; and such
practices, that Christ, and the Prophets, and the Apostles cried against? And
are not all they the Fanatic spirits, that deny the order of the true Church;
which is, If any thing be revealed to another that sits by, let the first hold
his peace, that all may learn, and be comforted; For the Spirits of the
Prophets are subject to the Prophets; and are not they the Fanatic spirits
that denies this Order? or, are they the Fanatic spirits that practice this
order? Or, are they the Fanatic spirits whose weapons are spiritual, not
carnal, and wrestles with the powers of darkness, and the spiritual
wickednesses; and not with flesh and blood, and the creatures, about the
Church, Worship, and Religion, Ministry and Maintenance? Are not they the
Fanatic spirits that wrestles with flesh and blood with carnal weapons, about
the Church, Worship, and Religion, Ministry and Maintenance? Can any wrestle
with his carnal weapons about Religion, Church, Worship, and Ministry, but he
must be in the rage and fury, foolishness, and a Fanatic blasted spirit, which
be out of that Spirit that has the spiritual weapons? Was there ever any since
the days of the Apostles, that did persecute about Church, worship, Ministry,
and Religion, but they were in the Fanatic spirit, which is fury, mad, rage,
foolishness, which is judged and blasted with the Spirit of God? And are not
all they that quenches the Spirit, that checks and reproves them for sin, that
they have done, and do not turn from the sin, Do not they rise up in the
foolish, furious, mad-raging- Fanatic spirit, which is to be blasted, that
quenches the Spirit of God in themselves, and vex it, and grieves it, in which
they should worship God, and pray, and sing, and be sober? Are not all they
that meddle with Religion, Church, worship, Ministry and Maintenance, with
carnal weapons, the Phanatick spirits, seeing the Apostle said their weapons
were spiritual, not carnal, with which they meddled with the Church, Ministry
and worship, who preached down the Jews, and the carnal weapons, and their
types, and figures, and shadows, and priesthood, and Law, and first Covenant,
and Temple, which was held up by them with their carnal weapons; they who were
Ministers of the Spirit, with spiritual weapons, wrestled with the Jews that
had carnal weapons, and the things aforementioned? Are not all the Christians
that wrestles with carnal weapons about the Church, worship, and Religion,
Ministry and maintenance, apostatized from the Apostles, whose weapons were
spiritual; and fallen into the Fanatic, furious, mad ragious, foolish, blasted
spirit, with weapons that be carnal, not spiritual; are not these things so,
yea or nay?

It is a dangerous thing, to publish that thing to the Nation, that people
cannot understand what it is, for that may let up Fanatic spirits that do not
understand; For does a foolish, ragious, mad spirit understand? and who is more
confident then a foolish, ragious, mad spirit, wilful, wicked in persecution
and blind zeal? and who does he hate more then them that be in the spirit and
power of God that comprehends and does understand the Fanatic and his fruit,
which our days every day more and more shall show it, which comes from those
trees that bears not the good fruit, which tree and fruit, against it the
arrows of the Lord do shoot, and against it his hand is turned, that is into
the fire to be cast and burned.

Is not all drunken spirits, gluttonous spirits, swearing spirits, cursing
spirits, adulterous spirits, covetous spirits, proud ambitious spirits,
high-minded, puffed up with pride and ambition; full of fury, rage, and a
persecuting spirit, like a distracted man, whose countenance changed like Cain,
and visage with fury like Nebuchadnezar, and persecuting as mad as Saul, and as
mad as ever the Apostate Christians have been since the Apostles days? And is
not this a Fanatic spirit, and the fruits of the fanatic spirit, mad, wrath,
distracted, like Herod, Cain, false-prophet, Devil, beast, Antichrist, false
Christ, Wolf, false-Church, which has drunk the blood of the Saints, out of
truth and meekness. And have not we tasted and handled, and seen and known this
poisonous Fanatic spirit?

Was not Saul in a Fanatic spirit, when he was made, and persecuted? Was he in
a Fanatic spirit when he confessed this, and denied carnal weapons, but
confessed spiritual? Which of these spirits is Fanatic, and which of these
spirits is now Christendom found in? In the spirit of Saul a mad man, a
persecuter, with his packet of Letters. Or in the spirit that wrestles not with
flesh and blood, and wrestles not with carnal weapons, but with spiritual?
Wheather this be the Fanatic spirit, yea, or nay?

G. F.

London, Printed for Robert Wilson, at the Sign of the Black-spread-Eagle and
Windmill, in Martins Le Grand. 1660.


