AN EPISTLE From the People in scorn called QUAKERS To all People upon the
Earth, to read over; That they may see what the People called QVAKERS hold
Concerning God, Concerning Christ, Concerning His Death, Concerning His
Resurrection, Concerning His Blood, Concerning His Offering, Concerning
Redemption, Concerning Salvation, Concerning Justification, Concerning Faith
and Hope.


Printed in the Year, 1668.

An Epistle to all People upon the Earth to read over, that they may see what
the people called Quakers hold concerning God, Christ, etc.
ALL what is written of in the Law, the Prophets and the Gospel in the new
Testament, and before the Law concerning God, Christ, and his Birrh, and
Miracles, and Sufferings, and his Resurrection, we own; and all the Promises,
as the first Promise, the Seed of the Woman shall bruise the Serpents head,
which is Christ Jesus; and how that he through death destroyed Death, and the
power of death, the Devil; and how that Christ being the Priest made higher
then the Heavens, after the order of Melchisedeck, ends the Levitical
Priesthood; and how that he by one offering offered himself once for all, ends
all the Jews Offerings that were typical of him, (figures and shadows) and put
down the Sacrifices; and Christ by his Blood which cleanses from all sin,
whose Blood was shed for all men, puts an end to the blood of Bulls and goats,
which was to be offered and sprinkled upon the Jews, which Blood of Christ
every one must feel sprinkling their Consciences from dead works to serve the
Living God; and also Christ's Righteousness, we own; who is the the Lord our
Righteousness, by which self righteousness, man's righteousness, which is as
filthy rags, is denied; and the righteousness of the Law among the Jews, the
Righteousness of Christ ends: and people are to be saved by it; and not that
people should live in their sins, and live in their own unrighteousness, nor in
the righteousness of the works of the Law of the Jews; and not that People
should profess Christ, and live in their own unrighteousness and sins, and die
in them; for Christ came to take away sin, and to make an end of sin and finish
transgression; and every one that professes Christ, and names his Name should
depart from iniquity, and not live in it; for none can call him Lord but by the
holy Ghost: then how can people call him Lord by the unclean spirit? and he
that has not the Spirit of Christ is none of his; and God so loved the Word
that he gave his only begotten son into the World, that whosoever believes in
him should not perish, but have everlasting Life; and Christ is the Light of
the World, and he does enlighten every one that comes into the World, and
says, believe in the Light, that you may become children of the Light: and the
Faith of Gods Elect we own, which purifies the heart, and gives victory over
the World, and access to God, without which none can please God, which faith
justifies and sanctifies; and this Faith is the Gift of God: and Christ is
our Hope which purifies as he is pure. And the holy Ghost we own according to
the Scriptures, and there is three that bear record in Heaven, the Father, the
Word and the Spirit, and these three are one; and there is three that bear
record in the Earth, the Spirit, the Water, and the Blood, and these three
agree in one; and Christ's Blood was shed for all men, and was the Offering not
for our sins only, but for the sins of the whole World, who was crucified
without the Gates at Jerusalem, and was a propitiation not for our sins only,
but for the sins of the whole World; so we are bought with a price, 1 Cor.
6.20. and we are to glorify God with our bodies, souls, and our spirits, for
they are Gods, 1 Cor. 7.23. we are bought with a price; and so all is to mind
the Truth in the inward parts, the hidden man of the heart, which in the sight
of God is of great price, 1 Per. 1.19. And we are not redeemed with corruptable
things, as Silver and Gold from a vain conversation, but with the precious
Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without blemish, and without spot; and so Christ
has purchased his Church with his own Blood, to present it to God without spot
or wrinkle; and so Christ is King, Prophet and Priest; and so God was in Christ
reconciling the World unto himself: And Christ who was in the form of God
thought it no robbery to be equal with God, but made himself of no reputation,
but took upon him the form of a Servant, and was formed in fashion of a man, he
humbled himself, and became obedient unto the death, even the death of the
Cross, and therefore God has highly exalted him, and given him a Name above
every name, and there is no Salvation by any other name under the whole Heaven,
but the Name of Christ Jesus. And so Christ Jesus died and rose again, 1 These.
4.14. and 5.10. Christ who died for us, that whether we wake or sleep we should
live together with him, (who was dead and is alive, and lives for evermore)
whose Garments he makes white with his Blood, 1 Cor. 15.3. how that Christ died
for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that he was buried, and that he
rose the third day according to the Scriptures, Romans 5.6. In due time Christ
died for the ungodly; and God has set forth his Love toward us, that while we
were yet Sinners Christ died for the ungodly, Romans 14.9. To this end Christ
both died and revived, that he might be Lord both of quick and dead, Rom 8.34.
It is Christ that died, ye rather that is risen again, who is also at the right
hand of God making intercession for us.

And whereas many scandals have been cast upon us, as that we deny Christ above
the Stars, Sun, Moon and Elements.

To this we say, all Power in Heaven and Earth is given to Christ; if all Power
in Heaven and Earth [Mark] be given unto him, then he must needs be above the
Sun, Moon and Elements, and yet he will dwell in his people; for he ascended
far above all Heavens, that he might fill all things, Ephesians. 4.10.

The second false Accusation is that the Quakers denies God above the Elements,
Sun, Moon and Stars.

Answ. God we own who is a Spirit, and to be worshipped in Spirit and Truth,
and Heaven is his Throne, and Earth is his Footstool, and he fills Heaven and
Earth, and the Heaven of Heavens is not able to contain him, and he upholds all
things by his Word and Power, and is in all, through all, and above all, God
blessed for ever; and so then he must needs be above the Sun, Moon, Stars and
Elements which are the works of his hands, he being Maker and Creator of all
things; and Christ who was with the Father before the World began, by whom all
things were made and created, and this is the Word, and the Word was God, John
1. And so we do know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an
understanding to know him which is true, and we are in him that is true, that
is in his Son Jesus Christ, this is the true God and Eternal Life, Ephesians. 2.16.
That Christ might reconcile both unto God in one body by the Blood, his Cross,
and slay Enmity thereby, and so making of twain one new man, and so making
peace: And so people ought to walk in love, as Christ has loved us, and given
himself for us, to be an Offering, and a Sacrifice, a sweet smelling savor to
God: and so not another Gospel do we preach but the Gospel which is the Power
of God unto Salvation to them that believe, Romans 1.16. and so through Christ
Jesus we come to God out of old Adam, and in Christ we please God; and Christ
is our Mediator, who makes peace between us and God; and he is the new
Covenant, the Covenant of Light to the Gentiles, and in this Covenant of Light
all is to walk, which brings them out of the old Covenant which vanishes away,
and through which Covenant we have peace with God in the Covenant of Light and
Covenant of Life; and so Christ is our Rock, who is the Life which all must be
built upon, and no other Foundation can any man lay, then what is laid already,
Christ Jesus who is the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; and for this
purpose was the Son of God made manifest to destroy the Devil (and his works)
who led man from God; and so he is the Way to God to walk in, and as every one
has received Christ the Life, they must walk in him, and he is worthy of all
honor and glory, who is the Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World: the
Lamb must have the victory, Christ Jesus the Emanuel, God with us, the First
begotten, full of Grace and Truth, whom all the Angels must worship; and as the
Law came by Moses, so Grace and Truth came by Jesus Christ; and God will judge
the World in Righteousness by the man Christ Jesus according to the Gospel
which is the Power of God, who would have all men to be saved, and to come to
the knowledge of the Truth, who desires not the death of a Sinner, but rather
that he should repent; for this the Lord binds with an oath; As I live, says
the Lord, I desire not the death of a Sinner, but rather that he would repent
and live, and often cries, Why will ye die? And whereas its said the Quakers
hold forth Free Will, we answer, no, for God works in us both to will and to
do according to his good pleasure; and we do know it is the Devil that works
in people to will and to do that which dishonors God, Hebr. 9.14. Christ
offered himself through the Eternal Spirit without spot to God, and by his
Blood purges our Consciences from dead works to serve the Living God: and must
not people come to feel his Blood in their Consciences, and so come to eat his
Flesh, and drink his Blood? and except they eat his Flesh, and drink his Blood
they have no Life in him; and now God is writing his Law in peoples hearts, and
putting it into their minds, by which all shall come to know the Lord from the
greatest to the least, and shall not need to say to his Brother know the Lord;
for the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth as waters cover the Sea:
and so Christ is come to cleanse from sin, and to purge from sin, and to make
an end of sin, and to destroy the Devil and his works, who bruises the Serpents
head, and abolishes death, and brings in Life and Immortality to light through
his Power the Gospel: So not that people should name Christ's Name and live in
iniquity, and live in unrighteousness and sin, and ungodliness; but they should
live to Christ Jesus, and walk in him; for did Christ die for Sinners that they
should live in sin? nay, but that they should be cleansed from sin, and their
Garments made white in the Blood of the Lamb, and so come to be heirs of Christ
and Salvation, and to sit down in the Heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and not
sit down in the old Adam. And true belief, is it not to believe in the true
Light, as Christ commands, and so to become Children of the Light, and of the
Day, and not children of Darkness? and so he that believes is born of God, and
he that is born of God overcomes the World, for greater is he that is in them,
then he that is in the World; so the greater overcomes the less: and so he that
believes passes from Death to Life, and he that hates his Brother abides in
Death, and what kind of belief is that? and he that envies his Brother is a
Manslayer, and no Manslayer has Eternal Life abiding in him; and therefore
Christ commands you Christians should love one another, and love Enemies, which
was a mark they were Disciples of Christ; and he that says he loves God which
he never saw, and hates his brother which he has seen, what says the
Scriptures of such a one? And he that says he knows God and Christ, and
keeps not his Commandments is a Liar, 1 John 2.4. but he that keeps his Word,
in him is the Love of God perfect, which he that does not keep the Word, the
Love of God is not perfect in him; and so we know that Christ by one offering
has for ever perfected them that are Sanctified: and so all people to mind the
Grace of God which brings Salvation, that has appeared to all men, which
teaches the Saints, and establishes their hearts, and seasons their words, and
teaches them to live godly and soberly in this evil present World, and to deny
ungodliness, unrighteousness, and and the lusts of the World; and the Spirit of
God is given to every man to profit withal; and the Lord gave his good Spirit (
Neh. 9.) to people, yet they rebelled against it, and so they quenched the
Spirit, and vexed it, and grieved it by yielding to the evil spirit and its
work, so his Servants they are whom they do obey; and Christ is the true Light
who enlightens every man that comes into the World; one loves the Light, and
the other hates it, and he hates it because his deeds are evil, and will not
come to it, because it reproves him; and this is the condemnation that Light is
come into the World, and men love Darkness more then the Light, because their
deeds be evil; and they that love the Light bring their deeds to it, that with
the Light they may see that their deeds be wrought in God; and so as people
walks in the Light, as he is in the Light, they have fellowship one with
another, and the Blood of Christ cleanses them from all sin; and so with the
Light they see the Blood, and him that cleanses them. And the Spirit of Truth
which leads into all Truth is come according to Christ's Promise, and this
Spirit reproves the World of sin, of righteousness and unbelief, and of
judgment; and God has poured forth his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and
Daughters do prophecy, and young men shall see visions, and old men shall
dream dreams, and upon his Handmaids and Servants he will pour out of his
Spirit, and so every one shall have something whereby they may have a sense of
God, the Word being sown upon all grounds: and Christ where he speaks of his
Talents, speaks of a measure given to every one according to his ability. So as
it is said in Hebr. 1.8. and to the Son he says, Thy Throne, O God, is for
ever and ever; a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of thy Kingdom: thou
have loved Righteousness, and hated Iniquity; wherefore God, even thy God has
anointed thee with oil of gladness above thy Fellows. And so [mark] the Fruit
of Righteousness is sowed in peace of them that make peace, James 3. and such
as are heirs of this Righteousness, are heirs of Christ, the Righteousness it
self: And Christ who his own self bare our sins in his body on the Tree, that
we being delivered from sin should live in righteousness, by whose stripes you
are healed: so it is plain, people, you should not live in unrighteousness; and
its clear through the Righteousness of our God and Savior Jesus Christ we have
obtained the precious Faith, 2 Pet. 1.1. and 1 John, 2.29. Every one that does
righteousness is born of God: and 1 John 3.7. he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he is righteous, little children let no man deceive you: and
whosoever does not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his
brother, verse 10. 2 Cor. 2.15. all that profess themselves Christians ought to
be a sweet savor, For we are unto God a sweet savor of Christ in them that
are saved, and in them that perish. Ephesians. 5.2. And people ought to walk in
love, even as Christ has loved us, and has given himself for us an Offering
and a Sacrifice of a sweet smelling savor to God. And we have seen and do
testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Savior of the World, 1 John
4.14. And so to the only Wise God our Savior be glory and majesty, dominion
and power, both now and for ever, Amen, Jude verse. 25. and he is able to keep
us faultless before the Presence of his Glory with joy. And we being justified
by the Blood of Christ, we shall be saved from wrath through him, Romans 5.9.10.
For when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son;
much more being reconciled we shall be saved by his Life: And the God of our
Fathers has raised up Jesus whom the Jews slew, and hanged on a Tree, him has
God raised up by his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior, and who is a
Prophet like unto Moses, whom all must hear; and this is my beloved Son hear ye
him: and learn of me, says Christ; and God has anointed him to preach, to
bind up the brokenhearted, etc. And so that people should live in all
godliness and honesty, and lead a peaceable life, this is acceptable in the
sight of God our Savior, 1 Timothy 2. And wherefore was, and is, there hatred
against the true Christians, but because they trusted in the Living God? who is
the Savior of all men, especially of those that believe: and Christ came not
to destroy men lives, but to save them, 1 Timothy: 4.10. Hebr. 7. Christ is able to
save to the uttermost all that come unto God by him 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a true
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ is come into the World
to save Sinners, of whom I am chief, Gal. 3.^3. Christ has redeemed us from
the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us, Rev. 5.19. and Christ has
redeemed us to God by his Blood; and so we know that we are not redeemed by
corruptible things from our vain conversation, but with the precious Blood of
Christ; therefore people are not to live in their vain conversation, that are
redeemed. And therefore people are to redeem the time because the days are
evil; and be not unwise, but understand what the Will of God is, Col. 4.5. we
are of him in Christ, Jesus who of God is made unto us Wisdom, and
Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. and we are justified
freely by his Grace, through the Redemption that is in Christ Jesus, Romans 3.14.
and Christ gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and
purge us to be a peculiar people unto himself, zealous of good works; and so
not that people should live in iniquity and bad works, Col. 1.20, and God by
Christ reconciled all things to himself, to set at peace through the Blood of
his Cross, both of things in Earth, and things in Heaven; therefore all people
is to mind this reconciliation, Hebr. 2.17. wherefore in all things it became
Christ to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful and
faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, that he might make
reconciliation for the sins of the people: so this is not that people should
live in their sins, and unrighteousness, and ungodliness, to dishonor God: For
if you should redeem a man from Turkey, from being a Slave, would it not grieve
you for that man to go into Turkey to be a Slave again, after you have paid a
great Ransom for him? so Christ redeeming people from sin and iniquity, from
unrighteousness, which is from the slavery of the Devil, by his Blood, and
Death, and Offering, and this is Gods Love to Mankind through Christ Jesus: and
does he redeem from iniquity, ungodliness, sin and evil, that they should go
into it again, and so into slavery? will not this grieve God and Christ? and
will he not render vengeance in flames of Fire upon all them that does not obey
the Gospel of Christ? and what will become of them that holds Truth in their
ungodly and unrighteous minds, that is, the truths of God, and the truths of
Christ, and the truths of the Porphets and Apostles? So, all People, the
Scriptures were given forth to be read, believed, and fulfilled, and not to
make a trade of, and to keep people always teaching of them, that they may be
always paying of them; and to make merchandise neither of people, nor them; so
it is the Spirit of Truth that must lead you into all Truth of them; for they
were given forth by holy men, as they were moved by the holy Ghost; and the
same holy Ghost must ^ead you into all Truth of them: and so they are
profitable for reproof and for instruction, and for correction, in
righteousness: and unto them also that are contentious, and disobey the Truth,
but obey unrighteousness, shall be indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon the Souls of every man that does evil; upon the Jews first, and
also upon the Gentiles: but glory, honor and peace shall be to every man that
does good; to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile.

Postscript.
ANd this is to clear us from all those Pamphlets which are spread and
scattered up and down among people, that we should deny the Godhead, his
Eternal Power, or his Offering, or Blood; or that we should not he bought with
a Price; For is pleased the Father, that in him the Fullness of the Godhead
should dwell bodily; and the Father, and the Son, and the Spirit, we do own.
And so let all them stop their Mouths, that say the Quakers Principles are hid
till now; for we have manifested our Principles, both in our printed Books; and
would that all People knew our Inside, as they did know our Outside; and we do
know (and also others know it) that we have an esteem of Christ's Sufferings,
and Death, and Blood, and the Scriptures of the Prophets and Apostles more then
any other people; for we do know that they were all Sufferers for speaking
forth the Scriptures.


George Fox. Ellis Hooks.

THE END.

