AN Epistle General To them who are of the ROYAL PRIESTHOOD AND CHOSEN
GENERATION.

Given forth from the Movings of the Power and Spirit of Truth, and now made
public to be sent abroad among the Saints scattered in Old and New England,
Germany, Holland, Ireland, Scotland, Barbados, and Virginia, for them to read
in the Fear of the Lord.

LONDON: Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the sign of the Bull and Mouth, near
Aldersgate, 1660.

FRIENDS,
LEt all that you do be done in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all
things was made and created, that you may do that which you do in the true
Dominion, and then what you do, ye do in the Power of God; and all Friends,
dwell in love, for that is the mark of the Disciple, and the fruits of Faith
and the Spirit, which is the end of the Commandment, out of a pure heart, and
fulfils the Law that Edifies, and in that is edification, and building, and the
fruits of being past from death to life, there is love to Brethren and Enemies,
being in the seed that destroys death, and the power of it the Devil.

We need no Mass for to teach us, for the Spirit that gave forth Scripture
teaches us how to pray, sing, praise, rejoice, honor and worship God, and in
what and how to walk, and to behave our selves to God and man, and leads us
into all truth, in which is our unity, and Comforter, and Guide, and Leader,
and not men without, which say they have not the Spirit and Power, as the
Apostles had that gave forth the Scriptures; and we need not your Common Prayer
to teach us, for the Spirit that gave forth Scriptures, teaches us how to
pray, praise, sing, fast, and to give thanks, and praise and worship, and in
what and how to honor and glorify God, and how to walk to him and men, and all
Creatures upon the Earth, and leads and guides into all Truth, which was
given forth from it, which reproves the World of sin, that is our Comforter,
Leader, and Guide, by which we know sonship, in which we have unity, and this
does never change: But that which man does invent, prayers and forms, which
does say that they have not the same Spirit which gave forth the Scriptures; so
the spirit that gave forth Scriptures teaches us how to pray, speak, sing,
fast, give thanks, and how to read, and to walk to God and man, and how to
worship God, and in what, for it leads us into all Truth, which is our
Comforter, in which we have unity, and fellowship, and to know our Religion
which does never change; and so the Spirit of Truth which gave forth Scripture
is our Director, Guide, Leader and Comforter, which reproves the world for
sin, and this leads to see the end of all Directories which man invents,
which have not the Spirit the Apostles had, and when they cannot hold it up,
they cry to the Powers of the Earth to help them; and these we see from the
Spirit erred, and without the Spirit, with whom we cannot trust our bodies,
spirits, nor souls, into their hands, but has committed them up to the Lord
whose they are.

And we are a people that are redeemed from the Earth, and World, and need none
of your Church made Faith which you have framed and made in a eleven days
time, and your other three days set apart; for Christ is the Author of our
Faith, which is the gift of God, which is a mystery held in a pure Conscience,
and we say that all the Priests in Scotland, and London, and New England,
cannot make the Gift of God, the mystery, which is the Faith which remains, and
by which men are justified, and saved, neither have they power over it which
brings us to have access to God, and gives us victory over that which
separated us from God, and so we need none of their Faith to lead us, for the
Faith Christ is the Author of, we live in, which they cannot make nor frame,
and though they may cry to the Magistrates to help them to uphold their made
Faith, which Idol they cannot hold up themselves, which they have invented, and
say, they are not in the Life and Power as they was in that gave forth the
Scriptures, and say Revelations ceased from people, and there is no Victory
while they be upon the Earth; this is the fruits of their framed Faith, which
we need not, for the Spirit that gave forth the Scriptures, teaches us to know
who is the Author of our Faith, and the fruits of it which gives Victory, and
the Spirit teaches us how to pray, sing, give thanks, praise, rejoice, fast,
worship God, and in what, and how to walk to God and man, and leads us into
all Truth, the Reprover of the World for sin, which is our Comforter, Guide,
and Leader, and Director, in which we have unity and fellowship that is without
end, and a pure Religion that does never change.

And a great deal of stuff there is in their Books, which is not worth
mentioning, which it and the Nature will rot that gave it forth; but the Seed,
and Life, and Power will stand; Church Faith changes, Directory changes,
Common Prayer changes, and Mass changes; and here is the Four Religions which
is got up since the Apostles days, which they have fought for and killed one
another about, but the pure Religion, does not change which we are of and own,
in which is the Spiritual weapons, which were amongst the Apostles, the true
Faith changes not, for it abides and remains, which is the gift of God, and a
mystery held in a pure Conscience, Romans 13. of which we are, and which is our
Faith; Mass for the Papists, Common Prayer for the Episcopal men, and the
Directory for the Presbiterians, Church-made framed Faith, for the Independants
and mixed Baptists, and others, and those have had their fellowship in these,
for which they fought, and about which Carnal weapons got up since the days of
the Apostles; but the fellowship in the Spirit remains and does not change,
which has spiritual Weapons, and are known to fight withal about Religion, in
which the Seed of God is known which bruiseth the Serpents head, which led man
from God, and made a separation betwixt man and God, and the Election known
before the world began, who is the Head of our Church, and not them that be
Head of the Mass, Head of your Directory, Head of the Common Prayer, and Head
of the Church-made Faith, which we see all changes and comes to naught, and God
confounds, and men stands in Doubts, and Questions, and have no assurance in
their Religion; but that of God stands in them all bound.

They that followed the Pope was called Papists, and them that protested
against the Pope was called Protestants; and thus they gave names one to
another, and so Common Prayer men, and Directory men, and Independants men, and
Baptists men; and thus in the Envy, out of the Love, out of the Spirit which
gave forth the Scriptures, gave Names one to another, all which we Judge; our
Faith, our Church, our Unity is in the Spirit, and our Word at which we
tremble, was in the beginning before the Papists men's Mass, and your Episcopals
Common Prayer, and the Presbiterians Directory, and Independants, Baptists, and
other Church-made framed Faith was, and our Unity, Church, and Fellowship will
stand, when they are all ended, by which Spirit we all judge them, and deny
their works, in which is our Unity with God, with Scriptures, and one with
another, for they have been to people like so many changable Coverings; but now
the Spirit is taking them off, by which we are covered, and is our weapons, in
this day of great battle with them; the Scriptures which you do speak, and show
forth in all your Books, is owned, but your imaginations of them we deny; but
they are all owned in themselves and places, so they are all ours, which end in
Christ, which is ours, and in whom we are that remains; the Mass is the
Papists Sacrifice that they kill about, the Common Prayer is the Episcopals
Sacrifice, that they persecute and kill about, and the Directory is the
Presbiterians Sacrifice they persecute and kill about, the made Framed Church
Faith is that which the Independants and Baptists Sacrifice, which they kill
and persecute about, which Sacrifice the Lord does not accept, neither he has
respect to, which is from them which has Erred from the Spirit which the
Apostles was in, with which they offered spiritual Sacrifice to God the Father
of Spirits which we are in.

And all my dear hearts, all know the Fellowship of the Seed in its suffering,
and to be made conformable to his Death, that you in the Suffering, through it
may know the Power of the Resurrection of the just Seed, and this is it which
kills all bad Spirits, that will talk but not do with the Seed, such may
crucify Christ in themselves afresh; therefore mind the daily suffering which
the Seed had, and have unity with that, so you may rise with that, which
destroys that which causes it to suffer.

The Papists cries Higher Power help, help, or else my Mass will go down, and
all my Ceremonies; The Episcopal Men cries help, help Higher Power, or else my
Common Prayer goes down: the Presbiterians cries help, help Higher Power, or
else my Directory will down: the Independants, and Anabaptists, and others
cries help, help Higher Powers, or else my framed Faith, which is my eleven
days work will down, and we shall not stand; Are not you ashamed all, and
shows you are naked, out of the Power and Life the Apostles was in, and from
their Weapons are naked; the outward Power neither upheld nor separated them
from the Love of God which they had in Christ the end of the Law, I am not one
of them that calls themselves Papists, Common Prayer men, nor Presbiterians,
Independent, nor Anabaptists, Puritans, nor Heathen, which be out of the Life
of God; but that which God has called me to, that I am, and the Elect before
the World began: this is to go every where all abroad amongst Friends, who are
of the Royal Priesthood, which destroys that that made a separation from God:
from the Royal Seed goes the Royal Commandment, which Seed remains for ever,
from the Royal Seed to the Royal Seed, which are the Royal Priesthood, which
has the Royal Law, and Love to Friends and Enemies, which is beyond the Love
of the World, and before it was, that is the Royal Love where no Enmity can
come; Forgive us as we forgive them, cries Papists, cries Episcopal, cries
Presbiterians, and Baptists, and Independants; these cries and says the Lords
Prayer, Forgive us our debts and trespasses, as we forgive them that trespass
against us; and then like a company of senceless men, without understanding
falls a fighting one with another about their trespasses and debts, and never
minded what they prayed, as though they never looked for forgiveness, and to
receive the things they prayed for, that prays, Forgive us Lord as we forgive
them, and falls a persecuting, and imprisoning one another, and taking their
Brethren and fellow servants by the throat, about Religion, which in their
prayers they said, Forgive us as we forgive them, and will not forgive, but
says their Prayers as the Pharisees did the Scriptures, and did not. This is
he that must be cast into Prison until he pay the utmost farthing, and must
not come out; and this has been their work since the Apostles days, and is
not here Law? The Apostles and Christ did not bid that any should kill about
their words, but that they should love Enemies; So you will kill about their
words which were killed for speaking them forth. And so all Friends, dwell in
the Seed of God which is Heir of the Power of the World which is without end,
in that dwell and keep your Meetings, that you may all be Possessors.

All Religions will fight about Religions, and Worships, kill like the Heathen
about their Gods, Jews, Gentiles, Papists, Protestants, of all Sects, which be
out of the Power of the Lord, and the Spirit that the Apostles was in, and so
they be all out of the Royal Spirit, that has the Royal Spiritual Weapons, and
out of the Royal Seed which says Love Enemies, which is the Royal-Command, to
the Royal Priesthood: and they confess they have not the same power and spirit
of the Apostles; So then its true for them to say, we are not the spiritual
men, we have not spiritual weapons to fight withal; if you do not help us,
Higher Powers, we fall, for we hold our Traditions, and that which we have is
by Tradition, is by the Earthly Powers; for we are not made Ministers as the
Apostles was by the immediate Spirit and Power and Gifts as the Apostles was,
therefore the Higher Power must help us, and to them go we with our Packet of
Letters as Saul did, for we are not spiritual weaponed men as Paul was; for in
all these things are the Priests guilty.

The Papists, Common Prayer men, Presbiterian, Independants, Baptists,
persecute one another about their Inventions which they have invented, their
Mass, their Common Prayer, their Directory Church Faith, which they have made
and framed, their Inventions and handy-works, and not for the Truth, for they
know not what Spirit they are of that persecute and would have men's lives
destroyed about Church-Worship and Religion, Christ says, who said, He came
not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; Now they that know not what Spirit
they be of that will persecute and destroy men's lives, and not save them, we
cannot trust our bodies, souls, nor spirits into their hands that know not what
spirit they be of themselves, they are not like to be trusted with others that
would destroy by a Law which the Disciples would have done by Prayer, to
command fire to come down from Heaven to destroy them that would not receive
Christ, which sort Christ rebukes and tells them that they did not know what
spirit they are of; and now if they did not know what Spirit they was of, do
these which have persecuted about Church and Religion since the Apostles days,
who would compel men's Bodies, Goods, Lives, Souls, and Estates into their hands
by a Law, or make them suffer else; these are not the Ministers of Christ (the
Savior) that destroys men's lives, and they know not what Spirit they be of,
and the lives, bodies, and souls are not to be trusted in their hand; and you
that do persecute shall have no Resurrection to life except you repent; but
they that do know what Spirit they be of themselves, they are in the
unrebukable Zeal, and by the Spirit of God they offer up their spirit, their
souls and bodies to the Lord, which are his, whose they are to keep them.

G. F.

WE be of the Royal Seed, Elect and precious, before the World began, that
which (ever) the Sodomites crucified, grieved, and vexed, by their unrighteous,
ungodly Conversation, who lived in fullness and pleasures; and abundance of
idleness; And are of the Seed that cannot serve the wills and lusts of men, and
bow and stoop to them, who are a people redeemed out of kindreds, Kingdoms,
Peoples, and Nations, who are of the Household of God, built up together a
spiritual House, whose builder and maker is God, and do reign upon the Earth as
Kings and Priests unto God, whom we serve day and night; and are of the seed
that has been slain from the Foundation of the World, which the Princes of the
World and Councels, and the great and wise of the Earth crucified, who lived in
the form of Godliness of the Saints words, but quenched the spirit in
themselves, and being that Birth born of the flesh, persecutes that which is
born of the spirit.

We are the Seed, the Anointed which the Powers of the Earth combines and
takes counsel together against, whom we see God sitting in Heaven laugh them to
scorn; we are the Royal Priesthood, who offers daily to the Lord the spiritual
Sacrifice, the holy Generation, and the peculiar people, zealous of good works,
clothed with the zeal of Christ against the bad works, and the workers;
Therefore of all Nations, Peoples, sects, Ways, Professions, and Talkers of
Religion are we hated, by them that be out of the way and power of God, though
they profess Scriptures, Church Worship, and Ministry, yet such have crucified
Christ, and the Lord of Glory: We are them that witness the Promise of God
fulfilled, and that do witness that the Ages is come wherein God would show
forth his exceeding Riches, and kindness, which was wrought amongst the
Apostles; we are the Anointed of God, and his Prophets that he says Touch
not, who are as the apple of his Eye, who for our sakes has reproved Powers,
and Thrones, and Dominions, and rebuked them; We are the Preachers of
Righteousness in this great City Sodom wherein Christ was crucified, where the
life of the Prophets, and the Apostles and holy men of God lies slain, and
Cursers, Swearers, Drunkards, Eaters and Drinkers that rises up to play in all
fullness, wantonness, and profaneness professes their words, and makes merry
over their lives; and the witnesses since the Apostles days have been slain,
the woman in the Wilderness, the Lamb and his Wife shall be known which is come
up out of the Wilderness. So in this great City Sodom and Gomorah the false
Church and the Whore wherein all the abominations and, that made all the
Nations drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her Fornication, whereby the World is
all on heaps about Religion and Church Worship, and the several ways in
Sodomites nature professing the Saints words, imitating forms, killing and
slaying one another about the professing the Saints words, but out of their
life, which shows that they are not of the Royal Seed which says Love Enemies,
that is the Royal Seed, and they that follows him is of the Royal Priesthood,
and holy People and Generation, amongst whom is the Royal Law of Love, whereby
we cannot respect men's persons, for he who does is convinced of the Royal Law
to be a Transgressor. So every one of us, that is come to the seed of God, that
bruiseth the Serpents head that led man from God, who is the Prince of the
World, the Prince of Darkness, and the Prince of the Air, the Father of Lies, a
Murderer from the beginning, the Corrupter of Mankind, the Author of the
separation from God, and the Original of sin, the beginning of it, which led
man from his Dominion over the handy works of God, which the Royal Seed Christ
destroys, and renews man again in the Image of God, and brings him again to
his Dominion over the handy works of God, and this hundreds of thousands are
now witnessing, by which they come to be Kings, and redeemed from the Earth,
and comes to be made Kings upon the Earth in the Image of God, over the handy
works of God, in the wisdom by which they were created; so all Powers whatever
that are a terror to evil doers, that bears not the Sword in vain, to us are a
praise that do well. And all Kings upon the Earth that are anointed by God, a
figure of our Christ the King, the anointed, who ends them all, and makes
Kings to reign upon the Earth, amongst whom Christ is King, which thousands
witness, amongst whom he is King, and all other Kings made by man, and putting
man on Earthly Crowns, by Earthly Man, will put them off again, if they cross
them, and unking them; this is the state amongst them in whom Christ reigns
not, nor the true Magistrate, which is to the Evil Doers a Terror; but since
the Apostles days all has been in a Confusion about Religion, Church, and
Worship, amongst them that have killed the witnesses, and since the true Church
went into the Wilderness, and the Witnesses slain, and the man Child caught up
to God; So they that have slain the Witnesses, and killed the Saints, has been
in all this confusion; and the Witnesses is rising, and the Everlasting Gospel
shall be preached again amongst them that have had the words, but have slain
the life of the Prophets, and the Apostles, unto all Nations, Kindreds, and
Tongues of them that dwell upon the Earth; so the great Professors of the
World, which was the Jews, could not abide Jesus the King that he should reign,
and where he is now in the Male and in the Female he is King, and that makes
Kings among whom he is King; All in the Name of the mighty King of Kings is to
be done, and then it is in the Power.

All Friends, Take heed of running on in a form, least you do lose the Power;
but keep in the Power and Seed of God in which you will live in the substance;
and at any Disputes take heed, many may be lifted up in the Victory and
Conquest, and after have a joy in the Prophesies and openings, and after fall:
And if Brablers come and Janglers, say they have a bad Meeting, and so the
murmuring Nature gets up, out of patience, and the Seed which bears all
things, and suffers all things, which keeps down that which causes lifting
up, murmuring and disputing, which the Seed ends and Prophecy, and keeps
down all the other that is contrary, and would live in the contrary; that which
keeps down that which does change, is the peace and the Corner stone, and the
staidness in the Seed and Life.

G. F.

THE END.

