This is to all the PRISONERS And SUFFERERS, For the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ and his Worship. And ye know that the word of God is not bound.
Dear Friends,
IN the seed of Life that is over all, whom the Lord work support and has
supported by his Eternal Arm and Power, to stand for his Glory, and be valient
for his Truth and his name upon the Earth, who is God all sufficient and
Almighty, who is God over all to support you all, and to supply you with all
things needful. Now dear Friends, it is not only given you to believe in the
name of Christ, but also to suffer for his name sake; so you see and know it is
a gift given you to believe, and a gift to suffer for Christ's sake and his
Righteousness, but however, as Christ says, be ye wise as Serpents, and
harmless as Doves, for Christ's believers are as Sheep or Lambs among Wolves,
and he has declared how they shall be brought before Counsels, and before
Rulers for his name sake: but Christ bids his Sheep, take no thought what they
shall speak, for it shall be given you in that same hour what ye ought to
speak, for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of your Father that speaks
in you, and this Spirit of the Father is sufficient to trust to, for it shall
answer all if they have Ears to hear, and comfort his People, his Lambs and
Sheep. And Christ further said, speaking to his Sheep, ye shall be hated of all
men for my name sake, but he that endures to the end, the same shall be saved,
and he that hears Christ's Sheep hears me, (says Christ,) and he that
dispiseth you dispiseth me, namely Christ, and he that dispiseth me dispiseth
him that sent me, (to wit) the Father, Mat. 10. Luke 10. And the Disciple is
not above his Master, nor the Servant above his Lord, for Christ the Lord and
Master of the Sheep was despised, so it is enough for the Disciple that he be
as his Master, and the Servant as his Lord, for if they call the Master of the
House, namely Christ, Beelzebub, how much more shall they call them of his
Household, but the very Hairs of your head are all numbered, fear ye not
therefore ye are of more value then many Sparrows, and not of them shall fall
to the ground without the Heavenly Father, see here how Christ encourages his
Lambs and Sheep, therefore stand in his will; and if the Lord suffer you who
are his Lambs and Sheep and Doves and Chickens, that Christ has gathered under
his Wings, none are able to pluck you out of his hands, his power who has all
power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and now if it be the will of the Lord
to try you his Lambs and Sheep, by spoiling of the outward goods, as he did his
Servant Job and others of his Servants and Children, in the days of the
Apostles, who took joyfully the spoiling of their goods, and Moses by Faith
chose rather to suffer affliction with the People of God, then to enjoy the
pleasures of sin, which are but for a season, esteeming the reproaches of
Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt, for he had an Eye to the
recompense of reward, as in Heb. Chap. 11.

And therefore consider how Noah, Lot, Abraham, Isaac and Jacob by Faith served
the Lord and went through sufferings and Trials, and Jeremiah and the rest of
the Prophets through Faith, went through great sufferings and imprisonments,
and Daniel and the 3 Children passed through great sufferings and Trials by
Faith, so Faith was their Victory which was the gift of God, which Christ is
the Author and finisher of, and you read in the days of the Apostles, what
sufferings and Imprisonments they were carried through by Faith, and since the
Apostles days how all the Martyrs were carried through great sufferings and
Imprisonments by their Faith, which was their Victory, in which Faith they
pleased God, and had Victory over the Devil, and in which Faith they were all
in Unity. Now dear Friends and Brethren, if it does please the Lord to try you,
who are the believers in the Light, and Children of the Light and the day of
Christ: I say again if it please the Lord, and be his will to try you in
stinking Prisons and Dungeons, Bride-wells, Houses of Correction, and suffer
you to be put in such places, who are his Sheep and Lambs, Doves and Chickens,
Lyllies and Roses, Plants and Branches, I say the Lord can Sanctify all such
places for his People, his Children, his Sons and Daughters, and make all
pleasant to them, for his Sheep and People cannot go any where from the Lord,
for the Lord and his presence is with them, and the Angel of his presence
Suffers with them, and therefore such Goals and Dungeons, Bride-wells, Houses
of Correction, which are for evil Doers, and if the Lord do try or suffer his
People to be put in such places, his Lambs and Sheep, Lyllies and Roses, Doves
and Chickens, yet they are all in the Hand and under the Wing of Christ, and he
can Sanctify all such places to them; and you in that state are to pray for the
Enemies that put you there, and if they curse and hate you, you are to bless
them, and do good unto them, and you are to pray for them, that dispitefully
use you and persecute you, and love your Enemies, that you may be Children of
your Father which is in Heaven, for he makes the Sun to rise on the evil and
on the good, and causes his Rain to fall on the just and on the unjust. And
the Apostle says to the Believers, try all things, hold fast that which is
good, so you holding fast that which is good, with that you can try all things,
whether they be good or bad; and be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil
with good: this is the command, so it is the good that must overcome the evil,
and what has the Children of God to overcome the evil withal, but the good;
therefore then all must hold fast that which is good if that with the good they
over come the evil, and can try all things; but when any do go from the good in
themselves, then they are not like with it to overcome the evil, nor with it
try all things, without holding fast that which is good, for without it you
cannot try all things nor overcome the evil except you hold fast that which is
good, which was before the bad was or evil either, for by the good evil is
overcome, and with it you can try all things whether they be good or bad, and a
good man David says, he has dispersed, he has given to the poor, his
Righteousness endures forever, his Horn shall be exalted with Honor. They
that choose the things that please the Lord, and keep his Covenant, even them
will I give a name in my House and within my Walls, a place and a name better
than of Sons and Daughters, says the Lord, and I will give them an everlasting
name which shall not be cut off, Isai. 56. So you may see how the Lord does
encourage his People to walk in the Truth, in Faithfullness to him, for the
Lord has loved his People with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness has he, and does he draw them unto himself, to serve and
worship him, Jer. 31. And Christ says, he that believes on him has
everlasting life, Mark, has it, as in John 3. and again Christ says, he that
drinks of the Water that I give, shall never thirst; but the Water that I
shall give, shall be in him a well springing up to Eternal life, so every one
mind this well in you who have drunk of the Water which Christ has given you.

And the Apostle says, God will punish them that disobey his Gospel with an
everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his power, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Here you may see everlasting destruction to the wicked
that disobey the Gospel of Christ, and everlasting life, to them that believe
and obey the Gospel of Christ. Now they that disobey the Gospel of Christ,
disobey their own comfort and ^oy o^ life and Salvation, which Gospel is the
power of God, which is preached to every Creature under Heaven to believe and
obey, therefore happy are you who have received it, and obeyed it, which brings
Life and immortality to Light in you; that you see over the Enemy which
darkened you, and are now become Heirs of this comfortable and joyful Gospel of
life and everlasting Salvation, in which everlasting Gospel you have an
everlasting glorious fellowship, and in this everlasting Gospel, you can praise
the everlasting God, that Reigns over all from everlasting to everlasting; and
all that are of the seed and Faith of David can say as David said, blessed be
God from everlasting to everlasting, and let all the People say, Amen. Praise
ye the Lord, Psalm 108.48. And further can say, That the Mercy of the Lord is
from Everlasting to Everlasting, upon all them that fear him and his
Righteousness unto the Children of Men, Psalm. 103, 17. For the Lord God he
changes not, he is the same that he was who Inhabits Eternity and dwells in the
humble heart, and therefore you Humble fear, and Serve and Worship him. And
keep under the wing of Christ, and in him your Sanctuary and Savior, who
destroys the Destroyer, and is over all the first and last, Amen.

Dolston, the 3 of the first Mo. 1684. G. F.

Concerning Christ's meetings and gatherings to Salvation, and the Devils
meetings and his gatherings to Destruction.
JOhn said, that he saw three unclean Spirits like Frogs that came out of the
Mouth of the Dragon, Devil and Satan, and out of the mouth of the Beast, and
out of the mouth of the false Prophet, mark they do go out of their mouths, for
they are the Spirits of Devils working Miracles that goes out of there mouths,
the foul unclean Spirits which goes forth unto the Kings of the Earth, and of
the whole World, mark, the whole World to gather together them, mark, to gather
them, so here they are to be gathered to the Battle of the great day of God
Almighty, Rev. 16: 13, 14. And Satan the old Serpent shall go out to deceive
the Nations, which are in the four Quarters of the Earth, Gog and Magog to
gather them together to Battle, the number of whom is as the sand of the Sea,
so here is a gathering togather by the Devil, and they went up on the breadth
of the Earth, and compassed the Camp of the Saints about, and the beloved City,
and Fire came down from God out of Heaven and devoured them, so these that were
gathered togather by the Devil, the destroyer was destroyed by God the Savior
of his People, Rev. 20:8.

And the Lord scatered Nimrod that mighty Hunters gathering, who gathered up
People together to build Babel and confounded them, Genesis 10: 11. And Isaiah
said, All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord, and great shall be the
Peace of thy Children, and in Righteousness shall they be established: Behold
they shall surely gather together, but not by me says the Lord, and whosoever
shall gather togather against thee, shall fall for thy sake; no Weapon that is
formed against thee shall prosper, and every Tongue that shall rise against
thee in judgment thou shall condemn, this is the heritage of the Servants of
the Lord and their Righteousness is of me says the Lord, Isai. 54. And Christ
Jesus says, where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in
the midst of them; and the Apostle said to the Jews, speaking of Christ, that
there is no Salvation in any other: for there is no other name under Heaven
given among men whereby we must be saved Acts 4: 12. but by Christ Jesus, so
here is the Saints true gathering in the name of Christ Jesus the second Adam,
and none is able to pluck them out of his hand, John 10.

Christ the seed of the Woman bruises the Serpents head, and Christ through
death destroys death, and the Devil the power of death, and so does reconcile
all things, both in Heaven and in the Earth in one.

Concerning the Devil not abiding in the truth, became a Devil, a Destroyer, a
Serpent, and such as followed him out of the truth.
THe Devil abode not in the truth and so he became a Devil, a Destroyer, and a
Serpent, an Enemy, and a Satan, and Adversary to the truth, and to
Righteousness, and Holiness, and to Man, and Woman, that God made in his image,
in Righteousness and Holiness, so he became an Enemy, and Adversary, and a
Destroyer, who is out of the truth, and abode not in it in whom there is no
truth, and so is called the old Serpent, and Satan, and Devil, tempter and
False Accuser; and Christ through death destroys death the Devil the power of
death.

And when the Jews went from the truth they became Enemies, and Adversaryes to
it, and Destroyers of the Righteous, and the Just; yea they were Adversaryes
and Accusers and Enemies to the Prophets and Christ Jesus, and Apostles, and
Christ called the Jews, Vipers and Serpents, and said to them that made a
Profession of the Scriptures of the Old Testament, but were gone from the truth
of them, that they were of their Father the Devil, and his works and lusts they
would do.

And here the Jews that went out of the truth, did not they become Serpents,
Enemies, Satan's, Adversaryes, and Judass, Betrayers, and of the Devil,
Destroyers of the Just?

And when they which are called Christians became haters of the Light, and
Walkers dispitefully against the Spirit of Grace, Dispisers of the word in
their heart, and erred from the truth and the true faith, and professed the
form of Godlyness, but denied the power thereof, and so denied the Spirit of
true Christianity, these became Serpents, Enemies, Satan's, Adversaries to true
Christianity, and of the Devil, that seek to Destroy it, and Judas's, Betrayers
of it, and of the Righteous and the Just, where ever it appeared to the unjust,
and this has been the work of that Spirit, that did not abide in the truth in
all ages to be Enemies, Adversaryes and Judas's, Betrayers, who seek to Destroy
the truth, but Christ the truth does destroy that destroying Spirit, who is the
Savior.

And Christ said to the Jews, and to the Scribes and Pharisees which were the
greatest outward Professors and applyers of the Prophets and promises of the
old Testament to themselves upon the Earth, and yet the greatest persecutors of
the Holy Men and Women, and the Lords Prophets upon the Earth.

I say that Christ said to them, O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the
Prophets and Stonest them which are sent unto thee, how often would I have
gathered thy Children together, even as a Hen gathers her Chickens under her
Wings and ye would not! behold your Houses are left unto you desolate, etc.
Mat. 23.37, 38.

Jerusalem was the chiefest place of worship, and the chiefest City among the
Jews, and the greatest place of persecution, and yet the Lord Jesus Christ wept
over this City, and would have gathered these persecuting Professors, without
possessing of the life of what they did profess, but they would not come to him
that they might have life.

And these persecuting Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, Christ said unto them, ye
Compass Sea and Land to make one proselyte, and when he is made ye make him two
fold more the Child of Hell, Mat. 23.

Here you may see these Scribes, Pharisees and Jews, the great Professors and
Temple Worshippers without life, what they gathered People into, and what
Disciples they made in their Compass^^^ Sea and Land, they made them like
themselves, and the Devil, and Satan, and the Serpent, who abode not in the
Truth, did seek to draw all out of the Truth, and to make them Serpents and
Satan's, adversaries, and of the Devil, destroyers, and so he rules in the
Hearts of the disobedient, and blinds the Eyes of the Heathen or infidels,
and the Apostated Christians from the Spirit of Christ, and the life of
Christianity they do seek to draw all from the Truth and Spirit of Christ, and
the life of Christianity into death, Enmity, and into persecution and
destroying, like the Devil, Jews and Judas, all in one Spirit, according to
their measures that they have from the Devil, but all that live and walk in the
Truth and the Spirit of Jesus, labor to bring and draw and gather all into the
Truth, and to Christ their Savior, who destroys the destroyer.

London, Printed by J. B. 1684.


