A TESTIMONY FOR God's Truth, etc.
Concerning New and Heavenly Jerusalem, and her Children, distinct from
Jerusalem which is from below, and her Children. -- And that all who read this,
do see whether Jerusalem that is above be their Mother.

THe Apostle writes to the Church of Christ, and says, Jerusalem which is
above is Free, which is the Mother of us all. -- All Jerusalems Children are
born of the Spirit, and led by the Spirit of God; And as many as receive
Christ, he gives them power to become the Sons of God; even to them that
believe in his Name. -- And whosoever believes that Jesus is the Christ, is
born of God; And they that believe in the Light, the Life in Christ, do become
the Children of Light, as in John 1.12. and 12.36. and 1 John 5.1.

And now in this heavenly Light, Power and Spirit, they come to be heavenly
Jerusalems Children, that is from above. -- For such as hate the Light, and do
Evil, are condemned by it, and they that have not the Spirit of Christ are none
of his; but all the true Christians, in the new Covenant, and new Testament, in
Christ Jesus, to whom Christ has given his Life, which is his Light and his
Power, them that believe in it, and receive him, do become the Children of
Light, and the Sons of God; so they are heavenly Jerusalems Children, born from
above, of the Spirit and the Light.

The Apostle says to the Converted Hebrews, Ye are come unto Mount Sion, unto
the City of the Living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable
company of Angels, and to the general Assembly and Church of the First Born,
which is written in Heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of
just Men made perfect, and to Jesus the Mediator of the new Covenant; and
hither Jerusalems Children were come then, while they were upon the Earth. --
The Children of God, that were born of the Spirit, and the Children of the
Light, they were come hither in the Apostles Days, they were come to that
heavenly Mount-Sion, that looks over the whole World; for Natural Sion, the
Watchtower, looked over into Canaan; but this heavenly Sion, spoke of in the
New Testament, which is the Joy of the whole Earth, looks over all the Earth,
and in this Joyful Sion, Christ the Elect and Precious was laid, 1 Pet. 2.6.
And Christ the Deliverer comes out of this Sion, Romans 11.26. And the Children
of heavenly Jerusalem, which is the City of the Living God, they see the
innumerable company of Angels; and is not this the City that Abraham, Isaac and
Jacob sought for, which has Foundations, whose Builder and Maker is God; is
not this heavenly Jerusalem, the City of the Living God, that they sought for?
And are not all heavenly Jerusalems Children written in Heaven? seeing the
Apostle said, Jerusalem that is above is the Mother of us all that believe in
Christ, and receive him, and are born of the Spirit, and they were come to the
General Assembly, the Church of the First Born, written in Heaven, and to God
the Judge of all, and to the Spirits of just Men made Perfect. All these were
and are Born of the Spirit that comes to heavenly Sion and Jerusalem. and to
God and his Son, and to the just Men's Spirits made perfect; for it is the
Spiritual Birth, heavenly Jerusalems Children, that sees these things and knows
them; that which is born of the Flesh is Flesh, and may know fleshly things,
and that which is born of the Spirit is Spirit, and knows spiritual things. --
And John in the Revelations, he saw the great holy City, new Jerusalem, coming
down from God, out of Heaven, prepared as a Bride adorned for her Husband,
having the Glory of God, and her Light was like unto a precious Stone, and the
City had no need of the Sun, neither of the Moon, nor of a Candle, for the
Glory of God does enlighten it, and the Lamb is the Light thereof: This
heavenly Jerusalem is and was the Mother of all them that receive Christ, who
gives them Power to become the Sons of God, and they that believe in the Light
are the Children of the Light, and walk in the Light of their Mother New
Jerusalem. -- And you may read how this new Jerusalem is garnished with Pearls,
figuratively, and there is written on the Wall, the name of the twelve Tribes,
and twelve Apostles, and of the Lamb; the Gates of it shall not be shut at all
by Day, for there shall be no Night there. -- So here you may see there is no
Night here, but always Day, in the holy City, New and Heavenly Jerusalem, that
is from above; all the Children of the Light, and that are born of the Spirit
from above, see it their Mother; and the Nations of them that are saved shall
walk in the Light of this City, new Jerusalem, that is from above; and all
Jerusalems Children, that have overcome, have Right to the Tree of Life, and
Drink of the Water of Life in this new and Heavenly Jerusalem: and in this
Heavenly Jerusalem there shall be no more Curse, and none that are defiled
enter into it, but they that are written in the Lambs Book of Life; and he that
overcomes says Christ, I will make a Pillar in the House of my God, and he
shall go no more out, and I will write upon him the Name of my God, and the
name of the City of my God, New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from
my God; and I will write upon him my new Name.

Here you may see New Jerusalems Children, and the Name of God, and the holy
City, and the Name of Christ written upon them, and their Fathers Name written
in their Foreheads, that they may know that they are the Children of new
Jerusalem, and of God and Christ, and they shall see his Face, and his Name
shall be in their Fore heads, Rev. 22.4. and 3.12. He that has an Ear, let him
hear what the Spirit says to the Churches, Heavenly Jerusalems and Sions
Children; and therefore all that are Born of the Spirit the Children of the
Light, that believe in Christ, and receive him, their Mother is new and
Heavenly Jerusalem; and this Spiritual Birth cannot own any Mother below this
New and Heavenly Jerusalem, and all Heavenly Jerusalems New Born Babes are
Nourished with the sincere Milk of the Word: and the Bond-Womans Children, that
is born after the Flesh persecute New and Heavenly Jerusalems Children, that
are born after the Spirit; the Bond-Womans Children are in bondage, but
Jerusalems Children, which is from above, is free, who give Glory to the Lord
God over all for Evermore.

So new and Heavenly Jerusalem brings forth a new and Heavenly Generation, a
spirirual Household, Heavenly and Spiritual Citizens, and a Royal Priesthood,
that offers up Living and Spiritual Sacrifices.

And in the Apostles Days, before the Apostasy, all the true believers and
followers of Christ, had Jerusalem that was above for their Mother, but since
the Apostles Days, in the Apostasy the outward Christians have gone into many
Sects, and they have got many Mothers, and by Law they force other to them, but
they that are brought out of the Night of Apostasy, by the Light, Power and
Spirit of Christ Jesus, they are come to new and Heavenly Jerusalem, and can
own none of their Mothers, that they have set up since the Apostles Days, that
are below Heavenly Jerusalem, that is free, and from above, in whom there is
neither Sect nor Schism, Rent nor Division, Contest nor Strife, for no unclean
thing comes into it. -- And the Lord said, Behold, I Create New Heavens, and a
New Earth, and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind; Isaiah
saw this by Prophecy, Isa. 56.17. -- And John said, I saw a new Heaven and a
new Earth, and the First Earth was passed away, and there was no more Sea, Rev.
2^ 1. -- And the Lord said, Behold I Create Jerusalem a Rejoicing and her
People a Joy, and I will Rejoice in Jerusalem, and Joy in my People, and the
Voice of Weeping and Crying shall be heard no more in her. Is not this Heavenly
Jerusalem that Isaiah Prophesied of, Isa. 65.18, 19. and is not this the
Heavenly Jerusalem that John saw in Revelations 21.2, 3, 4. -- This new and
heavenly Jerusalem that is above, it shines over all the Nations, for the
Nations of them that are saved walk in the Light of it, where it is always Day,
and there is no Night there, for the Lord God and the Lamb is the Light of it,
in which Light the Nations of them that are saved walk.

Natural Men may know natural Sciences, and the natural Tongues, and Languages,
and the natural Arts, and natural Philosophy; for the natural Jews and Pilate
could set their natural Tongues, which begun at Babel, upon Christ, and yet
Crucify him: And the Whore of Babylon and Confusion, the Mother of Harlots,
she has Power over the natural Tongues, that is whored from the Spirit of God;
and so these natural men, with these natural things, that know nothing, but
follow their own spirits, and see not the things of God, they are foolishness
to them, but God is pouring his Spirit upon all natural men, upon all Flesh,
that with his Spirit they may know the things of God, and serve and Worship him
in Spirit and Truth, and know Heavenly Jerusalem their Mother, with the Spirit
that God pours upon them. -- And John saw the Mother of Harlots Drunk with the
Blood of the Saints and Martyrs of Jesus, and their Blood was found in the
Mother of Harlots, the Mystery Babylon, the false Church; And were not these
Saints Martyrs of Jesus, and Prophets of Heavenly Jerusalems Children, whose
Blood was and is Found in the Mother of Harlots, the false Church, the Mystery
Babylon? Rev. 17.18. -- He that was Born after the Flesh, persecuted him that
was Born after the Spirit, even so it is now; and the Children of new
Jerusalem, that is above, and is your Mother, they and their Mother never
persecuted any: But the Mother of Mystery Babylon, and of Harlots, she and her
Harlots were and are the persecutors, in whom is found the Blood of the
Righteous, viz. The free Born Children of Jerusalem from above,

G. F.

How all Nations may see with the Light the Life in Christ, him the great
Mountain that fills the whole Earth.
COncerning the Stone Cut out of the Mountain without Hands, spoke of in Daniel
2. which did dash to pieces the Image whose Head was fine Gold, which was
Nebuchadnezars and the Babilonians Monarchy, and should dash to pieces the
Breast and Arms of Silver, which was the Meeds and Persians Monarchy, and
likewise it should dash to Pieces the Belley and Thighs of Brass, which was
the Grecians Monarchy, and the Legs of Iron, and his Feet part of Iron and part
of Clay, which was the Romans Monarchy.

So all these four Monarchies were but one Image, the Head was Gold, and the
Breast and Arms Silver, and the Belley and Thighs Brass, and his Legs Iron, and
his Feet part of Iron and part of Clay, and this same Stone, Cut out of the
Mountain, break the Image of Iron, Clay, Silver, Brass, and Gold to pieces, and
they become like unto the Chaff of the Summer Threshing-floor, and the Wind
carried them away, that no place was found for them; So here was the end of
these four Monarchies, and the Stone that Smote the Image, became a great
Mountain, and filled the whole Earth, And in the Days of these Kings (or four
Monarchies) shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom, which shall never be
destroyed; and the Kingdom shall not be left to others, but it shall Consume
and Destroy all these Kingdoms, and it shall stand for ever, and of his Kingdom
there shall be no end, Dan. 2. and Luke 1.33.

Now is not this Stone Christ, that becomes a great Mountain, and fills the
whole Earth? and did not he come in the days of these four Monarchies, who
dashed them to pieces, and set up his Kingdom? and did not Christ say, when he
was come, My Kingdom is not of this World? and also did not he say, All Power
in Heaven and Earth is given unto me?

Now Christ's Kingdom is an everlasting Kingdom that shall never be Destroyed,
but shall stand for ever, and his Kingdom stands in Righteousness, and Power,
and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; and Christ said to Nicodemas, Except a
Man be Born again he cannot see the Kingdom of God; and again he says to him,
Except a Man be Born again of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into
the Kingdom of God, John 3. And also the Apostle says, That none that is
Defiled or Unclean shall enter into the Kingdom of God and Christ; and the
Natural Man knows not the things of God, they are foolishness to him.

So this everlasting Kingdom of God, which was set up above Sixteen Hundred
years ago, which shall never have end, for no unclean or defiled Person can
enter into it, nor none can see it, nor enter into it, except they be Born
again of Water and of the Spirit, though this everlasting Kingdom stands and
remains over all, and the unclean and defiled cannot enter into it, and they
that are not Born again cannot enter into it, nor see it, so they are not like
to destroy this everlasting Kingdom, it remains firm, and will never have an
End; though the unclean and defiled, and them that are not Born again do not
see it, yet John says in Rev. 1.9. He was in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus
Christ. -- And the Apostle told the Saints, that they were delivered from the
power of Darkness, and translated into the Kingdom of his dear Son; And was not
this while they were upon the Earth? Col. 1.13. -- So these were Born again;
and Christ says, The Law and the Prophets were until John, and he was the
greatest Prophet Born of a Woman. but the Least in the Kingdom is greater then
John, and since John Baptist Preached, men Pressed into the Kingdom, and those
are they that are Born again, and have the Spiritual Eye that see the end of
the Prophets and John, that see Christ's Everlasting Spiritual Kingdom, and
Press into it.

Now Christ the Stone that became the great Mountain, and fills the whole
Earth, [mark the whole Earth] and none shall hurt nor destroy in my holy
Mountain, says the Lord, Isa, 65.25. -- And this is the Mountain of the House
of the Lord that is established on the top of all Mountains, and exalted above
the Hills, Isa. 2.2. Mich. 4.1.

And now Christ this Mountain, filling the whole Earth, you may say, What does
it fill Asia, Africa, Europe, and America, and the East, West, North and
South? I say yes, Christ this Mountain fills the whole Earth, and he does
enlighten every one that comes into the whole World, for in him was Life, and
this Life was the Light of Men, This was the true Light which enlightens every
one that comes into the World, and that every one with this true Light, the
Life in Christ, both in Asia, Europe, Africa, and America, both East, West,
North, and South, that is come into the World; I say with this Divine Light,
the Life in Christ, they may see Christ the Mountain in their own Country,
which fills the whole Earth, for the Light shines in their Hearts, to give the
knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, John, 1.4, 9.2, Cor.
4.4. -- And Christ says, Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of
the Light, John 12.36. -- So the Light, which is the Life in Christ, gives the
knowledge of him in all places, who is the Mountain that fills the whole Earth,
for the Light is the Life in Christ, that great Glorious Mountain, and they
that believe in the Light, the Life in Christ, and are become Children of the
Light, they see this Everlasting Glorious Kingdom, and enter into it, and so
are the Children of the Kingdom of God and Christ. -- The Lord says, speaking
of Christ, I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, or upon Sion, the Hill
of my Holiness; Ask of me, and I will give thee the Heathen for thy
Inheritance, and the utmost parts of the Earth for thy Posession, thou shall
break them with a Rod of Iron, and dash them to pieces like a Potters Vessel;
be wise therefore now, O ye Kings, be ye Instructed ye Judges of the Earth,
serve the Lord with fear, and Rejoice with Trembling, Kiss the Son least he be
angry, and ye perish from the way while his Wrath is kindled but a little,
Blessed are all they that put there trust in him.

How can the Kings be wise, and the Judges Instructed, and Kiss the Son, and
keep in his way, and trust in him, but by believing in his Divine Light, which
is the Life in Christ? -- Now Christ with his Divine Light, does Inherit the
Heathen and possess the utmost Parts of the Earth, and the Wrath of the Lamb is
turned against them that do evil, and hate the Light which is his Life, then he
dashes them to pieces, like a Potters Vessel, and they perish from him the way
-- and therefore all must believe in the Light, which is the Life in Christ,
the great Mountain that fills the whole Earth, and here, in this Mountain,
the Lord will teach them his ways; and so the knowledge of the Lord shall cover
the Earth as the Waters covers the Sea. -- Gods and Christ's everlasting Kingdom
is over all, and from Generation to Generation, and the Scepter of his Kingdom
is a Righteous Scepter, and he Rules in the Kingdoms of Men: for by him Kings
Rule, and Princes Decree Justice; and his Seed I will make endure for ever, and
his Throne as the Days of Heaven.

Kingston upon Thames the 11th of the 11th Month 1687. G. F.

Here you may see how Male and Female were Help-meets in the Government, when
God made them in his Image of Righteousness and Holiness, and how Christ
restores Man up into his Image again, and how that Male and Female are all one
in him, and of the Increase of Christ's Government and Peace there is no end.
GOd said, Let us make Man in our Image, after our Likeness, and let them have
Dominion over the Fish of the Sea, and over the Fowls of the Air, and over all
the Cattle, and over every Living thing that moves upon the Earth: so God
Created Man in his own Image, in the Likeness of God Created he him, Male and
Female Created he them, and Blessed them; and God said unto them, be Fruitful
and Multiply and Replenish the Earth, and subdue it, and have Dominion over,
etc. as before, as in Genesis 1.2. Chap.

Here the Female which was the Meet-help for Adam, and they both Male and
Female were Meet-helps, Joined in Government, Dominion and Rule, being in the
likeness and Image of God, and they were Blessed in it; for God said unto them
[Mark, them] be Fruitful, and Multiply, and Replenish the Earth, Subdue it, and
have Dominion over, etc. And this was before Man and Woman fell from his Image:
So God who made Man and Woman in his own Image, gave them an Understanding to
understand what he said to them.

And the Apostle says to the Collossians, seeing ye have put off the old Man
with his Deeds, and have put on the (...) Man which is Renewed in Knowledge,
after the Image of God that Created them, where there is neither Greek nor Jew,
Circumcision, nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian Scythian, bond nor free, but Christ
is all and in all, Collos. 3.9, 10, 11.

Now this Old Man, in Adam, in the Fall, being put off, and this New Man in the
Image of God, that he made and Created them in, put on, in Righteousness and
Holiness, in such Christ is all and in all, a Ruler and a Governor, so that he
Rules in the Male and in the Female, in the new Man, in the Image of God, they
know him to be a Ruler and Governor: Isaiah says, Unto us, a Child is Born, a
Son is given, the Government shall be upon his Shoulders, and his Name shall be
called the Wonderful Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting Father, the
Prince of Peace, of the Increase of his Government and Peace there shall be no
end, etc. Isa. 9.6.7.

And the Lord says, Behold, a Virgin shall Conceive and Bear a Son, and shall
call his Name Emanuel, God with us, Isa. 7.14.

And Man was drove from God, for his Sin and Transgression, but Christ his Son
makes an end of Sin, and finishes Transgression, and Christ renews Man and
Woman again up into the Image of God, that God had Created them in; and so the
Emanuel, God with us, and so Christ is a Ruler and a Governor in them that have
put on the New Man, that he has renewed in the Image of God, For in Christ
Jesus neither Circumcision avails any thing, nor Uncircumcision, but a new
Creature, Gal. 6.16. For the Apostle says, As many of you as have been
Baptized into Christ, have put on Christ; there is neither Jew nor Greek, there
is neither Bond nor Free, there is neither Male nor Famale, for they are all
one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.27, 28.

So here all are one in Christ, that are Baptized into the Death of Christ, and
have put him on, and such know his Rule and Government, the increase of which
there is no end, etc.

The Apostle says to the Ephesians, For we are Gods Workmanship, Created in
Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has (prepared, or) ordained that we
should walk in them, that Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith, etc. Ephesians.
3.17.

So the new Creation in Christ Jesus is Gods Workmanship in his Image, in
Righteousness and Holiness, as Man was made in the Beginning, and s^^^ know
Christ to be Ruler and Governor in Male and Female, for Christ who is the
Bightness of Gods Glory, and the express Image of his Substance, who destroys
the Devil and his Work, renews Man and Woman up into the Image of God again, as
God made them in the Beginning, and such know him to be a Ruler, and a
Governor, and a Counselor, and a Father; and the Work of the Apostles, who
warned every Man and taught every Man in all Wisdom, that they might present
every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, for in Adam in the Fall they were imperfect,
and so to be Members of his Body, and the Mystery which has been hid from Ages
and Generations, which is now made manifest to the Saints, which is Christ in
you the hope of Glory, Col. 1.27, 28.

And Christ being in his People the hope of Glory, which Hope purifies them,
even as he is pure; And is not Christ's Government upon his Shoulders in his
People, and a Wonderful Councellor, and a Prince of Peace in them? as in Isa.
9.6.

And does not the Apostle say, God has set some in the Church, which is the
Body of Christ, to be helps in Government (to wit) in the Image of God, in
Righteousness and Holiness, where Christ is Governor and Counselor, and such
have put on Love and Charity which is the Bond of Perfectness, and the Peace of
God Rules in their Hearts, by which they are called into one Body, which Christ
is the holy Head of, Prince of Peace, Governor and Counselor, but as there
were such in the Days of the Apstles that were self-willed, Wells without
Water, and carried about with Tempests; that speak great Swelling words of
Vanity, promising themselves Liberty, that were presumptuous, and despised
Government: And was not this the holy pure Government of Christ in his Male and
Female, his People, his Church which they despised?

Now they that have come so far as a Cain and a Balaam, to hear Gods Voice, and
Corah, Dathan and Abiram that came out of Egypt, and never came so far as to be
Baptized into the Death of Christ, and to put him on, nor never came to be
Created a new in Christ Jesus, and to put off the old Man of Adam in the Fall,
and to be renewed up again into the Image of God, in Righteousness and
Holiness, that God Almighty made them in; therefore such Cains, Corahs, and
Balaams never came to know the Government of Christ in Male and Female; but
presumptuously Despised Government, as Corah, Dathan and Abiram did Moses, and
as Balaam, who went forth with Balak to Curss Israel, but God Restrained him,
and Reproved him for his Error, who was Destroyed at last, as well as Corah,
Dathan and Abiram; so will all they come to naught that Despise the holy
Government of Christ in his Males and Females, and do not you think that Corah,
Dathan and Abiram, and Balaam could not Speak high swelling Words of Vanity,
though they were Wells without Water, and Trees without Fruit, and Clouds that
are carried about with a Tempests, as in 2 Pet. 2. and Jude 11, 12, 13. Which
such presumptuous ones as these now are known by their Fruits, as it was in the
Apostles Days, which Despise the Righteous Government of Christ in his Male
and Female, but Christ the Beloved Seed, who bruises the Serpents Head, and in
all his Followers, and Destroys the Divil and his Works, he will Reign whose
Right it is, in them that are Baptized into his Death, and have put him on, and
have put off the old Man in Adam in the Fall, and have put on the new Man in
the Image of God, which he has Created in Righteousness and Holiness; in such
Christ was and is a Wonderful Counselor, and a Governor, and a Prince of
Peace, the same to Day as he was Yesterday, and so forever, in his Church,
throughout all Ages, who Destroys the Devil and his Works, that would hinder
him; so he will Reign, Rule and Govern, and is a Counselor in the Hearts of
his People, whose Right it is, Blessed be the Lord forever, Halelujah, the Lord
and his Christ Raigns.

God said, Let us make Man in our Image after our Likeness, and let them have
Dominion, etc. Gen, 1.26.

Now the Lord says, Let us, and were not all things made and Created by Jesus
Christ, whose Name is called the Word of God? And does not John say, There are
three that bear Witness or Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word and the Holy
Ghost, and these three are one? so there are three that bear witness and Record
in Heaven, etc. And there are three that bear Record or Witness in the Earth,
the Spirit, the Water and the Blood, and these three agree in one; and is it
not the Spirit, of God that Mortifies the Deeds of the Flesh, and the Water of
the Word that washes, and the Blood of Christ that cleanses? are not these
three that bear Witness for God in the Earth, for Man or against Man? Are they
not Gods Witnesses in the Earth? And the Lord says, Out of the Mouth of two or
three Witnesses (Namely Men Witnesses) Every Word is Established among Men, but
the Witness of God is greater than the Witness of Men, he that has an Ear, let
him Understand these things, 1 John 5.7, 8.

Kingston upon Thames, the 7th of the 10th Month 1687 G. F.

Here you may see how every one is to Improve their Talents which Christ gives
them, if not, it will be taken from them, and they cast into utter Darkness.
CHrist Jesus says, The Kingdom of Heaven is as a Man traveling into a far
Country to receive for himself a Kingdom, and to Return, who called his own
Servants, and Delivered them his Goods, and to one he gave Five Talents, and to
another Two, and to another One, and to every one according to his several
Ability, etc. Mat. 25. Luke 19.12. And after a long time the Lord of those
Servants comes, and reckons with them; and he that had Five Talents, had
gained Five more; and he that had two Talents, had gained two more; and the
Lord commended these Servants, and said, Well done Good and Faithful Servants,
Enter into the Joy of your Lord; but he that had received the One Talent, went
and Dug in the Earth, and hid his Lords Money; the Lord said, Take it from
him, and give it to him that has Ten, and Cast the Unprofitable Servants into
utter Darkness, and there shall be Weeping and Gnashing of Teeth.

Now these Talents that were given to the Lords Servants, and to every one
according to their several Abilities, was the Lords Heavenly Treasure, and was
not their own, but the Lords, and they were, and are to Improve this Heavenly
Treasure for the Lord, and to put it forth, and to gain with it for the Lord at
his appearing to them, when he calls them to an account, that it may be said,
Well done Good and Faithful Servant, enter into the Joy of the Lord, but the
Wicked and Slothful servant (he is called a servant too) hides the Lords
Talent in his Earthly Napkin, and did not Improve the Lords Heavenly Treasure;
and therefore he was cast into utter Darkness; and therefore all are to
consider, whom the Lord has given more or less of his Heavenly Treasure to,
how you do, and how you have put the Lords Heavenly Treasure forth, and have
Improved it; I say the Heavenly Treasure which you have from the Lord Jesus
Christ, who Spoke this before he was Crucified, and after he was Risen did not
he go to the Father to Receive a Kingdom, who said, All Power in Heaven and
Earth is given to me, therefore the Lords Money or Treasure of Talents ought to
be Improved, and put to the Exchangers, that he may Receive it with Usury and
Advantage; so here are Exchangers of the Heavenly Talents or Treasure of the
Lord, the increasing of them to Advantage for the Lord, as there is outward
Bankers and Exchangers and Usuries, where they do put forth their outward Money
for gain and Profit to themselves; but this is a Parable that Christ Speaks
concerning Improving of his Heavenly Treasure of Talents, which every one is to
Improve or Increase that Heavenly Talent, or Measure which they have Received
from the Lord, as good and Faithful Servants, and Stewards, if that they do
intend to enter into the Joy of the Lord.

G. F.

THE END

