John James, I hearing that thou do make a noise up and down in the Country
amongst the Ignorant, and has spoken Reproachfully, and backbited the people
of God, that by such as thee are in scorn called Quakers, here is a few Queries
for thee to answer in writing, and plainess of words, which if thou do not,
we shall spread them abroad and set them in places where thou comes.
1. Have thou the same Spirit and Power as the Prophets and Apostles had.

2. Have thou the same Revelation and Inspiration, and Spirit of Prophecy, and
pouring forth of the Holy Ghost, and do thon own the pouring forth of the
spirit upon Sons and Daughters, and is not this the last time, in which it
should be poured out, and the Sons and Daughters should Prophecy, and Old men
dream Dreams, and Young men see Visions;

3. Have thou heard Gods voice, and Christ's voice immediately from Heaven, or
art thou one of them the Lord never sent, nor spoke unto, Answer me these
Queries.

4. Do thou own that Christ that dyed at Ierusalens to be the Light that
Enlighteneth every man that comes into the World, and are not all Enlightened
by him either to their Salvation or condemnation.

5. What and where is that which must give the knowledge of God, is it within
people or without the, Aswer me according to plain Scripture.

6. Do thou preach, that whilst a man is upon the Earth, he may be freed
from sin, and the body of death, and Imperfection, and shall be perfect whilst
he be upon Earth; or do thou keep people in the state of thy Father Adam and
Mother Eve in the Fall, or do thou bring them to the state before they fell,
and so to Christ that shall never fall, which of these states do thou bring
them to, and keep thy flock in, in Adam and Eve in the fall, or Adam and Eve
before they fell, or in Christ that shall never fall, thou must keep thy Flock
in one of these three states, and which of them is it, have thou brought any of
thy Flock whom thou drivest to that Condition and state, they need no man teach
them, that is to the anointing in them, the Law in their hearts, whereby they
need not say to one another know the Lord, and that is to the light of Christ
that shines in their hearts to give them the Light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus, and how many have thou brought hither.

7. What is the Mother of Harlots, and what is the Beast she rides upon, and
what are the Peoples, Nations, and Multitudes; and Tongues the Whore sits upon,
and what is Mystery Babylon, and what is the Woman that went into the
Wilderness, and what was her time she was to be there, and what is the Beasts
and Dragons worship, and what is a will Worship, and what is it to worship
Angels, and what is that which leads Nature into its Course, and so to the
glory of the first body, and what is the glory of the second body, and what is
that which leads Nature out of its Course, and so sets the whole Course of
Nature on Fire.

8. What is the ground of that which keeps in good manners, and what is that
which corrupts them, and what is the Righteousness the world is reproved of,
and what is the Judgments, and what is that which lead the Saints into all
truth, and has every one the Spirit of God, and whether bowing, bending,
doffing hats, scraping, cringing, saying you to one', be the honor that comes
from above, or what is it, and whence comes it, and whether this before
mentioned to not stand in that Nature, part and principle which is on fire, if
it has not these things, and therefore whether or not these things do proceed
from that which leads Nature into its Course, or out of its Course, and what is
it that defaces the glory of the first body.

9. Whether or no do thou own Trembling and Quaking at the word of God.

10. Seeing thou looks upon thy self to differ from the world, and to be above
them, let us see wherein, and in what it is manifest.

11. What is self-Righteousness, and what is man's Righteousness, and the
Righteousness that is as filthy Rags, distinguish these one from another, or
whether they be all one, for our Righteousness is that which was before Adam
was, whom ye in scorn calls Quakers.

12. Whether ever thou came to see so far as Balaams Ass, that is to say, to
see the Angel of the Lord.

13. What are the Graves, and the Tombs, and the Sepulchers, and the fowls of
the Air, and the nests they sit in, which Christ spoke of, Answer.

14. Whether or no to pay Tyths or receive Tyths is not to deny Christ Jesus
to be come in the flesh, and to deny Christ to be offered up, the offering once
for all, and was not their of the Tyths a heave Offering, and was not that
Offering to be ended by Christ offering up himself, and had not the Priests a
Commandment to take Tyths of the people, of their brethren, and do not you
transgress the Law of God which takes them of those you do not call brethren,
and was not the widows, fatherless and strangers to have a part of the Tyths,
and was every Priest and Levit, and them that was to have a part of them, to
have a particular Tyth Barn, and was Tyths to be sold, and was their any
Impropriators, and whether they do not hold up the Priests of the Jews, and
their Law and Commandments that take Tyths and give Tyths and so denis Christ
the Priest, in holding up the Jews Priests.

15. And whether or no Melchisedeck did take Tyths of all other Nations that
were under him, or any other spoil but once of Abraham, and whether he had a
command for doing it, or whether it was an Example.

16. Whether the Jews did take Tyths of the Cananites or any of those Nations
that lived amougst them, or of any people where ever they came that they had
the power over, that was not of them.

17. You that speaks so much of Christ Reigning, whether or no Your Swords are
bear into Plowshares, and your Spears into Pruning books, that you do not
learn War any more; that Nation shall not life up a Sword against Nation; And
whether or no this Ministration should be amongst Christians, seeing that it
was Christ's Doctrine, That they should love one onother and love Enemies, and
he bid Peter put up his sword, and the Apostle said their Weapons were
spiritual: Secondly, Does not Peter say That the Heavens must receive Christ
Jesus until the time of Restitution of all things, which God has spoken by the
mouth of his Prophets since the World began, Acts 3. Now do you look at
restoring of things, then by what does Christ restore, whether by his Light and
power within people or without them, seeing the sin is within them, and whether
or no Christ does not remain in the Heavens until all things be restored, and
whether or no Christ do not now Reign, and whether or no he is not restoring,
and then by what (as I said before) does he restore seeing he is in the
Heavens, and must remain in the Heavens until all things be restored, and
whether or no some was not restored, when they sat in the Heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2. And whether or no he that remains in the Heavens, be not
also manifest in man, that is restored, and lives, and walks, and Reigns in
him; Answer this thou that talks of a personal Reign.

And Answer these Queries to the same thing queried, in writing, if thou be a
Minister of Christ, as thou have so published thy self, if not it will manifest
whether thou be not one of the dumb, Sheapheards spoken of in Isa. And in thy
silence it will make thee manifest to be one of the evil beasts whose mouth is
stopped.

If thou do not give us thy Answer within two weeks, we may cause this to be
Printed, because thou have slanderously reported of us.

G. F.

Printed for M.W.


