TO ALL RULERS AND MAGISTRATES, To be Tender and Take Heed of Persecuting and
Imprisoning, And Spoiling the GOODS of God's People, For Obeying, Serving, and
Worshipping the LORD GOD, that made them, and the Heavens, and the Earth, and
all things therein

By G. FOX.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BRIGHVRST, at the Sign of the BOOK in
Grace Church Street, 1683.

To All Rulers and Magistrates, to be TENDER, etc.
FOR we (the People in Scorn called Quakers) have suffered as the Lambs of
Christ by all sorts of powers, both Imprisonment, and spoiling of our Goods,
only for serving and worshipping the God that made us: And for these thirty
five or thirty six years the Goales in most Counties have seldom been empty but
we are and have been Imprisoned, and many to Death; which has caused many
Weeping Widows, and many Crying Fatherless, and yet having their goods spoiled
which should refresh and nourish them; And did we ever but Entreat, when we
have been threatened? and when we were Cursed by Bishops and Priests, did not we
Bless? and We, who are and have been Persecuted, have not we always prayed for
our Persecutors? have not we been devoured like Chickens and hunted like
Partridges by Birds of Prey? Have not we been as Sheep among Wolves? and do not
you know, that in New England some of us have been Hanged and others Banished
on pain of death, and others their Bodies whipped and beat till they have been
like a Gelly? and have not others of us had our Ears cut and some Branded with
a Hot Iron in the other Power's days? And now in Several Dungeons and Goales
Men and Women are Crowded, yea some that have Sucking Children? Oh! do not lose
the Bowels of Humanity, nor the love and tenderness of Christianity; do ye and
they learn of Christ, who is meek and low in Heart, that do and have done so
unto us: Would such be so served themselves? is this to fulfill the Royal Law
of God, To do unto all men as they would have them do unto them? Are not many
of us spoiled both in our Trades and Husbandry through the Informers that take
away our Goods? God in Heaven knows and sees all our Sufferings and
Afflictions; which is only for Obeying and Serving and Worshipping him.

And you know that the Prophets and Christ and the Apostles, they were never
Imprisoned, nor Persecuted and suffered as Just and Righteous men (by them that
made them to Suffer) but the Question is, Whether they would be so done unto
themselves, as they do unto others? whether they would not judge it to be hard
measure?

Therefore I beseech you all to consider, whether ever Christ and his Apostles
did give any Power to Imprison and persecute, and spoil the goods of any for
Obeying, serving and Worshipping God that made them? or did they ever
persecute, Imprison or spoil the goods of any, because they would not be of
their Religion?

Oh! therefore consider, you that profess your selves Christians; shut not up
your Bowels of Compassion against your Brethren; but as the Apostle says, Put
on Bowels of Mercy and Loving Kindness one toward another. And consider what
became of Pharaoh, that Oppressed and Persecuted the Children of Israel, and all
his Host that rose up against them, and would not let them go to worship God.
And what became of Cain, that Killed and Persecuted his Brother about Religion?
And what became of the Old Ungodly World? And what became of the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah, that grieved Just Lot? And what became of the Jews that
Persecuted the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles? Did they not Persecute them
because they obeyed God, and they themselves disobeyed God? And what became of
them that Persecuted Daniel and the Three Children? Did not they Persecute them
for Worshipping and Obeying God that made them? And what do you Read will
become of the Beast that Compelled to Worship? And the Whore spoken of in the
Revelations, that drinks the Blood of the Martyrs and Servants of Jesus? Does
not John in the Revelations say, that their End will be Destruction and their
followers, with the Devil and his Angels? Who was the first that led Man and
Woman from Obeying God?

But my desire is, that none that Profess Christianity may follow their Ways,
lest they partake with them in their Misery; but that all may come to the
knowledge of the truth, as it is in Jesus and in their own inward parts? And
that all may cease from Persecuting, and Imprisoning, and Spoiling the Goods of
such as meet together to Serve and Worship God in Spirit, and in truth, as
Christ has Commanded.

And Christ Jesus by the Grace of God has tasted Death for every Man; and then
has he not shed his Blood for all? And then bought them with the price of his
Blood? And is there any thing that brings Condemnation but Disobedience, and
Unbelief in him? And did Christ give any Command to his Apostles, Messengers,
and Ambassadors, to Persecute them that would not believe, hear or receive
their Testimony? But to shake off the Dust of their feet as a Witness against
them, and that should be Punishment enough for them in the day of Judgment.

And does not Christ say, let the Tares and the Wheat grow together until the
Harvest (which is the end of the world) and in the end of the world, Christ
would send his Angels that should be the Reapers, that should distinguish the
Wheat from the Tares? So Christ did not give Men Power before the World was
ended, to pluck up the Tares, lest they should pluck up the Wheat with the
Tares? for that Power Christ gives to his Angels, to sever the Wheat from the
Tares at the end of the World: And if they went into Everlasting punishment,
that did not cloth Christ in his members, and visit when he was in Prison;
What will become of them that cast Him in his Members into Prison?

And you Read what Christ says unto Saul, why Persecutest thou me? when he was
going with Authority from the Chief Priests to Persecute the Christians at
Damascus.

And you Read how often Christ Commands Christians to forgive one another, as
God and Christ has forgiven them: And must these Commands of Christ be
preached and Talked of and not Practiced? for Christ says, you must do the
will of his Father if ye enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: And they that love
God and Christ will not only call him Lord, but keep his Commands, and do what
he says.

And how do they that are called Christians say the Lords prayer, who desire
the Lord to forgive them their Trespasses as they forgive them that trespass
against them? for Christ says, if you forgive Men their trespasses, your
Heavenly Father will also forgive you your Trespasses? but if ye forgive not
Men their trespasses, neither will your Father which is in Heaven forgive you
your trespasses, to wit, your Trespasses that you trespass against him, Matthew.
6. Mark 11.

Now here you may see that you Pray to God Conditionally, for God to forgive
you your Trespasses against him as you do forgive them that Trespass against
you, and not otherwise you desire God to forgive you yours? therefore I Desire
you will Consider what you desire in this Prayer.

Oh! that all that Profess themselves Christians had the Spirit of Christ and
the mind of Christ, who said, he Came not to Destroy Men's Lives, but to Save
them? And rebuk't his Disciples, who would have had fire to have come down from
Heaven upon the Samaritans that would not Receive Christ, and told them, they
did not know what Spirit they were of: So if all Christendom had been in the
Spirit of Christ, and the mind of Christ, and known what Spirit they had been
of, they would not have Destroyed so many Men's Lives, by Goals and Persecutions
about Religion, and the Worship of God, as they have done since Christ and the
Apostles days.

So it is clear, it is not the mind of Christ, that any should suffer, or be
put to Death, because they would not receive him, or believe on him; but to
shake off the Dust of their Feet, to be a Witness against them in the Day of
Judgment.

And if we are to Pray for them that Persecute us, then they need not fear that
we should hate them; for we are commanded to Love our Enemies, and salute them,
and not only our Brethren; we are to Pray for All Men, even for KINGS and all
that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and a peaceable Life in all
Godliness and Honesty; for this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
Savior (Now this should be the Practice of all them that profess true
Christianity) for God would have all men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge
of the Truth; for there is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God and Men, the
Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due
time.

Now, if Kings and all men must be prayed for, and all that be in Authority,
and God would have them all to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, and Christ gave himself a Ransom for all; then why should men Persecute,
and Imprison, and Destroy one another, and Spoil the Goods of one another,
concerning Church, Religion and Worship, for not Conforming one to another?
whereas they should Pray for one another. And do they not pretend to pluck up
Tares before the World's End? which Christ has forbidden but is the Angels
Work at the End of the World.

Why should such as pretend themselves Christians, Imprison and Persecute any
to Death whom Christ has Ransomed? who gave himself a Ransom for all. And God
would have all Men saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth: then, why
should any be Destroyed upon the Account of Religion? And Christ said, He came
to Save Men's Lives, and not to Destroy them.

So it is clear, it is not the Mind of God and Christ that Men should Destroy
one another about Religions, Ways and Worships, but Pray for one another; for
Christ said to his Disciples, who would have had Fire come down from Heaven to
have Destroyed the Samaritans, Ye know not what Spirit ye are of; and Rebuked
them, and told them, He was not come to Destroy Men's Lives, but to Save them.

And when Christ came, there were too many destroyers of Men's Lives about
Religion in the world; and some of the Disciples were giving way to that
spirit, that would have had Men's Lives Destroyed, that would not receive
Christ; but he came to destroy the Devil and his Works, who was the Destroyer
of Men's Lives: and so Christ came not to Destroy Men's Lives, but to Save
them. And therefore have all in Christendom, who have Destroyed, not known what
Spirit they have been of, that have Destroyed so many Men and Women's Lives, by
Imprisoning and Persecuting them about Religion and Worship, since the Apostles
days? And has not this been contrary to the Commands of Christ and the Mind
of God? who would have all be saved, and all to be prayed for, and to forgive
one another, and to love one another, and to love Enemies; yea, to Pray for
Persecutors, and not be Persecutors; and to be Clothers and Visiters of Christ
in his Members in Prison, and not to be Casters of him and his Members into
Prison; for Christ, who tasted Death for every man, and gave hmiself a Ransom
for all, to wit, Men and Women, who says, He came to Save Men's Lives, and not
to Destroy them; He is the one Mediator between God and Man.

So judge in your selves what Spirit it has been, that has led professed
Christians to Persecute, and Imprison and Destroy Men's Lives and Estates about
Religion, Church and Worship, since Christ and the Apostles days, seeing
Christ bids you; Love Enemies, Pray for Persecutors, and them that Hate you,
and Despightfully use you. And therefore my Desire is to the Lord, That all
that profess Christianity, may possess Christ's Spirit and Mind; and then they
will not Persecute Christ in his Members.

And so I desire that all may come into the Fear of God, that they may receive
his pure, gentle, heavenly Wisdom, that by it you may all be ordered, and order
all that God gives you under your hands, to his Glory, Amen.

From him that desires nothing in his Heart and Soul, but the eternal Good and
all men's everlasting Happiness and welfare in Christ Jesus, Amen. G. F.
Kingston, the 24th of the 12th Month, 1682.
All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus shall Suffer Persecution,

2 Timothy 3.12. He that was Born After the Flesh, Persecuted him that was Born
After the Spirit, even so it is now,

Gal. 4.29. Whosoever stops his Ears at the Cry of the Poor, he also shall Cry
Himself, but shall not be heard.

Prove. 21.13. THE END.

