TO THE Great TURK, AND HIS KING AT ARGIERS TOGETHER WITH A Postscript of
George Pattison's taking the TURKS, and setting them on their own Shore.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. ^lark, in George-yard, in Lumbard-street, 1680.

TO THE Great TURK, And his King, at ARGIERS.
IN the Name of the great God, and Lord, Creator, and King of all things, in
Heaven and Earth, do I write unto you. And I do take Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and
Lot, and Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and Moses, and David, and all the
Prophets of the Great and most High, Dreadful and Terrible God, who is a
consuming Fire to the Wicked, and John, as you say in your Alcoran, page 30.
chap 33. I say John, the Son of Zachariah, that did affirm Christ to be the
Messiah, and to be the Word of God, that great, and chaste, just Prophet, and
Mary the Mother of Jesus Christ, with all his Holy Apostles, and your own
Mahomet that writ your Alcoran, to be Witness against you and some of your
practices that is practiced amongst you, at the dreadful day of Judgment of the
great God, when you shall all give an Account of your Words, Deeds and Actions,
and be rewarded; who will reward every man according to his works, whether they
be good or evil. For I say of a Truth, That the great God and Lord of Heaven
and Earth, and all things therein, is no respecter of Persons, but in every
Nation, he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is accepted of him.

And now, O great Turk, and the King of Argier, I have something here to
present before you, And my desires are, That you may read, hear and fear, the
Great and Terrible, Righteous, Holy and pure God.

And here as follows, you may see the Impiety and unchastness, and the
cruelties of some of your People at Argier, against honest, chaste People, that
serve and fear and worship the most high God, which you have taken Captive, I
say you have taken their Ships, their Goods, and some you keep Slaves, some
till they have died, and others you have sold for Slaves, many people of the
most high God, in scorn called Quakers, besides great numbers of other English
people, and people of other Nations cruelly Oppressed, and inhumanely used by you.

Did ever Mahomet give you Authority to rob, spoil, and take the Goods of them
that do you no harm, and keep Captives the bodies of them, and sell them, or to
beat upon the feet, belly, or back, them which are so taken, to make them
promise more money for their Ransoms than they are able; Or to beat upon the
feet with one, or two, or three hundred blows, and hang up by the heels, and
beat them which you have taken Captives, because they refuse to lie with your
men, as a man lies with a Woman: And is it not contrary to your very wild
Bulls, Horses, Rams, and He Goats, and other wild Creatures and bruit Beasts?

And is it not declared against, by the Mighty and Eternal God, by Moses and
all his holy Prophets; who says, It is an Abomination to lie with mankind as
with Woman kind: and such men as commit these Abominations have defiled the
Land, and God will spue them out. And such Emperors, Kings and Magistrates as
wink at, and suffer such wicked Abominations and Impieties, the great God will
bring his Judgments and Vengeance upon them.

For the Eternal Holy Lord God Almighty says, who is of purer eyes than to
behold Iniquity; If any man lies with mankind, as he lies with Women, both of
these men have committed Abomination, they shall surely be both put to Death;
their Blood shall be upon them, for all such defile Gods Land and Earth; and
for such Iniquities will the mighty God visit your Land: For he is the mighty
God, to see all your actions, ways and doings, and hears all your words, and
sees all your thoughts; and you can turn your selves no way from the eye and
face of God, nor from his hearing your words, nor seeing your thoughts. Now
would you (to wit, the Great Turk, and the King of Argiers, or any of your
Subjects) be so served your selves, if you should be so taken Captive, to be
hanged up by the heels, and beaten with two or three hundred stripes, because
you esteem Virtue, Piety and Chastity, and not be forced to lie with other men,
as you lie with Women, could you undergo such punishment as you inflict upon
some of our Chaste people, because they will not submit to such abominable
impieties, as some of your Subjects would force upon them that you have now in
Captivity.

And would you think it were just, according to the Law of the great God, and
your own Alcoran, if you were taken Captive and your Goods spoiled, and to be
beaten upon the belly, back on feet, to get more money than you are able to be
give, for the Redemption out of your Captivity; and is not this contrary to the
Just Law of the great and holy God, and contrary to his Prophets, yea and
contrary to Mahomet, that gave forth the Alcoran: Or did those which took Lot,
Abraham's Friend, and his company Captive, beat them, because they would not
lie with men as with Women: Or where did ever David, or any of the Prophets of
God, force any that they had taken Captive, to lie with man as with Woman as
you have done.

And do not you remember, that when some of your Men of War took George
Pattison Captive, who was a Quaker; and his Ship, and his Men, and after they
conquered them again, without hurting of them, and took them Captive, and when
they had done, set them on the Turkish Shore without hurting of them, as may be
seen in the Postcript.

And where did ever any of the Turkish Men of War do so to the English or to
the Quakers; but on the contrary you beat them, to get more money than they are
able to give you, and because they will not lie with your men as they do with
Women; and this practice of yours is neither moral nor humane, but worse than
Beasts; and so do contrary to the Law of the great God, in that you do that to
others, which you would not have others do unto you. Now Mahomet says in your
Alcoran, chap. 15. page 161. When the Messengers of the great Eternal God, were
sent to destroy the Infidels of Sodom, which came to Lot's House; and the
Inhabitants of the City came to Lot's House, to see the Messengers: And Lot
said unto them, I beseech you, defile not your selves with my Guests: Fear God,
and dishonor not your selves, and how, that Lot said, behold my two Daughters,
take them, and the Inhabitants said, we do not hinder thee to lodge thy Guests:
and how that the Inhabitants remained confounded in their Drunkenness, and that
God overthrew the City, and turned it upside down, and caused it to Rain with
Stones and Fire which utterly destroyed it, who were so impious: And this shall
serve for an Example to Passengers that shall see those ruins; and for a mark
of the Omnipotency of God; to them that believe in his Divine Majesty, that God
avenged on them, they may serve for Examples to Posterity. Now how can you look
up to the great God of Truth, and in your owned Alcoran and Scriptures
concerning Lot, and suffer such impious abominable Actions, to be committed at
Argier, for your men to whip young men, and force, because they will not lie
with men as women; Is not this as bad or worse than the Sodomites, that would
have layn with the Messengers that came to Lots House, as with Women; who
called to Lot, and said, bring them out that we may know them, and Lot
proffered them his two Daughters to save the Messengers. And is not the Eternal
God, that changes not the same, to Judge and Destroy them that act such things
among you, as them in Sodom did, and that suffer such Impieties and
Abominations to be acted, and love their Sins more than Piety.

And Mahomet says in your Alcoran, Chap. 15. God guides not the Unjust. and
therefore the Great and Eternal God does not guide your people in these
Impieties; and you say, The greatest part of the World are impious, because of
the enormities of their Crimes; But now look among your own Subjects, and see
if they be not the same for crimes, impieties, and enormities. And if Jesus the
Son of Mary, who confirms the ancient Scriptures be full of Light, and of the
Gospel, to conduct the people the right way, with a confirmation of the Old
Testament, and guide, and instruct for the righteous, then certain your actions
before mentioned at Argier, and that way, does declare you not to be in this
right way of Light, and Gospel of Jesus.

And again Mahomet says in your Alcoran, such as shall not Judge conformable
to the Laws of God, are unjust: and these Abominable Impieties of yours, are
not conformable to the Law of God, but leads you into the way of Destruction,
from the way of Salvation, and therefore unjust.

And you say in your Alcoran, chap. 5. God loves the Just, but he hates such
unjust action of yours: And in your Alcoran you write, That God punished the
Children of Israel that polluted the earth, and opposed the Will of God, etc.
and further you say, He that slays an Innocent person, shall be punished as
if he had slain the whole World; and he that shall give his life shall be
recompensed as if he had given Life to the whole World. Now has not your
practice herein been contrary to your Alcoran, as in chap. 5. and page 64.65.

And do not you say, you gave them your Curse, that altered the words of the
Scripture, and also says, That God loves them that do good, c. 5 p. 65.

Now these bad actions of yours are contrary to the Scriptures, and contrary to
your Alcoran, and therefore how can God love you. And again you say, Such as
have the Knowledge of the Scriptures, ought to believe in Jesus before their
Death; for he shall be a Witness against them of their Actions in the day of
Judgment. Now ye Turks consider how you do acknowledge the Scriptures, and
believe in Jesus, and in God, who shows forth such abominable Actions: and do
not you think that Jesus the Messiah, will be a Witness against you at the day
of Judgment, for your impitles and your infidelity, and must not all such be
cast into the lowest Hell, and find no relief except they repent in their
lifetime, and do good Works meet for Repentance, and resign your selves to
God, and obey his Commandments; as to this effect you say in your Alcoran, cap.
4. page 61.

And you confess, That every man shall taste Death, and have reward at the day
of Judgment. And do you think of the day of Judgment, and fear God, that do
such Evils and Impieties.

And again, you say in the Alcoran, That you would have the fear of God before
your eyes, and if you be converted, your Principle remains unto you, do
injustice to no man, then it shall not be done unto you: if your Debtors be not
able to pay and in want, you do well to stay their convenience, chap. 2. page
28.

Now do not you Turks show, That you are degenerated from your Principle, and
are not converted, that do these unjust, abominable things to others, that you
would not have them do unto you, and beat your Slaves and Captives, because
they will not give you more money than they have to redeem themselves withal,
and because they will not lie with your men as with Women; and therefore, as
you say in the same Chapter, The Wicked shall be deprived of Protection at the
day of Judgment. And again in your Alcoran you say, You shall all one day
appear before his Divine Majesty, to be judged. Therefore dread and fear this
day, you that commit such Abominations, and act such Cruelties. Again, Mahomet
says, in c. 2. p. 19. There be men whose Speeches may be pleasent to thee in
this World, they wiil call God to witness what is in their hearts,
nevertheless, they are very pernicious. Now, is not this your Condition at
Argier? And you say, God knows, he is with them that fear him, c. 2. p. 18.
But truly you do show that you are not in this fear, c. and p. 11. Again, you
say, Wheresoever men do turn themselves, there the Face of God will meet them,
his Divinity extends through the whole Earth. Therefore how dare you in the
face and sight of God act such things, and not repent, and fear his divine
Majesty: And therefore take heed that you do not purchase to your selves the
Life and Lusts of the World, and quit Paradise, and go into misery; as you say
in your 8 page.

And again, Mahomet says, If Slaves have recourse to you, ye shall redeem
them, etc. page 8. Now you are far from redeeming Slaves, when you beat them
for not giving you Money according to your wills, and more than they can give,
and also beat them, because they will not commit horrid Uncleanness, to defile
and abuse their Bodies with Mankind. And you say that Adam begged pardon for
his Fault, who departed from his Grace, and have not you need of this, and
repent and turn to the Lord, you who defiles the Earth? For else is not Hell
prepared for all such that polutes the Earth, for you are not observers of Gods
Law, nor of your own Alcoran, as you may see, chap. 2. page 2.

And the great God, the Creator of all, does know all in Heaven and in Earth,
both what is done in secret and openly, and all is naked before him, who will
reward every man according to his Works; He is a consuming Fire.

And Mahomet says, that God guides not the Wicked, chap. 19. page 115. And
again, he says, Alms is appointed for the Poor, for them that recommend
themselves to God, to redeem Slaves, and such as are in Debt, in the same chap.
p. 11. I say then, according to your own Alcoran, God has not been your Guide,
to be so wicked against the Slaves you take: And as for your Alms, and Charity
to them, is manifest but cold: But where did any called Christians, after they
had taken any of you Turks, beat you, because you would not give them more money
than you had, and because you would not lie with Men as with Women: And if God
be full of goodness for the people, as Mahomet says, c. 10. p. 130. then you
are degenerated from his Goodness.

And again, in c. 11. p. 134. Mahomet says, That God shall reward every one
according to his Works; And therefore, why do not you dread and fear this great
God of Heaven and Earth? And c. 11. p. 140. Mahomet says, detain nothing from
your Neighbors, defile not the Earth, etc. Then how can you detain men's
Children, and Servants, and Goods from them, and beat them, because they will
not give you more Money than they have, to redeem them, and hang them up by the
heels and beat them, because they will not lie with Men, as with Women; O
horrible Impieties; And did not God destroy such both in the day of Noah,
Abraham, Lot, and Moses, that did corrupt and defile the Earth?

And, c. 12. p. 144. How Joseph's Mistress would have had him to have been
unchaste, and how amorous she was of Joseph her Husband's Slave, and how that
Joseph said, O God, I had rather be a Prisoner, than do what she desires. Now
here, Do not you act contrary to Joseph and your own Alcoran who would force
your Captives to lie with you as with Women? Is not this worse then Joseph's
Mistress, who would not only force, but beat them with some hundreds of
Stripes, because they will not submit to your inhumane Impieties, and unchaste
wicked Lusts? For our Friends, that are your Captives, are of Joseph's Spirit,
that obey the Law of the most high God. And, you say, that Joseph's Mistress
did confess he was a just man, but Joseph would not be a Traitor to his Master;
No more can the People of God called Quakers, your Slaves in Argier, be
Traitors to God, and disobey his just Laws, that condemns such unchaste
inhumane Impieties, that you Turks would force in Argier, to lie with Men as
with Women, they had rather be Prisoners all the days of their Lives.

And therefore, as Mahomet says, c. 19. p. 188 That all such Infidels, for
Actions. For, as you confess, You must all appear before the Lord, at the Day
of Judgment, and give an account of your actions. And could the old World, and
Sodom, be more vicious than you, that do such wicked Actions. And Mahomet
says, chap. 21. page 200. That David and Solomon who rendered Justice in the
Field, that the Flocks of the Village entered by night without Shephards; Now
are not you fallen and degenerated from this Justice both of David and Solomon?
that the Flocks cannot enter the Villages without Shepherds and Guides, let the
Great God of Truth judge; And therefore what will you say in the day of
Judgment, when the Prophets and your own Alcoran will be against you; for will
not you that act such things, be found Firebrarnds of Hell; and how can such
expect the Lords Protection: and therefore the great God will call you to an
account for all your actions; and all men upon the earth, who transgress his
good and holy Just Law: and if the God of Truth be King of the whole Earth, as
you confess in your Alcoran chap. 23. page 212: and the Creator of all, and
King of all things, both in Heaven and Earth, then how dare you act such
unchaste, unjust things, and be such Wicked Rebels against his Commandment and
Just Law, and therefore the Balance of the Cursed, as you confess, shall be
light of good Works, that obeys not the Commandments of God.

And Mahomet says chap. 29. page 245. how God delivered Abraham from the
People that would have killed him: but if you were in the steps and Faith of
Abraham or Lot, you would not defile your selves with filthiness; and do not
you confess, That Lot said to them of Sodom, ye defile your selves with
filthiness, unknown to any before you, and told them they inclined to the love
of men; ye rob in the highways and defile one another: Now have not you Turks
forgotten Lots Preaching, and degenerated from your own Alcoran, and are become
Robbers, and to follow that unknown filthiness, with which you defile your
selves (to wit,) the Lust of men: that you beat those men which you have robbed
and spoiled, and taken Captive, because they will not lie with your men as
Women: And therefore how can you expect, but that Gods Wrath and Indignation
will fall upon you for your impieties, and you to be set forth for examples to
Posterity, whom the Devil has seduced from the right way of the Lord, and of
his righteous law, who neither follows your own Mahomet, what he has declared,
but the vanities of Infidelity and fears not God, his Divine Majesty, nor
regard his Law, but have contemned his Commandments. And therefore Mahomet
says chap. 51. page 326. such as fear not God, and do not believe, shall be
punished in Hell fire. And again Mahomet says, chap. 59. page 344. In the Name
of God, gracious and merciful, whatsoever is in Heaven and Earth exalts the
Glory of God, he is Omnipotent and Wise; It is he that exiles the Wicked from
among them that knows his Law: Then here are not you the Wicked that are
exiled, that disobey his Law, and commit such abominable things, and therefore
you cannot exalt Gods Glory, neither are you gracious nor merciful, that do
thus beat and abuse your Captives, because they will not lie with men as Women,
yea 2 or 300 Stripes, and to give more money for their Redemption than they are
able to give: and therefore such Wickedness as yours does dishonor the great
God, and you will be made the examples of his Wrath, and suffer the pains of
Hell fire, except ye repent; as Mahomet says chap. 67. page 356.

And therefore, do not streng then your selves in Impiety, nor put your Fingers
in your Ears and stop them, and cover your Head with your Garments, that you
will neither hear nor see Gods Law, as Mahomet tells you, which reproves you
for your Impieties, who are erred from the right way of the Lord, that do
commit such things. And c. 93. p. 385. Mahomet tells you, how the Lord inriches
you, and that you should do no injury to the Orphans, and that you should not
devour the poor, but that you should recount the Graces that God has conferred
upon you: Now, are not you Turks degenerated, not only from the Law of God, but
from Mahomet's teaching in his Alcoran? Do not ye devour the poor Orphans, who
you take Captive, and injure them when you beat them, because they will not
give you more money than they have, and because they will not lie with your men,
which is abominable?

Again, Mahomet says, c. 102. p. 319. He that persecutes his Neighbor, misery
is upon him, and persecution shall come upon him, and conquer him; And
therefore, if ye believe his Alcoran, this will be fulfilled unto you, that do
such things. And again, Mahomet says, He that heaps up Treasures, and is busy
to count them, thinks they will make him Immortal, he tells such what shall be
their misery, that their Hearts shall burn in the fire of Hell: and therefore
what will become of you, who get your Treasure by Theft and Robbery, and taking
Captives, and beat them to give more money for Redemption than they have,
neither do not think you any harm, who are the Subjects of the great God, and
keep his Commandments; surely such that do so, will be overwhelmed with the
Flames of Hell, and bound to great Pillars of the same. And again Mahomet
says, chap 105. page 391. He that devours the Substance of Orphans, and the
Bread of the Poor, Blasphemes against the Law of God, and misery is upon him.
Now are not you men of Argier, that devours the substance of Orphans, and
hinder men to do well and follow their lawful business: and so are not only
under the Judgment of the Law of God, but under the Judgment of your
Mahoment, who live there by spoiling and robbing your Neighbor, that think you
no hurt.

And Jesus the Son of Mary, which you confess in your Alcoran was sent to guide
and instruct people in the right way, whom you confess was a great Prophet, and
do find fault with the Jews because they did not obey him, he commands people
that they should love their enemies, and do good unto enemies, and pray for
enemies, and do good unto them that despightfully use them. And you say in your
Alcoran, That Jesus shall be a Witness in the day of Judgment, against such as
obey not his Law; then do not you believe he will be a Witness against you, for
disobeying his Command and Law, who hate not only them you think your enemies,
but those that neither think nor do you harm, and take them Captive, and rob
and spoil them of their Goods; and beat them because they will not be defiled
with your men, and give you more money for their Ransom than they are able to
give.

And again Mahomet says, chap. 3. page 34 That Jesus said, Who shall sustain
the Law of God in my absence? and the Apostles answered him, We will sustain
the Law of God in thy absence, etc. And therefore why do not you believe in the
Law of God, according to Jesus and the Prophets; for Jesus Apostles declared
against such men as burned in their Lusts one toward another, men with men;
and who knew the Judgments of God was upon them that committed. such things,
and that they were worthy of Death, and yet did not only do such things, but
had pleasure in them that did them; and therefore you Turks that do such
things, are Judged by the great God, and all his Holy Prophets, and Jesus
Christ, and his Apostles, to Act contrary to Gods pure, just, holy, righteous
Law, and they are Witnesses against you, as is also your own Alcoran.

And now, consider O ye Turks, The great and holy Eternal God, who made the
World and all things therein, he is Lord of Heaven and Earth, and great King
over all, and dwells not in Temples made with hands, but in Temples of
Peoples hearts, neither is he Worshipped with men's hands; he gives to all
breath, life, and all things, that they might serve and worship him, and he
has made of one Blood all Nations of men, for to dwell on the face of the
Earth; and has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of their
Habitations, and all should seek after the Lord, who fills Heaven and Earth,
who is not far from any people, and now commands all men every where to repent;
because he has appointed a day in which he will Judge the World in
Righteousness; And therefore how can you do any Violence against your own flesh
and blood, seeing that God has made of one Blood all Nations of men, and
commands you to do unto all men, as you would have them do unto you, yea and to
love one another, and to love enemies: and therefore it is the Devil that
seduces you, and makes you hate both your Friends and Enemies, and your own
Flesh and Blood. And also the Eternal God of Truth commands, That Prayers and
Supplications be made for all men, who would have all men to be saved, and come
to the knowledge of the Truth, and therefore you ought not to destroy them, nor
to hurt them, which you cannot hurt, if you truly pray for them: For the Lord
has commanded his Prophet Ezekiel to say unto the People, As I live says the
Lord, I have no pleasure in the Death of the Wicked, but that the Wicked turn
from his Wicked ways and live: Therefore turn ye, turn ye from your evil ways,
for why will ye Die, for I have no pleasure in the Death of him that Dies,
says the Lord God of Truth, therefore turn your selves to the Lord and ye
shall live; for the Lord God that Created the Heavens and the Earth, and
stretched them out; he that spread forth the Earth, and that which comes out of
it, he that gives breath to the People upon it, and Spirit to them that walk
therein, his Law and Covenant, and Light is to be minded and kept that he has
given to the Nations, so that every one that has Breath, may praise the Lord
in his Covenant of light; for in the hand of the Lord is the Soul of every
living thing, and the Breath of all mankind. And the Lord opens unto them that
obey him, his good Treasure; that they have the Blessings from above and also
from below; and he is the Lord God of the spirits of all flesh, and therefore
all are to worship and serve him in the Spirit and Truth, who is the Lord God
of their Spirits: And he was the Teacher of Adam and Eve, and as long as they
kept under his Teachings they were happy; but when they forsook Gods Teaching,
and followed the Devils and Satan's Teaching, who led them from God into
corruptions, filthiness, uncleanness, and into Divisions, and to destroy one
another, but according to Gods Promises and Prophets, the Seed of the Woman is
come to bruise the Serpents head: and is the Speaker and Teacher again to his
People by it, as he was to Adam and Eve in Paradise; Glory and Praise to the
Great and Eternal God for Ever.

And God by his Prophets said, That he would pour out of his Spirit upon all
Flesh: And Jesus Christ said, That God was a Spirit, and they that Worship him,
must Worship him in Spirit and Truth: And now all Men and Women in the whole
World, they must come to the Spirit and the Truth in their own hearts, which
they have from the God of Truth, if they do serve and worship the holy and
eternal God of Truth, in his Spirit and Truth: and these are the true
Worshippers that Worship the Eternal God of Truth in his Spirit and Truth,
which the Devil, which is the foul corrupt Spirit is out of, who abode not in
the Truth, and there is no Truth in him, therefore he is not to be followed nor
worshipped, but the God of Truth: and the Grace of God which brings Salvation,
has appeared to all men, which teaches us his people to deny Ungodliness and
Worldly Lusts, we living Soberly, Righteously and Godly in this present World:
Now all men must come to this Grace of God in their hearts, which appears to
them in their hearts, which shows them their Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and
their unrighteousness, and it will teach them to forsake it, and bring their
Salvation; but if that you do turn this Grace of God into wantonness, and walk
despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, you walk in despite of that which
should bring your Salvation, then you bring the Wrath and Indignation of the
great God against you, who abuse his Grace and Favor; and the Messiah and you
and Mahomet do consess that John declares Christ the Messiah to be the Word,
then you are to obey him. Moreover John says, That he was not that Light, but
sent to bear Witness of that Light, and that was the true Light which lights
every man that comes into the World: Now you all being enlightened with this
true Light, which Light lets you see all your evil deeds and actions that you
do, and all your evil words and thoughts that you speak and think. And every
one of you that does Truth comes to the Light, that your Deeds may be manifest
they are wrought in God, from whom they have this Light in whom there is no
Darkness; but every one of you that does evil hates the light, then you hate
Jesus Christ and the Eternal God, neither will you come to the light, lest your
Deeds should be reproved by the light; and this is the Condemnation, That Light
is come into the World, and men love Darkness rather than Light, because their
Deeds be Evil. Now if you would do the Truth and come to the Light and love it,
it shines in your hearts, and would give you the Light of the knowledge of the
Glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ, and then you would know this
Heavenly Treasure in your Earthen Vessels, and the excellency of this power to
be of God, and not of your selves. And you do confess, That Jesus Christ was
not begotten by the Will of man, who was Conceived of Mary, and that she should
Conceive and bring forth without the touching of man, and he being Conceived by
the Holy Spirit, then whose Son can he be but Gods; who taught him the
Scriptures, and the mysteryes of the Laws of the Old Testament, and the Gospel;
who was a Prophet to the Children of Israel, as you confess in your Alcoran,
chap. 3. page 34. So he was declared to be Gods Son in the power. according to
the Spirit of Holiness by the Resurrection from the Dead; for all Died in Adam,
and he tasted Death for every man, and is risen for the Just fication of all
that believe in him, the true Light of the Eternal God.

And now all ye Turks, and all People upon the earth; God who is Immortal,
Eternal, and Invisible, he has poured out of his Spirit upon you all; but if
you do grieve it, and vex, and rebel, and err from and against his good Spirit,
then you go from Gods Law, and that which does Witness for him, which is, his
Spirit in your hearts, which is a Witness for the King of Kings, yea, the great
King of Heaven and Earth; I say, this Witness does Witness for the great God,
who will Judge the World in Righteousness, according to this Witness, and the
Secrets of every man's heart, he by his Spirit does show unto man his Thoughts
and the Imaginations of his heart, and searches the Heart, and tryes the Reins,
and all things are naked and open to him* who is a Consuming Fire to the
Wicked: Now this Spirit of the God of Truth, which he has poured upon all
flesh of men and women, it is a Witness against you for the pure God, for all
your unrighteous, and ungodly, impious actions, and your bad Thoughts and
Words, and whatever you do or act that is unjust, and unholy, and for what you
do to others, you would not have done to you; the Holy Spirit of the great God
of Truth is a Witness against you: It was a Witness against Adam and the Old
World that disobeyed him; it was a Witness against the Jews; and it is a
Witness against all Christians that walk not in it; and Turks, and all people
upon the earth: and they that are led by the good Spirit of God, are his
Children, Sons and Daughters: and therefore prize your time while you have it,
ye Turks and others, and mind Gods good Spirit, and his Light and Grace: which
will bring your Salvation, that you may come into favor with the God of Truth.

From him whose Love is to God and Jesus Christ, the Just and Holy One, and all
his Holy Prophets and Apostles, and all People upon the Earth, for their
Salvation, and desires their Eternal Good and Happiness, and not any man's
Destruction. G. Fox.
Kingston upon Thames, the 16 of the fifth month, 1680.
POSTSCRIPT.
Of George Pattisons taking the Turks about the 8 Month 1663.
Dear Friend,
THine I have received: In Answer to thy request, I have given thee an Account
as well and as near as I can; but as to the exact time I cannot, for I have not
my Books. I was George Pattisons Mate, and coming from Venice, being near a
Spanish Island called May-York, we were Chased by a Turkish Ship or Patah, as
sometimes before we had been, and thinking by our Vessels well Sailing, might
escape: But Providence Ordered it so, That by carrying overmuch Sail, some of
our Materials gave way, by which means the said Turk came up with us, and
commanded the Master on Board, who accordingly went with four men more, leaving
me and three men and a boy on board our Ship; and so soon as our men came on
Board the Turk, they took them all out of the Boat, and came about 14 Turks in
our Boat. All which time I was under a very great Exercise in Spirit, not so
much for my self, because I had a secret hope of relief; but a great stress lay
upon me for the men in this very Juncture of time; for all hope of outward
appearance being then gone; the Master being on board of the Turk, and four
more, and the Turks just coming on Board, I being as one, even as if I were or
were not, only desiring of the Lord for patience in such an Exercise, and going
to the Vessel side, to see the Turks come in, the Word of Life run through me,
Be not afraid, for all this thou shall not go to Argier. And I having formerly
good experience of the Lords doing upon several such like occasions, as in
times of War I believed what the Lord did say in me: At this all kind of fear
was taken from me, and I received them as a man might his Friend; and they were
as Civil, so showing them all parts of the Vessel, and what she was laden
withal, then I said to them that were our men; Be not afraid, for I believe for
all this we shall not go to Argier, but let me desire you, as you have been
willing to obey me, so be as willing to obey the Turks. For by our so doing I
saw we got over them, for when they saw our great diligence, it made them
careless of us, I mean, in securing of us: So when they had taken some small
matter of what we were laden withal, some went on Board their own Ship again,
and some staid with us, which were about eight: Then began I to think of the
Master and the other four, which were in the Turks Ship; for as for my self and
the other with me, I had no fear at all; Nay, I was so far from it, That I said
to one then, Were but the Master on Board, and the rest, if there were twice so
many Turks I should not fear them: So my earnest desire was to the Lord, That
he would put it into their hearts to send him on board with the rest, and good
was the Lord in answering, for it was as a Seal to what he before spoke through
me.

As soon as the Master was on Board with the rest, all manner of fear was off
on me as to my going to Argier, and some said to me, I was a strange man, I was
afraid before I was taken, but now I was taken I was not; my Answer was, I now
believe I shall not go to Argier, and if you will be ruled by me, I will act
for your delivery as well as my own. But as yet I saw no way made, for they
were all Armed, and we without Arms. Now we being altogether, except the
Master, I began to reason with them, What if we should overcome the Turks and
go to May York? At which they very much rejoiced; and one said, I will kill one
or two; another said, I will cut as many of their Throats as you will have me;
this was our men's Answer. At which I was much troubled, and said unto them, If
I knew any of them that offered to touch a Turk, I would tell the Turks my
self. But said to them? If you will be ruled, I will act for you, if not, I
will be still; to which they agreed to do what I would have them. Then said I,
if the Turks bid you do any thing, do it without grumbling, and with as much
diligence and quickness as you can, for I see that pleases them, and that will
cause them to let us be together: To which they agreed.

Then I went to the Master, who was a man of a very bold Spirit, and told him
our Intents; whose Answer to me was, If we offered to rise, and they overcame
us, we had as good be burnt alive, the which I knew very well. But I could get
him no way to adhere to me, in that he being fearful of Bloodshed; for that
was his reason: Insomuch that at last I told him we were resolved, and I
questioned not to do it without one drop of Blood spilt, and I believed that
the Lord would prosper it, by reason I could rather go to Argier than to kill a
Turk: So at last he agreed to this, to let me do what I would, Provided we
killed none: at that time there being still two Turks lying in the Cabin with
him; So that he was to lie in the Cabin, that by his being there they should
mistrust nothing, which accordingly he did. And having bad Weather, and lost
the Company of the Man of War; the Turks seeing our diligence, made them
careless of us.

So the second night, after the Captain was gone to sleep, I persuaded one to
lie in my Cabin, and so one in another, till at last it raining very much, I
persuaded them all down to sleep; and when asleep got their Arms in Possession.
Then said I to the men of our Vessel: Now have we the Turks at our Command; no
man shall hurt any of them, for if you do, I will be against you: But this we
will do, now they are under we will keep them so, and go to May-York. So when I
had ordered some to keep the Doors, if any should come out, straightly charging
the spilling of no Blood; and so altered our Course for May York, the which in
the Morning we were fair by: So my Order was to our men, if any offered to come
out, not to let out above one at a time. And in the morning one came out,
expecting to have seen their own Country, but on the contrary it was May-York.
Now, said I to our men, be careful of the Door, for when he goes in, we shall
see what they will do. And as soon as he told them we were going toward May
York, they instead of rising fell all to crying, for their hearts were taken
from them. So they desired they might not be sold; the which I promised they
should not. So soon as I had pacified them, then I went in to the Master, he
not yet knowing what was done, and so he told their Captain what we had done,
how that we had overcome his men, and that we were going for May York. At
which unexpected News he Wept, and desired the Master not to sell him; the
which he promised he would not. Then we told the Captain we would make a place
to hide them in, where the Spaniards should not find them; at which they were
very glad, and we did accordingly. So when we came in, the Master went on Shore
with four more, and left me on board with the Turks which were ten. And when he
had done his business, not taking Product, lest the Spaniards should come and
see the Turks --. But at Night an English Master came on Board, being an
Acquaintance; and after some Discourse, we told him if he would not betray us,
we would tell him what we had done; but we would not have the Spaniards to know
it, lest they should take them from us; The which he promised but broke it; and
would fain have had two or three of them, to have brought them for England; but
we saw his end: And when he saw he could not prevail, he said they were worth
two or three hundred pieces of eight a piece; Whereat both the Master and I
told him, if they would give many Thousands, they should not have one, for we
hoped to send them home again.

So he looked upon us as Fools, because we would not sell them; the which I
would not have done for the whole Island. But contrary to our expectations, he
told the Spaniards, who threatened to take them from us: but so soon as we heard
thereof, we called out all the Turks, and told them they must help us, for the
Spaniards would take them from us. So they resolvedly helped us, and we made
all haste to run from the Spaniards, the which pleased the Turks very well. So
we put our selves to the hazard of the Turks, and being taken again, to save
them

So we continued about six or seven days, not being willing to put into any
Port of Spain, for fear of losing of the Turks.

We let them have all their liberty for four days, till they made an attempt to
rise, the which I foresaw, and prevented without any harm: I was very Courteous
to them, at the which some of our men grumbled; saying, I had more Care of the
Turks than them: My Answer was, They are Strangers, I must treat them well.

At last, I told the Master it might do well to go to the Turks Coast, for
there it was more likely to miss their Men of War than where we were; and also
it might fall out so, that we might have an opportunity to put the Turks on
Shore: To which the Master agreed.

And in two days we were near the Turks Shore at a place called Cape hone,
about Fifty Miles from Argier, as the Turks told us. So when we came about six
miles from the Shore, it fell calm, and I had very much working in my mind,
about getting them ashore.

At last I went to the Master and told him, I had a great desire to put the
Turks on Shore, but how I knew not; for to give them the Boat, they might go
and get Men and Arms, and so take us again; and to put half on Shore, they
would raise the Country and surprise us when we came with the rest. But if he
would let me go, and if three more would go with me, I would venture to put
them on Shore; to which he consented.

So then I spoke to the men, and there were two more, and my self and a Boy
took in the 10 Turks all loose, and went about six miles and put them on Shore
in their own Country, within about four miles of two Towns which they knew.
Withal we gave them about fifty Padas of Bread and other necessaries to Travel
with. They would fain have enticed us to go to the Towns, telling us we should
have Wines, and many other things: as to their parts, I could have ventured
with them. They all embraced me very kindly in their Arms when they went
ashore. They made one Rising in the Boat when going ashore, the which I
prevented; and we parted with a great deal of love.

When we came home to England, the King came to the Vessels side, and enquired
an Account, the which the Master gave him.

So this is as near as I can certify thee; I have writ thee more atlarge to
give thee the whole as it was; but thou may take what is the most material;
and so I rest thine in that which can do good for evil, which ought to be the
practice of all true men.

Thomas Lurting.
Liverpoole, the 30 of the fifth month, 1680.
THE END.

