OLD SIMON THE SORCERER Who has bewitched the whole City of Christendom, and
to all the Cities he has given out, That himself is some great one; to whom
they have all given heed from the least to the greatest, saying, This Man is
the great Power of God; who deceived the City by his Sorcery and Witchcrafts,
who has been baptized.

Also, Certain QVERIES TO BE ANSWERED.

G. F.

LONDON, Printed in the Year 1663.

Old SIMON the Sorcerer, etc.
THere was a certain man called Simon, who before-time in the City of Samaria
used Sorcery, and bewitched the people of Samaria, giving out that himself was
some great one, to whom they all of Samaria gave heed, from the least to the
greatest, saying, This man is the great Power of God; to whom they had regard,
because for a long time he had bewitched them with his Sorceries: And after
this, Simon the Sorcerer himself believed at the preaching of Philip, and was
baptized; and when he saw how the Holy Ghost fell upon the people by the
Apostles laying of their hands on them, and the Miracles they did Simon would
have given the Apostles money, saying, Give me this power, that on whomsoever I
lay hands, may receive the Holy Ghost. But Peter said unto him, Thy money
perish with thee; because thou have thought the gift of God is to be bought
with money, thou have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God; repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray if
perhaps the thought of thy heart may be forgiven thee; for I perceive that thou
art in the gall of bitterness, and the bond of iniquity. Then answered Simon
and said, Pray ye for me, that none of these things ye have spoken, come upon
me. Mark, his thought to have bought the gift of God for money, got into him
after he was baptized, but all the other Simons who have been since Simon
Magus, have gone beyond him, who thought to have bought the gift of God for
money, for they have bought and sold that which they imagined to be the gift of
God, and so deceived themselves and others; for the gift of God cannot be
bought and sold for money.

First, Here you may see, that this Simon Magus gave out himself to be some
great one. Secondly, That all the people from the least to the greatest (whom
he had deceived by his Witchcraft and Sorcery for a long time) said he was the
great Power of God. Now what, have all people from the least to the greatest
since the Apostles days, cried up that Simon's Nature which was out of the
Power of God, as the people of Samaria cried up Simon to be the great Power of
God; for Simon Magus when he saw that through the laying on of the Apostles
hands the Holy Ghost was given, he offered them money, etc. But Simon could not
purchase this gift with money, by which the Apostles preached, did miracles,
and laid hands upon the people? And what, have all these Simons attained it
(which have been since the days of the Apostles and Simon Magus) who have
bought and sold that which people have cried up to be the great Power of God?
Nay, if Simon Magus his money was to perish with him, who did but think to have
bought the gift of God, that he might have ministered and laid on hands, (mark)
thought to have done it, but did not do it; then what will become of all the
Simons, who since the Apostles days have bought and sold that which they
dreamed and imagined was the gift of God which they have ministered, and made
people cry, the great Power of God; will not they and their money perish (all
of them) according to the Apostles doctrine, who are in their vain thoughts,
thinking the gift of God may be bought for money. Therefore to conclude, this
is not the gift of God which all the Simons have bought and sold since the
Apostles days.

And Simon Magus because he thought the gift of God could be bought or
purchased for money, had neither part nor lot in this matter of the Ministry of
the Holy Ghost, laying on of hands, nor of the Ministry of God or Christ: Then
have all the Simons since the Apostles days (that have bought and sold that
which they thought was the gift of God) neither part nor lot in this matter of
the gift of God, which by the Holy Ghost is to minister and lay on hands, by
which the Holy Ghost is received; for Simon Magus his heart was not right in
the sight of God, who thought to have purchased the gift of God for money. Now
whether are all these Simons hearts right or unright in the sight of God, who
have not only thought, but have purchased that which they imagined was the
gift of God.

The true Apostle said to Simon Magus, I perceive that thou art in the gall of
bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity; [Mark] Simon Magus was in the gall of
bitterness, and bond of iniquity, who did but think to have bought the gift of
God for money: Then where are all these Simons which are got up since the
Apostles days, who (as is said before) have bought and sold that which they
imagined to be the gift of God? Has not their gall and bitterness appeared to
all true Ministers of the gift of God, and them that fear God, worse then old
Simon did in the Apostles days.

Simon Magus was also in the bond of iniquity, who thought the gift of God was
to be bought and sold for money; and where are all they, but in the bond of
iniquity, chained, compassed and bound about in it, who have told people that
was the gift of God which they bought and sold for money? And are not the sons
worse then the father, who has not only thought the gift of God is to be
bought and sold for money, but have persecuted those who will not buy that
which they have bought, and call the gift of God; and so are not the young
Simons worse than the old?

Old Simon was to repent of his wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the
thought of his heart might be forgiven him; and what was his thought and his
wickedness, but to have bought the gift of God for money, which he was to
repent of, and then to pray? But are not all these Simons since the Apostles
days, (who have bought and sold that which they have told people is the gift of
God, and cost them money) worse then old Simon in the wickedness, and have not
repented, and so not out of the wickedness, nor the thoughts of their hearts
changed; and how then can the young Simons pray? for old Simon was first to
repent before he prayed, and had forgiveness; and therefore the young Simons
must do the same, which few of them have done.

Old Simon the Sorcerer answered the Apostles, Pray ye for me, that none of
these things ye have spoken, come upon me: And what was his transgression, but
that he thought to have bought the gift of God for money? But all these Simons
that have bought and sold that which they thought was the gift of God, are
short of this old Simon, for he was afraid of perishing with his money.

First, They that think the gift of God can be bought and sold for money, are
as Simon Magus, or rather worse, in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity, and it does manifest it self; and this bitter gall people cannot
abide.

Secondly, Their money and they are to perish.

Thirdly, They have neither part nor lot in the Ministry of the gift of the
Holy Ghost.

Fourthly, Their hearts are not right in the sight of God.

Fifthly, Their thoughts are bad and wicked, and to be repented of, and to be
prayed to God for the forgiveness of, which few are come to in our days, and to
do as Simon Magus did.

Sixthly, The spirit of Simon Magus is the same that ever it was, or rather
worse; and Christ is the same as ever he was, and so are his Ministers; and his
gift is not to be bought and sold for money, but is free; and those who have
freely received it, freely declare it, without money, and judge those who think
the gift of God is to be bought and sold for money.

G. F.

Certain Queries to be answered.
1. FRiends, I would be satisfied in a Scripture-way, Whether or no John
baptized Christ in a Font? And whether or no signed him with the fign of a
Cross, and baptized him? And whether or no Christ had a Godfather or Godmother
when J^hn baptized him; and if so, who were they? and where stood the Font he
baptized him in? 2. Those many thousands Pe^er converted and baptized, whether
he baptized every one of them in a F^nt, and signed them with the sign of the
Cross? and had every one of them Go^^^^hers and Godmothers, yea or nay? 3. And
whether or no Christ or the Apostles Timothy or Titus, being Bishops, did set
up a spiritual Court to summon in all that would not hear them (or give them
maintenance) by Appa^ators? And where stood their Court? 4. Whether or no the
Christians had a Law among themselves to force one another to give their
Teachers maintenance? Or whether or no the Christians brought one another to
the Heathen or Jews Law to give them maintenance? 5. And whether any that went
to Law before the Heathen, was not a manifestation they were unwise men? 6.
Whether or no Aarons white breeches, and white robes, typed forth the Surplice,
or the fine Linen, which is the righteousness of Saints? And you that have
got on the white Robes, who pleads it from Aaron, where are your Bells, your
golden Bell and Pomeg^anates, as Aaron had in his garments, by which he was to
be heard when he went into the holy place, and came out; and your Urim and
Thummim, which is light and perfections? Now when you go into your place, we do
not hear the Bells at your coming out, or your coming in: Where do we see you
in your Ephod made of gold, blew silk scarlet, fine trimmed Linen, according
to Exodus 20? And if it be, that you do summon in all to give you maintenance
whether they will hear you or no? 7. Whether or no you would be so served your
selves? Whether or no this is as you would be done by? if not, do you not
transgress the Law of God, which is, to have all men to do unto others as they
would have others do unto them; for would you be contented the Turks, or the
Papists, or the Hea hen should summon in all you to hear them, their Alcaron,
their Mass, their Worship before an image, and bow before the Alcaron, and bow
to a stock or a stone the Heathen set up, or Dagon, or in the House of R^mmon,
at the sound of the Pipe and Harp, and fall down before Nebuchadnezzar his
Image, and give money to the maintenance of all his Magicians; and the Jesuits,
Priests, and Turks and Heathens Priests? Would you think this is well and
right? Or could you conform? Would you not cry out for Liberty of Conscience?
And if so, do you then do to another, as you would have another do unto you? 8.
And whether or no Christ and the Apostles did whip any into the outward Temple?
We read he whipped them out of the Temple, but never whipped them into the Temple.
9. Whether or no Christ or his Apostles did set up in their Religion, they must
abstain from meats at such and such times, and wear such and such clothes in
their Worship, and they might observe some of his days, and the Apostles, and
other of the Saints days, and the Virgin Mary's? Sati^fie me in a Scripture-way
of these things, and I will be of your Religion; for we are not to presume
above what is written, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 4. but he commended them who
searched the Scriptures, and said they were noble, who searched to see whether
it were so or no, as they spoke; and this was the Bereans, the Heathens, and
shall Christians be worse and more ignoble then the Heathens, not to search the
Scriptures to see whether the things be so or no that they preach, or to see
whether they do not presume above what is written, 1 Cor. 4.6.? 10. And whether
it be not said in the Bible and Common Prayer, Six days shall thou labor and
do all that thou have to do? And whether or no you that set up holy days which
Christ and his Apostles did not, do not go contrary to the express commands of
God, and confound your selves in what you teach? 11. And whether or no to curse
out any that does not give you maintenance, and does not hear you, and does not
pull off their hats in spiritual Courts, is flat contrary to Christ's and the
Apostles doctrine, which says, Bless, and curse not; for Christ has redeemed
us out of the curse, and it is ignorance, weakness or error, to excommunicate
such as are not of your Church, that will not hear you, nor give you
maintenance. 12. And when any was excommunicated, was it not such as had done
some bad thing among them, which caused them to excommunicate them, which
Members they put out of their Church or Assemblies. 13. And did not you all
leave and run away from us first, about twenty years ago? and might not we have
turned Jews or Heathens ere this time for you, that many now of young people
does not know what your Religion is; for according to the Apostle, they are to
try all things, and hold fa^t that which is good, and lay hands on no man
suddenly. 14. And do you not read daily in the Bible and Common-prayerbook,
Cursed is he that keeps the Widows, Fatherless and strangers right? and was
not tithes the widows, fatherless and strangers right, as well as the Priests,
for them all to eat together, and to praise the Lord? 15. And does not they
that keep away the widows, fatherless and strangers right, bring, and read the
curse on their own heads, and let widows, fatherless and strangers go begging
up and down, which God took care for when he gave them part of his tenths,
which some are careless of, which the tenths of his tenths were a heave
offering, which Christ the offering ends that, and all other offerings, and
ends the tenths before the Law, and in the Law, and redeemed man out of the
ninths, up to God, out of the earth, and reign upon it.

And so now did not the Independents and Presbyterians do the same? and so
cursed is he that keeps away the strangers, widows and fatherless right,
which was the tithe; so they keeping the tithe from them, caused many beggars,
fatherless, strangers and widows, and then made a Law to whip and punish
Vagrants and sturdy beggars: Did, and do not these and those read the curse on
their own heads, that did, and do so now; for when there was so many Jews
converted to Christians by Peter, then there was a murmuring among the Widows,
as being neglected; for they having had their maintenance formerly with Levi,
which being converted, they could not go back again for: Therefore says the
Apostle, Choose you out seven men to distribute unto them, and see nothing be
lacking; for it was not meet for the Apostles to serve Tables, but to preach
the Word; and this was the order among the Christians, (was it not?) and
whether they ever altered it to this day?

16. And whether or no Christ ever altered his Commission which he had given to
his Ministers, Freely you have received, freely give. 17. And if so, in what
Record may we find it? whether ever any the Apostles, Timothy or Titus, made
any Ministers by oaths? if so, where is it written?
THe Apostle who was a true Minister of Christ Jesus, his work was to present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus: Whom we preach, warning every man, and
teaching every man in all Wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in
Christ Jesus, Col. 1.28 Now you that call your selves, and go under the Name of
the Min^sters of Christ, are presenting, and warning men to such a Court, and
such a Court, and tell them, they shall not be perfect whilst upon earth, for
they must earry a body of death while they be on this side the grave; and thus
instead of presenting them perfect in Christ Jesus, and warning of them unto
him, you are presenting of them, and warning of them to your Courts; contrary
to the Apostle, showing the spirit of error; and will not all people see into
this, think you?

And now you that say you are be gifted men, and others are to give you so much
a year for your gift of God, will you not in the end call all such as had given
you money for your gift, young Simon Magus's, and tell them their hearts are
not right in the sight of God, but that they are in the gall of bitterness, and
bond of iniquity, and tell them that the gift of God is not to be bought nor
sold for money? And has not they that have said they have bought the gift of
God, and sell it again for money, both buyer and seller been worse than old
Simon Magus? And has not this practice proved that they have not had the gift
of God, which cannot be bought nor sold for money.

G. F.

THE END.

