The People of God in Scorn called QUAKERS Their Love to All MANKIND.

For as God's Love through Christ has been shed abroad in our Hearts, we
cannot but in the same Love desire the Eternal Good and the Salvation of all
Mankind, and would have them Repent, and turn to Jesus Christ, whom God h^th
given in his Love to be their Way, Leader and Captain of their Salvation, and
has tasted Death for every man, and has bought them with a Price, therefore
that they all might serve and live to him, and glorify God with their Bodies,
Souls and Spirits, which are the Lord's, that he has made, and Christ's, who
has redeemed and bought them.

By George Fox.

I will give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation
to the Ends of the World, Isa. 49.6. And all the Ends of the Earth shall see
the Salvation of our God, Isa. 52.10. Have I any Desire that the Wicked should
dye? says the Lord God: or shall he not live if he turn from his Wicked Ways?
for I desire not the Death of him that dies, says the Lord; wherefore turn
your selves, and live ye. Ezekiel. 18.23, 32. Printed in the Year, 1676.

The People of God in Scorn called QUAKERS Their LOVE to All MANKIND.
IT has often been said, That the People of God in scorn called Quakers love
none but themselves.

To this I answer, such are mistaken in their Judgment, and I fear it is their
own Conditions, for we love God that Created all things, and his Son, by whom
all things were made, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost, born of a Virgin,
who made a good Confession before Pontius Pilate, who was Cruc^fied without the
Gates at Jerusalem, and rose the third Day, and sits at the right Hand of God;
by whom God will judge the World according to the Gospel, that is according to
the invisible Power which is preached to every Creature.

Secondly, we love all Men and Women, simply as they are Men and Women, and as
they are God's workmanship, and so as Brethren and Children of Adam and Eve by
Generation.

Thirdly, we love them all as they come to be Sons of God by Adoption, and can
say, Abba Father in the heavenly Brotherly fellowship, and we are commanded to
do good unto all, especially to the House hold of Faith: For Christ commands us
to love one another, and not so only, but to love Enemies, and it is a mark by
which his were known to be his Disciples, viz. by their loving each other.

And we are to pray for Enemies and our Persecuters, by the command of Christ
and the Apostles.

For God has ma^e of one Blood all mankind to dwell upon the face of the
Earth, Acts 17.26.

And the Earth is the Lord's and the fullness thereof. And the Lord says in
Job 31. All under the Heavens is mine, who has Created all to his Glory: and
the Lord says unto Ezekiel, say unto them, as I live says the Lord God; I
desire not the Death of the wicked, but that the wicked turn from his Way and
live; turn you, turn you, from your evil Ways, for why will you dye Oh ye
House of Israel, says the Lord; here ye may see God's mind and his love to
People, which all his People is to be in, who would have People turn from their
wicked Ways and live, Ezekiel. 33.11.

And further, the Lord says, I desire not the death of him that dies, cause
therefore one another to turn and live; see here the love of God to Mankind,
who would have them to turn and live, Ezekiel. 18.23. And so he would have all
that is called Christendom to turn to the New Covenant and live, which is our
desire also.

And further, he says, Have I any desire that the Wicked should dye says the
Lord God? Or shall he not live, if he turn from his ways? here ye may see what
the Lord's desire is, and his goodness to wicked Mankind, in the same Chap. And
in Esai. 1.18. Come now and let us Reason together, says the Lord, though your
Sins were as Crimson, they shall be made white as Snow, though they were as red
as Scarlet, they shall be as Wool, if you consent and obey, ye shall eat the
good things of the Land, but if you refuse and be Rebellious, ye shall be
devoured with the Sword; for the Mouth of the Lord has spoken it: here ye may
see the love of God to Man and Woman, who would reason with Man, and have him
to obey and consent, and shows him the good in obeying, and shows him the
Judgments in disobeying.

And in Esai. 45.22. Look unto me, and ye shall be saved, says the Lord, all
ye ends of the Earth, for I am God and there is no other: So all ye ends of the
Earth must look unto the Lord for Salvation.

And Esai. says, Cease you from Man whose Breath is in his Nostrils, for
wherein is he to be esteemed of? Isa. 2.22. and therefore all ye ends of the
Earth must look unto the Lord for Salvation, these are the words of the Lord to
the ends of the Earth, and to all People upon it.

And thus says the Lord, I will give thee for a Light of the Gentiles, that
thou may be my Salvation unto the End of the World, (speaking of Christ) as
in Isa. 49.6.

Who is the Salvation to the End of the World? Christ Jesus, the Covenant of
Light, which Prophecy of Isaiah was fulfilled in Christ, of whom it is said in
John 1. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men, and the Light
shined in the Darkness, and the Darkness comprehended it not, and John Baptist
said, he was not that Light, but was sent to bear Witness of the Light, and
that was the true Light which lights every man that comes into the World, he
was in the World, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not,
(to wit) Christ the Light, that lights every Man that comes into the World;
and Grace and Truth comes by Jesus Christ, as the Law came by Moses, for the
Grace of God which brings Salvation unto all men has appeared, (mark) unto
all men has appeared this Grace of God which brings Salvation.

Here is the general love of God to Mankind, which teaches us to live Soberly,
etc. says the Apostle to the true Christians, and that we should deny
Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and live Soberly and Righteously, and Godly in
this present World.

So this Grace of God, which has appeared unto all men, was their Teacher, how
to live and walk to God and Man, and what to deny; I say, how to live and walk
to God which brought their Salvation, and to look for the blessed Hope and the
appearing of the Glory of the mighty God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all Iniquity, and purge us,
to be a peculiar People unto himself, Zealous of good Works, etc. So, here is
the love God in Christ unto all Mankind, Titus 2.14 to the end, which we are
Witnesses of, and we desire all might obey it, and not turn from it into
Wantonness.

And John says of Christ, Behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of
the World. So all the World is to look unto the Lamb of GOd, which takes away
their Sins, as you may see in Joh. 2. and not to plead for Sin to the Grave,
but for the Lamb that takes it away.

For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him should not Perish but have everlasting Life: So here God so
loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son into the World, that he
that believes in the Son has everlasting Life, and he that believes not in
the Son of God shall not have Life, but the wrath of God abides on him: Now
here is God's love to be seen whether Men believe and obey, or not, and the
wrath of God abides upon him that does not believe, as in John 3.

And Jesus Christ says, Wh^le ye have the Light believe in the Light, for I am
come a Light into the world, that whosoever believes in me should not abide in
Darkness, but have the Light of life: Now here Christ teaches how men should
believe, and what to believe in, to wit, the Light, as in John 12. which we do
and would have all People to believe in, Christ the light.

And again, Jesus says, I am the light of the world, he that follows me
shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the light of life. So he who is the
heavenly man and the Son of God, is the Light of the World, and enlightneth
every man that comes into the world, and bid^ them believe in the Light whom
God has given for a Light* and to be his Salvation to the ends of the Earth.
And when Christ said, he was the Light of the World etc. The Pharisees were
offended at him; as many fair Sayers and had Doers are now offended at the
believers in the Light, and such as are become Children of it, that bear
witness to it, John 8.12.

And in Luke 2.28, 29, 30, 31. When Simeon took Jesus in his Arms, and said,
Now Lord let thy Scrvant depart in Peace, for mine Eyes have seen thy
Salvation, which thou preparest before the face of all People (mark) all
People; here is no Sect) a light to be revealed to the Gentiles, and the Glory
of thy People Israel, mark, a Light to be revealed to the Gentiles.

Christ is revealed to the Gentiles, who is their Light to enlighten them, Luke
2. By which Light People see their Sins, and by which Light they see their
Savior, Christ, that saves them from their Sins, and dyed for their Sins, and
rose again for their Justification.

And see Christ's own Words in Joh. 6.51. I am the Living Bread which came down
from Heaven, if any man eat of this Bread, he shall live forever; and the Bread
that I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the Life of the WORLD,
Mark, his Flesh for the Life of the World; and they must eat it, if they will
live forever; and here is the Love of God in Christ Jesus to the World, who
gives his Flesh for the Life of the World; and they must eat him who is the
Bread of Life that came down from Heaven, if they live: So it is not only
talking, but it is seeding and eating (Joh. 6.) that is required, if you will
have Life.

Now, Christ does not say, He would give his Flesh for the Life of some of the
World; but in Luke 3.6. says, ALL Flesh shall see the Salvation of God; and
they that see their Salvation, Christ Jesus, they must come to the Light that
comes from him, which gives the Knowledge; but if they hate this Light, it does
condemn them, as in John 3.

And in Romans 5. For Christ (when we were yet of no Strength) at this time dyed
for the Ungodly; for when we were Enemies we were reconciled to God by the
Death of his Son. And therefore People should dye with Christ to Sin, and have
their Old Man crucified with him, that their Old Man might be destroyed; that
henceforth they should not serve Sin, and remain Enemies, Romans 5, and 6. Here
ye may see Christ dyed for the Ungodly and for Enemies, not that they should
live in Ungodliness, but live to him that dyed for them: For Christ dyed, and
rose again, and asscended that he might be Lord both of the Dead and of the
Living: Therefore none are to live to themselves, but unto the Lord; and this
should be all true Christians living and dying in the Lord, Romans 14.

For as in Adam all dyed, even so in Christ shall ALL be made alive, Cor. 1.15.
Here is God's Love to all Mankind, who are made alive by Christ Jesus; for as
it is written, The first Adam was made a Living Soul, the second Adam a
Quickening Spirit; the first Adam was of the Earth earthly, the second Adam the
Lord from Heaven.

And the Apostle says in 2 Cor. 5.14, 15. For the Love of Christ constrains us
because we thus judge, that if one dyed for ALL, then were all dead, and he
dyed for all (to wit, Christ, says the Apostle) that they which live should
not henceforth live unto themselves, [mark, not live unto themselves] but live
unto him (to wit, Christ) which dyed for them and rose again: Here is the Love
of God to Mankind in Christ Jesus, which we bear witness to, who dyed for all,
for Sinners and Enemies, that henceforth they should not live unto themselves,
but unto Christ that dyed for them.

And in Col. 1.23. to the End, the Apostle says to the Saints, If ye continue
grounded and established in the Faith, and not be moved away from the Hope of
the Gospel, whereof ye have heard, which has been preached to EVERY Creature
under Heaven.

And the Apostle says, The Gospel of Christ is the Power of God unto Salvation
to EVERY one that believes, to the Jew first, and also to the Grecian, as in
Romans 1.16. So mark, this Gospel is preached to every Creature under Heaven, this
Joyful News and Gladtidings: So here the Apostle makes no Sects; here is God's
Love in the Gospel of Christ Jesus to every Creature under Heaven. And the
Apostles preached Christ Jesus and his Gospel, admonishing every man and
teaching every man [mark EVERY Man] in all Wisdom, that we may present EVERY
Man Perfect in Christ Jesus; and this we desire all People may come to witness
with us.

Now all the Imperfection is out of Christ Jesus, in the Devil, and Adam in the
Fall; and the Perfection is in Christ Jesus, that never fell: Here was their
general Ministry in the Love of God in Christ Jesus, and so is ours, and to
present all perfect in Christ.

For, Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust, that he
might bring us unto God [mark, that he might bring us unto God] and Christ was
put to Death concerning the Flesh (not as he was God) but was quickened in the
Spirit, 1 Pet. 3.18. And He is the Reconciliation for our Sins, to wit, Christ,
and not for our Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World; mark, for the
Sins of the Whole World: And he that says he abides in Christ, ought even so
to walk as he walks, 1 John 2.2. for he has left us an Example, not only to
talk of him, but to walk after him, and follow him.

And the Apostle says, Therefore we labor and are rebuked, because we trust
in the Living God, which is the Savior of all men, especially of those that
believe; these things (says he to Timothy) command and teach, 1 Timothy 4.10, 11.
which we do by the same Power and Spirit.

And the Apostle says in Hebr. 2.9. But we see Jesus crowned with Glory and
Honor, which was made a little inferior to the Angels, through the sufferings
of Death, that by God's Grace he might taste Death for EVERY Man, that he might
destroy through Death him that has the Power of Death, that is the Devil,
Hebr. 2. So here is the Love of God in giving his Son, who tasted Death for all
men, who said, He had Power to lay down his Life, and Power to take it up
again. And they that say, Christ did not taste Death for every Man, are the
Sect-Makers and Sectaries amongst People, and are contrary to the Apostles,
Christ and his Prophets Doctrine.

And in 1 Pet. 2.17. Peter says to the Christians, Honor ALL Men, love the
Brotherly-Fellowship, fear God, honor the King: For God has honored all men
in giving his Son, a Light, and to be his Salvation to the Ends of Earth, and
to enlighten all men: And his Grace has appeared to all men, which brings
Salvation, and he has dyed for all men, and tasted Death for all men; and God
desires not the Death of any man, but would have them to turn to him: If God
has so honored all men, in giving his Son to be a Mediator, and a Redeemer,
and Purchaser with his Blood of Men and Women out of Sin and Evil, we are to
honor all Men as Men, because they are God's Creation and Workmanship, who
made them in his Image, though they lost it; and all they that are renewed in
again, are renewed by Jesus Christ; so we are to have all men in Esteem, and
Honor all men, and not to curse nor hate any man; and we are to love the
Brotherhood, such as are Disciples and Learners of Christ Jesus, and Followers
of him, who are in the Brotherly Fellowship, which is in the Holy Ghost, which
the Apostles were in; and the Fellowship is in the Spirit, and the Unity, which
is the Bond of Peace, yea, even the Bond of the Prince of Princes Peace, which
is the Duty of every true Christian to keep, as also to Fear God and Honor the
King; now none can honor the King but who fear God; they that fear God must
depart from Sin and Evil; for they that do not depart from Sin and Evil, do not
fear God, which does keep their Hearts clean, and is the Beginning of God's
Wisdom from above; and they that do not depart from Evil, but live in it,
dishonor both God and the King, and their own Bodies, which are God's
Workmanship, and so dishonor God their Creator, and Christ their Savior and
Redeemer.

And the Apostle says in 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort therefore, that first of all
Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions and Giving of Thanks be made for ALL Men
[mark, for all men.] So here in their Prayers, and Supplications, and
Intercessions they are to make no Sect, but that all men must be prayed for;
and Prayers, Supplications, and Intercessions and Thanks must be made for Kings
and for all that are in Authority; mark, for all that be in Authority: again,
here is no Sect made, but an universal general Prayer, that we may lead a quiet
and a peaceable Life under them in all Godliness and Honesty; mark, in all
Godliness and Honesty; for this is Good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
Savior, who wills that All Men should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of
the Truth, and that is by the Light of Christ Jesus, that shines in the Heart;
mark, this is God's Will and Mind, that All men should be saved, and come to
the Knowledge of the Truth; for there is one God, and one Mediator betwixt God
and Man, which is the Man Christ Jesus; mark, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a Ransom for all men, to be testified in due time; mark, for all men,
to be testified in due time: again, here is no Sect made, nor any excluded;
therefore as he gave himself a Ransom for all men; and the Will of God is, that
all men should be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth; and therefore
Prayers, and Supplications, and Intercessions, and giving of Thanks must be
made for all men, and for Kings, and all that be in Authority, that we may lead
a quiet and a peaceable Life under them in all Godliness and Honesty, Amen.

And they that have the Mind of Christ do this, and know the Common Faith and
the Common Salvation, Jude 3. Tit. 1.4.
And this Common Faith and Common Salvation the Saints were earnestly to
contend for, which Christ their Savior is the Author of, which we do contend
for this day against all Opposers.

And all that have the Mind of Christ, own this; for the Apostle said, We have
the Mind of Christ; we the Church, Disciples and True Christians: and also the
Apostle says, Let the same Mind be in you as was in Christ Jesus; and then the
same Mind will own his Words and Doctrine, that he spoak, and as the Apostles
did and spoak, Phil. 2.5. 1 Cor. 2.16.

But all you that say, Christ has not tasted Death for every Man, and has not
given himself a Ransom for all men; and say that He has not enlightened every
man that comes into the World, the heavenly Man with his heavenly Light, the
spiritual Man with his divine and spiritual Light; and that his Grace has not
appeared to all men, which brings Salvation, which is the Saints Teacher; and
that Christ has not dyed for all men, and is not a Propitiation for the Sins
of the whole World, but for the Saints only, or the World of Believers, as you
call them; you are the Makers of Sects and Schisms, and in your vain Thoughts
imagine, Christ dyed only for your own Sects, and that God has Ordained of old
the Greatest part of Mankind for Hell; you are of another Mind then the
Apostles, who said, Christ dyed for all, and tasted Death for every man, and
would have all men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and
therefore Supplications and Prayers must be made for all men; and you must Love
Enemies as well as Friends; and the Lord desires not the Death of a Sinner, but
rather that he might turn and live; and Christ is the Savior of All Men,
especially of them that believe: you are of another Mind and Spirit then the
Prophets, and Christ and the Apostles were of, that say, Christ did not dye for
all Men, and tasted Death for every man, and gave himself a Ransom for all men:
And God would have all men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth;
and the Manifestation of the Spirit of God is given to every man to profit
withal (1 Cor. 12.7.) mark, every man; and you that are against this, are the
Sect-makers, and have not the Mind of the Apostle; and this Doctrine of Christ
and the Apostles we preach and teach, and bear witness unto against all the
Opposers and Sect-makers whatsoever.

And the Apostle says, But he that understands according to Sobriety, as God
has dealt to every man the Measure of Faith; mark, as God has dealt to every
man the Measure of Faith; so he is the Dealer; for it is his Gift; for Faith is
the Gift of God, which Christ is the Author of, and not man, by which every man
should walk, by that Faith which God has dealt to him by Christ Jesus, the
Author and Finisher, Romans 12.3. For of him (to wit, God) and through him, and
for him are all things; to him be Glory forever, Amen. Romans 11.

So your Directory and Church Faith, as you call it, may lie and mold; for we
understand according to Sobriety, that as God has dealt to every man the
Measure of Faith, his Gift, so he is to walk by, in which he pleases God
through Christ Jesus, whom all Christians must look unto, Jesus, who is the
Author of their Faith, and Finisher of it, who is the Author of ours, Glory to
God forever: And the Wise Man's Eye is in his Head, Christ Jesus, who is the
Head of all, who bruises the Serpent's Head, that led Men from God, and has
been between Men and God; and he that does this, leads Man again to God (to
wit, Christ) who is the true Baptizer, who baptizes with Fire and with the Holy
Ghost, whose Fan is in his Hand, and he will cleanse his Floor, the Floor of
your Hearts, and will gather his Wheat into his Garner, but will burn up the
Chaff with unquenchable Fire; and they that know this Baptizer (to wit, Christ)
are the true Christians, and will never plead for the Chaff, their Body of
Death and Sin to the Grave; for when Christ sets Fire in your Hearts and Minds,
that never shall be quenched till the Chaff is burnt up; such will not plead
for the Chaff, but for Christ and his Baptism, which we own, and would have all
People come to. For in the Time of the Law things were to pass through the Fire
and Water, to be made clean; so must you pass through Christ's Fire and Water,
which purifies and washes, before you will be clean to enter into his holy
Kingdom, and know his Baptism, as in Luke 3.16, 17. For Simon Magus may go into
the Outward Water, and yet not come to Christ's Baptism, and think he can buy
the Gift of God for Money, which was judged by the Apostle, and by all that be
in the same spirit.

And this is the One Baptism, For by One Spirit we (the true Church) are all
baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Grecians, Bond or Free, and have
been all made to drink into one Spirit: And for want of this Spirit's baptizing
of you, and you drinking into it, there are so many Bodies and Sects in
Christendom, and so many Baptisms and Ways, and so do not drink all into one
Spirit, in which the Unity and Fellowship and the Bond of the Prince of Princes
Peace is, which we say all true Christians are bound to keep, and then they
will seek the Good of all men and the Peace of all men; let them be of several
Sects formerly, yet by One Spirit they are all baptized into one Body, as they
come to the Spirit, then they drink into one Spirit, then here is Fellowship in
the One Spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.

So all Christians are to endeavor to keep the Unity of this Spirit in the
Bond of Peace.

Here is one Body and one Spirit, even as ye are called into one Hope of your
Vocation; there is one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, and one God, and one
Father of all, which is above all, and through all, [mark] and in you all;
Phil. 4.
know him there searching your Hearts, and find him there trying your Reins;
incline your Ears, and give ear to him there, who will render to every one of
you according to your Words and Works, whether they be Good or Evil.

And therefore quench not, nor vex, nor grieve his good Spirit, nor rebel
against the Good Spirit which God has given to you to instruct you, and to
profit withal, Neh. 9. nor turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, which would
teach you, and bring your Salvation; neither walk despightfully against the
Spirit of Grace; neither despise Prophecy, which is an Office in the Church;
neither hate the Light of Christ (lest it be your Condemnation) which you
should believe in, and become Children of.

And in the 1 Corinthians. 8.6. Unto us (to wit, the Christians) there is but one
God, which is the Father, of whom are all things, [mark, all things] and we in
him, [mark, in him] to wit, the Father, of whom are all things) and one Lord
Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, [mark, by whom are all things] and we by
him [to wit, by Christ] of whom is named the whole Family in Heaven and Earth,
and so that Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith, and that you may be
strengthened by his Spirit in your Inward Man, Ephesians. 3.

And do not resist the Holy Ghost, as the Outside Professing Jews did, and the
Stiff-necked and Uncircumcised in Hearts and Ears, as it is to be feared too
many of those called Christians do now, Acts 7.51. for they that do resist the
Holy Ghost, resist that in which they should have Fellowship, and pray in; and
they that resist the Holy Ghost, resist that which Christ sends to lead the
Saints into all Truth by, and shows them things to come, and takes of mine
(says Christ) and gives unto you; and they that resist this, resist their
Leader, and their Minister, and their Reprover: and this Comforter, the Spirit
of Truth, shall reprove the World of Sin, John 14.15, 16.
and of their Righteousness, which is not Christ's, and of their Judgment,
which is not of the Holy Ghost; and therefore must the World leave their Sin,
Righteousness and Judgment, and turn at the Reproof of the Holy Ghost, which
Christ prayed unto the Father that he would send, and should abide with his
Disciples forever; and he did and has sent him, the Holy Ghost, the Comforter,
that leads into all Truth, in which Holy Ghost is our Fellowship, which Felship
we would have all that are called Christians to come into with us.

And the Apostle says to the Collossions, he tells them, ( Col. 2.10, 11.)
They were Complete in Christ, the Head of all Principalities and Powers, in
whom also ye are circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, by
putting off the sinful Body of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ; which
we are Witnesses of, and would have all come to, which they must do before they
go to the Grave, or never.

Now this was so amongst the true Christians; but all you that plead for the
sinful Body of the Flesh to the Grave, deny the Circumcision of Christ.

And further, the Apostle says, Seeing ye have put off the Old Man with his
Works, and have put on the New Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the
Image of him (to wit, God) that created him; where is neither Greek nor Jew,
Circumcision nor Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond nor Free, but Christ
is all and in all, Col. 3.9, 10, 11. Mark this you called Christians; for this
is a high State.

So all they that plead for the Old Man with his Works to the Grave, are of
another Mind and Spirit then the Apostles were in, and preach another Doctrine,
and there you may see these true Christians had put off the Old Man before they
went to the Grave, and put on the New, and were renewed in Knowledge after the
Image of God that created them; and this Work must all the true Christians know
whilst they be upon the Earth, which we witness, and desire all might come to
know and do the same.

And the Apostle James in his General Epistle to the Church, speaking of the
Tongue, that Unruly Member, which is full of deadly Poison, Therewith bless we
God, even the Father, therewith curse we Men, which are made after the
Similitude of God.

And now all Christendom consider this, if you bless God, and curse Men that
are made after the Similitude of God, ye curse his Works and his Workmanship,
and curse that which he has made and created after his own Similitude; and
therefore that Evil Tongue and Unruly Member, that is full of Poison, you must
have Power over and bridle, else your Religion is vain; for it must not do so,
to curse the Creator's Workmanship after his own Image; for that proceeds from
the Wisdom below, and not from that which is above, as you may see in James 3.
and therefore you must love, and honor, and pray for all men, and not curse
them; seeing Christ has tasted Death for all men, therefore bless, and curse
not, and obey his Doctrine who is the Savior of all men, and especially of
them that believe, who would have all men to be saved, and to come to the
Knowledge of the Truth, to wit, Christ, who is the Way, the Truth and the Life.

And as Peter says, I perceive God is no Respecter of Persons, but in every
Nation he that fears God and works Righteousness is accepted of him, Acts
10.34, 35. So God being no Respecter of Persons, but accepts all that fear him
and work Righteousness; therefore all People are to fear God, and depart from
Evil and from all Unrighteousness, if they be accepted of God; and their not
fearing God, and not working Righteousness, is that which makes them
unacceptable with him.

And Peter further says, Ye know the Word that God has sent to the Children
of Israel, preaching Peace by Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all; mark, of ALL:
So there is no Peace with God but by Jesus Christ.

And the Gospel, which is preached to every Creature under Heaven; and Christ's
Ministers were to go into All Nations to preach the Gospel of Christ; then the
Gospel was preached to the Stock of Ham, the Stock of Ishmael, and the Stock of
Esau. For, Christ dyed for all men, and tasted Death for every man: and here is
God's Love, in sending his Son, that dyed for all men; and God and Christ's
Love, in sending his Ministers to preach the Gospel to all men, that they might
know the Heavenly Riches, and their Inheritance of the same by Christ Jesus;
for God's heavenly Sun has shined upon the Just and the Unjust, for their
eternal Good, as the natural Sun does for their outward Good; and does
enlighten all, that all might believe in the Light, and through it receive
God's Love and Favor, and they that do not are condemned by it; and the Wrath
of God abides upon them that reject his Love: so we and all that have the Mind
of Christ, our Love is unto all men for their Outward and Eternal Good, though
we are hated by them for it, as their Forefathers hated the Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles for their Love and Good Will toward them.

And are not a great part in Christendom saying with Pilate, that crucified
Christ, What is Truth? Joh. 18.38. though they are bred up at Schools, and
think themselves as wise men as Pilate was, who understood the Jews Law and the
Romans, and had his Latin, Greek and Hebrew to set over Christ when he was
crucified; but Christ is risen atop of it, and the Truth is Christ, that does
enlighten you, and you must find it in your Inward Parts: And Christ says, I
am the Way, the Truth and the Life; but the wise professing Jews would not
receive him, nor believe in him then, though they had the Scriptures; and they
confessed he was to come, as the Professors now, which profess he is come, yet
will not believe in the Light, but with literal learned Pilate say, What is
Truth, though Christ says, I am the Way the Truth and the Life, and no man
comes to the Father but by me; and yet People that call themselves Christians
will say, There are so many Sects in the World, we know not which to follow;
oh! that we did know the Truth: To which we say, Have you been learning all
this while, and do not yet know the Truth? Indeed there are Teachers that have
the Form of Godliness, and deny the Power, that are always teaching, that they
may be always paying of them, and leading People that are never able to come
to the Knowledge of the Truth (to wit, Christ, the Way, the Truth and the Life)
For, to know God and Jesus Christ is Eternal Life; but to talk of God and Jesus
Christ is not Eternal Life: and that which gives People the Knowledge of the
Glory of God in the Face of Jesus Christ, is the Light that shines in their
Hearts, which Christ has enlightened them withal; and here is the Love of God
in Christ Jesus to them all, to enlighten them all; and here is our Love to all
Mankind, In desiring and inviting them to turn from the Darkness to the Light,
and to believe in the Light, that they may become Children of the Light, and so
to look unto Jesus Christ, the Author and Finisher of their Faith, who has
dyed for their Sins, and is risen again for their Justification, and sits at
the Right Hand of God: for, by him, to wit Christ, all things in Heaven and in
Earth are reconciled in one; and God was in Christ reconciling the World unto
himself; and so we cannot but in Love beseech all to receive Christ Jesus, the
Light, Life and Truth, that by him you may be reconciled unto God, who will
lead you out of old Adam, and destroy the Devil and his Works, who has
separated you from God; and as every one has received Christ Jesus, so walk in
him, who is the New and Living Way, who is over all the old and dead Ways, who
is the Rock of Ages, and the Foundation of many Generations, and is our Rock
and our Foundation in this our Age and Generation, who bruises the Serpent's
Head, who is the First and Last, who is the Love of God to Mankind; Glory to
God forever.

G. F.

A QUERY to all the Preachers in Christendom.
HOw many men and Women have you presented Perfect in Christ Jesus? Col. 1. How
many have you Perfected? How many have you brought to the Knowledge of the Son
of God, and to a Perfect Man, unto the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of
Christ? Ephesians. 4. which is the Work of Christ's Ministers.

Worcester-Prison, the 10th Day of the 11th Mon. 1674.

