THE Line of Righteousness AND JUSTICE Stretched forth over All MERCHANTS, etc.

AND An Exhortation to all Friends and People whatsoever, who are Merchants,
Tradesmen, Husbandmen, or Seamen, who deal in Merchandise, trade in Buying and
Selling by Sea or Land, or deal in Husbandry, That ye all do that which is
Just, Equal and Righteous in the Sight of God and Man one to another, and to
all Men; and that you Use Just Weights, and Just Measures; and Speak and Do
that which is True, Just and Right in all things; that so your Conversations,
Lives, Practices and Tongues may preach to all People, and answer the Good,
Just and Righteous Principle of God in them all; in which ye may be serviceable
unto God and to the Creation in your Generation, and a Blessing both to God and
Man.

By George Fox.

He that walks in his Integrity is Just; and blessed shall be his Children
after him,

Prove. 20.7. Unjust Weights and Unjust Measures, both these are Abomination to
the Lord,

Verse. 10. Printed in the Year, 1674.

THE Line of Righteousness AND JUSTICE Stretched forth over all MERCHANTS, etc.
ALL Friends every where, live in the Seed of God, which is the Righteousness
it self; and inherits the Wisdom, and is the Wisdom it self, with which Wisdom
ye may order, rule and govern all things which be under your Hands (which God
has given you) to his Glory: Govern and Order with his Wisdom all the
Creatures that you have under you, and all Exchangings, Merchandising,
Husbandry; do what you do in the Wisdom of God, and with it, which is pure from
above, and gentle, and easy to be entreated: With this Wisdom (which is not
Earthly, Sensual, nor Devilish) you do Good unto all, and Hurt no one, nor your
self; for it is Pure, and preserves Pure.

So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, Keep all in the Power of God,
over all the Unrighteous World, which Power of God was before it was; in which
Power of God you will be preserved in Justice, in Truth, in Equal Balance, and
Weights and Measures, in the Truth, Uprightness and Honesty to all People. So
all here in this are serviceable to God in their Generation, and to the
Creation, and to God and it a Blessing. Do Rightly, that is the Word of the
Lord God to you all, whether ye be Tradesmen of what Calling, or Profession,
or Sort soever, or Husbandmen: Do rightly, justly, truly, holily, equally to
all people in all things; and that is according to that of God in every Man,
and the Witness of God, the Wisdom of God, and the Life of God in your selves;
and there you are serviceable in your Generation, laboring in the thing that
is good, which does not spoil, nor destroy, nor waste the Creation upon the
Lusts.

And all Merchants whatsoever, Seamen and Traffickers by Sea or Land, this is
the Word of the Lord God to you all; Do Justly, speak truly to all People
whatsoever; then are ye a Dread and a Terror to the Unjust: VVrong no Man,
Overreach no Man (if it may be never so much to your Advantage) but be plain,
righteous and holy; in this are you serviceable to your own Nation and others,
by your Change and Exchanging of things and Merchandise, and to the Lord God ye
come to be a Blessing in the Creation and Generation. Live in the Life of
Truth, and let the Truth speak in all things, and let Righteousness and Justice
be acted, and Holiness in all things, without any Guile, Fraud or Deceit; and
so that is well-pleasing to God and Men, and according to that of God in every
one: And this shows forth the Fruits of Believers, that are passed from Death
to Life, from Death which came by Sin, the Original of which is the Devil. So
being come from Death to Life, which goes over him; over him, I say, who is the
Author of all Unrighteousness: Now in the Truth and Righteousness you will all
have Peace, Favor, and the Blessing of the Lord in all things, and that
keeps out the covetous Mind, and covetous Desires; the Power and Life of God,
that goes over the power of Death, which brought the Sin; that which keeps
over this has the Blessing and the Enercase of the Heavenly Riches, and that
shall not want the Creatures, nor any Good Thing from them the Lord will not
withhold. So be Careful to do Good in all things to all People, whatsoever; in
the Fear of God serve him; and be dilligent, and not stubborn in any thing, but
pliable in the Power of God, that keeps you over all the power of
Unrighteousness; acting so in that, that ye may be a Good Savor in all
Nations, I slands and Places where you come, in the Hearts of all people, doing
truly and plainly, uprightly, faithfully, justly and honestly, according to the
Light of Christ Jesus in every Man, that that you may witness all; then will
your Words, Lives and Conversations preach and manifest that ye serve God in
the New Life; and that ye have put off the Old Man, and his Deeds, which are
Unrighteous; and that ye have put on the New Man, which is after God in
Righteousness and Holiness, according to his Image.

Loathe Deceit and Unrighteousness, Hard-heartedness, Wronging, Cozening,
Cheating or Unjust Dealing; but live and reign in the Righteous Life and Power
of God and Wisdom (that presses all the other down) to answer the good and
just Principle in all People, and that will win people to deal with you; doing
Truth to all without respect to Persons, to High or Low whatsoever, Young or
Old, Rich or Poor; and so here your Lives and Words will preach wherever you
come.

All Husbandmen and Dealers about Husbandry whatsoever Cattle or Ground, to
you all this is the Word of the Lord God; do rightly, holily, justly honestly,
plainly and truly to all Men and People whomsoever you have to deal withal,
wrong not any in any ca^e, though it be never so to your Advantage: Deny your
selves and live in the Cross of Christ, the Power of God; for that destroys
Injustice; and without Holiness none can ever see the Lord; and out of
Righteousness there is no true Peace: Therefore all of what sort sover, or what
Calling soever, do justly (whether ye be Masters or Servants, Fathers or
Mothers, Sons or Daughters) to one another; and to all do that which is Just
and Righteous, uprightly and holily, in that you will have Peace, and see God.

So in all Husbandry speak Truth, act Truth, doing justly and uprightly in all
your Actions, in all your Pra^tices, in all your Words, in all your Dealings,
Buyings, Sellings, Changings and Commerce with People, let Truth be the Head,
and practice it; And in all your Words let Truth be spoken; This brings
Rightousness forth, and Deceit to the Judgment Bar. VVrong no man, nor covet,
nor cheat, nor oppress, nor defraud any Man in any Case; but keep your Dominion
in the Truth, in Righteousness, Holiness and Equity, in the Power, and Light,
and Wisdom of Christ: in this you answer the Light of Christ in every one, and
are a Blessing to the Lord God, and to your Generation you are serviceable, and
come to walk in the new Life, in which the righteous holy God is served, in
which Righteousness ye have peace, and in which Holiness ye see God: For the
Kingdom of God stands in Righteousness, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost.

So speak the Truth, whether Merchants or Trades Men, and all Sorts of People
whatsoever in all your Occasions, and in all your Tradings, Dealings and
Doings, speak the Truth, act in the Truth, and walk in the Truth; and this
brings Righteousness forth; for it answers the VVitness of God in every one,
which lets every one see all the Deeds and Actions they have done amiss, and
Words which they have spoken amiss: So the VVitness of God within them arises
a swift VVitness against them, for their Words which they have spoken amiss,
and for t^eir Actions which they have done amiss, and brings them to the
Judgment Bar, and to Condemnation. Here Righteousness goes forth, and here the
sweet Savor to the Lord God begins to ascend, and Truth and Equity arises
both to be acted and spoken.

So ye all Friends of what Calling soever, that dwell in the Power of God, and
feel the Power of God, and the Light of Christ Jesus; dwell in that, act in
that, that ye may answer that of God in every one upon the Earth, with your
Actions, and by your Conversations, and by your Words, being right, just and
true: This goes over the unjust, untrue, unholy and unrighteous in all the
whole World, and reaches to the good and true Principle of God in all People,
which tells them when they do not do equally, justly, righteously and holily:
So that is the Word of God to you all Friends, of what Calling soever ye be:
Live in the Power of Truth, and Wisdom of God, to answer the just Principle of
God in all People upon the Earth; and so ye answering of it, thereby ye come to
be as a City set upon a Hill, which is above that Mountain that is in the whole
World, that lies above the just Principle of God in every one there, which the
Power of God goes over: So let your Lives preach, let your Light shine, that
your Works may be seen, that your Father may be glorified, that your Fruits
may be unto Holiness, and that your End may be everlasting Life. Dwell in the
Power of the Lord God, and Light, and Life, with which ye may feel and see
before the Unrighteousness was; in this you will know the Everlasting
Righteousness brought forth, which answers the righteous Principle of God in
every one, to which they must come down, to lead them and guide them, to teach
them to speak and act Truth, justly, righteously and holily, and that has the
Dominion, which does justly, holily and righteously speak, act and think; and
this has the Praise of God; and they who do so, come to answer what God
requires, to love Mercy, do justly, and to walk humbly with God. And this is
more then all the Talkers of Justice, Righteousness and Holiness, whose Life
denies what their Tongues profess and talk of, by that God and Christ is
dishonored: So these are no good Example, neither serviceable in their
Generation nor Creation, nor any, but them who live in the Power of God, and in
his Wisdom, in which they have the Righteousness, Peace, Truth, Holiness,
Justice and Equity: This is comely and ^avourable both to God and Man.

And all of what Trade or Calling soever, keep out of Debts, owe to no man any
thing but Love; go not beyond your Estate, lest you bring your selves to
Trouble and Cumber and a Snare; keep low and down in all things you act; for a
Man that would be great, and goes beyond his Estate, lifts himself up, runs
into Debts, and lives highly of other Men's Means, he is a VVaster of other
Men's, and a Destroyer, he is not serviceable to the Creation, but a Destroyer
of the Creation and Creatures, and cumbreth himself, and troubles others, and
is lifted up, who would appear to be some body, but being from the honest, the
just and good, falls into the Shame: Therefore dwell every one of you under
your own Vine (that know Redemption from the Earth) and seek not to be great,
but in that; and dwell in the Truth, Justice, Righteousness and Holiness; and
there is the Blessing enlarged.

And no one (of what Calling soever) run into Debt, U^ury and Exaction; for
many People have been wronged thereby; they that have taken of them, who by it
have appeared great, and lived above what they were, and so would seem to be:
Therefore be true and honest, holy and righteous, every one in that which ye
have; Owe to none any thing but Love, and in that ye will feel the Blessing,
and come to be serviceable in the Creation, serving one another in Love, and
not in Oppression or Taxation, and that keeps all down in the Power, Wisdom
and Life of God, and bends all Minds to strive for one another good, and to
help one another in that which is good, just and righteous, and serve one
another in that; in that you live in the Life, and in the Seed, the Power and
Righteousness that is everlasting, which is of God and his Wisdom, through
which ye come to answer the good, just and holy Principle of God in every one
upon the Earth, in which Power ye have Dominion, in which ye come to live the
Life that is well-pleasing to God, and Life which shall stand when the World is
ended; And in this Life, Power and Wisdom of God, that is endless, you are a
Terror to all that be in the Wisdom below, you are a Terror to all that be in
the unrighteous Actions and Words; and you are a Terror to all that be in the
unjust and unequal Doings, and all the Defrauders, Cozeners, Cheaters,
Over-reachers, Liars and wrong Dealers: In the Power of God and his Life, in
which ye have Justice, ye have Truth, ye have Equity, ye have Righteousness,
and it comes to be in you as natural; your Words, your Lives, your
Conversations, your Presence and your Practices, both judge and preach; and you
are a Terror to all Men in the just Life and Everlasting Righteousness, Christ
Jesus, living in him, and in his Wisdom, and walking in him, and speaking the
Truth as it is in him in all things; your Lives and your Words are a Terror to
all that speak not Truth in your Dealings, and to all that act not truly and
Righteously in their Doings; your Lives do judge them, and are a Judge to them;
and through your Constancy, Faithfulness and Life, which is everlasting, you
bring many to Amendment: For both Life, Actions, Words and Conversation preach
(all these preach to the unrighteous World) being in the Everlasting
Righteousness, which over the World has Dominion; through which Life, Power,
Seed of God and Wisdom, you reach and answer the good and just Principle of God
in every one; and it you will make at last to confess you, though they may go
on in the contrary for a Time.

So in that Power, Wisdom, and Dominion, and Strength that gives you Dominion
over all, and to answer that of God in all, in the Love and Power of the Lord
Jesus Christ preserve and keep you all in his Wisdom, Life, Seed and Dominion,
that to him you may be a Blessing, and a good Savor in the Hearts of all
People; and let all your Actions and Words be one with the VVitness of God in
all People, Amen.

The Wicked and Unrighteous ow Envy and Hatred, and with that they pay their
Debt; but the Righteous Just and Harmless, who owe nothing to any Man but Love,
with that they pay their Debt: But Drunkards, Adulterers, Swearers, Rioters,
who eat and drink, and rise up to Play, and live in Pleasures wantonly upon the
Earth; Fighters, Quarrellers, Envious, Malicious, Unjust, Unrighteous; all such
Actions and Practice judge out of the Power of God, and out of his Kingdom.

ALL Friends every where, that be Shopkeepers or Merchants, or Factors, or any
other Trades, keep low in the Power of God, and do not go into things beyond
your Capacity, nor reach after things more then ye can justly perform, and
answer all men: But all in your Places be just and true, that ye may answer all
men within and without, with Truth and Justice in your Returns, that you may
keep your Words; so say, and so do, which is the Royal Law of Liberty in all
your Tradings, else you are a Dishonor to Christianity. Therefore foresee
your Business, that what you do, and what you say, you may perform, that you
may not break your Words and Promises; for if you do, ye go to Loss, neither
are ye Masters of what ye take in hand; for a Master should be a top of things,
and be in that which can command things.

And none to be negligent in their Business; but give an Account by Words or
Writings, how things are with them, when others write to them; so that none may
Wrong one another in these outward things, nor oppress one another; but be
serviceable one to another, keeping their Words (their going into things beyond
their Ability makes them break their Words) keeping within their Compass with
that which they may answer, lest any be lifted up; For it is a bad thing to be
lifted up, and to make a Noise and a Show for a time with other Peoples Goods,
and cannot keep their Word, their Promise, their Day; such may be lifted up for
a time, and Break, and Fall, and go out as a Stink, and bring a great Dishonor
to Christ and true Christians: And therefore keeping your Word, your Day, and
keeping your just Measure, your just Weight, that keeps down the Oppression;
And by that just Measure and Weight, and your Word and Day, by the Power of
God, and his Spirit in your own Hearts, and there the Blessing is doubled,
there you come to be Rich, and you are a good Savor to God, and in the Hearts
of all People.

So every one strive to be Rich in the Life, and Kingdom and Things of the
World that has no End; For he that covets to be rich in the things of this
World, falls into many Snares and hurtful Lusts. And therefore let him that
buys, or sells, or possesses, or uses this World, be as if he did not; Let
them be Masters over the world in the Power and Spirit of God, and let them
know that to owe no man nothing but Love, yet serve God in Truth and one
another in their Generation.

For Friends, if you be not faithful in the Outward Treasure, Outward Mammon,
who will trust you with the True Treasure? or who can believe that ye have the
True Treasure, but that you speak by hearsay of it? So I say to you all, See
that you are faithful in this outward Mammon, this outward Treasure of the
things of this Life, of this World, faithful to your Word, faithful to your
Days, faithful to your Promises in all your Tradings, Traffickings,
Bargainings, true, and just, and righteous and honest in these outward
Treasures or Mammon, concerning the things of this World, of this Life, of
these outward Riches; just and faithful, true and honest Men and Women in these
outward things: I say, as Christ says, who will trust you with the true and
heavenly Treasure, if not as before? Therefore I say, to be Faithful in these
Outward, that shows an honest Man and honest Woman, faithful in all your
Dealings and Practices between Man and Man, and Woman and Woman, that shows
an honest Heart, and a faithful Man and Woman in outward things; that answers
the faithful Principle in all people. So all Men and Women to be faithful in
these outward things one to another, that shows the good Heart to receive the
true Treasure, that you may be faithful in it to God, who have been faithful in
their outward Treasure or Mammon one to another. So let every ones Conversation
be without Covetousness, let not that be once named among Saints; and do to all
men as you would have them do to you, that is the Law and the Prophets, if not
judged by them; For the Kingdom stands in Righteousness, [mark, stands in it]
and in Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost [mark, in it.]

Postscript.
HOliness becomes the House of God; whosoever acts Unholily, it is that does
dishonor his House, and does not become it: Whosoever acts Unfaithfully in
this Outward Treasure or Mammon, or in the True Treasure to God, is not
justified in the Sight of God nor Man; for they are justified by Faith, through
Faithfulness both of God and Man; For whosoever does Righteousness is of God,
and he that does not Righteousness is not of God: For God loves the Righteous,
and delights in them; but not in them that do Unrighteousness: for in the
Righteousness they have Peace; but out of Righteousness People have Trouble. So
all God's People, his Children, his Saints must be holy, as he is holy; and
therefore do that which is holy and just in all your Lives and Conversations;
and whatsoever ye do, let it be done to the Praise and Glory of God [mark that]
have God's Praise and Glory in your Eye, in all your Speakings and Doings; then
you will be preserved to his Glory, and then you will honor him; and they that
honor him, he will honor, and beautify, and cloathe with the fine Linen,
the Righteousness of Christ, that men may not see your Nakedness: For God will
have a holy People, to serve him in Holiness; a true People, to serve him in
Truth, and in his Spirit, and in his new and living Way, above all the dead
Ways that are come by Sin, and Unrighteousness, and Transgression of his
Spirit, and Power, and Command. So all you that know his Power and Spirit, live
in it, that you may Glorify God in all your Lives, and Conversations and
Words, that you may answer that of God in all, that you may Glorify God in
your Bodies, Souls and Spirits, which are his, who has made them, and gives
them to you for that End; To whom be Glory and Honor forever, who created all
for his Glory and for his Honor. So the Lord God Almighty keep and preserve
you faithful in all things to his Glory and Honor forever.

G. F. Let this be read in all the Men and VVomen's Meetings.

THE END.

