A JOURNAL OR Historical Account OF THE Life, Travels, Sufferings, Christian
Experiences and Labor of Love in the Work of the Ministry. OF THAT Ancient,
Eminent and Faithful Servant of JESUS CHRIST, George Fox; Who departed this
Life in great Peace with the LORD, the 13th of the 11th Month, 1690.

The First Volume.

Dan. 12.3. And they that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars
for ever and ever.

Verse 4. Many shall run to and fro; and Knowledge shall be Increased.

2 Timothy 2.12. If we suffer, we shall also reign with him; ( i. e. with Christ.)

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Northcott, in George-Yard, in Lombard Street.
MDCXCIV.

THE TESTIMONY OF Margaret Fox Concerning her Late Husband GEORGE FOX;
TOGETHER With a brief Account of some of his Travels, Sufferings and Hardships
endured for the Truth's sake.
IT having pleased Almighty God to take away my Dear Husband out of this Evil,
Troublesome World, who was not a Man thereof; being Chosen out of it, and had
his Life and Being in another Region, and his Testimony was against the World,
that the Deeds thereof were evil, and therefore the World hated him: So I am
now to give in my Account and Testimony for my Dear Husband, whom the Lord has
taken unto his blessed Kingdom and Glory. And it is before me from the Lord,
and in my View, to give a Relation, and leave upon Record the Dealings of the
Lord with us from the Beginning.

He was the Instrument in the Hand of the Lord in this present Age, which he
made use of to send forth into the World, to preach the Everlasting Gospel,
which had been hid from many Ages and Generations; the Lord Revealed it unto
him, and made him open that New and Living Way, that Leads to Life Eternal,
when he was but a Youth, and a Stripling. And when he Declared it in his own
Country of Leicestershire, and in Darbyshire, Nottinghamshire and Warwickshire,
and his Declaration being against the Hireling-Priests and their Practices, it
raised a Great Fury and Opposition amongst the Priests and People against him:
yet there was always some, that owned him in several places; but very few, that
stood firm to him, when Persecution came on him. There was he and one other put
in Prison at Darby, His first Imprisonment.
but the other declined, and left him in Prison there; where he continued
almost a whole Year, and then he was Released out of Prison: And went on with
his Testimony abroad, Second Imprisonment.
and was put in Prison again at Nottingham; and there he continued a while, and
after was Released again.

And then he Traveled on into Yorkshire, and passed up and down that Great
County, and several received him; as William Dewsbury, Richard Farnsworth,
Thomas Aldam and others, who all came to be faithful Ministers of the Spirit
for the Lord. And he continued in that Country, and Traveled through Holderness
and the Wowlds, and abundance were Convinced; and several were brought to
Prison at York for their Testimony to the Truth, both Men and Women: So that we
heard of such a People that were Risen, and we did very much inquire after
them. And after a while he Traveled up farther toward the Dales in Yorkshire,
as Wensdale, and Sedbur; and amongst the Hills, Dales and Mountains he came on,
and Convinced many of the Eternal Truth.

And in the Year 1652. it pleased the Lord to draw him toward us; so he came
on from Sedbur, and so to Westmorland, as Firbank-Chappel, where John Blaykling
came with him: and so on to Preston, and to Grarig, and Kendal, and
Vnder-barrow, and Poobank, and Cartmel, and Staveley; and so on to Swarthmore,
my Dwelling House, whither he brought the blessed Tideings of the Everlasting
Gospel, which I, and many Hundreds in these parts, have cause to praise the
Lord for. My then Husband, Thomas Fell, was not at home at that time, but gone
the Welsh Circuit, being one of the Judges of Assize: And our House being a
Place open to entertain Ministers and Religious People at, one of George Fox
his Friends brought him hither; where he stayed all Night. And the next day,
being a Lecture, or a Fast Day, he went to Ulverston-Steeple-house, but came
not in, till People were gathered; I and my Children had been a long time there
before. And when they were singing before the Sermon, he came in; and when they
had done singing, he stood up upon a Seat or Form, and desired, That he might
have liberty to speak: And he that was in the Pulpit, said he might. And the
first words, that he spoke, were as follows: He is not a Jew, that is one
outward; neither is that Circumcision, which is outward: But he is a Jew, that
is one inward; and that is Circumcision, which is of the heart. And so he went
on, and said, How that Christ was the Light of the World, and ligheth every Man
that comes into the World; and that by this Light they might be gathered to
God, etc. And I stood up in my Pew, and I wondered at his Doctrine; for I had
never heard such before. And then he went on, and opened the Scriptures, and
said; The Scriptures were the Prophets words, and Christ 's and the Apostle 's
words, and what, as they spoke, they enjoyed and possessed, and had it from the
Lord: And said, Then what had any to do with the Scriptures, but as they came
to the Spirit, that gave them forth. You will say, Christ says this, and the
Apostles say this; but what can thou say? Art thou a Child of Light, and have
walked in the Light, and what thou speak, is it inwardly from God? etc. This
opened me so, that it cut me to the Heart; and then I saw clearly, we were all
wrong. So I sat me down in my Pew again, and cried bitterly: And I cried in my
Spirit to the Lord, We are all Thieves, we are all Thieves; we have taken the
Scriptures in Words, and know nothing of them in our selves. So that served me,
that I cannot well tell, what he spoke afterward; but he went on in declaring
against the false Prophets, and Priests, and Deceivers of the People. And there
was one John Sawrey, a Justice of Peace, and a Professor, that bid the
Churchwarden, Take him away: And he laid his hands on him several times, and
took them off again, and let him alone; and then after a while he gave over,
and came to our House again that night. And he spoke in the Family amongst the
Servants, and they were all generally Convinced; as William Caton, Thomas
Salthouse, Mary Askew, Anne Clayton and several other Servants. And I was
stricken into such a sadness, I knew not what to do; my Husband being from
home. I saw, it was the Truth, and I could not deny it; and I did, as the
Apostle says, I Received the Truth in the Love of it: And it was opened to me
so clear, that I had never a Tittle in my Heart against it; but I desired the
Lord, that I might be kept in it, and then I desired no greater Portion.

And then he went on to Dalton, Aldingham, Dendrum and Ramsyde-Chappels and
Steeple Houses, and places several up and down, and the People followed him
mightily; and abundance were Convinced, and saw, that which he spoke, was
Truth: But the Priests were all in a Rage. And about two Weeks after James
Naylor and Richard Farnsworth followed him, and enquired him out, till they
came to Swarthmore, and there stayed a while with me at our House, and did me
much Good; for I was under great Heaviness and Judgment. But the Power of the
Lord entered upon me, within about two Weeks, that he came; and about three
Weeks-end my Husband came home: And many were in a mighty Rage. And a deal of
the Captains and Great Ones of the Country went to meet my then Husband, as he
was coming home, and informed him, That a Great Disaster was befallen amongst
his Family, and that they were Witches; and that they had taken us out of our
Religion: and that he might either set them away, or all the Country would be
undone. But no Weapons formed against the Lord, shall prosper; as you may see
hereafter.

So my Husband came home greatly offended: And any may think, what a Condition
I was like to be in, that either I might displease my Husband, or offend God;
for he was very much troubled with us all in the House and Family, they had so
prepossest him against us. But James Naylor and Richard Farnsworth were both
then at our House, and I desired them to come and speak to him; and so they
did, very moderately and wisely: But he was at first displeased with them; but
they told him, They came in Love, and good Will to his House. And after that he
had heard them speak a while, he was better satisfied; and they offered, as if
they would go away: but I desired them to stay, and not to go away yet; for
George Fox will come this Evening. And I would have had my Husband to have
heard them all, and satisfied himself farther about them; because they had so
prepossest him against them of such dangerous, fearful things in his coming
first home. And then was he pretty moderate and quiet: and his Dinner being
ready, he went to it; and I went in, and sat me down by him. And whilst I was
sitting, the Power of the Lord seized upon me: and he was stricken with
Amazement, and knew not what to think; but was quiet and still. And the
Children were all quiet and still, and grown Sober, and could not play on their
Music, that they were learning: and all these things made him quiet and still.

And then at Night George Fox came: And after Supper my Husband was sitting in
the Parlour, and I asked him, If George Fox might come in? and he said, Yes. So
George came in without any Complement, and walked into the Room, and began to
speak presently; and the Family, and James Naylor, and Richard Farnsworth came
all in: and he spoke very excellently, as ever I heard him; and opened Christ
and the Apostles Practices, which they were in, in their Day. And he opened the
Night of Apostasy since the Apostles Days, and laid open the Priests and their
Practices in the Apostasy; that if all in England had been there, I thought,
they could not have denied the Truth of those things. And so my Husband came to
see clearly the Truth, of what he spoke, and was very quiet that Night, and
said no more; and went to Bed. And next Morning came Lampit, Priest of
Ulversion, and got my Husband into the Garden; and spoke much to him there: But
my Husband had seen so much the Night before, that the Priest got little
Entrance upon him. And when the Priest Lampit was come into the House, George
spoke sharply to him, and asked him; When God spoke to him, and called him to
go, and preach to the People? But after a while the Priest went away: This was
on a Sixth-day of the Week about the Fifth Month, 1652. And at our House diverse
Friends were speaking one to another, how there was several Convinced here
aways; and we could not tell, where to get a Meeting: My Husband also being
present, he overheard, and said of his own Accord; You may Meet here, if you
will: And that was the First Meeting we had, that he offered of his own Accord.
And then Notice was given that Day and the next to Friends; and there was a
good large Meeting the First Day, which was the First Meeting, that was at
Swarthmore: and so continued there a Meeting from 1652, till 1690. And my
Husband went that Day to the Steeple-house, and none with him, but his Clerk
and his Groom, that rid with him; and the Priest and People were all fearfully
troubled: But praised be the Lord, they never got their Wills upon us to this
day.

And then after a few Weeks, George went to Ulverston-Steeple-house again, and
the said Justice Sawrey, with others, set the Rude Rabble upon him; and they
beat him so, that he fell down as in a Swoon, and was sore bruised and
black'ned in his Body, and on his Head and Arms. Then my Husband was not at
home: but when he came home, he was displeased, that they should do so; and
spoke to Justice Sawrey, and said, It was against Law to make Riots. And after
that he was sore beat and stoned at Walney, till he fell down: And also at
Dalton was he sore beat and abused; so that he had very hard Usage in diverse
places in these parts. And then when a Meeting was settled here, he went again
into Westmorland, and settled Meetings there; and there was a great
Convincement, and abundance of brave Ministers came out there-aways, as John
Camm, John Audland, Francis Howgil, Edward Borough, Miles Halhead, and John
Blaykling with diverse others. He also went over Sands to Lancaster, and
Yelland, and Kellet, where Robert Widders, Richard Hubberthorn and John Lawson,
with many others were Convinced. And about that time he was in those parts,
many Priests and Professors rose up, and falsely accused him for Blasphemy, and
did endeavor to take away his Life; and got People to swear at a Sessions at
Lancaster, that he had spoken Blasphemy. But my then Husband and Colonel West,
having had some Sight and Knowledge of the Truth, withstood the two Persecuting
Justices, John Sawrey and Thompson; and brought him off, and cleared him: for
indeed he was Innocent. And after the Sessions there was a great Meeting in the
Town of Lancaster; and many of the Towns People came in, and many were
Convinced. And thus he was up and down about Lancaster, Yelland, Westmorland
and some parts of Yorkshire, and our parts above one Year; in which time there
was above Twenty and four Ministers brought forth, that were ready to go with
their Testimony of the Eternal Truth unto the World: And soon after Francis
Howgil and John Camm went to speak to Oliver Cromwell.

And in the Year 1653. George's drawings was into Cumberland by Milholm,
Lampley, Embleton and Brigham, Pardsey and Cockermouth, where at or near
Embleton he had a Dispute with some Priests, as Larkham and Benson, but chiefly
with John Wilkinson, a Preacher at Embleton and Brigham; who after was
Convinced, and owned the Truth, and was a serviceable Minister both in England,
Ireland and Scotland. And then he went to Coldbeck and several places, till he
came to Carlisle, and went to their Steeple-house: And they beat and abused
him, and had him before the Magistrates; who Examined him, The third
Imprisonment.
and put him in Prison there in the Common-Goal among the Thieves. And at the
Assizes one Anthony Pearson, who had been a Justice of Peace, and was Convinced
at Appleby (when he was upon the Bench) by James Naylor and Francis Howgil, who
were then Prisoners there, and brought before him; so Anthony Pearson spoke to
the Justices at Carlisle, he being acquainted with them, having married his
Wife out of Cumberland; and after a while they Released him. And after he went
into several parts in Cumberland, and many were Convinced, and owned the Truth:
and he gathered and settled Meetings there amongst them, and up and down in
several Parts there in the North.

And in the Year 1654. he went Southward to his own Country of Leicestershire,
visiting Friends. And then Colonel Hacker sent him to Oliver Cromwell: The
fourth Imprisonment.
and after his being kept Prisoner a while, he was brought before Oliver, and
was Released. And then he stayed a while, visiting Friends in London, and the
Meetings therein; and so passed Westward to Bristol, and visited Friends there:
and after went into Cornwall, where they put him in Prison at Launceston, The
fifth Imprisonment.
and one Edward Pyot with him; where he had a bad, long Imprisonment. And when
he was Released, he passed into many parts in that County of Cornwall, and
settled Meetings there. And then he Traveled through many Counties, visiting
Friends and settling Meetings all along; and so came into the North, and to
Swarthmore, and to Cumberland.

And so for Scotland he passed in the Year 1657. and there went with him Robert
Widders, James Lancaster, John Grave and others. And he Traveled through many
places in that Nation, as Douglas, Heads, Hambleton, Glascow, and to
Edenborough, where they took him, and carried him before General Monk, and the
Council, and Examined him, and asked him his Business into that Nation: who
Answered; He came to visit the Seed of God. And after they had threatened him,
and charged him to depart their Nation of Scotland, they let him go. And then
he went to Linlithgow, and Sterling, and Johnstons and many places, visiting
the People; and several were Convinced. And after he had stayed a pretty while,
and settled some Meetings, he returned into Northumberland, and into the
Bishopric of Durham, visiting Friends and settling Meetings, as he went; and
then returned back again to Swarthmore, and stayed amongst Friends a while, and
so returned South again. And in 1658. Judge Fell died.

And in 1660. he came out of the South into the North, and had a Great General
Meeting about Balby in Yorkshire; and so came on visiting Friends in many
places, till he came to Swarthmore again. And King Charles then being come in,
the Justices sent out Warrants, The sixth Imprisonment.
and took him at Swarthmore, charging him in their Warrants, That he drew away
the King 's Liege People, to the endangering the embruing the Nation in Blood;
and sent him Prisoner to Lancaster-Castle. And I having a Great Family, and he
being taken in my House, I was moved of the Lord to go to the King at
Whitehall; and took with me a Declaration, and an Information of our
Principles: And a long time, and much ado I had, to get to him. But at last,
when I got to him, I told him; If he was Guilty of those things, I was Guilty,
for he was taken in my House: And I gave him the Paper of our Principles, and
desired, that he would set him at Liberty; as he had promised, That none should
suffer for tender Consciences: and we were of tender Consciences, and desired
nothing, but the Liberty of our Consciences. And then with much ado, after he
had been kept Prisoner near half a Year at Lancaster, we got a Habeas Corpus,
and Removed him to the King's Bench; where he was Released. And then would I
gladly have come home to my great Family; but was bound in my Spirit, and could
not have Freedom to get away for a whole Year. And the King had promised me
several times, that we should have our Liberty: And then the Monarchy-Men rose;
and then came the Great and General Imprisonment of Friends the Nation through:
And so could I not have Freedom nor Liberty to come home, till we had got a
General Proclamation for all our Friends Liberty; and then I had Freedom and
Peace to come home.

And in 1663. he came North again, and to Swarthmore: And then they sent out
Warrants, and took him again, and had him to Holcrof before the Justices, and
tendered him the Oath of Allegiance; and sent him Prisoner to Lancaster-Castle.
The seventh Imprisonment.
And about a Month after, the Justices sent for me also out of my House, and
tendered me the Oath; and sent me Prisoner to Lancaster. And the next Assizes
they tendered the Oath of Allegiance and Supremacy to us again both, and
Premunired me: But they had missed the Date, and other things in his
Indictment, and so it was quasht; but they tendered him the Oath again, and
kept him Prisoner a Year and an half at Lancaster-Castle. And then they sent
him to Scarborough-Castle in Yorkshire, where they kept him Prisoner close
under the Soldiers much of a Year and an half; so that a Friend could scarcely
have spoken to him: yet after that it pleased the Lord, that he was Released.
But I continued in Prison, and a Prisoner four years at that time: And an Order
was procured from the Council, whereby I was set at Liberty. And in that time I
went down into Cornwall with my Son and Daughter Lower, and came back by London
to the Yearly Meeting; and there I met with him again: And then he told me, The
time was drawing on toward our Marriage; but he might first go into Ireland.
The eithth Imprisonment.
And a little before this time was he Prisoner in his own Country at Leicester
for a while; and then Released. And so into Ireland he went: and I went into
Kent and Suffex; and came back to London again: And afterward I went to the
West, toward Bristol, in 1669. and there I stayed, till he came over from
Ireland. And then it was Eleven years after my former Husband's Decease. And in
Ireland he had had a great Service for the Lord and his Eternal Truth, amongst
Friends and many People there, but escaped many Dangers, and Times of being
taken Prisoner; they having laid in Wait aforehand for him in many places. And
then he being returned, at Bristol, he declared his Intentions of Marriage: and
there also was our Marriage solemnized. And then within ten Days after I came
homewards; and my Husband stayed up and down in the Countries amongst Friends,
visiting them.

And soon after I came home, there came another Order from the Council to cast
me into Prison again; and the Sheriff of Lancashire sent his Bailiff, and
pulled me out of my own House, and had me Prisoner to Lancaster-Castle (upon
the Old Praemunire;) where I continued a whole Year: And most part of all that
time was I sick and weakly; and also my Husband was weak and sickly at that
time. And then after a while he Recovered, and went about to get me out of
Prison; and a Discharge at last was got under the Great Seal: and so I was set
at Liberty. And then I was to go up to London again, for my Husband was
intending for America: And he was full two years away, before he came back
again into England; and then he arrived at Bristol, and then came to London:
and he intended to have come to the middle of the Nation with me. But when we
came into some parts of Worcestershire, they got there Information of him; and
one Justice Parker by his Warrant sent him and my Son Lower to Worcester-Gaol:
The ninth Imprisonment.
and the Justices there tendered him the Oath, and Premunired him, but Released
my Son Lower; who stayed with him most of the time he was Prisoner there.

And after some time he fell sick in a long, lingering Sickness, and many times
was very ill: so they writ to me from London, That if I would see him alive, I
might go to him; which accordingly I did. And after I had tarried Seventeen
Weeks with him at Worcester, and no Discharge like to be obtained for him, I
went up to London, and writ to the King an Account of his long Imprisonment,
and how he was taken in his Travel homewards; and how he was weak and sick, and
not like to live, if they kept him long there. And I went with it to Whitehall
my self; and I met with the King, and gave him the Paper: And he said, I must
go to the Chancellor, he could do nothing in it. Then I writ also to the Lord
Chancellor, and went to his House, and gave him my Paper, and spoke to him,
That the King had left it wholly to him; and if he did not take pity, and
Release him out of that Prison, I feared, he would end his days there. And the
Lord Chancellor Finch was a very tender Man, and spoke to the Judge; who gave
out an Habeas Corpus presently. And when we got it, we sent it down to
Worcester; and they would not part with him at first, but said, he was
Premunired, and was not to go out on that manner. And then we were forced to go
to Judge North, and to the Attorney General, and we got another Order, and sent
down from them; and with much ado, and great Labor and Industry of William
Mead, and other Friends, we got him up to London, where he Appeared in
Westminster Hall at the King's- Bench, before Judge Hales, who was a very
honest, tender Man; and he knew, they had Imprisoned him but in Envy. So that,
which they had against him, was Read; and our Counsel pleaded, That he was
taken up in his Travel and Journey: And there was but a little said, till he
was quitted. And this was the Last Prison, that he was in, being freed by the
Court of King's- Bench.

And when he was at Liberty, he Recovered again: And then I was very desirous
to go home with him, which we did. And this was the first time, that he came to
Swarthmore, after we were Married; and so he stayed here much of two years. And
then went to London again to the Yearly Meeting; and after a while went into
Holland, and some parts of Germany, where he stayed a pretty while: and then
Returned to London again at the next Yearly Meeting. And after he had stayed a
while in and about London, he came into the North to Swarthmore again; and
stayed that time nigh two years: And then he grew weakly, being troubled with
Pains and Aches, having had many sore and long Travels, Beatings, and hard
Imprisonments. But after some time he rid to York: and so passed on through
Nottinghamshire and several Counties, visiting Friends; till he came to London
to the Yearly Meeting, and stayed there, and there-aways, till he finished his
Course, and laid down his Head in Peace.

And though the Lord had provided an outward Habitation for him, yet he was not
willing to stay at it; because it was so remote and far from London, where his
Service most lay. And my Concern for God, and his holy, Eternal Truth was then
in the North, where God had placed and set me; and likewise for the Ordering
and Governing of my Children and Family: so that we were very willing both of
us, to live apart some years upon God's Account, and his Truth's Service, and
to deny our selves of that Comfort, which we might have had in being together,
for the sake and Service of the Lord, and his Truth. And if any took Occasion,
or Judged hard of us because of that, the Lord will Judge them; for we were
Innocent. And for my own part, I was willing to make many long Journies, for
taking away all Occasion of evil Thoughts: And though I lived Two hundred Miles
from London, yet have I been Nine times there, upon the Lord, and his Truth's
Account; and of all the times that I was at London, this last time was most
Comfortable, that the Lord was pleased to give me Strength and Ability, to
travel that great Journey, being Seventy six years of Age, to see my Dear
Husband, who was better in his Health and Strength, than many times I had seen
him before. I look upon that, that the Lord's special Hand was in it, that I
should go then; for he lived but about half a Year after I left him: Which
makes me admire the Wisdom and Goodness of God in Ordering my Journey at that
time.

And now he has finished his Course, and his Testimony, and is entered into
his Eternal Rest and Felicity. I trust in the same powerful God, that his holy
Arm and Power will carry me through, whatever he has yet for me to do; and that
he will be my Strength and Support, and the Bearer up of my Head unto the End,
and in the End. For I know his Faithfulness and Goodness, and I have Experience
of his Love; To whom be Glory and Powerful Dominion for ever: Amen.

M. F.

The Testimony of some of the AUTHOR'S Relations.
NEither Days, nor Length of Time with us can wear out the Memory of our Dear
and Honored Father George Fox, whom the Lord has taken to himself. And though
his Earthly House of this Tabernacle be dissolved, and Mortality put off; yet
we believe, he has a Building with God Eternally in the Heavens, and is entered
into Rest, as a Reward to those great Labors, hard Sufferings and sore Trials,
he patiently endured for God and his Truth. Of which Truth he was made an Able
Minister, and One, if not the First Promulgator of it in our Age: who though of
no great Literature, nor seeming much Learned, as to the outward (being hid
from the Wisdom of this World;) yet he had the Tongue of the Learned, and could
speak a Word in due Season to the Conditions and Capacities of most, especially
to them, that were weary, and wanted Soul's Rest; being deep in the Divine
Mysteries of the Kingdom of God. And the Word of Life and Salvation through him
reached unto many Souls; whereby many were Convinced of their great Duty of
inward Retiring to Wait upon God: and as they became diligent in the
Performance of that Service, were also raised up to be Preachers of the same
Everlasting Gospel of Peace and Glad Tidings to others; who are as Seals to his
Ministry both in this and other Nations, and may possibly give a more full
Account thereof. Howbeit we knowing his unwearied Diligence, not Sparing, but
Spending himself in the Work and Service, whereunto he was Chosen and Called of
God, could not but give this short Testimony of his Faithfulness therein; and
likewise of his tender Love and Care toward us: who as a tender Father to
Children (in which Capacity we stood, being so Related unto him) he never
failed to give us his wholesome Counsel and Advice. And not only so, but as a
Father in Christ, he took Care of the whole Family and Household of Faith, which
the Lord had made him an Eminent Overseer of, and endued him with such an
Excellent Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, to propose and direct Helps and
Advantages to the Well-ordering and Establishing of Affairs and Government in
the Church, as now are found very serviceable thereunto; and have greatly
disappointed and prevented the false, loose and libertine Spirit in some, who
to their own Confusion have endeavored (by Separation and Division) to disturb
the Church's Peace. And although many of that sort have at sundry times shot
their poisonous Darts at him, publicly in Print, and privately other ways; yet
he has been always preserved by the Heavenly Power of God, out of the Reach of
their Envy, and all Perils and Difficulties, that attended on their Account:
Who as a Fixed Star in the Firmament of God's Power, did constantly abide, and
held his Integrity to the last, being of a sweet, savoury Life; and as to
Conversation kept his Garments clean: And though outwardly dead, yet lives,
and his Memory is right precious unto us; as it is and will be to all, that
abide in the Love of Truth, and have not declined the Way of it. For he was one
of the Lord's Worthies, Valiant for the Truth upon Earth, not turning his Back
in the Day of Battle; but his Bow still abiding in its Strength, he through
many Hardships brought Gladness and Refreshment to Israel's Camp: being
assisted by the Might of that Power, that always put the Armies of Aliens and
Enemies to Flight. And now having finished his Course, is removed from us into
a Glorious State of Immortality and Bliss; and is gathered unto the Lord, as a
Shock of Corn in its full Season, and to that Habitation of Safety, where the
Wicked cease from troubling, and the Weary be at Rest.

John Rous. William Meade. Thomas Lower. William Ingram. Daniel Abraham.
Abraham Morris. Margaret Rous. Sarah Meade. Mary Lower. Susanna Ingram. Rachel
Abraham. Isabel Morris.


An Epistle by Way of Testimony, to Friends and Brethren of the Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings in England, Wales, and elsewhere, concerning the Decease of
our Faithful Brother GEORGE FOX.
From our Second-Days Morning Meeting in London, the 26th of the 11th Month,
1690.
DEar and truly beloved Friends, Brethren and Sisters in Christ Jesus, our
Blessed Lord and Savior, we sincerely and tenderly salute you all in his free
and tender Love, wherewith he has graciously visited us, and largely shed it
abroad in our Hearts and Souls, to our own unspeakable Comfort and Consolation,
and toward his whole Heritage, and Royal Offspring; blessed be his pure and
powerful Name for Evermore. And our Souls do truly and fervently desire, and
breathe unto the God of all our Mercies, that you all may be preserved, and
kept truly faithful and diligent in his Work and Service, according to your
Heavenly Calling and Endowments with his Light, Grace and Truth, unto the End
of your Days; as being livingly engaged thereby, all your appointed Time to
serve him, and to wait, till your Change come: That none may neglect that true
Improvement of your Times and Talents, that God has afforded you here, for your
Eternal Advantage hereafter, in that Inheritance and Life Immortal, that never
fades away. And that the whole Flock and Heritage of Christ Jesus, which he has
purchased and bought for himself with a Price incorruptible, may always be so
preserved in his own pure Love and Life, as to grow, increase, and prosper in
the same; and thereby be kept in Love, Unity and Peace with one another, as
becomes his true and faithful Followers, is that, which our very Hearts and
Souls desire, being often truly comforted and enlarged in the living sense and
feeling of the Increase and Aboundings thereof, among faithful Friends and
Brethren.

And Dear Brethren and Sisters, unto this our Tender Salutation, We are
concerned in Brotherly Love, and true Tender-heartedness, to add and impart
unto you some Account of the Decease of our Dear and Elder Brother in Christ,
namely, his and his Church's true and faithful Servant and Minister, George
Fox; whom it has pleased the Lord to take unto himself, as he has diverse
others of his faithful Servants and Ministers of late Time; who have faithfully
served out their Generation, and finished their Testimony and Course with Joy
and Peace. Howbeit, O Dear Brethren and Friends! that so many Worthies in
Israel, and serviceable Instruments in the Lord's Hand, are of late taken away
and removed from us, so soon one after another, appears a Dispensation, that
deeply and sorrowfully affects us, and many more, whose Hearts are upright and
tender toward God, and one to another in the Truth. The Consideration of the
Depth, Weight and Meaning thereof, is very weighty upon our Spirits, though
their precious Life and Testimony lives with us, as being of that same Body,
united to one Head, even Christ Jesus; in which we still, and hope, ever shall
have secret Comfort and Union with them, whom the Lord has removed, and taken
to himself out of their Earthly Tabernacles and Houses, into their Heavenly and
Everlasting Mansions.

This our said Dear Brother, George Fox, was enabled by the Lord's Power, to
Preach the Truth fully and effectually, in our Public Meeting in
White-Hart-Court, by Grace Church Street, London, on the Eleventh Day of this
instant 11th Month, 1690: After which he said, I am glad I was here; now I am
clear, I am fully clear. Then he was the same Day taken with some Illness or
Indisposition of Body, more than usual; and continued weak in Body for two days
after, at our Friend Henry Goldney's House in the same Court, close by the
Meeting House, in much Contentment and Peace, and very sensible to the last. In
which time he mentioned diverse Friends, and sent for some in particular; to
whom he expressed his Mind, for the spreading Friends Books and Truth in the
World, and through the Nations thereof; as his Spirit in the Lord's Love and
Power was universally set, and bent for Truth and Righteousness, and the making
known the Way thereof to the Nations and People afar off: signifying also to
some Friends, That all is well; and the Seed of God reigns over all, and over
Death it self. That though he was weak in Body, yet that the Power of God is
over all, and the Seed reigns over all disorderly Spirits: which were his
wonted sensible Expressions, being in the living Faith and Sense thereof, which
he kept to the End. And the Thirteenth Instant, between the Ninth and Tenth
Hour in the Night, he quietly departed this Life in Peace; being two days after
the Lord enabled him to Publish and Preach the Blessed Truth in the Meeting, as
aforesaid. So that he clearly and evidently ended his days in his faithful
Testimony, in perfect Love and Unity with his Brethren, and Peace and Good Will
to all Men; being about Sixty and six Years of Age (as we understand) when he
departed this Life.

And on the Sixteenth of this Instant, being the day appointed for his Funeral,
a very great Concourse of Friends and People assembled at our Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court aforesaid, about the Midday, in order to attend his Body to
our Burying-place near Bunhill-Fields, to be Interred, as Friends last Office
of Love and Respect, due on that Account. The Meeting was held about two Hours,
with great and heavenly Solemnity, manifestly attended with the Lord's Blessed
Power and Presence; and diverse living Testimonies given from a lively
Remembrance and Sense of this his Dear, Ancient Servant, his Blessed Ministry
and Testimony of the breaking forth of this Gospel-day; his Innocent Life, long
and great Travels, and Labors of Love in the Everlasting Gospel, for the
turning and gathering many Thousands from Darkness to the Light of Christ
Jesus, the Foundation of true Faith; also of his manifold Sufferings,
Afflictions and Oppositions, which he met withal for his faithful Testimony,
both from his open Adversaries and false Brethren; and his Preservations,
Dominion, and Deliverances out of them all by the Power of God: To whom the
Glory and Honor was and is ascribed, in raising up and preserving this his
faithful Witness and Minister to the End of his Days; whose blessed Memorial
will Everlastingly remain.

He loved Truth and Righteousness, and bore faithful Testimony against Deceit
and Falsehood, and the Mystery of Iniquity: and often, of late time especially,
warned Friends against Covetousness, Earthly-mindedness, against getting into
the Earth, and into a brittle Spirit; and the younger sort, against Looseness
and Pride of Life, etc.

A few days before he died, he had a great Concern upon his Mind, concerning
some, in whom the Lord's Power was working, to lead them into a Ministry and
Testimony to his Truth; who through their too much entangling themselves in the
things of this World, did make themselves unready to answer the Call and
Leadings of the Power of God, and hurt the Gift, that was bestowed upon them,
and did not take that regard to their Service and Ministry, as they ought: And
mentioned the Apostle's Exhortation to Timothy, To take heed to his Ministry,
and to show himself approved, etc. And expressed his Grief concerning such, as
preferred their own Business before the Lord's Business, and sought the
advancing worldly Concerns, before the Concerns of Truth: And concluded with a
tender and fatherly Exhortation to all, to whom God had imparted of his
Heavenly Treasure, that they would improve it faithfully; and be diligent in
the Lord's Work, that the Earth might be sown with the Seed of the Kingdom, and
God's Harvest might be minded by those, whom he had called and enabled to
labor therein: and that such would commit the Care of their outward Concerns
to the Lord, who would care for them, and give a Blessing to them. However,
this is not mentioned to encourage any to run unsent, or without being called
of God.

Many are living Witnesses, that the Lord raised him up by his Power, to
proclaim his mighry Day to the Nations, and made him an Effectual Instrument in
our Day, to turn many from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's Power to God;
and freely to suffer and bear all Reproaches, and the manifold Persecutions,
Buffetings, Halings, Stonings, Imprisonments, and Cruelties, that were in the
Beginning, and for some time inflicted on him and others, for the Name of
Christ Jesus. He was in his Testimony as a fixed Star in the Firmament of God's
Power, where all that be truly wise, and that turn many to Righteousness, shall
shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as the Stars for ever and ever.
He knew and Preached the Mystery of Christ Revealed, the Life and Substance,
and the Power of Godliness, above all Shadows and Forms: The Lord endued him
with a hidden Wisdom and Life. He loved Peace, and earnestly labored for
universal Love, Unity, Peace, and good Order in the Churches of Christ: And
wherever he met with the contrary, it was his great Grief and Burden. He was
greatly for the Encouragement of faithful Laborers in the Lord's Work; and it
was a great Offense and Grief to him, to have their Testimony weakened, or
Labors slighted through Prejudice in any professing Truth.

And inasmuch as the Lord suffered him not to be delivered up to the Will of
his Enemies and Persecutors, who often heretofore breathed out Cruelty against
him, and designed his Destruction; but in his good Pleasure so fairly and
quietly took him away in his own time, when his Testimony was so blessedly
finished, and his Work accomplished, This is all remarkable, and worthy of
serious and due Observation, as being by a special and Divine Providence and
Wisdom of God; to whom we ascribe the Glory of all, and not unto Man or
Creatures. Though we must needs allow, and own that good Report and due Esteem,
which faithful Elders, Ministers and Servants of God and Christ have by Faith
obtained, to the Praise of that blessed Power, that upheld them in every Age in
their day; many whereof are even of late taken away from the Evil to come, and
are at Rest in the Lord, out of the Reach of all Envy and Persecution, where
the Wicked cannot trouble them any more.

And we must patiently bear our Parting with them, and our Loss and Sorrow on
that Account, with respect to their unspeakable Gain: Yet how can we avoid
being deeply affected with Sadness of Spirit, and brokenness of Heart, under
the sense and consideration of such Loss and Revolutions, which we have cause
to believe are Ominous of Calamities to the wicked World, though of good to the
Righteous? Did the Death of plain upright Jacob, Genesis 50.
namely Israel, (who was as a Prince of God) so deeply affect both his own
Children and Kindred, as that they made a great and exceeding sore Lamentation
for him; and even the Egyptians also, that they bewailed him seventy days? And
the Death of Moses so deeply affect the Children of Israel, Deuteronomy. 34.
as that they did weep and mourn for him in the Plain of Moab thirty Days? And
the Death of Stephen, that faithful Martyr of Jesus, so deeply affect certain
Men fearing God, Acts 7.
as that they made great Lamentation for him? And the Apostle Paul, when taking
his leave of the Elders of the Church of Ephesus, Acts 20.
and telling them, They should see his Face no more? If this did so deeply
affect them, that they wept all abundantly, sorrowing most of all for these
Words, That they should see his face no more, (with many more of this kind;)
How then can we otherwise choose, but be deeply affected with Sorrow and Sadness
of Heart (though not as those, which have no hope) when so many of our Ancient,
Dear and Faithful Brethren (with whom we have had much sweet Society) are
removed from us one after another? (We pray, God raise up and increase more
such!) Yet must we all contentedly submit to the good Pleasure and Wisdom of
the Lord our God in all these things; who takes away, and none can hinder him,
nor may any say unto him, What do thou? Yet we have cause to bless the Lord,
that he has of late raised, and is raising up more to publish his Name in the
Earth: And we that yet remain, have but a short Time to stay after them, that
are gone; but we shall be gone to them also. The Lord God of Life keep us all
Faithful in his holy Truth, Love, Unity and Life to the End. He has a great
Work still to bring forth in the Earth, and great things to bring to pass, in
order to make way for Truth and Righteousness, to take place therein; and that
his Seed may come forth, and be gathered, and the Power and Kingdom of our God
and of his Christ, made known and exalted in the Earth, unto the Ends thereof.

Dear Friends and Brethren, Be faithful, till Death, that a Crown of Life you
may obtain. All dwell in the Love of God in Christ Jesus, in Union and Peace in
him: To whom we tenderly Commit you to keep and strengthen you, bless and
preserve you to the End of your Days. In whose dear and tender Love we remain
--

Your Dear Friends and Brethren, Stephen Crisp. Geo. Whitehead. Fra. Camfield.
James Park. John Elson. Peter Price. John Field. John Edridge. Nicholas Gates.
Francis Stamper. John Vaughton. Gilbert Latey. Charles Marshal. Rich. Needham.
James Martin. Daniel Monro. John Heywood. George Bowls. William Robinson.
William Bingley. John Butcher. Benjamin Antrobus.

These Names are since added, at the desire of the Persons following:

Sam. Goodaker. Amb. Rigg. William Fallowfield.




POSTSCRIPT.
BEfore his Death he writ a little Paper, desiring all Friends every where,
that use to write to him about the Sufferings and Affairs of Friends in their
several Countries, should henceforth write to their several Correspondents in
London, to be Communicated to the Second-Days Meeting, to take Care, that they
be answered.

Thomas Ellwood's Account of that Eminent and Honorable Servant of the Lord,
George Fox.
THis Holy Man was raised up by God in an Extraordinary Manner, for an
Extraordinary Work, even to Awaken the sleeping World, by proclaiming the
Mighty Day of the Lord to the Nations, and publishing again the Everlasting
Gospel to the Inhabitants of the Earth, after the long and dismal Night of
Apostasy and Darkness. For this Work the Lord began to prepare him by many and
various Trials and Exercises from his very Childhood: And having fitted and
furnished him for it, he called him into it very Young; and made him
Instrumental, by the effectual Working of the Holy Ghost, through his Ministry
to call many Others into the same Work, and to turn many Thousands from
Darkness to the Light of Christ, and from the Power of Satan unto God. I knew
him not, till the Year 1660: from that Time to the Time of his Death I knew him
well, Conversed with him often, Observed him much, Loved him dearly, and
Honored him truly; and upon good Experience can say, He was indeed an
Heavenly-minded Man, zealous for the Name of the Lord, and preferred the Honor
of God before all things. He was Valiant for the Truth, Bold in Asserting it,
Patient in Suffering for it, Unwearied in Laboring in it, Steady in his
Testimony to it; Immovable as a Rock. Deep he was in Divine Knowledge, Clear
in opening heavenly Mysteries, Plain and Powerful in Preaching, Fervent in
Prayer. He was richly endued with heavenly Wisdom, Quick in Discerning, Sound
in Judgment, Able and ready in Giving, Discreet in Keeping Counsel: A Lover of
Righteousness, an Encourager of Virtue, Justice, Temperance, Meekness, Purity,
Chastity, Modesty, Humility, Charity and Self-Denial in all, both by Word and
Example. Graceful he was in Countenance, Manly in Personage, Grave in Gesture,
Courteous in Conversation, Weighty in Communication, Instructive in Discourse;
Free from Affectation in Speech or Carriage. A severe Reprover of hard and
obstinate Sinners; A mild and gentle Admonisher of such, as were tender, and
sensible of their Failings: Not apt to resent personal Wrongs; Easy to forgive
Injuries: But zealously Earnest, where the Honor of God, the Prosperity of
Truth, the Peace of the Church were concerned. Very Tender, Compassionate and
Pitiful he was to all, that were under any sort of Affliction; full of
Brotherly Love, full of Fatherly Care: For indeed, the Care of the Churches of
Christ was daily upon him, the Prosperity and Peace whereof he studiously
sought. Beloved he was of God; Beloved of God's People: and (which was not the
least part of his Honor) the Common Butt of all Apostates Envy; whose Good
notwithstanding he earnestly sought. He lived to see the Desire of his Soul,
The Spreading of that Blessed Principle of Divine Light, through many of the
European Nations, and not a few of the American Islands and Provinces, and the
Gathering many Thousands into an Establishment therein; which the Lord
vouchsafed him the Honor to be the First Effectual Publisher of, in this
latter Age of the World. And having fought a good Fight, finished his Course,
and kept the Faith, his righteous Soul (freed from the Earthly Tabernacle, in
which he had led an Exemplary Life of Holiness) was translated into those
Heavenly Mansions, where Christ our Lord went to prepare a Place for His; there
to possess that Glorious Crown of Righteousness, which is laid up for, and
shall be given by the Lord the Righteous Judge, to all them that love his
Appearance. Ages to come, and Peoples yet unborn shall call him Blessed, and
bless the Lord for raising of him up: And Blessed shall we also be, if we so
walk, as we had him for an Example; for whom this Testimony lives in my Heart,
He lived and died the SERVANT of the LORD.

T. E.

Advertisement.
FOrasmuch as many other Testimonies from diverse Counties and Friends
concerning George Fox, and his Great Service for the Truth are sent up to
London, which cannot conveniently be printed with the Journal, lest they should
swell it too Bigg; and many of them being of the same Import, Therefore they
are reserved for further Consideration, to be disposed of, as a future Service
may be seen in the Wisdom of God for them, when Way is made for his Epistles,
or any of his other Works to be published.

The Appearance of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, and Breaking forth again in
his Eternal Power in this our Day and Age in ENGLAND --
WHerein the Lord's mighty Power and Word of Life has been Richly and Freely
preached, to the Gathering of many into Reconciliation with God by it; to the
Exaltation and Glory of the great God, through the bringing forth of the
Heavenly and Spiritual Fruits, from such as have been Gathered by his Eternal
Light, Power, and Spirit unto himself. And by the Sowing to the Spirit in the
hearts of People, Life Eternal has been Reaped; That the Flocks have been
Gathered, which have the Milk of the Word plenteously: That the Riches of the
Word have flourished, and mightily abounded; and God's Heavenly Plow with his
Spiritual Men has gone on cheerfully, to the Overturning the Fallow Ground of
the Hearts, that had not borne Heavenly Fruit to God. And God's Heavenly
Threshers with his Heavenly Flail, have with Joy and Delight Thresht out the
Chaff, and the Corruptions, that have been a-Top of God's Seed and Wheat in Man
and Woman: And thus have they Thresht in Hope, and are made Partakers of their
Hope; through which God's Seed is come into his Garner.

Oh! the Unutterable Glory, and the Unexpressible Excellency of the
Everlasting, Glorious Truth, Gospel and Word of Life, that the Infinite,
Invisible and Wise God, (who is over all) has Revealed and Manifested! And how
have the Professors, Priests and Powers risen up in Opposition against his
Children, that are born of the Immortal Seed by the Word of God! And Oh! how
great have the Persecutions, and Reproaches, and Spoiling of Goods been, that
have been Executed upon them! But they that have Touched them, and Touches
them, which are as Dear to God, as the Apple of his Eye, how has the Lord
Manifested himself to stand by them, in Overthrowing Powers, Priests and
States! What Changes have there been since (1644) and 1650, and 1652! How have
the Gaols been filled since then in this Nation with the Heirs of Life, God's
Chosen Ones, who had no Helper in the Earth, but the Lord and his Christ! So
that Truth's Faithful Witnesses were scarcely to be found, but in Gaols and
Prisons, where the Righteous were Numbered among the Transgressors; who had
neither Staff nor Bag from Man, but the Staff, the Bread of Life, and the Bag
that holds the Treasure, that waxes not old. But the Lord Jesus Christ, that
sent them forth, was their Exceeding great Supporter and Upholder by his
Eternal Power and Spirit, both then and now.

G. F.

THE PREFACE, BEING A SUMMARY ACCOUNT Of the DIVERSE Dispensations of God TO
MEN, FROM The Beginning of the World to That of our present Age, by the
Ministry and Testimony of his Faithful Servant George Fox, as an Introduction
to the ensuing Iournal.
DIVERSE have been the Dispensations of God since the Creation of the World unto
the Sons of Men; But the Great End of all of them has been the Renown of his
own Excellent Name in the Creation and Restoration of Man: Man, the Emblem of
himself, as a God on Earth and the Glory of all his Works. The World began with
Innocence: All was then good that the good God had made: And as he blessed the
Works of his hands, so their Natures and Harmony magnified him their Creator.
Then the Morning Stars Sang together for Joy, and all parts of his Works said
Amen to his Law. Not a Jarr in the whole Frame, but Man in Paradise, the Beasts
in the Field, the Fowl in the Air, the Fish in the Sea, the Lights in the
Heavens, the Fruits of the Earth; yea the Air, the Earth, the Water and Fire
Worshipped, praised and exalted his Power, Wisdom and Goodness. O Holy Sabbath,
O Holy Day to the Lord!

But this Happy State lasted not long: For Man, the Crown and Glory of the
Whole, being tempted to aspire above his place, unhappily yielded against
Command and Duty, as well as Interest and Felicity; and so fell below it, lost
the Divine Image, the Wisdom, Power and Purity he was made in. By which, being
no longer fit for Paradise, he was expelled that Garden of God, his proper
Dwelling and Residence, and was driven out, as a poor Vagabond, from the
presence of the Lord, to wander in the Earth, the Habitation of Beasts.

Yet God, that made him had pity on him; for He seeing he was deceived, and
that it was not of Malice, or an Original Presumption in him, but through the
Subtilty of the Serpent, (that had first fallen from his own State, and by the
Mediation of the Woman, man's own Nature and Companion, whom the Serpent had
first deluded) in his infinite Goodness and Wisdom found out a way to Repair
the Breach, Recover the Loss, and Restore fallen Man again by a Nobler and more
Excellent Adam, promised to be born of a Woman; that as by means of a Woman the
evil one had prevailed upon Man, by a Woman also He should come into the World,
who would prevail against him and bruise his Head, and deliver Man from his
Power: And which, in a signal manner, by the Dispensation of the Son of God in
the Flesh, in the fullness of Time, was personally and fully accomplished by
him, and in him, as Man's Savior and Redeemer.

But his Power was not limited, in the Manifestation of it, to that time; for
both before and since his blessed Manifestation in the Flesh, He has been the
Light and Life, the Rock and Strength of all that ever feared God: Present with
them in their Temptations, followed them in their Travels and Afflictions, and
supported and carried them through and over the Difficulties that have attended
them in their Earthly Pilgrimage. By this Abel's heart excelled Cains, and Seth
obtained the pre-eminence, and Enoch walked with God. It was this that strove
with the Old World, and which they rebelled against, and which sanctified and
instructed Noah to Salvation.

But the outward Dispensation that followed the benighted State of Man, after
his Fall, especially among the Patriarcks, was generally that of Angels; as the
Scriptures of the Old Testament do in many places express, as to Abraham,
Jacob, etc. The next was that of the Law by Moses, which was also delivered by
Angels, as the Apostle tells us. This Dispensation was much outward, and suited
to a low and servil State; called therefore that of a Schoolmaster, to point
out and prepare that People to look and long for the Messiah, who would deliver
them from the servitude of a Ceremonious and imperfect Dispensation, by knowing
the Realities of those Misterious Representations in themselves. In this time
the Law was written on Stone, the Temple built with Hands attended with an
outward Priesthood and External Rites, and Ceremonies, that were Shadows of
the Good Things that were to come, and were only to serve till the Seed came,
or the more excellent and general manifestation of Christ, to whom was the
Promise, and to all Men only in him, in whom it was Yea and Amen; even Life
from Death, Immortality and Eternal Life.

This the Prophets foresaw, and comforted the believing Jews in the certainty
of it; which was the Top of the Mosaical Dispensation, and which ended in
John's Ministry, the Forerunner of the Messiah, as John's was finished in him,
the Fullness of all. And God, that at sundry Times and in diverse manners had
spoken to the Fathers by his Servants the Prophets, Spoak then by his Son
Christ Jesus, Who is Heir of all things; being the Gospel-Day, which is the
Dispensation of Sonship: Bringing in thereby a nearer Testament and a better
hope; even the beginning of the Glory of the latter days, and of the
Restitution of all things; yea, the Restoration of the Kingdom unto Israel.

Now the Spirit, that was more sparingly communicated in former Dispensations,
began to be Poured forth upon all Flesh, according to the Prophet Joel, and the
Light that shined in Darkness, or but dimly before, the most gracious God
caused to Shine out of Darkness, and the Day Star began to arise in the Hearts
of Believers, giving unto them the knowledge of God in the Face (or Appearance)
of his Son Christ Jesus.

Now the Poor in Spirit, the Meek, the true Mourners, the Hungry and Thirsty
after Righteousness, the Peacemakers, the Pure in Heart, the Merciful and the
Persecuted, came more especially in Remembrance before the Lord, and were
sought out and blessed by Israel's true Shepherd. Old Jerusalem with her
Children grew out of Date, and the New Jerusalem into Request, the Mother of
the Sons of the Gospel-Day. Wherefore no more at Old Jerusalem, nor at the
Mountain of Samaria, will God be worshipped above other places; for, behold, he
is declared and preached a Spirit, and he will be known as such, and worshipped
in the Spirit and in the Truth. He will come nearer then of old time, and he
will write his Law in the Heart, and put his Fear and Spirit in the inward
parts, according to his promise. Then Signs, Types and Shadows flew away, the
Day having discovered their Insufficiency in not reaching to the inside of the
Cup, to the cleansing of the Conscience; and all Elementary services were
expired in and and by him that is the substance of all.

And to this Great and Blessed End of the Dispensation of the Son of God, did
the Apostles Testify, whom he had chosen and anointed by his Spirit, to turn
the Jews from their Prejudice and Superstition, and the Gentiles from their
Vanity and Idolatry, to Christ's Light and Spirit that shined in them; that
they might be quickened from the Sins and Trespasses in which they were Dead, to
serve the Living God in the Newness of the Spirit of Life, and walk as Children
of the Light, and of the Day, even the Day of Holiness: For such put on Christ,
the Light of the World, and make no more Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the
Lusts thereof. So that the Light, Spirit and Grace that comes by Christ, and
appears in Man, was what the Apostles ministered from, and turned Peoples Minds
unto, and in which they gathered and built up the Churches of Christ in their
Day. For which cause they advised them not to quench the Spirit, but wait for
the Spirit, and Speak by the Spirit, and Pray by the Spirit, and Walk in the
Spirit too, as that which approved them the truly begotten Children of God;
born, not of Flesh and Blood, or of the will of Man, but of the will of God; by
doing his will, and denying their own; by drinking of Christ's Cup, and being
Baptized with his Baptism of Self-denial: The Way and Path that all the Heirs
of Life have trod to Blessedness. But alas! even in the Apostles Days, (those
bright Stars of the first Magnitude of the Gospel Light) some Clouds
(foretelling an Eclipse of this Primitive Glory) began to appear, and several
of them gave early Caution of it to the Christians of their Time; that even
then there was, and yet would be more and more, a falling away from the Power
of Godliness and the Purity of that Spiritual Dispensation, by such as sought
to make a fair show in the Flesh, but with whom the offense of the Cross
ceased: Yet with this comfortable Conclusion, that they saw beyond it a more
glorious Time than ever, to the true Church. Their sight was true, and what
they foretold to the Churches, gathered by them in the Name and Power of Jesus,
came so to pass: For Christians degenerated a-pace into outsides, as Days and
Meats, and diverse other Ceremonies. And which was worse, they fell into Strife
and Contention about them, separating one from another, then Envying, and, as
they had Power, Persecuting one another, to the shame and scandal of their
common Christianity, and grievous stumbling and offense of the Heathen, among
whom the Lord had so long and so marvellously preserved them. And having got at
last the Worldly Power into their Hands, by Kings and Emperors embracing the
Christian Profession, they changed what they could, the Kingdom of Christ,
which is not of this World, into a Worldly Kingdom; or at least styled the
Worldly Kingdom that was in their Hands the Kingdom of Christ, and so they
became Worldly, and not true Christians. Then Humane Inventions and Novelties,
both in Doctrine and Worship, crowded fast into the Church; a Door being opened
thereunto by the Grossness and Carnality that appeared then among the
generality of Christians; who had long since left the Guidance of God's meek
and heavenly Spirit, and given themselves up to Superstition, Will Worship, and
Voluntary Humility. And as Superstition is Blind, so it is Heady and Furious;
for all must stoop to its blind and boundless Zeal or Perish by it: In the Name
of the Spirit, persecuting the very appearance of the Spirit of God in others,
and opposing that in them which they resisted in themselves, viz. the Light,
Grace and Spirit of the Lord Jesus Christ; but always under the Notion of
Innovation, Heresy, Schism, or some such plausible Name. Though Christianity
allows of no Name or Pretense whatever for persecuting of any Man for matters
of mere Religion; Religion being in its very Nature, Meek, Gentle and
Forbearing; and consists of Faith, Hope and Charity, which no Persecutor can
have, whilst he remains a Persecutor; in that a Man cannot believe well, or
hope well, or have a charitable or tender regard to another, whilst he would
violate his mind or persecute his Body for matters of Faith or Worship toward
his God.

Thus the False Church sprang up, and mounted the Chair. But though she lost
her Nature, she would keep her good Name of the Lambs-bride, the True Church
and Mother of the Faithful; constraining all to receive her Mark, either in
their Forehead or Righthand, publicly or privately: But Indeed and in Truth
she was Mystery Babylon, the Mother of Harlots: Mother of those that with all
their show and outside of Religion, were adulterated and gone from the Spirit,
Nature and Life of Christ, and grown Vain, Worldly, Ambitious, Covetous, Cruel,
etc. which are the Fruits of the Flesh and not of the Spirit.

Now it was that the True Church fled into the Wilderness, that is, from
Superstition and Violence, to a Retired, Solitary and lonely State; hidden and
as it were out of Sight of Men, though not out of the World: Which shows that
her wonted Visibility was not Essential to the Being of a True Church in the
Judgment of the Holy Ghost; she being as True a Church in the Wilderness,
though not as Visible and Lustrious, as when she was in her former Splendour of
Profession. In this State many Attempts She made to return, but the Waters were
yet too High, and her way blocked up, and many of her excellent Children in
several Nations and Centuries fell by the Cruelty of Superstition, because they
would not fall from their Faithfulness to the Truth.

The last Age did set some steps toward it, both as to Doctrine, Worship and
Practice. But Practice quickly failed, for Wickedness flowed in a little time,
as well among the Professors of the Reformation as those they reformed from; so
that by the Fruits of Conversation they were not to be distinguished. And the
Children of the Reformers, if not the Reformers themselves, betook themselves
very early to Earthly Policy and Power to uphold and carry on their Reformation
that had been begun with Spiritual Weapons; which I have often thought, has
been one of the greatest reasons the Reformation made no better Progress, as to
the Life and Soul of Religion: For whilst the Reformers were Lowly and
Spiritually Minded, and trusted in God, and looked to Him, and lived in his
Fear, and consulted not with Flesh and Blood, nor sought Deliverance in their
own way, there were daily added to the Church such as, one might reasonably
say, should be saved. For they were not so careful to be safe from Persecution
as to be Faithful under it.

Being more concerned to spread the Truth by their Faith and Patience in
Tribulation, than to get the worldly Power out of their Hands that inflicted
their Sufferings upon them; and it will be well if the Lord suffer them not to
fall by the very same way they took to stand. In Doctrine they were in some
things short, in other things, to avoid one extreme they run into another: And
for Worship, there was for the generality, more of Man than God. They owned the
Spirit, Inspiration and Revelation indeed, and grounded their Separation and
Reformation upon the Sense and Understanding they received from it, in the
Reading of the Scriptures of Truth; and this was their Plea, the Scripture was
the Text, the Spirit the Interpreter, and that to every one for himself. But
yet there was too much of humane Invention, Tradition and Art that remained
both in Praying and Preaching, and of worldly Authority and worldly Greatness
in their Ministers, especially in this Kingdom, Sweden, Denmark and some Parts
of Germany. God was therefore pleased among us, to shift from Vessel to Vessel:
And the next remove humbled the Ministry, so that they were more Strict in
Preaching, Devout in Praying, and Zealous for keeping the Lord's Day, and
Catechizing of Children and Servants, and Repeating at Home in their Families
what they had heard in public.

But even as these grew into Power, they were not only for Whipping some out,
but others into the Temple: And they appeared Rigid in their Spirits, rather
than Severe in their Lives, and more for a Party then for Piety: Which brought
forth another People, that were yet more retired and select. They would not
communicate at large, or in common with others; but formed Churches among
themselves of such as could give some account of their Conversion, at least, of
very promising experiences of the Work of God's Grace upon their Hearts, and
under mutual Agrements and Covenants of fellowship they kept together. These
People were somewhat of a Softer Temper, and seemed to recommend Religion by
the Charms of its Love, Mercy and Goodness rather than by the Terrors of its
Judgments and Punishment; by which the former Party would have terrified People
into Religion.

They also allowed greater liberty to Prophecy than those before them; for they
admitted any Member to Speak or Pray, as well as their Pastor (whom they always
Chose, and not the Civil Magistrate). If such found any thing pressing upon
them to either Duty, even without the Distinction of Clergy or Laity; Persons
of any Trade, be it never so Low and Mechanical. But alas! even these People
suffered great loss: For tasting of Worldly Empire, and the favor of Princes,
and the gain that ensued, they degenerated but too much. For though they had
cried down National Churches and Ministry and Maintenance too, some of them,
when it was their own turn to be Tried, fell under the Weight of Worldly Honor
and Advantage, got into profitable Parsonages too much, and outlived and
contradicted their own Principles: And, which was yet worse, turned some of
them absolute Persecutors of other Men for God's Sake, that but so lately came
themselves out of the Furnace, which drove many a step farther, and that was
into the Water. Another Baptism, as believing they were not Scripturally
Baptized; and hoping to find that Presence and Power of God in submitting to
that Ordinance, which they desired and wanted.

These People made also Profession of Neglecting, if not Renouncing and
Censuring, not only the Necessity but use of all Human Learning as to the
Ministry; and all other Qualifications to it besides the Helps and Gifts of the
Spirit of God, and those natural and common to Men; and for a time they seemed
like John of Old, a Burning and a Shining Light, to other Societies.

They were very Diligent, Plain and Serious, strong in Scripture, and bold in
Profession, bearing much Reproach and Contradiction: But that which others fell
by, proved their Hurt. For worldly Power spoiled them too; who had enough of it
to try them what they would do if they had more; and they rested also too much
upon their Watery Dispensation, instead of passing on more fully to the Fire and
Holy Ghost, which was his Baptism, who came with a Fan in his Hand, that he
might thoroughly (and not in part only) purge his Floor, and take away the Dross
and the Tin of his People and make a Man finer than Gold. Withal, they grew
High, Rough and Self-righteous, opposing further attainment; too much
forgetting the Day of their Infancy and Littleness, which gave them something
of a real Beauty; in so much that many left them and all visible Churches and
Societies, and Wandered up and down, as Sheep without a Shepherd, and as Doves
without their Mates; seeking their Beloved but could not find Him, as their
Souls desired to know Him; whom their Souls loved above their chiefest Joy.

These People were called Seekers by some, and the Family of Love by others;
because, as they came to the knowledge of one another, they sometimes met
together, not formally to Pray or Preach, at appointed times or Places, in
their own Wills, as in times past they were accustomed to do; but waited
together in Silence, and as any thing rose in any one of their Minds that they
thought Savoured of a Divine Spring, so they sometimes Spoke. But so it was
that some of them not keeping in Humility and in the Fear of God, after the
Abundance of Revelation, were exalted above Measure, and for want of staying
their Minds in an humble Dependence upon him that opened their Understandings
to see great things in his Law; they run out in their own Imaginations, and
mixing them with those Divine Openings, brought forth a Monstrous Birth; to the
Scandal of those that feared God, and waited daily in the Temple, not made with
Hands, for the Consolation of Israel; the Jew inward, and Circumcision in
Spirit.

This People obtained the Name of Ranters from their extravagant Discourses and
Practices. For they interpreted Christ's fullfilling of the Law for us, to be a
discharging of us from any Obligation and Duty the Law required, instead of the
Condemnation of the Law for sins past, upon Faith and Repentance, and that now
it was no Sin to do that which before it was a Sin to commit; the slavish Fear
of the Law being taken off by Christ, and all things good that Man did, if he
did but do them with the Mind and Persuasion that it was so. Insomuch that
diverse fell into Gross and Enormous Practices; pretending in excuse thereof
that they could, without Evil, commit the same Act which was Sin in another to
do; thereby distinguishing between the Action and the Evil of it, by the
Direction of the Mind and Intention in the doing of it. Which was to make Sin
Super-abound by the aboundings of Grace, and to turn from the Grace of God into
Wantonness, a securer way of Sinning than before: As if Christ came not to take
away Sin, but that we might Sin more freely at his Cost, and with less Danger
to our selves. I say, this ensnared Diverse, and brought them to an utter and
lamentable Loss as to their Eternal State; and they grew very troublesome to
the better sort of People, and furnished the looser with an occasion to
Profane.

It was about that very same time, as you may see in the ensuing Annals, that
the Eternal, Wise, and Good God was pleased, in his Infinite Love, to Honor
and Visit this benighted and bewildred Nation with his Glorious Dayspring from
on High; yea with a most sure and certain sound of the Word of Light and Life,
through the Testimony of a Chosen Vessel, to an effectual and blessed purpose,
can many thousands say, Glory be to the Name of the Lord for ever.

For as it reached the Conscience and broak the Heart, and brought many to a
Sense and Search, so what People had been vainly seeking without, with much
Pains and Cost, they by this Ministry found within; where it was they wanted
what they sought for, viz. The right way to Peace with God. For they were
directed to the Light of Jesus Christ within them, as the Seed and Leven of the
Kingdom of God; near All, because in All, and God's Talent to All. A Faithful
and True W^^ness and Just Monitor in every Bosom. The Gift and Grace of God to
Life and Salvation that appears to all, though few regard it. This, the
Traditional Christian, conceited of himself, and strong in his own Will and
Righteousness, and overcome with blind Zeal and Passion, either despised as a
low and common thing, or opposed as a Novelty, under many hard Names and
opprobrious Terms; denying, in his ignorant and angry Mind, any fresh
Manifestation of God's Power and Spirit in Man in these days, though never more
needed to make true Christians: Not unlike those Jews of Old that rejected the
Son of God at the very same time that they blindly professed to wait for the
Messiah to come; because, alas, he appeared not among them according to their
Carnal Mind and Expectation.

This brought forth many abusive Books, which filled the greater sort with
Envy, and lesser with Rage, and made the way and progress of this Blessed
Testimony Straight and Narrow indeed to those that received it. However, God
owned his own Work, and this Testimony did effectually Reach, Gather, Comfort
and Establish the Weary and Heavy Leaden, the Hungry and Thirsty, the Poor and
Needy, the Mournful and Sick of many Maladys, that had spent all upon
Physicians of no Value, and waited for Relief from Heaven; Help only from
above: Seeing upon a serious Trial of all things, nothing else would do but
Christ himself, the Light of his Countenance, a Touch of his Garment and Help
from his Hand, who cured the poor Woman's Issue, raised the Centurions Servant,
the Widows Son, the Rulers Daughter, and Peter's Mother, and like Her, they no
sooner felt his Power and Efficacy upon their Souls; but they gave up to obey
him in a Testimony to his Power, and with resigned Wills and faithful Hearts,
through all Mockings, Contradictions, Beatings, Prisons, and many other
Jeopardies that attended them for his Blessed Name Sake.

And truly, they were very many and very Great; so that in all Humane
Probabili^^ they must have been swallowed up Quick of the Proud and Bosterous
Waves that swelled and beat against them; but that the God of all their tender
Mercies was with them in his Glorious Authority, so that the Hills often Fled
and the Mountains melted before the Power that filled them; working mightily
for them as well as in them, one ever following the other. By which they saw
plainly, to their exceeding great Confirmation and Comfort, that all things
were possible with him with whom they had to do. And that the more that which
God required seemed to cross Man's Wisdom, and expose them to Man's Wrath, the
more God appeared to help and carry them through all to his Glory: Insomuch
that if ever any People could say in Truth, Thou art our Sun and our Shield,
our Rock and Sanctuary, and by thee we have leaped over a Wall, and by thee we
have run through a Troop, and by thee we have put the Armies of the Aliens to
Flight, these People had Right to say it. And as God had delivered their Souls
of the warisom Burdens of Sin and Vanity, and enriched their poverty of
Spirit, and satisfied their great Hungar and Thirst after Eternal
Righteousness, and filled them with the Good Things of his own House, and made
them Stewards of his Manifold Gifts; so they went forth to all Quarters of
these Nations, to Declare to the Inhabitants thereof, what God had done for
them; what they had found, and where and how they had found it; viz. The way to
Peace with God: Inviting them to come and see and taste, for themselves, the
Truth of what they Declared unto them.

And as their Testimony was to the Principle of God in Man, the precious Pearl
and Leven of the Kingdom, as the only blessed means appointed of God to
Quicken, Convince and Sanctify Man; so they opened to them what it was in it
self, and what it was given to them for: How they might know it from their own
Spirit, and that of the Subtle appearance of the Evil one; and what it would do
for all those whose minds are turned off from the Vanity of the World and its
Lifeless ways and Teachers, and ad-hear to this blessed Light in themselves,
which discovers and condemns Sin in all its appearances, and shows how to
overcome it, if minded and obeyed in its holy Manifestations and Convictions:
Giving Power to such to Avoid and Resist those things that do not please God,
and to grow Strong in Love, Faith, and Good Works: That so Man, whom Sin has
made as a Wilderness, overrun with Briers and Thorns, might become as the
Garden of God, cultivated by his divine Power, and replenisht with the most
Virtuous and Beautiful Plants of God's own Right Hand Planting, to his Eternal
Praise.

But these Experimental Preachers of Glad Tidings of God's Truth and Kingdom
could not run when they List, or Pray or Preach when they Pleased, But as the
Christ their Redeemer prepared and moved them by his own Blessed Spirit, for
which they waited in their Services and Meetings, and Spoak as that gave them
utterance, and which was as those having Authority, and not like the Dreaming,
Dry and formal Pharisees. And so it plainly appeared to the serious Minded,
whose Spiritual Eye the Lord Jesus had in any measure opened; so that to one
was given the Word of Exhortation, to another the Word of Reproof, to another
the Word of Consolation, and all by the same Spirit and in the good Order
thereof, to the Convincing and Edifying of many.

And truly, they waxed Strong and Bold through Faithfulness; and by the Power
and Spirit of the Lord Jesus became very Fruitful; thousands, in a short time,
being turned to the Truth through their Testimony in Ministry and Sufferings,
insomuch as in most Counties, and many of the considerable Towns of England,
Meetings were settled, and daily there were added such as should be saved. For
they were Diligent to Plant and to Water, and the Lord blessed their Labors
with an Exceeding great Increase; notwithstanding all the opposition made to
their blessed Progress, by false Rumors, Calumnies and bitter Persecutions; not
only from the Powers of the Earth, but from every one that listed to injure and
abuse them: So that they seemed indeed to be as poor Sheep appointed to the
Slaughter, and as a People killed all the Day long.

It were fitter for a Volumn than a Preface, but so much as to repeat the
Contents of their cruel Sufferings from Professors as well as from Prophaine,
and from Magistrates as well as the Rabble, that it may well be said of this
abused and despised People, they went forth Weeping and sowed in Tears, bearing
Testimony to the Precious Seed, the Seed of the Kingdom, which stands not in
Words, the Finest the Highest that Man's Wit can use, but in Power; the Power
of Christ Jesus, to whom God the Father has given all Power in Heaven and in
Earth, that he might rule Angels above, and Men below; who empowered them, as
their Work witnesses, by the many that were turned through their Ministry from
Darkness to the Light, and out of the Broad into the Narrow Way, bringing
People to a Weighty, Serious and God-like Conversation; the Practice of that
Doctrine which they Taught.

And as without this Secret Divine Power there is no Quickening and Regenerating
of dead Souls, so the want of this Generating and begetting Power and Life, is
the Cause of the little Fruit that the many Ministrys that have been, and are
in the World bring forth. O that both Ministers and People were sensible of
this! My Soul is often troubled for them, and Sorrow and Mourning compass me
about for their Sakes. O! that they were Wise, O! that they would consider, and
lay to Heart the things that truly and substantially make for their lasting
Peace.

Two things are to be briefly touched upon, the Doctrine they Taught, and the
Example they lead among all People. I have already touched upon their
Fundamental Principle, which is as the Corner stone of their Fabric: And to
speak eminently and properly, their Characteristick, or main distinguishing
Point or Principle, viz. the Light of Christ within, as God's Gift for Man's
Salvation. This I say, is as the Root of the goodly Tree of Doctrines that grew
and branched out from it, which I shall now mention in their Natural and
Experimental Order.

First, Repentance from dead Works to serve the Living God. Which comprehends
three Operations. First, a sight of Sin. Secondly, A Sense and Godly Sorrow for
it. Thirdly, An Amendment for the Time to come. This was the Repentance they
preached and pressed, and a Natural result from the Principle they turned all
People unto. For of Light came Sight; and of Sight came Sense and Sorrow; and
of Sense and Sorrow, came Amentment of Life: Which Doctrine of Repentance leads
to Justification; that is, Forgiveness of the Sins that are past through Christ
the alone Propitiation and the Sanctification or Purgation of the Soul from the
defiling Nature and Habits of sin present; which is justification in the
complete Sense of that Word; comprehending both justification from the Guilt of
the Sins that are past, as if they had never been committed, through the Love
and Mercy of God in Christ Jesus; and the Creatures being made inwardly just
through the Cleansing and Sanctifying Power and Spirit of Christ revealed in
the Soul; which is commonly called Sanctification..

From hence sprang a Second Doctrine they were led to declare, as the Mark of
the Price of the High Calling of all true Christians, viz. Perfection from sin,
according to the Scriptures of Truth, which testify it to be the end of
Christ's coming and the Nature of his Kingdom, and for which his Spirit was
given. But they never held a Perfection in Wisdom and Glory in this Life, or
from Natural Infirmities or Death, as some have with a weak or ill mind,
imagined and insinuated against them.

This they called a Redeemed State, Regeneration, or the New Birth: Teaching
every where, according to their Foundation, that without this Work were known,
there was no inheriting the Kingdom of God.

Third, To an acknowledgment of Eternal Rewards and Punishment, as they have
good Reason; for else of all People, certainly they must be the most Miserable:
Who for about Forty Years, have been exceeding great Sufferers for their
Profession, and in some Cases, treated worse then the worst of Men; yea, as the
Refuge and Off-scowering of all things.

This was the Purport of their Doctrine and Ministry; which, for the most part,
is what other Professors of Christianity pretend to hold in Words and Forms,
but not in the Power of Godliness; that has been long lost by Men's departing
from that Principle and Seed of Life, that is in Man and which Man has not
regarded, but lost the Sense of; and in and by which he can only be quickened in
his Mind to serve the living God in Newness of Life. For as the Life of
Religion was lost, and the generality lived and Worshipped God after their own
Wills, and not after the Will of God, nor the mind of Christ, which stood in
the Works and Fruits of the Holy Spirit; so that which they pressed, was not
Notion but Experience, no Formality but Godliness; as being sensible in
themselves, through the Work of God's Righteous Judgments, that without
Holiness no Man should ever see the Lord with Comfort.

Besides these Doctrines, and out of them, as the larger Branches, there sprang
forth several particular Doctrines, that did exemplify and further explain the
Truth and Efficacy of the General Doctrine before observed, in their Lives and
Examples. As,

I. Communion and loving one another. This is a noted Mark in the Mouth of all
sorts of People concerning them. They will meet, They will help and stick one
to another. Whence it is common to hear some say, Look how the Quakers love and
take care of one another. Others less Moderate will say, The Quakers love none
but themselves, and if loving one another and having an Intimate Communion in
Religion, and constant care to meet to Worship God and help one another, be any
Mark of Primitive Christianity, they had it, Blessed be the Lord, in an ample
manner.

II. To love Enemies: This they both Taught and Practiced: For they did not
only refuse to be revenged for Injuries done them, and condemned it as of an
Unchristian Spirit, but they did freely Forgive, yea, Help and Relieve those
that had been Cruel to them, when it was in their Power to have been even with
them; of which many and singular Instances might be given: Endeavoring,
through Patience, to overcome all Injustice and Oppression, and Preaching this
Doctrine as Christian for others to follow.

III. The Sufficiency of Truth speaking, according to Christ's own form of
Words, of Yea, Yea, and Nay, Nay, among Christians without Swearing, both from
Christ's express Prohibition to Swear at all. Mat. 5. And for that they being
under the Tie and Bond of Truth in themselves, there was both no Necessity for
an Oath, and it would be a Reproach to their Christian Veracity to Assure their
Truth by such an Extraordinary way of Speaking: But offering at the same time,
to be punnisht to the full, for false Speaking, as others for Perjury, if ever
guilty of it; and hereby they exclude, with all True, all False and Profane
Swearing; for which the Land did and does Mourn, and the great God was and is
not a little offended with it.

IV. Not Fighting but Suffering, is another Testimony peculiar to this People:
They affirm that Christianity teaches People To beat their Swords into Plough
Shears, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and to learn War no more, that so
the Wolf may lie down with the Lamb, and the Lion with the Calf, and nothing
that destroys be entertained in the Hearts of People; exhorting them to employ
their Zeal against Sin, and turn their Anger against Satan, and no longer War
one against another; because, all Wars and Fightings come of Men's own Hearts
Lusts, according to the Apostle James, and not of the Meek Spirit of Christ
Jesus who is Captain of another Warfare, and which is carried on with other
Weapons. Thus, as Truth speaking succeeded Swearing, so Faith and Truth
succeeded Fighting, in the Doctrine and Practice of this People. Nor ought they
for this to be Obnoxious to Civil Government, since if they cannot Fight for
it, neither can they Fight against it; which is no mean security to the State:
Nor is it reasonable that People should be blamed for not doing more for others
than they can do for themselves. And Christianity set aside, if the Costs and
Fruits of War were well considered, Peace, with its Inconveniences, is
generally Preferable. But though they were not for Fighting, they were for
submitting to Government; and that, not only for Fear, but for Conscience Sake,
where Government does not interfere with Conscience: Believing it to be an
Ordinance of God, and where it is justly administered, a great Benefit to
Minkind: Though it has been their Lot, through blind Zeal in some, and Interest
in others, to have felt the Strokes of it with greater Weight and Rigor than
any other Persuasion in this Age; whilst they, of all others (Religion set
aside) have given the Civil Magistrate the least occasion of Trouble in the
Discharge of his Office.

V. Another part of the Character of this People is, They refuse to pay Tithes,
or Maintenance to a National Ministry, and that for two Reasons; The one is,
that they believe all compelled Maintenance, even to Gospel Ministers, to be
Unlawful, because expressly contrary to Christ's Command, who said, Freely you
have received, freely give: At least, that the Maintenance of Gospel Ministers
should be free and not forced. The other Reason of their Refusal is, Because
those Ministers are not Gospel ones, in that the Holy Ghost is not their
Foundation, but Humane Arts and Parts: So that it is not matter of Humor or
Sullenness, but pure Conscience toward God, that they cannot help to support
National Ministers where they dwell, which are but too much and too visibly
become ways of Worldly Advantage and Preferment.

VI. Not to respect Persons, was another of their Doctrines and Practices, for
which they were often Buffeted and Abused. They Affirmed it to be sinful to
give Flattering Titles, or to use Vain Gestures and Complements of Respect;
though to Virtue and Authority they ever made a Difference, but after their Plain
and Homely Manner, yet sincere and substantial way; well remembering the
Example of Mordecai and Elihu, but more especially the Command of their Lord
and Master Jesus Christ, who forbad his Followers to call Men Rabby, which
implies Lord and Master, also the fashionable Greetings and Salutations of
those Times; that so Self-love and Honor, to which the proud Mind of Man is
incident, in his fallen Estate, might not be Indulged but Rebuked.

They also used the Plain Language of Thou and Thee to a single Person,
whatever was his Degree among Men. And indeed the Wisdom of God was much seen,
in bringing forth this People in so Plain an Appearance; for it was a Close and
Distinguishing Test upon the Spirit of those they came among; showing their
Insides and what predominated, notwithstanding their High and Great Profession
of Religion. This, among the rest, sounded so harsh to many of them, and they
took it so ill, that they would say, Thou me, Thou my Dog: If thou thouest me,
I Will thou thy Teeth down thy Throat, forgetting the Language they use to God in
their own Prayers, and the common Style of the Scriptures, and that it is an
absolute and essential Propriety of Speech: And what good had their Religion
done them, who were so sensibly touched with Indignation for the use of this
Plain, Honest, and True Speech?

VI. They recommended Silence by their Example, having very few words upon all
Occasions: They were at a Word in Dealing; nor could their Customers many Words
tempt them from it; having more regard for Truth than Custom, to Example then
Gain, they sought Solitude; but when in Company, they would neither use nor
willingly hear Unnecessary as well as Unlawful Discourses; whereby they
preserved their Minds pure and undisturbed from unprofitable Thoughts and
Diversions: Nor could they humor the Custom of Good Night, Good Morrow, God
Speed; for they knew the Night was Good, and the Day was Good, without wishing
of either; and that in the other Expression, the Holy Name of God was too
lightly and unthinkingly used, and therefore taken in Vain. Besides, they were
Words and Wishes of Course, and are usually as little meant, as are Love and
Service in the Custom of Cap and Knee; and superfluity in those as well as in
other things was Burthensom to them; and therefore They did not only decline to
use them, but found themselves often pressed to reprove the Practice.

For the same reason they forbore Drinking to People, or Pledging of them, as
the manner of the World is: A Practice that is not only Unnecessary, but they
thought Evil in the Tendencies of it; being a Provocation to Drinking more than
did People Good, as well as that it was in it self Vain and Heathenish.

VII. Their way of Marriage is peculiar to them; and is a distinguishing
Practice from all other Societies professing Christianity. They say that
Marriage is an Ordinance of God, and that God only can rightly join Man and
Woman in Marriage. Therefore they use neither Priest nor Magistrate, but the
Man and Woman concerned take each other as Husband and Wife in the presence of
diverse Credible Witnesses, promising unto each other with God's Assistance, to
be Loving and Faithful in that Relation till Death shall separate them. But,
antecedent to all this, They first present themselves to the Monthly Meeting
for the Affairs of the Church, where they reside, There declaring their
Intentions to take one another as Man and Wife, if the said Meeting have
nothing material to object against it. They are constantly asked the necessary
Questions, as in Case of Parents, or Guardians if they have acquainted them
with their Intention, and have their Consent, etc. The Method of the Meeting is
to take a Minute thereof, and to appoint Proper Persons to enquire of their
Conversation and Clearness from all others, and whether they have discharged
their Duty to their Parents or Guardians; and make report thereof the next
Monthly Meeting; where the same Parties are desired to give their Attendance.
In case it appears they proceeded Orderly, the Meeting passes their Proposal,
and so Records it in their Meeting Book; and in Case the Woman be a Widow and
has Children, due care is there taken, that Provision also be made by her for
the Orphans before the said Marriage; advising the Parties concerned to appoint
a convenient Time and place, and to give fitting Notice to their Relations, and
such Friends and Neighbors, as they desire should be the Witnesses of their
Marriage: Where they take one another by the Hand, and by Name promising
Reciprocally after the Manner before expressed. Of all which Proceedings, a
Narative, in a way of Certificate, is made, to which the said Parties first set
their Hands, thereby making it their Act and Deed; and then diverse of the
Relations, Spectators and Auditors set their Names as Witnesses of what they
Said and Signed. Which Certificate, is afterward Registered in the Record
belonging to the Meeting, where the Marriage is Solemnized. Which Regular
Method has been, as it deserves, adjudged in Courts of Law a good Marriage,
where it has been Disputed and Contested, for want of the accustomed Formality
of Priest and Ring, etc. which Ceremonies they have Refused, not out of Humor,
but Conscience reasonably grounded, in as much as no Scripture Example tells
us, that the Priest had any other part of Old Time, than that of a Witness
among the rest, before whom the Jews used to take one another: And therefore
this People look upon it as an Imposion, to advance the Power and Profits of
the Clergy. And for the use of the Ring, it is enough to say that it was an
Heathen and vain Custom. and never in Practice among the People of God, Jews or
Primitive Christans. The words of the Usual form, as With my Body I thee
Worship, etc. are hardly defensible: In short, they are more Careful, Exact and
Regular than any Form now used, and it is Free of the inconveniences other
Methods are attended with. Their Care and Checks being so many, and such, as no
Clandestine Marriages can be performed among them.

VIII. It may not be unfit to say something here of their Births and Burials,
which make up so much of the Pomp and Solemnity of too many called Christians.
For Births, the Parents Name their own Children, which is usually some days
after they are Born, in the presence of the Midwife (if she can be there) and
those that were at the Birth, etc. who afterward sign a Certificate, for that
purpose prepared, of the Birth and Name of the Child, or Children, which is
Recorded in a proper Book, in the Monthly Meeting, to which the Parents belong;
avoiding the accustomed Ceremonies and Feastivals.

IX. Their Burials are performed with the same Simplicity. If the Corpse of the
Deceased be near any public Meeting Place, it is usually carried thither, for
the more convenient Reception of those that Accompany it to the Ground they
Bury in, and it so falls out sometimes, that while the Meeting is gathering for
the Burial, some or other have a Word of Exhortation, for the sake of the
People there met together: After which, the Body is borne away by the Young
Men, or those that are of their Neighborhood, or that were most of the
Intimacy of the Deceased Party: The Corpse being in a plain Coffin, without any
Covering or Furniture upon it. At the Ground, they pause some time before they
put the Body into its Grave, that if any one there should have any thing upon
them to exhort the People, they may not be dissappointed, and that the
Relations may the more Retiredly and Solemnly take their last leave of the
Corpse of their departed Kindred, and the Spectators have a Sense of Mortality,
by the occasion then given them to reflect upon their own Latter End.
Otherways, they have no set Rites or Ceremonies on those Occasions; neither do
the Kindred of the Deceased ever wear Mourning; they looking upon it as a
Wordly Ceremony and piece of Pomp, and that what Mourning is fit for a
Christian to have at the Departure of a beloved Relation or Friend, should be
worn in the Mind which is only sensible of the Loss, and the Love they had to
them, and Remembrance of them, to be outwardly expressed by a respect to their
Advice, and care of those they have left behind them, and their Love of that
they Loved. Which Conduct of theirs, though unmodish or unfashionable, leaves
nothing of the Substance of things neglected or undone; and as they aim at no
more, so that simplicity of Life is what they observe with great Satisfaction,
though it sometimes happens not to be without the Mockeries of the vain World
they live in.

These things gave them a Rough and Disagreeable Appearance with the
Generality; who thought them Turners of the World upside down, as indeed, in
some Sense they were; but in no other than that wherein Paul was so charged,
viz. To bring things back into their Primitive and right Order again. For these
and such like Practices of theirs were not the Result of Humor, as some have
fancied, but a Fruit of Inward Sense, which God, through his Fear, had begotten
in them. They did not consider how to contradict the World, or distinguish
themselves; being none of their Business, as it was not their Interest, no, it
was not the Result of Consultation, or a framed design to declare or recommend
Schism or Novelty. But God having given them a sight of themselves, they saw
the whole World in the same Glass of Truth; and sensibly discerned the
Affections and Passions of Men, and the Rise and Tendency of Things. What
gratified the Lust of the Flesh, the Lust of the Eye and the Pride of Life
which are not of the Father, but of the World; and from thence Sprang in that
Night of Darkness and Apostasy, which has been over People, through their
Degeneration from the Light and Spirit of God, these and many other vain
Customs; which are seen by the Heavenly day of Christ which dawns in the Soul,
to be, either wrong in their Original, or, by Time and Abuse, Hurtful in their
Practice. And though these things seemed Trivial to some, and rendered this
People Stingy and conceited in such Persons Opinions; there was and is more in
them than they were aware of. It was not very easy to our Primitive Friends,
to make themselves Sights and Spectacles, and the Scorn and Derision of the
World; which they easily foresaw must be the Consequence of so Unfashionable a
Conversation in it. But herein was the Wisdom of God seen in the Foolishness of
these things; First, That they discovered the Satisfaction and Concern that
People had in and for the Fashions of this World, notwithstanding their
Pretenses to another; in that any disappointment about them came so very near
them; that the greatest Honesty, Virtue, Wisdom and Ability, were unwelcom
without them. Secondly, It seasonably and profitably divided Conversation; for
making their Society uneasy to their Relations and Acquaintance, it gave them
the opportunity of more Retirement and Solitude, wherein they met with better
Company, even the Lord, God their Redeemer, and grew strong in his Love, Power
and Wisdom, and were thereby better qualified for his Service; and the success
abundantly showed it: Blessed be the Name of the Lord.

And though they were not Great and Learned in the Esteem of this World (for
then they had not wanted Followers upon their own Credit and Authority) yet
they were generally of the most Sober of the several Persuasions they were in,
and of the most Repute for Religion; and many of them of good Capacity,
Substance and Account among Men.

And also some among them neither wanted for Parts, Learning nor Estate; though
then, as of Old, not many Wise, nor Noble, etc. were called, or at least
received the Heavenly Call; because of the Cross that attended the Profession
of it in Sincerity: But neither do Parts or Learning make Men the better
Christians, though the better Orators and Disputants; and it is the Ignorance
of People about the Divine Gift that causes that vulgar and mischievous
mistake. Theory and Practice, Expression and Enjoyment; Words, and Life; are
two things. Oh! it is the Penitent, the Reformed, the Lowly, the Watchful, the
Self-denying and Holy Soul that is the Christian; and that Frame is the Fruit
and Work of the Spirit, which is the Life of Jesus; whose Life, though hid in
God the Father, is shed abroad in the Hearts of them that truly Believe. Oh!
that People did but know this to cleanse them, to circumcise them, to quicken
them, and to make them New Creatures indeed; Re-created or Regenerated after
Christ Jesus unto good Works. That they might live to God and not to
themselves; and offer up living Prayers and living Praises, to the living God,
through his own living Spirit, in which he is only to be Worshipped in this
Gospel Day. Oh! that they that read me could but feel me; for my Heart is
affected with this Merciful Visitation of the Father of Lights and Spirits, to
this poor Nation, and the whole World through the same Testimony. Why should
the Inhabitants thereof reject it? Why should they loose the Blessed Benefit of
it? Why should they not turn to the Lord with all their Hearts, and say from
the Heart, Speak Lord, for now thy poor Servants hear. Oh! that thy will may be
done, thy Great, thy Good and Holy will in Earth as it is in Heaven: Do it in
us, do it upon us, do what thou will with us, for we are thine and desire to
glorify thee our Creator, both for that, and because thou art our Redeemer;
for thou art redeeming us from the Earth; from the Vanities and Pollutions of
it, to be a Peculiar People unto thee. Oh! this were a Brave Day for England,
if so she could say in Truth. But alas, the Case is otherwise, for which some
of thine Inhabitants, O Land of my Nativity! have mourned over thee with bitter
Wailing and Lamentation. Their Heads have been indeed as Waters, and their Eyes
as Fountains of Tears, because of thy Transgression and Stiffneckedness; becuse
thou will not Hear, and Fear and Return to the Rock, even thy Rock, O England!
from whence thou were Hewn. But be thou warned, O Land of great Profession, to
receive him into thy Heart; Behold at that Door it is, he has stood so long
Knocking, but thou will yet have none of him. Oh! be thou awakned, least
Jerusalem's Judgments do swiftly overtake thee, because of Jerusalems Sins that
abound in thee. For she abounded in Formality, but made void the Weighty things
of God's Law as thou daily do.

She withstood the Son of God in the Flesh, and thou resists the Son of God
in the Spirit. He would have gathered her as an Hen gathers her Chickens
under her Wings, and she would not; so would he have gathered thee out of thy
Life-less Profession, and have brought thee to inherit Substance, to have known
his Power and Kingdom, for which he often knocked within, by his Grace and
Spirit, and without by his Servants and Witnesses; but thou would not be
gathered: But on the Contrary, as Jerusalem of old persecuted the Manifestation
of the Son of God in the Flesh, and Crucified him and Whipped and Imprisoned his
Servants; so have thou, O Land, Crucified to thy self afresh the Lord of Life
and Glory, and done dispite to his Spirit of Grace; slighting the Fatherly
Visitation, and persecuting the blessed Dispensers of it by thy Laws and
Magistrates; though they have Early and Late pleaded with thee in the Power and
Spirit of the Lord; in Love and Meekness, that thou might know the Lord and
serve him, and become the Glory of all Lands.

But thou have Evilly entreated and requited them. Thou have set at naught all
their Counsel, and would have none of their Reproof, as thou should have
done. Their appearance was too Straight, and their qualifications were to Mean
for thee to receive them; who like the Jews of Old, that cried, Is not this the
Carpenters Son, and are not his Brethren among us; which of the Scribes, of the
Learned (the Orthodox) believe in him? Prophesying their fall in a year or two,
and making and executing of severe Laws to bring it to pass; by endeavoring to
terrify them out of their Holy way, or distroying them for abiding Faithful to
it. But thou have seen how many Governments that rise against them, and
determined their Downfall, have been overturned and extinguished, and that they
are still preserved, and become a great and a considerable People, among the
Middle sort of thy numerous Inhabitants. And notwithstanding the many
difficulties without and within, which they have Labored under, since the Lord
God Eternal first gathered them, they are an increasing People, the Lord still
adding unto them, in diverse Parts, such as shall be saved, if they persevere to
the End. And to thee; were they and are they lifted up as a Standard, and as a
City set upon a Hill, and to the Nations round about thee, that in their Light,
thou may come to see Light, even in Christ Jesus, the Light of the World;
and therefore thy Light, and Life too, if thou would but turn from thy many
evil ways, and receive and obey it. For in the Light of the Lamb, must the
Nations of them that are saved walk, as the Scriptures Testify.

Remember, O Nation of great Profession! How the Lord has waited upon thee
since the Days of Reformation, and the many Mercies and Judgments with which he
has pleaded with Thee; and awake and arise out of thy deep Sleep, and yet hear
(his Word in thy Heart) that thou may live.

Let not this thy day of Visitation pass over thy Head, nor neglect thou so
great Salvation as is this which is come to thy House, Oh England! For why
should thou die, Oh Land that God desires to Bless? Be assured it is he that
has been in the midst of this People, in the midst of thee; and no Delusion,
as thy mistaken Teachers have made thee believe. And this thou shall find by
their Marks and Fruits, if thou will consider them in the Spirit of Moderation.
For,

I. They were changed Men themselves before they went about to change others.
Their Hearts were rent as well as their Garments; and they knew the Power and
Work of God upon them. And this was seen by the great Alteration it made, and
their stricter Course of Life, and more Godly Conversation, that immediately
followed upon it.

II. They went not forth or Preached in their own Time or Will, but in the Will
of God, and Spoke not their own studdied Matter, but as they were opened and
moved of his Spirit, with which they were well acquainted in their own
Conversion; which cannot be expressed to Carnal Men so as to give them any
intelligible account; for to such it is as Christ said, like the blowing of the
Wind, which no Man knows whence it comes, or whether it goes: Yet this Proof
and Seal went along with their Ministry, that many were turned from their
Life-less Professions, and the Evil of their Ways, to the knowledge of God, and
an Holy Life, as thousands can witness. And as they Freely received what they
had to say from the Lord, so they Freely administered it to others.

III. The Bent and Stress of their Ministry was Conversion to God, Regeneration
and Holiness; not Schemes of Doctrines and Verbal Creeds, or new Forms of
Worship; but a leaving off in Religion the Superfluous, and reducing the
Ceremonious and Formal part, and pressing earnestly the Substantial, the
Necessary and Proffitable part; as all upon a serious Reflection must and do
accknowledge.

IV. They directed People to a Principle, by which all that they asserted,
Preached and Exhorted others to, might be wrought in them and known, through
Experience, to them to be true; which is a high and distinguishing Mark of the
Truth of their Ministry; both that they knew what they said, and were not
afraid of coming to the Test. For as they were bold from Certainty, so they
required Conformity upon no Humane Authority, but upon Conviction, and the
Conviction of this Principle, which they asserted was in them that they
Preached unto, and unto that directed them, that they might examine and prove
the Reaality of those things which they had affirmed of it, and its
Manifestation and Work in Man. And this is more than the many Ministries in the
World pretend to. They declare of Religion, say many things true; in words of
God, Christ, and the Spirit; of Holiness and Heaven; that all Men should Repent
and mend their Lives, or they will go to Hell, etc. but which of them all
pretend to speak of their own Knowledge and Experience? Or ever directed Men to
a Divine Principle, or Agent, placed of God in Man, to help him; and how to
know it, and wait to feel its Power to work that good and accceptable Will of
God in them.

Some of them indeed have Spoke of the Spirit, and the Operations of it to
Sanctification, and Performance of Worship to God; but where and how to find it
and wait in it to perform, was yet as a Mystery reserved for this further
degree of Reformation. So that this People did not only in words, more than
equally press Repentance, Conversion and Holiness, but did it knowingly and
experimentally; and directed those to whom they preached, to a sufficient
Principle, and told them where it is, and by what Tokens they might know it,
and which way they might experience the Power and Efficacy of it to their
Soul's Happiness. Which is more then Theory and Speculations, upon which most
other Ministries depend; for here is certainly, a bottom upon which Man may
boldly appear before God in the great Day of Account.

V. They reached to the Inward State and Condition of People, which is an
Evidence of the Virtue of their Principle, and of their Ministering from it, and
not their own Imaginations, Glosses or Comments upon Scripture. For nothing
reaches the Heart, but what is from the Heart, or pierces the Conscience, but
what comes from a living Conscience. Insomuch as it has often happened, where
People have under Secrecy revealed their State or Condition to some choice
Friends, for Advice or Ease, they have been so particularly directed in the
Ministry of this People, that they have challenged their Friends with
discovering their Secrets, and telling the Preachers their Cases. Yea, the very
Thoughts and Purposes of the hearts of many have been so plainly detected; that
they have (like Nathaniel) cried out of this inward appearance of Christ, Thou
art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel. And those that have embraced
this Divine Principle, have found this Mark of its Truth and Divinity (that the
Woman of Samaria did of Christ when in the Flesh, to be the Messiah,) viz. It
had told them all that ever they did; showed them their insides, the most
inward secrets of their Hearts, and laid Judgment to the Line, and
Righteousness to the Plummet; of which Thousands can, at this day give in their
Witness. So that nothing has been affirmed by this People, of the Power and
Virtue of this Heavenly Principle, that such as have turned to it have not
found true, and more; and that one half had not been told to them of what they
have seen of the Power, Purity, Wisdom, Mercy and Goodness of God herein.

VI. The Accomplishments with which this Principle fitted, even some of the
meanest of this People, for their Work and Service: Furnishing some of them
with an Extraordinary Understanding in Divine Things, and an admirable Fluency
and Taking way of expression, which gave occasion to some to wonder, saying of
them, as of their Master, is not this such a Mechanick's Son, how came he by
this Learning? As from thence others took occasion to suspect and insinuate
they were Jesuits in Disguise; who have had the Reputation of learned Men for
an Age past; though there was not the least ground of Truth for any such
Reflection.

VII. That they rise Low, and Despised and Hated, as the Primitive Christians
did, and not by the help of Worldly Wisdom or Power, as former Reformations, in
part did: But in all things it may be said, this People were brought forth in
the Cross, in a Contradiction to the Ways, Worship, Fashion and Customs of this
World; yea, against Wind and Tide, that so no Flesh might Glory before God.

They could have no design to themselves in this Work, thus to expose
themselves to Scorn and Abuse; to spend and be spent: Leaving Wife and
Children, House and Land, and all that can be accounted dear to Men, with their
lives in their Hands, being daily in Jeopardy, to declare this Primitive
Message, 1 Jo. 1.5. revived in their Spirits, by the good Spirit and Power of
God. viz. That God is Light, and in him is no darkness at all; and that he has
sent his Son a Light into the World to enlighten all Men in order to Salvation;
and that they that say they have Fellowship with God and are his Children and
People, and yet walk in Darkness, viz. in Disobedience to the Light in their
Consciences, and after the Vanity of this World, they lie and do not the Truth.
But that all such as love the Light and bring their Deeds to it, and walk in
the Light, as God is Light, the blood of Jesus Christ his Son should cleanse
them from all Sin.

VIII. Their known great Constancy and Patience in Suffering for their
Testimony, in all the Branches of it, and that, sometimes unto Death, by
Beatings, Bruisings, long and crowded Imprisonments, and Noisome Dungeons. Four
of them in New England Dying by the Hands of the Executioner, purely for
Preaching amongst that People; besides Banishments and Excessive Plunders and
Sequestrations of their Goods and Estates, almost in all parts; not easily to
be expressed, and less to be endured, but by those that have the support of a
good and glorious Cause; refusing Deliverance by any indirect ways or means, as
often as it was offered to them.

IX. That they did not only, not show any disposition to Revenge, when it was
at any time in their Power; but forgave their cruel Enemies; showing Mercy to
those that had none for them.

X. Their Plainness with those in Authority: not unlike the Ancient Prophets,
not fearing to tell them to their Faces of their Private and Public Sins, and
their Prophecies to them of their Afflictions and Downfall, when in the Top of
their Glory; also of some National Judgments, as of the Plague, and Fire of
London, in express Terms, and likewise particular ones to diverse Persecutions,
which accordingly overtook them; and which were very remarkable in the Places
where they dwelt, and in time they may be made public for the Glory of God.

Thus Reader, thou see this People in their Rise, Principles, Ministry and
Progress, both their General and Particular Testimony, by which thou may be
informed how and upon what foot they Sprung and became so considerable a
People. It remains next that I show also their Care, Conduct and Discipline, as
a Christian and Reformed Society, that they might be found living up to their
own Principles and Profession. And this, the rather, because they have hardly
suffered more in their Character from the Unjust Charge of Error, than by the
false Imputation of Disorder: Which Calumny indeed has not failed to follow all
the true steps that were ever made to Reformation, and under which Reproach
none suffered more than the Primitive Christians themselves, that were the
Honor of Christianity, and the great Lights and Examples of their own and
succeeding Ages.

This People increasing daily both in Town and Country, an Holy Care fell upon
some of the Elders among them, for the Benefit and Service of the Church. And
the first Business in their View, after the Example of the Primitive Saints,
was the Exercise of Charity, to supply the Necessities of the Poor, and answer
the like Occasions: Wherefore Collections were early and liberally made for
that, and diverse other Services in the Church, and entrusted with Faithful Men,
fearing God, and of good Report, who were not weary in well-doing; adding often
of their own, in large Proportions, which they never brought to account, or
desired should be known, much less restored to them, that none might want, nor
any Service be retarded or disappointed.

They were also very careful, that every one that belonged to them, answered
their Profession in their Behavior among Men, upon all Occasions; that they
lived Peaceably, and were in all things good Examples. They found themselves
engaged to record their Sufferings and Services; and in case of Marriage, which
they could not perform in the usual Methods of the Nation, but among
themselves; they took care that all things were clear between the Parties and
all others, and it was then rare that any one entertained such Inclination to a
Person on that account, till he or she had communicated it secretly to some
very Weighty and Eminent Friends among them, that they might have a sense of
the Matter; looking to the Council and Unity of their Brethren, as of great
Moment to them. But because the Charge of the Poor, the Number of Orphans,
Marriages, Sufferings and other Matters multiplied, and that it was good that
the Churches were in some way and Method, of proceeding in such Affairs among
them, to the end they might the better correspond upon occasion, where a Member
of one Meeting, might have to do with one of another: It pleased the Lord in
his Wisdom and Goodness, to open the Understanding of the first Instrument of
this Dispensation of Life, about a Good and Orderly way of Proceeding; and he
felt an Holy Concern to visit the Churches in Person throughout this Nation, to
begin and establish it among them; and by his Epistles the like was done in
other Nations and Provinces abroad; which he also afterward Visited, and
helped in that Service, as shall be observed when I come to speak of him.

Now the Care, Conduct and Discipline, I have been speaking of, and which is
now practiced among this People, is as follows.

III. This Godly Elder, in every County where he traveled, exhorted them, that
some out of every Meeting of Worship, should meet together once in the Month,
to confer about the Wants and Occasions of the Church. And as the Case
required, so those Monthly Meetings were fewer or more in number in every
respective County; Four or Six Meetings of Worship, usually making one Monthly
Meeting of Business. And accordingly the Brethren met him from place to place,
and began the said Meetings, viz. For the Poor, Orphans orderly Walking,
Integrity to their Profession, Births, Marriages, Burials, Sufferings etc. And
that these Monthly Meetings should, in each County make up one Quarterly
Meeting, where the most Zealous and Eminent Friends of the County should
assemble to Communicate, Advise and Help one another, especially when any
Business seemed difficult, or a Monthly Meeting was tender of determining a
Matter.

Also these Quarterly Meetings should digest the Reports of the Monthly
Meetings, and prepare one for the County, against the Yearly Meeting; in which
the Quarterly Meetings resolve, which is held Yearly in London; where the
Churches in this Nation, and other Nations, and Provinces Meet, by chosen
Members of their Respective Counties, both mutually to communicate their Church
Affairs, and to advise and be advised in any depending Case to Edification.
Also to provide a requisite Stock, for the discharge of general Expenses for
general Services in the Church, not needful to be here particularized.

At these Meetings any of the Members of the Churches may come if they please,
and speak their Minds freely, in the Fear of God, to any matter; but the Mind
of each Meeting therein represented is chiefly understood, as to particular
Cases, in the Sense delivered by the Persons deputed or chosen for that Service.

During their Yearly Meeting, to which their other Meetings referr in their
Order and Resolve themselves; care is taken by a Select Number, for that
service chosen by the General Assembly, to draw up the Minutes of the said
Meeting, upon the several matters that have been under Consideration therein,
to the end that the Respective Quarterly and Monthly Meetings may be informed
of all Proceedings, together with a general Exhortation to Holiness, Unity and
Charity: Of all which Proceedings in Yearly, Quarterly and Monthly Meetings,
due Record is kept by some One appointed for that Service, or that has
voluntarily undertaken it. These Meetings are opened, and usually concluded in
their Solemn waiting upon God, who is sometimes graciously pleased to answer
them with as signal Evidences of his Love and Presence, as in any other their
Meetings of Worship.

It is further to be Noted, that in these Solemn Assemblies, for the Church's
Service, there is no one presides among them after the manner of the Assemblies
of other People; Christ only being their President, as he is pleased to appear
in Life and Wisdom in any one or more of them, to whom, whatever be their
Capacity or Degree, the rest adhere with a Firm Unity, not of Authority but
Conviction, which is the Divine Authority and way of Christ's Power and Spirit
in his People: Making good his blessed Promise, That he would be in the Midst
of his, where and whenever they were met together in his Name, even to the End
of the World. So be it.

Now it may be expected, I should here set down what sort of Authority is
exercised by this People, upon such Members of their Society, as correspond not
in their Lives with their Profession, and that are Refractory to this good and
wholesome Order settled among them; and the rather because they have not wanted
their Reproach and Suffering from some Tongues, upon this occasion in a
plentiful manner.

The Power they exercise is such as Christ has given to his own People, to the
End of the World, in the Persons of his Disciples, viz. To Oversee, Exhort,
Reprove, and after long Suffering and Waiting upon the Disobedient and
Refractory, to disown them, as any more of their Communion, or that they will
any longer stand Charged in the Sight and Judgment of God or Men, with their
Conversation or Behavior as one of them, until they Repent. The subject
matter about which this Authority, in any of the foregoing Branches of it, is
Exercised; is First, in Relation to common and general Practice, and Secondly,
about those things that more strictly referr to their own Character and
Profession, and distinguish them from all other Professors of Christianity;
avoiding two Extremes upon which many Split, viz. Persecution and Libertinism.
A Coercive Power to Whip People into the Temple, that such as will not Conform,
though against Faith and Conscience, shall be punished in their Persons or
Estates; or leaving all loose and at large, as to Practice, unaccountable to
all but God and the Magistrate. To which hurtful Extreme, nothing has more
contributed than the Abuse of Church Power, by such as suffer their Passions
and private Interests to prevail with them to carry it to outward Force and
Corporal Punishment. A Practice they have been taught to dislike, by their
extreme Sufferings, as well as their known Principle for an universal Liberty
of Conscience.

On the other hand, they equally dislike an Independency in Society. An
unaccountableness in Practice and Conversation to the Terms of their own
Communion, and to those that are the Members of it. They distinguish between
Imposing any Practice that immediately regards Faith or Worship, (which is
never to be done nor suffered or submitted unto) and requiring Christian
Compliance with those Methods that only respect Church Business in its more
Civil part and Concern, and that regard the Discreet and Orderly Maintenance of
the Character of the Society as a Sober and Religious Community. In short, what
is for the Promotion of Holiness and Charity, that Men may Practice what they
profess, live up to their own Principles, and not be at Liberty to give the Lie
to their own Profession, without Rebuke. They compel none to them, but oblige
those that are of them to walk Suitably, or they are denied by them: That is
all the Mark they set upon them, and the Power they Exercise, or Judge a
Christian Society, can Exercise upon those that are the Members of it.

The way of their Proceedings against such as have Lapst or Transgrest, is
this. He is visited by some of them, and the matter of Fact laid Home to him,
be it any evil Practice against known and general Virtue, or any Branch of
their Particular Testimony, which he, in Common, professes with them. They
labor with him in much Love and Zeal for the good of his Soul, the Honor of
God, and Reputation of their Profession, to own his Fault and condemn it, in as
ample a Manner as the Evil or Scandal was given by him; which for the most
part, is performed by some Written Testimony under the Partys Hand; and if it
so happen that the Party prove Refractory, and is not willing to clear the
Truth they profess, from the Reproach of his or her evil doing or
Unfaithfulness, they, after repeated Entreaties and due waiting for a Token of
Repentance, give forth a Paper to disown such a Fact, and the Party offending;
recording the same as a Testimony of their care for the Honor of the Truth
they profess.

And if he or she shall clear their Profession and themselves, by sincere
Acknowledgment of their Fault, and Godly sorrow for so doing, they are received
and looked upon again as Members of their Communion. For as God, so his true
People upbraid no Man after Repentance.

This is the account I had to give of the People of God called Quakers, as to
their Rise, Appearance, Principles and Practices, in this Age of the World,
both with Respect to their Faith and Worship, Discipline and Conversation. And
I Judge it very proper in this place, because it is to Preface the Journal of
the first Blessed and Glorious Instrument of this Work, and for a Testimony to
him in his singular Qualifications and Services, in which he abundantly
excelled in this day, and are worthy to be set forth as an Example to all
succeeding Times; to the Glory of the Most High God, and for a just Memorial to
that Worthy and Excellent Man, his Faithful Servant and Apostle to this
Generation of the World.

I am now come to the Third Head or Branch of my Preface, viz. The Instrumental
Author. For it is Natural for some to say, Well, here is the People and Work,
but where and who was the Man, the Instrument; he that in this Age was sent to
begin this Work and People. I shall, as God shall enable me, declare who and
what he was, not only by report of others, but from my own long and most inward
Converse and intimate knowledge of him; for which my Soul blesses God, as it
has often done; and I doubt not, but by that time I have discharged my self of
this part of my Preface, my serious Readers will believe I had good Cause so to
do.

The Blessed Instrument of and in this day of God, and of whom I am now about
to Write, was George Fox, distinguished from another of that Name, by that
Other's addition of Younger to his Name in all his Writings; not that he was so
in Years, but that he was so in the Truth, but he was also a Worthy Man,
Witness and Servant of God in his time.

But this George Fox was Born in Leicestershire, about the Year 1624. He
descended of Honest and Sufficient Parents, who endeavored to bring him up, as
they did the rest of their Children, in the Way and Worship of the Nation;
especially his Mother, who was a Woman accomplished above most of her Degree in
the place where she lived. But from a Child he appeared of another Frame of
Mind than the rest of his Brethren; being more Religious, Inward, Still, Solid
and Observing beyond his Years, as the Answers he would give, and the Questions
he would put upon occasion, manifested to the Astonishment of those that heard
him, especially in Divine Things.

His Mother taking Notice of his Singular Temper, and the Gravity, Wisdom and
Piety that very early shined through him, refusing Childish and Vain Sports and
Company, when very Young; she was Tender and Indulgent over him, so that from
her he met with little Difficulty. As to his Employment he was brought up in
Country Business, and as he took most delight in Sheep, so he was very skillful
in them, an Employment that very well suited his mind in several Respects, both
for its Innocence and Solitude; and was a just Figure of his after Ministry and
Service.

I shall not break in upon his own Account, which is by much the best that can
be given, and therefore desire, what I can, to avoid saying any thing of what
is said already, as to the particular Passages of his coming forth; but, in
general, when he was somewhat above Twenty, he left his Friends, and visited
the most Retired and Religious People in those Parts; and some there were short
of few, if any, in this Nation, who waited for the Consolation of Israel Night
and Day; as Zacherias, Anna and good Old Simeon did of Old Time. To these he
was sent, and these he sought out in the Neighboring Countries, and among them
he Sojourned till his more ample Ministry came upon him. At this time he taught
and was an Example of Silence, endeavoring to bring them from
Self-performances, Testifying and turning to the Light of Christ within them,
and encouraging them to wait in Patience to feel the Power of it to stir in
their Hearts, that their Knowledge and Worship of God might stand in the Power
of an Endless Life, which was to be found in the Light, as it was obeyed in the
Manifestation of it in Man. For in the Word was Life, and that Life is the
Light Men. Life in the Word, Light in Men, and Life in Men as the Light is
obeyed; the Children of the Light living by the Life of the Word, by which the
word begets them again to God, which is the Regeneration and New Birth, without
which there is no coming unto the Kingdom of God; and which, whoever comes to,
is greater than John, that is, than John's Dispensation, which was not that of
the Kingdom, but the Consummation of the Legal, and Forerunning of the Gospel
Times. Accordingly, several Meetings were gathered in those Parts, and thus his
Time was employed for some Years.

In 1652. He being in his usual Retirement to the Lord upon a very High
Mountain, in some of the hither parts of Yorkshire, as I take it, his Mind
exercised toward the Lord, he had a Vision of the great Work of God in the
Earth, and of the way that he was to go forth to begin it. He saw People as
thick as Motes in the Sun, that should in time, be brought Home to the Lord;
that there might be but one Shepherd and one Sheepfold in all the Earth. There
his Eye was directed Northward, beholding a great People that should receive
him and his Message in those Parts. Upon this Mountain he was moved of the Lord
to sound out his Great and notable Day, as if he had been in a great Auditory,
and from thence went North, as the Lord had shown him; and in every place where
he came, if not before he came to it, he had his particular Exercise and
Service shown to him, so that the Lord was his Leader indeed; for it was not in
vain that he Travailled, God in most places sealing his Commission with the
Convincement of some of all sorts, as well Publicans as sober Professors of
Religion. Some of the first and most Eminent of them, which are at Rest, were
Richard Farnsworth, James Nayler, William Dewsberry, Francis Howgil, Edward
Buroughs, John Camm, John Audland, Richard Hubberthorn, T. Tailor, John Aldam,
T. Holmes, Alexander Parker, William Simpson, William Caton, John Stubbs,
Robert Widders, John Burnyeat, Robert Lodge, Thomas Salthouse, and many more
Worthies, that cannot be well here Named, together with diverse yet living of
the first and great Convincement, who after the knowledge of God's purging
Judgments in themselves, and some time of waiting in silence upon him, to feel
and receive Power from on High to speak in his Name, (which none else rightly
can, though they may use the same Words.) They felt the Divine Motions, and
were frequently drawn forth, especially to visit the Public Assemblies, to
reprove, inform and exhort them, sometimes in Markets, Fairs, Streets, and by
the High-way-side, calling People to Repentance, and to turn to the Lord with
their Hearts as well as their Mouths; directing them to the Light of Christ
within them, to see and examine and consider their ways by, and to eschew the
Evil and do the Good and Acceptable Will of God. And they suffered great
Hardships for this their Love, and Good Will, being often Stockt, Stoned,
Beaten, Whipped and Imprisoned, though Honest Men and of Good Report where they
lived, that had left Wives and Children, and Houses and Lands to visit them
with a living Call to Repentance. And though the Priests generally set
themselves to oppose them, and write against them, and insinuated most False
and Scandalous Stories to Defame them, stirring up the Magistrates to suppress
them, especially in those Northern Parts; yet God was pleased so to fill them
with his living Power, and give them such an open Door of utterance in his
Service, that there was a mighty Convincement over those Parts.

And through the tender and singular Indulgence of Judge Bradshaw and Judge
Fell, who were wont to go that Circuit, in the Infancy of things, the Priests
were never able to gain the point they labored for, which was to have
proceeded to Blood, and if possible, Herod like, by a Cruel exercise of the
Civil Power, to have cut them off and rooted them out of the Country.
Especially Judge Fell, who was not only a Check to their Rage in the Course of
Legal Proceedings, but otherwise upon occasion, and finally countenanced this
People; for his Wife receiving the Truth with the First, it had that Influence
upon his Spirit, being a Just and Wise Man, and seeing in his own Wife and
Family, a full Confutation to all the popular Clamours against the Way of
Truth, that he covered them what he could, and freely opened his Doors, and
gave up his House to his Wife and her Friends, not valuing the Reproach of
Ignorant or Evil Minded People, which I here mention, to His and her Honor,
and which will be I believe, an Honor and a Blessing to such of their Name and
Family, as shall be found in that Tenderness, Humility, Love and Zeal for the
Truth and People of the Lord.

That House was for some Years at first, till the Truth had opened its way in
the Southern parts of this Island, an Eminent Receptacle of this People. Others
of good Note and Substance in those Northern Countries, had also opened their
Houses with their Hearts, to the many Publishers, that in a short time the Lord
had raised to declare his Salvation to the People, and where Meetings of the
Lord's Messengers were frequently held, to communicate their Services and
Exercises, and Comfort and Edify one another in their Blessed Ministry.

But least this may be thought a Digression, having touched upon this before, I
return to this Excellent Man: And for his Personal Qualities, both Natural,
Moral and Divine as they appeared in his Converse with Brethren and in the
Church of God; take as follows.

I. He was a Man that God endued with a Clear and Wonderful Depth, a discerner
of others Spirits, and very much a Master of his own. And though the side of
his Understanding which lay next to the World, and especially the Expression of
it might sound Uncouth and Unfashionable to Nice Ears, his matter was
nevertheless very profound; and would not only bear to be often considered, but
the more it was so, the more Weighty and Instructing it appeared. And as
abruptly and brokenly as sometimes his Sentences would fall from him, about
Divine Things, it is well known they were often as Texts to many fairer
Declarations. And indeed it showed beyond all Contradiction that God sent him,
that no Arts or Parts had any share in his matter or manner of his Ministry;
and that so many Great, Excellent and Necessary Truths as he came forth to
Preach to Mankind, had therefore nothing of Man's Wit or Wisdom to recommend
them. So that as to Man he was an Original, being no Man's Copy. And his
Ministry and Writings show they are from one that was not Taught of Man, nor
had Learned what he said by Study. Nor were they Notional or Speculative, but
sensible and Practical Truths, tending to Conversion and Regeneration, and the
setting up the Kingdom of God in the Hearts of Men, and the way of it was his
Work. So that I have many times been overcome in my self, and been made to say,
with my Lord and Master upon the like Occasion; I thank thee O Father Lord of
Heaven and Earth, that thou have hid these things from the Wise and Prudent of
this World, and revealed them to Babes, For many times has my Soul bowed in an
Humble Thankfulness to the Lord, that he did not choose any of the Wise and
Learned of this World to be the first Messenger in our Age, of his blessed
Truth to Men; but that he took one that was not of High Degree, or Elegant
Speech, or learned after the way of this World, that his Message and Work he
sent him to do, might come with less Suspicion or Jealousy of Humane Wisdom
and Interest, and with more Force and Clearness upon the Consciences of those,
that sincerely Sought the way of Truth in the Love of it. I say, beholding with
the Eye of my mind which the God of Heaven had opened in me, the Marks of God's
Finger and Hand visibly in this Testimony, from the Clearness of the Principle,
the Power and Efficacy of it in the Exemplary Sobriety, Plainness, Zeal,
Steadiness, Humility, Gravity, Punctuality, Charity and Circumspect care in the
Government of Church Affairs, which shined in his and their Life and Testimony
that God employed in this Work, it greatly confirmed me that it was of God, and
engaged my Soul in a Deep Love, Fear, Reverence and Thankfulness for his Love
and Mercy therein to Mankind; in which Mind I remain, and shall, I hope, to the
end of my Days.

II. In his Testimony or Ministry, he much labored to open Truth, to the
Peoples Understandings, and to bottom them upon the Principle, and Principal,
Christ Jesus, the Light of the World, that by bringing them to something that
was of God in themselves, they might the better know and judge of him and
themselves.

He had an Extraordinary Gift in opening the Scriptures. He would go to the
Marrow of things, and show the Mind, Harmony and Fullfilling of them with much
Plainness, and to great Comfort and Edification.

The Mystery of the first and second Adam, of the Fall and Restoration, of the
Law and Gospel, of Shadows and Substance, of the Servant and Sons State, and
the fullfiling of the Scriptures in Christ, and by Christ the True Light, in
all that are his, through the Obedience of Faith, were much of the Substance
and Drift of his Testimonies. In all which he was witnessed to be of God, being
sensibly felt to speak that which he had received of Christ, and was his own
Experience, in that which never Ers nor Fails.

But above all, he excelled in Prayer. The Inwardness and Weight of his Spirit,
the Reverence and Solemnity of his Address and Behavior, and the Fewness and
Fullness of his Words, have often struck, even Strangers, with Admiration, as
they used to reach others with Consolation. The most Awful, Living, Reverent
Frame I ever Felt or Beheld, I must say was his in Prayer. And truly it was a
Testimony he knew and lived nearer to the Lord than other Men; for they that
know him most will see most reason to approach him with Reverence and Fear.

He was of an Innocent Life, no Busy Body, nor Self Seeker, neither Touchy,
nor Critical: What fell from him was very Inoffensive, if not very Edifying. So
Meek, Contented, Modest, Easy, Steady, Tender, it was a pleasure to be in his
Company. He exercised no Authority but over Evil, and that every where and in
all; but with Love, Compassion and Long Suffering. A most Merciful Man, as
ready to Forgive as unapt to take or give an Offense. Thousands can truly say,
he was of an Excellent Spirit and Savor among them, and because thereof, the
most Excellent Spirits loved him with an unfeigned and unfading Love.

He was an Incessant Labourer; for in his Younger time, before his many great
and deep Sufferings and Travels had enfeebled his Body for Itinerant Services,
he labored much in the Word, and Doctrine and Discipline in England, Scotland
and Ireland, turning many to God, and confirming those that were convinced of
the Truth, and settling Good Order as to Church Affairs among them. And toward
the Conclusion of his Traveling Services, between the Years Seventy One, and
Seventy Seven, he Visited the Churches of Christ in the Plantations in America,
and in the United Provinces, and Germany as his following Journal Relates, to
the Convincement and Consolation of many. After that time he chiefly resided in
and about the City of London, and besides the Services of his Ministry which
were Frequent and Serviceable, he writ much both to them that are within, and
those that are without the Communion. But the care he took of the Affairs of
the Church in General was very great.

He was often where the Records of the Affairs of the Church are kept, and the
Letters from the many Meetings of God's People over all the World where
settled, come upon Occasions, which Letters he had read to him, and
Communicated them to the Meeting that is Weekly held there for such Services,
he would be sure to stir them up to discharge them, especially in Suffering
Cases. Showing great Sympathy and Compassion upon all such Occasions, carefully
looking into the Respective Cases, and endeavoring Speedy Relief according to
the Nature of them. So that the Churches and any of the Suffering Members
thereof, were sure not to be forgotten or delayed in their Desires if he were
there.

As he was Unwearied, so he was Undaunted in his Services for God and his
People, he was no more to be moved to Fear than to Wrath. His Behavior at
Darby, Litchfield, Appleby, before Oliver Cromwell at Launston, Scarborough,
Worcester and Westminster Hall, with many other Places and Exercises, did
abundantly evidence it to his Enemies as well as his Friends.

But as in the Primitive Times, some rise up against the blessed Apostles of
our Lord Jesus Christ, even from among those that they had turned to the Hope
of the Gospel, and who became their greatest Trouble; so this Man of God had
his share of Suffering from some that were convinced by him, who through
prejudice or mistake run against him, as one that sought Dominion over
Conscience; because he pressed by his Presence or Epistles, a ready and zealous
compliance with such good and wholesome things, as tended to an Orderly
Conversation about the Affairs of the Church, and in their walking before Men.
That which contributed much to this ill Work, was in some a begrudging of this
Meek Man, the love and esteem he had and deserved in the Hearts of the People,
and weakness in others, that were taken with their groundless Suggestions of
Imposition and blind Obedience.

They would have had every Man Independent, that as he had the Principle in
himself, he should only stand and fall to that and no Body else; not
considering that the Principle is One in all; and though the Measure of Light
or Grace might differ, yet the Nature of it was the same, and being so, they
struck at the Spiritual Unity, which a People, guided by the same Principle,
are naturally led into: So that what is an evil to One, is so to All, and what
is Virtuous, Honest and of good Report to One, is so to All, from the Sense and
Savor of the one Universal Principle which is common to all, (and which the
disaffected profess to be) the Root of all True Christian Fellowship, and that
Spirit into which the People of God drink and come to be Spiritually Minded,
and of one Heart and one Soul.

Some weakly mistook good Order in the Government of Church Affairs, for
Discipline in Worship, and that it was so pressed or recommended by Him and other
Brethren: And they were ready to reflect the same things that Dissenters had
very reasonably objected upon the National Churches, that have coercively
pressed Conformity to their Respective Creeds and Worships: Whereas these
things related wholly to Conversation, and the Outward (and as I may say) Civil
part of the Church, that Men should walk up to the Principles of their Belief,
and not be wanting in Care and Charity. But though some have stumbled and
fallen through Mistakes, and an unreasonable Obstinancy, even to a Prejudice;
yet blessed be God, the Generality have returned to their First Love, and seen
the Work of the Enemy, that looses no Opportunity or Advantage by which he may
check or hinder the Work of God, and disquiet the Peace of his Church, and
chill the Love of his People to the Truth and one to another; and there is hope
of diverse that are yet at a Distance.

In all these Occasions, though there was no Person the Discontented struck so
sharply at, as this Good Man, he bore all their Weakness and Prejudice, and
returned not Reflection for Reflection; but forgave them their weak and bitter
Speeches, praying for them that they might have a Sense of their hurt, and see
the Subtilty of the Enemy to Rend and Devide, and return into their First Love,
that thought no Ill.

And truly, I must say, that though God had visibly clothed him with a Divine
Preference and Authority, and indeed his very Presence expressed a Religious
Majesty; yet he never abused it, but held his Place in the Church of God with
great Meakness and a most engaging Humility and Moderation. For upon all
Occasions, like his blessed Master, he was a Servant to all; holding and
exercising his Eldership, in the Invisible Power that had gathered them, with
Reverence to the Head and Care over the Body: And was received only in that
Spirit and Power of Christ as the First and Chief Elder in this Age; who, as he
was therefore worthy of double Honor, so for the same Reason it was given by
the Faithful of this day; because his Authority was inward and not outward, and
that he got it and kept it by the Love of God and Power of an Endless Life. I
write my Knowledge and not Report, and my Witness is True, having been with him
for Weeks and Months together on diverse Occasions, and those of the nearest and
most exercising Nature, and that by Night and by Day, by Sea and by Land; in
this and in Foreign Countries: And I can say, I never saw him out of his Place,
or not a Match for every Service or Occasion.

For in all things he acquitted himself like a Man, yea a strong Man, a New and
Heavenly minded Man. A Divine and a Naturalist, and all of God Almighty's
making. I have been surprised at his Questions and Answers in Natural things;
that whilst he was Ignorant of useless and Sophistical Science, he had in him
the Foundation of useful and commendable Knowledge, and cherisht it every
where. Civil beyond all Forms of Breeding, in his Behavior. Very Temperate,
eating Little, and sleeping Less, though a Bulky Person.

Thus he Lived and Sojourned among us, and as he lived, so he died; feeling the
same Eternal Power that had raised and preserved him in his last Moments. So
full of assurance was he, that he Triumphed over Death; and so even to the last,
as if Death were hardly worth Notice or a Mention: Recommending to some with
him, the Dispatch and Dispersion of an Epistle, just before Written to the
Churches of Christ, throughout the World, and his own Books; but above all,
Friends, and of all Friends, those in Ireland and America, twice over. Saying,
mind poor Friends in Ireland and America.

And to some that came in and enquired how he found himself, he answered, Never
heed, the Lord's Power is over all Weakness and Death, the Seed reigns, Blessed
be the Lord: Which was about Four or Five Hours before his Departure out of
this World. He was at the great Meeting near Lombard Street on the First day of
the Week, and it was the Third following about Ten at Night when he left us;
being at the House of H. Goldney in the same Court. In a good Old Age he went,
after having lived to see his Childrens Children to many Generations in the
Truth. He had the Comfort of a short Illness, and the Blessing of a clear Sense
to the last; and we may truly say, with a Man of God of Old, that being Dead,
he yet Speaks; and though absent in Body, he is Present in Spirit; neither
Time nor Place being able to interrupt the Communion of Saints, or dissolve the
Fellowships of the Spirits of the Just. His Works praise him, because they are
to the Praise of him that worked by him; for which his Memorial is, and shall
be Blessed. I have done, as to this part of my Preface, when I have left this
short Epitaph to his Name. Many Sons have done virtuously in this Day, but Dear
George thou Excellest them All.

And now, Friends, you that profess to walk in the way, this Blessed Man was
sent of God to turn us into, suffer I beseech you the word of Exhortation, as
well Fathers as Children, and Elders as Young Men. The Glory of this Day and
Foundation of the Hope that has not made us ashamed since we were a People, you
know is that Blessed Principle of Light and Life of Christ which we Profess,
and Direct all People to, as the great Instrument and Agent of Man's Conversion
to God: It was by this we were first Touched, and effectually enlightened as to
our Inward State, which put us upon the Consideration of our Latter End,
causing us to set the Lord before our Eyes, and to Number our Days, that we
might apply our Hearts to Wisdom. In that Day we judged not after the Sight of
the Eye, or after the Hearing of the Ear, but according to the Light and Sense
this Blessed Principle gave us; we judged and acted in reference to Things and
Persons, our selves and others, yea, toward God our Maker. For being quickened
by it in our Inward Man, we could easily discern the difference of things, and
feel what was Right, and what was Wrong, and what was Fit and what not, both in
reference to Religion and Civil Concerns. That being the ground of the
Fellowship of all Saints, it was in that our Fellowship stood. In this we
desired to have a Sense one of another, acted toward one another, and all Men,
in Love, Faithfulness and Fear.

In the feeling of the Motions of this Principle we drew near to the Lord, and
waited to be prepared by it, that we might feel those Drawings and Movings,
before we approached the Lord in Prayer, or opened our Mouths in Ministry. And
in our Beginning and Ending with this, stood our Comfort, Service and
Edification. And as we run faster, or fell short we made Burdens for our
selves to bear; our Services finding in our selves a Rebuke instead of an
Acceptance, and in lieu of Well done, who has required this at your Hands? In
that day we were an Exercised People, our very Countenances and Deportment
declared it.

Care for others was then much upon us, as well as for our selves, especially
the Young Convinced. Often had we the Burden of the Word of the Lord to our
Neighbors, Relations and Acquaintance; and sometimes Strangers also, We were
in Travail for one another Preservation: Not seeking, but shunning Occasions
of any Coldness or Misunderstanding, treating one another as those that
believed and felt God present. Which kept our Conversation Innocent, Serious
and Weighty, guarding our selves against the Cares and Friendships of the
World. We held the Truth in the Spirit of it, and not in our own Spirits, or
after our own Wills and Affections.

They were bowed and brought into Subjection, in so much that it was visible to
them that knew us, we did not think our selves at our own Dispose, to go where
we List, or say or do what we List, or when we List. Our Liberty stood in the
Liberty of the Spirit of Truth, and no Pleasure, no Profit, no Fear no Favor
could draw us from this retired, strict and watchful Frame. We were so far from
seeking occasions of Company, that we avoided them what we could; persuing our
own Business with Moderation, instead of meddling with other Peoples
Unnecessarily.

Our Words were Few and Savoury, our Looks Composed and Weighty, and our whole
Deportment very Observable. True it is, that this Retired and strict sort of
Life from the Liberty of the Conversation of the World, exposed us to the
Censures of many, as Humourists, Conceited and Self-righteous Persons, etc. But
it was our Preservation from many Snares, to which others were continually
exposed by the Prevalency of the lust of the Eye, the lust of the Flesh, and
the Pride of Life, that wanted no Occasions or Temptations to excite them
abroad in the Converse of the World.

I cannot forget the Humility and Chaste Zeal of that Day. Oh! how Constant at
Meetings, how Retired in them, how firm to Truth's Life, as well as Truth's
Principles; and how Entire and United in our Communion, as indeed became those
that profess One Head, even Christ Jesus the Lord.

This being the Testimony and Example the Man of God, before mentioned, was
sent to Declare and Leave amongst us, and we having Embraced the same as the
Merciful Visitation of God to us, the Word of Exhortation at this time is, that
we continue to be found in the Way of this Testimony with all Zeal and
Integrity, and so much the more, by how much the Day draws near.

And First, as to you, my Beloved and much Honored Brethren in Christ, that
are in the Exercise of the Ministry: Oh, feel Life in the Ministry! Let Life be
your Commission, your Wellspring and Treasury in all such Occasions, else you
well know, there can be no begetting to God, since nothing can quicken or make
People alive to God, but the life of God: And it must be a Ministry in and from
Life, that enlivens any People to God. We have seen the Fruit of all other
Ministrys by the few that are turned from the Evil of their Ways. It is not our
Parts, or Memory, the repetition of former Openings in our own will and time,
that will do God's Work. A dry Doctrinal Ministry, however sound in Words, can
reach but the Ear, and is but a Dream at the Best: There is another Soundness,
that is soundest of all, viz. Christ the power of God. This is the Key of
David, that Opens and none Shuts, and Shuts, and none can Open; as the Oil to
the Lamp, and the Soul to the Body, so is that to the best of Words. Which made
Christ to say, My Words they are Spirit, and they are Life; that is, they are
from Life, and therefore they make you alive, that receive them. If the
Disciples that had lived with Jesus, were to stay at Jerusalem till they
received it; so must we wait to receive, before we Minister, if we will turn
People from Darkness to Light, and from Satan's power to God.

I fervently bow my Knees to the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, that
you may always be like minded, that you may ever wait Reverently for the coming
and opening of the Word of Life, and tend upon it in your Ministry and Service,
that you may serve God in his Spirit. And be it little, or be it much, it is
well; for much is not too much, and the least is enough, if from the motion of
God's Spirit; and without it, verily, never so little is too much, because to
no profit.

For it is the Spirit of the Lord immediately, or through the Ministry of his
Servants, that teaches his People to profit; and to be sure, so far as we take
him, along with us in our Services, so far we are profitable and no farther.
For if it be the Lord that must work all things in us and for our selves; much
more is it the Lord, that must work in us for the Conversion of others. If
therefore it was once a Cross to us to Speak, though the Lord required it at
our Hands; let it never be so to be silent, when he does not.

It is one of the most dreadful Sayings in the Book of God, That he that adds
to the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God will add the Plagues written in
this Book. To keep back the Counsel of God, is as Terrible; for he that takes
away from the Words of the Prophecy of this Book, God shall take away his part
out of the Book of Life. And truly, it has great Caution in it to those, that
use the Name of the Lord, to be well assured, the Lord Speaks, that they may
not be found of the Number of those, that add to the Words of the Testimony of
Prophecy, which the Lord gives them to bear; nor yet to mince or diminish the
same, both being so very offensive to God.

Wherefore, Brethren, let us be careful neither to out-go our Guide, nor yet
loiter behind him; since he that makes Haste, may miss his Way, and he that
stays behind, loose his Guide: For even those, that have Received the Word of
the Lord, had need wait for Wisdom, that they may see how to divide the Word
aright; which plainly implies that it is possible for one, that has received
the Word of the Lord, to miss in the Division and Application of it, which must
come from an Impatiency of Spirit, and a Self-working, which makes an unsound
and dangerous Mixture; and will hardly beget a right minded living People to
God.

I am earnest in this, above all other Considerations, as to public Brethren,
well knowing how much it concerns the present and future State, and
preservation of the Church of Christ Jesus, that has been gathered and built up
by a Living and Powerful Ministry, that the Ministry be held, preserved and
continued in the Manifestations, Motions and Supplies of the same Life and
Power from time to time.

And where ever it is observed, that any one does Minister more from Gifts and
Parts, than Life and Power, though they have an Enlightened and Doctrinal
Understanding; let them in time be advised and admonished for their
Preservation, because insensibly such will come to depend upon a
Self-sufficiency; to forsake Christ the living Fountain, and to hew out unto
themselves Cisterns that will hold no living Waters; and by degrees draw others
from waiting upon the Gift of God in themselves, and to feel it in others, in
order to their Strength and Refreshment to wait upon them, and to turn from God
to Man again, and so to make Shipwreck of the Faith once delivered to the
Saints, and of a good Conscience toward God; which are only kept by that
Divine Gift of life, that begat the one and awakened and sanctified the other
in the Beginning.

Nor is it enough that we have known the Divine Gift, and in it have reached to
the Spirits in Prison, and been the Instruments of the Convincing of others of
the way of God, if we keep not as low and poor in our selves, and as depending
upon the Lord as ever; since no Memory, no Repetitions of former Openings,
Revelations or Enjoyments will bring a Soul to God, or afford Bread to the
Hungry, or Water to the Thirsty, unless Life go, with what we say, and that
must be waited for.

O that we may have no other Fountain, Treasury or Dependence! that none may
presume at any rate to Act of themselves for God! Because they have long acted
from God, that we may not supply want of waiting with our own Wisdom, or think
that we may take less Care, and more liberty in speaking, than formerly; and
that where we do not feel the Lord by his Power to open us and enlarge us,
whatever be the Expectation of the People, or has been our Customary Supply and
Character, we may not exceed or fill up the time with our own.

I hope, we shall ever Remember, who it was that said, Of your selves you can
do nothing, our sufficiency is in Him: And if we are not to speak our own
Words, or take Thought what we should say to Men in our Defense, when exposed
for our Testimony, surely, we ought to speak none of our own Words, or take
Thought what we shall say in our Testimony and Ministry in the Name of the Lord
to the Souls of the People; for then of all Times, and of all other Occasions
should it be fulfilled in us; for it is not you that speak, but the Spirit of
my Father that speaks in you.

And indeed, the Ministry of the Spirit must and does keep its Analogy and
Agreement with the Birth of the Spirit; that as no Man can Inherit the Kingdom
of God, unless he be born of the Spirit; so no Ministry can beget a Soul to
God, but that which is from the Spirit. For this, as I said before, the
Disciples waited before they went forth; and in this our Elder Brethren, and
Messengers of God in our Day, waited, visited and reached to us. And having
begun in the Spirit, let none ever hope or seek to be made perfect in the
Flesh: For what is the Flesh to the Spirit, or the Chaff to the Wheat? And if
we keep in the Spirit, we shall keep in the Unity of it, which is the ground of
true Fellowship. For by Drinking into that one Spirit, we are made one People
to God, and by it we are continued in the Unity of the Faith, and the Bond of
Peace. No Envying, no Bitterness, no Strife can have place with us. We shall
watch always for Good, and not for Evil over one another, and rejoice
exceedingly, and not begrudge at one another increase in the Riches of the
Grace, with which God replenisheth his Faithful Servants.

And, Brethren, as to you is committed the Dispensation of the Oracles of God,
which give you frequent Opportunities, and great Place with the People among
whom you Travail, I beseech you that you would not think it sufficient to
declare the Word of Life in their Assemblies, however Edifying and Comfortable
such opportunities may be to you and them: But as was the Practice of the Man
of God before mentioned, in great Measure, when among us, inquire the State of
the several Churches you Visit; who among them are Afflicted or Sick, who are
Tempted; if any are Unfaithful or Obstinate, and endeavor to Issue those
things in the Wisdom and Power of God, which will be a glorious Crown upon your
Ministry. As that prepares your way in the Hearts of the People to receive you
as Men of God, so it gives you Credit with them to do them good by your Advice
in other Respects. The Afflicted will be Comforted by you, the Tempted
Strengthened, the Sick Refreshed, the Unfaithful Convicted and Restored, and
such as are Obstinate Softened and fitted for Reconciliation, which is Clenching
the Nail, and applying and Fastening the general Testimony by that particular
Care of the several Branches of it, in reference to them more immediately
concerned in it.

For though Good and Wise Men and Elders too, may reside in such places, who
are of Worth and Importance in the general, and in other Places; yet it does
not always follow, that they may have the Room they deserve in the hearts of
the People they live among; or some particular occasion may make it unfit for
him or them to use that Authority. But you that Travail as God's Messengers, if
they receive you in the Greater, shall they refuse you in the Less? And if they
own the general Testimony, can they withstand the particular Application of it
in their own Cases? Thus, ye will show your selves Workmen indeed, and carry
your Business before you, to the praise of his Name that has called you from
Darkness to Light, that you might turn others from Satan's Power unto God and
his Kingdom, which is within. And Oh that there were more of such Faithful
Laborers in the Vineyard of the Lord! Never more need since the day of God!

Wherefore I cannot but Cry and Call aloud to you, that have been long
Professors of the Truth, and know the Truth in the convincing Power of it, and
have had a sober Conversation among Men, yet content your selves only to know
Truth for your selves; to go to Meetings, and Exercise an ordinary Charity in
the Church, and an honest Behavior in the World, and limit your selves within
those Bounds, feeling little or no concern upon your Spirits for the Glory of
the Lord in the prospirity of his Truth in the Earth, more than to be glad that
others succeed in such Service; Arise ye in the Name and Power of the Lord
Jesus! Behold, how white the Fields are unto Harvest in this and other Nations,
and how few Able and Faithful Laborers there are to work therein! Your Country
Folks, Neighbors and Kindred want to know the Lord and his Truth, and to Walk
in it. Does nothing lie at your Door upon their Account? Search and see, and
loose no time, I beseech you, for the Lord is at Hand. I do not Judge you,
there is one that Judges all Men, and his Judgment is true: You have mightily
increased in your outward Substance; may you equally increase in your inward
Riches, and do good with both, while you have a day to do Good. Your Enemies
would once have taken what you had from you, for his Names Sake, in whom you
have believed; wherefore he has given you much of the World in the Face of your
Enemies. But Oh let it be your Servant and not your Master, your Diversion
rather than your Business! Let the Lord be chiefly in your Eye, and ponder your
Ways, and see if God has nothing more for you to do; and if you find your
selves short in your Account with him, then wait for his Preparation, and be
ready to receive the word of Command, and be not weary of well doing, when you
have put your Hand to the Plow; and assuredly you shall Reap (if you faint not)
the Fruit of your Heavenly Labor in God's Everlasting Kingdom.

And you, Young Convinced Ones, be you Entreated and Exhorted to a Diligent and
Chaste waiting upon God, in the way of his Blessed Manifestation and appearance
of himself to you. Look not out, but within: Let not another Liberty be your
Snare. Neither Act by Imitation, but Sense and Feeling of God's Power in your
selves: Crush not the tender Buddings of it in your Souls, nor over run in your
desires, and your warmness of Affections the Holy and Gentle Motions of It.
Remember it is a still Voice that Speaks to us in this Day, and that it is not
to be heard in the Noises and Hurries of the Mind; but is distinctly understood
in a retired Frame. Jesus loved and chose out Solitudes; often going to
Mountains, to Gardens and Sea-sides to avoid Crowds and Hurries, to show his
Disciples it was good to be Solitary, and sit loose to the World. Two Enemies
lie near your States, Imagination and Liberty, but the plain, practical,
Living, Holy Truth, that has convinced you will preserve you, if you mind it in
your selves, and bring all Thoughts, Imaginations and Affections to the Test of
it, to see if they are wrought in God, or of the Enemy, or your own selves: So
will a true Taste, Discerning and Judgment be preserved to you, of what you
should do and leave undone: And in your diligence and Faithfulness in this way
you will come to inherit Substance; and Christ, the Eternal Wisdom, will fill
your Treasury. And when you are Converted, as well as Convinced, then confirm
your Brethren, and be ready to every good Word and Work, that the Lord shall
call you to; that you may be to his Praise, who has chosen you to be partakers
with the Saints in Light of a Kingdom that cannot be shaken, an Inheritance
incorruptible, in Eternal Habitations.

And now, as for you that are the Children of God's People, a Great Concern is
upon my Spirit for your good; and often are my Knees Bowed to the God of your
Fathers for you, that you may come to be partakers of the same Divine Life and
Power, that has been the Glory of this Day; that a Generation you may be to
God, an Holy Nation and a Peculiar People, Zealous of Good Works, when all our
Heads are laid in the Dust. Oh you Young Men and Women, let it not suffice you,
that you are the Children of the People of the Lord! you must also be born
again, if you will inherit the Kingdom of God. Your Fathers are but such after
the Flesh, and could but beget you into the likeness of the first Adam; but you
must be begotten into the likeness of the second Adam by a Spiritual
Generation. And therefore look carefully about you, Oh ye Children of the
Children of God, Consider your Standing, and see what you are in Relation to
this Divine Kindred, Family and Birth! Have you obeyed the Light, and received
and walked in the Spirit, that is the incorruptible Seed of the Word and
Kingdom of God, of which you must be born again: God is no respecter of
Persons. The Father cannot save or answer for the Child, the Child for the
Father, but in the Sin thou Sinnest, thou shall die; and in the Righteousness
thou do, through Christ Jesus, thou shall live; for it is the Willing and
Obedient that shall eat the Good of the Land. Be not deceived, God is not
mocked, such as all Nations and People Sow, such they shall reap at the hand of
the just God. And then your many and great Privileges, above the Children of
other People, will add weight in the scale against you, if you choose not the
way of the Lord. For you have had Line upon Line, and Precept upon Precept, and
not only good Doctrine, but good Example; and which is more, you have been
turned to and acquainted with a Principle in your selves, which others have
been ignorant of; and you know, you may be as Good as you please, without the
Fear of Frowns and Blows, or being turned out of doors and forsaken of Father
and Mother for God's Sake, and his Holy Religion, as has been the Case of some
of your Fathers in the day they first entered into this Holy Path: And if you,
after hearing and seeing the Wonders that God has wrought in the deliverance
and perservation of them, through a Sea of Troubles, and the manifold Temporal,
as well as spiritual Blessings, that he has filled them with in the sight of
their Enemies, you should neglect and turn your backs upon so great and so near
a Salvation, you would not only be most ungreatful Children to God and them,
but must expect that God will call the Children of those that knew him not, to
take the Crown out of your Hands, and that your lot will be a dreadful Judgment
at the hand of the Lord. But Oh that it may never be so with any of you! The
Lord forbid, says my Soul.

Wherefore, Oh ye Young Men and Women, look to the Rock of your Fathers! choose
the God of your Fathers: There is no other God but him; no other Light but his;
no other Grace but his, nor Spirit, but his to Convince you, Quicken and
Comfort you; to Lead, Guide and Preserve you to God's Everlasting Kingdom: So
will you be Possessors, as well as Professors of the Truth; embracing it not
only by Education but Judgment and Conviction, from a Sense begotten in your
Souls, through the operation of the Eternal Spirit and Power of God in your
hearts, by which you may come to be the Seed of Abraham through Faith, and the
circumcision not made with Hands, and so heirs of the promise made to the
Fathers of an Incorruptible Crown: That (as I said before) a Generation you may
be to God, holding up the Profession of the blessed Truth in the Life and Power
of it. For Formality in Religion is Nauseous to God and good Men; and the more
so, where any Form or Appearance has been new and peculiar, and begun and
practiced upon a Principle, with an Uncommon Zeal and Strictness. Therefore I
say, for you to fall flat and formal, and continue the profession without that
Salt and Savor, by which it is come to obtain a good Report among Men, is not
to answer God's Love, nor your Parents Care, nor the mind of Truth in your
selves, nor in those that are without; who though they will not obey the Truth,
have Sight and Sense enough to see if they do that make a Profession of it. For
where the Divine Virtue of it is not felt in the Soul, and waited for, and
lived in, imperfections will quickly break out, and show themselves, and detect
the Unfaithfulness of such Persons, and that their insides are not seasoned
with the Nature of that holy Principle which they profess.

Wherefore, Dear Children, let met entreat you to shut your Eyes at the
Temptations and Allurements of this low and perishing World, and not suffer
your affections to be captivated by those Lusts and Vanities that your Fathers,
for Truths Sake, long since turned their Backs upon: But as you believe it to
be the Truth, receive it into your Hearts, that you may become the Children of
God: So that it may never be said of you, as the Evangelist Writes of the Jews
of his time, That Christ, the true Light, came to his own, but his own received
him not; but to as many as received him, to them he gave Power to become the
Children of God; which were born, not of Blood, nor of the Will of the Flesh,
nor of the Will of Man, but of God. A most close and comprehensive Passage to
this occasion: You exactly and peculiarly answer to those professing Jews, in
that you bear the Name of God's People, by being the Children and wearing of
the Form of God's People: So that he by his Light in you, may be said to come
to his own, and if you obey it not, but turn your Back upon it, and walk after
the Vanities of your Minds, you will be of those that receive him not, which, I
pray God, may never be your Case and Judgment; but that you may be thoroughly
sensible of the many and great Obligations you lie under to the Lord for his
Love, and your Parents for their Care: And with all your Heart and all your
Soul, and all your Strength turn to the Lord, to his Gift and Spirit in you,
and hear his Voice and obey it, that you may Seal to the Testimony of your
Fathers, by the Truth and Evidence of your own Experience; that your Childrens
Children may bless you, and the Lord for you, as those that delivered a
faithful Example, as well as Record of the Truth of God unto them. So will the
Gray Hairs of your Dear Parents yet alive, go down to the Grave with Joy, to
see you the posterity of Truth, as well as theirs, and that not only their
Natures but Spirit shall live in you when they are gone.

I shall conclude this Preface with a few Words to those that are not of our
Communion, into whose hands this may come, especially those of our own Nation.

Friends, As you are the Sons and Daughters of Adam, and my Brethren after the
Flesh, often and earnest have been my Desires and Prayers to God on your
behalf, that you may come to know him that has Made you to be your Redeemer and
Restorer to the Image that, through Sin, you have lost, by the power and Spirit
of his Son Jesus Christ, whom he has given for the Light and Life of the
World. And Oh that you, who are called Christians, would receive him into your
Heart! for there it is you want him, and at that Door he stands knocking, that
you should let him in, but you do not open to him; You are full of other
Guests, so that a Manger is his Lot among you Now, as well as of Old: Yet you
are full of Profession, as were the Jews when he came among them, who knew him
not, but rejected and evilly entreated him. So that if you come not to the
Possession and Experience of what you profess, all your Formality in Religion
will stand you in no stead in the Day of God's Judgment.

I beseech you ponder with your selves your Eternal Condition, and see what
Title, what Ground and Foundation you have for your Christianity: If more than
a Profession, and an Historical Belief of the Gospel. Have you known the
Baptism of Fire, and the Holy Ghost, and the Fan of Christ that winnows away
the Chaff; The Carnal Lusts and Affections? That Divine Leven of the Kingdom,
that being received, Levens the whole Lump of Man, sanctifying him throughout
in Body, Soul and Spirit? If this be not the Ground of your Confidence, you are
in a Miserable Estate.

You will say perhaps, that though you are Sinners, and live in the daily
Commission of Sin, and are not Santified, as I have been Speaking, yet you have
Faith in Christ, who has borne the Curse for you, and in him you are Complete
by Faith; his Righteousness being imputed to you.

But my Friends, let me entreat you not to deceive your selves, in so Important
a Point, as is that of your Immortal Souls. If you have true Faith in Christ,
your Faith will make you Clean, it will Sanctify you; for the Saints Faith was
their Victory: By this they over came Sin within, and Sinful Men without. And
if thou art in Christ thou walk not after the Flesh, but after the Spirit,
whose Fruits are Manifest. Yea, thou art a New Creature, New Made, New
Fashioned after God's Will and Mold: Old things are done away, and behold, all
things are become New: New Love, Desires, Will, Affections and Practices. It is
not any longer Thou that live, Thou Disobedient, Carnal, Worldly One; but it
is Christ that lives in thee, and to live is Christ and to die is thy Eternal
Gain; because thou art assured, That thy Corruptible shall put on Incorruption,
and thy Mortal, Immortality; and that thou have a Glorious House Eternal in the
Heavens that will never wax Old or pass away. All this follows being in Christ,
as Heat follows Fire and Light the Sun.

Therefore have a Care how you presume to Rely upon such a Notion, as that you
are in Christ, whilst in your old fallen Nature. For what Communion has Light
with Darkness, or Christ with Belial? Hear what the beloved Disciple tells you:
If we say we have fellowship with God, and walk in Darkness, we lie, and do not
the Truth. That is, if we go on in a sinful way, are Captivated by our Carnal
Affections, and are not Converted to God, we walk in Darkness, and cannot
possibly have any fellowship with God. Christ Cloths them with his
Righteousness that receive his Grace in their Hearts, and deny themselves, and
take up his Cross daily, and follow him. Christ's Righteousness makes Men
inwardly Holy, of Holy Minds, Wills and Practices. It is nevertheless Christ's,
because we have it; for it is ours, not by Nature, but by Faith and Adoption:
It is the Gift of God: But still though not ours, as of or from our selves, for
in that Sense it is Christ's, for it is of and from him, yet it is ours; and
must be ours in Possession, Efficacy and Enjoyment to do us any Good, or
Christ's Righteousness will profit us nothing. It was after this manner, That
he was made to the primitive Christians, Righteousness, Sanctification,
Justification and Redemption; and if ever you will have the Comfort, Kernel and
Marrow of the Christian Religion, thus you must come to learn and obtain it.

Now, my Friends, by what you have Read, and will Read in what Follows, you may
perceive, that God has visited a Poor People among you with this saving
Knowledge and Testimony; whom he has upheld and increased to this Day,
notwithstanding the fierce opposition they have met withal. Despise not the
meanness of this Appearance: It was, and yet is (we know) a day of small
things, and of small Account with too many; and many hard and ill Names are
given to it; but it is of God, it came from him because it leads to him. This
we know, but we cannot make another know it, as we know it, unless he will take
the same way to know it, that we took. The World talks of God; but what do they
do? They pray for Power, but reject the Principle in which it is. If you would
know God and Worship and serve God, as you should do, you must come to the
means he has ordained and given for that purpose. Some seek it in Books, some
in Learned Men, but what they look for, is in themselves, but they overlook it.
The Voice is too still, the Seed too small, and the Light shines in Darkness.
They are abroad, and so cannot divide the Spoil; but the Woman, that lost her
Silver found it at Home, after she had light her Candle and swept her House. Do
you so too, and you shall find what Pilate wanted to know, viz. Truth.

The light of Christ within, who is the Light of the World, (and so a Light to
you, that tells you the Truth of your Condition) leads all, that take heed unto
it, out of Darkness into God's mavelous Light; for Light grows upon the
Obedient. It is sown for the Righteous, and their way is a shining Light, that
shines forth more and more to the perfect day.

Wherefore, O Friends, Turn in, Turn in, I beseech you! Where is the Poison,
there is the Antidote: There you want Christ, and there you must find him; and
blessed be God, there you may find him. Seek and you shall find, I testify for
God: But then you must seek aright, with your whole Heart, as Men that seek for
their Lives, yea, for their Eternal Lives: Diligently, Humbly, Patiently, as
those that can taste no Pleasure, Comfort or Satisfaction in any thing else,
unless you find him whom your Souls want, and desire to know and love above
all. O it is a Travail, a Spiritual Travail! Let the Carnal, Profane World
think and say as it will. And through this Path you must walk to the City of
God, that has Eternal Foundations, if ever you will come there.

Well! And what does this blessed Light do for you? Why, 1. it sets all your
sins in order before you: It detects the Spirit of this World in all its Bates
and Allurements, and shows how Man came to fall from God, and the fallen Estate
he is in. 2. It begets a Sense and Sorrow, in such as believe in it, for this
fearful Laps. You will then see him Distinctly, whom you have Pierced him, and
all the Blows and Wounds you have given him by your Disobedience; and how you
have made him to serve with your Sins, and you will Weep and Mourn for it, and
your Sorrow will be a Godly Sorrow. 3. After this it will bring you to the Holy
Watch, to take Care that you do so no more, that the Enemy surprise you not
again: Then Thoughts, as well as Words and Works, will come to Judgment, which
is the way of Holiness, in which the Redeemed of the Lord do Walk. Here you
will come to love God above all, and your Neighbors as your selves. Nothing
Hurts, Nothing Harms, Nothing makes Afraid on this Holy Mountain: Now you come
to be Christ's indeed, for you are his in Nature and Spirit, and not your own.
And when you are thus Christ's, then Christ is yours, and not before: And here
Communion with the Father and with the Son you will know, and the Efficacy of
the Blood of Cleansing, even the Blood of Jesus Christ, that Immaculate Lamb,
which speaks better things than the Blood of Abel, and which cleanses from
all Sin the Consciences of those that, through the living Faith, come to be
sprinkled with it from dead Works to serve the living God.

To Conclude, Behold the Testimony and Doctrine of the People called Quakers!
Behold their Practice and Discipline! And behold the blessed Man and Men that
were sent of God in this Excellent Work and Service! All which will be more
particularly expressed in the Ensuing Annals of the Man of God; which I do
heartily recommend to my Readers most serious Perusal, and beseech Almighty
God, that his Blessing may go along with it, to the Convincing of many, as yet
Strangers to this Holy Dispensation, and also to the Edification of the Church
of God in General: Who, for his manifold and repeated Mercies and Blessings to
his People in this day of his great Love, is worthy ever to have the Glory,
Honor, Thanksgiving and Renown; and be it rendered and ascribed, with Fear and
Reverence, through him in whom he is well pleased, his bloved Son and Lamb, our
Light and Life, that fits with him upon the Throne, World without End. Amen,
Says One that God has long since Mercifully favored with his Fatherly
Visitation, and who was not Disobedient to the Heavenly Vision and Call, to
whom the Way of Truth is more Lovely and Precious than ever, and that knowing
the Beauty and Benefit of it above all Worldly Treasure, has chosen it for his
Chiefest Joy, and therefore recommends it to thy Love and Choice, because he is
with great Sincerity and Affection thy Souls Friend.

William Penn.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soul, at the Crooked Billet in
Holly-well-lane, Shoreditch, and near the Meeting House in White-hart-court in
Grace Church Street, 1694.

A JOURNAL, OR Historical Account OF THE Life, Travels, Sufferings, And
CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCES, etc. OF GEORGE FOX.
THAT all may know the Dealings of the Lord with me, and the various Exercises,
Trials and Troubles, through which he led me, in order to prepare and fit me
for the Work, unto which he had appointed me; and may thereby be drawn to
admire and glorify his Infinite Wisdom and Goodness; I think fit (before I
proceed to set forth my Public Travels in the Service of Truth) briefly to
mention, how it was with me in my Youth; and how the Work of the Lord was
begun, and gradually carried on in me, even from my Childhood.

I was born in the Month called July, in the Year 1624. Drayton in
Leicestershire, the Place of G. F's Birth.
at Drayton in the Clay, in Leicestershire. My Father's Name was Christopher
Fox: He was by Profession a Weaver, an honest Man; and there the was a Seed of
God in him. The Neighbors called him Righteous Christer. My Mother was an
upright Woman; her Maiden-name was Mary Lago, of the Family of the Lago's, and
of the Stock of the Martyrs.

In my very Young Years, I had a Gravity and stayedness of Mind and Spirit, not
usual in Children; insomuch, that when I have seen Old Men carry themselves
lightly and wantonly toward each other, I have had a Dislike thereof risen in
my Heart, and have said within my self; If ever I come to be a Man, surely, I
should not do so, nor be so wanton.

When I came to Eleven Years of Age, I knew Pureness and Righteousness: For
while I was a Child, I was taught how to walk to be kept pure. The Lord taught
me to be faithful in all Things, and to act faithfully two ways; viz. Inwardly
to God, and Outwardly to Man; and to keep to Yea and Nay in all Things. For the
Lord showed me, that though the People of the World have Mouths full of Deceit,
and changeable Words, yet I was to keep to Yea and Nay in all Things; and that
my Words should be few and savory, seasoned with Grace: And that I might not
Eat and Drink to make my self Wanton, but for Health; using the Creatures in
their Service, as Servants in their Places, to the Glory of him that harh
created them: they being in their Covenant, and I being brought up into the
Covenant, as sanctified by the Word, which was in the Beginning, by which all
things are upheld; wherein is Unity with the Creation.

But People, being Strangers to the Covenant of Life with God, they Eat and
Drink to make themselves wanton with the Creatures, devouring them upon their
own Lusts, and living in all Filthiness, loving foul ways, and devouring the
Creation; and all this in the World, in the Pollutions thereof without God: And
therefore I was to shun all such.

Afterward, as I grew up, my Relations thought to have made me a Priest; but
others persuaded to the Contrary. Whereupon I was put to a Man, that was a
Shoo-maker by Trade, and that dealt in Wool and used Grazing, and sold Cattle;
and a great deal went through my Hands. While I was with him, he was blessed: But
after I left him, he broke, and came to nothing. I never wronged Man or Woman
in all that Time: For the Lord's Power was with me, and over me, to preserve
me. While I was in that Service, I used in my Dealings the Word [Verily,] and
it was a common Saying among People, that knew me, If George says verily, there
is no altering him. When Boys and rude People would laugh at me, I let them
alone, and went my Way: But People had generally a Love to me, for my Innocence
and Honesty.

When I came toward Nineteen Years of Age, I being upon Business at a Fair,
one of my Cousins, whose Name was Bradford, (being a Professor, and having
another Professor with him) came to me, and asked me to drink part of a Jug of
Beer with them; and I, being Thirsty, went in with them: For I loved any, that
had a Sense of Good, or that did seek after the Lord. And when we had drunk a
Glass a piece, they began to drink Healths, and called for more Drink; agreeing
together, That he that would not drink, should pay all. I was grieved, that
any, that made Profession of Religion, should offer to do so. They grieved me
very much, having never had such a thing put to me before, by any sort of
People. Wherefore I rose up to be gone; and putting my Hand into my Pocket, I
took out a Groat, and laid it down upon the Table before them, and said, If it
be so, I Will leave you. So I went away: And when I had done, what Business I had
to do, I returned home: But did not go to Bed that Night, nor could not Sleep;
but sometimes walked up and down, and sometimes prayed, and cried to the Lord,
who said unto me; Thou see,
how Young People go together into Vanity and Old People into the Earth; and
thou must forsake all, both Young and Old, and keep out of all, and be as a
Stranger unto all.

Then at the Command of God, Ninth Day of the Seventh Month, 1643. I left my
Relations, Lutterworth. Northampton. Newport-pagnel in Bucks. Barnet.
and brake off all Familiarity or Fellowship with Young or Old. And I passed to
Lutterworth, where I stayed some Time: And from thence I went to Northampton,
where also I made some stay: Then passed from thence to Newport-Pagnel in
Buckinghamshire; where, after I had stayed a while, I went unto Barnet, and
came thither in the Fourth Month, called June, in the Year, 1644. And as I thus
traveled through the Countries, Professors took notice of me, and sought to be
acquainted with me; but I was afraid of them: For I was sensible, they did not
Possess, what they Professed. Now during the time, that I was at Barnet, a
strong Temptation to Despair came upon me: and then I saw, how Christ was
Tempted; and mighty Troubles I was in. And sometimes I kept my self retired in
my Chamber, and often walked solitary in the Chase there, to Wait upon the Lord.

And I wondered, why these Things should come to me, and I looked upon my self,
and said, Was I ever so before? Then I thought, because I had forsaken my
Relations, I had done amiss against them. So I was brought to call to Mind all
my Time, that I had spent, and to consider, whether I had wronged any? But
Temptations grew more and more, and I was tempted almost to Despair. And when
Satan could not effect his Design upon me that way, then he laid Snares for me,
and Baits to draw me to commit some Sin, whereby he might take advantage to
bring me to Despair. I was about Twenty Years of Age, when these Exercises came
upon me; and some Years I continued in that Condition, in great Troubles; and
fain I would have put it from me. And I went to many a Priest to look for
Comfort, but found no Comfort from them.

From Barnet I went to London, where I took a Lodging, London.
and was under great Misery and Trouble there: For I looked upon the great
Professors of the City of London, and I saw all was dark, and under the Chain
of Darkness. And I had an Uncle there, one Pickering, a Baptist (and they were
tender then:) Yet I could not impart my Mind to him, nor join with them: For I
saw all, Young and Old, where they were. Some tender People would have had me
stayed, but I was fearful, and returned homewards in Leicestershire again,
Leicestershire.
having a Regard upon my Mind unto my Parents and Relations, lest I should
grieve them, who, I understood, were troubled at my Absence.

When I was come down into Leicestershire, my Relations would have had me
Married: But I told them, I was but a Lad, and I must get Wisdom. Others would
have had me into the Auxiliary Band, among the Soldiery; Coventry.
but I refused: and I was grieved, that they proffered such Things to me, being
a tender Youth. Then I went to Coventry, where I took a Chamber for a while at
a Professor's House, till People began to be acquainted with me; for there were
many tender People in that Town. And after some time, I went into my own
Country again, Leicestershire.
and was there about a Year, in great Sorrows and Troubles, and walked many
Nights by my self.

Priest of Drayton (the Town of my Birth) whose Name was Nathaniel Stevens,
would come often to me, and I went often to him; and another Priest sometimes
would come with him: And they would have given place to me, to hear me; and I
would ask them Questions, and reason with them. And this Priest Stevens asked
me a Question, viz. Why Christ cried out upon the Cross, My God, my God, why
have thou forsaken me? And why he said, If it be possible, let this Cup pass
from me; yet not my Will, but thine be done? And I told him; At that time, the
Sins of all Mankind were upon him, and their Iniquities and Transgressions,
with which he was wounded; which he was to bear, and to be an Offering for
them, as he was Man, but died not, as he was God. And so, in that he died for
all Men, and tasted Death for every Man, he was an Offering for the Sins of the
whole World. (This I spoke, being at that time in a measure sensible of
Christ's Sufferings, and what he went through.) And the Priest said, It was a
very good, full Answer; and such an one, as he had not heard. And at that time,
he would applaud and speak highly of me to others: And what I said in Discourse
to him on the Weekdays, that he would Preach of on the First-days; for which I
did not like him. And this Priest afterward became my great Persecutor.

Mansetter in Warwickshire.
After this, I went to another Ancient Priest at Mansetter in Warwickshire, and
reasoned with him about the Ground of Despair and Temptations; but he was
ignorant of my Condition: And he bid me Take Tobacco, and Sing Psalms. Tobacco
was a thing I did not love; and Psalms I was not in an Estate to Sing: I could
not Sing. Then he bid me come again, and he would tell me many Things. But when
I came again, he was angry and pettish: For my former Words had displeased him.
And he told my Troubles, and Sorrows and Griefs to his Servants, so that it was
got among the Milk-Lasses; which grieved me, that I should open my Mind to such
an one. I saw, they were all Miserable Comforters: And this brought my Troubles
more upon me. Tamworth.
Then I heard of a Priest living about Tamworth, who was accounted an
Experienced Man; and I went Seven Miles to him: But I found him but like an
Empty, hollow Cask. Then I heard of one called Doctor Cradock of Coventry; and
I went to him, and I asked him the Ground of Temptations and Despair; and how
Troubles came to be wrought in Man? He asked me, Who was Christ's Father and
Mother? I told him, Mary was his Mother, and that he was supposed to be the Son
of Joseph; but he was the Son of God. Now as we were walking together in his
Garden, the Ally being narrow, I chanced, in turning, to set my Foot on the
side of a Bed; at which the Man was in such a Rage, as if his House had been on
Fire. And thus all our Discourse was lost, and I went away in Sorrow, worse
than I was, when I came. I thought them Miserable Comforters: And I saw, they
were all as Nothing to me; for they could not reach my Condition. After this I
went to another, one Macham, a Priest in high Account: And he would needs give
me some Physic, and I was to have been let Blood: But they could not get one
drop of Blood from me, either in Arms or Head (though they endeavored it) my
Body being, as it were, dried up with Sorrows, Grief and Troubles, which were
so great upon me, that I could have wished, I had never been born to see Vanity
and Wickedness; or that I had been born Blind, that I might never have seen
Wickedness nor Vanity; and Deaf, that I might never have heard vain and wicked
Words, or the Lord's Name blasphemed. And when the time, called Christmas,
came, while others were Feasting and Sporting themselves, I would have gone,
and looked out poor Widows from House to House, and have given them some Money.
And when I was invited to Marriages (as I sometimes was) I would go to none at
all; but the next day or soon after I would go, and visit them: And if they
were Poor, I gave them some Money; for I had, wherewith both to keep my self
from being Chargeable to others, and to administer something to the Necessities
of Others.

About the beginning of the Year, 1646. Coventry, and entering toward the Gate,
a Consideration arose in me, how it was said, That All Christians are
Believers, Coventry.
both Protestants and Papists. And the Lord opened to me, that if all were
Believers, then they were all born of God, and passed from Death to Life; and
that none were true Believers, but such: And though Others said, they were
Believers, yet they were not. At another time, as I was walking in a Field on a
First Day Morning, the Lord opened unto me, That being bred at Oxford or
Cambridge, was not enough to fit and qualify Men to be Ministers of Christ:
And I stranged at it, because it was the common Belief of People. But I saw it
clearly, as the Lord opened it to me, and was satisfied; and admired the
Goodness of the Lord, who had opened this thing unto me that Morning: Which
struck at Priest Stevens his Ministry, namely, that To be bred at Oxford or
Cambridge, was not enough to make a Man fit to be a Minister of Christ. So that
which opened in me, I saw, struck at the Priest's Ministry. But my Relations
were much troubled at me, that I would not go with them to hear the Priest: For
I would get into the Orchard, or the Fields, with my Bible, by my self. And I
told them, did not the Apostle say to Believers, That they needed no Man to
teach them, but as the Anointing teaches them? And though they knew, this was
Scripture, and that it was true; yet they would be grieved, because I could not
be subject in this Matter, to go to hear the Priest with them: For I saw, that
a true Believer was another thing, than they looked upon it to be. And I saw,
that being bred at Oxford or Cambridge, did not qualify or fit a Man to be a
Minister of Christ; and what then should I follow such for? So neither them,
nor any of the Dissenting People, could I join with; but was as a Stranger to
all, relying wholly upon the Lord Jesus Christ.

At another time it was opened in me, That God, who made the World, did not
dwell in Temples made with Hands. This, at the first, seemed a strange Word,
because both Priests and People use to call their Temples or Churches, dreadful
Places, and Holy Ground, and the Temples of God. But the Lord showed me, so
that I did see clearly, that he did not dwell in these Temples, which Men had
commanded and set up; but in People's Hearts. For both Stephen and the Apostle
Paul bore Testimony, That he did not dwell in Temples made with Hands; not even
in that, which he had once commanded to be built; since he put an End to it:
But that his People were his Temple; and he dwelt in them. This opened in me,
as I walked in the Fields to my Relations House. And when I came there, they
told me, That Nath Stevens, the Priest, had been there, and told them, He was
afraid of me, for going after New Lights. And I smiled in my self, knowing,
what the Lord had opened in me concerning him and his Brethren: But I told not
my Relations; who though they saw beyond the Priests, yet they went to hear
them, and were grieved, because I would not go also. But I brought them
Scriptures, and told them, There was an Anointing within Man, to teach him; and
that the Lord would teach his People himself. And I had great Openings
concerning the Things written in the Revelations; and when I spoke of them, the
Priests and Professors would say, That was a sealed up Book; and would have
kept me out of it. But I told them, Christ could open the Seals; and that they
were the nearest things to us: For the Epistles were written to the Saints,
that lived in former Ages; but the Revelations were written of things to come.

After this I met with a sort of People, that held, Women have no Souls;
(adding in a light manner) no more than a Goose. But I reproved them, and told
them, that was not right: For Mary said, My Soul does magnify the Lord, and my
Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior.

And removing again to another Place, I came among a People, that relied much
on Dreams. And I told them; Except they could distinguish between Dream and
Dream, they would mash or confound altogether: For there were Three sorts of
Dreams; for Multitude of Business sometimes caused Dreams: And there were
Whisperings of Satan in Man in the Night-Season; and there were Speakings of
God to Man in Dreams. But these People came out of these Things, and at last
became Friends.

Now though I had great Openings, yet great Trouble and Temptation came many
Times upon me; so that when it was Day, I wished for Night, and when it was
Night, I wished for Day. And by reason of the Openings I had in my Troubles, I
could say as David said, Day unto Day utters Speech, and Night unto Night
shows Knowledge. And when I had Openings, they answered one another, and
answered the Scriptures: For I had great Openings of the Scriptures. And when I
was in Troubles, one Trouble also answered to anoth^^.

Darbyshire, Darbyshire.
where I met with some Friendly People, and had many Discourses with them. Then
passing further, into the Peak-Country, I met with more friendly People,
Peak-Country. Leicester^^ire. Nottinghamshire.
and with some in empty, high Notions. And traveling on through some Parts of
Leicestershire, and into Nottinghamshire, there I met with a tender People, and
a very Tender Woman, whose Name was E^^^beth Hootton; and with these I had some
Meetings and Discourses. B^^ my Troubles continued, and I was often under great
Temptations; and I fasted much, and walked abroad in solitary Places many Days,
and often took my Bible, and went and sat in hollow Trees, and lonesome
Places, till Night came on; and frequently, in the Night, walked mournfully
about by my self: For I was a Man of Sorrows in the Times of the first Workings
of the Lord in me.

Now, during all this Time I was never joined in Profession of Religion with
any, but gave up my self to the Lord; having forsaken all evil Company, and
taken leave of Father and Mother, and all other Relations, and traveled up and
down as a Stranger in the Earth, which Way the Lord inclined my Heart; taking a
Chamber to my self in Town, where I came, and tarrying sometimes a Month,
sometimes more, sometimes less in a Place: For I durst not stay long in any
Place, being afraid both of Professor and Profane, lest, being a tender
Young Man, I should be hurt by conversing much with either. For which Reason I
kept my self much as a Stranger, seeking heavenly Wisdom, and getting Knowledge
from the Lord; and was brought off from outward Things, to rely wholly on the
Lord alone. And though my Exercises and Troubles were very great, yet were they
not so continual, but that I had some Intermissions; and was sometimes brought
into such an Heavenly Joy, that I thought, I had been in Abraham's Bosom. As I
cannot declare the Misery I was in, it was so great and heavy upon upon me; so
neither can I set forth the Mercies of God unto me in all my Misery. Oh! the
everlasting Love of God to my Soul, when I was in great Distress! when my
Troubles and Torments were great, then was his Love exceeding great. Thou,
Lord, make a fruitful Field a barren Wilderness, and a barren Wilderness a
fruitful Field! thou bring down and set up! Thou killest and make
alive! all Honor and Glory be to thee, O Lord of Glory! The Knowledge of thee
in the Spirit is Life: But that Knowledge which is fleshly, works Death. And
while there is this Knowledge in the Flesh, Deceit and Self will conform to any
thing, and will say Yes, yes, to that it does not know. The Knowledge which the
World has, of what the Prophets and Apostles spoke, is a fleshly Knowledge;
and the Apostates from the Life, in which the Prophets and Apostles were, have
gotten their Words, the Holy Scriptures, in a Form, but not in their Life, nor
Spirit, that gave them forth. And so they all lie in Confusion, and are making
Provision for the Flesh, to fulfill the Lusts thereof; but not to fulfill the Law
and Command of Christ in his Power and Spirit: For that, they say, they cannot
do; but to fulfill the Lusts of the Flesh, that they can do with Delight.

Now after I had received that Opening from the Lord, that To be bred at Oxford
or Cambridge, was not sufficient to fit a Man to be a Minister of Christ, I
regarded the Priests less, and looked more after the Dissenting People. And
among them I saw, there was some Tenderness: And many of them came afterward
to be Convinced; for they had some Openings. But as I had forsaken all the
Priests, so I left the Separate Preachers also, and those called the
Most-Experienced People: For I saw, there was none among them all, that could
speak to my Condition. And when all my hopes in them, and in all Men was gone,
so that I had nothing outwardly to help me, nor could tell what to do; Then, O!
then I heard a Voice, which said,
" There is one, even Christ Jesus, that can speak to thy Condition: And when I
heard it, my Heart did leap for Joy. Then the Lord did let me see, why there
was none upon the Earth, that could speak to my Condition? namely, that I might
give him all the Glory. For all are concluded under Sin, and shut up in
Unbelief, as I had been; that Jesus Christ might have the Pre-heminence; who
enlightens, and gives Grace, and Faith and Power. Thus when God does work, who
shall let it? And this I knew experimentally. My Desires after the Lord grew
stronger, and Zeal in the pure knowledge of God, and of Christ alone, without
the help of any Man, Book or Writing. For though I read the Scriptures, that
spoke of Christ, and of God; yet I knew him not, but by Revelation, as he, who
has the Key, did open, and as the Father of Life drew me to his Son by his
Spirit. And then the Lord did gently lead me along, and did let me see his
Love, which was Endless and Eternal, and surpasses all the Knowledge, that Men
have in the natural State, or can get by History, or Books. And that Love did
let me see my self, as I was without him; and I was afraid of all Company: For
I saw them perfectly, where they were, through the Love of God, which let me
see my self. And I had not Fellowship with any People, Priests nor Professors,
nor any sort of separated People; but with Christ, who has the Key, and opened
the Door of Light and Life unto me. And I was afraid of all Carnal Talk and
Talkers; for I could see nothing but Corruptions, and the Life lay under the
Burden of Corruptions. And when I my self was in the Deep, under all shut up, I
could not believe, that I should ever Overcome; my Troubles, my Sorrows and my
Temptations were so great, that I thought many times, I should have despaired,
I was so tempted. But when Christ opened to me, how he was tempted by the same
Devil, and had Overcome him, and bruised his Head; and that through him and his
Power, Light, Grace and Spirit, I should Overcome also; I had Confidence in
him. So he it was, that opened to me, when I was shut up, and had not hope, nor
Faith. Christ it was (who had enlightened me) that gave me his Light to believe
in, and gave me Hope, which is himself, Revealed himself in me, and gave me his
Spirit, and gave me his Grace, which I found sufficient in the Deeps and in
Weakness. Thus in the deepest Miseries, and in the greatest Sorrows and
Temptations, that many times beset me, the Lord in his Mercy did keep me. And I
found, that there were Two Thirsts in me; the one after the Creatures, to have
gotten Help and Strength there; and the other after the Lord, the Creator, and
his Son Jesus Christ. And I saw, all the World could do me no good. If I had
had a King's Diet, Palace and Attendance, all would have been as nothing: For
nothing gave me Comfort, but the Lord by his Power. And I saw Professors,
Priests and People were whole and at ease in that Condition, which was my
Misery; and they loved that, which I would have been rid of. But the Lord did
stay my Desires upon himself, from whom my help came, and my care was cast upon
him alone. Therefore all Wait patiently upon the Lord, whatsoever Condition you
be in; wait in the Grace and Truth, that comes by Jesus: For if ye so do, there
is a Promise to you, and the Lord God will fulfill it in you. And Blessed are
all they indeed, that do indeed hunger and thirst after Righteousness; they
shall be satisfied with it: I have found it so, praised be the Lord, who
fills with it, and satisfies the desires of the hungry Soul. O let the House
of the Spiritual Israel say, His Mercy endures for ever! It is the great Love
of God, to make a Wilderness of that, which is pleasant to the outward Eye and
fleshly Mind; and to make a fruitful Field of a barren Wilderness: This is the
great Work of God. But while People's Minds do run in the Earthly, after the
Creatures, and changeable Things, and changeable Ways and Religions, and
changeable, uncertain Teachers, their Minds are in Bondage, and they are
brittle and changeable, and tossed up and down with windy Doctrines and
Thoughts, and Notions and Things; their Minds being from the unchangeable Truth
in the inward Parts, the Light of Jesus Christ, which would keep their Minds to
the Unchangeable, who is the Way to the Father; who in all my Troubles did
preserve me by his Spirit and Power, praised be his Holy Name for ever!

Again I heard a Voice, which did say, Thou Serpent! Thou do seek to destroy
the Life; but can not: For the Sword, which keeps the Tree of Life, shall
destroy thee. So Christ, the Word of God, that bruised the Head of the Serpent,
the Destroyer, preserved me; my inward Mind being joined to his good Seed, that
bruised the Head of this Serpent, the Destroyer. And this inward Life did
spring up in me, to answer all the Opposing Professors and Priests, and did
bring in Scriptures to my Memory to refute them with.

At another time I saw the great Love of God; and I was filled with admiration
at the Infiniteness of it. And then I saw, what was Cast out from God; and what
Entered into God's Kingdom: And how by Jesus, the Opener of the Door by his
Heavenly Key, the Entrance was given. And I saw Death, how it had passed upon
all Men, and oppressed the Seed of God in Man, and in me: And how I in the Seed
came forth; and what the Promise was to. Yet it was so with me, that there
seemed to be Two Pleading in me; and Questionings arose in my Mind about Gifts
and Prophecies: and I was tempted again to Despair, as if I had sinned against
the Holy Ghost. And I was in great Perplexity and Trouble for many Days; Yet I
gave up my self to the Lord still. And one day, when I had been walking
solitarily abroad, and was come home, I was taken up in the Love of God, so
that I could not but admire the greatness of his Love: And while I was in that
Condition, it was opened unto me by the Eternal Light and Power, and I therein
clearly saw, That all was done, and to be done in and by Christ; and how he
conquers and destroys this Tempter, the Devil, and all his Works, and is a top
of him; And that all these Troubles were good for me, and Temptations for the
Trial of my Faith, which Christ had given me. And the Lord opened me, that I
saw through all these Troubles and Temptations: My living Faith was raised,
that I saw, All was done by Christ, the Life, and my Belief was in him. And
when at any time my Condition was veiled, my secret Belief was stayed firm, and
Hope underneath held me, as an Anchor in the bottom of the Sea, and Anchored my
Immortal Soul to its Bishop, causing it to swim above the Sea, the World, where
all the raging Waves, foul Weather, Tempests and Temptations are. But oh! then
did I see my Troubles, Trials and Temptations more than ever I had done. As the
Light appeared, all appeared, that is out of the Light, Darkness, Death,
Temptations, the Unrighteous, the Ungodly; all was manifest and seen in the
Light: Then, after this, there did a pure Fire appear in me: Then I saw, how he
sat as a Refiner's Fire, and as the Fuller's Soap. And then the Spiritual
Discerning came into me, by which I did discern my own Thoughts, Groans and
Sighs; and what it was, that did vail me, and what it was, that did open me.
And that which could not abide in the Patience, nor endure the Fire, in the
Light I found to be the Groans of the Flesh (that could not give up to the Will
of God) which had veiled me; and that could not be patient in all Trials,
Troubles, and Anguishes and Perplexities, and could not give up Self to die by
the Cross, the Power of God, that the Living and Quickened might follow him, and
that that, which would cloud and vail from the Presence of Christ, that which
the Sword of the Spirit cuts down, and which must die, might not be kept alive.
And I discerned the Groans of the Spirit, which did open me, and made
Intercession to God: In which Spirit is the true Waiting upon God, for the
Redemption of the Body, and of the whole Creation. And by this true Spirit, in
which the true Sighing is, I saw over the false Sighings and Groanings. And by
this Invisible Spirit I discerned all the false Hearing, and the false Seeing,
and the false Smelling, which was a top, above the Spirit, quenching and
grieving it; and that all they, that were there, were in Confusion and Deceit,
where the false Asking and Praying is, in Deceit and a top, in that Nature and
Tongue, that takes Gods holy Name in vain, and wallows in the Egyptian Sea, and
asks, but has not; for they hate his Light, and resist the Holy Ghost, and
turn the Grace into Wantonness, and rebel against the Spirit, and are erred
from the Faith they should ask in, and from the Spirit they should pray by: He
that knows these things in the true Spirit, can witness them. The divine
Light of Christ manifests all things, and the spiritual Fire tries all
things, and severeth all things. Several things did I then see, as the Lord
opened them to me: For he showed me that, which can live in his holy Refining
Fire, and that can live to God under his Law. And he made me sensible, how the
Law and the Prophets were until John; and how the least in the Everlasting
Kingdom of God, is greater than John. The pure and perfect Law of God is over
the Flesh, to keep it, and its Works, which are not perfect, under, by the
perfect Law: And the Law of God, that is perfect, answers the perfect Principle
of God in every one: And this Law the Jews, and the Prophets, and John were to
perform and do. None knows the Giver of this Law, but by the Spirit of God;
neither can any truly read it, or hear its Voice, but by the Spirit of God: He
that can receive it, let him. John, who was the greatest Prophet, that was born
of a Woman, did bear Witness to the Light, which Christ, the Great heavenly
Prophet, has Enlightened every Man, that comes into the World, withal, that
they might believe in it, and become the Children of Light, and so have the
Light of Life; and not come into Condemnation. For the true Belief stands in
the Light, that condemns all Evil, and the Devil, who is the Prince of
Darkness, who would draw out of the Light into Condemnation. And they that walk
in this Light, come to the Mountain of the House of God, established above all
Mountains, and to God's Teaching, who will teach them his ways. These things
were opened to me in the Light.

And I saw the Mountains burning up, and the Rubbish; and the rough and crooked
Ways and Places made smooth and plain, that the Lord might come into his
Tabernacle. These things are to be found in Man's Heart: But to speak of these
things being within, seemed strange to the rough and crooked, and mountainous
Ones. Yet the Lord says, O Earth, hear the Word of the Lord! The Law of the
Spirit crosses the fleshly Mind, Spirit and Will, which lives in Disobedience,
and does not keep within the Law of the Spirit. And I saw, this Law was the
pure Love of God, which was upon me, and which I must go through; though I was
troubled, while I was under it: For I could not be dead to the Law, but through
the Law, which did judge and condemn that, which is to be condemned. I saw,
many talked of the Law, who had never known the Law to be their Schoolmaster:
And many talked of the Gospel of Christ, who had never known Life and
Immortality brought to Light in them by it. You that have been under that
Schoolmaster, and the Condemnation of it, know these things (for though the Lord
in that day opened these things unto me in secret, they have since been
published, by his Eternal Spirit, as on the House top.) And as you are brought
into the Law, and through the Law to be dead to it, and witness the
Righteousness of the Law fulfilled in you; ye will afterward come to know,
what it is, to be brought into the Faith, and through Faith from under the Law.
And abiding in the Faith, which Christ is the Author of, ye will have Peace and
Access to God. But if ye look out from the Faith, and from that which would
keep you in the Victory, and look after fleshly Things or Words, ye will be
brought into Bondage to the Flesh again; and to the Law, which takes hold upon
the Flesh and Sin, and works Wrath, and the Works of the Flesh will appear
again. The Law of God takes hold upon the Law of Sin and Death: But the Law of
Faith, or the Law of the Spirit of Life, which is the Love of God, and which
comes by Jesus (who is the end of the Law for Righteousness-sake) this makes
free from the Law of Sin and Death. This Law of Life fleshly-minded Men do not
know; yet they will tempt you, to draw you from the Spirit into the Flesh, and
so into Bondage. Therefore ye, who know the Love of God, and the Law of his
Spirit, and the freedom that is in Jesus Christ, stand fast in him, in that
divine Faith, which he is the Author of in you; and be not entangled with the
Yoke of Bondage. For the Ministry of Christ Jesus, and his Teaching, brings
into Liberty and Freedom: But the Ministry that is of Man, and by Man, and
which stands in the Will of Man, brings into Bondage, and under the shadow of
Death and Darkness. And therefore none can be a Minister of Christ Jesus, but
in the Eternal Spirit, which was before the Scriptures were given forth: For if
they have not his Spirit, they are none of his. Though they may have his Light
to condemn them, that hate it; yet they can never bring any into Unity and
Fellowship in the Spirit, except they be in it. For the Seed of God is a
burdensome Stone to the selfish, fleshly, earthly Will, which reigns in its own
Knowledge and Understanding, that must perish, and in its Wisdom, that is
Devilish. And the Spirit of God is grieved, and vexed, and quenched with that
which brings into the fleshly Bondage; and that which wars against the Spirit
of God, must be mortified by it: For the Flesh lusts against the Spirit, and
the Spirit against the Flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other. The
Flesh would have its Liberty; and the Spirit would have its Liberty: But the
Spirit is to have its Liberry; and not the Flesh. If therefore ye quench the
Spirit, and join to the Flesh, and be Servants of it, then ye are judged and
tormented by the Spirit: But if ye join to the Spirit, and serve God in it, ye
have Liberty, and Victory over the Flesh, and its Works. Therefore keep in the
daily Cross, the Power of God, by which ye may witness all that to be
Crucified, which is contrary to the Will of God, and which shall not come into
his Kingdom. These things are here mentioned and opened for Information,
Exhortation and Comfort to others, as the Lord Opened them unto me in that day.
And in that day I wondered, that the Children of Israel should murmur for Water
and Victuals; for I could have fasted long without murmuring, or minding
Victuals. But I was judged sometimes, that I was not contented to be sometimes
without the Water and Bread of Life, that I might learn to know, how to Want,
and how to Abound.

Lancashire.
And I heard of a Woman in Lancashire, that had Fasted Two and twenty Days: And
I traveled to see her; but when I came to her, I saw, that she was under a
Temptation. And when I had spoken to her what I had from the Lord, I left her;
her Father being one high in Profession. Duckenfield. Manchester.
And passing on, I went among the Professors at Duckenfield and Manchester,
where I stayed a while, and declared Truth among them: And there were some
Convinced, who received the Lord's Teaching, by which they were confirmed, and
stood in the Truth. But the Professors were in a Rage, all pleading for Sin and
Imperfection; and could not endure to hear talk of Perfection, and of an holy
and sinless Life. But the Lord's Power was over all; though they were chained
under Darkness and Sin, which they pleaded for, and quenched the tender Thing
in them.

About this time there was a great Meeting of the Baptists, 1647. Broughton in
Leichestershire.
at Broughton in Leichestershire, with some that had separated from them; and
People of other Notions went thither: And I went thither also. Not many of the
Baptists came; but abundance of other People were there. And the Lord opened my
Mouth, and his Everlasting Truth was declared amongst them; and the Power of
the Lord was over them all. For in that day the Lord's Power began to spring,
and I had great Openings in the Scriptures, and several were Convinced in those
Parts, and were turned from Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto
God; and his Power they did receive, and by it many were raised up to praise
God. And when I reasoned with Professors and other People, some were Convinced,
and did stand. Yet I was under great Temptations sometimes, and my inward
Sufferings were heavy; but I could find none to open my Condition to, but the
Lord alone, unto whom I cried Night and Day. And I went back into
Nottingham-shire, Nottingham-shire.
and there the Lord showed me, that the Natures of those things, which were
hurtful without, were within in the Hearts and Minds of Wicked Men. The Natures
of Dogs, Swine, Vipers, of Sodom and Egypt, Pharaoh, Cain, Ishmael, Esau, etc.
the Natures of these I saw within, though People had been looking without. And
I cried to the Lord, saying, Why should I be thus, seeing I was never addicted
to commit those Evils? And the Lord answered, That it was needful, I should
have a sense of all Conditions; how else should I speak to all Conditions? And
in this I saw the Infinite Love of God. I saw also, that there was an Ocean of
Darkness and Death; but an infinite Ocean of Light and Love, which flowed over
the Ocean of Darkness: And in that also I saw the Infinite Love of God; and I
had great Openings. And as I was walking by the Steeple-house side, in the Town
of Mansfield, Mansfield.
the Lord said unto me, That which People do trample upon, must be thy Food.
And as the Lord spoke, he opened it to me, how that People and Professors did
trample upon the Life, even the Life of Christ was tram^led upon; and they fed
upon Words, and fed one another with Words; but trampled upon the Life: And
trampled under Foot the Blood of the Son of God (which Blood was my Life;) and
they lived in their airy Notions, talking of him. It seemed strange to me at
the first, that I should feed on that, which the high Professors trampled upon;
but the Lord opened it clearly to me by his Eternal Spirit and Power.

Then came People from far and near to see me: And I was fearful of being drawn
out by them; yet I was made to speak, and open things to them. There was one
Brown, who had great Prophecies and Sights upon his Deathbed of me. And he
spoke openly, of what I should be made Instrumental by the Lord to bring forth.
And of others he spoke, that they should come to nothing: Which was fulfilled
on some, that then were something in show. And when this Man was buried, a
great Work of the Lord fell upon me, to the admiration of many, who thought I
had been Dead: And many came to see me for about fourteen Days time; for I was
very much altered in Countenance and Person, as if my Body had been New-moulded
or changed. And while I was in that Condition, I had a sense and discerning
given me by the Lord, 1647. Nottinghamshire.
through which I saw plainly, that when many People talked of God and of
Christ, etc. the Serpent spoke in them: But this was hard to be born. Yet the
Work of the Lord went on in some, and my Sorrows and Troubles began to wear
off, and Tears of Joy dropped from me, so that I could have wept Night and Day
with Tears of Joy to the Lord, in Humility and Brokenness of Heart. And I saw
into that, which was without End, and things which cannot be uttered, and of
the Greatness and Infinitness of the Love of God, which cannot be expressed by
Words. For I had been brought through the very Ocean of Darkness and Death, and
through the Power, and over the Power of Satan, by the Eternal, Glorious Power
of Christ; even through that Darkness was I brought, which covered-over all the
Word, and which chained down all, and shut up all in the Death. And the same
Eternal Power of God, which brought me through these Things, was that, which
afterward shook the Nations, Priests, Professors and People. Then could I say,
I had been in Spiritual Babylon, Sodom, Egypt and the Grave; but by the Eternal
Power of God I was come out of it, and was brought over it, and the Power of
it, into the Power of Christ. And I saw the Harvest WHITE, and the Seed of God
lying thick in the Ground, as ever did Wheat, that was sown outwardly; and none
to gather it: And for this I mourned with Tears. And a Report went abroad of
me, That I was a Young Man, that had a discerning Spirit: Whereupon many came
to me, from far and near, Professors, Priests and People; and the Lord's Power
brake forth: And I had great Openings and Prophecies; and spoke unto them of
the Things of God, and they heard with Attention and Silence; and went away,
and spread the Fame thereof. Then came the Tempter, and set upon me again,
charging me; That I had sinned against the Holy Ghost: But I could not tell in
what. And then Paul's Condition came before me, how, after he had been taken up
into the Third Heavens, and seen things not lawful to be uttered, a Messenger
of Satan was sent to buffet him again. Thus by the Power of Christ I got over
that Temptation also.

Friend's House in Nottinghamshire (for by this time the Power of God had
opened the Hearts of some to receive the Word of Life and Reconciliation) I
saw, there was a great Crack to go throughout the Earth, and a great Smoke to
go, as the Crack went; and that after the Crack there should be a great
Shaking: This was the Earth in People's Hearts, which was to be shaken, before
the Seed of God was raised out of the Earth. And it was so; for the Lord's
Power began to shake them, and great Meetings we began to have, and a mighty
Power and Work of God there was amongst People, to the Astonishment of both
People and Priests.

And there was a Meeting of Priests and Professors at a Justice's House, and I
went among them. And there they discoursed, how Paul said, He had not known
Sin, but by the Law, which said, Thou shall not lust: And they held that to be
spoken of the outward Law. But I told them, Paul spoke that, after he was
Convinced: For he had the outward Law before, and was bred up in it, when he
was in the Lust of Persecution; but this was the Law of God in his Mind, which
he served, and which the Law in his Members warred against: For that which he
thought had been Life to him, proved Death. So the more sober of the Priests
and Professors yielded, and consented, that it was not the Outward Law, but the
Inward, which showed the Inward Lust, which Paul spoke of, after he was
Convinced: For the outward Law took hold upon the outward Action; but the
Inward Law upon the Inward Lust.

After this I went again to Mansfield, Mansfield.
where was a great Meeting of Professors and People: And I was moved to Pray.
And the Lord's Power was so great, that the House seemed to be shaken. And when
I had done, some of the Professors said, It was now, as in the Days of the
Apostles, when the House was shaken, where they were: After I had prayed, one
of the Professors would pray; which brought Deadness and a Vail over them: And
others of the Professors were grieved at him, and told him, It was a Temptation
upon him. Then he came to me, and desired, that I would pray again: But I could
not pray in Man's Will.

Soon after there was another great Meeting of Professors, and a Captain (whose
Name was Amor Stoddard) came in: And they were discoursing of the Blood of
Christ. And as they were discoursing of it, I saw, through the immediate
Opening of the Invisible Spirit, the Blood of Christ. And I cried out among
them, and said; Do ye not see the Blood of Christ? See it in your Hearts, to
sprinkle your Hearts and Consciences from Dead Works, to serve the Living God:
For I saw it, the Blood of the New Covenant, how it came into the Heart. This
startled the Professors, who would have the Blood only without them, and not in
them. But Captain Stoddard was reached, and said; Let the Youth speak; hear the
Youth speak; when he saw, they endeavored to bear me down with many Words.

There were also a Company of Priests that were looked upon to be tender (one
of their Names was Kellet) and several People, that were tender, went to hear
them. And I was moved to go after them, and bid them, Mind the Lord's Teaching
in their inward Parts. That Priest Kellet was against Parsonages then; but
afterward he got a great One, and turned a Persecutor.

Now, after I had had some Service in these Parts, Derbyshire, Leicestershire.
I went through Derbyshire into my own Country Leicestershire again, and
several tender People were Convinced. And passing thence, I met with a great
Company of Professors in Warwickshire, who were Praying, Warwickshire.
and Expounding the Scriptures in the Fields; and they gave the Bible to me,
and I opened it on the Fifth of Matthew, where Christ expounded the Law: And I
opened the Inward State to them, and the Outward State; and they fell into a
feirce Contention, and so parted: But the Lord's Power got Ground.

Then I heard of a great Meeting to be at Leicester, for a Dispute, Leicester.
wherein both Presbyterians, Independents, Baptists and Common-Prayer-Men were
said to be all concerned. The Meeting was in a Steeple-house; and thither I was
moved by the Lord God to go, and be amongst them. 1648. Leicester.
And I heard their Discourse and Reasonings, some being in Pews, and the Priest
in the Pulpit; abundance of People being gathered together. At last one Woman
asked a Question out of Peter, What that Birth was, viz. A being born again of
Incorruptible Seed, by the Word of God, that lives and abides for ever? And
the Priest said to her, I permit not a Woman to speak in the Church; though he
had before given liberty for any to speak. Whereupon I was wrapped up, as in a
Rapture, in the Lord's Power; and I stepped up in a Place, and asked the
Priest; Do thou call this Place (the Steeple-house) a Church? Or do thou
call this mixed Multitude a Church? For the Woman asking a Question, he ought to
have answered it, having given liberty for any to speak. But he did not answer
me neither; but asked me, What a Church was? I told him, The Church was the
Pillar and Ground of Truth, made up of living Stones, living Members, a
spiritual Household, which Christ was the Head of: But he was not the Head of a
mixed Multitude, or of an old House made up of Lime, Stones and Wood: This set
them all on Fire. The Priest came down out of his Pulpit, and others out of
their Pews, and the Dispute there was marred. But I went to a great Inn, and
there disputed the thing with the Priests and Professors of all sorts; and they
were all on a Fire. But I maintained the true Church, and the true Head
thereof, over the Heads of them all, till they all gave out, and fled away. And
there was one Man, that seemed loving, and appeared for a while to join with
me; but he soon turned against me, and joined with a Priest, in pleading for
Infant's Baptism; though he himself had been a Baptist before: And so left me
alone. Howbeit there were several Convinced that day: and the Woman, that asked
the Question aforesaid, was Convinced, and her Family: And the Lord's Power and
Glory shined over all.

Nottingham-shire.
After this I returned into Nottingham-shire again, and went into the Vale of
Beavor. And as I went, I preached Repentance to the People: Vale of Beavor.
And there were many Convinced in the Vale of Beavor, in many Towns; for I
stayed some Weeks amongst them. And one Morning, as I was sitting by the Fire,
a great Cloud came over me, and a Temptation beset me: And I sat still. And it
was said; All things come by Nature; And the Elements and Stars came over me;
so that I was in a manner quite clouded with it: But inasmuch as I sat still,
and said nothing, the People of the House perceived nothing. And as I sat
still under it, and let it alone, a living Hope arose in me, and a true Voice
arose in me, which said; There is a living God, who made all things. And
immediately the Cloud and Temptation vanished away, and Life rose over it all,
and my Heart was glad, and I praised the living God. And after some time I met
with some People, that had such a Notion, That there was no God, but that all
things came by Nature. And I had great Dispute with them, and overturned them;
and made some of them Confess, that there was a Living God: Then I saw, that it
was good, that I had gone through that Exercise. And we had great Meetings in
those Parts; Nottingham-shire.
for the Power of the Lord broke through in that side of the Country. And
returning into Nottingham-shire, I found there a Company of shattered Baptists,
and Others; 1648. Nottingham-shire Mansfield. Darbyshire. Eton.
and the Lord's Power wrought mightily, and gathered many of them. Then
afterward I went to Mansfield and there-a-way; where the Lord's Power was
wonderfully manifested both at Mansfield, and other Towns thereabouts. And in
Darby-shire the mighty Power of God wrought in a wonderful manner. At Eton, a
Town near Darby, there was a Meeting of Friends, where there was such a mighty
Power of God, that they were greatly Shaken, and many Mouths were opened in the
Power of the Lord God. And many were moved by the Lord to go to Steeple Houses,
to the Priests and to the People, to declare the Everlasting Truth unto them.

And at a certain time, when I was at Mansfield, Mansfield.
there was a Sitting of the Justices, about hiring of Servants; and it was upon
me from the Lord, to go and speak to the Justices, That they should not oppress
the Servants in their Wages. So I walked toward the Inn, where they sat; but
finding a Company of Fiddlers there, I did not go in, but thought to come in the
Morning, when I might have a more serious Opportunity to discourse them; not
thinking that a seasonable time. But when I came again in the Morning, they
were gone, and I was struck even blind, that I could not see. And I inquired of
the Innkeeper, where the Justices were to sit that day? And he told me, At a
Town eight Miles off. And my Sight began to come to me again; and I went, and
Ran thitherward, as fast as I could. And when I was come to the House, where
they were, and many Servants with them, I exhorted the Justices, Not to oppress
the Servants in their Wages; but to do that which was Right and Just to them:
And I exhorted the Servants, To do their Duties, and serve honestly, etc. And
they all received my Exhortation kindly; for I was moved of the Lord therein.

Moreover I was moved to go to several Courts, and Steeple Houses at Mansfield,
and other Places, to warn them to leave off Oppression and Oaths, and to turn
from Deceit, and to turn to the Lord, and do justly. Particularly at Mansfield,
after I had been at a Court there, I was moved to go, and speak to one of the
Wicked'st Men in the Country, one who was a Common Drunkard, a noted
Whore-master, and a Rime-maker: And I reproved him, in the dread of the Mighty
God, for his evil Courses. And when I had done Speaking, and left him, he came
after me, and told me; That he was so smitten, when I spoke to him, that he had
scarce any Strength left in him. So this Man was Convinced, and turned from his
Wickedness, and remained an honest, sober Man, to the Astonishment of the
People, who had known him before. Thus the Work of the Lord went forward, and
many were turned from the Darkness to the Light, within the compass of these
three Years, 1646, 1647, and 1648. And diverse Meetings of Friends, in several
Places, were then gathered to Gods Teaching, by his Light, Spirit and Power:
For the Lord's Power brake forth daily more and more, wonderfullly.

Now was I come up in Spirit through the flaming Sword, into the Paradise of
God. All things were New; and all the Creation gave another Smell unto me, than
before, beyond what Words can utter. I knew nothing, 1648. Mansfield.
but Pureness, and Innocence, and Righteousness, being renewed up into the
Image of God by Christ Jesus; so that I say, I was come up to the State of
Adam, which he was in, before he fell. The Creation was opened to me: And it
was showed me, how all things had their Names given them, according to their
Nature and Virtue. And I was at a stand in my Mind, whether I should practice
Physic for the good of Mankind, seeing, the Nature and Virtues of the
Creatures were so opened to me by the Lord. But I was immediately taken up in
Spirit, to see into another or more steadfast State, than Adam's in Innocence,
even into a State in Christ Jesus, that should never fall. And the Lord showed
me, that such as were faithful to him in the Power and Light of Christ, should
come up into that State, in which Adam was before he fell: In which the
admirable Works of the Creation, and the Virtues thereof may be known, through
the Openings of that divine Word of Wisdom and Power, by which they were made.
Great things did the Lord lead me into, and wonderful Depths were opened unto
me, beyond what can by Words be declared: But as People come into subjection to
the Spirit of God, and grow up in the Image and Power of the Almighty, they may
receive the Word of Wisdom, that opens all things, and come to know the hidden
Unity in the Eternal Being.

Thus traveled I on in the Lord's Service, as the Lord led me. And when I came
to Nottingham, Notingham. Leicestershire. Clauson. Vale of Beavor.
the mighty Power of God was there among Friends. From thence I went to Clauson
in Leicestershire, in the Vale of Beavor, and the mighty Power of God was there
also, in several Towns and Villages, where Friends were gathered. While I was
there, the Lord opened to me Three Things, relating to those Three great
Professions in the World, Physic, Divinity (so called) and Law. And he showed
me, that the Physicians and Doctors of Physic were out of the Wisdom of God,
by which the Creatures were made; and so knew not the Virtues of the Creatures,
because they were out of the Word of Wisdom, by which they were made. And he
showed me, that the Priests were out of the true Faith, which Christ is the
Author of; the Faith which purifies and gives Victory, and brings People to
have Access to God, by which they please God: Which Mystery of Faith is held in
a pure Conscience. He showed me also, that the Lawyers were out of the Equity,
and out of the true Justice, and out of the Law of God, which went over the
first Transgression, and over all Sin, and answered the Spirit of God, that was
grieved, and transgressed in Man. And that these three, the Physicians, the
Priests, and the Lawyers, ruled the World out of the Wisdom, out of the Faith,
and out of the Equity and Law of God; the one pretending the Cure of the Body,
the other the Cure of the Soul, and the third the Property of the People. But I
saw, they were all out, out of the Wisdom, out of the Faith, out of the Equity
and perfect Law of God. And as the Lord opened these things unto me, I felt his
Power went forth over all, by which all might be Reformed, if they would
receive and bow unto it. The Priests might be Reformed, and brought into the
true Faith, which was the Gift of God. The Lawyers might be Reformed, and
brought into the Law of God, 1648. Vale of Beavor.
which answers that of God (that is transgressed) in every one, and brings to
love one's Neighbor as himself: This lets Man see, If he wrongs his Neighbor,
he wrongs himself; and this teaches him To do unto others, as he would they
should do unto him. The Physicians might be Reformed, and brought into the
Wisdom of God, by whick all things were made and Created; that they might
receive a right Knowledge of the Creatures, and understand the Virtues of them,
which the Word of Wisdom, by which they were made and are upheld, has given
them. Abundance was opened concerning these things; how all lay out of the
Wisdom of God, and out of the Righteousness and Holiness, that Man at the first
was made in: But as all believe in the Light, and walk in the Light, which
Christ has enlightened every Man, that comes into the World, withal, and so
become Children of the Light, and of the Day of Christ, in his Day all things
are seen, Visible and Invisible, by the Divine Light of Christ, the Spiritual,
Heavenly Man, by whom all things were made and Created.

Then I saw concerning the Priests, that although they stood in the Deceit, and
acted by the dark Power, which both they and their People were kept under; yet
they were not the greatest Deceivers spoken of in the Scriptures: For these
were not come so far, as many of them had come. But the Lord opened to me, who
the greatest Deceivers were, and how far they might come; even such as came as
far as Cain, to hear the Voice of God; and such as came out of Egypt, and
through the Red Sea, and to praise God on the Banks of the Seashore; such as
could speak by Experience of God's Miracles and Wonders; such as were come as
far as Corah and Dathan, and their Company; such as came as far as Balaam, who
could speak the Word of the Lord, who heard his Voice and knew it, and knew his
Spirit; and could see the Star of Jacob, and the goodliness of Israel's Tent;
the Second Birth, which no Enchantment could prevail against: These that could
speak so much of their Experiences of God, and yet turned from the Spirit and
the Word, and went into the Gainsaying; These were, and would be the great
Deceivers, far beyond the Priests. Likewise among the Christians, such as
should preach in Christ's Name, and should work Miracles, cast out Devils, and
go as far as a Cain, a Core and a Balaam in the Gospel Times, These were and
would be the great Deceivers; they that could speak some Experiences of Christ
and God, but lived not in the Life. These were they, that led the World after
them, who got the Form of Godliness, but denied the Power; who inwardly ravened
from the Spirit, and brought People into the Form; but persecuted them, that
were in the Power (as Cain did) and ran greedily after the Error of Balaam,
through Covetousness, loving the Wages of Unrighteousness, as Balaam did. These
Followers of Cain, Core and Balaam have brought the World since the Apostles
Days to be like a Sea. And such as these, I saw, might deceive now, as they had
in former Ages: But it is impossible for them to deceive the Elect, who were
chosen in Christ, who was, before the World began, and before Deceiver was:
Though others may be deceived in their Openings and Prophecies, not keeping
their Minds to the Lord Jesus Christ, who does Open and Reveal to his.

And I saw the State of those both Priests and People, who in reading the
Scriptures cry out much against Cain, Esau, and Judas, and other wicked Men of
former Times, mentioned in the Holy Scriptures; but do not see the Nature of
Cain, of Esau, of Judas, and those Others in themselves. And these said, It was
They, They, They, that were the bad People; putting it off from themselves: But
when some of these came with the Light and Spirit of Truth to see into
themselves, then they came to say, I, I, I, it is I my self, that have been the
Ishmael, and the Esau, etc. For then they came to see the Nature of wild
Ishmael in themselves; the Nature of Cain, of Esau, of Corah, of Balaam, and of
the Son of Perdition in themselves, sitting above all that is called God in
them. So I saw, it was the fallen Man, that was got up into the Scriptures, and
was finding Fault with those beforementioned; and with the backsliding Jews,
calling them the sturdy Oaks, and tall Cedars, and fat Bulls of Bashan, wild
Heifers, Vipers, Serpents, etc. And charging them, that it was They, that
closed their Eyes, and stopped their Ears, and hardened their Hearts, and were
dull of Hearing: And that it was They, that hated the Light, and rebelled
against it, and that quenched the Spirit, and vexed and grieved it, and walked
despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, and turned the Grace of God into
Wantonness: And that it was They, that resisted the Holy Ghost; and They, that
got the Form of Godliness, and turned against the Power: And that They were the
inwardly Ravening Wolves, that had got the Sheep's Clothing: And that They
were the Wells without Water, and Clouds without Rain, and Trees without Fruit,
etc. But when these (who were so much taken up with finding Fault with others,
and thought themselves clear from these Things) came to look into themselves,
and with the Light of Christ thoroughly to search themselves, they might see
enough of this in themselves: and then the Cry could not be, It is He, or They,
as before; but I, and We are found in these Conditions.

I saw also, how People Read the Scriptures without a right Sense of them, and
without duly applying them to their own States. For when they read, that Death
reigned from Adam to Moses; and that the Law and the Prophets were until John;
and that the least in the Kingdom is greater than John; they read these things
without them, and applied them to others without them (and the Things were true
of others without them:) but they did not turn in to find the Truth of these
things in themselves. But as these things came to be opened in me, I saw, Death
reigned over them from Adam to Moses, from the Entrance into Trangression, till
they came to the Ministration of Condemnation, which restrains People from Sin,
that brings Death. Then when the Ministration of Moses is passed through, the
Ministry of the Prophets comes to be read and understood, which reaches through
the Figures, Types and Shadows unto John, the greatest Prophet born of a Woman;
whose Ministration prepares the Way of the Lord, by bringing down the exalted
Mountains, and making strait Paths. And as this Ministration is passed through,
an Entrance comes to be known into the Everlasting Kingdom. So I saw plainly,
that none could read Moses aright, without Moses's Spirit, by which Moses saw,
how Man was in the Image of God in Paradise, and how he fell, and how Death
came over him, and how all Men have been under this Death. And I saw, how Moses
received the pure Law, that went over all Transgressors; and how the clean
Beasts, which were Figures and Types, were offered up, when the People were
come into the righteous Law, that went over the first Transgression. And both
Moses and the Prophets saw through the Types and Figures, and beyond them, and
saw Christ the great Prophet, that was to come to fulfill them. And I saw, that
none could read John's Words aright, and with a true Understanding of them, but
in and with the same Divine Spirit, by which John spoke them; and by his
burning, shining Light, which is sent from God. For by that Spirit their
Crooked Natures might be made strait, and their Rough Natures smooth, and the
Exacter and violent Doer in them might be thrown out: And they that had been
Hypocrites, might come to bring forth Fruits meet for Repentance, and their
Mountain of Sin and Earthliness might be laid low in them, and their Valley
exalted in them; that there might be a Way prepared for the Lord in them: And
then the least in the Kingdom is greater than John. But all must first know the
Voice crying in their Wilderness, in their Hearts, which through Transgression
were become as a Wilderness. Thus I saw, it was an easy matter to say, Death
reigned from Adam to Moses; and, That the Law and the Prophets were until John;
and, That the least in the Kingdom is greater than John: But none could know,
how Death reigned from Adam to Moses, etc. but by the same Holy Spirit, which
Moses and the Prophets, and John were in. They could not know the Spiritual
Meaning of Moses, the Prophets and John's Words, nor see their Path and
Travels, much less see through them, and to the end of them into the Kingdom;
unless they had the Spirit and Light of Jesus: Nor could they know the Words of
Christ, and of his Apostles, without his Spirit. But as Man comes through, by
the Spirit and Power of God, to Christ (who fulfills the Types, Figures,
Shadows, Promises and Prophecies, that were of him) and is led by the Holy
Ghost into the Truth and Substance of the Scriptures, sitting down in him, who
is the Author and End of them; then are they read, and understood, with profit
and great Delight.

Moreover, the Lord God let me see (when I was brought up into his Image, in
Righteousness and Holiness, and into the Paradise of God) the State, How Adam
was made a Living Soul: And also the Stature of Christ, the Mystery, that had
been hid from Ages and Generations: Which things are hard to be uttered; and
cannot be born by many. For of all the Sects in Christendom (so called) that I
discoursed withal, I found none, that could bear to be told, that any should
come to Adam's Perfection, into that Image of God, and Righteousness, and
Holiness, that Adam was in, before he fell; to be so clear and pure without
Sin, as he was. Therefore, how should they be able to bear, being told, that
any should grow up to the Measure of the Stature of the Fullness of Christ, when
they cannot bear to hear, that any shall come, whilst upon Earth, into the same
Power and Spirit, that the Prophets and Apostles were in? Though it be a
certain Truth, that none can understand their Writings aright, without the same
Spirit, by which they were written.

Now the Lord God has opened to me by his invisible Power, how that Every Man
was enlightened by the Divine Light of Christ; and I saw it shine through all:
And that they, that believed in it, came out of Condemnation, and came to the
Light of Life, and became the Children of it: But they that hated it, and did
not believe in it, were Condemned by it; though they made a Profession of
Christ. This I saw in the pure Openings of the Light, without the help of any
Man; neither did I then know, where to find it in the Scriptures (though
afterward, searching the Scriptures, I found it.) For I saw in that Light and
Spirit, which was, before Scripture was given forth, and which led the Holy Men
of God to give them forth, That all must come to that Spirit, if they would
know God or Christ, or the Scriptures aright, which They that gave them forth,
were led and taught by.

But I observed a Dullness and Drowzy Heaviness upon People, which I wondered at:
For sometimes, when I would set my self to sleep, my Mind went over all to the
Beginning, in that which is from Everlasting to Everlasting. And I saw, Death
was to pass over this sleepy, heavy State. And I told People, they must come to
witness Death to that sleepy, heavy Nature, and a Cross to it in the Power of
God, that their Minds and Hearts might be on things above.

And on a certain Time, as I was walking in the Fields, the Lord said unto me;
Thy Name is written in the Lamb's Book of Life, which was before the Foundation
of the World. And as the Lord spoke it, I believed, and saw it in the New
Birth. Then sometime after the Lord commanded me to go abroad into the World,
which was like a briary, thorny Wilderness. And when I came in the Lord's
mighty Power, with the Word of Life into the World, the World swelled, and made
a Noise, like the great raging Waves of the Sea. Priests and Professors,
Magistrates and People were all like a Sea, when I came to proclaim the Day of
the Lord amongst them, and to preach Repentance to them.

Now I was sent to turn People from Darkness to the Light, that they might
receive Christ Jesus: For to as many as should receive him in his Light, I saw,
that he would give Power to become the Sons of God: Which I had obtained by
receiving Christ. And I was to direct People to the Spirit, that gave forth the
Scriptures, by which they might be led into all Truth, and so up to Christ and
God, as they had been, who gave them forth. And I was to turn them to the Grace
of God, and to the Truth in the Heart, which came by Jesus; that by this Grace
they might be taught, which would bring them Salvation, that their Hearts might
be established by it, and their Words might be seasoned, and all might come to
know their Salvation nigh. For I saw, that Christ had died for all Men, and was
a Propitiation for all; and had enlightened all Men and Women with his divine
and saving Light: And that none could be a true Believer, but who believed in
it. I saw, that the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, had appeared to all
Men, and that the Manifestation of the Spirit of God was given to every Man, to
profit withal. These Things I did not see by the help of Man, nor by the Letter
(though they are written in the Letter;) but I saw them in the Light of the Lord
Jesus Christ, and by his immediate Spirit and Power, as did the Holy Men of
God, by whom the Holy Scriptures were written. Yet I had no slight esteem of
the Holy Scriptures; but they were very precious to me: For I was in that
Spirit, by which they were given forth; and what the Lord opened in me, I
afterward found was agreeable to them. I could speak much of these things, and
many Volumes might be written; but all would prove too short to set forth the
Infinite Love, Wisdom and Power of God, in prepairing, fitting and furnishing
me for the Service he had appointed me to; letting me see the Depths of Satan
on the one Hand, and opening to me, on the other Hand, the divine Mysteries of
his own Everlasting Kingdom.

Now when the Lord God, and his Son Jesus Christ did send me forth into the
World, to preach his Everlasting Gospel and Kingdom, I was glad, that I was
Commanded To turn People to that Inward Light, Spirit and Grace, by which all
might know their Salvation, and their Way to God; even that divine Spirit,
which would lead them into all Truth, and which I infallibly knew, would never
deceive any.

But with and by this divine Power and Spirit of God, and the Light of Jesus, I
was to bring People off from all their own ways, to Christ the new and living
Way; and from their Churches (which Men had made and gathered) to the Church in
God, the general Assembly written in Heaven, which Christ is the Head of; And
off from the World's Teachers, made by Men, to learn of Christ, who is the Way,
the Truth and the Life, of whom the Father said, This is my beloved Son, hear
ye him; and off from all the Worlds Worships, to know the Spirit of Truth in
the inward Parts, and to be led thereby; that in it they might Worship the
Father of Spirits, who seeks such to Worship him: Which Spirit they that
Worshipped not in, knew not, what they Worshipped. And I was to bring People
off from all the World's Religions, which are vain; that they might know the
pure Religion, and might visit the Fatherless, the Widows and the Strangers,
and keep themselves from the Spots of the World: And then there would not be so
many Beggars; the sight of whom often grieved my Heart, to see so much
Hard-heartedness amongst them, that professed the Name of Christ. And I was to
bring them off from all the World's Fellowships, and Prayings and Singings,
which stood in Forms without Power; that their Fellowships might be in the Holy
Ghost, and in the Eternal Spirit of God; that they might Pray in the Holy
Ghost, and Sing in the Spirit, and with the Grace, that comes by Jesus; making
Melody in their Hearts to the Lord, who has sent his beloved Son to be their
Savior; and caused his heavenly Sun to shine upon all the World, and through
them all, and his heavenly Rain to fall upon the Just and the Unjust (as his
outward Rain does fall, and his outward Sun does shine on all) which is God's
unspeakable Love to the World. And I was to bring People off from Jewish
Ceremonies, and from Heathenish Fables, and from Men's Inventions and windy
Doctrines, by which they blowed the People about, this way and the other way,
from Sect to Sect; and all their beggarly Rudiments, with their Schools and
Colleges, for making Ministers of Christ, who are indeed Ministers of their
own making, but not of Christ's. And all their Images and Crosses, and
Sprinkling of Infants, with all their Holy Days (so called) and all their vain
Traditions, which they had gotten up since the Apostles Days, which the Lord's
Power was against: And in the Dread and Authority thereof was I moved to
declare against them all; and against all that Preached, and not freely; as
being such, as had not Received freely from Christ.

Moreover, when the Lord sent me forth into the World, he forbad me To put off
my Hat to any, High or Low. And I was required to Thee and Thou all Men and
Women, without any respect to Rich or Poor, Great or Small. And as I traveled
up and down, I was not to bid People Good Morrow, or Good Evening; neither
might I Bow or Scrape with my Leg to any one: And this made the Sects and
Professions to rage. But the Lord's Power carried me over all to his Glory; and
many came to be turned to God in a little time: For the heavenly Day of the
Lord sprang from on high, and brake forth apace; by the Light of which many
came to see, where they were.

But oh! the Rage that then was in the Priests, Magistrates, Professors and
People of all sorts; but especially in Priests and Professors! For though Thou to
a single Person was according to their own Learning, their Accidence and
Grammar Rules, and according to the Bible; yet they could not bear to hear it:
And the Hat-Honour, because I could not put off my Hat to them, it set them all
into a Rage. But the Lord showed me, that it was an Honor below, which he
would lay in the Dust, and stain it; an Honor which proud Flesh looked for,
but sought not the Honor, which came from God only. That it was an Honor
invented by Men in the Fall, and in the Alienation from God, who were offended,
if it were not given them; and yet would be looked upon themselves as Saints,
Church Members and great Christians: But Christ says, How can ye believe, who
receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor, that comes from God
only? And I (says Christ) receive not Honor of Men: Showing, that Men have an
Honor, which Men will receive and give; but Christ will have none of it: This
is the Honor, which Christ will not receive, and which must be laid in the
Dust. Oh! the Rage and Scorn, the Heat and Fury that arose! Oh! the Blows,
Punchings, Beatings and Imprisonments that we underwent, for not putting off
our Hats to Men! For that soon tried all Men's Patience and Sobriety, what it
was. Some had their Hats violently plucked off, and thrown away; so that they
quite lost them. The bad Language and evil Usage we received on this Account,
is hard to be expressed; besides the Danger we were sometimes in of losing our
Lives for this Matter, and that by the great Professors of Christianity; who
thereby discovered, that they were not true Believers. And though it was but a
small thing in the Eye of Man; yet a wonderful Confusion it brought among all
Professors and Priests: But, blessed be the Lord, many came to see the Vanity
of that Custom, of putting off the Hat to Men; and felt the weight of Truth's
Testimony against it.

About this time I was sorely exercised in going to their Courts to cry for
Justice, Judges and Justices to do Justly; and in warning such, as kept public
Houses for Entertainment, that they should not let People have more Drink, than
would do them good: And in testifying against their Wakes or Feasts, their
May-Games, Sports, Plays and Shows, which trained up People to Vanity and
Looseness, and led them from the fear of God; and the Days they had set forth
for Holy Days, were usually the times, wherein they most dishonored God by
these things. In Fairs also, and in Markets I was made to declare against their
deceitful Merchandise, and Cheating and Cozening; warning all to deal Justly,
and to speak the Truth, and to let their Yea be yea, and their Nay be nay; and
to do unto others, as they would have others do unto them: And fore-warning
them of the Great and Terrible Day of the Lord, which would come upon them all.
I was moved also to Cry against all sorts of Music, and against the
Mountebanes playing Tricks on their Stages; for they burdened the pure Life,
and stirred up Peoples Minds to Vanity. I was much exercised too with
Schoolmasters and School-mistresses, warning them to teach their Children
Sobriety in the fear of the Lord; that they might not be nursed and trained up
in Lightness, Vanity and Wantonness. Likewise I was made to warn Masters and
Mistresses, Fathers and Mothers in private Families, to take care, that their
Children and Servants might be trained up in the fear of the Lord; and that
they themselves should be therein Examples and Patterns of Sobriety and Virtue
to them. For I saw, that, as the Jews were to teach their Children the Law of
God, and the Old Covenant, and to train them up in it; and their Servants, yea
the very Strangers, were to keep the Sabbath amongst them, and be Circumcised,
before they might eat of their Sacrifices; so all Christians, and all that made
a Profession of Christianity, ought to Train up their Children and Servants in
the New Covenant of Light, Christ Jesus, who is God's Salvation to the Ends of
the Earth; that all may know their Salvation. And they ought to train them up
in the Law of Life, the Law of the Spirit, the Law of Love and of Faith; that
they might be made free from the Law of Sin and Death. And all Christians ought
to be Circumcised by the Spirit, which puts off the Body of the Sins of the
Flesh, that they may come to Eat of the heavenly Sacrifice, Christ Jesus, that
true spiritual Food, which none can, rightly feed upon, but they, that are
Circumcised by the Spirit, Likewise I was Exercised about the Star-Gazers, who
drew Peoples Minds from Christ, the bright and the Morning Star; and from the
Sun of Righteousness, by whom the Sun, and Moon and Stars, and all things else
were made, who is the Wisdom of God, and from whom the right Knowledge of all
things is received.

But the black, Earthly Spirit of the Priest wounded my Life: And when I heard
the Bell toll, to call People together to the Steeple-house, it struck at my
Life: For it was just like a Market-Bell, to gather People together, 1649. Vale
of Beavor.
that the Priest might set forth his Ware to Sale. O the Vast Sums of Money,
that are gotten by the Trade they make of selling the Scriptures, and by their
Preaching, from the highest Bishop to the lowest Priest! What one Trade else in
the World is Comparable to it? Notwithstanding that the Scriptures were given
forth freely; and Christ commanded his Ministers to Preach freely; and the
Prophets and Apostles denounced Judgment against all Covetous Hirelings, and
Diviners for Money. But in this free Spirit of the Lord Jesus was I sent forth,
to declare the Word of Life, and Reconciliation freely, that all might come up
to Christ, who gives freely, and who renews up into the Image of God, which Man
and Woman were in, before they fell; that they might sit down in the heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus.

Nottingham.
Now as I went toward Nottingham on a First Day in the Morning, with Friends to
a Meeting there, when I came on top of a Hill, in sight of the Town, I espied
the great Steeple-house; and the Lord said unto me; Thou must go cry against
yonder great Idol, and against the Worshippers therein. So I said nothing of
this to the Friends, that were with me; but went on with them to the Meeting,
where the mighty Power of the Lord God was amongst us: In which I left Friends
sitting in the Meeting; and I went away to the Steeple-house. And when I came
there, all the People looked, like Fallow Ground; and the Priest (like a great
Lump of Earth) stood in his Pulpit above: And he took for his Text these Words
of Peter, [We have also a more sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well,
that ye take heed, as unto a Light, that shines in a dark Place, until the day
dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts.] And he told the People, that this
was the Scriptures, by which they were to Try all Doctrines, Religions and
Opinions. Now the Lord's Power was so mighty upon me, and so strong in me, that
I could not hold; but was made to cry out, and say; Oh no, It is not the
Scriptures. But I told them what it was, namely the Holy Spirit; by which the
Holy Men of God gave forth the Scriptures, whereby Opinions, Religions and
Judgments were to be tried: For it led into all Truth, and so gave the
knowledge of all Truth. For the Jews had the Scriptures, and yet resisted the
Holy Ghost, and rejected Christ, the bright Morning Star; and persecuted Christ
and his Apostles, and took upon them to Try their Doctrines by the Scriptures;
but erred in Judgment, and did not try them a-right; because they tried without
the Holy Ghost. Now as I spoke thus amongst them, the Officers came, and took
me away, and put me into a nasty, stinking Prison; the smell whereof got so
into my Nose and Throat, that it very much annoyed me.

But that day the Lord's Power sounded so in their Ears, that they were amazed
at the Voice, and could not get it out of their Ears for some time after; they
were so reached by the Lord's Power in the Steeple-house. At Night they took me
out of Prison, and had me before the Major, Aldermen and Sheriffs of the Town:
And when I was brought before them, the Major was in a peevish, fretful Temper;
but the Lord's Power allayed him. Then they examined me at large; and I told
them, how the Lord had moved me to come. Then, after some Discourse had passed
between them and me, they sent me back to Prison again: But sometime after,
1649. Nottingham.
the Head-Sheriff, whole Name was John Reckless, sent for me to his House: And
when I came in, his Wife met me in the Hall, and said, " Salvation is come to
our House.
And she took me by the Hand, and was much wrought upon by the Power of the
Lord God: And her Husband, and Children, and Servants were much changed; for
the Power of the Lord wrought upon them. And I lodged at the Sheriff's House,
and great Meetings we had in his House; and some Persons of considerable
Condition in the World came to them, and the Lord's Power appeared eminently
amongst them. And this Sheriff sent for the other Sheriff, and for a Woman,
they had had Dealings with in way of Trade; and he told her before the other
Sheriff, that they had wronged her in their Dealings with her (for the other
Sheriff and he were Partners) and that they ought to make her Restitution: This
he spoke cheerfully. But the other Sheriff denied it; and the Woman said, She
knew nothing of it. But the friendly Sheriff said, it was so; and that the
other knew it well enough: And then having discovered the Matter, and
acknowledged the Wrong done by them, he made Restitution to the Woman; and
exhorted the other Sheriff to do the like. And the Lord's Power was with this
Friendly Sheriff, and wrought a mighty Change in him; and great Openings he
had. And on the next Market Day following, as he was walking with me in the
Chamber, in his Slippers, he said, I must go into the Market, and preach
Repentance to the People: And accordingly he went in his Slippers into the
Market, and into several Streets, and preached Repentance to the People.
Several others also in the Town were moved to speak to the Major and
Magistrates, and to the People, exhorting them to Repent. Hereupon the
Magistrates grew very Angry, and sent for me from the Sheriff's House, and
Committed me to the Common Prison. Nottingham Prison.
When the Assize came on, there was one moved to come and offer up himself for
me, Body for Body; yea Life also: But when I should have been brought before
the Judge, the Sheriff's Man being somewhat long in fetching me to the
Sessions House, the Judge was risen, before I came. At which, I understood, the
Judge was somewhat offended, and said; He would have admonished the Youth, if
he had been brought before him: For I was then Imprisoned by the Name of A
YOVTH. So I was returned to Prison again, and put into the Common Goal. And the
Lord's Power was great among Friends; but the People began to be very Rude:
Wherefore the Governor of the Castle sent down Soldiers, and dispersed them;
and after that they were quiet. But both Priests and People were astonished at
the wonderful Power, that brake forth: And several of the Priests were made
tender, and some did Confess to the Power of the Lord.

Now, after I was set at Liberty from Nottingham-Goal (where I had been kept
Prisoner a pretty long time) I traveled, as before, in the Work of the Lord.
And coming to Mansfield-Woodhouse, Mansfield Wood-house.
there was a distracted Woman under a Doctor's Hand, with her Hair loose all
about her Ears; and he was about to let her Blood, she being first bound, and
many People being about her, holding her by Violence: But he could get no Blood
from her. And I desired them to unbind her, 1649. Mansfield. Woodhouse.
and let her alone; for they could not touch the Spirit in her, by which she
was tormented: So they did unbind her. And I was moved to speak to her, and in
the Name of the Lord to bid her, Be quiet and still: And she was so. And the
Lord's Power settled her Mind, and she mended; and afterward Received the
Truth, and Continued in it to her Death. And the Lord's Name was honored; To
whom the Glory of all his Works belongs. Many great and wonderful Things were
wrought by the heavenly Power in those Days: For the Lord made bare his
Omnipotent Arm, and manifested his Power to the Astonishment of many; by the
healing Virtue whereof many have been delivered from great Infirmities, and the
Devils were made subject through his Name: Of which particular Instances might
be given, beyond what this unbelieving Age is able to receive or bear. But
blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord, and everlastingly Honored, and over
all Exalted, and Magnified be the Arm of his Glorious Power, by which he has
wrought gloriously; and let the Honor and Praise of all his Works be ascribed
to him alone.

Now while I was at Mansfield-Woodhouse, I was moved to go to to the
Steeple-house there, and declare the Truth to the Priest and People. But the
People fell upon me in great Rage, and struck me down, and almost stifled and
smothered me; and I was cruelly beaten and bruised by them with their Hands,
Bibles and Sticks. Then they haled me out (though I was hardly able to stand)
and put me into the Stocks, where I sat some Hours; and they brought Dogwhips
and Horse-whips, threatening to Whip me. And after some time, they had me before
the Magistrate, at a Knight's House, where were many great Persons; who seeing,
how evilly I had been used, after much Threatening, set me at Liberty: But the
rude People stoned me out of the Town, for Preaching the Word of Life to them.
And I was scarce able to go, or well to stand, by reason of the Ill Usage I had
received: Yet with much ado I got about a Mile from the Town; and then I met
with some People, that gave me something to Comfort me, because I was inwardly
bruised: But the Lord's Power soon healed me again. And that day some People
were Convinced of the Lord's Truth, and turned to his Teaching; at which I
rejoiced.

Leichestershire.
Then went I out of Nottingham-shire into Leichestershire, several Friends
accompanying me. And there were some Baptists in that Country, whom I desired
to see and speak with; because they were separated from the public Worship. So
one Oats, who was one of their Chief Teachers, and others of the Heads of them,
with several others of their Company, Barrow.
came to Meet us at Barrow; and there we discoursed with them. One of them
said, What was not of Faith, was Sin. Whereupon I asked them, What Faith was?
And how it was wrought in Man? But they turned off from that, and spoke of
their Baptism in Water. Then I asked them, Whether their Mountain of Sin was
brought down, and laid low in them? And their rough and crooked Ways made
smooth and strait in them? For they looked upon the Scriptures, as meaning
Outward Mountains and Ways: But I told them, they must find them in their own
Hearts: Which they seemed to wonder at. And we asked them; Who baptized John
the Baptist? and who baptized Peter, 1649. Barrow.
John and the rest of the Apostles? and put them to prove by Scripture, that
these were baptized in Water: But they were silent. Then I asked them; Seeing
(...), who betrayed Christ, and was called the Son of Perdition, had H^^ged
himself, what Son of Perdition was that, which Paul spoke of, that s^te in the
Temple of God, exalted above all that is called God? And that Temple of God
that was, in which this Son of Perdition sat? And whether he, that betrays
Christ within in himself, be not one in Nature with that Judas, that betrayed
Christ without? But they could not tell, what to make of this, nor what to say
to it. So after we had had some Discourse together, we parted; and some of them
were loving to us.

On the First Day of the Week following we came to Bagworth, Bagworth.
and went to a Steeple-House, where some Friends were got in; and the People
locked them in, and themselves too, with the Priest. But after the Priest had
done, they opened the Door, and we went in also; and had a Service for the Lord
amongst them. Afterward we had a Meeting in the Town, amongst several People
that were in high Notions. Then passing from thence, I heard of a People, that
were in Prison in Coventry for Religion. Coventry.
And as I walked toward the Jail, the Word of the Lord came to me, saying;
MY LOVE WAS ALWAYS TO THEE, AND THOU ART IN MY LOVE. And I was ravished with
the Sense of the Love of God, and greatly strengthened in my Inward Man. But
when I came into the Jail, where those Prisoners were, a great Power of
Darkness struck at me; and I sat still, having my Spirit gathered into the
Love of God. At last these Prisoners began to Rant, and Vapor, and Blaspheme;
at which my Soul was greatly grieved. They said, They were GOD: But another of
them said, We could not bear such Things. So, when they were calm, I stood up
and asked them, Whether they did such things by Motion, or from Scripture? and
they said; from Scripture. Then, a Bible lying by, I asked them for that
Scripture; and they showed me that Place, where the Sheet was let down to
Peter, and it was said to him, What was sanctified, he should not call Common
or Unclean. Now, when I had showed them, That that Scripture made nothing for
their purpose; they brought another Scripture, which spoke of God's Reconciling
all Things to himself, Things in Heaven, and Things in Earth. I told them, I
owned that Scripture also; but showed them, that that was nothing to their
purpose neither: Then seeing they said, They were GOD, I asked them, If they
knew, whether it would Rain to Morrow? They said, They could not tell. I told
them, God could tell. Again, I asked them; If they thought, they should be
always in that Condition, or should change? And they answered, They could not
tell. Then said I unto them, God can tell, and God does not change. You say,
you are God; and yet you cannot tell, whether you shall Change, or no. So they
were Confounded, and quite brought ^own for the time. Then after I had Reproved
them for their blasphemous Expressions, I went away: For I perceived, they were
Ranters; and I had met with none before: And I admired the Goodness of the Lord
in appearing so unto me, before I went amongst them. Not long after this, 1649.
Coventry.
one of these Ranters, whose Name was Joseph Salmon, put forth a Paper, or Book
of Recantation; upon which they were set at Liberty.

Atherstone.
From Coventry I went to a Place called Atherstone; and it being their
Lecture-day, I was moved to go to their Chapel to speak to the Priests and
People: And they were generally pretty quiet; Only some few raged, and would
have had my Relations to have bound me. I declared largely to them, how that
God was come to Teach his People himself, and to bring them off from all their
Man-made Teachers, to hear his Son: And some were Convinced there.

Market-Bossoth.
Then went I to a Place called Market-Bossoth, and there was a Lecture there
also. And he that preached there that day, was Nathaniel Stevens, who was
Priest of the Town, where I was born. And he raged much, when I spoke to him
and to the People; and told the People, I was Mad: (though he had said before to
one Colonel Purfoy, That there was never such a Plant bred in England;) and he
bid the People, they should not hear me. So the People, being stirred up by
this deceitful Priest, fell upon us, and stoned us out of the Town: Yet they
did not do us much hurt. Howbeit some People were made Loving that day; and
others were Confirmed, seeing the Rage of both Priests and Professors: And some
cried out, that the Priest durst not stand to prove his Ministry.

And as I traveled through Markets, Fairs and diverse Places, I saw Death and
Darkness in all People, where the Power of the Lord God had not shaken them.
Leichestershire. Twy-Cross.
And as I was passing on in Leichestershire, I came to a Place called
Twy-Cross, where there were Excise-Men; and I was moved of the Lord to go to
them, and warn them to take heed of Oppressing the Poor: And People were much
affected with it. Now there was in that Town a great Man, that had long lain
sick, and was given over by the Physicians; and some Friends in the Town
desired me to go to see him. And I went up to him in his Chamber, and spoke the
Word of Life to him, and was moved to Pray by him; and the Lord was entreated,
and Restored him to Health. But when I was come down the Stairs, into a lower
Room, and was speaking to the Servants, and to some People that were there; a
Serving-Man of his came Raving out of another Room, with a naked Rapier in his
Hand, and set it just to my side. But I looked steadfastly on him, and said;
Alack for thee, poor Creature! what will thou do with thy carnal Weapon? It is
no more to me, than a Straw. The Standers by were much troubled, and he went
away in a Rage, and full of Wrath: But when the News of it came to his Master,
he turned him out of his Service. Thus the Lord's Power preserved me, and
raised up the Weak Man; who afterward was very Loving to Friends: And when I
came to that Town again, both he and his Wife came to see me.

After this I was moved to go into Darbyshire, where the mighty Power of God
was among Friends. Darbyshire. Chesterfield.
And I went to Chesterfield, where one Britland was Priest. He was one, that
saw beyond the common sort of Priests; for he had been partly Convinced, and
had spoken much on behalf of Truth, before he was Priest there: But when the
Priest of that Town died, he got the Parsonage, and choked himself with it.
1649. Chesterfield.
So I was moved to speak to him and the People in the great Love of God, that
they might come off from all Men's Teaching unto God's Teaching; and he was not
able to gainsay. But they had me before the Major, and threatened to send me,
with some others, to the House of Correction; and kept us in Custody, till it
was late in the Night: And then the Officers, with the Watchmen, put us out of
the Town, leaving us to shift, as we could. So I bent my Course toward Darby,
having a Friend or two with me: And in our way we met with many Professors;
Kidsey-park.
and at Kidsey-Park many were Convinced.

Then coming to Darby, I lay at a Doctor's House, 1650. Darby.
whose Wife was Convinced; and so were several more in the Town. And as I was
walking in my Chamber, the Bell rung; and it struck at my Life at the very
hearing of it. So I asked the Woman of the House, What the Bell rung for? And
she said, There was to be a great Lecture there that day, and many of the
Officers of the Army, and Priests and Preachers were to be there that Day, and
a Colonel, that was a Preacher. Then was I moved of the Lord to go up to them:
And when they had done, I spoke to them, what the Lord Commanded me; and they
were pretty quiet. But there came an Officer, and took me by the Hand, and
said, I must go before the Magistrates; and the other Two that were with me. It
was about the First Hour Afternoon, that we came before them. They asked me,
Why we came thither? I said, God moved us so to do; and I told them, God dwells
not in Temples made with Hands. I told them also, All their Preaching, Baptism
and Sacrifices would never sanctify them; and bid them, Look unto Christ in
them, and not unto Men: For it is Christ, that sanctifies. Then they ran into
many Words; but I told them, They were not to Dispute of God and Christ, but to
Obey him. And the Power of God thundered amongst them, and they did fly like
Chaff before it. They put me in and out of the Room often, hurrying me backward
and forward often: For they were from the First Hour till the Ninth at Night in
Examining me. And sometimes they would tell me in a deriding manner, That I was
taken up in Raptures. At last they asked me, Whether I was Sanctified? I
answered, Yes; for I was in the Paradise of God. Then they asked me, If I had
no Sin? I answered; Christ my Savior has taken away my Sin; and in him there
is no Sin. They asked, How we knew, that Christ did abide in us? I said, by his
Spirit, that he has given us. They temptingly asked, If any of us were Christ?
I answered, NAY,
we were nothing; Christ was all. They said, If a Man steal, is it no Sin? I
answered; All Unrighteousness is Sin. So when they had wearied themselves in
Examining me, they Committed me and one other Man to the House of Correction in
Darby for six Months, as Blasphemers; as may appear by the Mittimus, a Copy
whereof here follows: To the Master of the House of Correction in Darby,
Greeting.
WE have sent you herewithal the Bodies of George Fox late of Mansfield in the
County of Nottingham, and John Fretwell, late of Staniesby in the County of
Darby Husbandman, brought before us this present Day, and charged with the
avowed uttering and broaching of diverse blasphemous Opinions, contrary to a
late Act of Parliament, which upon their Examination before us, they have
Confessed. These are therefore to require you, forthwith upon sight hereof, to
receive them, the said George Fox and John Fretwell into your Custody, and them
therein safely to keep during the space of Six Months, without Bail or
Mainprize, or until they shall find sufficient Security to he of the good
Behavior, or be thence delivered by Order from our Selves. Hereof you are not
to fail.

Given under our Hands and Seals this 30th Day of October, 1650. Ger. Bennet,
Nath. Barton.




Now did the Priests bestir themselves in their Pulpits to preach up Sin for
term of Life; and much of their Work was, to plead for it: So that People said,
Never was the like heard. Then after some time, he that was Committed with me,
not standing faithful in his Testimony, got in with the Jailer, and by him made
way to the Justice to have leave to go see his Mother; and so got his Liberty.
And then they reported, that he should say, I had bewitched and deceived him:
But my Spirit was strengthened, when he was gone. Now the Priests and
Professors, the Justices and the Jailer were all in a great Rage against me.
The Jailer watched my Words and Actions, and would often ask me Questions to
ensnare me; and sometimes he would ask me such silly Questions, as, Whether the
Door was latched, or not? Thinking, to draw some sudden, unadvised Answer from
me, from whence he might take Advantage to charge Sin upon me: But I was kept
watchful, and chaste, so that they could get no advantage of me; and they
admired at it.

Not long after my Commitment, I was moved to write both to the Priests and
Magistrates of Darby. And first I directed these following Lines to the Priests.

O Friends, I was sent unto you to tell you, That if you had received the
Gospel freely, 1650. Darby-Prison.
you would Minister it freely without Money or Price: But you make a Trade and
Sale, of what the Prophets and the Apostles have spoken; and so you corrupt the
Truth. And you are the Men, that lead silly Women Captive, who are ever
learning, and never able to come to the knowledge of the Truth: you have a Form
of Godliness; but you deny the Power. Now as Jannes and Jambres withstood
Moses, so do you resist the Truth; being Men of corrupt Minds, reprobate
concerning the Faith. But you shall proceed no further; for your Folly shall be
made manifest to all Men, as theirs was. More-over the Lord sent me to tell
you, that he does look for Fruits. You asked me, if the Scripture was my Rule?
but it is not your Rule, to rule your Lives by; but to talk of in Words. You
are the Men, that live in Pleasures, Pride and Wantonness, in Fullness of Bread
and abundance of Idleness: See if this be not the Sin of Sodom. Lot received
the Angels: but Sodom was envious. You show forth the vain Nature: You stand in
the Steps of them, that crucified MY SAVIOVR, and mocked him: You are their
Children; you show forth their Fruit. They had the Chief Place in the
Assemblies; and so have you: They loved to be called Rabbi; and so do you.

G. F.


That which I writ to the Magistrates, who committed me to Prison, was to this
effect: Friends,
I Am forced, in tender Love unto your Souls, to write unto you, and to beseech
you to Consider, what you do, and what the Commands of God call for. He does
require Justice and Mercy, to break every Yoke, and to let the Oppressed go
free. But who calls for Justice? or loves Mercy? or contendeth for the
Truth? Is not Judgment turned backward? and does not Justice stand afar off? Is
not Truth silenced in the Streets? or can Equity enter? And do not they that
depart from Evil, make themselves a Prey? Oh! Consider what ye do, in Time, and
take heed, whom ye do Imprison: For the Magistrate is set for the Punishment of
Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well. Now, I entreat you, in
Time take heed, what you do: For surely, the Lord will come, and will make
manifest both the Builders and the Work: And if it be of Man, it will fail; but
if it be of God, nothing will overthrow it. Therefore I desire and pray, that
you would take heed, and beware what you do; lest ye be found Fighters against
God.

G. F.




Now, after I had thus far cleared my Conscience to them, I waited in the holy
Patience; leaving the Event to God, in whose Will I stood. And after some Time
I was moved to write again to the Justices, that had Committed me to Prison, to
lay their Evils before them, that they might Repent. One of them, that signed
the Mittimus, to wit, Nathaniel Barton, was both a Colonel, a Justice and a
Preacher: So I writ to them, as follows; Friends,
YOU did speak of the Good old Way, which the Prophet spoke of; but the Prophet
cried against the Abominations, which you hold up. Had you the Power of God, ye
would not persecute the Good Way. He that spoke of the Good Way, was set in the
Stocks: The People Cried, Away with him to the Stocks, for speaking the Truth.
Ah! foolish People, which have Eyes and see not, Ears and hear not, without
Understanding! Fear ye not me, says the Lord, and will ye not tremble at my
Presence! O your Pride and Abominations are odious in the Eyes of God! You
(that are Preachers) have the chiefest Place in the Assemblies, and are called
of Men Master; and such were and are against my Savior and Maker: And they
shut up the Kingdom of Heaven from Men, neither go in themselves, nor suffer
others. Therefore ye shall receive the greater Damnation, who have their
Places, and walk in their Steps. You may say, If you had been in the Days of
the Prophets, or Christ, ye would not have persecuted them: Wherefore be ye
Witnesses against your selves, that ye are the Children of them, seeing, ye now
persecute the way of Truth. O consider, There is a true Judge, that will give
every one of you a Reward according to your Works. O mind where you are, you
that hold up the Abominations, which the true Prophet cried against! O come
down, and sit in the Dust! The Lord is coming with Power; and lie will throw
down every one that is Exalted, that he alone may be Exalted.




And as I had thus written unto them jointly; so after some respite of Time, I
writ to each of them by himself. To Justice Bennet thus: Friend,
THou that do profess God and Christ in Words, see how thou do follow him.
To take off Burdens, and to visit them that be in Prison, and show Mercy, and
cloth thy own Flesh, and deal thy Bread to the Hungry; these are God's
Commandments: To relieve the Fatherless, and to visit the Widows in their
Afflictions, and to keep thy self unspotted of the World; this is pure Religion
before God. But if thou do profess Christ, and followest Covetousness, and
Greediness, and Earthly-mindedness, thou deniest him in Life, and deceivest thy
self and others, and take him for a Cloak: Woe be to you Greedy Men, and Rich
Men; weep and houl for your Misery, that shall come. Take heed of Covetousness
and Extortion: God does forbid that. Woe be to the Man, that Coveteth an Evil
Covetousness, that he may set his Nest on high, and cover himself with thick
Clay. O do not love that, which God does forbid: His Servant thou art, whom
thou do obey, whether it be of Sin unto Death, or of Obedience unto
Righteousness. Think upon Lazarus and Dives: the one fared sumptuously every
Day; the other was a Beggar. See, if thou be not Dives? Be not deceived; God is
not mocked with vain Words: Evil Communication corrupts good Manners. Awake
to Righteousness, and sin not.

G. F.




That to Justice Barton was in these Words: Friend,
THou that preachest Christ, and the Scriptures in Words, when any come to
follow that, which thou have spoken of, and to live the Life of the Scriptures,
then they, that speak the Scriptures, but do not lead their Lives according
thereunto, persecute them that do. Mind the Prophets, and Jesus Christ, and his
Apostles, and all the Holy Men of God; what they spoke, was from the Life: But
they that had not the Life, but the Words, Persecuted and Imprisoned them that
lived in the Life, which they had back-slidden from.

G. F.




Now, as I had written to the Justices and to the Priests, so it was upon me to
write to the Major of Darby also; who (though he did not sign the Mittimus) had
a Hand with the rest in sending me to Prison. And to him I writ after this
manner: Friend,
THou art set in Place to do Justice; but in Imprisoning my Body, thou have
done contrary to Justice, according to your own Law. O take heed of pleasing
Men more, than God, for that is the way of the Scribes and Pharisees: They
sought the Praise of Men more than God. Remember who said, I was a Stranger,
and ye took me not in; I was in Prison, and ye visited me not. O Friend, thy
Envy is not against me, but against the Power of Truth: I had no Envy to you;
but Love: O take heed of Oppression; for The Day of the Lord is coming, that
shall burn as an Oven; and all the Proud, and all that do wickedly, shall be as
Stubble; and the Day that comes, shall burn them up, says the Lord of Hosts;
It shall leave them neither Root nor Branch. O Friend, if the Love of God were
in thee, thou would love the Truth, and hear the Truth spoken; and not
Imprison unjustly: The Love of God bears, and suffers, and envieth no Man.
If the Love of God had broken your Hearts, you would show Mercy; but you do
show forth, what rules you. Every Tree does show forth its Fruit: you do show
forth your Fruits openly. For Drunkenness, Swearing, Pride and Vanity rule
among you, from the Teacher to the People. O Friend, Mercy, and true Judgment,
and Justice are Cried for in your Streets! Oppression, Unmercifulness, Cruelty,
Hatred, Pride, Pleasures, Wantonness and Fullness is in your Streets; but the
Poor is not regarded. O take heed of the Woe: Woe be to the Crown of Pride! Woe be
to them that drink Wine in Bowls, and the Poor is ready to perish. O remember
Lazarus and Dives. One fared deliciously every Day; and the other was a Beggar.
O Friend, Mind these Things, for they are near; and see, whether thou be not
the Man, that is in Dives his State.




I writ also to the Court at Darby thus:

I Am moved to write unto you, to take heed of Oppressing the Poor in your
Courts, or laying Burdens upon poor People, which they cannot bear: And of
false Oaths, or making them to take Oaths which they cannot perform. The Lord
says, I will come near to Judgment, and will be a swift Witness against the
Sorcerers, against the false Swearers, and against the Idolaters, and against
those that do oppress Widows and Fatherless: Therefore take heed of all these
things betimes. The Lord's Judgments are all true and righteous, and he
delights in Mercy: So love Mercy, Dear People, and Consider in Time.

Likewise to the Ringers, who used to Ring the Bells in the Steeple-house,
called S. Peter's in Darby, I sent these few Lines: Friends,
TAke heed of Pleasures, and prize your Time now, while you have it; and do not
spend it in Pleasures, nor Earthliness. The Time may come, that you will say,
You had Time, when it is past. Therefore look at the Love of God now, while you
have Time; for it brings to loath all Vanities and worldly Pleasures. O
Consider! Time is precious: Fear God and rejoice in him, who has made Heaven
and Earth.




Now, while I was there in Prison, diverse of the Professors came unto me to
discourse with me: And I had a Sense, before they spoke, that they came to
plead for Sin and Imperfection. And I asked them; Whether they were Believers,
and had Faith? and they said, Yes. Then I asked them, In whom? and they said,
In Christ. Then I replied; If ye are true Believers in Christ, you are passed
from Death to Life; and if passed from Death, then from Sin, that brings
Death: And if your Faith be true, it will give you Victory over Sin and the
Devil, and purify your Hearts and Consciences (for the true Faith is held in a
pure Conscience) and it will bring you to please God, and give you Access to
him again. But they could not endure to hear of Purity, and of Victory over Sin
and the Devil: For they said, They could not believe, that any could be free
from Sin on this Side the Grave. Then I bid them, give over babbling about the
Scriptures, which were Holy Men's Words; whilst they pleaded for Unholiness. And
at another Time another Company of Professors came; and they also began to
plead for Sin. And I asked them, Whether they had Hope? And they said, Yes: God
forbid, but we should have Hope. Then I asked them, What Hope is it that you
have? Is Christ in you the Hope of your Glory? Does it purify you, as he is
Pure? But they could not abide to hear of being made pure here. Then I bid
them, forbear talking of the Scriptures, which were the Holy Men's Words: For
the Holy Men, that writ the Scriptures, pleaded for Holiness in Heart, Life and
Conversation here; but since you plead for Impurity and Sin, which is of the
Devil, what have you to do with the Holy Men's Words?

Now the Keeper of the Prison, being an high Professor, was greatly enraged
against me; and spoke very wickedly of me: But it pleased the Lord one Day to
strike him so, that he was in great Trouble, and under great Terrors of Mind.
And as I was walking in my Chamber, I heard a doleful Noise; and standing
still, I heard him say to his Wife: Wife, I have seen the Day of Judgment, and
I saw GEORGE there, and I was afraid of him; because I had done him so much
wrong, and spoken so much against him to the Ministers and Professors, and to
the Justices, and in Taverns and Alehouses. After this, toward the Evening, he
came up into my Chamber, and said to me; I have been as a Lion against you: But
now I come like a Lamb, and like the Jailer, that came to Paul and Silas
trembling. And he desired, that he might lie with me: I told him, that I was in
his Power; he might do, what he would: But he said, Nay, he would have my
Leave; and he could desire to be always with me, but not to have me as a
Prisoner. And he said, He had been plagued, and his House had been plagued for
my sake. So I suffered him to lie with me; and then he told me all his Heart,
and said, He believed, what I had said of the true Faith and Hope, to be true:
And he wondered, that the other Man, that was put into Prison with me, did not
stand to it; and said, That Man was not right, but I was an honest Man. He
confessed also to me; that at those Times, when I had asked him to let me go
forth, to speak the Word of the Lord to the People, and he had refused to let
me go, and I had laid the weight thereof upon him, that then he used to be
under great Trouble, amazed and almost distracted for some time after; and in
such a Condition, that he had little Strength left him. When the Morning came,
he arose, and soon after went to the Justices, and told them; That he and his
House had been plagued for my sake: and one of the Justices replied (as he
reported to me) that the Plagues were on them too, for keeping me. This was
Justice Bennet of Darby, who was the first that called us Quakers, because I
bid them, Tremble at the Word of the Lord. And this was in the Year 1650.

After this the Justices gave leave, That I should have Liberty to walk a Mile.
I perceived their End; and I told the Jailer, If they would set down to me, how
far a Mile was, I might take the liberty of walking it sometimes: For I had a
Sense, they thought, I would go away. And the Jailer Confessed afterward, that
they did it with that Intent, to have me go away, to ease them of their Plague:
But I told him, I was not of that Spirit.

This Jailer had a Sister, who was a sickly young Woman; and she came up into
my Cham^er to Visit me; and after she had stayed some time, and I had spoken
the Words of Truth to her, she went down, and told them; That we were an
Innocent People, and did none any hurt, but did good to all, even to them that
hated us: And she desired them to be Tender toward me.

Now forasmuch as, by reason of my Restraint, I had not the Opportunity of
Traveling about, to declare and spread Truth through the Countries; it came
upon me to Write a Paper, and send it forth to be spread abroad both amongst
Friends, and other tender People, for the Opening of their Understandings in
the Way of Truth, and directing them to the true Teacher in themselves. And it
was as follows: THE Lord does show unto Man his Thoughts, and discovers all
the secret Workings in Man. A Man may be brought to see his evil Thoughts, and
running Mind, and vain Imaginations, and may strive to keep them down, and to
keep his Mind in; but cannot Overcome them, nor keep his Mind within to the
Lord. Now, in this State and Condition submit to the Spirit of the Lord, that
shows them, and that will bring to Wait upon the Lord; and he that has
discovered them, will destroy them. Therefore stand in the Faith) of the Lord
Jesus Christ (who is the Author of the true Faith) and mind him; for he will
discover the Root of Lusts, and evil Thoughts, and vain Imaginations, and how
they are begotten, conceived and bred; and then how they are brought forth, and
how every evil Member does work. He will discover every Principle from its own
Nature and Root.

So mind the Faith of Christ, and the Anointing, which is in you, to be taught
by it, which will discover all Workings in you: And as he teaches you, so obey
and forsake; else you will not grow up in the Faith, nor in the Life of Christ,
where the Love of God is received. Now Love begets Love, its own Nature and
Image: And when Mercy and Truth do meet, what Joy there is! And Mercy does
Triumph in Judgment: And Love and Mercy does bear the Judgment of the World in
patience. That which cannot bear the World's Judgment, is not the Love of God;
for Love bears all things, and is above the World's Judgment; for the World's
Judgment is but Foolishness. And though it be the World's Judgment and
Practice, to cast all the World's Filthiness, that is among themselves, upon
the Saints; yet their Judgment is false. Now the Chaste Virgins follow Christ,
the Lamb, that takes away the Sins of the World: But they that are of that
Spirit, which is not Chaste, will not follow Christ the Lamb in his Steps; but
are disobedient to him in his Commands. So the fleshly Mind does mind the
Flesh, and talks fleshly, and its Knowledge is fleshly, and not spiritual;
but savours of Death, and not of the Spirit of Life. Now some Men have the
Nature of Swine, wallowing in the Mire: And some Men have the Nature of Dogs,
to bite both the Sheep and one another: And some Men have the Nature of Lions,
to tear, devour and destroy: And some Men have the Nature of Wolves, to tear
and devour the Lambs and Sheep of Christ: And some Men have the Nature of the
Serpent (that old Adversary) to sting, envenom and poison: He that has an Ear
to hear, let him hear, and learn these things within himself. And some Men have
the Natures of other Beasts and Creatures, minding nothing, but earthly and
visible things, and feeding without the fear of God. Some Men have the Nature
of an Horse, to praunce and vapor in their Strength, and to be swift in doing
Evil. And some Men have the Nature of Tall sturdy Oaks, to slourish and spread
in Wisdom and Strength; who are strong in Evil, which must perish, and come to
the Fire. Thus the Evil is but one in all, but works many Ways; and
whatsoever a Man's or Woman's Nature is addicted to, that is Outward, the Evil
one will fit him with that, and will please his Nature and Appe^ite, to keep
his Mind in his Inventions, and in the Creatures from the Creator. O therefore
let not the Mind go forth from God; (...) it do, it will be stained, and
venomed and corrupted: And if the Mind go forth from the Lord, it is hard to
bring it in again. Therefore take heed of the Enemy, and keep in the Faith of
Christ. O! therefore mind that which is Eternal and Invisible, and him who is
the Creator and Mover of all things: For the things that are made, are not made
of things that do appear; for the visible covers the invisible Sight in you.
But as the Lord, who is Invisible, does open you by his Invisible Power and
Spirit, and brings down the carnal Mind in you; so the Invisible and Immortal
things are brought to Light in you. O therefore you, that know the Light, walk
in the Light! For there are Children of Darkness, that will talk or the Light,
and of the Truth, and not walk in it; but the Children of the Light love the
Light, and walk in the Light. But the Children of Darkness walk in Darkness,
and hate the Light; and in them the earthly Lusts, and the carnal Mind choke
the Seed of Faith, and that brings Oppression on the Seed, and Death over
them. O therefore mind the pure Spirit of the Everlasting God, which will reach
you to use the Creatures in their right place; and which judges the Evil. To
thee, O God, be all Glory and Honor, who art Lord of all Visibles and
Invisibles! To thee be all Praise, who bring out of the Deep to thy Self; O
powerful God, who art worthy of all Glory! For the Lord, who created all, and
gives Life and Strength to all, is over all, and Merciful to all. So thou, who
have made all, and art over all, to thee be all Glory! In thee is my Strength,
Refreshments and Life, my Joy and my Gladness, my Rejoicing and Glorying for
evermore! So to live and walk in the Spirit of God, is Joy, and Peace, and
Life; but the Mind going forth into the Creatures, or into any Visible Things
from the Lord, this brings Death. Now when the Mind is got into the Flesh,
and into Death, then the Accuser gets within, and the Law of Sin and Death,
that gets into the Flesh; and then the Life suffers under the Law of Sin and
Death: And then there is straitness and failings. For then the Good is shut up,
and then the Self-Righteousness is set a top; and then Man does work in the
outward Law, and he cannot Justify himself by the Law; but is Condemned by the
Light: For he cannot get out of that State, but by abiding in the Light, and
resting in the Mercy of God, and believing in him, from whom all Mercy does
flow: For there is Peace in resting in the Lord Jesus. This is the Narrow Way,
that leads to him, the Life; but few will abide in it: Therefore keep in the
Innocence, and be obedient to the Faith in him. And take heed of Conforming to
the World, and of Reasoning with Flesh and Blood, for that brings
Disobedience; and then Imaginations and Questionings do arise, to draw from
Obedience to the Truth of Christ. But the Obedience of Faith destroys
Imaginations, and Questionings, and Reasonings, and all the Temptations in the
Flesh, and Buffetings, and lookings forth, and fetching up things that are
past. But not keeping in the Life and Light, and not crossing the Corrupt Will
by the Power of God, the Evil Nature grows up in Man; and then Burdens will
come, and Man will be stained with that Nature. But Esau's Mountain shall be
laid waste, and become a Wilderness, where the Dragons lie: But Jacob, the
second Birth, shall be fruitful, and shall arise. For Esau is hated, and must
not be Lord: but Jacob, the second Birth, which is perfect and plain, shall be
Lord; for he is beloved of God.

G. F.



I writ another Paper also, much about the same time, and sent it forth amongst
the Convinced People, as follows: THE LORD is KING over all the Earth!
Therefore all People, praise and glorify your King in the true Obedience, in
the Uprightness, and in the beauty of Holiness. O Consider, in the true
Obedience the Lord is known, and an Understanding from him is received. Mark
and consider in silence, in the Lowliness of Mind, and thou will hear the Lord
speak unto thee in thy Mind: His Voice is sweet and pleasant; His Sheep hear
his Voice, and they will not hearken to another: And when they hear his Voice,
they Rejoice, and are Obedient; they also sing for Joy. Oh, their Hearts are
filled with everlasting Triumph! They sing, and praise the Eternal God in Sion:
their Joy shall never Man take from them. Glory to the Lord God for Evermore!



But many, that had been Convinced of the Truth, turned aside, because of the
Persecution that arose: Whereupon I writ a few Lines for the Comfort and
Encouragement of the Faithful, thus:

COme ye Blessed of the Lord, and Rejoice together! Keep in Unity and Oneness
of Spirit; Triumph above the World! Be joyful in the Lord; reigning above the
World, and above all things that draw from the Lord: that in Clearness,
Righteousness, Pureness and Joy, you may be preserved to the Lord. O hear, O
hearken to the Call of the Lord, and come out of the World, and keep out of it
for evermore! And come, Sing together, ye Righteous Ones, the Song of the Lord,
the Song of the Lamb; which none can learn, but they, who are Redeemed from the
Earth, and from the World.

Now while I was in the House of Correction, my Relations came to see me; and
being troubled for my Imprisonment, they went to the Justices, that cast me
into Prison, and desired to have me home with them; offering to be bound in One
hundred Pounds, and others of Darby in fifty Pounds a piece with them, that I
should come no more thither to declare against the Priests. So I was had up
before the Justices; and because I would not consent, that they, or any should
be bound for me (for I was Innocent from any Ill Behavior, and had spoken the
Word of Life and Truth unto them) Justice Bennet rose up in a rage: and as I
was kneeling down to Pray to the Lord to forgive him, he ran upon me, and
struck me with both his Hands, Crying; Away with him Jailer: Take him away
Jailer. Whereupon I was had back again to Prison, and there kept, until the
time of my Commitment for Six Months was Expired. But I had now the Liberty of
walking a Mile by my self; which I made use of, as I felt freedom. And
sometimes I went into the Market, and Streets, and warned the People to Repent
of their Wickedness; and so returned to Prison again. And there being Persons
of several sorts of Religion in the Prison, I sometimes went, and visited them
in their Meetings on the First-days.

After I had been before the Justices, and they had required Sureties for my
good Behavior (which I could not Consent should be given, to blemish my
Innocence) It came upon me to write to the Justices again; which I did as
follows: Friends,
SEE what it is in you, that does Imprison; and see, who is Head in you: and
see, if something do not Accuse you? Consider, you must be brought to Judgment.
Think upon Lazarus and Dives: the one fared sumptuously every day; the other a
Beggar: And now you have time, prize it, while you have it. Would you have me
to be bound to my Good Behavior? I am bound to my Good Behavior; And do Cry
for Good Behavior of all People, to turn from the Vanities, Pleasures and
Oppression, and from the Deceits of this World: And there will come a time,
that you shall know it. Therefore take heed of Pleasures, and Deceits, and
Pride; and look not at Man, but at the Lord: for Look unto me, all ye Ends of
the Earth, and be ye saved, says the Lord.




Some little time after, I writ to them again, thus:

Friends,
WOuld you have me to be bound to my Good Behavior from Drunkenness, or
Swearing, or Fighting, or Adultery, and the like? The Lord has Redeemed me
from all these things; and the Love of God has brought me to loath all
Wantonness, blessed be his Name. They who are Drunkards, and Fighters, and
Swearers, have their Liberty without Bonds: And you lay your Law upon me, whom
neither you, nor any other can justly accuse of these things; praised be the
Lord! I can look at no Man for my Liberty, but at the Lord alone; who has all
Men's Hearts in his Hand.


And after some time, not finding my Spirit clear of them, I writ to them
again, as follows: Friends,
HAD you known, who sent me to you, ye would have received me: for the Lord
sent me to you, to warn you of the Woes, that are coming upon you; and to bid
you, Look at the Lord, and not at Man. But when I had told you my Experience,
what the Lord had done for me, then your Hearts were hardened, and you sent me
to Prison; where you have kept me many Weeks. If the Love of God had broke your
Hearts, then would ye see, what ye have done: Ye would not have Imprisoned me,
had not my Father suffered you; and by his Power I shall be loosed: For he
opens and shuts; to him be all Glory! In what have I misbehaved my self,
that any should be bound for me? All Men's Words will do me no good, nor their
Bonds neither, to keep my Heart, if I have not a Guide within, to keep me in
the upright Life to God. But I believe in the Lord, that through his Strength
and Power I shall be preserved from Ungodliness and worldly Lusts. The
Scripture says, Receive Strangers; but you Imprison such. As you are in
Authority, take heed of Oppression and Oaths, and Injustice and Gifts, or
Rewards; for God does loath all such. But love Mercy, and true Judgment and
Justice; for that the Lord del^ghts in. I do not write with Hatred to you; but
to keep my Conscience Clear: Take heed, how you spend your time.




I was moved also to write again to the Priests of Darby; which I did after
this manner: Friends,
YOU do profess to be the Ministers of Jesus Christ in Words, but you show
forth by your Fruits, what your Ministry is. Every Tree does show forth its
Fruit: The Ministry of Jesus Christ is in Mercy and Love, to unloose them that
be bound, and to bring out of Bondage, and to let them that are Captivated, go
free. Now Friends, where is your Example (if the Scriptures be your Rule) to
Imprison for Religion? Have you any Command for it from Christ? If that were in
you, which you do profess, you would walk in their Steps, who spoke forth those
Words, the Scriptures, which you do profess. But he is not a Jew, who is one
outward, whose Praise is of Men; but he is a Jew, who is one inward, whose
Praise is of God. But if you do build upon the Prophets and Apostles in Words,
and pervert their Life, remember the Woes, which Jesus Christ spoke against
such. They that spoke the Prophets words, but denied Christ, they professed a
Christ to come; but had they known him, they would not have Crucified him. The
Saints, whom the Love of God did Change, were brought thereby to walk in Love
and Mercy; for he that dwells in Love, dwells in God. But where Envy, Pride
and Hatred does rule, the nature of the World does rule, and not the nature of
Jesus Christ. I write with no hatred to you; but that you may weigh your
selves, and see, how you pass on your Time.




Thus having cleared my Conscience to the Priests, it was not long, before a
Concern came upon me again, to write again to the Justices, which I did as
follows:

I am moved to Warn you to take heed of giving way to your own Wills. Love the
Cross, and satisfy not your own Minds in the Flesh; but prize your Time, while
you have it, and walk up to that you know, in Obedience to God: and then you
shall not be Condemned for that you know not; but for that you do know, and do
not obey. Consider betimes, and weigh your selves, and see where you are, and
whom you serve. For if ye blaspheme God, and take his Name in vain; if ye Swear
and Lie; if ye give way to Envy, Hatred, Covetousness and Greediness, Pleasures
and Wantonness, or any other Vices, be assured then, that ye do serve the
Devil: But if ye fear the Lord, and serve him, ye will loath all these things.
He that loves God, will not blaspheme his Name: but where there is Opposing of
God, and serving the Devil, that Profession is sad and miserable O prize your
Time, and do not love that which God does forbid; Lying, Wrath, Malice, Envy,
Hatred, Greediness, Covetousness, Oppression, Gluttony, Drunkenness, Whoredom
and all Unrighteousness God does forbid. So Consider, and be not deceived; Evil
Communication corrupts good Manners. Be not deceived, God will not be mocked
with vain Words: The Wrath of God is Revealed from Heaven against all
Ungodliness. Therefore Obey that which does Convince you of all Evil, and
tells you, that you should do no Evil: It will lead to Repentance, and keep
you in the Fear of the Lord. O look at the Mercies of God, and prize them; and
do not turn them into Wantonness. O Eye the Lord, and not earthly things!

Besides this, I writ the following to Colonel Barton, who was both a Justice,
and a Preacher, as was hinted before.

Friend,
DO not Cloak and Cover thy self; there is a God, who knows thy Heart, and
will Uncover thee: He sees thy Way. Woe be to him, that Covers, and not with
my Spirit, says the Lord. Do thou do contrary to the Law, and then put it
from thee? Mercy and true Judgment thou neglectest: look what was spoken
against such. My Savior said to such, I was Sick and in Prison, and ye visited
me not; I was hungry, and ye fed me not; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not
in. And when they said, When saw we thee in Prison, and did not come to thee,
etc. He replied; Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of these little ones, ye did
it not to me. Friend, thou have Imprisoned me for bearing Witness to the Life
and Power or Truth; and yet professest to be a Minister of Christ: But if
Christ had sent thee, thou would bring out of Prison, and out of Bondage,
and would receive Strangers. Thou have been wanton upon Earth, thou have
lived plenteously, and nourished thy Heart, as in a Day of Slaughter: thou have
killed the Just. O look, where thou art, and how thou have spent thy Time! O
remember thy self, and now, while thou have Time, prize it; and do not slight
the free Mercy of God, and despise the long-suffering of God, which is great
Salvation: But mind that in thee, which does Convince thee, and would not let
thee Swear, nor Lie, nor take God's Name in vain. Thou know, thou should
do none of these Things; Thou have learned, that which will Condemn thee:
Therefore obey the Light, which does Convince thee, and forsake thy Sins, and
look at the Mercies of God; and prize his Love in sparing thee, till now. The
Lord says, Look unto me, all ye Ends of the Earth, and be ye saved; and, Cease
from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils. And Friend, prize thy Time, and see
whom thou servest: For his Servant thou art, whom thou do obey, whether of
Sin unto Death, or Obedience unto Righteousness. If thou servest God, and
fear him, thou will not blaspheme his Name, nor Curse, nor Swear, nor take
his Name in vain, nor follow Pleasures and Wantonness, Whoredom and
Drunkenness, or Wrath, or Malice, or Revenge, or Rashness, or Headiness, Pride
or Gluttony, Greediness, Oppression or Covetousness, or foolish Jesting, or
vain Songs; God does forbid these things, and all Unrighteousness. If thou
professest God; and actest any of these Things, thou take him for a Cloak,
and servest the Devil. Consider with thy self, and do not love that which God
does hate. He that loves God, keeps his Commandments. The Devil will tell
thee, It is an hard thing, to keep God's Commandments: but it is an easy
thing, to keep the Devil's Commandments, and to live in all Unrighteousness and
Ungodliness, turning the Grace of God into Wantonness. But let the Unrighteous
Man forsake his Ways, and turn unto me, says the Lord, and I will have Mercy:
Turn ye, why will ye die? says the Lord.

Howl, ye Great Ones, for the Plagues are pouring out upon you! Howl, ye
Oppressors, for Recompense and Vengeance is coming upon you! Woe unto them, that
Covetously Join one House to another; and bring one Field so nigh unto another,
that the Poor can get no more Ground, and that ye may dwell upon the Earth
alone: These things are in the Ears of the Lord of Hosts. Woe unto him that
Covetously gets evil-gotten Goods into his House, that he may set his Nest
on high, to escape from the Power of Evil.


While I was yet in the House of Correction, there came unto me a Trooper, and
said; As he was sitting in the Steeple-house, hearing the Priest, exceeding
great Trouble came upon him; and the Voice of the Lord came to him saying; Do
thou not know,
that my Servant is in Prison? Go to him for direction. So I spoke to his
Condition, and his Understanding was opened. And I told him; That which showed
him his Sins, and troubled him for them, would show him his Salvation: For he
that shows a Man his Sin, is the same, that takes it away. Now, while I was
speaking to him, the Lord's Power opened him, so that he began to have a good
Understanding in the Lord's Truth, and to be sensible of God's Mercies; and
began to speak boldly in his Quarters amongst the Soldiers, and to others,
concerning Truth (for the Scriptures were very much opened to him) insomuch
that he said; His Colonel was as Blind as Nebuchadnezar, to cast the Servant of
the Lord into Prison. Upon this his Colonel had a Spite at him; and at
Worcester-Fight, the Year after, when, the Two Armies lying near one another,
Two came out from the King's Army, and challenged any Two of the
Parliament-Army to fight with them; his Colonel made Choice of him and another,
to Answer the Challenge. And when in the Encounter his Companion was slain, he
drove both his Enemies within Musket Shot of the Town, without firing a Pistol
at them: This, when he returned, he told me with his own Mouth. But when the
Fight was over, he saw the Deceit and Hypocrisy of the Officers: And being
sensible, how wonderfully the Lord had preserved him, and seeing also to the
End of Fighting, he laid down his Arms.

Now the Time of my Commitment to the House of Correction being very neat out,
and there being many new Soldiers Raised, the Commissioners would have made me
Captain over them: And the Soldiers cried, They would have none but me. So the
Keeper of the House of Correction was Commanded to bring me up before the
Commissioners and Soldiers, in the Marketplace; and there they proffered me
that Preferment (as they called it) asking me, If I would not take up Arms for
the Commonwealth against Charles Steward? I told them, I knew, from whence all
Wars did arise, even from the Lust, according to James his Doctrine: and that I
lived in the Virtue of that Life and Power, that took away the Occasion of all
Wars. But they courted me to accept of their Offer, and thought, I did but
Complement with them. But I told them, I was come into the Covenant of Peace,
which was before Wars and Strifes were. They said, They offered it in Love and
Kindness to me, because of my Virtue; and such like flattering Words they used.
But I told them, If that was their Love and Kindness, I trampled it under my
Feet. Then their Rage got up, and they said; Take him away Jailer, and put him
into the Dungeon amongst the Rogues and Fellons. Darby-Dungeon.
So I was had away and put into a lousy, stinking Place, without any Bed,
amongst thirty Fellons; where I was kept almost half a Year, unless it were at
Times: For they would sometime let me walk in the Garden, having a Belief of
me, that I would not go away. Now, when they had gotten me into Darby-Dungeon,
it was the Belief and saying of People, that I should never come out: But I had
Faith in God, and believed, I should be delivered in his Time: For the Lord had
said to me before, That I was not to be removed from that Place yet, being set
there for a Service, which he had for me to do.

After it was bruited abroad, That I was in Darby-Dungeon, my Relations came to
see me again; and they were much troubled, that I should be in Prison: For they
looked upon it, to be a great shame to them, for me to lie in Jail. It was a
strange thing then, to be Imprisoned for Religion: And some thought, I was Mad,
because I stood for Purity, and Righteousness, and Perfection.

Among others that came to see me, and discourse with me, there came a certain
Person from Nottingham, a Soldier, and that had been a Baptist (as I
understood) and with him came several others. And in Discourse this Person said
to me, Your Faith stands in a Man, that died at Jerusalem, and there was never
any such thing. I was exceedingly grieved, to hear him say so; and I said to
him: How! Did nor Christ suffer without the Gates of Jerusalem through the
Professing Jews, and Chief Priests, and Pilate? And he denied, that ever Christ
suffered there outwardly. Then I asked him, Whether there were not Chief
Priests, and Jews, and Pilat there outwardly? And when he could not deny that,
then I told him: As certainly as there was a Chief Priest, and Jews, and Pilat
there outwardly; so certainly was Christ persecuted by them, and did suffer
there outwardly under them. Yet from this Man's Words was a Slander raised upon
us, That the Quakers should deny Christ, that suffered and died at Jerusalem:
Which was all utterly false; and the least Thought of it never entered our
Hearts; but it was a mere Slander cast upon us, and occasioned by this Person's
Words. The same Person also said; That never any of the Prophets, nor Apostles,
nor Holy Men of God suffered any thing Outwardly; but all their DunSufferings
were Inward. 1651. Darby-Dungeon.
But I instanced to him many of the Prophets and Apostles, how they suffered,
and by whom they suffered: And so was the Power of the Lord brought over his
wicked Imaginations and Whimsies.

There came also another Company to me, that pretended, They were Triers of
Spirits: And I asked them; What was the first Step to Peace? And what it was,
by which a Man might see his Salvation? And they were presently up in the airy
Mind, and said, I was Mad. Thus they came to Try Spirits, who did not know
themselves, nor their own Spirits.

In this Time of my Imprisonment, I was exceedingly exercised about the
Proceedings of the Judges and Magistrates in their Courts of Judicature. And I
was moved to write to the Judges, concerning their putting Men to Death for
Cattle, and Money, and small Matters; and to show them, how Contrary it was to
the Law of God in old Time: for I was under great Suffering in my Spirit
because of it, and under the very Sense of Death; but standing in the Will of
God, an heavenly Breathing arose in my Soul to the Lord. Then did I see the
Heavens opened, and I rejoiced, and gave Glory to God. So I writ to the Judges,
as follows:

I Am moved to write unto you to take heed, of putting Men to Death for
stealing Cattle, or Money, etc. for the Thieves in the old Time were to make
Restitution; and if they had not wherewith, they were to be sold for their
Theft. Mind the Laws of God in the Scriptures, and the Spirit that gave them
forth; and let them be your Rule in executing Judgment: And show Mercy, that
you may receive Mercy from God, the Judge of all. And take heed of Gifts and
Rewards, and of Pride; for God does forbid them, and they do blind the Eyes of
the Wise. I do not write to give liberty to Sin; God has forbidden it: But
that you should Judge according to his Laws, and show Mercy: For he delights
in true Judgment, and in Mercy. I beseech you to mind these Things, and prize
your Time, now you have it; and Fear God, and Serve him: for he is a Consuming
Fire.

Besides this, I writ another Letter to the JUDGES, to this effect:

I Am moved to write unto you, That ye do true Justice to every Man, and see,
that none be Oppressed, nor Wronged; nor no Oaths Imposed: for the Land
mourns because of Oaths, and Adulteries, and Sorceries, and Drunkenness, and
Profaneness. O Consider, ye that be Men set in Authority: Be moderate, and in
Lowliness Consider these things. Show Mercy to the Fatherless, and to the
Wido^s, and to the Poor: And take heed of Rewards or Gifts; for they do blind
the Eyes of the Wise: The Lord does loath all such. Love Mercy and true
Judgment, Justice and Righteousness; for the Lord delights in such. Consider
these Things in Time, and take heed, how ye do spend your Time. Now ye have
Time, prize it; and show Mercy, that ye may receive Mercy from the Lord: For he
is coming to Try all Things, and will plead with all Flesh, as by Fire.

Moreover, I laid before the Judges, what an hurtful thing it was, that
Prisoners should lie so long in Jail; showing, how that they learned Badness
one of another, in talking of their bad Deeds: and therefore speedy Justice
should be done. For I was a tender Youth, and dwelt in the Fear of God; and I
was grieved to hear their bad Language; and was often made to reprove them for
their wicked Words, and evil Carriage toward each other. And People did
admire, that I was so preserved and Kept; for they could never catch a Word or
Action from me, to make any thing of against me, all the time, that I was
there: For the Lord's Infinite Power upheld and preserved me all that time; to
him be Praises and Glory for ever!

Now, while I was here in Prison, there was a young-Woman in the Jail for
Robbing her Master of some Money: and when she was to be Tried for her Life, I
writ to the Judge and to the Jury about her, showing them; How contrary it was
to the Law of God in old Time, to put People to Death for Stealing: and moving
them to show Mercy. Yet she was Condemned to die, and a Grave was made for her;
and at the Time appointed, she was carried forth to Execution. Then I writ a
few Words, Warning all People to beware of Greediness or Covetousness, for it
leads from God; but that all should Fear the Lord, and avoid all Earthly Lusts,
and prize their Time, while they have it: This I gave to be read at the
Gallows. And though they had her upon the Ladder, with a Cloth bound over her
Face, ready to be turned off; yet they did not put her to Death, but brought
her back again to Prison: And in the Prison she afterward came to be Convinced
of God's Everlasting Truth.

There was also in the Jail, while I was there, a Prisoner, a Wicked, Ungodly
Man, who was reputed a Conjurer; and he threatened, how he would talk with me,
and what he would do to me: but he never had Power to open his Mouth to me. And
on a time, the Jailer and he falling out, he threatened the Jailer, That he
would Raise the Devil, and break his House down; so that he made the Jailer
afraid. Then I was moved of the Lord, to go in his Power, and Rebuke him in it;
and to say unto him: Come let us see, what thou can do; and do thy worst. And
I told him, The Devil was Raised high enough in him already; but the Power of
God Chained him down: So he slu^k away, and went from me.

Now the Time of Worcester-Fight coming on, Justice Bennet sent the Constables
to press me for a Soldier, seeing I would not voluntarily accept of a Command:
And I told them, That I was brought off from outward Wars. They came down again
to give me Press-Money; but I would take none. Then I was brought up to
Sergeant Holes, and kept there a while; 1651. Darby-Prison.
and then I was taken down again. Then, after a while, the Constables fetched
me up again, and then I was brought before the Commissioners; and they said I
should go for a Soldier: But I told them, I was dead to it. They said, I was
Alive: I told them, where Envy and Hatred is, there is Confusion. They
proffered me Money twice; but I would not take it: Then they were Wroth, and I
was Committed Close Prisoner, without Bail or Mainprize. Whereupon I writ to
them again, directing my Letter to Colonel Barton (who was a Preacher) and the
rest, that were concerned in my Commitment: And I writ thus:

YOU, who are without Christ, and yet use the Words, which he and his Saints
have spoken, Consider, neither he nor his Apostles did ever Imprison any; but
my Savior is Merciful even to the Unmerciful and Rebellious. He does bring out
of Prison and Bondage: But Men, while the carnal Mind does rule, do Oppress and
Imprison. My Savior says, Love your Enemies, and do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you: For the
Love of God does not persecute any; but loves all, where it dwells: He that
hates his Brother, is a Murderer. You profess to be Christians, and one of you
a Minister of Jesus Christ; yet you have Imprisoned me, who am a Servant of
Jesus Christ. The Apostles never Imprisoned any; but were Imprisoned
themselves: Take heed of speaking of Christ in Words, and denying him in Life
and Power. O Friends, the Imprisoning my Body is to satisfy your Wills; but
take heed of giving way to your Wills, for that will hurt you. If the Love of
God had broken your Hearts, ye would not have Imprisoned me; but my Love is to
you, as to all my Fellow Creatures: and that you may Weigh your selves, and
see, how you stand, is this written.

About this Time I was moved to give forth the following Lines, to go amongst
the Convinced and Tender People, to manifest the Deceits of the World, and how
the Priests have deceived the People:

To all you, that love the Lord Jesus Christ with a pure and naked Heart, amd
the Generation of the Righteous.
CHRIST was ever hated; and the Righteous for his sake. Mind, who they were,
that did ever hate them: He that was born after the Flesh, did persecute him,
that was born after the Spirit; and so it is now. And mind, who were the
Chiefest against Christ; even the great Learned Men, the Heads of the People,
Rulers and Teachers, that did profess the Law and the Prophets, and looked for
Christ. They looked for an outwardly-Glorious Christ, to hold up their outward
Glory: But Christ spoke against the Works of the World; and against the
Priests, and Scribes, and Pharisees, and their hypocritical Profession. He that
is a Stranger to Christ, is an Hireling: but the Servants of Jesus Christ are
Freemen. The false Teachers always laid Burdens upon the People: and the true
Servants of the Lord did speak against them. Jeremiah did speak against
Hirelings, and said, It was an horrible thing; and said, What will ye do in the
End? for the People and Priests were given to Covetousness. Paul did speak
against such, as did make Gain upon the People; and exhorted the Saints to turn
away from such, as were Covetous Men and Proud Men, such as did love Pleasures
more than God; such as had a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof.
For of this sort (said he) are they, that Creep into Houses, and lead Captive
silly Women, who are ever learning, but never able to come to the knowledge of
the Truth; Men of corrupt Minds, Reprobate concerning the Faith: and as Jannes
and Jambres withstood Moses, so (said he) do these Resist the Truth: but they
shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest unto all Men.
Moses forsook Honors and Pleasures, which he might have enjoyed. The Apostle
in his time saw this Corruption entering, which now is spread over the World, of
having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power. Ask any of your Teachers,
whether you may ever Overcome your Corruptions or Sins? None of them does
believe that; but as long as Man is here, he must (they say) carry about with
him the Body of Sin. Thus Pride is kept up, and that Honor and Master-ship,
which Christ denied; and all Unrighteousness: Yet Multitudes of Teachers; Heaps
of Teachers; the Golden Cup full of Abominations! Paul did not preach for
Wages; but labored with his Hands, that he might be an Example to all them
that follow him. O People, see who follow Paul! The Prophet Jeremiah said, The
Prophets prophecy falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means; but now
the Priests bear Rule by the Means they get from the People: take away their
Means, and they will bear Rule over you no longer. They are such, as the
Apostle said, Intruded into those things, which they never saw, being vainly
puffed up with a fleshly Mind; and, as the Scriptures declare of some of old,
They go in the way of Cain, (who was a Murderer) and in the way of Balaam, who
coveted the Wages of Unrighteousness. The Prophet Micah also cried against the
Judges, that Judged for Reward; and the Priests, that taught for Hire; and the
Prophets, that prophesied for Money; and yet leaned on the Lord, saying; Is not
the Lord amongst us? Gifts do blind the Eyes of the Wise: And the Gift of God
was never purchased with Money. All the holy Servants of God did ever cry
against Deceit: and where the Lord has manifested his Love, they do loath it,
and that Nature, which holds it up.

Again a Concern came upon me to write unto the Magistrates of Darby, which I
did as follows: Friends,
I desire you to consider in time, whom ye do Imprison: for the Magistrate is
set for the punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of them that do well
But when the Lord does send his Messengers unto you, to warn you of the Woes,
that will come upon you, except you Repent; then you persecute them, and put
them into Prison, and say; We have a Law, and by our Law we may do it. For you
indeed Justify your selves before Men; but God knows your Hearts: He will
not be worshipped with your Forms and Professions, and Shows of Religion.
Therefore Consider, ye that talk of God, how ye are subject to him; for they
are his Children, that do his Will. What does the Lord require of you, but To
do Justice, to love and show Mercy, to walk humbly with him, and to help the
Widows and Fatherless to their Right? But instead thereof ye Oppress the Poor.
Do not your Judges Judge for Rewards, and your Priests Teach for Hire? The time
is coming, that he who sees all things, will discover all your Secrets. And
know this assuredly, The Lord will deliver his Servants out of your Hands, and
he will recompense all your unjust Dealings toward his People. I desire you to
Consider of these things, and search the Scriptures, and see, whether any of
the People of God did ever Imprison any for Religion; but were themselves
Imprisoned. I desire you to Consider, how it is written, that when the Church
is met together, they may all Prophesy, one by one; that all may hear, and all
may learn, and all may be comforted: And then, If any thing be Revealed to him,
that sits by, let the first hold his Peace. Thus it was in the true Church;
and thus it ought now to be. But it is not so in your Assemblies: but he that
Teaches for Hire, may speak, and none may Contradict him. Again, Consider the
Liberty, that was given to the Apostles, even among the unbelieving Jews; when
after the reading of the Law and the Prophets, the Rulers of the Synagogue said
unto them: Ye Men and Brethren, if ye have any Word of Exhortation for the
People, say on. I desire you to Consider in Stilness, and strive not against
the Lord: for he is stronger than you. Though ye hold his People fast for a
time; yet when he comes, he will make known, who are his: for his Coming is
like the Refiner's Fire, and like Fuller's Soap. Then the Stone, that is set at
naught of you Builders, shall be the Head-Stone of the Corner. O Friends, lay
these things to Heart, and let them nor seem light things to you, I wrote unto
you in Love, to mind the Laws of God, and your own Souls, and do, as the Holy
Men of God did.




Great was the Exercise and Travel in Spirit, that I went under during my
Imprisonment here, because of the Wickedness that was in this Town: for though
there were some Convinced there, yet for the generality they were an hardened
People. And I saw the Visitation of God's Love pass away from them; and I
mourned over them. And it came upon me to give forth the following Lines, as a
Lamentation for them:

O Darby! As the Waters run away, when the Floodgates are up; so does the
Visitation of God's Love pass away from thee, O Darby! Therefore look, where
thou art, and how thou art grounded; and Consider, before thou art utterly
forsaken. The Lord moved me Twice, before I came to Cry against the Deceits and
Vanities, that are in thee; and to warn all to look at the Lord, and not at
Man. The Woe is against the Crown of Pride, and the Woe is against Drunkenness
and vain Pleasures, and against them that make a Profession of Religion in
Words, and are high and lofty in Mind, and live in Oppression and Envy. O
Darby! thy Profession and Preaching stinks before the Lord. Ye do profess a
Sabbath in Words, and Meet together, dressing your selves in fine Apparel; and
you uphold Pride. Thy Women go with stretched-forth Necks, and wanton Eyes,
etc. which the true Prophet of old Cried against. Your Assemblies are odious,
and an Abomination to the Lord: Pride is set up, and bowed down to;
Covetousness abounds; and he that does wickedly, is honored: So Deceit does
bear with Deceit; and yet they profess Christ in Words. O the Deceit, that is
within thee! It does even break my Heart to see, how God is dishonored in
thee, O Darby!

Now, after that I had seen the Visitation of God's Love pass away from this
Place, I knew, that my Imprisonment here would not continue long: But I saw,
that when the Lord should bring me forth, it would be, as the letting of a Lion
out of a Den amongst the Wild Beasts of the Forest. For all Professions stood
in a Beastly Spirit and Nature, pleading for Sin, and for the Body of Sin and
Imperfection, as long as they lived: And they all kicked, and yelled, and
roared, and raged, and ran against the Life and Spirit, which gave forth the
Scriptures, which they professed in words. And so it was; as will appear
hereafter.

There was a great Judgment upon the Town; and the Magistrates were uneasy
about me, and could not agree, what to do with me. One while they would have
sent me up to the Parliament: another while they would have Banished me to
Ireland. At first they called me a Deceiver, and a Seducer, and a Blasphemer:
afterward, when God had brought his Plagues upon them, then they said, I was
an Honest, Virtuous Man. But their good Report, and bad Report, their
well-speaking or their ill-speaking was nothing to me: for the one did not lift
me up, nor the other cast me down: Praised be the Lord! At length they were
made to turn me out of Jail, about the beginning of Winter in the Year 1651;
after I had been a Prisoner in Darby almost a Year; whereof Six Months in the
House of Correction, and the rest of the Time in the Common Jail and Dungeon.

Thus being set at Liberty again, I went on (as before) in the Work of the
Lord, passing through the Country, first, into my own Country of
Leicestershire, and had Meetings as I went; Leicestershire.
and the Lord's Spirit and Power accompanied me. Afterward I went near to
Burton upon Trent, where some were Convinced; Burton upon Trent. Bushel-House.
and so to Bushel-House, where I had a Meeting. And I went up into the Country,
where there were friendly People: But there was an outrageous, wicked
Professor, who had an intent to have done me a Mischief; but the Lord prevented
him: Blessed be the Lord!

And as I was walking along, with several Friends, I lifted up my Head, and saw
Three Steeple-house-Spires; and they struck at my Life. And I asked Friends,
What Place that was? and they said, Lichfield. Lichfield.
Immediately the Word of the Lord came to me, that I must go thither. So being
come to the House, we were going to, I wished Friends, that were with me, to
walk into the House; saying nothing to them, whither I was to go. And as soon
as they were gone, I stepped away, and went by my Eye over Hedge and Ditch, till
I came within a Mile of Lichfield; where, in a great Field, there were
Shepherds keeping their Sheep. Then was I commanded by the Lord to pull off my
Shoos. And I stood still (for it was Winter:) And the Word of the Lord was like
a Fire in me. So I put off my Shoos, and left them with the Shepherds; and the
poor Shepherds trembled, and were astonished. Then I walked on about a Mile,
till I came into the City; and as soon as I was got within the City, the Word
of the Lord came to me again, saying; Cry, Woe unto the bloody City of
Lichfield! So I went up and down the Streets, Crying with a loud Voice, WOE TO
THE BLOODY CITY OF LICHFIELD! And it being Market Day, I went into the
Marketplace, and to and fro in the several Parts of it, and made stands,
Crying as before, WOE TO THE BLOODY CITY OF LICHFIELD! And no one laid Hands on
me. But as I went thus Crying through the Streets, there seemed to me to be a
Channel of Blood running down the Streets, and the Marketplace appeared like a
Pool of Blood. Now, when I had declared, what was upon me, and felt my self
Clear, I went out of the Town in Peace; and returning to the Shepherds, gave
them some Money, and took my Shoos of them again. But the Fire of the Lord was
so in my Feet, and all over me, 1651. Lichfield.
that I did not matter to put on my Shoos any more; and was at a stand, whether
I should or no; till I felt freedom from the Lord so to do: and then, after I
had washed my Feet, I put on my Shoes again. After this, a deep Consideration
came upon me, Why, or for what reason, I should be sent to Cry against that
City, and call it THE BLOODY CITY? For though the Parliament had the Minster
one while, and the King another while, and much Blood had been shed in the
Town, during the Wars between them; yet that was no more, than had befallen
many other Places. But afterward I came to understand, that in the Emperor
Diocletian's Time a Thousand Christians were Martyred in Lichfield. So I was to
go, without my Shoos, through the Channel of their Blood, and into the Pool of
their Blood in the Marketplace, that I might Raise up the Memorial of the
Blood of those Martyrs, which had been shed above a Thousand Years before, and
lay Cold in their Streets. So the Sense of this Blood was upon me, and I obeyed
the Word of the Lord. Ancient Records testify, how many of the Christian
Britains suffered there. And much I could write of the Sense I had of the Blood
of the Martyrs, that has been shed in this Nation for the Name of Christ, both
under the Ten Persecutions, and since; but I leave it to the Lord, and to his
Book, out of which all shall be Judged: For his Book is a most certain, true
Record, and his Spirit a true Recorder.

Then passed I up and down through the Countries, having Meetings amongst
friendly People in many Places: But my Relations were offended at me.
Nottinghamshire. Mansfield. Darbyshire. Yorkshire. Doncaster Balby. Wakefield
So after some Time I came into Nottinghamshire again, and to Mansfield, and
went into Darbyshire, visiting Friends. Then passing into Yorkshire, I preached
Repentance through Doncaster, and several other Places; and after came to
Balby, where Richard Farnsworth and several others were convinced. So traveling
through the Countries to several Places, preaching Repentance, and the Word of
Life to the People, I came into the Parts about Wakefield, where James Naylor
lived; and he and Thomas Goodyear came to me, and were both Convinced, and
received the Truth. William Dewsbury also and his Wife, with many more, came to
me, who were Convinced, and received the Truth. From thence I passed through
the Country toward Captain Pursloe's house by Selby, Selby.
and visited one John Leek, who had been to visit me in Darby-Prison, and was
Convinced. I had an Horse, but was fain to leave him, not knowing, what to do
with him: for I was moved to go to many great Houses, to admonish and exhort
the People to turn to the Lord, Thus passing on, Beverly.
I was moved of the Lord to go to Beverly-Steeple-house, which was then a Place
of high Profession. And being very Wet with Rain, I went first to an Inn; and
as soon as I came to the Door, a Young-woman of the House came to the Door, and
said, What! is it you? Come in, said she, as if she had known me before: for
the Lord's Power bowed their Hearts. So I refreshed my self, and went to Bed:
And in the Morning, (my Clothes being still wet) I got ready, and having paid,
for what I had had in the Inn, I went up to the Steeple-house, where was a Man
preaching. And when he had done, I was moved to speak to him, and to the
People, in the mighty Power of God; and turned them to their Teacher, Christ
Jesus: 1651. Yorkshire.
And the Power of the Lord was so strong, that it struck a mighty Dread amongst
the People. And the Major came down to me, and spoke a few Words to me: but
none of them had any Power to meddle with me. So I passed away out of the Town:
And in the Afternoon went to another Steeple-house, about Two Miles off: And
when the Priest had done, I was moved to speak to him, and to the People very
largely, showing them the Way of Life and Truth, and the Ground of Election and
Reprobation. The Priest said, he was but a Child, and could not dispute with
me: I told him, I did not come to dispute; but to hold forth the Word of Life
and Truth unto them, that they might all know the One Seed, which the Promise
of God was to, both in the Male and in the Female. Here the People were very
loving, and would have had me come again on a Weekday, and preach among them:
But I directed them to their Teacher, Christ Jesus, and so passed away; and the
next Day went to Crantsick, Crantsick.
to Captain Pursloe's, who accompanied me to Justice Hotham's. This Justice
Hotham was a pretty tender Man, one that had had some Experiences of God's
Workings in his Heart. After I had had some Discourse with him of the things of
God, he took me into his Closet; where sitting together, he told me; he had
known that Principle these Ten Years, and was glad, that the Lord did now
publish it abroad to the People. After a while there came a Priest to visit
him, with whom also I had some Discourse concerning Truth. But his Mouth was
quickly stopped: for he was nothing but a Notionist, and not in Possession, of
what he talked of.

While I was here, there came a Great Woman of Beverly, to speak with Justice
Hotham about some Business; and in Discourse she told him, That the last
Sabbath Day (as she called it) there was an Angel or Spirit came into the
Church at Beverly, and spoke the wonderful things of God, to the astonishment
of all that were there: And when it had done, it passed away; and they did not
know, whence it came, nor whither it went: But it astonished all, both Priest,
Professors and Magistrates of the Town. This Relation Justice Hotham gave me
afterward; and then I gave him an Account, how I had been that Day at
Beverly-Steeple-house; and had declared Truth to the Priest and People there:

There was in the County thereabouts some Noted Priests, and Doctors, that
Justice Hotham had acquaintance with, and he would fain have them speak with
me; and offered to send for them, under pretense of some Business he had with
them: but I wished him not to do so.

Now when the First Day of the Week was come, Justice Hotham walked out with me
into the Fields; and then, Captain Pursloe coming up after us, Justice Hotham
left us, and returned home; but Captain Pursloe went with me into the
Steeple-house. And when the Priest had done, I spoke to both Priest and People;
and declared to them the Word of Life and Truth, and directed them, where they
might find their Teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ. Some of the People were
Convinced there that Day, and received the Truth, and stand fast in it; and
have a fine Meeting there-a-ways to this Day.

In the Afternoon I went to another Steeple-house, about Three Miles off, where
preached a great High Priest, called a Doctor (being one of them, whom Justice
Hotham would have sent for, to have spoken with me.) So I went into the
Steeple-house, and stayed, till the Priest had done (Now the Words, which he
took for his Text, were these; Ho, every One that Thirsts, come ye to the
Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy Wine and
Milk without Money and without Price.) Then was I moved of the Lord God to say
unto him; Come down, thou deceiver; Do thou bid People, Come freely, and take
of the Water of Life freely, and yet thou take Three hundred Pounds a Year of
them, for preaching the Scriptures to them! May not thou blush for shame!
Did the Prophet Isaiah and Christ do so, who spoke the Words, and gave them
forth freely? Did not Christ say to his Ministers, whom he sent to preach,
Freely ye have received, freely give? So the Priest, like a Man amazed, hastened
away. And after he was gone, and had left his Flock, I had as much Time, as I
could desire, to speak to the People. And I directed them from the Darkness to
the Light, and to the Grace of God, that would Teach them, and bring them
Salvation; and to the Spirit of God in their Inward Parts, which would be a
free Teacher unto them.

Then, having Cleared my self amongst that People, I returned to Justice
Hotham's House that Night; who when I came in, took me in his Arms, and said:
His House was my House, for he was exceeding glad at the work of the Lord, and
that his Power was Revealed. Then he told me, Why he went not with me to the
Steeple-house in the Morning, and what Reasonings he had in himself about it:
for he thought, if he had gone with me to the Steeple-house, the Officers would
have put me to him; and then he should have been so put to it, that he should
not have known, what to have done: But he was glad, he said, when Captain
Pursloe came up to go with me. Yet neither of them was dressed, nor had their
Bands about their Necks. And it was a strange thing then, to see a Man come
into a Steeple-house without a Band: Yet Captain Pursloe went in with me
without his Band; the Lord's Power and Truth had so affected him, that he
minded it not.

From hence I passed on through the Country, and came at Night to an Inn, where
was a Company of rude People; and I bid the Woman of the House, if she had any
Meat, to bring me some: But because I said Thee and Thou to her, she looked
strangely on me. Then I asked her, if she had any Milk? and she said, No. I was
sensible, she spoke falsely: And seeing a Churn standing in the Room, and being
willing to try her further, I asked her; If she had any Cream? she denied, that
she had any. Now there stood a Churn in the Room, and a little Boy playing
about it, put his Hands into it, and pulled it down; and threw all the Cream on
the Floor before my Eyes. Thus was the Woman manifested to be a Liar. The Woman
was amazed, and blessed her self, and took up the Child, and whipped it sorely: But
I reproved her for her Lying and Deceit. After the Lord had thus discovered her
Deceit and Perverseness, I walked out of the House, and went away, till I came
to a Stack of Hay, and lay in the Hay-Stack that Night, in Rain and Snow; 1651.
York.
it being but Three Days before the Time called Christmas.

The next day I came into York, where were several People, that were very
tender. And upon the First Day of the Week following I was Commanded of the
Lord, to go to the great Minster, and speak to Priest Bowls and his Hearers in
their great Cathedral. Accordingly I went: and when the Priest had done, I told
them; I had something from the Lord God to speak to the Priest and People. Then
say on quickly, said a Professor, that was among them; for it was Frost and
Snow, and very Cold Weather. Then I told them; This was the Word of the Lord
God unto them, that they lived in Words; but God Almightly looked for Fruits
amongst them. As soon as the Words were out of my Mouth, they hurried me out,
and threw me down the Steps: but I got up again without hurt, and went to my
Lodging again; and several were Convinced there. For the very Groans, that
arose from the Weight and Oppression, that was upon the Spirit of God in me,
would open People, and strike them; and make them Confess, That the Groans,
which brake forth through me, did reach them: For my Life was burdened with
their Profession without Possession, and Words without Fruit.

Now after I had done my present Service in York, and that several were
Convinced there, and received the Truth of God, and were turned to his
Teaching; I passed out of York, and looked toward Cleaveland. And I saw, there
was a People, that had tasted of the Power of God; and I saw then, there was a
Seed in that Country, and that God had an humble People there. So I passed
onwards that Night; and a Papist overtook me, and talked to me of his Religion,
and of their Meetings: and I let him speak all that was in his Mind. That Night
I stayed at an Alehouse; and the next Morning I was moved of the Lord to speak
the Word of the Lord to this Papist. So I went to his House, and declared
against his Religion, and all their Superstitious Ways; and told him, that God
was come to teach his People himself. This put the Papist into such a Rage,
that he could not then endure to stay in his own House.

The next day I came to Burraby, where there was a Priest, Burraby.
and several Friendly People Met together: Many of the People were Convinced,
and have continued faithful ever since; and there is a great Meeting of Friends
in that Town. The Priest also was forced to Confess to Truth, though he Came
not into it.

The day following I passed to Cleaveland, amongst those People, Cleaveland.
that had tasted of the Power of God: They had formerly had great Meetings, but
were then all shattered to pieces; and the Heads of them turned Ranters. I told
them, That after they had had such Meetings, they did not Wait upon God to feel
his Power, to gather their Minds Inward, that they might feel his Presence and
Power amongst them in their Meetings, to sit down therein, and Wait upon him:
for they had spoken themselves dry; they had spent their Portions, and not
living in that, which they spoke of, they were now become DRY. They had some
kind of Meetings still: but they took Tobacco, and drank Ale in their Meetings;
and were grown light and loose. But my Message unto them from the Lord was,
1651. Cleaveland.
That they should all come together again, and Wait to feel the Lord's Power
and Spirit in themselves, to gather them to Christ, that they might be taught
of him, who says, Learn of me. For when they had declared, that which the Lord
had opened to them, then the People were to receive it; and both the Speakers
and Hearers were to live in that themselves. But when these had no more to
declare, but went to seek Forms without Life; that made themselves dry and
barren, and the People also: and from thence came all their Loss: for the Lord
renews his Mercies and his Strength to them that Wait upon him. The Heads of
these People came to nothing: but most of the People came to be Convinced, and
received God's everlasting Truth, and continue a Meeting to this day; sitting
under the Teaching of the Lord Jesus Christ, their Savior.

Upon the First day of the next Week the Word of the Lord came to me to go to
the Steeple-house there; which I did. And when the Priest had done, I spoke the
Truth to him and the People, and directed them to their Teacher within, Christ
Jesus, their free Teacher, that had bought them. The Priest came to me; and I
had a little Discourse with him: but he was soon stopped, and silent. Then, being
Clear of the Place, I passed away, having had several Meetings amongst those
People.

Though at this time the Snow was very deep; yet I kept traveling: And going
through the Country, came to a Market Town, where I met with many Professors,
with whom I had much Reasoning; and I asked them many Questions, which they
were not able to Answer; but said, They had never had such deep Questions put
to them in all their Lives.

Stath.
From them I went to another Place called Stath, where also I met with many
Professors, and some Ranters. I had great Meetings amongst them, and a great
Convincement there was, and many received the Truth: amongst whom One was an
Ancient Man of an hundred Years of Age; Another was a Chief Constable; and a
third was a Priest, whose Name was Philip Scafe: Him the Lord, by his free
Spirit, did afterward make a free Minister of his free Gospel.

The Priest of this Town was a lofty Priest, and did much Oppress the People
for his Tithes: for if they went a Fishing many Leagues off, he would make them
pay the Tithe-Money, of what they made of their Fish; though they catched them
at a great distance, and carried them as far as Yarmouth to sell. Now I was
moved to go to the Steeple-house there, to declare the Truth, and lay open the
Priest. And when I had spoken to the Priest, and laid his Oppressing of the
People upon him, he fled away. The Chief of the Parish were very light and
vain: So after I had spoken the Word of Life to them, I turned away from them,
because they did not receive it; and left them. But the Word of the Lord, which
I had declared amongst them, stuck with some of them; so that at Night some of
the Heads of the Parish came to me: and most of them were Convinced and
satisfied, and confessed to the Truth. Thus the Truth began to spread up and down
that Country, and great Meetings we had; at which the Priest began to rage,
1651. Stath.
and the Ranters began to be stirred: and they sent me word, that they would
have a Dispute with me; both the Oppressing Priest, and the Leader of the
Ranters. A day was set, and the Ranter came with his Company: and another
Priest, a Scotch Man, came; but not the Oppressing Priest of Stath. Philip
Scafe, who had been a Priest, and was Convinced, was with me; and a great
Number of People were met. When we were settled, the Ranter, whose Name was T.
Bushel, told me; He had had a Vision of me, that I was sitting in a great
Chair, and that he was to come and put off his Hat, and bow down to the Ground
before me; and he did so: and many other flattering Words he spoke. I told him,
It was his own Figure: and said unto him, Repent thou Beast. He said, it was
Jealousy in me to say so. Then I asked him the Ground of Jealousy, and how it
came to be bred in Man? And the Nature of a Beast, what made it? And how that
was bred in Man? For I saw him directly in that Nature of the Beast; and
therefore I would have known of him, how that Nature came to be bred in him? I
told him, He should give me an Account of things done in the Body, before we
came to discourse of things done out of the Body. So I stopped up his Mouth, that
he could say no more; and all his Fellow- Ranters were silenced: for he was the
Head of them. Then I called for the Oppressing Priest; but he came not: Only
the Scotch Priest came; but his Mouth was soon stopped with a very few Words; he
being out of the Life of what he did profess. Then had I a good Opportunity
with the People: and I laid open the Ranters, ranking them with the old Ranters
in Sodom. And the Priests I manifested to be of the same stamp with their
Fellow- Hirelings, the false Prophets of old, and the Priests that then bore
rule over the People by their Means, seeking for their Gain from their Quarter,
Divining for Money, and Teaching for filthy Lucre: and so I brought all the
Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles over the Heads of the Priests, showing,
how the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles had long since discovered them by
their Marks and Fruits. Then I directed People to their Inward Teacher, Christ
Jesus their Savior; and I preached up Christ in the Hearts of his People, when
all these Mountains were laid low. The People were all quiet, and the
Gainsayers Mouths were stopped: for though they broiled inwardly, yet the Power
bound them down, that they could not break out.

After the Meeting was over, this Scottish Priest desired me to walk with him a
top of the Cliffs. Whereupon I called a Brother-in-Law of his, who was in some
measure Convinced, and desired him to go with me, telling him; I was willing to
have some Body by, to hear, what we said; lest the Priest, when I was gone,
should report any thing of me, which I did not say. So we went together; and as
we walked, the Priest asked me many things concerning the Light, and concerning
the Soul: To all which I answered him fully. When he had done questioning, we
parted; and he went his way: and as he w^nt, meeting with the other Priest,
Philip Scafe, that was Convinced, he brake his Cain against the Ground in
Madness, and said, If ever he met with me again, he would have my Life, or I
should have his; adding, that he would give his Head, if I was not knocked down
within a Month. By this Friends suspected, his intent was, in desiring me to
walk with him alone, either to have Thrust me down from off the Cliff, or to
have done me some other Mischief: And that when he saw himself frustrated in
that, by my having one with me, that made him rage so. But I feared neither his
Prophecies, nor his Threats: for I feared God Almighty. But some Friends,
through their Affection to me, feared much, that this Priest would do me some
Mischief, or set on Others to do it. Yet after some Years, this very Scotch
Priest, and his Wise also came to be Convinced of the Truth; and about Twelve
Years after this I was at their House.

After this there came another Priest to a Meeting, where I was, (one that was
in Repute above all the Priests in the Country) and as I was speaking in the
Meeting, That the Gospel was the Power of God, and how it brought Life and
Immortality to Light in Men, and so was turning People from Darkness to the
Light; this high-flown Priest said, The Gospel was Mortal. I told him, The true
Minister said, The Gospel was the Power of God; and would he make the Power of
God Mortal? Upon that, the other Priest, Philip Scafe, that was Convinced, and
had felt the Immortal Power of God in himself, took him up, and reproved him;
and so a great Dispute arose between them: the Convinced Priest holding, that
the Gospel was Immortal; and the other Priest holding, that it was Mortal. But
the Lord's Power was too hard for this Opposing Priest, and stopped his Mouth:
And many People were Convinced, seeing the Darkness, that was in the Opposing
Priest, and the Light that was in the Convinced Priest.

Then another Priest sent to have a Dispute with me, and Friends went with me
to the House, where he was: But when he understood, we were come, he slipped out
of the House, and hid himself under an H^dge. The People went to seek him, and
found him; but could not get him to come to us. Then I went to a Steeple-house
hard by there, where the Priest and People were in a great rage: This Priest
had threatened Friends, what he would do; but when I came there, he would not
stand, but fled: for the Lord's Power came over him and them. Yea, the Lord's
Everlasting Power was over the World, and did reach to the Hearts of People,
and made both Priests and Professors tremble. It shook the earthly and airy
Spirit, in which they held their Profession of Religion and Worship;
so that it was a dreadful thing unto them, when it was told them, " The Man in
Leathern Breeches is come. At the hearing thereof the Priests in many Places
would get out of the way; they were so struck with the dread of the Eternal
Power of God: and Fear surprised the Hypocrites.

Whitby. Scarborough. Wowls. Malton.
From this Place we passed to Whitby and Scarborough, where we had some Service
for the Lord; and there are large Meetings settled there since. From thence I
passed over the Wowls to Malton, where we had great Meetings; as we had also at
the Towns thereabouts. At one of those Towns there was a Priest sent me a
Challenge, to dispute with me: But when I came, he would not come sorth. So I
had a good Opportunity with the People, and the Lord's Power seized upon them:
And one, who had been a Wild, drunken Man, was reached therewith, so that he
came to me as lowly, as a Lamb; though he and his Companions had before sent
for Drink, 1651. Yorkshire.
to make the rude People drunk, on purpose, that they might abuse us. So when
the Priest would not come forth, I was moved to go to the Steeple-house there;
and the Priest was Confounded, and the Lord's Power came over all.

On the First Day following, there came one of the highest
Independent-Professors, a Woman, who had let in such a Prejudice against me,
that she said, before she came, She could willingly have gone to see me hanged.
But when she came, she was Convinced; and remains a Friend.

Then I turned to Malton again, Malton.
and very great Meetings there were; to which several People more would have
come, but durst not for fear of their Relations: for it was thought a strange
thing then, to preach in Houses, and not go to the Church (as they called it;)
so that I was much desired, to go and speak in the Steeple Houses. One of the
Priests writ to me, and invited me to preach in his Steeple-house; calling me
his Brother: Another Priest, a noted Man, kept a Lecture there. Now the Lord
had showed me, while I was in Darby-Prison, That I should speak in
Steeple Houses, to gather People from thence; and a Concern sometimes would
come upon my Mind about the Pulpits, that the Priests lolled in. For the
Steeple Houses and Pulpits were offensi^e to my Mind, because both Priests and
People called them the H^use of God, and Idolized them; reckoning, that God
dwelt there in the outward House: whereas they should have looked for God and
Christ to dwell in their Hearts, and their Bodies to be made the Temples of
God: for the Apostle said, God dwells not in Temples made with Hands: But by
reason of the People's Idolizing those Places, it was counted an heinous thing
to declare against them. Now when I came into the Steeple-house, there were not
passing Eleven Hearers; and the Priest was preaching to them. But after it was
known in the Town, that I was in the Steeple-house, it was soon filled with
People. When the Priest, that preached that day, had ^one, he sent the other
Priest, that had Invited me thither, to bring me up into the Pulpit: but I sent
back Word to him, that I needed not to go into the Pulpit. Then he sent to me
again, desiring me to go up into it; for (he said) it was a better Place, and
there I might be seen of the People. I sent him Word again, I could be seen and
heard well enough, where I was; and that I came not there to hold up such
Places, nor their Maintenance and Trade. Upon my saying so, they began to be
angry, and said, These False Prophets were to come in the last Times. Their
saying so, grieved many of the People; and some began to murmur at it.
Whereupon I stood up, and desired all to be quiet: and stepping upon an High
Seat, I declared unto them the Marks of the false Prophets; and showed, That
they were already come: and set the true Prophets, and Christ and his Apostles
over them; and manifested, these to be out of the Steps of the true Prophets,
and of Christ and his Apostles. And I directed the People to their Inward
Teacher, Christ Jesus, who would turn them from the Darkness to the Light. And
having opened diverse Scriptures to them, I directed them to the Spirit of God
in themselves, by which they might come to him; and by which they might also
come to know, 1651. Pickering.
who the false Prophets were. So having had a large time among them, I departed
in Peace.

After some time, traveling in the Country, I came to Pickering, where in the
Steeple-house the Justices held their Sessions; Justice Robinson being
Chairman: and I had a Meeting in the School-house at the same time; and
abundance of Priests and Professors came to it, asking Questions; which were
Answered to their Satisfaction. And it being Sessions-time, four
Chief-Constables, and many other Poople were Convinced that day. And word was
carried to Justice Robinson, that his Priest was Overthrown and Convinced; whom
he had a Love to, more than to all the Priests besides. After the Meeting was
done, we went to an Inn, and Justice Robinson's Priest was very lowly and
loving; and would have paid for my Dinner: but I would by no means suffer it.
Then he offered, that I should have his Steeple-house to preach in; But I
denied it, and told him and the People, That I came to bring them off from such
things to Christ.

The next Morning I went up, with the Four Chief-Constables, and some others,
to visit Justice Robinson; who met me at his Chamberdoor. I told him, I could
not honor him with Man's Honor; and he said, He did not look for it. So I
went into his Chamber, and opened te him the State of the false Prophets, and
of the true Prophets; and set the true Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles
over the other; and directed his Mind to Christ his Teacher; and opened to him
the Parables, and how Election and Reprobation stood; as that Reprobation stood
in the first Birth, and Election stood in the second Birth: I showed also, what
the Promise of God was to, and what the Judgment of God was against. He
Confessed to it all; and was so opened with the Truth, that when another
Justice, that was present, made some little Opposition; he Informed him. At our
parting he said, It was very well, that I did exercise that Gift, which God had
given me: And he took the Chief-Constables aside, and would have given them
some Money, to have given me, saying; He would not have me be at any Charge in
their Country: but they told him, That they themselves could not get me to take
any Money; and so accepting his Kindness, refused his Money.

From thence I passed up into the Country, and the Priest that called me
Brother (in whose School-house I had the Meeting at Pickering) went along with
me. When we came into a Town to bait, the Bells rang: Whereupon I asked, What
the Bells rang for? And they said, for me to preach in the Steeple-house. After
some Time I felt Drawings that way: And as I walked to the Steeple-house; I
saw, the People were gathered together in the Steeple-house-yard. The Old
Priest would have had me gone into the Steeple-house; but I said, Nay, it was
no matter: But it was something strange to the People, that I would not go into
that, which they called the House of God. Then I stood up in the
Steeple-house-yard, and declared to the People, That I came not to hold up
their Idol-Temples, nor their Priests, nor their Tithes, nor their
Augmentations, nor their Priests-wages, nor their Jewish and Heathenish
Ceremonies and Traditions (for I denied all these) and told them, that that
piece of Ground was no more Holy, than another Piece of Ground. 1651. Yorkshire.
And I showed them, that the Apostles going into the Jews Synagogues and
Temples, which God had Commanded, was To bring People off from that Temple, and
those Synagogues, and from the Offerings and Tithes, and Covetous Priests of
that Time. And that such, as came to be Convinced of the Truth, and Converted
to it, and believed in Jesus Christ, whom the Apostles preached; they met
together afterward in Dwelling-Houses. And that all who preach Christ, the
Word of Life, ought to preach freely, as the Apostles did; and as he had
Commanded. So I was sent of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth to preach freely;
and to bring People off from these outward Temples made with Hands, which God
dwells not in; that they might know their Bodies to become the Temples of God
and of Christ: And to draw People off from all their Superstitious Ceremonies,
and Jewish and Heathenish Customs, Traditions and Doctrines of Men; and from
all the World's Hireling-Teachers, that take Tithes and great Wages, preaching
for Hire, and divining for Money, whom God and Christ never sent, as themselves
confess, when they say; They never heard God's Voice, nor Christ's Voice.
Therefore I exhorted the People to come off from all these things, and directed
them to the Spirit and Grace of God in themselves, and to the Light of Jesus in
their own Hearts; that they might come to know Christ, their Free Teacher, to
bring them Salvation, and to open the Scriptures to them. Thus the Lord gave me
a good Opportunity amongst them, to open things largely unto them; and all was
quiet, and many were Convinced: Blessed be the Lord.

I passed on to another Town, where there was another great Meeting, and the
Old Priest beforementioned went along with me; and there came Professors of
several sorts to it. Now I sat on an Hay-stack, and spoke nothing for some
Hours: for I was to famish them from Words. And the Professors would ever and
anon be speaking to the Old Priest, and asking him, When I would begin? and
when I would speak? And he bad them Wait; and told them, That the People waited
upon Christ a long while, before he spoke. At last I was moved of the Lord to
speak; and they were struck by the Lord's Power, and the Word of Life reached
to them, and there was a General Convincement amongst them.

From hence I passed on, the Old Priest being still with me, and several
others. And as we went along, some People called to the Old Priest, and said;
Mr. Boys, We owe you some Money for Tithes, pray come and take it. But the Old
Priest threw up his Hands, and said; He had enough, he would have none of it;
they might keep it: And, he praised the Lord, he had enough.

At length we came to this Old Priest's Steeple-house in the Moors: And when we
were come into it, the Old Priest went before me, The Moors.
and held open the Pulpit-Door; but I forbad him, and told him, I should not go
into it. This Steeple-house was very much painted; and I told him and the
People, That the painted Beast had a painted House. Then I opened to them the
Rise of all those Houses, and their Superstitious Ways; showing them, that as
the End of the Apostles going into the Temple and Synagogues, which God had
Commanded, was not to hold them up; 1651. Yorkshire, in the Moors.
but to bring them to Christ, the Substance: So the End of my coming there, was
not, to hold up these Temples, Priests and Tithes, which God had never
Commanded; but to bring them off from all these things, to Christ the
Substance. So I showed them the True Worship, which Christ had set up: and
distinguished unto them Christ the True Way, from all the false Ways; opening
the Parables to them, and turning them from the Darkness to the true Light,
that by it they might see themselves and their Sins, and Christ their Savior;
that believing in him, they might be saved from their Sins.

After this we went to one Birdet's House, where I had a great Meeting; and
this Old Priest accompanied me still, leaving his Steeple-house: For he had
been looked upon as a famous Priest, above Common-prayer-Men, and Presbyters,
and Independents too. Before he was Convinced, he would have gone sometimes
into their Steeple Houses, and have preached: For he had been a zealous Man in
his Way. And when they have Complained of him to Justice Hotham, he would bid
them, Distrein his Horse, for traveling on the Lord's Day (as he called it:)
But Hotham did that only to put them off; for he knew, the Priest used no
Horse, but traveled on Foot.

Crantsick.
Now came I up through the Country again toward Crantsick, to Captain Purslo's
and Justice Hotham's, who received me kindly; being glad, that the Lord's Power
had so appeared; and that Truth was spread, and so many had received it; and
that Justice Robinson was so Civil. And Justice Hotham said; If God had not
raised up this Principle of Light and Life, which I preached, the Nation had
been overrun with Ranterism; and all the Justices in the Nation could not have
stopped it with all their Laws: Because (said he) they would have said, as we
said, and done as we Commanded; and yet have kept their own Principle still.
But this Principle of Truth (said he) overthrows their Principle and the Root
and Ground thereof; and therefore (he said) he was glad, the Lord had raised up
this Principle of Life and Truth.

Holderness.
From thence I traveled up into Holderness, and came to a Justice's House,
whose Name was Pearson; where there was a very tender Woman, that believed in
the Truth, and was so affected therewith, that she said; She could have left
all, and have followed me.

Oram.
Thence I went to Oram, to one George Hartise's; where many of that Town were
Convinced. On the First Day I was moved to go into the Steeple-house, where the
Priest had got another Priest to help him: And a many Professors and Contenders
were got together. But the Lord's Power was over all, and the Priests fled
away, and a great deal of good Service I had for the Lord amongst the People.
And some of those great Professors were Convinced, and became honest faithful
Friends; being Men of Account in the Place.

The next day Friends and friendly People having left me, I traveled alone,
declaring the Day of the Lord amongst People in the Towns, Patrington.
where I came; and warning them to Repent. And as I traveled one day, I came
toward Night into a Town called Patrington; and as I walked along the Town,
1652. Patrington.
I warned both Priest and People (for the Priest was in the Street) to Repent,
and turn to the Lord. Now it grew dark, before I came to the End of the Town;
and a Multitude of People gathered about me, and I declared the Word of Life
unto them. And when I had cleared my self, I went to an Inn, and desired them
to let me have a Lodging; but they would not. Then I desired them to let me
have a little Meat, or Milk, and I would pay them for it; but they would not.
So I walked out of the Town, and a Company of Fellows followed me, and asked
me; What News? And I bid them Repent, and fear the Lord. After I was gone a
pretty way out of the Town, I came to another House, and I desired the People
of that House to let me have a little Meat, and Drink, and Lodging for my
Money; but they would not neither, but denied me. Then I went to another House,
and desired the same; but they refused me also. By this time it was grown so
dark, that I could not see the Highway; but I discerned a Ditch, and got a
little Water, and refreshed my self. Then I got over the Ditch; and being weary
with traveling, I sat down amongst the Furz-bushes, till it was day. About
break of Day I got up, and passed on the Fields; and a Man came after me with a
great Pike-Staff, and went along with me to a Town: And he raised the Town upon
me, with the Constable and Chief-Constable, before the Sun was up. So I
declared God's Everlasting Truth amongst them, warning them of the day of the
Lord, that was coming upon all Sin and Wickedness; and exhorted them to Repent.
But they seized on me, and had me back again to Patrington, about three Miles,
guarding me with Watch-Bills, and Pikes, and Staves and Halberds. Now when I
was come back to Patrington, all the Town was in an Vproar; and the Priest and
Constables were consulting together: So I had another Opportunity to declare
the Word of Life amongst them, and warn them to Repent. At last a Professor, a
tender Man, called me into his House, and there I took a little Milk and Bread;
having not eaten for some Days before. Then they guarded me about Nine Miles to
a Justice; and when I was come near his House, there came a Man riding after
us, and asked me, Whether I was the Man, that was apprehended? And I asked him,
Wherefore he asked? And he said, For no hurt; and I told him, I was: So he rode
away to the Justice before us. The Men, that guarded me, said; It was well, if
the Justice was not drunk, before we got to him: for he used to be drunk early.
Now when I was brought in before him, because I did not put off my Hat, and
said Thou to him, he asked the Man, that rode thither before me, Whether I was
not mazed, or fond? But the Man told him, No; it was my Principle. Then I
warned him to Repent, and come to the Light, which Christ had enlightened him
withal; that by it he might see all his evil Words and Actions, that he had
spoken and acted (his ungodly Ways he had walked in, and his ungodly Words he
had spoken) and to return to Christ Jesus, whilst he had time; and that whilst
he had Time, he should prize it. Ay, Ay, said he, the Light, that is spoken of
in the third of John: I desired him, that he would mind it, and obey it. And as
I admonished him, I laid my Hand upon him; and he was brought down by the Power
of the Lord: And all the Watchmen stood amazed. Then he took me into a little
Parlour with the other Man, and desired to see, what I had in my Pockets, of
Letters, or Intelligence; and I plucked out my Linen, and showed him, that I
had no Letters: So he said, He is not a Vagrant by his Linen: and then he set
me at Liberty. Then I went back to Patrington again, with that Man, that had
ridden before me to the Justice; for he lived at Patrington. When I came there,
he would have had me have had a Meeting at the Cross: But I said, It was no
matter, his House would serve. Then he desired me to go to Bed, or lie down
upon a Bed: Which he did, that they might say, they had seen me in a Bed, or
upon a Bed; for they had got up a Report, that I would not lie on any Bed,
because at that time I lay many times without Doors. Now when the First Day of
the Week was come, I went to the Steeple-house, and declared the Truth to the
Priest and People: and the People did not molest me; for the Power of God was
come over them. Then presently after I had a great Meeting at that Man's House,
where I lay: And many that day were Convinced there of the Lord's Everlasting
Truth; who stand faithful Witnesses for it to this day. And they were exceeding
sorry and grieved, that they did not Receive me, nor give me Lodging, when I
was there before.

Yorkshire.
From hence I Traveled through the Country, even to the furthest part thereof;
Warning People, both in Towns and in Country-Villages, to Repent; and directing
them to Christ Jesus their Teacher.

On the First Day of the Week I came to one Colonel Overton's House, and had a
great Meeting of the Prime of the People of that Country; where many things
were opened out of the Scriptures, which they had never heard before in all
their Lives: and many were Convinced, and received the Word of Life, and were
settled in the Truth of God.

Patrington.
Then I returned to Patrington again, and visited those Friends, that were
Convinced there; by whom I understood, that a Tailor, and some wild Blades in
that Town had occasioned my being carried before the Justice. The Tailor came
to ask me forgiveness, fearing, I would Complain of him: The Constables also
were afraid, lest I should trouble them: But I forgave them all, and warned
them to turn to the Lord, and to amend their Lives. Now that which made them
the more afraid, was this: When I was in the Steeple-house at Oram not long
before, there came a Professor, and gave me a Push on the Breast in the
Steeple-house, and bid me, Get me out of the Church: Alas, poor Man, said I,
do thou call the Steeple-house the Church? The Church is the People, whom God
has purchased with his Blood, and not the House. It happened, that Justice
Hotham came to hear of this Man's Abuse done to me; and sent his Warrant for
him, and bound him over to the Sessions: So affected was he with the Truth; and
so Zealous to keep the Peace. And indeed, this Justice Hotham had asked me
before, whether any People had meddled with me, or abused me? But I was not to
tell him any thing of that kind; but was to forgive all.

From Patrington I went to several Great Men's Houses, warning them to Repent:
Some Received me lovingly, and some slighted me. Thus I passed on through the
Country: And at Night came to another Town, where I desired Lodging and Meat,
and I would pay for it: But they would not Lodge me, except I would go to the
Constable, which was the Custom (they said) of all Lodgers at Inns, if
Strangers. I told them, I should not go: for that Custom was for suspicious
Persons; but I was an Innocent Man. So, after I had warned them to Repent, and
declared unto them the Day of their Visitation, and directed them to the Light
of Christ and Spirit of God, that they might come to know Salvation, I passed
away; and the People were something tendered, and troubled afterward. But when
it grew dark, I spied an Hay-Stack, and went, and sat under it all Night, till
Morning.

The next Day I passed into Hull, Hull.
admonishing and warning People, as I went, to turn to Christ Jesus, that they
might receive Salvation. That Night I got a Lodging; but was very sore with
traveling on Foot so far.

Afterward, passing through the Country, I came to Balby, Balby.
and visited Friends up and down in those Parts; And then passed into the Edge
of Nottinghamshire, visiting Friends there: Nottinghamshire. Lincolnshire.
Trent.
and so passed into Lincolnshire, and visited Friends there. And on the
First Day of the Week I went to a Steeple-house on this side of Trent; and in
the Afternoon I went to another Steeple-house on the other side of Trent,
declaring the Word of Life to the People, and directing them to their Teacher,
Christ Jesus, who died for them,
that they might hear him, and receive Salvation by him. Then I went further
into the Country, and had several Meetings there-aways. And at one Meeting,
where I was, there came a Great Man, and a Priest, and many Professors: but the
Lord's Power came over them all; and they went their ways peaceably. And there
came a Man to that Meeting, who had been at a Meeting before; and he raised a
false Accusation against me, and made a Noise up and down the Country,
reporting, that I said; I was Christ; which was utterly false. And when I came
to Gainsborough, Gainsborough.
where a Friend had been declaring Truth in the Market, the Town and
Market-People was all in an Uproar: So I went into a Friendly Man's House, and
the People rushed in after me; so that the House was filled with Professors,
and Disputers, and rude People. And this false Accuser came in before them all,
and accused me openly before all the People, That I said, I was Christ; and he
had got Witnesses to prove the same: Which set the People into such a Rage,
that they had much ado to keep their Hands off me. Then was I moved of the Lord
God to stand up upon the Table, in the Eternal Power of God, and tell the
People, That Christ was in them, except they were Reprobates; and that it was
Christ, the Eternal Power of God, that spoke in me at that time unto them: NOT,
that I was CHRIST. And the People were generally satisfied, except himself, and
a Professor, and his own false Witnesses. And I called the Accuser, Judas; and
was moved to tell him, That he was Judas, and Judas his End should be his; and
that that was the Word of the Lord, and of Christ through me to him. So the
Lord's Power came over all, 1652. Gainsborough.
and quieted the Minds of the People, and they departed in Peace. But this
Judas went away, and shortly after hanged himself; and a Stake was driven into
his Grave. And afterward the Wicked Priests raised a Scandal upon us, and
reported, That a Quaker had hanged himself in Lincolnshire, and had a Stake
driven through him. This Falsehood they printed to the Nation, adding Sin to
Sin; which the Truth and we were clear of: for he was no more a Quaker, than
the Priest, that printed it; but was one of their own People. But
notwithstanding this wicked Slander, by which the Adversary designed to defame
us, and turn Peoples Minds against the Truth we held forth, many in
Lincolnshire received the Gospel, being Convinced of the Lord's Everlasting
Truth, and sat down therein under the Lord's heavenly Teaching.

Yorkshire. Warnsworth.
After this I passed in the Lord's Power into Yorkshire, and came to Warnsworth,
and went to the Steeple-house in the Fore-noon; but they shut the Door against
me: Yet after a while they let in Thomas Aldam, and then shut it again; and the
Priest fell upon him, asking him Questions. At last they opened the Door, and I
went in: and as soon as I was come in the Priests sight, he left Preaching,
though I said nothing to him; for he was in a great Maze, and asked me, What
have you to say? and presently Cried out, Come, come, I will prove them false
Prophets in Matthew: But he was so Confounded, he could not find the Chapter.
Then he fell on me, asking me many Questions; and I stood still all this while,
not saying any thing amongst them. At last I said; Seeing, here are so many
Questions asked, I may Answer them. But as soon as I began to speak, the People
violently rushed upon me, and thrust me out of the Steeple-house again, and
locked the Door on me. And as soon as they had done their Service, and were come
forth, the People ran upon me, and knocked me sorely with their Staves, threw
Clods and Stones at me, and abused me much: the Priest also, being in a great
rage, laid violent Hands on me himself. But I warned them and him of the
Terrible Day of the Lord, and exhorted them to Repent, and turn to Christ. And
being filled with the Lord's refreshing Power, I was not sensible of much hurt
I had received by their Blows. In the Afternoon I went to another
Steeple-house; but the Priest had done, before I got thither: So I preached
Repentance to the People, that were left, and directed them to their inward
Teacher, Jesus Christ.

Balby. Doncaster.
From hence I went to Balby, and so to Doncaster, where I had formerly preached
Repentance on the Market Day; which had made a Noise and Alarm in the Country.
On the First Day I went to the Steeple-house; and after the Priest had done, I
spoke to him and the People, what the Lord God had Commanded me. And they were
in a great Rage, and hurried me out, and threw me down, and haled me before the
Magistrates; and a long Examination they made of me, and much Work I had with
them: And they threatened my Life, if ever I came there again; and that they
would leave me to the Mercy of the People. Nevertheless I declared Truth
amongst them, and directed them to the Light of Christ in them; testifying unto
them, That God was come to teach his People himself, 1652. Doncaster.
whether they would hear, or whether they would forbear. After a while they put
us out (for some Friends were with me) among the rude Multitude; and they
stoned us down the Streets. And there was an Innkeeper, that was a Bailiff,
came and took us into his House: and they brake his Head, that the Blood ran
down his Face, with the Stones, that they threw at us: So we stayed a while in
his House, and showed the more sober People the Priest's Fruits. Then we went
away to Balby, Balby.
about a Mile off; and the rude People laid wait for us, and stoned us down the
Lane: But blessed be the Lord, we did not receive much hurt.

The next First Day I went to Tickhill, Tickhill.
whither the Friends of that Side gathered together, and there was a Meeting;
and a mighty Brokenness by the Power of God there was amongst the People. I
went out of the Meeting, being moved of God to go to the Steeple-house: And
when I came there, I found the Priest, and most of the Chief of the Parish
together in the Chancel. So I went up to them, and began to speak; but they
immediately fell upon me: and the Clark up with his Bible, as I was speaking,
and struck me on the Face with it, so that my Face gushed out with Blood; and I
bled exceedingly in the Steeple-house. Then the People cried, Let us have him
out of the Church. And when they had got me out, they beat me exceedingly; and
threw me down, and threw me over an Hedge: And afterward dragged me through an
House into the Street, stoning and beating me, as they dragged me along; so
that I was all-over besmeared with Blood and Dirt. And they got my Hat from me,
which I never got again. Yet when I was got upon my Legs again, I declared to
them the Word of Life, and showed them the Fruits of their Teacher; and how
they dishonored Christianity. So after a while I got into the Meeting again
amongst Friends: And the Priest and People coming by the House, I went forth
with Friends into the Yard, and there I spoke to the Priest and People; and the
Priest scofed at us, and called us Quakers. But the Lord's Power was so over
them, and the Word of Life was declared in such Authority and Dread to them,
that the Priest fell a Trembling himself; and one of the People said, Look how
the Priest trembles and shakes, he is turned a Quaker also. So when the Meeting
was over, Friends departed; and I went without my Hat to Balby, about Seven or
Eight Miles. Balby.
And Friends were much abused that Day by the Priest and his People; Insomuch
that some moderate Justices hearing of it, Two or Three of them came, and sat
at the Town, to hear and examine the Business. And he that had shed my Blood,
was afraid, of having his Hand cut off, for striking me in the Church (as they
called it:) but I forgave him, and would not appear against him.

In the beginning of this Year, Yorkshire. West Riding.
1652 great Rage got up in Priests and People, and in some of the Magistrates
in the West Riding of Yorkshire, against the Truth and against Friends;
insomuch that the Priest of Warnsworth procured a Warrant from the Justices
against me and Thomas Aldam, which was to be executed in any part of the
West Riding of Yorkshire.
At the same Time I had a Vision of a Bear and Two great Mastiff-Dogs; that I
should pass by them, and they should do me no hurt: and it proved so. 1652.
West Riding.
For the Constable took Thomas Aldam, and carried him to York; and I went with
Thomas Aldam Twenty Miles toward York: and the Constable had the Warrant for
me also, and said, He saw me; but he was loath to trouble Men, that were
Strangers: but Thomas Aldam was his Neighbor. So the Lord's Power restrained
him, that he had not Power to meddle with me. And we came to Lieutenant
Roper's, where we had a great Meeting of many Considerable Men; and the Truth
was powerfully declared amongst them, and the Scriptures wonderfully opened,
and the Parables and Sayings of Christ were expounded, and the State of the
Church in the Apostles Days was plainly set forth, and the Apostasy since from
that State discovered. And the Truth had great Dominion that Day, so that those
Great Men, that were present, did generally Confess to it, saying; They
believed, that this Principle must go over the whole World. There were at this
Meeting James Naylor, Thomas Goodyear and William Dewsbury, who had been
Convinced the Year before; and Richard Farnsworth also. And the Constable
stayed with Thomas Aldam, till the Meeting was over: And then went toward
York-prison; but did not meddle with me.

Wakefield
From hence I went to Wakefield: and on the First Day after I went to a
Steeple-house, where James Naylor had been a Member of an Independent-Church;
but upon his receiving Truth, he was Excommunicated. When I came in, and the
Priest had done, the People called upon me to come up to the Priest; which I
did: But when I began to declare the Word of Life to them, and to lay open the
Deceit of the Priest, they rushed upon me on a sudden, and thrust me out at
the other Door, and fell a punching and beating me, and Cried; Let us have him
to the Stocks: But the Lord's Power was over them, and restrained them, that
they were not suffered to put me in. So I passed away to the Meeting, where
were a great many Professors and friendly People gathered, and a great
Convincement there was that Day: For the People were mightily satisfied, that
they were directed to the Lord's Teaching in themselves. Here we got some
Lodging: for Four of us had lain abroad under an Hedge the Night before, there
being then few Friends in that Place.

The same Day Richard Farnsworth went to another great Steeple-house, belonging
to a great High Priest, and declared the Word of Truth unto the People; and a
great Service he had amongst them: For the Lord's Dread and Power was mightily
over all.

The Priest of that Church, which James Naylor had been a Member of, whose Name
mas Marshal, raised many Wicked Slanders upon me, as, That I carried Bottles
about with me, and made People drink of my Bottles, and that made them follow
me. And, That I rid upon a great Black Horse, and was seen in one Country upon
my Black Horse in one Hour, and in the same Hour in another Country Threescore
Miles off; and That I should give a Fellow Money to follow me, when I was on my
Black Horse: With these Hellish Lies he fed his People, to make them think Evil
of the Truth, which I had declared amongst them. But by these Lies of his, he
preached many of his Hearers away from him: For I was then on Foot, and
traveled on foot, and had no Horse at that Time; and that the People generally
knew. But the Lord soon after met with this Envious Priest, 1652. High-town.
and Cut him off in his Wickedness.

After this I came to a Town called High-Town, where dwelt a Woman, who had
been Convinced a little before; and we went to her House, and had a Meeting:
and the Towns-people gathered together, and we declared the Truth to them, and
had some Service for the Lord amongst them; and they passed away again
peaceably. But there was a Widow-woman in the Town, whose Name was Green, who
being filled with Envy, went to one, that was called a Gentleman in the Town
(who was reported to have killed Two Men and One Woman) and Informed him
against us; though he was no Officer. The next Morning we drew up some Queries,
to be sent to the Priest: And when we had done, and were just going away, some
of the Friendly People of the Town came running up to the House, where we were,
and told us; That this Murdering Man had sharpened a Pike to stab us, and was
coming up with his Sword by his Side. We were just passing away, and so missed
him. But we were no sooner gone, but he came to the House, where we had been;
and the People generally Concluded, If we had not been gone, he would have
murdered some of us. That Night we lay in a Wood, and were very Wet; for it
Rained exceedingly. In the Morning I was moved to come back to that Town again;
and then they gave us a full Relation of this wicked Man.

From hence we passed to Bradford, and came to an House, Bradford.
where we met with Richard Farnsworth again; from whom we had parted a little
before. When we came in, they set Meat before us; but as I was going to Eat,
the Word of the Lord came to me, saying; Eat not the Bread of such, as have an
Evil Eye. Immediately I arose from the Table, and ate nothing: The Woman of the
House was a Baptist. So after I had exhorted the Family, To turn to the Lord
Jesus Christ, and hearken to his Teachings in their own Hearts, We departed
thence.

And as we traveled through the Country, preaching Repentance to the People,
we came into a Market Town on the Market Day; and there was a Lecture there
that Day: And I went into the Steeple-house, where were many Priests, and
Professors, and People. The Priest, that preached, took for his Text those
Words of Jeremiah, Chap. 5. ver 31. My People love to have it so: Leaving out
the foregoing Words, viz. The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests bear
Rule by their Means. So I showed the People his Deceit; and directed them to
Christ, the true Teacher within; declaring unto them, that God was come to
Teach his People himself, and to bring them off from all the World's Teachers
and Hirelings; that they might come to receive freely from him. Then warning
them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Flesh, I passed from
thence without much Opposition.

At Night we came to a Country House; and there was no Alehouse near. They
desired us to stay there all Night; which we did, and had good Service for the
Lord, declaring his Truth amongst them.

1652. Yorkshire.
The next Day we passed on: For the Lord had said unto me; If but one Man or
Woman were Raised up by his Power, to stand and live in the same Spirit, that
the Prophets and Apostles were in, who gave forth the Scriptures,
that Man or Woman should shake all the Country in their Profession for Ten
Miles round. For People had the Scriptures, but were not in that same Light,
and Power, and Spirit, which they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures: and
so they neither knew God, nor Christ, nor the Scriptures aright; nor had they
Unity one with another, being out of the Power and Spirit of God. Therefore as
we passed along, we Warned all People, wherever we met them, of the Day of
the Lord, that was coming upon them.

Pendle-hill.
As we traveled on, we came near a very great and high Hill, called
Pendle-hill, and I was moved of the Lord, to go up to the Top of it; which I
did with much ado, it was so very Steep and High. When I was come to the Top of
this Hill, I saw the Sea bordering upon Lancashire: And from the Top of this
Hill the Lord let me see, in what Places he had a Great People to be gathered.
As I went down, I found a Spring of Water in the Side of the Hill, with which I
refreshed my self; having eaten or drunk but little in several Days before.

At Night we came to an Inn, and declared Truth to the Man of the House, and
writ a Paper to the Priests and Professors, declaring the Day of the Lord, and
that Christ was come to teach People himself, by his Power and Spirit in their
Hearts, and to bring People off from all the World's Ways and Teachers, to his
own free Teaching, who had bought them, and was the Savior of all them, that
believed in him. The Man of the House spread the Paper abroad, and was himself
mightily affected with the Truth. Here the Lord opened unto me, and let me see
a Great People in white Raiment by a Riverside, coming to the Lord: And the
Place that I saw them in, was about Wentzerdale and Sedbergh.

The next Day we traveled on, and at Night got a little Fern or Brakins to lay
under us, and lay upon a Common. Next Morning we reached to a Town, and there
Richard Farnsworth parted from me; and then I traveled alone again.
Wentzerdale.
So I came up Wentzerdale, and at the Market Town in that Dale there was a
Lecture on the Market Day; and I went into the Steeple-house. And after the
Priest had done, I Proclaimed the Day of the Lord to the Priest and People;
Warning them to turn from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God, that they might come to know God and Christ aright, and to
receive his Teaching, who teaches freely. And largely and freely did I declare
the Word of Life unto them, and had not much Persecution there. Afterward I
passed up the Dales, Warning People to fear God; and preaching the Everlasting
Gospel to them. And in my way I came to a Great House, where there was a
Schoolmaster; and they got me into the House. And I asked them Questions about
their Religion and Worship: and afterward I declared the Truth to them. They
had me into a Parlour, and locked me in, pretending that I was a Young Man, that
was Mad, and had got away from my Relations; and that they would keep me, till
they could send to my Relations. 1652. Wentzerdale.
But I soon Convinced them of their Mistake in that, and they let me forth; and
would have had me to stay there: But I was not to stay there. Then having
exhorted them to Repentance, and directed them to the Light of Christ Jesus,
that through it they might come unto him, and be saved; I passed from them, and
came in the Night to a little Alehouse on a Common, where there was a Company
of Rude Fellows drinking. And because I would not drink with them, they got up
their Clubs, and were striking at me: but I reproved them, and brought them to
be somewhat Cooler; and then I walked out of the House upon the Common in the
Night. After some time one of these drunken Fellows came out, and would have
come close up to me, pretending to whisper to me: but I perceived, he had a
Knife; wherefore I kept off from him, and bid him Repent, and fear God. So the
Lord by his Power preserved me from this Wicked Man; and he went into the House
again. The next Morning I went on through other Dales, Yorkshire Dales.
Warning and Exhorting People every where, as I passed, to Repent and turn to
the Lord: and several were Convinced. At one House, that I came to, the Man of
the House (whom I afterward found to be a Kinsman of John Blakelin's) would
have given me Money; but I would not Receive it.

As thus I traveled on through the Dales, I came to another Man's House, whose
Name was Tennant: And I was moved to speak to the Family, and declare God's
Everlasting Truth to them. And as I was turning away from them, I was moved to
turn again, and speak to the Man himself: And he was Convinced, and his Family,
and lived and died in the Truth. Thence I came to Major Bousfield's, who
received me, as did also several others; and some that were then Convinced,
have stood faithful ever since. Grysedale.
I went also through Grysedale, and several other of those Dales; in which some
were Convinced. And I went into Dent, where many were Convinced also. Dent.
But from Major Bousfield's I came to Richard Robinson's, and declared the
Everlasting Truth to him.

The next day I went to a Meeting at Justice Benson's, where met a a People,
that were separated from the public Worship This was the place, that I had
seen, where a People came forth in white Raiment. A large Meeting it was, and
the People were generally Convinced; and continue a large Meeting still of
Friends near Sedburgh: Near Sedburgh.
Which was then first gathered through my Ministry in the Name of Jesus.

In the same Week there was a great Fair, at which Servants used to be hired:
And I went and declared the day of the Lord through the Fair. And after I had
done so, I went into the Steeple-house-Yard; and many of the People of the Fair
came thither to me, and abundance of Priests and Professors. There I declared
the Everlasting Truth of the Lord, and the Word of Life for several Hours;
showing, that the Lord was come to Teach his People himself, and to bring them
off from all the World's Ways and Teachers, to Christ the true Teacher, and the
true Way to God. I laid open their Teachers, showing, that they were like them,
that were of Old condemned by the Prophets, and by Christ, and by the Apostles:
And I exhorted the People to come off from the Temples made with Hands; 1652.
Near Sedburgh.
and Wait to receive the Spirit of the Lord, that they might know themselves to
be the Temples of God. Not one of the Priests had power to open his Mouth
against what I declared: But at last a Captain said, Why will you not go into
the Church? for this is not a fit place to preach in, said he. But I told him,
I denied their Church. Then stood up one Francis Howgill, who was a Preacher to
a Congregation: He had not seen me before; yet he undertook to Answer that
Captain; and soon put him to Silence. Then said this Francis Howgill of me;
This Man speaks with Authority, and not as the Scribes. After this I opened to
the People, That that Ground and House was no holier, than another Place; and
that that House is not the Church but the People; whom Christ is the Head of.
Then after a while the Priests came up to me, and I warned them to Repent: One
of them said, I was Mad; and so they turned away. But many People were
Convinced there that day, and were glad at the hearing of the Truth declared,
and received it with Joy. Amongst these was one called Captain Ward, who
received the Truth in the love of it, and lived and dyed in it.

Westmorland. Firbank-Chappel.
The next First Day I came to Firbank-Chappel in Westmorland, where Francis
Howgill before named, and one John Audland had been preaching in the Morning:
The Chapel was full of People, so that many could not get in. And Francis
Howgill said, He thought, I looked into the Chapel, and his Spirit was ready to
fail; the Lord's Power did so surprise him: But I did not look in. They made
haste, and had quickly done at that time: and they and some of the People went
to their Dinners; but abundance stayed, till they came again. Now John
Blakelin, and others came to me, and desired me not to Reprove them publicly;
for they were not Parish-Teachers, but pretty Tender Men. I could not tell
them, whether I should or no (though I had not at that time any Drawings to
declare publicly against them;) but I said, They must leave me to the Lord's
Movings. So while the others were gone to Dinner, I went to a Brook, and got me
a little Water; and then came, and sat down on the Top of a Rock hard by the
Chapel. In the Afternoon the People gathered about me, with several of their
Preachers; it was judged, there were above a Thousand People: amongst whom I
declared God's everlasting Truth and Word of Life freely and largely, for about
the space of three Hours, directing all to the Spirit of God in themselves;
that they might be turned from the Darkness to the Light, and believe in it,
that they might become the Children of it: and might be turned from the Power
of Satan, which they had been under, unto God; and by the Spirit of Truth might
be led into all Truth, and sensibly understand the words of the Prophets, and
of Christ, and of the Apostles; and might all come to know Christ to be their
Teacher to instruct them, their Counselor to direct them, their Shepherd to
feed them, their Bishop to oversee them, and their Prophet to open divine
Mysteries to them; and might know their Bodies to be prepared, sanctified and
made fit Temples for God and Christ to dwell in. And in the openings of the
heavenly Life, I opened unto them the Prophets, and the Figures and Shadows,
and directed them to Christ, the Substance. 1652. Westmorland. Firbank-Chappel.
Then I opened the Parables and Sayings of Christ, and things that had been
long hid; showing the intent and scope of the Apostles Writings, how that their
Epistles were written to the Elect. And when I had opened that State, I showed
also the State of the Apostasy, that has been since the Apostles days; how the
Priests have gotten the Scripture (but are not in that Spirit, which gave them
forth) and have put them into Chapter and Verse, to make a Trade of the Holy
Men's Words: And how that the Teachers and Priests now are found in the steps of
the false Prophets, Chief Priests, Scribes and Pharisees of old, and are such,
as the true Prophets, Christ and his Apostles cried against, and so are judged
and condemned by the Spirit of the true Prophets, and of Christ, and of his
Apostles; and that none, who was in that Spirit, and guided by it now, could
own them. Now there were many old People, who went into the Chapel, and looked
out at the Windows; thinking it a strange thing, to see a Man preach on an Hill
or Mountain, and not in their Church (as they called it;) whereupon I was moved
to open to the People, That the Steeple-house (and the Ground whereon it
stood,) was no more holy, than that Mountain; and that those Temples, which
they called the dreadful Houses of God, were not set up by the Command of God
and of Christ; nor their Priests called, as Aaron's Priesthood was; nor their
Tithes appointed by God, as those amongst the Jews were: but that Christ was
come, who ended both the Temple and its Worship, and the Priests and their
Tithes; and all now should hearken unto him: for he said, Learn of me; and God
said of him, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him. So
I declared unto them, that the Lord God had sent me to preach the Everlasting
Gospel and Word of Life amongst them; and to bring them off from all these
Temples, Tithes, Priests and Rudiments of the World, which had gotten up since
the Apostles days, and had been set up by such, as had erred from the Spirit
and Power, that the Apostles were in. Very largely was I opened at this
Meeting, and the Lord's Convincing Power accompanied my Ministry, and reached
home unto the Hearts of the People; whereby many were Convinced that day, and
all the Teachers of that Congregation (who were many) were Convinced of God's
everlasting Truth that day.

After the Meeting was over, I went to John Audland's, and from thence to
Preston-Patrick-Chappel, Preston-Patrick-Chappel.
where a great Meeting was appointed; to which I went, and had a large
opportunity amongst the People, to preach the Everlasting Gospel to them,
opening to them (as to others on the like occasion) that the End of my coming
into that Place, was not to hold it up; no more than the Apostles going into
the Jewish Synagogues and Temple was, to uphold those: But to bring them off
from all such things (as the Apostles brought the Saints of old from off the
Jewish Temple and Aaron's Priesthood) that they might come to witness their
Bodies to be the Temples of God, and Christ in them to be their Teacher.

1652. Kendal.
From this Place I went to Kendal, where a Meeting was appointed in the
Town Hall: in which I declared the Word of Life amongst the People, showing
them; How they might come to the saving knowledge of Christ, and to have a
right Understanding of the Holy Scriptures: and opening to them, what it was,
that would lead them into the way of Reconciliation with God; and what would be
their Condemnation. After the Meeting I stayed a while in the Town; and several
were Convinced there, and many appeared loving. One, whose Name was Cock, met
me in the Street, and would have given me a Roll of Tobacco (for People then
were much given to smoking Tobacco:) I accepted his love; but did not receive
the Tobacco.

Under-barrow.
From thence I went to Vnder-barrow, to one Miles Bateman's, and several People
going along with me, great Reasonings I had with them; especially with Edward
Borough. At Night the Priest came, and many Professors to the House; and a
great deal of Disputing I had with them. Supper being provided for the Priest
and the rest of the Company, I had not freedom to eat with them; but told them,
If they would appoint a Meeting for the next day at the Steeple-house, and
acquaint the People with it, I might meet them. They had a great deal of
Reasoning about it; some being for it, and some against it. In the Morning I
walked out (after I had spoken again to them concerning the Meeting:) and as I
walked upon a Bank by the House, there came several poor People, Travelers,
asking Relief, who I saw were in Necessity: and they gave them nothing; but
said, they were Cheats. It grieved me to see such hard-heartedness amongst
Professors; whereupon, when they were gone in to their Breakfast, I ran after
the Poor People about a quarter of a Mile, and gave them some Money. Mean while
some of them, that were in the House, coming out again, and seeing me a quarter
of a Mile off, said; I could not have gone so far in such an Instant, if I had
not had Wings. Hereupon the Meeting was like to have been put by: for they were
filled with such strange Thoughts concerning me, that many of them were against
having a Meeting with me. I told them, I ran after those poor People to give
them some Money; being grieved at their hard-heartedness, who gave them
nothing. Then came Miles and Stephen Hubbersty; and they being more
simple-hearted Men, would have the Meeting held. So to the Chapel at
Vnder-barrow I went: and the Priest came, and a great Meeting there was, and
the Way of Life and Salvation was opened; and after a while the Priest fled
away. And many of Crook and Vnder-barrow were Convinced that day, and received
the Word of Life; and stood fast in it under the Teaching of Christ Jesus. Now
after I had declared the Truth to them for some Hours, and the Meeting was
ended; the Chief-Constable, and some other Professors fell to Reasoning with me
in the Chappel-Yard: Whereupon I took a Bible, and opened to them the
Scriptures, and dealt tenderly with them, as one would do with a Child. And
they that were in the Light of Christ, and Spirit of God, knew when I spoke
Scripture, though I did not mention Chapter and Verse after the Priest's Form
unto them.

From hence I went along with an ancient Man, 1652. Under-barrow.
whose Heart the Lord had opened; and he invited me to his House: His Name was
James Dickinson. He was Convinced that day, and received the Truth, and lived
and died in it.

From his House I came the next day to James Taylor's of Newton in Cartmell, in
Lancashire. And on the First Day of the Week, Lancashire. Newton in Cartmell.
I went to the Chapel, where one Priest Camelford used to preach; and after he
had done, I began to speak the Word of Life to the People. But this Priest
Camelford was in such a Rage, and did so fret, and was so peevish, that he had
no patience to hear; but stirred up the rude Multitude, and they rudely haled
me out, and struck and punched me, and threw me Headlong over a Stone-Wall:
yet, blessed be the Lord, his Power preserved me. He that did this Violence to
me, was a wicked Man, one John Knipe, whom afterward the Lord cut off. But
there was a Youth in the Chapel, writing after the Priest; and I was moved to
speak to him, and he came to be Convinced, and received a part of the Ministry
of the Gospel: His Name was John Brathwait.

Then went I up to an Alehouse, whither many People resorted betwixt the time
of their Morning and Afternoon-Preaching; and I had a great deal of Reasoning
with the People there, declaring to them; That God was come to Teach his People
himself, and to bring them off from all false Teachers, such as the Prophets,
Christ and the Apostles cried against. And many received the Word of Life at
that time, and abode in it.

In the Afternoon I went about two or three Miles to another Steeple-house or
Chapel, called Lyndal. And when the Priest had done, I spoke to him and the
People, what the Lord commanded me: and there were great Opposers; but
afterward they came to be Convinced. After this I went to one Captain Sands,
who with his Wife seemed somewhat affected with Truth: and if they could have
held the World and Truth together, they would have received it; but they were
Hypocrites, and he a very Chaffy, light Man. Wherefore I reproved him for his
Lightness, and for his Jesting; telling him, It was not seemly in a great
Professor, as he was. Thereupon he told me, He had a Son, who upon his
Deathbed had also reproved him for it, and warned him of it. But he neither
regarded the Admonition of his dying Son, nor the Reproofs of God's Spirit in
himself.

From hence I went to Vlverstone, Ulverstone. Swarthmore.
and so to Swarthmore to Judge Fell's; whether came up one Lampitt, a Priest,
who I perceived had been, and still was an high Notionist. With him I had a
great deal of Reasoning: for he would talk of high Notions and Perfection; and
thereby deceived the People. He would have owned me; but I could not own nor
join with him: he was so full of Filth. He said, He was above John; and made,
as though he knew all things. But I told him; Death reigned from Adam to Moses;
and that he was under Death, and knew not Moses: for Moses saw the Paradise of
God; but he knew neither Moses, nor the Prophets, nor John. For that crooked
and rough Nature stood in him, and the Mountain of Sin and Corruptions; and the
Way was not prepared in him for the Lord. 1652. Swarthmore.
He confessed, he had been under a Cross in things; but now he could sing
Psalms, and do any thing. I told him; Now he could see a Thief, and join Hand
in Hand with him: But he could not preach Moses, nor the Prophets, nor John,
nor Christ, except he were in the same Spirit, that they were in. Now Margaret
Fell had been abroad in the Daytime; and at Night her Children told her, that
Priest Lampitt and I had dis-agreed: which did somewhat trouble her, because
she was in a Profession with him; (but he hid his dirty Actions from them.) At
Night we had a great deal of Reasoning; and I declared the Truth to her and her
Family. The next day Lampitt came again, and I had a great deal of Discourse
with him before Margaret Fell, who then clearly discerned the Priest; and a
Convincement of the Lord's Truth came upon her, and her Family. Within a day or
two there was a day to be observed for an Humiliation; and Margaret Fell asked
me to go with her to the Steeple-house at Vlverstone, Ulverstone.
(for she was not wholly come off from them:) I replied, I must do, as I am
ordered by the Lord. So I left her, and walked into the Fields; and the Word of
the Lord came to me, saying; Go to the Steeple-house after them. When I came,
the Priest Lampitt was singing with his People: But his Spirit was so foul, and
the Matter they sung, so Unsuitable to their States, that after they had done
singing, I was moved of the Lord to speak to him and the People. The Word of
the Lord to them was; He is not a Jew, that is one Outward; but he is a Jew,
that is one Inward, whose Praise is not of Man, but of God. Then, as the Lord
opened further; I showed them, That God was come to Teach his People by his
Spirit, and to bring them off from all their old Ways and Religions, Churches
and Worships: for all their Religions, and Worships and Ways was but talking of
other Men's Words; but they were out of the Life and Spirit, which they were in,
who gave them forth. Then cried out one, called Justice Sawrey; Take him away:
But Judge Fell's Wife said to the Officers; Let him alone: Why may not he
speak, as well as any other? Lampitt also, the Priest (in Deceit) said, Let him
speak. So at length, when I had declared a pretty while, this Justice Sawrey
caused the Constable to put me out; and then I spoke to the People in the
Grave-yard.

Aldenham.
Upon the First Day after, I was moved to go to Aldenham-Steeple-house: And when
the Priest had done, I spoke to him; but he got away. Then I declared the Word
of Life to the People, and warned them to Return to the Lord.

Ramside.
From thence I passed to Ram-side, where was a Chapel, in which one Thomas
Lawson used to preach, who was a high sort of a Priest: and he very lovingly
spoke to his People in the Morning, of my Coming in the Afternoon; by which
means very many People were gathered together. When I came, I saw, there was no
Place so Convenient to declare to the People there, as the Chapel; wherefore I
went into the Chapel, and all was quiet: And the Priest Thomas Lawson went not
up into his Pulpit, but left all the Time to me. And the Everlasting Day of the
Eternal God was proclaimed that Day, and the Everlasting Truth was largely
declared; which reached and entered into the Hearts of People, and many received
the Truth in the Love of it. And this Priest came to be Convinced, and left his
Chapel; 1652. Firbank. Chapel.
and threw off his Preaching for Hire, and came to preach the Lord Jesus and
his Kingdom freely. After that, some rude People cast Scandals upon him, and
thought to have done him a Mischief; but he was carried over all, and grew in
the Wisdom of God mightily, and proved very serviceable in his Place.

Then returned I to Swarthmore again, Swarthmore. Dalton. Steeple-house.
and on the next First Day went to Dalton-Steeple-house; where after the Priest
had done, I declared the Word of Life to the People, that they might be turned
from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of Satan to God; and might
come off from their Superstitious Ways, and from their Teachers made of Man, to
Christ the true and living Way, to be taught of him.

From thence I went into the Island of Walnah: Island of Walnah.
and after the Priest had done, I spoke to him; but he got away. Then I spoke
to the People, and declared the Truth unto them; but they were something Rude.
Then went I to speak with the Priest at his House; but he would not be seen:
The People said, he went to hide himself in the Hay-mow; and they went to look
for him there, but could not find him. Then they said, he was gone to hide
himself in the standing Corn; but they could not find him there neither. So I
went to James Lancaster's, who was Convinced in the Island; and from thence I
returned to Swarthmore again, Swarthmore.
where the Lord's Power seized upon Margaret Fell and her Daughter Sarah, and
several of them.

Then I went to Becliff, where Leornard Fell was Convinced, Becliff.
and became a Minister of the Everlasting Gospel: And several others were
Convinced there, and came into obedience to the Truth. Here the People said,
They could not tell how to dispute; and would fain have put on some other to
hold Talk with me: but I bid them, Fear the Lord; and not in a light way hold a
Talk of the Lord's Words, but put the Things in practice. And I directed them
to the Divine Light of Christ, and his Spirit in their Hearts, which would let
them see all the Evil Thoughts, Words and Actions, that they had thought,
spoken and acted; by which Light they might see their Sin, and by which Light
they might also see their Savior, Christ Jesus, to save them from their Sins.
This, I told them, was their first Step to Peace, even to stand still in the
Light, that showed them their Sins and Transgressions; by which they might come
to see, how they were in the fall of Old Adam, in the Darkness and Death,
Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, and without God in the World: And by the
same Light they might see Christ, that died for them, to be their Redeemer and
Savior, and their Way to God.

After this I went to a Chapel beyond Gleaston; which was built, Chapel
beyond Gleaston.
but never Priest had preached in it. Thither all the Country up and down came;
and a quiet, peaceable Meeting it was, in which the Word of Life was declared
amongst the People, and many were convinced of the Truth about Gleaston.

1652. Swarthmore. Westmorland on Kendal-side.
From thence I returned to Swarthmore again; where after I had staid a few Days,
and most of the Family were Convinced, I went from thence back again into
Westmorland, where Priest Lampitt had been amongst the Professors on
Kendal-Side, and had mightily Incensed them against me; telling them, I held
many strange Things. So I met with them, that he had so Incensed, and sat up
all Night with them at James Dickinson's, and answered all their Objections:
And then they were both thoroughly satisfied with the Truth, that I had
declared, and dissatisfied with him, and his Lies that he had divulged; so that
he clearly lost the best of his Hearers and Followers, who hereby came to see
his Deceit, and forsook him.

Then I passed on to John Audland's and Gervase Benson's, and had great
Meetings amongst those People, that had been Convinced before: And to John
Blakelin's and Richard Robinson's, and had mighty Meetings there; and so up
toward Grisedale.

Soon after Judge Fell being come home, Margaret Fell his Wife sent to me,
desiring me to return thither: And I feeling Freedom from the Lord so to do,
Swarthmore.
went back through the Country to Swarthmore. Where when I came, I found, the
Priests and Professors, and that envious Justice Sawrey had much Incensed Judge
Fell and Captain Sands against the Truth, by their Lies: But when I came to
speak with him, I answered all his Objections; and so thoroughly satisfied him
by the Scriptures, that he was Convinced in his Judgment. Then he asked me, If
I was that George Fox, whom Justice Robinson spoke so much in Commendation of
amongst many of the Parliament Men? I told him, I had been with Justice
Robinson, and with Justice Hotham in Yorkshire, who were very Civil and Loving
to me; and that they were Convinced in their Judgments by the Spirit of God,
that the Principle, which I bore Testimony to, was the Truth, and they did see
over and beyond the Priests of the Nation: So that they, and many others, were
now come to be wiser than their Teachers. After we had discoursed a pretty Time
together, Judge Fell himself was satisfied also, and came to see, by the
Openings of the Spirit of God in his Heart, over all the Priests and Teachers
of the World; and did not go to hear them for some Years, before he died: for
he knew, it was the Truth, that I declared; and that Christ was the Teacher of
his People, and their Savior: And he would sometimes wish, that I were a while
with Judge Bradshaw to discourse with him. There came to Judge Fell's that
Captain Sands beforementioned, endeavoring to Incense the Judge against me;
for he was an evil-minded Man, and full of Envy against me: And yet he could
speak high things, and use the Scripture-words, and say, Behold, I make all
things new. But I told him, Then he must have a New God; for his God was his
Belly. Besides him, thither came also that envious Justice John Sawrey: And I
told him, His Heart was rotten, and he was full of Hypocrisy to the Brim.
Several other People also came, whose States the Lord gave me a discerning of;
and I spoke unto their Conditions. And while I was in those Parts, Richard
Farnsworth and James Naylor came thither to see me, and the Family; and Judge
Fell being satisfied, that it was the Way of Truth, notwithstanding all their
Opposition let the Meeting be kept at his House: And a great Meeting was
settled there in the Lord's Power, to the tormenting of the Priests and
Professors; which has continued there near Forty Years, until the Year 1690.
that a New Meeting House was erected near it.

Now after I had stayed a while, Underbarrow.
and the Meeting there was well settled, I departed from thence, and went to
Vnderbarrow, where I had a great Meeting. From thence I went to Kellet, Kellet.
and had a great Meeting at Robert Withers, to which several came from
Lancaster, and some from York; and many were Convinced there. Then on the
Market Day I went to Lancaster, Lancaster
and spoke through the Market in the dreadful Power of God; declaring the Day
of the Lord to the People, and crying out against all their deceitful
Merchandise: And I preached Righteousness and Truth unto them, which they
should all follow after, and walk and live in; directing them, how and where
they might find and receive the Spirit of God, to guide them there-into. After
I had cleared my self in the Market, I went to my Lodging, whither several
People came to me; and many were Convinced there, who have stood faithful to
the Truth.

On the First Day following, in the Forenoon, I had a great Meeting in the
Street at Lancaster, amongst the Soldiers and People, unto whom I declared the
Word of Life, and the Everlasting Truth: And I opened unto them, That all the
Traditions they had lived in, and all their Worships and Religions, and the
Profession they made of the Scriptures, was good for nothing, while they lived
out of the Life and Power, which they were in, who gave forth the Scriptures.
And I directed them to the Light of Christ, the heavenly Man, and to the Spirit
of God in their own Hearts, that they might come to be acquainted with God and
with Christ, and receive him for their Teacher, and know his Kingdom set up in
them.

In the Afternoon I went up to the Steeple-house at Lancaster, and declared the
Truth both to the Priest and People; laying open before them the Deceits they
lived in; and directing them to the Power and Spirit of God, which they wanted.
But they haled me out, and stoned me along the Street, till I came to John
Lawson's House.

On another First Day I went to another Steeple-house by the Waterside, where
one Whitehead was Priest; to whom, and to the People I declared the Truth in
the dreadful Power of God. And there came to me a Doctor, who was so full of
Envy, that he said, He could find in his Heart, to run me through with his
Rapier, though he was hanged for it the next Day: Yet this Man came afterward
to be Convinced of the Truth, so far as to be loving to Friends. And some
People were Convinced there-abouts, who willingly sat down under the Ministry
of Christ, their Teacher: And a Meeting was settled there in the Power of God,
which has continued to this Day.

After this I returned into Westmorland, Westmorland. Kendal.
and spoke through Kendal upon a Market Day: And so dreadful was the Power of
God, that was upon me, that People flew, like Chaff, before me into their
Houses. I warned them of the Mighty Day of the Lord, and exhorted them to
hearken to the Voice of God in their own Hearts, who was now Come to Teach his
People himself. And when some Opposed, many People took my part; insomuch, that
at last some of the People fell to Fighting about me: but I went to them, and
spoke to them; and they parted again. And several were Convinced.

On the First Day after I had a very large Meeting in Vnder-barrow at Miles
Bateman's House, where I was moved to declare, That all People in the Fall were
gone from the Image of God, Righteousness and Holiness, and were become as
Wells without the Water of Life, as Clouds without the heavenly Rain, as Trees
without the heavenly Fruit; and were degenerated into the Nature of Beasts, and
of Serpents, and of tall Cedars, and of Oaks, and of Bulls, and of Heifers: So
that they might read the Natures of these Creatures within, as the Prophet
described them to the People of Old, that were out of Truth. I opened unto
them, how some were in the Nature of Dogs and Swine, biting and rending; some
in the nature of Briars, Thistles and Thorns; some like the Owls and Dragons in
the Night; some like the wild Asses and Horses, snuffing up the Wind; and some
like the Mountains and Rocks, and crooked and rough Ways. Wherefore I exhorted
them to read these things within, in their own Natures, as well as without: And
that, when they read without of the wandering Stars, they should look within,
and see, how they have wandered from the bright and Morning Star. And they
should consider, that as the Fallow Ground in their Fields must be plowed up,
before it would bear Seed to them; so must the Fallow Ground of their Hearts be
plowed up, before they could bear Seed to God. Now all these Names and Things,
I showed them, were spoken of and to Man and Woman, since they fell from the
Image of God; but as they do come to be renewed again into the Image of God,
they come out of the Natures of these things, and so out of the Names thereof.
Many more such things were declared to them, and they were turned to the Light
of Christ, by which they might come to know Christ, and to receive him; and
might witness him to be their Substance and their Way, their Salvation and true
Teacher. And many were Convinced at that Time.

Now after I had traveled up and down in those Countries, and had had great
Meetings, Swarthmore. Ulverston.
I came to Swarthmore again. And when I had visited Friends a while in those
Parts; I heard of a great Meeting the Priests were to have at Vlverstone, on a
Lecture-Day. Whereupon I went down to it, and went into the Steeple-house in
the Dread and Power of the Lord: And when the Priest had done, I spoke among
them the Word of the Lord, which was as an Hammer, and as a Fire amongst them.
And though Lampit (the Priest of the Place) had been at variance with most of
the Priests before; yet against the Truth he and they all joined together. But
the mighty Power of the Lord was over all; and so wonderful was the Appearance
thereof, that Priest Bennet said, The Church shook; Insomuch that he was
afraid, and trembled: and after he had spoken a few Confused Words, he hastened
out, for fear the Steeple-house would fall on his Head. There were many Priests
got together there; yet they had no Power as yet, to Persecute.

When I had cleared my Conscience amongst them, I went up to Swarthmore again;
whither came up four or five of the Priests: 1652. Swarthmore.
And coming to discourse, I asked them; Whether any one of them could say, he
ever had the Word of the Lord to go and speak to such or such a People? None of
them durst say, He had: But one of them burst out into a Passion, and said, He
could speak his Experiences, as well as I. I told him, Experience was one
thing: but to receive and go with a Message, and to have a Word from the Lord,
as the Prophets and Apostles had and did, and as I had done to them; this was
another thing. And therefore I put it to them again; Could any of them say, he
had ever had a Command or Word from the Lord immediately at any time? but none
of them could say so. Then I told them; The false Prophets, and false Apostles,
and Antichrists could use the Words of the true Prophets, and true Apostles,
and of Christ, and would speak of other Men's Experiences; though they
themselves never knew nor heard the Voice of God and Christ: and such as They,
might get the good Words and Experiences of others: This puzzled them much, and
laid them open. For at another time, when I was discoursing with several
Priests at Judge Fell's House, and he was by, I asked them the same Question,
Whether any of them ever heard the Voice of God or Christ, to bid him go to
such or such a People, to declare his Word or Message unto them? for any one (I
told them) any that could but read, might declare the Experiences of the
Prophets and Apostles, which were recorded in the Scriptures. Hereupon one of
them, whose Name was Thomas Tailor, an ancient Priest, did ingenuously Confess
before Judge Fell, That he had never heard the Voice of God, nor of Christ, to
send him to any People; but he spoke his Experiences, and the Experiences of
the Saints in former Ages; and That he preached. This very much Confirmed Judge
Fell in the Persuasion he had, That the Priests were wrong; for he had thought
formerly, as the generality of People then did, That they were sent from God.

This Thomas Tailor was Convinced at this time, Westmorland. Cross-land.
and traveled with me into Westmorland. And coming to Crossland-Steeple-house,
we found the People gathered together there. And the Lord opened Thomas
Taylor's Mouth amongst the People (though he was Convinced but the day before)
so that he declared amongst them, How he had been, before he was Convinced; and
like the good Scribe, that was Converted to the Kingdom, he brought forth
things new and old to the People, and showed them, how the Priests were out of
the Way: Which did torment the Priests. Some little discourse I had with them,
but they sled away; and a precious Meeting there was, wherein the Lord's Power
was over all, and the People were directed to the Spirit of God, by which they
might come to know God and Christ, and to understand the Scriptures aright.
After this I passed on, visiting Friends, and had very large Meetings in
Westmorland.

Now began the Priests to Rage more and more, and as much as they could to stir
up Persecution. Whereupon James Naylor and Francis Howgill were cast into
Prison in Appleby-Jail, at the instigation of the malicious Priests; some of
whom prophesied, That within a Month we should be all scattered again, and come
to nothing. But blessed for ever be the Worthy Name of the Lord, the Work of
the Lord went on and prospered. 1652. Westmorland
For about this time John Audland and Francis Howgill, and John Camm, and
Edward Borough, and Richard Hubberthorn and Miles Hubbersty, and Miles Halhead
with several others, being endued with Power from on high, came forth into the
Work of the Ministry, and approved themselves faithful Laborers therein;
traveling up and down, and preaching the Gospel freely: by means whereof
Multitudes were Convinced, and many effectually turned to the Lord. Amongst
these Christopher Tailor was one, who was Brother to Thomas Tailor
beforementioned; and had been a Preacher to a People, as well as his Brother:
But after they had received the knowledge of the Truth, they soon came into
Obedience thereunto; and left their Preaching for Hire or Rewards. And having
received a part of the Ministry of the Gospel, they preached Christ freely;
being often sent by the Lord to declare his Word in Steeple Houses, and in
Markets: and great Sufferers they were.

Lancashire. Ulverstone
After I had visited Friends in Westmorland, I returned into Lancashire, and
went to Vlverstone, where -- Lampitt was Priest: who though he had preached of
a People, that did own the Teachings of God, and had said; That Men and Women
should come to declare the Gospel; yet afterward, when it came to be
fulfilled, he persecuted both it and them. To this Priest's House I went, where
abundance of Priests and Professors ^ere got together after their Lecture; with
whom I had great Disputings concerning Christ and the Scriptures: for they were
loath to let their Trade go down, which they made of preaching Christ's, and the
Apostles and Prophets Words. But the Lord's Power went over the Heads of them
all, and his Word of Life was held forth amongst them; though many of them were
exceeding Envious and Devilish. Yet after this, many Priests and Professors
came to me from far and near: of whom, they that were Innocent and
Simple-minded, were satisfied, and went away refreshed; but the fat and full
were fed with Judgment, and sent empty away: for that was the Word of the Lord
to be divided to them.

Now when Meetings were set up, and we Met in private Houses, then began
Lampitt the Priest to Rage: And he said, We forsook the Temple, and went to
Jeroboam 's Calves-houses: So that many Professors began to see, how he was
declined from that, which he had formerly h^ld and preached. Hereupon the Case
of Jeroboam's Calves was opened to the Professors, Priests and People; and it
was declared and manifested unto them, That their Houses (which they called
Churches) were more like Jeroboam's Calves-houses, even the Old Mass-houses,
which were set up in the darkness of Popery, and which they, who called
themselves Protestants, and professed to be more enlightened than the Papists,
did still hold up; although God had never commanded them: Whereas that Temple,
which God had commanded at Jerusalem, Christ came to end the Service of; and
they that received and believed in him, their Bodies came to be the Temples of
God, and of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost to dwell in them, and to walk in
them. And all such were gathered into the Name of Jesus, whose Name is above
every Name; 1652. Ulverstone.
and there is no Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the
Name of Jesus. And they that were thus gathered, met together in several
Dwelling-houses, which were not called the Temple, nor the Church; but their
Bodies were the Temples of God, and the Believers were the Church, which Christ
was the Head of. So that Christ was not called the Head of an Old House, which
was made by Men's Hands; neither did he come to purchase and sanctify, and
redeem with his Blood an Old House, which they called their Church; but the
People, which he is the Head of. Much work I had in those Days with Priests and
People, concerning their Old Mass-houses, which they called their Churches: for
the Priests had persuaded the People, that it was the House of God; whereas the
Apostle says, Whose House we are, etc. Heb. 3.6. So the People are God's House,
in whom he dwells. And the Apostle says; Christ purchased his Church with his
own Blood; and Christ calls his Church his Spouse, and his Bride, the Lamb's
Wife: So that this Title Church and Spouse, was not given to an Old House; but
to his People, the true Believers.

After this on a Lecture-day I was moved to go to the Steeple-house at
Vlverstone, where were abundance of Professors, Priests and People. I went up
near to Priest Lampitt, who was blustering on in his Preaching: And after the
Lord had opened my Mouth to speak, John Sawrey the Justice came to me, and
said; If I would speak according to the Scriptures, I should speak. I stranged
at him for speaking so to me, for I did speak according to the Scriptures; and
I told him, I should speak according to the Scriptures, and bring the
Scriptures to prove, what I had to say: for I had something to speak to Lampitt
and to them. Then he said: I should not speak; Contradicting himself, who had
said just before, I should speak, if I would speak according to the Scriptures:
which I did. Now the People were quiet, and heard me gladly; until this Justice
Sawrey (who was the first Stirrer up of cruel Persecution in the North)
incensed them against me, and set them on to hale, beat and bruise me. Then on
a sudden the People were in a Rage; and they fell upon me in the Steeple-house
before his Face, and knocked me down, and kicked me, and trampled upon me, he
looking on: And so great was the Vproar, that some People tumbled over their
Seats for fear. At last he came, and took me from the People, and led me out of
the Steeple-house, and put me into the Hands of the Constables and other
Officers; bidding them Whip me, and put me out of the Town. Then they led me
about a quarter of a Mile, some taking hold by my Collar, and some by my Arms
and Shoulders, and shook and dragged me along. And there being many Friendly
People come to the Market, and some of them come to the Steeple-house to hear
me, diverse of these they knocked down also, and brake their Heads; so that the
Blood ran down from several of them. And Judge Fell's Son running after, to see
what they would do with me, they threw him into a Ditch of Water; some of them
crying, Knock the Teeth out of his Head. Now when they had haled me to the
Common-Moss-side, a Multitude of People following, the Constables and other
Officers gave me some Blows over my Back with their Willow-Rods, and so thrust
me among the rude Multitude: who (having furnished themselves some with Staves,
some with Hedge-stakes, Common.
and others with Holm or Holly-bushes) fell upon me, and beat me on my Head,
Arms and Shoulders, till they had amazed me; so that I fell down upon the Wet
Common. And when I recovered my self again, and saw my self lying in a Watery
Common, and the People standing about me; I lay still a little while: And the
Power of the Lord sprang through me, and the Eternal Refreshings refreshed me;
so that I stood up again in the strengthening Power of the Eternal God. And
stretching out my Arms amongst them, I said with a loud Voice, Strike again;
here are my Arms, my Head and my Cheeks. There was in the Company a Mason, a
Professor, but a rude Fellow; He with his walking Rule-Staff gave me a Blow
with all his might, just over the back of my Hand, as it was stretched out;
with which blow my Hand was so bruised, and my Arm so benumbed, that I could
not draw it unto me again: so that some of the People cried out, He has
spoiled his Hand for ever having any use of it more. But I looked at it in the
Love of God (for I was in the Love of God to them all, that had persecuted me)
and atter a while the Lord's Power sprang through me again, and through my Hand
and Arm, so that in a Moment I recovered Strength in my Hand and Arm in the
fight of them all. Then they began to fall out among themselves; and some of
them came to me, and said; If I would give them Money, they would secure me
from the rest. But I was moved of the Lord to declare to them all the Word of
Life, and showed them their false Christianity, and the Fruits of their
Priest's Ministry; telling them: they were more like Heathens and Jews, than
true Christians. Ulverstone- Market.
Then was I moved of the Lord to come up again through the midst of the People,
and go up into Vlverstone-Market. And as I went, there met me a Man, a
Soldier, with his Sword by his Side; Sir, said he to me, I see, you are a Man,
and I am ashamed and grieved, that you should be thus abused: and he offered to
Assist me, in what he could. But I told him, The Lord's Power was over all: So
I walked through the People in the Market, and none of them had power to touch
me then. But some of the Market-People abusing some Friends in the Market, I
turned me about, and saw this Soldier among them with his naked Rapier;
whereupon I ran in amongst them, and catching hold of his Hand, that his Rapier
was in, I bid him, Put up his Sword again, if he would go along with me: for I
was willing to draw him out from the Company, lest some Mischief should be
done. Yet a few days after seven Men fell upon this Soldier, and beat him
cruelly, because he had taken part with Friends and me: For it was the manner
of the Persecutors of that Country, for twenty or forty People to run upon one
Man. And they fell so upon Friends in many Places, that they could hardly pass
the Highways; Swarthmore.
stoning, beating and breaking their Heads. Now when I came up to Swarthmore, I
found the Friends there dressing the Heads and Hands of Friends and Friendly
People, which had been broken or hurt that day by the Professors and Hearers of
Lampitt, the Priest. My Body and Arms were yellow, black and blue, with the
Blows and Bruises I received amongst them that day: And now began the Priests
to prophesy again, That within half a Year we should be all put down and gone.
1652. Walney- Island.


About two Weeks after this I went into Walney-Island, and James Naylor went
with me; and we stayed one Night at a little Town on this side, called Cockan,
and had a Meeting there, where there was one Convinced. After a while there
came a Man with a Pistol; Cockan.
whereupon the People ran out of Doors. He called for me: and when I came out
to him, he snapp'd his Pistol at me; but it would not go off. This caused the
People to make a great Bustle about him; and some of them took hold of him, to
prevent his doing Mischief. Bu^ I was moved in the Lord's Power to speak to
him: and he was so struck by the Power of the Lord, that he trembled for fear;
and went and hid himself. Thus the Lord's Power came over them all, though
there was a great Rage in the Country.

The next Morning I went over in a Boat to James Lancaster's; and as soon as I
came to Land, there rushed out about Forty Men with Staves, Clubs and
Fishing-poles; and fell upon me, beating and punching me, and endeavored to
thrust me backward into the Sea. And when they had thrust me almost into the
Sea, and I saw, they would have knocked me down there in the Sea, I went up
into the Middle of them: but they laid at me again, and knocked me down, and
stunned me. When I came to my self, I looked up and saw James Lancaster's Wife
throwing Stones at my Face, and her Husband James Lancaster, was lying over me,
to keep the Blows and the Stones from off me. For the People had persuaded
James Lancaster's Wife, that I had bewitched her Husband; and had promised her,
That if she would let them know, when I came thither, they would be my death.
And having got knowledge of my Coming, many of the Town rose up in this manner
with Clubs and Staves to kill me: but the Lord's Power preserved me, that they
could not take away my Life. At length I got up upon my Feet; but they beat me
down again into the Boat: which James Lancaster observing, he presently came
into the Boat to me, and set me over the Water from them; but while we were on
the Water within their Reach, they struck at us with long Poles, and threw
Stones after us. By that time we were come to the other side, we saw them
beating James Naylor: for whilst they had been beating of me, he walked up into
a Field, and they never minded him, till I was gone; then they fell upon him,
and all their Cry was, Kill him, Kill him.

Now when I was come over to the Town again, on the other side of the Water,
the Townsmen rose up with Pitchforks, Flails and Staves to keep me out of the
Town, crying, Kill him; knock him on the Head; bring the Cart, and carry him
away to the Churchyard. So after they had abused me, they drove me a pretty
way out of the Town, and there left me. Then went James Lancaster back again,
to look after James Naylor; and I being now left alone, went to a Ditch of
Water; and having washed my self (for they had all bedirted and besmeared my
Face, Hands and Clothes with Miry Dirt and Wet) I walked about three Miles to
Thomas Hutton's House, where lodged Thomas Lawson the Priest, that was
Convinced. And when I came in, I could hardly speak to them, I was so bruised;
only I told them, where I left James Naylor: whereupon they took each of them
an Horse, 1652. Cockan.
and went and brought him thither that Night. The next day Margaret Fell
hearing of it, sent an Horse for me; but so sore I was with the Bruises I had,
that I was not able to bear the shaking of the Horse without much pain. When I
was come to Swarthmore, Swarthmore.
Justice Sawrey, and one Justice Thompson of Lancaster, granted forth a Warrant
against me; but Judge Fell coming home, it was not served upon me: for he was
out of the Country all this time, that I was thus abused and cruelly used. But
when he came home, he sent forth Warrants into the Isle of Walney, to apprehend
all those Riotous Persons: whereupon some of them fled the Country. James
Lancaster's Wife was afterward Convinced of the Truth, and Repented of the
Evil she had done me; and so did some others of those bitter Persecutors also:
but the Judgments of God fell upon some of them, and Destruction is come upon
many of them since. Judge Fell asked me to give him a Relation of my
Persecution: but I told him; They could do no otherwise in the Spirit wherein
they were; and that they manifested the Fruits of their Priest's Ministry, and
their Profession and Religion to be wrong. So he told his Wife, I made nothing
of it; and that I spoke of it as Man, that had not been concerned. For indeed,
the Lord's Power healed me again.

Yelland.
After I was recovered, I went to Yelland, where there was a great Meeting. In
the Evening there came a Priest to the House, with a Pistol in his Hand, under
pretense to light a Pipe of Tobacco; and the Maid of the House seeing the
Pistol, told her Master: who thereupon clapping his Hands on both the
Door-Posts, told him, He should not come in there. And while he stood there,
keeping the Door-way, he looked up, and spied over the Wall a Company of Men
coming, some armed with Staves, and one with a Musket. But the Lord God
prevented their Bloody Design; so that seeing themselves discovered, they went
their way, and did no harm.

Lancaster.
The time for the Sessions at Lancaster being come, I went to Lancaster with
Judge Fell; who on the way told me, He had never had such a Matter brought
before him before, and he could not well tell, what to do in the Business. I
told him: when Paul was brought before the Rulers, and the Jews and Priests
came down to Accuse him, and laid many false things to his Charge, Paul stood
still all that while. And when they had done, Festus the Governor, and King
Agrippa beckned to him to speak for himself; which Paul did, and cleared
himself of all those false Accusations: And so he might do by me. Being come to
Lancaster, and Justice Sawrey and Justice Thompson having granted a Warrant to
apprehend me; though I was not apprehended by it, Lancaster- Sessions.
yet hearing of it, I appeared at the Sessions; where there appeared against me
about Forty Priests. These had chosen one Marshal, Priest of Lancaster, to be
their Orator; and had provided one young Priest, and two Priests Sons to bear
Witness against me; who had sworn beforehand, that I had spoken Blasphemy.
When the Justices were set, they heard all, that the Priests and their
Witnesses could say and charge against me; their Orator Marshal sitting by, and
explaining their Sayings for them: But the Witnesses were so Confounded, that
they discovered themselves to be false Witnesses. For when the Court had
Examined one of the Witnesses upon Oath, 1652. Lancaster- Sessions.
and then began to Examine another of them, he was at such loss, he could not
Answer directly; but said, the other could say it. Which made the Justices say
to him; Have you sworn it, and given it in already upon your Oath, and now say,
That he can say it? It seems, you did not hear those words spoken your self,
though you have sworn it.

There were then in Court several People, who had been at that Meeting, wherein
the Witnesses swore, I spoke those blasphemous Words, which the Priests accused
me of; and these, being Men of Integrity and Reputation in the Country, did
declare and affirm in Court, That the Oath, which the Witnesses had taken
against me, was altogether false; and that no such Words, as they had sworn
against me, were spoken by me at that Meeting: For indeed, most of the serious
Men of that side of the County, that were then at the Sessions, had been at
that Meeting, and had heard me both at that Meeting, and at other Meetings
also. This was taken notice of by Colonel West, who being a Justice of the
Peace, was then upon the Bench; and having long been weak in Body, blessed the
Lord, and said; The Lord had healed him that day: adding, That he never saw so
many sober People and good Faces together in all his Life. And then turning
himself to me, he said in the open Sessions; George, If thou have any thing to
say to the People, thou may freely declare it. And I was moved of the Lord
to speak: and as soon as I began, Priest Marshal, the Orator for the rest of
the Priests, went his way. That which I was moved to declare, was this: That
the Holy Scriptures were given forth by the Spirit of God; and all People must
first come to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which they might know God and
Christ, of whom the Prophets and the Apostles learnt; and by the same Spirit
know the Holy Scriptures: for as the Spirit of God was in them, that gave forth
the Scriptures; so the same Spirit of God must be in all them, that come to
know and understand the Scriptures. By which Spirit they might have Fellowship
with the Son, and with the Father, and with the Scriptures, and with one
another: And without this Spirit they can know neither God, nor Christ, nor the
Scriptures, nor have right Fellowship one with another. I had no sooner spoken
these Words, but about half a dozen Priests, that stood behind my Back, burst
out into a passion; and one of them, whose Name was Jackus, amongst other
things that he spoke against the Truth, said: That the Spirit and the Letter
were inseparable. I replied, Then every one, that has the Letter, has the
Spirit; and they might buy the Spirit with the Letter of the Scriptures. This
plain discovery of Darkness in the Priest moved Judge Fell and Colonel West to
Reprove them openly, and tell them, That according to that Position, they might
carry the Spirit in their Pockets, as they did the Scriptures. Upon this the
Priests being Confounded and put to silence, rusht out in a Rage against the
Justices, because they could not have their bloody Ends upon me. So the
Justices, seeing the Witnesses did not agree, and perceiving, that they were
brought to Answer the Priests Envy, and finding, that all their Evidences were
not sufficient in Law to make good their Charge against me, they discharged me.
And after Judge Fell had spoken to Justice Sawrey and Justice Thompson
concerning the VVarrant they had given forth against me, and showed them the
Errors thereof; He and Colonel West granted a Supersedeas, to stop the
Execution thereof. Thus was I cleared in open Sessions of all those lying
Accusations, which the malicious Priests had laid to my Charge: And Multitudes
of People praised God that day; for it was a joyful Day to many. There was
Justice Benson out of Westmorland, who was Convinced; and Major Ripan, that was
Mayor of the Town of Lancaster, who was Convinced also. It was a day of
Everlasting Salvation to hundreds of People: for the Lord Jesus Christ, the Way
to the Father, and the free Teacher was exalted and set up, and his Everlasting
Gospel was preached, and the Word of Eternal Life was declared over the heads
of the Priests, and all such Money-Preachers. For the Lord opened many Mouths
that Day to speak his Word to the Priests, and several friendly People and
Professors reproved the Priests in their Inns, and in the Streets; so that they
fell, like an old rotten House: and the Cry was among the People, That the
Quakers had got the day, and the Priests were fallen. Many People were
Convinced that day, amongst whom Thomas Briggs was one, who before had been
averse from Friends and Truth; insomuch, that discoursing on a time with John
Lawson, a Friend, concerning Perfection, Thomas Briggs said to him, Do thou
hold Perfection? and therewithal lift up his Hand, to have given the Friend a
Box on the Ear. But this Thomas Briggs, being Convinced of the Truth that day,
declared against his own Priest Jackus; and afterward became a faithful
Minister of the Gospel, and stood so to the End of his Days.

When the Sessions were over, James Naylor, who was present thereat, gave a
brief Account of the Proceedings thereof in a Letter, which soon after he writ
to Friends; which is here added for the Reader's further satisfaction in this
Matter:

DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear Love unto you all,
desiring, you may be kept steadfast in the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the power
of his Love, boldly to witness forth the Truth, as it is revealed in you by the
mighty working of the Father: To him alone be everlasting Praise and Honor for
evermore! Dear Friends, the Lord does much manifest his Love and Power in these
Parts. Upon the second day of the last Week my Brother George and I were at
Lancaster: There were abundance of Friends from all parts; and a great sort,
which sided with the Priests, giving out, They now hoped to see a stop put to
that great Work, which had gone on so fast, and with such Power, that their
Kingdom is much shaken. We were called before Judge Fell, Colonel West, Justice
Sawrey, etc. to Answer, what was charged against George. There were Three
Witnesses to Eight Particulars, but they were much Confused in themselves;
which gave much Light to the Truth: whereby the Justices did plainly see, that
it was Envy; and they diverse times told them so. One of the Witnesses was a
young Priest, who Confessed, He had not meddled, had not another Priest sent
for him, and set him on Work. The other VVitnesses were two Priests Sons: It
was proved there by many, that heard one of them say; If he had power, he would
make George deny his Profession, and that he would take away his Life. This was
a single VVitness to one of the greatest Untruths, that was charged against
George; And the Justices told him, That they saw, because he could not take
away his Life, he went about to take away his Liberty. There was one Priest
chosen out of the whole number, as an Orator, to plead against us; who spared
no pains to show forth his Envy against the Truth: And when he could not
prevail, he went down in a Rage; and there came up a Pack of them into the
Room, among whom was one Jacus. George was then speaking in the Room (one of
the Justices having wished him, if he had any thing to say, he would speak:) at
which the said Priest Jacus was in such a Rage, that he brake forth into many
high Expressions against the Truth spoken by my dear Brother George; amongst
which this was one, That the Letter and the Spirit were inseparable. Hereupon
the Justices stood up, and bid him, prove that, before he went any further.
Then he seeing himself caught, would have denied it; and when he could not get
off so, the rest of the Priests would have helped him to a Meaning for his
Words: But the Justices would admit no other Meaning, than the plain sense of
the Words; but told him, He had laid down a Position, and it was fit, he
should prove it; pressing the Matter close upon him. Whereupon the Priests,
being put to silence, went down in a greater Rage, than before; and some of
them, after they were gone down, being asked, what they had done, Lied and
said, They could not get into the Room; thereby to hide their Shame, and keep
the People in blindness. The Justices, Judge Fell and Colonel West were much
Convinced of the Truth, and did set up Justice and Equity; and have much
silenced the Rage of the People. Many bitter Spirits were at Lancaster, to see
the Event; but went home, and cried: The Priests had lost the day: Everlasting
Praises be to him, who fought the Batttel for us, who is our King for ever!
There were Others called, who the VVitnesses confessed were in the Room, when
the things charged on George were said to have been spoken; but they all, as
one Man, denied, that any such Words were spoken: Which gave much Light to the
Justices, and they durst trust, what they witnessed; for they said, they knew
many of them to be honest Men. There was a VVarrant granted out against us at
Appleby; but Justice Benson told them, It was not according to Law; and so it
ceased: As I hear, he is a faithful Man to the Truth. The Priests began to
preach against the Justices, and said; They were not to meddle in these things,
but to end Controversy betwixt Neighbor and Neighbor. They are not pleased
with the Law, because it is not in the Statute to Imprison us, as the Priest,
that pleaded against us, said: The Justices bid him Go put it into the Statute,
if he could; he said, It should want no will of his. They are much afraid, that
they shall loose all: They are much discontented in these parts; and some of
them cry, All is gone. Dear Friends, dwell in Patience, and wait upon the Lord,
who will do his own Work. Look not at Man in the Work; nor at Man, who
opposes the Work: but rest in the Will of the Lord, that so ye may be
furnished with Patience, both to do and to suffer, what ye shall be called
unto; that your End in all things may be his Praise. And take up his Cross
freely, which keeps low the fleshly Man; that Christ may be set up and honored
in all things, and so the Light advanced in you, and the Judgment set up, which
must give Sentence against all that opposes the Truth; That the Captivity may
be led Captive, and the Prisoner set free to seek the Lord; that Righteousness
may rule in you, and Peace and Joy may dwell in you, wherein consists the
Kingdom of the Father; to whom be all Praise for ever! Dear Friends, Meet often
together: and take heed, of what Exalts it self above its Brother; but keep
low, and serve one another in Love for the Lord's sake. Let all Friends know,
how it is with us: that God may have the Praise of all.

Written from Kellet, the 30th Day of the 8th Month, 1652. J. N.


At this Time I was in a Fast; and was not to Eat, until this Work of God,
which then lay weighty upon me, was accomplished. But the Lord's Power was
wonderfully set over all, and gave Truth and Friends Dominion therein over all,
to his Glory: And his Gospel was freely preached that Day, over the Heads of
about Forty Hireling-Priests. I stayed Two or Three Days afterward in
Lancaster, and had some Meetings there: And the rude and baser sort of People
plotted together to have drawn me out of the House, and to have thrown me over
Lancaster-Bridge; but the Lord prevented them. Then they invented another
Mischief, which was this: After a Meeting at Lancaster they brought down a
distracted Man, and another with him with Bundles of Birchen-Rods, bound
together like Besoms, with which they should have whipped me: But I was moved
to speak to them i^ the Lord's mighty Power, which chained down the distracted
Man, and the other also; and made them calm and quiet. Then I bi^ him, throw
his Rods into the Fire, and burn them; and he did so. Thus the Lord's Power
being over them, they departed quietly.

But the Priests, fretting to see themselves overthrown at the Sessions at
Lancaster, got some of the Envious Justices to join with them; and at the
following Assize at Lancaster informed Judge Windham against me. Whereupon the
Judge made a Speech against me in open Court; and commanded Colonel West, who
was Clerk of the Assize, to issue forth a Warrant for the apprehending of me:
But Colonel West told the Judge of my Innocence, and spoke boldly in my
defense. Yet the Judge commanded him again, either to write a Warrant, or go
off from his Seat: Then he told the Judge plainly, that he would not do it; but
that he would offer up all his Estate, and his Body also for me. So he stopped
the Judge; and the Lord's Power came over all: So that the Priests and Justices
could not get their Envy executed. That same Night I came into Lancaster, it
being the Assize-Time: and hearing of a Warrant to be given out against me, I
judged it better to show my self openly, Lancaster Assize.
than for my Adversaries to seek me. So I went to Judge Fell's and Colonel
West's Chambers: And as soon as I came in, they smiled on me; and Colonel West
said, What! 1652. Lancaster Assize.
are you come into the Dragon's Mouth? I stayed in Town, till the Judge went
out of Town; and I walked up and down the Town, but no one meddled with me, nor
questioned me. Thus the Lord's blessed Power, which is over all, ca^^^ed me
through and over this Exercise; and gave Dominion over his Enemies, and enabled
me to go on in his glorious Work and Service for his great Name's-sake. For
though the Beast makes War against the Saints; yet the Lamb has got, and will
get the Victory.

From Lancaster I returned to Robert Wither's, and from thence I went to Thomas
Leper's to a Meeting in the Evening; Meeting at T. Lepers.
and a very blessed Meeting we had there. After the Meeting was done, I walked
in the Evening to Robert Withers's again. And no sooner was I gone, but there
came a Company of disguised Men to Thomas Leper's with Swords and Pistols; who
suddenly entering the House, put out the Candles, and swung their Swords about
amongst the People of the House; so that the People were fain to hold up the
Chairs before them, to save themselves from being cut and wounded. At length
they drove all the People of the House out of the House, and then searched the
House for me; who, it seems, was the only Person they looked for: for they had
laid wait before in the Highway, by which I should have gone, if I had ridden
to Robert Withers's. And not meeting with me on the Way, they thought to have
found me in the House; but the Lord prevented them. Soon after I was come in at
Robert Withers, some Friends came from the Town, where Thomas Leper lived, and
gave us a Relation of this wicked Attempt: And the Friends were afraid, lest
they should come, and search Robert Withers's House also for me, and do me a
Mischief: But the Lord restrained them, that they came not. Though these Men
were in disguise; yet the Friends perceived some of them to be Frenchmen, and
supposed them to be Servants belonging to one called Sir Robert Bindlas: For
some of them had said, that in their Nation they used to Tie the Protestants to
Trees, and whip them, and destroy them. And his Servants used often to abuse
Friends, both in their Meetings, and going to and from their Meetings. They
once took Richard Hubberthorn and several others out of the Meeting, and
carried them a good way off into the Fields; and there bound them, and left
them bound in the Winter-Season. And at another Time one of his Servants came
to Francis Flemming's House, and thrust his naked Rapier in at the Door and
Windows: But there being at the House a Kinsman of Francis Flemming's, one who
was not a Friend, he came with a Cudgel in his Hand, and bid the Servingman put
up his Rapier: which when the other would not, but vapoured at him with it, and
was Rude; he knocked him down with his Cudgel, and took his Rapier from him:
And had it not been for Friends, he would have Run him through with it. So the
Friends preserved his Life, that would have destroyed theirs.

From Robert Withers's I went to visit Justice West, To Justice Wests, over the
Sands.
Richard Hubberthorn accompanying me. And not knowing the Way, nor the Danger
of the Sands, we Rid, where (as we were afterward told) no Man ever rid
before; swimming our Horses over a very dangerous Place. When we were come in,
Justice West asked us, If we did not see Two Men riding over the Sands? Justice
Wests.
I shall have their Clothes anon, said he, for they cannot escape Drowning; and
I am the Coroner. But when we told him, that we were the Men, be was astonished
at it; and wondered, how we escaped Drowning. Upon this the envious Priests and
Professors raised a slanderous Report concerning me, That neither Water could
drown me, nor could they draw Blood of me; and that therefore surely I was a
Witch (for indeed, sometimes when they beat me with great Staves, they did not
much draw my Blood, though they bruised my Body oft-times very sorely.) But all
these Slanders were nothing to me with respect to my self, (though I was
concerned on the Truth's behalf, which, I saw, they endeavored by these Means
to prejudice People against) for I considered, that their Forefathers, the
Apostate-Jews, called the Master of the House Beelzebub; and these
Apostate-Christians from the Life and Power of God, could do no less to his
Seed. But the Lord's Power carried me over their Slanderous Tongues, and their
bloody, murtherous Spirits; who had the Ground of Witchcraft in themselves,
which kept them from coming to God and to Christ.

Having visited Justice West, I went to Swarthmore, visiting Friends
there-aways; Swarthmore.
and the Lord's Power was over all the Persecutors there. And I was moved to
write several Letters to the Magistrates, Priests and Professors there-abouts,
who had raised Persecution before. That which I sent to Justice Sawrey, was
after this manner:

Friend,
THOU wast the first Beginner of all the Persecution in the North: Thou wast
the Beginner and the Maker of the People Tumultuous: Thou wast the first
Stirrer of them up against the Righteous Seed, and against the Truth of God;
and wast the first strengthner of the Hands of Evildoers against the Innocent
and Harmless: And thou shall not prosper. Thou wast the first Stirrer up of
Strikers, Stoners, Persecutors, Stockers, Mockers and Imprisoners in the North,
and of Revilers, Slanderers, Railers and false Accusers, and Scandal-Raisers:
This was thy Work, and this thou stirredst up! So thy Fruits declare thy
Spirit. Instead of stirring up the pure Mind in People, thou have stirred up
the Wicked, Malicious and Envious; and taken Hand with the Wicked. Thou have
made the People's Minds envious up and down the Country: This was thy Work. But
God has shortened thy Days, and limited thee, and set thy Bounds, and broken
thy Jaws, and discovered thy Religion to the Simple and Babes, and brought thy
Deeds to Light. How is thy Habitation fallen, and become the Habitation of
Devils! How is thy Beauty lost, and thy Glory withered! How have thou showed
thy End, that thou have served God but with thy Lips, and thy Heart far from
him, and thou in the Hypocrisy! How has the Form of thy Teaching declared it
self to be the Mark of the false Prophets, whose Fruit declares it self! for by
their Fruits they are known. How are the Wise Men turned backward! View thy
Ways, and take notice, with whom thou have taken part. That of God in thy
Conscience will tell thee: 1652. Swarthmore.
The Ancient of Days will reprove thee. How has thy Zeal appeared to be the
Blind Zeal; a Persecutor, which Christ and his Apostles forbad Christians to
follow! How have thou strengthened the Hands of Evildoers, and been a Praise
to them, and not to them that do well! How like a Madman, and a Blind-man did
thou turn thy Sword backward against the Saints, against whom there is no Law!
How will thou be gnawed and burned one Day, when thou shall feel the Flame and
have the Plagues of God poured upon thee, and thou begin to gnaw thy Tongue for
Pain, because of the Plagues! Thou shall have thy Reward according to thy
Works: Thou can not escape; the Lord's righteous Judgment will find thee out,
and the Witness of God in thy Conscience shall answer it. How have thou caused
the Heathen to Blaspheme, and gone on with the Multitude to do Evil, and joined
hand in hand with the wicked! How is thy latter End worse than thy Beginning,
who art come with the Dog to bite, and art turned as a Wolf, to devour the
Lambs! How have thou discovered thy self to be a Man more fit to be kept in a
place to be nurtured, than to be set in a Place to nurture! How wast thou
exalted and puffed up with Pride! And now art thou fallen down with Shame, that
thou come to be covered with that, which thou stirredst up, and broughtest
forth. Let not John Sawrey take the Words of God into his Mouth, till he be
Reformed: Let him not take his Name into his Mouth, till he depart from
Iniquity. Let not him and his Teacher make a Profession of the Saints Words,
except they intend to proclaim themselves Hypocrites, whose Lives are so
contrary to the Lives of the Saints; whose Church has made it self manifest to
be a Cage of Unclean Birds. You having a Form of Godliness, but not the Power,
have made them that be in the Power, your Derision, your Byword, and your Talk
at your Feasts. Thy ill Savor, John Sawrey, the Country about have smelled,
and of thy unchristian Carriage all that fear God have been ashamed; and to
them thou have been a Grief: In the Day of Account thou shall know it, even in
the Day of thy Condemnation. Thou wast mounted up, and had set thy Nest on
high; but never gottest higher, than the Fowls of the Air: But now thou art run
amongst the Beasts of Prey, and art fallen into the Earth; so that Earthliness
and Covetousness has swallowed thee up: and thy Conceitedness would not carry
thee through, in whom was found the selfish Principle, which has blinded thy
Eye. Thy Back must be bowed down always; for thy Table is already become thy
Snare.

G. F.


This Justice Sawrey, who was the first Persecutor in that Country, was
afterward drowned.

I writ also to William Lampit, who was the Priest of Vlverston; and thus it
was upon me to write unto him: THE Word of the Lord to thee, O Lampitt! who art
a Deceiver, surfetted and drunk with the Earthly Spirit, rambling up and down
in the Scriptures, and blending thy Spirit amongst the Saints Conditions; who
had a Prophecy, as thy Father Balaam had, but art erred from it, as thy
Father did: One whose Fruit has withered (of which I am a Witness;) and many
who have known thy Fruit, have seen the End of it, that it is withered: and do
see, where thou art, in the blind World, a blind Leader of the Blind; a Beast
wallowing and tumbling in the Earth, and in the Lust, one that is erred from
the Spirit of the Lord; who art of old ordained for Condemnation: Who art in
the Seat of the Pharisees, art called of Men Master, stand Praying in the
Synagogues, and have the Chief Seat in the Assemblies; a right Hypocrite in the
steps of the Pharisees, and in the way of thy Fathers, the Hypocrites, which
our Lord Jesus Christ cried Woe against. Such with the Light thou art seen to
be, and by the Light art Comprehended: which is thy Condemnation, who hate
it; and will be so Eternally, except thou Repent. To thee this is the Word of
God: for in Christ's Way thou art not, but in the Pharisees; as thou may
stread, Mat. 23. and all that own Christ's Words, may see thee there. Christ
who died at Jerusalem, cried Woe against such as thou art; and Christ is the
same yesterday, to day, and for ever. The Woe remains upon thee, and from under
it thou can never come; but through Judgment, Condemnation and true
Repentance. To thee this is the Word of God: To that of God in thy Conscience
I do speak, which will witness the Truth, of what I write, and will Condemn
thee. And when thou art in thy Torment (though now thou swellest in thy Vanity,
and live in Wickedness) remember, thou wast warned in thy Lifetime, when the
Eternal Condemnation is stretched over thee, thou shall witness this to be the
Word of the Lord God unto thee. And if ever thy Eye should see Repentance,
thou would witness me to have been a Friend of thy Soul.

G. F.




Having thus cleared my Conscience to the Justice, and to the Priest of
Vlverstone, who had raised the first Persecution in that Country; it was upon
me to send this Warning in Writing to the People of Vlverstone in general.

COnsider, O People! who be within the Parish of Vlverston; I was moved of the
Lord to come into your Public Places to speak among you, being sent of God to
direct your Minds to God, that you might know, where you might find your
Teacher; that your Minds might be stayed alone upon God, and you might not gad
abroad without you for a Teacher: for the Lord God alone will Teach his People,
and he is coming to Teach them, and to gather his People from Idols-Temples,
and from the customary Worships, which all the World is trained up in. And God
has given to every one of you a Measure of his Spirit according to your
Capacity; Liars, Drunkards, Whoremongers and Thieves, and who follow filthy
Pleasures, you all have this Measure in you. And this is the Measure of the
Spirit of God, that shows you Sin, and shows you Evil, and shows you Deceit;
which lets you see Lying is Sin, Theft, Drunkenness and Uncleanness, all these
to be the Works of Darkness. Therefore mind your Measure (for nothing that is
Unclean, shall enter into the Kingdom of God) and prize your Time, while you
have it; lest the Time come, that you say with Sorrow, We had Time, but it is
past. Oh, why will ye die! Why will ye choose your own Ways! Why will ye follow
the Course of the World! and why will ye follow Envy, Malice, Drunkenness and
foolish Pleasures! Know ye not in your Consciences, that all these are Evil and
Sin? and that such as act such things, shall never enter into the Kingdom of
God? Oh that ye would Consider, and see, how you have spent your Time, and
mind, how ye do spend your Time, and observe, whom ye do serve: for the Wages
of Sin is Death. Do not ye know, that whatsoever is more than Yea and Nay,
comes of Evil? Oh ye Drunkards, who live in Drunkenness, do ye think to escape
the Fire and the Judgment of God! Though ye swell in Venom, and live in Lust
for a while; yet God will find you out, and bring you to Judgment. Therefore
love the Light, which Christ has enlightened you withal, who says, I am the
Light of the World; and who does enlighten every one, that comes into the
World. One loves the Light, and brings his Works to the Light, and there is no
occasion at all of stumbling: the other hates the Light, because his Deeds are
Evil, and the Light will reprove him. Thou that hate this Light, thou have
it: Thou know, Lying is Evil, Drunkenness is Evil, Swearing is Evil;
Whoredom, Theft and all Ungodliness, and all Unrighteousness is Evil: Christ
Jesus has given thee Light enough to let thee see, this is Evil. And this
Light (if thou love it) will teach thee Holiness and Righteousness, without
which none shall see God: but if thou hate this Light, it is thy
Condemnation. And thus are Christ's Words found to be true, and fulfilled among
you: You that hate this Light, set up Hirelings, and Idols-Temples; and such
Priests, as bear rule by their means; and such Shepherds as hold up such
things; and such as are called of Men Masters, and have the chiefest Place in
the Assemblies, whom Christ cried Woe against; Matt. 23. And such as go in the
way of Cain, in Envy; and after the Error of Balaam for Wages, Gifts and
Rewards; These have been your Teachers, and these you have held up. But who
love the Light, are taught of God; and the Lord is coming to teach his People
himself, and to gather his from the Hirelings, and from such as seek for their
Gain from their Quarter, and from such as bear Rule by their Means: The Lord is
opening the Eyes of foolish People, that they shall see such, as bear Rule over
them. But all, whose Eyes are shut, are such as the Prophet spoke of, That have
Eyes, and see not; but are foolish, upholding such things. Therefore, poor
People, as ye love your own Souls, consider the Love of God to your Souls,
while ye have time; and do not turn the Grace of God into Wantonness. That
which shows you Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, that should and would be your
Teacher, if ye would hearken to it; for the Saints of Old witnessed the Grace
of God to be their Teacher, which taught them to live Soberly and Godly in this
present World. And ye that are not sober, this Grace of God has appeared unto
you; but you turn it into Wantonness, and so set up Teachers without you, who
are not sober, not holy, not godly. Here you are left without Excuse, when the
Righteous Judgment of God shall be revealed upon you all, who live Ungodlily.
Therefore to the Light in you I speak; and when the Book of Conscience shall
come to be opened, then shall you Witness, what I say to be true, and you all
shall be judged out of it. So God Almighty direct your Minds (such of you
especially, as love Honesty and Sincerity) that you may receive Mercy in the
time of Need. Your Teacher is within you; look not forth: It will Teach you
both lying in Bed, and going Abroad, to shun all Occasion of Sin and Evil.

G. F.

As the foregoing was directed To all the Inhabitants of Ulverston in general;
so it was upon me to write also to those more particularly, that did most
constantly follow W. Lampitt the Priest there. And unto these I writ thus: THE
Word of the Lord God to all the People, that follow Priest Lampitt, who is a
blind Guide. Ye are such, as are turned from the Light of Christ within, which
he has enlightened you withal: Ye are such, as follow that which Christ cried
Woe against, that goes not in Christ's Way, but in the Pharisees Way; as ye may
read Matt. 23. which our Lord Jesus Christ cried Woe against. He is the same
yesterday, to day and for ever: but him ye own not, while ye follow such, as he
cried Woe against; though under a Color ye make a Profession, and Lampitt, your
Priest, makes a Trade of Christ's and the Saint's Words, as his Fathers the
Pharisees did make a Profession of the Prophets Words, and of Moses his Words.
Woe was unto them, who had not the Life: so VVo is unto you, who have not the
Life, that gave forth the Scriptures; as your Fruits have made manifest. For
when the Lord has moved some to come amongst you, to preach the Truth freely,
you have knocked them down, beat, and punch'd and haled them out of your
Assemblies. Such a People serves thee, O Lampitt, to make a prey upon; and
these are thy Fruits: O let Shame, Shame strike thee and you all in the Faces,
who make a Profession of Christ's Words, thou and they; and yet are Stoners,
and Strikers, and Mockers, and Scoffers. Let all see, if this be not a Cage of
Unclean Birds spoken of in the Scriptures, which they, who had the Life of the
Scriptures spoke of. And such a Company of People thou deceivest, and feedest
them with thy Fancies, and make a Trade of the Scriptures, and take them
for thy Cloak. But thou art manifest to all the Children of Light: for that
Cloak will not cover thee; but thy Skirts are seen, and thy Nakedness appears.
And the Lord made one to go Naked among you, a Figure of thy Nakedness, and of
your Nakedness, and as a Sign amongst you, before your destruction comes; that
you might see, that you were Naked, and not covered with the Truth. To the
Light in all your Consciences I do speak, which Christ Jesus does enlighten you
withal: It will show you the Time you have spent, and all your Evil Deeds you
have done in that Time; who follow such a Teacher, that acts contrary to this
Light, and leads you into the Ditch. And when you are in the Ditch together,
both Teacher and People, remember, ye were warned in your Life time. And if
ever your Eye come to see Repentance, and you obey the Light of Jesus Christ in
you, you will witness me to have been a Friend of your Souls, and that I have
sought your Eternal Good, and written this in dear Love to you. And then will
you own your Condemnation; which you must all own, before ye can come into that
blessed Life, of which there is no End. But ye, who hate the Light, because
your Deeds are evil, this Light is your Condemnation, and will be: And when
your Condemnation is come upon you, remember, ye were warned. O that ye would
love this Light, and hearken to it! It would teach you, both as you walk up and
down about your Occasions, and as you lie upon your Beds, and would never let
you speak a vain Word: In loving it, you love Christ; in hating it, you bring
the Condemnation thereof upon your selves. And to you this is the Word of God,
from under which you can never pass, nor ever escape the Terror of the Lord in
the state you are in, who hate the Light.

G. F.



Amongst those, who were the Chief Hearers and Followers of this Priest Lampitt
of Vlverston, there was one Adam Sands, who was a very wicked, false Man, and
would have destroyed Truth and its Followers, if he could: To him I was moved
to write thus: Adam Sands,
TO the Light in the Conscience I appeal, thou Child of the Devil, thou Enemy
of Righteousness; the Lord will strike thee down! though now for a while in thy
wickedness thou may Reign: And the Plagues of God are due to thee, who
hardenest thy self in thy wickedness against the pure Truth of God. With the
pure Truth of God, which thou have resisted and persecuted, thou art to be
threshed down, which is Eternal, and does Comprehend thee: and with the Light,
which thou despisest, thou art seen; and it is thy Condemnation. Thou as one
brutish, and thy Wife, as an Hypocrite, and you both, as Murderers of the
Just, in that which is Eternal, are seen and comprehended; and your Hearts
searched and tried, and condemned by the Light. The Light in thy Conscience
will witness the Truth, of what I write to thee; and will let thee see, that
thou art not born of God, but art from the Truth, in the Beastly Nature: And if
ever thy Eye see Repentance, thou will witness me a Friend of thy Soul, and a
seeker of thy Eternal Good.

G. F.
This Adam Sands afterward died miserably.






I was moved also to write to Priest Tatham.

THE Word of the Lord to thee, Priest Tatham, who art found out of the Doctrine
of Christ; having the chiefest Place in the Assembly, and being called of Men
Master, and standing Praying in the Synagogue in the Steps of the Pharisees,
which our Lord Jesus Christ cried VVo against. In his Way thou art not; but in
the Way of the Scribes and Pharisees: as thou may read, Matthew. 23. There
Christ's Words Judge thee, and the Scriptures of Truth Condemn thee. For thou
art such an one, as sues Men at the Law for Tithes, and yet professest thy self
to be a Minister of Christ; which Christ never empowered his to do: Neither did
any of his Apostles or Ministers ever do so. Here I charge thee in the presence
of the Living God to be out of their Doctrine; and that thou art one of those
evil Beasts the Scripture speaks of, that mindest Earthly Things, which the
Life of the Scriptures is against. Thou art for Destruction in the State
wherein thou stand; and it will be thy Portion eternally, if thou do not
Repent. To that of God in thy Conscience I speak, which will witness the Truth,
of what I say. Thou art one, that go in Cain's Way, in Envy, an Enemy to
God, and from the Command of God: Thou art one that go in Balaam's Way, from
the Spirit of God, for Gifts and Rewards, the Wages of Unrighteousness. Thou
Son of Balaam, thou art worse than thy Father: for though he loved the Wages
of Unrighteousness, yet he durst not take it; but thou not only take it, but
suest Men at the Law, if they will not give it thee: which never did Minister
of Jesus Christ. Therefore stop thy Mouth for ever, and never make mention of
them, or profess thy self one of them: With the Light thou art seen and
comprehended; who art light and vain, and speak a Divination of thy own
Brain, and deceivest the People. That in thy Conscience will witness what I
say, and will Condemn thee; who art one that bear Rule by thy Means, which
the Lord sent Jeremiah to cry against, Jer. 5. and so thou hold up the
horrible and filthy thing, that is committed in the Land. And they, that do not
Tremble at the Word of the Lord, they are the foolish People, that hold thee
up; they are sottish Children, and have no Understanding: They are Wise to do
Evil, but not to do Good; who are deceived by thee. And such an one thou art,
that seek for thy Gain from thy Quarter; a greedy dumb Dog, that never has
enough, as thy Practice makes manifest; which the Lord sent Isaiah to cry
against, Isa. 56.11, 12. And thou art such an one, as the Lord sent Ezekiel to
cry against, who feedest of the Fat, and Clothest with the Wool, and make a
Prey upon the People. But the Lord is gathering his Sheep from thy Mouth, that
to thee they shall be a Prey no longer. Thou Enemy of God, here this Prophecy
is fulfilled upon thee, Ezekiel. 34. and thou art one of them; I charge it upon
thee in the presence of the living God: A Hireling thou art; and they that put
not into thy Mouth, thou preparest War against them. Thou hate the Good, and
love the Evil; which the Lord sent Micah to cry against, Mic. 3. Cover thy
Lips, and stop thy Mouth for ever, thou Child of Darkness: for with the Light
thou art comprehended, and seen to be among them, which the holy Men of God
cried W O against; and by the Spirit of the living God thou art judged. In the
Light, which is thy Condemnation, thou art comprehended; thy Race is seen, and
thy Compass known, who art out of the Commands of Christ, and out of the
Doctrine and Life of the Apostles. Thou art proved and tried, and to thee this
is the Word of the Lord, and to thee it shall be as an Hammer, a Fire and a
Sword; and from under it thou shall never come, unless thou Repent; who art
with the Light to be Condemned, in that State wherein thou stand. And if
ever thy Eye see Repentance, this thy Condemnation thou must own.

G. F.


I writ also to -- Burton, Priest of Sedbergh, much what to the same purpose;
he being in the same evil Ground, Nature and Practice, which the other Priests
were in. Many other Epistles also and Papers I writ about that Time, as the
Lord moved me thereunto, which I sent abroad among the Priests, Professors and
People of all sorts, for the laying their Evil ways open before them, that they
might see and forsake them; and opening the Way of Truth unto them, that they
might come to walk therein: which are too many and large, to be inserted in
this Place.

Now after I had cleared my Conscience at that Time, to the Priests and People
in those Parts near Swarthmore, I went again into Westmorland. Westmorland.
And a Company of Men with Pikes and Staves laid wait for me at a Bridge in the
Way; and they light on some Friends, but missed me. Afterward they came to the
Meeting with their Pikes and Staves: But Justice Benson being there, and many
considerable People besides, they were prevented from doing that Mischief they
intended. So they went away in a great Rage, but did not hurt any Body.

1652. Grayrigg.
I went from the Meeting to Grayrigge, and had a Meeting there at Alexander
Dixon's House; where the Priest (who was a Baptist, and a Chappel-Priest) came
to the Meeting to oppose: but the Lord Confounded him by his Power. And some of
the Priest's People tumbled down some Milk-Pales, which stood upon the Side of
the House (the House being much crowded;) whereupon the Priest, after he and
his Company were gone away, raised a Slander, That the Devil frighted him, and
took away a Side of the House, while he was in the Meeting. And though this was
an apparent and known Falsehood, yet it served the Priests and Professors to
feed on for a while: And so shameless they were, that they Printed it in a Book.

Another Time this Priest came to another Meeting, and fell to Jangling. First
he said, The Scriptures were the Word of God. I told him: They were the Words
of God, but not Christ, who is the Word; and bid him, prove by Scripture, what
he said. Then he said, It was not the Scripture, that was the Word: and setting
his Foot upon the Bible, he said; It was but Copies bound up together. Many
unsavory Words came from him: But after he was gone, we had a blessed Meeting;
and the Lord's Power and Presence was preciously manifested and felt among us.
Soon after he sent me a Challenge to meet him at Kendal: I sent him Word, He
need not go so far as Kendal, for I would meet him in his own Parish. So the
Hour being set, we Met, and abundance of rude People were gathered there
together (besides the baptized People, who were his own Members:) and they had
intended to have done Mischief that Day; but God prevented them. Now when we
were Met, I declared the Day of the Lord to them; and directed them to Christ
Jesus. Then the Priest out with his Bible, and said; It was the Word of God. I
told him it was the Words of God; but not God, the Word. His Answer was, He
would prove the Scriptures to be the God, before all the People. So I let him
go on, having a Man there, that could take down in writing, both what he said,
and what I said. And when he could not prove it (for I kept him to
Scripture Proof, Chapter and Verse for it) the People gnashed their Teeth for
Anger; and said, He would have me anon: But in going about to prove that one
Error, he run into many. And when at length he saw, he could not prove it; then
he said, He would prove it a God: So he toiled himself afresh, till he sweat
again; but could not Prove, what he had Affirmed. And he and his Company were
full of wrath: For I kept his Assertions on the Head of him and them all; and
told them, I owned, what the Scriptures said of themselves, namely, That they
were the Words of God; but Christ was the Word. So the Lord's Power came over
all; and they being confounded, went away, and the Lord disappointed their
mischievous Intentions against me: and Friends were established in Christ, and
many of the Priests Followers saw the Folly of their Teacher.

After this, as I came through the Country visiting Friends, Priest Bennet of
Cartmel sent a Challenge to dispute with me. Whereupon I came to his
Steeple-house on the First Day, and there found him Preaching. When he had
done, I spoke to him and his People; but the Priest would not stand the Trial,
but went his Way. After he was gone, I had a great deal of Discourse with the
People: And when I was come forth into the Steeple-house-yard, and was
discoursing further with the Professors, and declaring Truth unto them; One of
them set his foot behind me, and Two of them ran against my Breast, and threw
me down backwards against a Gravestone, wickedly and maliciously, seeking to
have spoiled me. But I got up again, and was moved of the Lord to speak to
them. Then I went up to the Priest's House, and desired him to come forth, that
I might discourse with him; seeing he had Challenged me: But he would not at
all come out, or be seen. So the Lord's Power came over them all, which was
greatly manifested at that Time. There was amongst the Priest's Hearers one
Richard Roper, one of the bitterest Professors the Priest had; and he was very
fierce and hot in his Contention: but afterward he came to be Convinced of
God's Eternal Truth, and became a Minister thereof; and continued faithful to
his Death.

It was now about the beginning of the Year 1653, Swarthmore: And going to a
Meeting at Gleeston, Swarthmore.
a Professor there challenged a Dispute with me. Whereupon I went to the House,
where he was, and called him to come forth: but the Lord's Power was over him,
so that he durst not meddle. Then I departed thence, and went and visited the
Meetings of Friends in Lancashire, Lancashire
and so came back to Swarthmore again. Swarthmore.
And great Openings I had from the Lord, not only of Divine and Spiritual
Matters, but also of Outward Things, relating to the Civil Government. For
being one Day in Swarthmore-Hall, when Judge Fell and Justice Benson were
talking of the News in the News-Book, and of the Parliament that then was
sitting (which was called the Long-Parliament) I was moved to tell them; That
before that Day Two Weeks the Parliament should be broken up, and the Speaker
plucked out of his Chair. And that Day Two Weeks Justice Benson coming thither
again, told Judge Fell, That now he saw, George was a true Prophet; for Oliver
had broken up the Parliament by that Time.

About this Time I was in a Fast for about Ten Days, my Spirit being greatly
exercised on Truth's behalf: for James Milner and Richard Myer went out into
Imaginations, and a Company followed them. This James Milner, and some of his
Company had true Openings at the first, but getting up into Pride and
Exaltation of Spirit, they run out from Truth. I was sent for to them, and was
moved of the Lord to go, and show them their Goings forth: And they came to see
their Folly, and Condemned it; and came into the Way of Truth again. After some
Time I went to a Meeting at Arn-side, Arnside.
where Richard Myer was. Now he had been long Lame of one of his Arms: And I
was moved of the Lord to say unto him amongst all the People. Prophet Myer,
stand up upon thy Legs (for he was sitting down:) And he stood up, and
stretched out his Arm, that had been Lame a long time, and said; Be it known
unto you, all People, that this Day I am healed. But his Parents could hardly
believe it; but after the Meeting was done, had him aside, and took off his
Doublet: and then they saw, it was true. Swarthmore.
He came soon after to Swarthmore-Meeting, and there declared, how that the
Lord had healed him. Yet after this the Lord commanded him to go to York with a
Message from him; 1653. Swarthm.
and he disobeyed the Lord: and the Lord struck him again, so that he died
about three quarters of a Year after.

Now were great Threatenings given forth in Cumberland, That if ever I came
there again, they would take away my Life. When I heard it, Cumberland
I was drawn to go into Cumberland again; and went to one Miles Wennington's,
in the same Parish, from which those Threatenings came: but they had not Power
to touch me then.

Much about this Time too it was, that Anthony Pearson was Convinced, who had
been an Opposer of Friends. He came over to Swarthmore; and I being then at
Colonel West's, they sent for me: and Colonel West said; Go, George, for it may
be of great Service to the Man. So I went, and the Lord's Power reached him.

About this Time also the Lord opened several Mouths to declare the Truth to
Priests and People; so that diverse were cast into Prison. And I went again into
Cumberland, and Anthony Pearson and his Wife, and several Friends went along
with me to Bootle, Bootle.
where Anthony Pearson left me; and went on himself to Carlisle-Sessions: for
he was a Justice of the Peace in Three Counties. Upon the First Day of the week
I went into the Steeple-house at Bootle; and when the Priest had done, I began
to speak. But the People were exceeding rude, and struck and beat me in the
Steeple-house-yard: One gave me a very great blow over my Wrist, so that the
People thought, he had broken my Hand to Pieces. The Constable was very willing
to have kept the Peace, and would have set some of them by the Heels, that
struck me, if I would have given way to it. After my Service at that time
amongst them was over, I went to Joseph Nicholson's House; and the Constable
went a little way with us, to keep off the rude Multitude from us. In the
Afternoon I went up again; and then the Priest had got another Priest to help
him, one that came from London, and was highly accounted of. Before I went into
the Steeple-house, I sat a little upon the Cross, and Friends with me; but the
Friends were moved to go into the Steeple-house, and I went in after them. The
London-priest was preaching; who gathered up all the Scriptures he could think
of, that spoke of false Prophets, and Antichrists, and Deceivers, and threw
them upon us: But when he had done, I Recollected all those Scriptures, and
brought them back upon himself. Then the People fell upon me in a rude manner;
but the Constable charged them to keep the Peace, and so made them quiet again.
Then the Priest began to Rage, and said; I must not speak there: I told him, he
had his Hourglass, by which he had preached; and he having done, the Time was
free for me, as well as for him: for he was but a Stranger there himself. So I
opened the Scriptures to them, and let them see, That those Scriptures, that
spoke of the false Prophets, and Antichrists and Deceivers, described them and
their Generation, and belonged to them, who were found walking in their Steps,
and bringing forth their Fruits; and not unto us, who were not guilty of such
things. And I manifested to them, that they were out of the Steps of the true
Prophets and Apostles; and showed them clearly by the Fruits and Marks, that
they were of those, whom those Scriptures spoke of, and not we. And I declared
the Truth, and the Word of Life to the People, and directed them to Christ
their Teacher. And all was quiet, while I was speaking: 1653. Bootel.
But when I had done, and was come forth, the Priests were both of them in such
a Fret and Rage, that they foamed at the Mouth for Anger against me. The Priest
of the Place made an Oration to the People in the Steeple-house-Yard, and said;
This Man has gotten all the honest Men and Women in Lancashire to him; and
now, said he, he comes here to do the same. Then said I unto him, What will thou have left? And what have the Priests left them, but such as themselves?
For if it be the Honest, that receive the Truth, and are turned to Christ; then
it must be the Dishonest, that follow thee, and such as thou art. Some also of
the Priest's People did begin to plead for their Priest, and for Tithes. But I
told them, It were better for them to plead for Christ, who had ended the
Tithing-Priesthood and the Tithes, and had sent forth his Ministers to give
freely, as they had received freely. So the Lord's Power came over them all,
and put them to Silence; and restrained the rude People, that they could not do
the Mischief they intended. And when I came down again to Joseph Nicholson's
House, I saw a great hole in my Coat, which was cut with a Knife; but it was
not cut through my Doublet, for the Lord had prevented their Mischief. And the
next day there was a rude, wicked Man would have done Violence to a Friend; but
the Lord's Power stopped him.

Now was I moved to send James Lancaster, to Appoint a Meeting at one John
VVilkinson's Steeple-house near Cockermouth; who was a Preacher in great
repute, and had three Parishes under him; wherefore I staid at Milholm in
Bootel, till he came back again. In the mean time some of those they called the
Gentry of the Country, had made a Plot against me, and had given a little Boy a
Rapier, for him to do me a Mischief with it. And they came with the Boy to
Joseph Nicholson's House to seek me: but the Lord had so ordered it, that I was
not in the House, but was gone forth into the Fields. They met with James
Lancaster, but did not much abuse him; and not finding me in the House, after a
while they went away again. So I walked up and down in the Fields that Night,
and did not go to Bed; as very often I used to do. Meeting near Cockermouth.
The next Morning we passed from thence, and came the next day to the
Steeple-house, where James Lancaster had appointed the Meeting. There were at
this Meeting Twelve Soldiers and their Wives, who were come thither from
Carlisle; and the Country People came in, like as it had been to a Fair. I lay
at an House somewhat short of the Place, so that many Friends were got thither
before me. And when I came there, I found James Lancaster speaking under a
Yew-Tree; which was so full of People, that I feared, they would break it down.
I looked about for a place to stand upon, to speak unto the People: for they
lay all up and down, like People at a Leaguer. But after a while, that I was
discovered, a Professor came to me and asked; If I would not go into the
Church? I seeing, there was no place abroad convenient to speak to the People
from, told him, Yes: Whereupon the People rushed in; so that when I came in,
the House and Pulpit was so full of People, that I had much ado to get in: and
they that could not get in, stood abroad about the VValls. 1653. A Meeting near
Cockermouth.
When the People were settled, I stood up upon a Seat: And the Lord opened my
Mouth to declare his Everlasting Truth, and his Everlasting Day; and to lay
open all their Teachers, and their Rudiments, Traditions and Inventions, that
they had been in, in the Night of Apostasy since the Apostles days: And I
turned them to Christ the true Teacher, and to the true, Spiritual Worship;
directing them, where to find the Spirit and Truth, that they might Worship God
therein. I opened Christ's Parables unto them, and directed them to the Spirit
of God in themselves, that would open the Scriptures unto them. And I showed
them, how all might come to know their Savior, and sit under his Teaching; and
come to be Heirs of the Kingdom of God, and know both God's and Christ's Voice,
by which they might discover all the false Shepherds and Teachers they had been
under, and be gathered to the true Shepherd, Priest, Bishop and Prophet Christ
Jesus, whom God commanded all to hear. So when I had largely declared the Word
of Life unto them, for about the space of three Hours, I walked forth from
amongst the People, and the People passed away very well satisfied. Among the
rest a Professor followed me, praising and commending me; and his Words were
like a Thistle to me: At last I turned about, and bid him, Fear the Lord:
Whereupon one, Priest Larkham of Cockermouth (for several Priests were got
together on the Way, who came, after the Meeting was done) said to me, Sir, why
do you judge so? you must not judge, said he. But I turned to him and said,
Friend, do not thou discern an Exhortation from a Judgment? for I admonished
him to fear God; and do thou say, I judge him? So this Priest and I falling
into Discourse, I manifested him to be amongst the false Prophets and covetous
Hirelings. And several People being moved to speak unto them, he and two other
of the Priests soon got away. When they were gone, John Wilkinson (who was
Preacher of that Parish, and of two other Parishes in Cumberland) began to
dispute against his own Conscience for several hours, till the People generally
turned against him: for he thought to have Tired me out; but the Lord's Power
tired him out, and the Lord's Truth came over him and them all. And Many
hundreds were Convinced that day, and received the Lord Jesus Christ, and his
free Teaching with Gladness; of whom some have died in the Truth, and many
stand there faithful Witnesses thereof. The Soldiers also were Convinced, and
their Wives; and continued with me, till the First Day.

Cockermouth.
On the First Day I went to the Steeple-house at Cockermouth, where Priest
Larkham lived: And when the Priest had done, I began to speak; and the People
began to be Rude: but the Soldiers told them, We had broken no Law; and then
they were quiet. Then I turned me to the Priest, and laid him open among the
false Prophets and Hirelings: At which word the Priest went his way, and said,
He calls me Hireling: which was true enough, and all the People knew it. Then
some of the Great Men of the Town came to me, and said, Sir, We have no learned
Men to dispute with you. I told them, I came not to dispute, but to declare the
way of Salvation to them, and the way of Everlasting Life. And so I declared
largely the way of Life and Truth to them, 1652. Brigham.
and directed them to Christ their Teacher, that had died for them, and bought
them with his Blood.

When I had done, I passed away about Two Miles to another great Steeple-house
of said John Wilkinson's, called Brigham; where the People, having been at the
other Meeting, were mightily affected; and would have put my Horse into the
Steeple-house-Yard: but I said, No; the Priest claims that; have him to an Inn.
When I came into the Steeple-house-Yard, I saw the People coming in great
Companies, as to a Fair; and abundance were already gathered in the Lanes, and
about the Steeple-house. I was very Thirsty; and walked about a quarter of a
Mile to a Brook, where I got some Water, and refreshed my Self. And as I came
up again, I met the said Wilkinson; who, as I passed by him, said, Sir, will
you preach to day? If you will, said he, I will not Oppose you in Word or
Thought. I replied, Oppose, if thou will; I have something to speak to the
People. And, said I, thou carried'st thy self foolishly the other day, and
spakest against thy Conscience and Reason; insomuch that thy Hearers cried out
against thee. So I left him, and went on; for he saw, it was in vain to Oppose,
the People were so affected with the Lord's Truth. When I came into the
Steeple-house-Yard, a Professor came to me, and asked, If I would not go into
the Church? (as he called it) And I seeing no convenient Place abroad, to stand
to speak unto the People from, went in; and stood up in a Seat, after the
People were settled. The Priest came in also; but did not go up to his Pulpit.
So the Lord opened my Mouth, and I declared his Everlasting Truth, and Word of
Life to the People; directing them to the Spirit of God in themselves, by which
they might know God and Christ, and the Scriptures, and come to have heavenly
Fellowship in the Spirit. And I declared to them, that Every one that comes
into the World, was enlightened by Christ the Life; by which Light they might
see their Sins, and Christ, who was come to save them from their Sins, and died
for them. And if they came to walk in this Light, they might therein see Christ
to be the Author of their Faith, and the Finisher thereof; their Shepherd to
feed them, their Priest to teach them, and their great Prophet to open divine
Mysteries unto them, and to be always present with them: I opened also unto
them, in the Openings of the Lord, the first Covenant, showing them the
Figures, and the Substance of those Figures; and so bringing them on to Christ,
the New Covenant. I also manifested unto them, that there had been a Night of
Apostasy since the Apostles days; but that now the Everlasting Gospel was
preached again, which brought Life and Immortality to Light: And the day of the
Lord was come, and Christ was come to teach his People himself by his Light,
Grace, Power and Spirit. A fine opportunity the Lord gave me, to preach Truth
among the People that day, for about three hours time; and all was quiet. And
Many hundreds were Convinced that day: And some of them praised God and said;
Now we know the first step to Peace. The said Preacher also said privately to
some of his Hearers, that I had broken them, and overthrown them.

1653. A Village.
After this I went to a Village, and many People accompanied me. And as I was
sitting in an House full of People, declaring the Word of Life unto them, I
cast mine Eye upon a Woman; and I discerned an Unclean Spirit in her. And I was
moved of the Lord to speak sharply to her; and told her, she was a Witch:
Whereupon the Woman went out of the Room. Now I being a Stranger there, and
knowing nothing of the Woman Outwardly, the People wondered at it; and told me
afterward, that I had discovered a great thing: for all the Country looked
upon her to be a Witch. The Lord had given me a Spirit of discerning, by which
I many times saw the States and Conditions of People, and could Try their
Spirits. For not long before, as I was going to a Meeting, I saw some Women in
a Field, and I discerned them to be Witches: and I was moved to go out of my
way into the Field to them, and declare unto them their Conditions; telling
them plainly, They were in the Spirit of Witchcraft. At another time there came
such an one into Swarthmore-Hall in the Meeting-time; and I was moved to speak
sharply to her, and told her, she was a Witch: And the People said afterward,
she was generally accounted so. There came also at another time another Woman,
and stood at a distance from me; and I cast mine Eye upon her and said: Thou
have been an Harlot: for I perfectly saw the Condition and Life of the Woman.
The Woman answered and said, Many could tell her of her Outward Sins; but none
could tell her of her Inward. Then I told her, Her Heart was not right before
the Lord; and that from the Inward came the Outward. This Woman came afterward
to be Convinced of God's Truth, and became a Friend.

From the aforesaid Village we came up to Thomas Bewley's, near Coldbeck;
Coldbeck.
and from thence, having had some Service for the Lord there, At a Market Town.
I passed to a Market Town, where I had a Meeting at the Cross; and all was
pretty quiet: and when I had declared the Truth unto them, and directed them to
Christ their Teacher, some received the Truth. Then we passed further, and had
another Meeting upon the Borders, in a Steeple-house-Yard, to which many
Professors and Contenders came; but the Lord's Power was over all: and when the
Word of Life had been declared amongst them, some received the Truth there also.

Carlisle.
From thence passing on we came to Carlisle, and the Pastor of the Baptists,
with most of his Hearers came to me there to the Abbey; where I had a Meeting,
and declared the Word of Life amongst them: and many of the Baptists, and of
the Soldiers were Convinced. After the Meeting was done, the Pastor of the
Baptists (being an high Notionist, and a flashy Man) came to me, and asked me,
What must be damned? I was moved immediately to tell him, That which spoke in
him, was to be damned. This stopped the Pastor's Mouth; and the Witness of God
was raised up in him: and I opened to him the States of Election and
Reprobation, so that he said; He never heard the like in his Life. He also came
afterward to be Convinced.

Then went I up to the Castle among the Soldiers; who beat a Drum, and called
the Garrison together: And I preached the Truth amongst them, Directing them to
the Lord Jesus Christ to be their Teacher, and to the measure of his Spirit in
themselves, 1653. Carlisle.
by which they might be turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from the
Power of Satan unto God. And I warned them all, that they should do no Violence
to any Man; but should show forth a Christian-Life: telling them, that he, who
was to be their Teacher, would be their Condemnation, if they were disobedient
to him. So I left them, having no Opposition from any of them, except the
Sergeants; who afterward came to be Convinced.

On the Market Day I went up into the Market, to the Market-Cross. Now the
Magistrates had both threatened, and sent their Sergeants: And the Magistrates
Wives had said, That if I came there, they would pluck the Hair from off my
Head; and that the Sergeants should take me up. Nevertheless I obeyed the Lord
God, and went upon the Cross; and there declared unto them, That the day of the
Lord was coming upon all their deceitful Ways and Doings, and deceitful
Merchandise; and that they should put away all Cozening and Cheating, and keep
to Yea and Nay, and speak the Truth one to another: So the Truth, and the Power
of God was set over them. And after I had declared the Word of Life to the
People, the Throng being so great, that the Sergeants could not get to me, nor
the Magistrates Wives come at me; I passed away quietly. Many People and
Soldiers came to me, and some Baptists, that were bitter Contenders; amongst
whom one of their Deacons, being an envious Man, and finding the Lord's Power
was over them, Cried out for very Anger. Whereupon I set my Eyes upon him, and
spoke sharply to him in the Power of the Lord: and he cried, Do not pierce me
so with thy Eyes; keep thy Eyes off me.

On the first day following, I went into the Steeple-house: And after the
Priest had done, I preached the Truth to the People, and declared the Word of
Life amongst them. The Priest got away; and the Magistrates desired me to go
out of the Steeple-house: But I still declared the Way of the Lord unto them,
and told them; I came to speak the word of Life and Salvation from the Lord
amongst them. The Power of the Lord was dreadful amongst them in the
Steeple-house, so that the People trembled and shook, and they thought, the
Steeple-house shook; and some of them feared, it would have fallen down on
their Heads. The Magistrates Wives were in a Rage, and strove mightily to have
been at me: but the Soldiers and friendly People stood thick about me. At
length the rude People of the City rose, and came with Staves and Stones into
the Steeple-house, crying; Down with these Round-headed Rogues: and they threw
Stones. Whereupon the Governor sent a File or two of Musketeers into the
Steeple-house, to appease the Tumult; and commanded all the other Soldiers
out. So those Soldiers took me by the Hand in a friendly manner, and said;
They would have me along with them then. When we came forth into the Street,
the City was in an Vproar; and the Governor came down: and some of those
Soldiers were put in Prison for standing by me, and for me against the Town
People. There was a Lieutenant, that had been Convinced; and he came, and had
me to his House, where there was a Baptists-Meeting, and thither came Friends
also: and we had a very quiet Meeting; and they heard the Word of Life gladly,
and many received it. The next day, the Justices and Magistrates of the Town
being gathered together in the Town Hall, they granted a VVarrant against me;
and sent for me to come before them. I was then gone to a Baptist's House; but
hearing of it, I went up to the Hall to them, where many rude People were: some
of whom had sworn strange false Things against me. I had a great deal of
Discourse with the Magistrates, wherein I laid open the Fruits of their
Priest's Preaching; and showed them, how Void they were of Christianity: and
that, though they were such great Professors (for they were Independents and
Presbyterians) they were without the Possession of that which they professed.
G. F. committed to Carlisle- Prison.
So after a large Examination they Committed me to Prison as a Blasphemer, an
Heretic and a Seducer; though they could not justly charge any such thing
against me. The Jail at Carlisle had Two Jailers, an Upper and an Under, which
looked like Two great Bear-wards. Now when I was brought in, the Vpper-Jailer
had me up into a great Chamber, and told me, I should have what I would in that
Room. But I told him, he should not expect any Money from me, for I would
neither lie in any of his Beds, nor eat any of his Victuals. Then he put me
into another Room; where after a while I got something to lie upon. There I
lay, till the Assizes came: Carlisle- Assize.
and then all the Talk and Cry was, that I was to be Hanged. And the
High Sheriff, whose Name was VVilfrey Lawson, stirred them much up to take away
my Life, and said; He would guard me to my Execution himself. They were in a
black, dark Rage, and set three Musketeers for Guard upon me; one at my
Chamber Door, another at the Stairs-foot, and a third at the Street-door: and
none they would let come at me, except one sometimes, to bring me some
necessary things. At Night they would bring up Priests to me, sometimes as late
as the Tenth Hour in the Night; and they would be exceeding Rude and Divellish.
There were a Company of bitter, Scotch Priests, Presbyterians, made up of Envy
and Malice, who were not fit to speak of the things of God, they were so
foul-mouthed: But the Lord by his Power gave me dominion over them all, and I
let them see both their Fruits, and their Spirits. Great Ladies also (as they
were called) came to see the Man, that they said was to die. Now, while both
the Judge, Justices and Sheriff were contriving together, how they might put me
to death; the Lord disappointed their Design by an unexpected way. For the
Judge's Clark (as I was Informed) started a Question among them; which
Confounded all their Counsels: So that after that they had not Power to call me
before the Judge.

Anthony Pearson being then in Carlisle, and perceiving, that they did not
intend to bring me (as was expected) upon my Trial, he writ a Letter to the
Judges, directed as follows: To the Judges of Assize and Jail-Delivery for
the Northern Parts, sitting at Carlisle. 1653. Carlisle- Assize.

YOU are raised up to do Righteousness and Justice, and sent forth to punish
him that does Evil, and to encourage him that does well, and to set the
oppressed free. I am therefore moved to lay before you the Condition of him,
who is called George Fox, whom the Magistrates of this City have cast into
Prison, for Words that he is accused to have spoken, which they call Blasphemy.
He was sent to the Jail, till he should be delivered by due Course of Law; and
it was expected, he should have been proceeded against in the Common Law-Course
at this Assizes. The Informations against him were delivered into Court; and
the Act allows and appoints that way of Trial. How hardly and unchristianly he
has been hitherto dealt with, I shall not now mention: but you may consider,
that nothing he is accused of, is nice and difficult. And, to my Knowledge, he
utterly abhors and detests every Particular, which by the Act against
Blasphemous Opinions is appointed to be punished; and differs as much from
those People, against whom the Law was made, as Light from Darkness. Though he
be Committed, Judgment is not given against him; nor have his Accusers been
face to face, to affirm before him, what they have Informed against him: Nor
was he heard, as to the Particulars of their Accusations: nor does it appear,
that any Word they charge against him, is within the Act. But indeed, I could
not yet so much as see the Information, no not in Court, though I desired it
both of the Clark of the Assizes and of the Magistrates Clark; nor has he had
a Copy of them. This is very hard: And that he should be so close restrained,
that his Friends may not speak with him, I know no Law nor Reason for. I do
therefore claim for him a due and lawful Hearing, and that he may have a Copy
of his Charge, and freedom to Answer for himself; and that rather before you,
than to be left to the Rulers of this Town, who are not competent Judges of
Blasphemy: as by their Mittimus appears, who have Committed him upon an Act of
Parliament; and mention Words, as spoken by him at his Examination, which are
not within the Act, and which he utterly denies. The Words mentioned in the
Mittimus he denies to have spoken; and has neither professed nor avowed them.

Anthony Pearson.




But notwithstanding this Letter, the Judges were resolved not to suffer me to
be brought before them; but reviling and Scoffing at me behind my back, left me
to the Magistrates of the Town: giving them what Encouragement they could, to
Exercise their Cruelty upon me. Whereupon (though I had been kept up so close
in the Jailer's House, that Friends were not suffered to come at me; and
Colonel Benson and Justice Pearson were denied to see me: yet) the next Day,
after the Judges were gone out of Town, an Order was sent to the Jailer, to put
me down into the Dungeon amongst the Moss-Troopers, Carlisle- Dungeon.
Thieves and Murderers; 1653. Carlisle- Dungeon.
which accordingly he did. A Filthy, Nasty Place it was, where Men and Women
were put together in a very uncivil manner; and never a House of Office to it.:
And the Prisoners so lousy, that one Woman was almost eaten to death with Lice.
Yet as bad as the Place was, the Prisoners were all made very loving and
subject to me; and some of them were Convinced of the Truth, as the Publicans
and Harlots were of old; so that they were able to confound a Priest, that
might come to the Grates to dispute. But the Jailer was very Cruel, and the
Vnder-Jailer very abusive both to me, and to Friends, that came to see me: For
he would beat Friends with a great Cudgel, that did but come to the Window to
look in upon me. I could get up to the Grate, where sometimes I took in my
Meat; at which the Jailer was often offended. One Time he came in a great Rage,
and fell a beating me with his great Cudgel, though I was not at the Grate at
that time: and as he beat me, he cried, Come out of the Window, though I was
then far enough from it. Now, while he struck me, I was made to sing in the
Lord's Power; and that made him Rage the more. Then he went, and fetched a
Fiddler, and brought him in where I was, and set him to play; thinking to vex
me thereby: But while he played, I was moved in the everlasting Power of the
Lord God to sing; and my Voice drowned the Noise of the Fiddle, and struck and
confounded them: and made them give over Fiddling, and go their ways.

Justice Benson's Wife was moved of the Lord to come to visit me, and to Eat no
Meat, but what she Eat with me at the Bars of the Dungeon-Window. She was
afterward herself Imprisoned at York, when she was great with Child, for
speaking to a Priest; and was kept in Prison, and not suffered to go out, when
the time of her Travail was come: so she was delivered of her Child in the
Prison. She was an honest, tender Woman, and continued faithful to the Truth,
until she died.

Whilst I was in the Dungeon at Carlisle, one James Parnel, a little Lad of
about Sixteen Years of Age, came to see me; and was Convinced: And the Lord
quickly made him a powerful Minister of the Word of Life, and many were turned
to Christ by him; though he lived not long. For traveling into Essex in the
Work of the Ministry, in the Year 1655, he was Committed to Colchester-Castle,
where he endured very great Hardships and Sufferings; being put by the Cruel
Jailer into a Hole in the Castle-wall, called the Oven, so high from the
Ground, that he went up to it by a Ladder: which being six Foot too short, he
was fain to climb from the Ladder to the Hole by a Rope, that was fastened
above. And when Friends would have given him a Cord and a Basket, to have drawn
up his Victuals in, the Inhuman Jailer would not suffer them; but forced him to
go down and up by that short Ladder and Rope, to fetch his Victuals (which for
a long time he did) or else he might have famished in the Hole. At length, his
Limbs being much benumbed with lying in that Place, yet being constrained to go
down to take up some Victuals; as he came up the Ladder again with his Victuals
in one hand, and catched at the Rope with the other, he missed the Rope; and
fell down from a very great height upon the Stones: by which Fall he was
exceedingly wounded in his Head and Arms, and his Body much bruised; and he
died in a short Time after. And when he was dead, the wicked Professors, to
cover their own Cruelty, writ a Book of him, and said; He fasted himself to
Death: Which was an abominable Falsehood; and was manifested so to be by another
Book, which was written in Answer to that, and was called, The Lamb's Defense
against Lies.

Now when I saw, that I was not like to be brought forth to a public Hearing
and Trial (although I had before Answered in Writing the particular Matters
charged against me, at the Time of my first Examination and Commitment) I was
moved to send forth the following Paper, as a public Challenge to all those,
that did belie the Truth and me behind my Back, to come forth, and make good
their Charge.

IF any in Westmorland, or Cumberland, or elsewhere, that profess Christianity,
and pretend to love God and Christ, are not satisfied concerning the things of
God, which I, who am called George Fox, have spoken and declared, let them
declare and publish their Dissatisfaction in Writing; and not back-bite, nor
lie, nor persecute in secret: This I demand of you all in the presence of the
living God, as ye will answer it to him. For the Exaltation of the Truth, and
the Confounding of the Deceit is this given forth: To that of God in your
Consciences I speak; declare or write your Dissatisfactions to any of them,
whom you call Quakers, that Truth may be exalted, and All may come to the
Light, with which Christ has enlightened every one, that comes into the World:
that nothing may be hid in Darkness, in Prisons, Holes or Corners; but that all
things may be brought to the Light of Christ, and by the Light of Christ may be
tried. This am I moved of the Lord to write, and send forth to be set upon the
Market-Crosses in Westmorland, and elsewhere. To the Light of Christ in you I
speak, that none of you may speak evil of the things of God, which you know
not; nor act contrary to the Light, that gave forth the Scriptures: lest you be
found Fighters against God, and the Hand of the Lord be turned against you.

G. F.

While I thus lay in the Dungeon at Carlisle, the Report, that was raised at
the time of the Assize, That I should be put to Death, was gone out far and
near; insomuch that the Parliament then sitting (which, I think, was called the
Little-Parliament) hearing, That a Young Man at Carlisle was to die for
Religion, caused a Letter to be sent down to the Sheriff and Magistrates
concerning me. And much about the same Time I writ also to the Justices at
Carlisle, that had cast me into Prison, and that persecuted Friends at the
Instigation of the Priests, for Tithes; expostulating the Matter with them
thus: Friends, Thomas Craston and Cuthbert Studholm,
YOur Noise is gone up to London before the sober People: What Imprisoning,
what Gagging, what Havoc and Spoiling the Goods of People have you made within
these few Years, unlike Men; as though you had never read the Scriptures, or
had not minded them! Is this the End of Carlisle's Religion? is this the End of
your Ministry? and is this the End of your Church, and of your Profession of
Christianity? you have shamed it by your Folly and Madness, and blind Zeal. Was
it not always the Work of the blind Guides, Watchmen, Leaders and false
Prophets, to prepare War against them, that would not put into their Mouths?
And have not you been the Priests Pack-horses and Executioners? When they spur
you up, to bear the Sword against the Just, do not you run on against the
Creatures, that cannot hold up such, as the Scriptures did always testify
against? Yet will you lift up your unholy Hands, and call upon God with your
polluted Lips, and pretend a Fast, who are full of Strife and Debate. Did your
Hearts never burn within you? Did you never come to question your Conditions?
Are you wholly given up to do the Devil's Lusts, to Persecute? Where is your
Loving Enemies? Where is your Entertaining Strangers? Where is your Overcoming
Evil with Good? Where are your Teachers, that can stop the Mouths of
Gainsayers, and can convince Gainsayers, and such as oppose themselves? Have
you no Ministers of the Spirit, no Soldiers with Spiritual Weapons, displaying
Christ's Colors? But all the Dragon's, the Murderer's, the Persecutor's; Arm
of Flesh; Cain's Weapons; Chief Priests taking Counsel; Judas and the Multitude
with Swords and Staves; Sodom's Company raging about Lot's House; like the
Priests and Princes against Jeremiah; like the Dragon, Beast and great Whore,
and the false Church, which John saw should cast into Prison, and Kill, and
Persecute? Whose Weapons are you bearing? does not the false Church, the
Whore, make Merchandise of Cattle, Corn, Wine and Oil, even to the very Souls
of Men? And has not all this been, since the true Church went into the
Wilderness? Read Revelations the 12th, with the 18th: Do you not read and see,
what a Spirit you are of, and what a bottomless Pit you are in? And have not
you dishonored the Place of Justice and Authority? What! turned your Sword
backward, like Madmen, who are a Praise to the Evil-Doer, and would be a
Terror to the Good, with all Force and Might to stop the way of Justice! Does
not the Lord, think you, behold your Actions? How many have you wronged? how
many have you Imprisoned and Persecuted, and put out of your Synagogues! Are
you they, that must fulfill the Prophecy of Christ, Matthew 23. John 16. Read the
Scriptures, and see, how unlike you are to the Prophets, Christ and his
Apostles: and what a Visage you have; like unto them, that persecuted the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles! You are found in their Steps, wrestling with
Flesh and Blood; and not with Principalities, and Powers, and Spiritual
Wickedness: And your Teachers imprisoning and persecuting for outward things,
you being their Executioners; the like whereof has not been in all the
Nations: The Havoc that has been made, the spoiling of the Goods of People,
taking away their Oxen and fatted Beeves, their Sheep, Corn, Wool and
Houshold-Goods, and giving them to the Priests, that have done no Work for
them: More like Moss-Troopers, than Ministers of the Gospel, they take them
from Friends; suing them in your Courts, and fining them, because they will not
break the Commands of Christ, that is, because they will not Swear. And thus
you Act against them, that do not lift up an Hand against you; and as much as
you turn against them, you turn against Christ. But he is risen, that will
plead their Cause; and you cannot be hid: for your Works are come to Light, and
the End of your Ministry is seen, what it is for; for Means. And ye have
dishonored the Truth, the Gospel; and are they, that make it Chargeable: You
have lost your Glory; you have dishonored your selves. Persecution was ever
blind and mad: Read the Apostle, what he says of himself, when he was in your
Nature. Exaltation and Pride, and your lifting up your selves, has brought you
to this; not being humble, and not doing Justice, and not loving Mercy. And
when such, as have beaten been and bruised by your Rude Company (to whom you
are a Praise and Encouragement) have come, and laid things before you, that you
might have done Justice, preserved and kept Peace; you (as knowing they could
not swear) have put an Oath to them: And this has been your Trick and Cover,
that ye might not do Justice to the Just; but by this means have gone on still
further to Encourage the Evil-Doer. But the Lord sees your Hearts! If ye were
not Men past feeling, ye would fear and tremble before him, the God of the
whole Earth; who is risen, and will stain your Glory, and mar your Pride, and
deface your Beauty, and lay it in the dust. Though for a Time you may swell in
your Pride, and glory in your Shame, and make a mock of God's Messengers, who,
for Reproving Sin in the Gate, are become your Prey; you will feel the heavy
hand of God, and his Judgments at the last. This is from a Lover of the Truth
and of Righteousness, and of your Souls; but a Witness against all such, as
make a Trade of the Prophets, Christ's and the Apostles Words, and are found in
the Steps of them, that persecuted the Prophets, Christ's and the Apostles
Life: who will persecute them, that will not hold you up, and put into your
Mouths, and give you Means. Tithes were before the Law, and Tithes were in the
Law; but Tithes since the Days of the Apostles have been only, since the false
Church got up. Now Christ, who is come to end the Law, and to end War, Redeems
Men out of the Tenths and out of the Nines also. The Redeemed of the Lord shall
reign upon the Earth; and know the Election, which was, before the World began.
Since the days of the Apostles Tithes have been set up by the Papists, and by
them that went forth from the Apostles into the World; so set up by the false
Church, that made Merchandise of People, since the true Church went into the
Wilderness. But now is the Judgment of the great Whore come, and the Beast and
false Prophet (the Old Dragon) shall be taken, and cast into the Fire; and the
Lamb and his Saints shall have the Victory. And now is Christ come, who will
make War in Righteousness, and destroy with the Sword of his Mouth all these
Inventers and Inventions, that have got up, and been set up since the Days of
the Apostles, and since the true Church went into the Wilderness. And the
everlasting Gospel, which is the Power of God, shall be preached again to all
Nations, and Kindreds, and Tongues in this the Lamb's Day; before whom you
shall appear to Judgment: and you have no way to Escape For he has appeared,
who is the First and the Last, the Beginning and the Ending, the Alpha and the
Omega: He that was Dead, is alive again, and lives for evermore!




I mentioned before, That Gervase Benson and Anthony Pearson, (though they had
been Justices of the Peace) were not permitted to come to me in the Prison;
whereupon they jointly wrote a Letter to the Magistrates, Priests and People at
Carlisle concerning my Imprisonment. And thus it was: HIM, who is called George
Fox, who is persecuted by Rulers and Magistrates, by Justices, by Priests and
by People, and who suffers Imprisonment of his Body at this present, as a
Blasphemer, and an Heretic, and a Seducer, him do we witness (who in measure
are made Partakers of the same Life, which lives in him) to be a Minister of
the Eternal Word of God, by whom the everlasting Gospel is preached; by the
powerful Preaching whereof the Eternal Father of the Saints has opened the
Blind Eyes, has unstopped the deaf Ears, has let the Oppressed go free, and
has raised up the Dead out of the Graves. Christ is now preached in and among
the Saints, the same, that ever he was; and because his heavenly Image is born
up in this his faithful Servant, therefore does fallen Man ( Rulers, Priests
and People^ persecute him: because he lives up out of the Fall, and testifies
against the Works of the World, that the Deeds thereof are Evil, he suffers by
you Magistrates; not as an Evil-Doer. For thus it was ever, where the Seed of
God was kept in Prison under the cursed Nature, that Nature sought to imprison
them, in whom it was raised. The Lord will make him to you as a burdensome
Stone: for the Sword of the Spirit of the Almighty is put into the Hands of the
Saints, which shall wound all the Wicked; and shall not be put up, till it has
cut down all corrupt Judges, Justices, Magistrates, Priests and Professors;
till he has brought his wonderful thing to pass in the Earth, which is, to
make New Heavens and a New Earth, wherein shall dwell Righteousness; which now
he is about to do. Therefore fear the Lord God Almighty, ye Judges, Justices,
Commanders, Priests and People: ye that forget God, suddenly will the Lord
come, and destroy you with an utter Destruction; and will sweep your Names out
of the Earth, and will restore his People Judges, as at the First, and
Counselors, as at the Beginning. And all Persecutors shall partake of the
Plagues of the Whore, who has made the Kings of the Earth, and the great Men
drunk with the Wine of her Fornications; and has drunk the Blood of the
Saints: and therefore shall you be Partakers of her Plagues. We are not
suffered to go see our Friend in Prison, whom we witness to be a Messenger of
the Living God. Now all People, mind, Whether this be according to Law, o^ from
the wicked, perverse, envious Will of the envious Rulers and Magistrates, who
are of the same Generation, that persecuted Jesus Christ: for, said he, as they
have done to me, so will they do to you. And as he took the love, the kindness
and service, that was showed and performed to any of his Afflicted Ones in
their Sufferings and Distress, as done unto himself; so the Injuries and
Wrongs, that were done by any to any of his Little Ones, he resented, as done
unto himself also. Therefore you, who are so far from visiting him your selves
in his suffering Servant, that ye will not suffer his Brethren to visit him; ye
must depart, ye Workers of Iniquity, into the Lake, that burns with Fire. The
Lord is coming to thresh the Mountains, and will beat them to Dust: And all
corrupt Rulers, corrupt Officers and corrupt Laws the Lord will take Vengeance
on, by which the tender Consciences of his People are oppressed. And he will
give his People his Law, and will judge his People himself, not according to
the sight of the Eye, and hearing of the Ear; but with Righteousness, and with
Equity. Now are your Hearts made manifest, to be full of Envy against the
living Truth of God, which is made manifest in his People; who are contemned
and despised of the World, and scornfully called Quakers. You are worse than
the Heathens, that put Paul in Prison; for none of his Friends or Acquaintance
were hindered to come to him by them: therefore they shall be Witnesses against
you. Ye are made manifest to the Saints, to be of the same Generation, that put
Christ to death, and that put the Apostles in Prison, on the same pretense, as
you act under; in calling Truth Error, and the Ministers of God Blasphemers, as
they did. But the day is dreadful and terrible, that shall come upon you, ye
Evil Magistrates, Priests and People, who profess the Truth in Words outwardly,
and yet persecute the Power of Truth, and them that stand in and for the Truth.
While ye have Time, prize it; and remember, what is written Isa. 54.17.

George Benson, Anthony Pearson.





Not long after this, the Lord's Power came over the Justices, and they were
made to set me at Liberty. But sometime before I was set at Liberty, the
Governor, and the said Anthony Pearson came down into the Dungeon to see the
Place, where I was kept; and understand, what Usage I had. And when they were
come down to me, they found the place so bad, and the savor so ill, that they
cried shame of the Magistrates, for suffering the Jailer to do such things: And
they called for the Jailers into the Dungeon, and required them to find
Sureties for their good Behavior; and the Vnder-Jailer, who had been such a
Cruel Fellow, they put into the Dungeon with me, amongst the Moss-Troopers.

1653. Cumberland At T. B's.
Now after I was set at Liberty, I went to Thomas Bewley's, where there came a
Baptist-Teacher to Oppose me; and he was Convinced. And Robert Widders being
with me, was moved to go to Coldbeck-Steeple-house; and the Baptist-Teacher
went along with him the same day. And the People fell upon them, and almost
killed Robert Widders; and took the Baptist's Sword from him, and beat him
sorely. This Baptist had the Inheritance of an Impropriation of Tithes; and he
went home, and gave it up freely. Robert VVidders was sent to Carlisle-Jail;
where having lain a while, he was set at Liberty again. William Dewsberry also
went to another Steeple-house hard by; and the People almost killed him, they
beat him so: but the Lord's Power was over all, and healed them again. At that
day many Friends went to the Steeple Houses, to declare the Truth to the
Priests and People; and great Sufferings they underwent: but the Lord's Power
sustained them.

Now I went into the Country, and had mighty great Meetings; and the
Everlasting Gospel and Word of Life flourished, and Thousands were turned to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and to his Teaching. And several that took Tithes, as
Impropriators, denied the receiving of them any longer; Westmorland.
and delivered them up freely to the Parishioners. Then passing on into
Westmorland, I had many great Meetings: and at Strickland-Head I had a large
Meeting, Strickland head.
where a Justice of Peace out of Bishopric, whose Name was Henry Draper, came
up; and many Contenders were there. The Priests and Magistrates were in a great
Rage against me in Westmorland, and had a VVarrant to apprehend me; which they
renewed from time to time, for a long time: Yet the Lord did not suffer them to
serve it upon me. So I traveled on amongst Friends, visiting the Meetings, till
I came to Swarthmore; Swarthmore.
where I heard, that the Baptists and Professors in Scotland had sent to me, to
have a Dispute with me. Whereupon I sent them word, Cumberland
that I would meet them in Cumberland at Thomas Bewley's House: whither
accordingly I went; but none of them came. Some dangers at this time I
underwent in my Travels to and fro: Wighton.
for at one time, as we were passing from a Meeting, and going through VVighton
on a Market Day, the People of the Town had set a Guard with Pitch-forks: and
although some of their own Neighbors were with us; they kept us out of the
Town, and would not let us pass through the Town, under a pretense of
preventing the Sickness: though there was no Occasion for any such thing.
However they fell upon us, and had like to have spoiled us and our Horses: But
the Lord did restrain them, that they did not much hurt; and we passed away.
Another time, as I was passing between two Friend's Houses, some Rude Fellows
lay in Wait in a Lane, and exceedingly stoned and abused us; but at last,
through the Lord's Assistance, we got through them, and had not much hurt. But
this showed the Fruits of the Priest's Teaching, which shamed their Profession
of Christianity.

Bishopric of Durham
Now, after I had visited Friends in that County, I went through the Countries
into Bishopric; having large Meetings by the way: and a very large Meeting I
had at Anthony Pearson's, where many were Convinced. From thence I passed
through Northumberland to Darren-Water, where there were great Meetings: 1653.
Northumberland.
and the Priests threatened, that they would come; but none came. The
everlasting Word of Life was freely preached, and freely received; and many
Hundreds were turned to Christ, their Teacher.

In Northumberland there came many to dispute; Darren-Water.
of whom some pleaded against Perfection: unto whom I declared, That Adam and
Eve were perfect, before they fell; and All that God made, was perfect; and
that the Imperfection came by the Devil, and the Fall: But Christ, that came to
destroy the Devil, said, Be ye perfect. Then one of the Professors said, That
Job said, Shall mortal Man be more pure, than his Maker? The Heavens are not
clear in his sight. God charged his Angels with Folly. But I showed him his
Mistake, and let him see, That it was not Job, that said so; but one of those,
that contended against Job: for Job stood for Perfection, and held his
Integrity; and they were called miserable Comforters. Then these Professors
said, The Outward Body was the Body of Death and Sin. I showed them their
Mistake in that also; showing them, That Adam and Eve had each of them an
Outward Body, before the Body of Death and Sin got into them; and that Man and
Woman will have Bodies, when the Body of Sin and Death is put off again; when
they are Renewed up into the Image of God again by Christ Jesus, which they
were in, before they fell. So they ceased at that time from Opposing further;
and glorious Meetings we had in the Lord's Power.

Then passed we on to Hexam, Hexam.
where we had a great Meeting a Top of an Hill: The Priest threatened, that he
would come and Oppose us, but he came not; so that all was quiet: And the
Everlasting Day, and Renowned Truth of the Everliving God was sounded over
those dark Countries, and his Son exalted over all. And it was proclaimed
amongst the People, that the Day was now come, wherein all that had made a
Profession of the Son of God, might receive him; and that to as many as would
receive him, he would give Power to become the Sons of God, as he had done to
me. And it was further declared, That he, that had the Son of God, he had Life
Eternal: but he that had not the Son of God (though he professed all the
Scriptures, from the first of Genesis to the last of the Revelations) he had
not Life. So after that all were directed to the Light of Christ, by which they
might see him, and receive him, and know, where their true Teacher was, and the
Everlasting Truth had been largely declared amongst them; we passed away
through Hexam peaceably, and came into Gilsland, Gilsland.
a Country noted for Thieving.

Here a Friend spying the Priest, went to speak to him: whereupon the Priest
came down to our Inn, and the Town's People gathered about us. The Priest said,
He would prove us Deceivers out of the Bible; but could find no Scripture for
his purpose. Then he went into the Inn; and after a while came out again, and
brought some broken Sentences of Scripture, that mention the Doctrines and
Commandments of Men, etc. and Touch not, Taste not, etc. for they perish with
the using; All which (poor Man) was his own Condition: whereas we were
persecuted, because we would not Taste, nor Touch, nor Handle their Doctrines
and Traditions, 1653. Gillsland.
which we knew, perished with the using. I asked him, What he called the
Steeple-house? Oh, said he, the dreadful House of God, the Temple of God. Then
I showed him, and the poor, dark People, That their Bodies should be the
Temples of God: and that Christ never commanded these Temples, but ended that
Temple at Jerusalem, which God had commanded. While I was speaking, the Pri^st
got away: and afterward the People made, as if they feared, we would take
their Purses, or steal their Horses; judging us like themselves, who are
naturally given to Thieving.

Cumberland
The next day we came through the Country into Cumberland again, where we had a
general Meeting of many Thousands of People a Top of an Hill near Langlands.
Langlands.
A glorious and heavenly Meeting it was; for the Glory of the Lord did shine
over all: and there were as many, as one could well speak over; the Multitude
was so great. Their Eyes were fixed on Christ their Teacher; and they came to
sit under their own Vine: insomuch that Francis Howgill, coming afterward to
Visit them, found, they had no need of Words; for they were sitting under their
Teacher Christ Jesus: In the s^nse whereof, he sat down amongst them, without
speaking any thing. A great Convincement there was in Cumberland, Bishopric,
Northumberland, Westmorland, Lancashire and Yorkshire: And the Plants of God
grew, and flourished so, the heavenly Rain descending, and God's Glory shining
upon them, that many Mouths were opened by the Lord to his Praise; yea, to
Babes and Sucklings he ordained Strength.

Brigham.
After my Release from Carlisle-Prison, I was moved to go to Priest Wilkinson's
Steeple-house again: and I being got into the Steeple-house before him, when he
came in, I was declaring the Truth to the People, though they were but few; for
the most and the best of his Hearers were turned to Christ's free Teaching: and
we had a Meeting of Friends hard by, where one Thomas Stubbs was declaring the
Word of Life amongst them. As soon as the Priest came in, he Opposed me: and
there did we stay most part of the Day; for when I began, he Opposed me: so if
any Law was broken, he broke it. And when his People would be haling me out, I
manifested his Fruits to be such, as Christ spoke of, when he said; They shall
hale you out of their Synagogues: And then he would be ashamed, and they would
let me alone. There did he stand, till it was almost Night, jangling and
opposing me; and would not go to his Dinner: for he thought to have wearied me
out. But at last, the Lord's Power and Truth came so over him, that he packt
away with his People. Then when he was gone, I went to the Meeting of Friends,
who were turned to the Lord, and established by his Power upon Christ, the Rock
and Foundation of the true Prophets and Apostles, but not of the False.

About this time the Priests and Professors fell to prophesying against us
afresh. They had said long before, That we should be destroyed within a Month;
and after that, they prolonged that time to Half a Year: But that time being
long expired, and we mightily increased in number; they now gave forth, That we
would eat out one another. For many times after Meetings, many tender People,
1653. NORTH Country.
having a great way to go, tarried at Friend's Houses by the way, and sometimes
more, than there were Beds to lodge in; so that some have lain on the Hay-mows:
Hereupon Cain's Fear possessed the Professors and World's People. For they were
afraid, that when we had eaten one another out, we would all come to be
maintained by the Parishes, and so we should be Chargeable to them. But after a
while, when they saw, that the Lord blessed and increased Friends, as he did
Abraham, both in the Field and in the Basket, at their Goings forth and Comings
in, at their Risings up and Lyings down, and that all things prospered with
them; then they saw the falseness of all their Prophecies against us; and that
it was In vain to Curse, where God had blessed. At the first Convincement, when
Friends could not put off their Hats to People, nor say You to a single Person,
but Thou and Thee, nor could not Bow, nor use flattering Words in Salutations,
nor go into the Fashions and Customs of the World; many Friends, that were
Tradesmen of several sorts, lost their Customers at the first: for the People
were shy of them, and would not Trade with them; so that for a time some
Friends, that were Tradesmen, could hardly get Money enough to buy Bread. But
afterward, when People came to have Experience of Friends Honesty and
Faithfulness, and found, that their Yea was Yea, and their Nay was Nay; that
they kept to a Word in their Dealings, and that they would not Cozen and Cheat
them; but that if they sent any Child to their Shops for any thing, they were
as well used, as if they had come themselves: the Lives and Conversations of
Friends did preach, and reached to the Witness of God in People. And then
things altered so, that all the Inquiry was; Where was a Draper, or
Shopkeeper, or Tailor, or Shoemaker, or any other Tradesman, that was a
Quaker? Then that was all the Cry: Insomuch that Friends had more Trade, than
many of their Neighbors; and if there was any Trading, they had a great part
of it. And then the Envious Professors altered their Note, and began to Cry
out; If we let these Quakers alone, they will take the Trade of the Nation out
of our Hands. This has been the Lord's doings to and for his People! which my
desire is, that All, who profess his Holy Truth, may be kept truly sensible of;
and that all may be preserved in and by his Power and Spirit, faithful to God
and Man: First to God, in Obeying him in all things, and then in Doing unto All
Men, that which is just and righteous, true and holy, and honest to all Men and
Women in all things, that they have to do or deal with them in: that the Lord
God may be glorified in their practicing Truth, Holiness, Godliness and
Righteousness amongst People in all their Lives and Conversations.

Now Friends being grown very Numerous in the Northern parts of this Nation,
and diverse Young-Convinced ones coming daily in among us; I was moved of the
Lord to write the following Epistle, and send it forth amongst them, for the
stirring up the pure Mind, and raising an Holy Care and Watchfulness in them
over themselves, and one another, for the honor of Truth.

To you all, Friends every where, scattered abroad.
IN the measure of the Life of God wait for Wisdom from God, even from him,
from whence it comes. And all ye, who be Babes of God, Wait for the Living Food
from the Living God, to be nourished up to Eternal Life, from the one Fountain,
from whence Life comes; that orderly and in Order ye may all be guided and
walk: Servants in your Places, Young Men and Young-Women in your Places, and
Rulers of Families; that every one, in your respective Places may adorn the
Truth, every one in the Measure of it. With it let your Minds be kept up to the
Lord Jesus, from whence it does come; that a sweet Savor ye may be to God, and
in Wisdom ye may all be ordered and ruled: that a Crown and a Glory ye may be
one to another in the Lord. And that no Strife, nor Bitterness, nor Self-Will
may appear amongst you; but with the Light, in which the Unity is, all that may
be Condemned. And that every one in particular may see to, and take care of the
ordering and ruling of their own Family; that in Righteousness and Wisdom it
may be governed, the fear and dread of the Lord in every ones Heart set, that
the Secrets of the Lord every one may come to receive, that Stewards of his
Grace you may come to be, to dispense it to every one as they have need; and so
in savouring and right-discerning you may all be kept: That nothing, that is
contrary to the pure Life of God, may be brought forth in you, or among you;
but all that is contrary to it, may by it be judged: So that in Light, in Life
and Love ye may all live; and all that is contrary to the Light, and Life and
Love, may be brought to Judgment, and by that Light condemned. And that no
fruitless Trees be among you; but all cut down and condemned by the Light, and
cast into the Fire: so that every one may bear and bring forth Fruit to God,
and grow fruitful in his Knowledge, and in his Wisdom. And so, that none may
appear in Words, beyond what they be in the Life, that gave forth the Words:
Here none shall be as the untimely Figs; and none shall be of those Trees,
whose Fruit withers: Such go in Cain's way, from the Light; and by it are
condemned. And that none amongst you boast your selves above your Measure; for
if you do, out of God's Kingdom you are excluded: for in that boasting part
gets up the Pride, and the Strife, which is contrary to the Light; which Light
leads to the Kingdom of God, and gives every one of you an Entrance thereinto,
and an Understanding, to know the things, that belong to the Kingdom of God.
And there the Light and Life of Man every one receives, him who was, before the
World was, by whom it was made; who is the Righteousness of God, and his
Wisdom: to whom all Glory, Honor, Thanks and Praise belongs, who is God
blessed for ever. Let no Image, nor Likeness be made; but in the Light Wait,
which will bring Condemnation on that part, that would make the Images: for
that prisons the Just. So to the Lust yield not the Eye, nor the Flesh; for the
Pride of Life stands in that, which keeps out of the Love of the Father; and
upon which his Judgments and Wrath remains, where the Love of the World is
sought after, and a Crown that is mortal: in which Ground the Evil enters,
which is cursed; which brings forth Briars and Thorns, where the Death reigns,
and Tribulation and Anguish is upon every Soul, and the Egyptian Tongue is
heard: All which is by the Light Condemned. And there the Earth is, which must
be removed: by the Light it is seen, and by the Power it is removed, and out of
its place it is shaken; to which the Thunders utter their Voices, before the
Mysteries of God be opened, and Jesus revealed. Therefore all ye, whose Minds
are turned to this Light (which brings Condemnation upon all those things
beforementioned, that are contrary to the Light) Wait upon the Lord Jesus for
the Crown, that is Immortal, and that fades not away.

G. F.
This is to be sent amongst all Friends in the Truth, the Flock of God, to be
read at their Meetings in every Place, where they are met together.




While yet Friends abode in the Northern Parts, a certain Priest of Rexam in
Wales, whose Name was Morgan Floyd, having heard Reports concerning us, sent
Two of his Congregation into the North to Inquire concerning us, and to Try us;
and bring him an Account concerning us. But when these Triers came down amongst
us, the Power of the Lord seized on them, and they were both Convinced of the
Truth. So they stayed some Time with us, and then returned back to Wales; where
afterward one of them departed from his Convincement: but the other, whose
Name was John-ap-John, abode in the Truth, and received a part of the Ministry,
in which he continued faithful.

Now were the Priests in a great Rage at New Castle, and at Kendal, and up and
down in most of the Northern Counties. And there being one Gilpin, that had
sometimes come amongst us at Kendal, and soon run out from the Truth into vain
Imaginations; the Priests made what Evil Use they could of him, against us: but
the Lord's Power confounded them all. And the Lord God cut off Two of those
persecuting Justices at Carlisle; and the other, after a Time, was turned out
of his Place, and went out of the Town.

About this Time also the Oath or Engagement to O. Cromwell was tendered to the
Soldiers; and many of the Soldiers were disbanded, because in Obedience to
Christ they could not swear. As John Stubbs for one, who was Convinced, when I
was in Carlisle-Prison, and became a good Soldier in the Lamb's War, and a
faithful Minister of Christ Jesus; traveling much in the Service of the Lord
in Holland, Ireland, Scotland, Italy, Egypt and America: and the Lord's Power
preserved him out of the Hands of the Papists; though many times he was in
great Danger of the Inquisition. But some of the Soldiers, who had been
Convinced in their Judgments, but had not come into Obedience to the Truth,
took O Cromwell's Oath; and going afterward into Scotland, and coming before a
Garrison there, the Garrison thinking, 1654. NORTH-Country.
they had been Enemies, fired at them, and killed diverse of them: which was a
sad Judgment.

Now when the Churches were settled in the North, and Friends were sat down
under Christ's Teaching, and the Glory of the Lord shined over them,
Swarthmore. Lancaster.
I passed from Swarthmore to Lancaster (about the beginning of the Year 1654)
and so through the Countries, visiting Friends, till I came to
Synder-hill-green, where there was a Meeting appointed three Weeks before;
leaving the North fresh and green, under Christ their Teacher. But before I
came to Synder-hill-green, we passed through Hallifax, Hallifax.
a rude Town of Professors, and came to one Thomas Taylor's, who had been a
Captain; where we met with some Janglers: but the Lord's Power was over all;
for I traveled in the Motion of God's Power. Synder-hill-Green.
And when I came to Synder-hill-green, there was a mighty Meeting, some
Thousands of People, (as it was judged) and many Persons of Note were there, as
Captains and other Officers; and there was a general Convincement: for the
Lord's Power and Truth was set over all, and there was no Opposition.

About this Time did the Lord move upon the Spirits of many, whom he had raised
up, and sent forth to Labor in his Vineyard, to travel Southwards, and spread
themselves in the Service of the Gospel to the Eastern, Southern and Western
parts of the Nation: As Francis Howgill and Edward Borough to London; John
Camm and John Audland to Bristol, through the Countries; Richard Hubberthorn
and George Whitehead toward Norwich; Thomas Holmes into Wales, and others
otherways: for above sixty Ministers had the Lord raised up, and did now send
abroad out of the North-Country. And the sense of their Service being very
Weighty upon me, I was moved to give forth the following Paper, directed thus:
To Friends in the Ministry.
ALL Friends every where, Know the Seed of God, which bruiseth the Seed of the
Serpent, and is a top of the Seed of the Serpent, which Seed sins not; but
bruiseth the Serpent's Head, that does sin, and tempts to Sin: Which Seed God's
Promise and God's Blessing is to; which Seed is One in the Male and in the
Female. Where it is Head, and has bruised the Head of the other, to the
beginning you are come; and the Younger is known, and he that is Servant to the
Younger. And the Promise of God, which is to the Seed, is fulfilled and
fulfilling; and the Scriptures come to be opened and owned: And the Flesh of
Christ known, who took upon him the Seed of Abraham according to the Flesh; the
Everlasting Priesthood known, the Everlasting Covenant. Christ takes upon him
the Seed of Abraham, and is a Priest after the Order of Melchizedeck; him that
is without Father, without Mother, without Beginning of Days (mark) or End of
Life: This is the Priest, that ever lives; he that is the Covenant of Life, of
Light and Peace. And the Everlasting Offering here is known once for all; which
Offering overthrows that Nature, which offered: out of which the Priesthood
arose, that could not continue by reason of Death. And here is the other
Offering known, the Everlasting Offering; which perfects for ever, them that
are sanctified: which Offering blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances,
triumphs over them, and ascends above all Principalities and Powers. Now, he
that has the Spirit of Jesus, sees this; and here is the Love of God received,
that does not Rejoice in Iniquity, but leads to Repent of it. So this is the
WORD OF THE LORD GOD to you all, Friends every where abroad scattered, Know the
Power of God in one another, and in that Rejoice; for then you Rejoice in the
Cross of Christ, who is not of the World: which Cross is the Power of God to
all them, that are saved. So you, that know the Power, and feel the Power, you
feel the Cross of Christ, you feel the Gospel, which is the Power of God unto
Salvation to every one, that believes. Now, he that believes in the Light,
believes in the Everlasting Covenant, in the one Offering, comes to the Life of
the Prophets and Moses, comes to see Christ the Hope, the Mystery, which Hope
perishes not; but lets you see the Hope that perishes, which is not that
Mystery: and the Expectation in that perishing Hope fades. And where this
never-failing Hope is witnessed, the Lord comes to be sanctified in the Heart,
and you come to the Beginning, to Christ the Hope, which perishes not; but the
other Hope, and the other Expectation that perishes. So all of you know the
perishing of the Other, and the failing of the Expectation therein; and know
that, which perishes not: that you may be ready to give a Reason of this Hope
with Meekness and Fear, to every Man that asks you. Christ the Hope, the
Mystery, that perishes not; the End of all perishing things, the End of all
changeable things, the End of the decaying Covenant, the End of that which
waxes old and does decay; the End of the first Covenant, of Moses and of the
Prophets; the Righteousness of God, Christ Jesus the Son: his Throne ye will
know, Heirs with him ye will be; who makes his Children Kings and Priests to
him, and brings them to know his Throne and his Power. There is no
Justification out of the Light, out of Christ: Justification is in the Light in
Christ: Here is the Doer of the Will of God, here is the Entering into the
Kingdom. He that believes in the Light, becomes a Child of Light; and here the
Wisdom is received, that is justified of her Children. Here believing in the
Light, you shall not abide in Darkness; but shall have the Light of Life: and
come every one to witness the Light, that shines in your Hearts; which Light
will give you the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of
Jesus Christ. With which Light you will see him reign, who is the Prince of
Life and of Peace: which Light turns from him, that is out of the Truth, and
abode not in it; where the true Peace is not.

Friends, Be not hasty: For he that believes in the Light, makes not Haste.
Here the Grace is received, by which you come to be saved; the Election is
known, which obtains the Promise: The Will is seen, that wills, the Mind is
known that runs, which obtains not; but stops and dulls. Now, that with the
Light being seen, and judged, and stopped, the Patience is here known, which
obtains the Crown; and the Immortality is come to Light. So all they now, that
act contrary to the Light, and do not believe in it, they do not come to
Justification. And all Friends, if you go from the Light, from wanting to have
the Promise of God fulfilled to the Seed, whereby you may know Christ Reign,
you thereby bring on your selves Changable Garments, and come to wear the
Changable Garments, and the strange Flesh, which leads to Adultery, which the
Law goes upon; which shuts out of the Kingdom: And out of this Will does
proceed the Work or Building, that is for the Fire; whereby you may come to
suffer Less. Therefore the Light love, which does that Condemn; and receive the
Power from the Lord, with which you stand over that, and do it Condemn: feeling
and seeing that, which gives you the Victory over the World, and to see out of
Time, to before Time. And again, Friends, Know Abraham, that must obey the
Voice of Sarah, that bears Seed; which casts forth the Bondwoman and her Son:
Do not go forth, there will the Wildness lodge. Know that, which bears the Wild
Son, and its Mother, who is not Sarah: for the Promise is to the Seed, not of
many, but one; which Seed is Christ: And this Seed now you come to witness
stand on the Top of all, yea, on the Head of the Serpent. And so all (as I said
before) who this come to feel and witness, ceme to the Beginning: and this to
all the Seed of God, the Church, that it you all may come to know, where there
is no blemish, nor spot, nor Wrinkle, nor any such thing; which is that, which
is purchased by the Blood of Jesus, and to the Father presented out of all that
does defile: which is the Pillar and Ground of Truth. And none comes to this,
but such, who come to the Light, which does come from Christ, who purchased
this Church. They who go from the Light, are shut out and condemned; though
they profess all the Scriptures declared forth from it. Therefore walk in the
Light, that you may have Fellowship with the Son, and with the Father; and come
all to witness his Image, and his Power, and his Law, which is his Light, which
has converted your Souls, and brought them to submit to the higher Power,
above that which is out of the Truth: that you may know here the Mercy and
Truth, and the Faith that works by Love, which Christ is the Author of; who
lights every one of you: which Faith gives the Victory. Now that which gives
the Victory, is perfect; and that, which the Ministers of God received from
God, is that which is perfect; and that which they are to Minister, is for the
perfecting of the Saints; till they all come in the Unity of the Faith unto a
Perfect Man. So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, every one in the
Measure of Life Wait, that with it all your Minds may be guided up to the
Father of Life, the Father of Spirits; all to receive Power from him, and
Wisdom, that with it you may be ordered to his Glory: to whom be all Glory for
ever! All keep in the Light and Life, that judges down that which is contrary
to the Light and Life. So the Lord God Almighty be with you all. And keep your
Meetings every where, being guided by that of God; by that you may see the Lord
God among you, even him, who lights every Man, that comes into the World: by
whom the World was made; that Men, that be come into the World, might believe.
He that believes not, the Light condemns him: He that believes, comes out of
Condemnation. So this Light, which lights every Man, that comes into the
World, which they that hate it, stumble at; this is the Light of Men.

All Friends, that speak abroad, see, that it be in the Life of God; for that
begets to God: the Fruits of that shall never Wither. And this sows to the
Spirit, which is in Prison; and of the Spirit reaps Life (to you this is the
Word of the Lord God) and the other sows to the Flesh, and of the Flesh reaps
Corruption. And this you may see all the World over, amongst these Seeds-Men;
what may be reaped in the Field, that is, the World. Therefore in the Spirit
of the Lord God VVait, which cuts down and casts out all this, the Root and
Branches of it. So in that wait to receive Power, and the Lord God Almighty
preserve you in it; whereby you may come to feel the Light, that comprehends
Time, and the World, and fathoms it: which believed in, gives you the Victory
over the World. And here the Power of the Lord is received, which subdues all
the contrary; and puts off the Garments, that will stain and pollute. With
which Light you come to reach the Light in every Man, which Christ enlightens
every Man, that comes into the world, with-all: And here the things of Christ
come to be known, and the Voice of Christ heard. Therefore keep in the Light,
the Covenant of Peace; and walk in the Covenant of Life. There is that, which
makes Merry over the Witness of God: and there is that, which makes Merry in
the Lord; which rejoices over that, which has made merry over it: of that
take notice, you who be in the Light. Such the Lord does beautify, whose Trust
is in his Strength: and the Lord does see such, and them that be in his Light.
But such as be from the Light, whose Eyes be after their Abominations and
Idols, their Eyes are to be blinded; and their beautiful Idols, and their
Abominations to be destroyed, and by the Light condemned, which they have made
from the Life, in their own Strength: which with the Light is seen, and
overthrown by the Power of God. If you can change my Covenant, says the Lord,
which keeps the Day in its Season, and the Night in its Season (mark, my
Covenant, the Light) If you can change this; then may you change the Covenant
of God with his Seed. So all Friends, that be turned to the Light, which comes
from him, by whom the World was made, who was, before it was made, Christ
Jesus, the Savior of your Souls; abide in the Light, and you will see your
Salvation to be VValls and Bulwarks against that, which the Light discovers to
be contrary to it. Waiting in the Light, you will receive the Power of God,
which is the Gospel of Peace; that you may be shod with it. And know that in
one another, which raises up the Seed of God, and sets it over the World and
the Earth, and Crucifies the Affections and Lusts: and then the Truth comes to
reign, which is the Girdle.

G. F.



About this time Rice Jones of Nottingham (who had been a Baptist, and was
turned Ranter; the same, that came to me in Darby-Jail) he and his Company
began to prophesy against me, giving out, That I was then at the highest; and
that after that time I should fall down as fast. And he sent a bundle of
Railing Papers from Nottingham to Mansfield, Clauson, and the Towns
thereabouts, Judging Friends for declaring the Truth in the Markets and in the
Steeple Houses; which Papers I Answered. But his and his Company's Prophecies
came upon themselves: for soon after they fell to Pieces; and many of his
Followers came to be Friends, and continued so. And through the Lord's blessed
Power, Truth and Friends have increased, and do increase in the increase of
God: And I by the same Power have been and am preserved, and kept in the
Everlasting Seed, that never fell, nor changes. But Rice Jones took the Oaths,
that were put to him; and so disobeyed the Command of Christ. Many such false
Prophets have risen up against me, but the Lord has blasted them; and will
blast them all, who rise against the blessed Seed, and me in that. My
Confidence is in the Lord: for whosoever did, I saw their End; and how the Lord
would Confound them, before the Lord sent me forth.

Synder-hill-Green
Now was I at Synder-hill-Green, where I had had a large Meeting in the
daytime; and at Night we had a great Meeting again in Thomas Stacy's House:
for People came from far, and could not soon depart. The High Sheriff of the
County told Captain Bradford, that he intended to have come up, with half a
dozen of his Troopers, to the Meeting; but the Lord prevented him, and stopped
him. When I had stayed some Meetings thereabouts, Yorkshire. Holderness.
Land'send
I traveled up and down in Yorkshire, as far as Holderness, and to the
Lands-End that way, visiting Friends and the Churches of Christ; which were
finely settled under Christ's Teaching. At length I came to Captain Bradford's
house, whither many Ranters came from York to wrangle; but they were
confounded, and stopped Thither came she also, who was called the Lady
Mountague, who was then Convinced; and lived and died in the Truth.

Hallifax.
Then I came again to Thomas Taylor's, within three Miles of Hallifax, where
there was a large Meeting of about Two hundred People: amongst which were many
rude People, and diverse Butchers; several of whom had Bound themselves with an
Oath, before they came out, that they would kill me (as I was told:) One of
those Butchers had been Accused for killing a Man and a Woman. They came in a
very rude manner, and made a great Disturbance in the Meeting. The Meeting
being in a Close, Thomas Tailor stood up and said unto them; If you will be
Civil, you may stay; but if not, I charge you to be gone from off my Ground.
But they were the worse; and said, They would make it like a Common: and they
yelled, and made such a Noise, as if they had been come to a Bear-baiting. And
they thrust Friends up and down; and Friends being peaceable, the Lord's Power
came over them. Several times they thrust me off from the place I stood on, by
the Crowding of the People together against me: but still I was moved of the
Lord to stand up again, as I was thrust down. At last I was moved of the Lord
to say unto them, If they would discourse of the things of God, let them come
up to me one by one; and if they had any thing to say, or to Object, I would
Answer them all, one after another: 1654. Near Hallifax at T. B 's.
Then they were all silent, and had nothing to say. And then the Lord's Power
came so over them all, and Answered the Witness of God in them, that they were
bound by the Power of God: and a glorious, powerful Meeting we had, and his
Power went over all; and the Minds of People were turned by the Spirit of God
in them to God, and to Christ their Teacher. And the powerful Word of Life was
largely declared that day; and in the Life and Power of God we brake up our
Meeting: and that Rude Company went their way to Hallifax. The People asked
them, Why they did not kill me, according to the Oath they had sworn? And they
maliciously Answered, That I had so bewitched them, that they could not do it:
Thus was the Devil chained at that time. Friends told me, that they used to
come at other times, and be very rude and unruly; and sometimes break their
Stools and Seats, and make fearful work amongst them: But the Lord's Power had
now bound them. Shortly after this, that Butcher, that had been accused of
killing a Man and a Woman before, and who was one of them, that had then Bound
himself by an Oath to kill me, killed another Man; and was thereupon sent to
York-Jail. Example.
Another of those rude Butchers, who had also sworn to kill me, having
accustomed himself to Thrust his Tongue out of his Mouth, in derision of
Friends, when they passed by him; had his Tongue so swollen out of his Mouth,
that he could never draw it in again, but died so. Several strange and sudden
Judgments came upon many of these Conspirators against me; which would be too
large here to declare. God's Vengeance from Heaven, came upon the
Blood-thirsty, who sought after Blood: for all such Spirits I laid before the
Lord, and left them to him to deal with them, who is stronger than them all; in
whose Power I was preserved, and carried on to do his Work. The Lord has
raised a fine People in those Parts, whom he has drawn to Christ, and gathered
in his Name; who feel Christ amongst them, and sit under his Teaching.

After this I passed through the Countries, till I came to Balby; Balby.
Lincolnshire.
from whence several Friends went with me into Lincolnshire, where I had
formerly been: of whom some went to the Steeple Houses, and some to private
Meetings. There came to the Meeting, where I was, the Sheriff of Lincoln, and
several with him; who made a great Contention and Jangling for a time. But at
length the Lord's Power struck him, that he was Convinced of the Truth, and
received the Word of Life: as did several others also, that did Oppose; and
continued among Friends, till they died. Great Meetings there were, and a large
Convincement in those Parts: Many were turned to the Lord Jesus, and came to
sit under his Teaching; leaving their Priests, and their superstitious Ways:
and the Day of the Lord flourished over all. Amongst them, that came to our
Meetings in that Country, there was one called Sir Richard Wrey; and he was
Convinced: as was also his Brother, and his Brother's Wife, who abode in the
Truth, and died therein; though he afterward Run out.

Having visited those Countries, I came into Darbyshire: Darbyshire.
and the Sheriff of Lincoln, who was lately Convinced, came with me. In one
Meeting we had some Opposition; 1654. Derbyshire.
but the Lord's glorious Power gave dominion over all. At Night there came a
Company of Bailiffs and Serving-men, and called me out: so I went out to them,
having some Friends with me. When I was come out, they were exceeding Rude and
Violent: for they had, it seems, Complotted together, and intended, To have
Carried me away with them in the dark of the Evening by force; and then to have
done me a Mischief: But the Lord's Power went over them, and chained them, so
that they could not effect their Design; and at last they went away. The next
day, Thomas Aldam understanding, that the Serving-men belonged to one called a
Knight (who lived not far off) went to his House, and laid before him the bad
Carriage of his Servants: And the Knight seemed to Rebuke them; and did not
allow of their Evil Carriage toward us.

Nottingham-shire. Skegby.
After this we came into Nottinghamshire to Skegby, where we had a great Meeting
of all sorts of People: and the Lord's Power went over them, and all was quiet;
and the People were turned to the Spirit of God, by which many came to receive
his Power, and to sit under the Teaching of Christ, their Savior. A great
People the Lord has that a ways.

Kidsley-Park.
Then I passed toward Kidsley-park, where there came many Ranters: but the
Lord's Power checked them. From thence I went up into the Peak-Country, Peak-
Country.
toward Thomas Hammersly's, where there came the Ranters of that Country, and
many high Professors. The Ranters opposed me, and fell a Swearing: And when I
reproved them for Swearing, they would bring Scripture for it, and said;
Abraham, and Jacob, and Joseph swore; and the Priests and Moses, and the
Prophets swore, and the Angels swore. Then I told them, I did confess, all
these did so, as the Scripture records; but, said I, Christ (who said, Before
Abraham was, I am) says, Swear not at all. And Christ ends the Prophets, and
the Old Priesthood, and the Dispensation of Moses, and reigns over the House of
Jacob and of Joseph; and he says, Swear not at all. And God, when he brings
in the First-begotten into the World, says, Let all the Angels of God worship
him, to wit, Christ Jesus, who says; Swear not at all. And as for the Plea,
that Men make for Swearing to end their Strife; Christ, who says, Swear not at
all, destroys the Devil and his Works, who is the Author of Strife; for that is
one of his Works. And God said, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased; hear ye him So the Son is to be heard, who forbids Swearing. And the
Apostle James, who did hear the Son of God, and followed him, and preached him,
forbids all Oaths, Jam. 5.12. So the Lord's Power went over them, and his Son;
and his Doctrine was set over them: and the Word of Life was fully and richly
preached, and many were Convinced that day. This Thomas Hammersly being
summoned to serve upon a Jury, was admitted to serve without an Oath: and he
being Foreman of the Jury, when he brought in the Verdict, the Judge did
declare: That he had been a Judge so many Years; but never heard a more upright
Verdict, than that Quaker had then brought in. Much might be written of things
of this nature; which time would fail to declare. But the Lord's blessed Power
and Truth was exalted over all; who is worthy of all Praise and Glory for ever!

Thus traveling through Darbyshire, I visited Friends, Leicestershire.
Swanington.
till I came to Swanington in Leicestershire, where there was a General
Meeting; to which many Ranters came, and Baptists and other Professors: for
great Contests there had been with them, and with the Priests in that Town. To
this Meeting several Friends came from several Parts; as John Audland, and
Francis Howgil, and Edward Pyot from Bristol, and Edward Borough from London;
and several were Convinced in those Parts. The Ranters, that came to the
Meeting, made a disturbance, and were very rude; but at last the Lord's Power
came over them, and they were Confounded. The next Day Jacob Bottomley, a great
Ranter, came from Leicester; but the Lord's Power stopped him, and came over them
all. There came a Priest too; but he also was Confounded by the mighty Power of
the Lord: For about this Time the Priests, and the Baptists, and the Ranters,
and other Professors were very rude, and stirred up the rude People against us.
Now we sent to the Ranters to come forth, and Try their God: and there came
abundance of them, who were very rude; and Sung, and whistled, and danced: but
the Lord's Power so Confounded them, that many of them came to be Convinced.

After this I came to Twy-cross, whither came some Ranters again; Twy-cross
and they Sang, and danced before me. But I was moved in the Dread of the Lord
to speak to them, and Reprove them; and the Lord's Power came over them, so
that some of them were reached, and Convinced; and received the Spirit of God:
and are come to be a pretty People, living and walking soberly, in the Truth of
Christ. So I went to Anthony Brickley's in Warwickshire, Warwickshire.
where there was a great Meeting; and several Baptists and other People came,
and jangled: but the Lord's Power came over them.

Then went I to Drayton in Leicestershire, to visit my Relations:
Leicestershire. Drayton.
and as soon as I was come in, Nathaniel Stephens the Priest, having gotten
another Priest, and given notice to the Country, sent down to me, to come up to
them: for they could not do any thing, till I came. Now I, having been Three
Years away from my Relations, knew nothing of their Design and Intentions. But
at last I went up into the Steeple-house-yard, where the Two Priests were; and
they had gathered abundance of People. When I came there, they would have had
me gone into the Steeple-house. I asked them, What I should do there? And they
said: Mr. Stephens could not bear the Cold. I told them, He might bear it as
well as I. At last we went into a great Hall, and there was Richard Farnsworth
with me: And a great Dispute we had with these Priests, concerning the Practice
of the Priests, how contrary they were to Christ and his Apostles. The Priests
would know, Where Tithes were forbidden, or ended? Whereupon I showed them out
of the Seventh Chapter to the Hebrews, That not only Tithes, but the
Priesthood, that took Tithes, was ended; and the Law was ended and disannulled,
by which the Priesthood was made, and Tithes were commanded to be paid. Then
the Priests stirred up the People to some Lightness and Rudeness. Now I had
known this Priest Stephens from a Child; therefore I laid open his Condition,
and the manner of his Preaching: 1654. Drayton.
and how that he, like the rest of the Priests, did apply the Promises to the
first Birth, which must die. But I showed, that the Promises were to the Seed,
not to many Seeds, but to the One Seed, Christ; who was one in Male and Female:
for all were to be born again, before they could enter into the Kingdom of God.
Then he said, I must not judge so: but I told him, He that was spiritual,
judged all things. Then he confessed. That that was a full Scripture: but
Neighbors, said he, This is the Business; George Fox is come to the Light of
the Sun, and now he thinks to put out my Star- light. Then I told him, I would
not quench the least Measure of God in any; much less put out his Starlight,
if it were true Starlight, Light from the Morning Star. But I told him, If he
had any thing from Christ or God, he ought to speak it freely, and not take
Tithes from the People for Preaching; seeing Christ commanded his Ministers to
give freely, as they had received freely. So I charged him to preach no more
for Tithes, or any Hire. But he said, He would not yield unto that. Then after
a while the People began to be vain and rude; whereupon we broke up: Yet some
were made loving to the Truth that Day. Now before we parted, I told them, That
(if the Lord would) I intended to be at the Town that Day Seven-night again;
and in the Interim I went into the Country, and had Meetings: and came thither
again that Day Seven-night. Against that time this Priest had got Seven Priests
to help him: for Priest Stephens had given notice at a Lecture on a Market Day
at Adderston, That such a Day there would be a Meeting and a Dispute with me:
But I knew nothing of it; but only had said, I should be in Town that day
Seven-night again. Now these Eight Priests had gathered several Hundreds of
People, even most of the Country thereabouts, and they would have had me into
the Steeple-house; but I would not go in, but got on an Hill, and there spoke
to them and the People. There was with me Thomas Tailor, who had been a Priest;
and James Parnel, and several other Friends. The Priests thought, that Day to
have Trampled down Truth; but the Truth came over them. And then they grew
Light, and the People Rude; and the Priests would not stand to Trial with me:
but would be contending here and there a little, with one Friend or other. At
last one of the Priests brought his Son to dispute with me; but his Mouth was
soon stopped: And when he could not tell, how to Answer; he would go ask his
Father: And his Father was confounded also, when he came to Answer for his Son.
So after they had toiled themselves, they went away in a Rage to Priest
Stephens his House to drink: And as they went away, I said; I never came in a
Place, where so many Priests together would not stand the Trial with me.
Whereupon they and some of their Wives came about me, and laid hold on me, and
fawningly said; What might I have been, if it had not been for the Quakers? And
then they fell a pushing of Friends to and fro, to thrust them from me, and to
pluck me to themselves. After a while several lusty Fellows came, and took me
up in their Arms, and carried me into the Steeple-house-porch; intending to
have carried me into the Steeple-house by Force: But the Door being locked,
they fell down on an Heap, having me under them. As soon as I could I got up
from under them, and got to my Hill again: Then they got me from that Place
again, and got me to the Steeple-house-wall, and set me on a Bass, like a
Stool: And all the Priests, being come back, stood under with the People. And
the Priests cried, Come, to Argument, to Argument: I said, I denied all their
Voices, for they were the Voices of the Hirelings and the Strangers. And they
cried, Prove it, prove it: Then I directed them to the tenth of John, where
they might see, what Christ said of such: for he said, He was the true
Shepherd, that laid down his Life for his Sheep, and his Sheep heard his Voice,
and followed him: But the Hireling would fly, when the Wolf came, because he
was an Hireling. And I offered to prove, that they were such Hirelings. Then
the Priests plucked me off from the Bass again; and they themselves got all
upon Basses under the Steeple-house-wall. Then I felt the mighty Power of God
arise over all (though the People began to be a little rude) and I told them,
If they would but give Audience, and hear me quietly, I would show them by the
Scriptures, why I denied those Eight Priests or Teachers, that stood there
before me; and all the Hireling-Teachers of the World whatsoever: and I would
give them Scriptures, for what I said. Whereupon both Priests and People
Consented. Then I showed them out of the Prophets, Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Micha, Malachy and other Prophets, that they were in the Steps of such, as God
sent his true Prophets to Cry against: For, said I, You are such, as the
Prophet Jeremiah cried against, Chap. 5. when he said; The Prophets prophecy
falsely, and the Priests bear rule by their means: which he called an horrible,
filthy thing. And you are such as they, That used their Tongues and said, Thus
says the Lord, when the Lord never spoke to them: And such as followed their
own Spirits, and saw nothing; but spoke forth a Divination of their own Brain:
and by their Lies and their Lightness had caused the People to err, Jer. 14.
And you are such as They were, that sought for their Gain from their Quarter;
that were as greedy, dumb Dogs, that could never have enough, whom the Lord
sent his Prophet Isaiah to cry against, Isa. 56. And you are such, as they
were, who taught for handfuls of Barley, and pieces of Bread; who sowed Pillows
under Peoples Arm-holes, that they might lie soft in their Sins, Ezekiel. 13. And
you are such as They, that Taught for the Fleece, and the Wool, and made a Prey
of the People, Ezekiel. 34. But the Lord is gathering his Sheep from your Mouths,
and from off your barren Mountains; and is bringing them to Christ, the one
Shepherd, which he has set over his Flocks: as by his Prophet Ezekiel he then
declared he would do. And you are such as They, that Divined for Money, and
preached for Hire; and if a Man did not put into their Mouths, they prepared
War against him, as the Prophet Micha complained, Chap. 3. Thus went I on
through the Prophets, too largly to be here repeated. Then coming to the New
Testament, I showed from thence, that They were like the Chief Priests, and
Scribes, and Pharisees of old, such as Christ cried Woe against, Matthew. 23. And
that they were such false Apostles, as the true Apostles Cried against, such as
taught for filthy Lucre; and such Antichrists and Deceivers, as they Cried
against, that minded Earthly things, and served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but
their own Bellies: for they that served Christ, gave freely and preached
freely, as he commanded them. But they that will not preach without Hire,
Tithes or outward Means, serve their own Bellies, and not Christ; and through
the good words of the Scriptures, and feigned Words of their own, they made
Merchandise of the People then, as (said I ye do now. So when I had largely
quoted the Scriptures, and showed them, wherein they were like the Pharisees,
loving to be called of Men Masters, and to go in Long Robes, and to stand
Praying in the Synagogues, and to have the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the
like; and when I had thrown them out in the sight of the People amongst the
false Prophets, Deceivers, Scribes and Pharisees, and showed at large, how such
as They, were judged and condemned by the true Prophets, by Christ, and by the
Apostles, I directed them to the Light of Christ Jesus, who enlightens every
Man, that comes into the World: that by it they might see, whether these
things were not true, as had been spoken. Now when I appealed to That of God in
their Consciences, the Light of Christ Jesus in them, they could not abide to
hear of it; they were all quiet till then: but then a Professor said; George,
What! will thou never have done? I told him, I should have done shortly. So I
went on a little longer, and cleared my self of them in the Lord's Power. When
I had done, all the Priests and People stood silent for a time: At last one of
the Priests said; They would read the Scriptures, that I had quoted. I told
them, With all my Heart. They began to read the 23d of Jeremiah, and there they
saw the Marks of the false Prophets, that he cried against. When they had read
a Verse or two, I said, Take notice, People: but the Priests said, Hold thy
Tongue, George. I bid them, Read the whole Chapter throughout; for it was all
against them: Then they stopped, and would read no further; but asked me a
Question. I told them, I would Answer their Question, the Matter being first
granted, that I had charged them with, viz. That they were false Prophets,
false Teachers, Antichrists and Deceivers, such as the true Prophets, Christ
and the Apostles cried against. A Professor said Nay to that; but I said, Yea:
For you leaving the Matter, and going to another thing, seem to consent to the
proof of the former Charge. Then I Answered their Question, which was this;
Seeing those false Prophets were adulterated, Whether I did judge Priest
Stephens to be an Adulterer? To which I Answered, He was adulterated from God
in his Practice, like those false Prophets and the Jews. They would not stand
to vindicate him, but broke up the Meeting. Then the Priests whispered
together; and Priest Stephens came to me, and desired, that my Father and
Brother and I might go aside with him, that he might speak to me in private;
and the rest of the Priests should keep the People from coming to us. I was
very loath to go aside with him: but the People cried, Go George, do Geor^e, go
aside with him: and I was afraid, if I did not go, they would say, I was
disobedient to my Parents. So I went; and the rest of the Priests were to keep
the People off: but they could not; for the People being willing to hear, drew
close to us. I asked the Priest, what he had to say? And he said, If he was out
of the way, I should pray for him; and if I was out of the way, he would pray
for me: and he would give me a Form of Words to pray for him by. I replied; It
seems, Thou do not know, whether thou be in the Right Way, or no; neither
do thou know, whether I am in the Right Way or no: But I know, that I am in
the Everlasting Way, Christ Jesus, which thou art out of. And thou would
give me a Form of Words to pray by, and yet thou deniest the Common Prayer Book
to pray by, as well as I; and I deny thy Form of Words, as well as it. If thou
would have me pray for thee by a Form of Words, is not this to deny the
Apostle's Doctrine and Practice of Praying by the Spirit, as it gave words and
utterance? Here the People fell a Laughing: but I was moved to speak more to
him. And when I had cleared my self to him and them, we parted; after I had
told them, That I should (God willing) be in the Town that day Seven-night
again. So the Priests packt away, and many People were Convinced that day: for
the Lord's Power came over all. And whereas they thought to have Confounded
Truth that day, many were Convinced of it; and many that were Convinced before,
were by that day's work Confirmed in the Truth, and abode in it: and a great
Shake it gave to the Priests. Yea, my Father, though he was an Hearer and
Follower of the Priest, was so well satisfied, that he struck his Cane upon the
Ground, and said; Truly I see, he that will but stand to the Truth, it will
carry him out. So I passed about in the Country, till that day Seven-night; and
then I came again: for we had appointed a Meeting at my Relation's House. Now
Priest Stephens having had notice before hand thereof, had got another Priest
to him: and they had got a Company of Troopers with them; and sent for me to
come to them. But I sent them word, Our Meeting was appointed; and they might
come to it, if they would. The Priests came not; but the Troopers came, and
many rude People Now they had laid their Plot, That the Troopers should take
every one's Name, and then command them to go home; and such as would not go,
they should take, and carry them away with them. Accordingly they began, and
took several Names, charging them to go home; but when they came to take my
Name, my Relations told them, I was at home already: So they could not take me
away that time. Nevertheless they took my Name: but the Lord's Power was over
them, and they went away, both Professors and Troopers, Crossed and Vexed, because
they had not their Ends. But several were Convinced that day, and admired the
Love and Power of God. This was that Priest Stephens, that had once said of me;
Never such a Plant was bred in England: Yet afterward he reported, That I was
carried up into the Clouds, and found again full of Gold and Silver; and many
Lies, and false Reports he raised on me: but the Lord swept them all away. Now
the Reason, why I would not go into their Steeple-house was, because I was to
bear my Testimony against it, and to bring all off from such Places, to the
Spirit of God; that they might know, their Bodies to be the Temples of the Holy
Ghost: And to bring them off from all the Hireling-Teachers, to Christ their
free Teacher, that had died for them, and purchased them with his Blood.

After this I went into the Country, and had several Meetings, and came to
Swannington, where the Soldiers came again; but the Meeting was quiet, and the
Lord's Power was over all, and the Soldiers did not meddle. Then I went to
Leicester; and from Leicester to Whetston. Leicester. Whetston.
But before the Meeting began, there came about Seventeen Troopers of Coll.
Hacker's Regiment, with his Marshal; and they took me up before the Meeting;
though Friends were beginning to gather together: for there were several
Friends come out of several Parts. I told the Marshal, He might let all the
Friends go, I would answer for them all: whereupon he took me, and let all the
Friends go; only Alexander Parker went along with me. At Night they had me
before Coll. Hacker, and his Major, and Captains, a great Company of them; and
a great deal of Discourse we had about the Priests, and about Meetings (for at
this time there was a noise of a Plot against O. Cromwell.) And much Reasoning I
had with them about the Light of Christ, which enlightneth every Man, that
comes into the World. Coll. Hacker asked, Whether it was not this Light of
Christ, that made Judas betray his Master, and after led him to hang himself. I
told him, No: That was the Spirit of Darkness, which hated Christ, and his
Light. Then Coll. Hacker said, I might go home, and keep at home; and not go
abroad to Meetings. I told him; I was an Innocent Man, free from Plots, and
denied all such Work. Then his Son Needham said, Father, This Man has reigned
too long; it is time to have him cut off. I asked him, For what? what had I
done? or whom had I wronged from a Child? for I was bred and born in that
Country, and who could accuse me of any Evil from a Child? Then Coll. Hacker
asked me again; If I would go home, and stay at home? I told him, If I should
promise him so, that would manifest, that I was guilty of something to go home,
and make my home a Prison: And if I went to Meetings, they would say, I broke
their Order. Therefore I told them; I should go to Meetings, as the Lord should
order me; and therefore could not submit to their Requirings: but I said, we
were a peaceable People. Well then, said Coll. Hacker, I will send you to
Morrow Morning by six a Clock to my Lord Protector, by Captain Drury, one of
his Lifeguard. That Night I was kept a Prisoner at the Marshalsey; and the
next Morning by the sixth hour I was ready, and delivered to Captain Drury. I
desired, he would let me speak with Coll. Hacker, before I went; and he had me
to his Bedside. Coll. Hacker at me presently again, To go home, and keep no
more Meetings. I told him, I could not submit to that; but must have my Liberty
to serve God, and to go to Meetings. Then, said he, you must go before the
Protector: Whereupon I kneeled on his Bedside, and besought the Lord to forgive
him; for he was as Pilate, though he would wash his Hands: and when the day of
his Misery and Trial should come upon him, I bid him, Then Remember, what I had
said to him. But he was stirred up, and set on by Priest Stephens, and the
other Priests and Professors, wherein their Envy and Baseness was manifest;
who, when they could not overcome me by Disputes and Arguments, nor resist the
Spirit of the Lord, that was in me, then they got Soldiers to take me up.

Afterward, when this Coll. Hacker was in Prison in London, 1654. Wherston.
a day or two before he was Executed, he was put in mind, of what he had done
against the Innocent: And he remembered it, and confessed to it to Margaret Fell,
and said; He knew well, whom she meant; and he had a Trouble upon him for it.
So his Son, who told his Father, I had reigned too long, and that it was time
to have me cut off, might observe, how his Father was Cut off afterward, being
hanged at Tyburn.

Now was I carried up a Prisoner by Captain Drury aforesaid from Leicester; and
when we came to Harborough, he asked me, Leicester. Harborough. Northampton.
If I would go home, and stay a Fort-night? I should have my Liberty, he said,
if I would not go to, nor keep Meetings. I told him, I could not promise any
such thing. Several times upon the Road did he ask, and try me after the some
manner; and still I gave him the same Answers. So he brought me to London,
London. Charing Cross.
and lodged me at the Mermaid over against the Mews at Charing Cross. And on
the way, as we traveled, I was moved of the Lord to Warn People at the Inns and
Places, where I came, of the day of the Lord, that was coming upon them. And
William Dewsberry and Marmaduke Stor being in Prison at Northampton, he let me
go, and visit them.

After Captain Drury had lodged me at the Mermaid, he left me there, and went
to give the Protector an Account of me. And when he came to me again, he told
me, The Protector did require, that I should promise, not to take up a carnal
Sword or Weapon against him or the Government, as it then was; and that I
should write it, in what words I saw good, and set my Hand to it: I said little
in Reply to Captain Drury. But the next Morning I was moved of the Lord to
write a Paper To the Protector, by the name of Oliver Cromwell, wherein I did in
the presence of the Lord God declare, that I did deny the wearing or drawing of
a carnal Sword, or any other outward Weapon against him or any Man. And that I
was sent of God to stand a Witness against all Violence, and against the Works
of Darkness; and to turn People from the Darkness to the Light, and to bring
them from the Occasion of War and Fighting, to the peaceable Gospel; and from
being Evildoers, which the Magistrates Sword should be a Terror to. When I had
written, what the Lord had given me to write, I set my Name to it, and gave it
to Captain Drury to give to O. Cromwell; which he did. Then after some time
Captain Drury brought me before the Protector himself at Whitehall: Whitehall.
It was in a Morning, before he was dressed; and one Harvey, that had come a
little among Friends, but was disobedient, waited upon him. When I came in, I
was moved to say, Peace be in this House: and I bid him, Keep in the Fear of
God, that he might receive Wisdom from him; that by it he might be ordered, and
with it might order all things under his Hand to God's Glory. I spoke much to
him of Truth; and a great deal of Discourse I had with him about Reli^ion:
wherein he carried himself very moderately. But he said, We quarrelled with the
Priests, whom he called Ministers: I told him, I did not quarrel with them, but
they quarrelled with me and my Friends. But, said I, If we own the Prophets,
Christ and the Apostles, we cannot hold up such Teachers, Prophets and
Shepherds, 1654. Whitehall.
as the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles declared against; but we must declare
against them by the same Power and Spirit. Then I showed him, That the
Prophets, Christ and the Apostles declared freely, and declared against them,
that did not declare freely; such as preached for filthy Lucre, and divined for
Money, and preached for Hire, and were covetous and greedy, like the dumb Dogs,
that could never have enough: And that they, that have the same Spirit, that
Christ and the Prophets and the Apostles had, could not but declare against all
such now, as they did then. As I spoke, he would several times say, It was very
good, and it was Truth. I told him, That all Christendom (so called) had the
Scriptures, but they wanted the Power and Spirit, that they had, who gave forth
the Scriptures; and that was the reason, they were not in Fellowship with the
Son, nor with the Father, nor with the Scriptures, nor one with another. Many
more words I had with him; but People coming in, I drew a little back: And as I
was turning, he catched me by the Hand, and with Tears in his Eyes, said, Come
again to my House; for if thou and I were but an hour of a day together, we
should be nearer one to the other: adding, That he wished me no more Ill, than
he did to his own Soul. I told him, If he did, he wronged his own Soul: And I
bid him hearken to God's Voice, that he might stand in his Counsel, and obey
it; and if he did so, that would keep him from hardness of Heart: but if he did
not hear God's Voice, his Heart would be hardened. And he said, It was true.
Then went I out: G. F. set at Liberty.
And when Capt. Drury came out after me, he told me; His Lord Protector said, I
was at Liberty, and might go whither I would. Then I was brought into a great
Hall, where the Protector's Gentlemen were to dine; and I asked them, What they
did bring me thither for? They said, It was by the Protector 's Order, that I
might dine with them. I bid them, Let the Protector know, I would not eat a bit
of his Bread, nor drink a sup of his Drink. When he heard this, he said; Now I
see, there is a People risen and come up, that I cannot win either with Gifts,
Honors, Offices or Places; but all other Sects and People I can. But it was
told him again, That we had forsook our own; and were not like to look for such
things from him.

Now I being set at Liberty, went up to the Inn again, where Capt. Drury had at
first lodged me. This Capt. Drury, though he sometimes carried fairly, was an
Enemy to me, and to Truth, and opposed it: and when Professors came to me
(while I was under his Custody) and he was by, he would scoff at Trembling, and
call us Quakers; as the Independents and Presbyterians had Nicknamed us
before. But afterward he came on a time to me, and told me, That, as he was
lying on his Bed to rest himself in the daytime, a sudden Trembling seized on
him, that his Joints knocked together; and his Body shook so, that he could not
rise from his Bed: he was so shaken, that he had not strength enough left to
rise. But he felt the Power of the Lord was upon him; and he tumbled off his
Bed, and cried to the Lord, and said; He would never speak against the Quakers
more, such as Trembled at the Word of God.

During the Time, that I was Prisoner at Charing Cross, 1654. Charing Cross.
there came abundance to see me, People almost of all Sorts, Priests,
Professors, Officers of the Army, etc. And one Time a Company of Officers being
with me, desired me to pray with them: I sat still, with my Mind retired to
the Lord. At last I felt the Power and Spirit of God move in me: and the Lord's
Power did so shake and shatter them, that they wondered; though they did not
live in it.

Among those, that came thither to see me, there was one Colonel Packer, with
several of his Officers; and while they were with me, came in one Cob, and a
great Company of Ranters with him. The Ranters began to call for Drink and
Tobacco: but I desired them to forb^ar it in my Room, telling them, If they had
such a Mind to it, they might go into another Room. One of them cried, All is
ours: and another of them said; All is well. I replied, How is all well, while
thou art so peevish, and envious, and crabbed? for I saw, he was of a peevish
Nature: and so I spoke to their Conditions; and they were sensible of it, and
looked upon one another, wondering.

Then Colonel Packer began to talk with a light, chaffy Mind, concerning God,
and Christ, and the Scriptures: That was a great Grief to my Soul and Spirit,
when I heard him talk so lightly; so that I told him. He was too light to talk
of the things of God: for he did not know the solidity of a Man. Thereupon the
Officers raged, and said; Would I say so of their Colonel! This Packer was a
Baptist, and he and the Ranters bowed and scraped to one another very much: for
it was the manner of the Ranters to be exceeding Complemental (as they call it)
so that Packer bid them, Give over their Complements: But I told them, They
were fit to go together, for they were both of one Spirit.

This Colonel Packer lived at Theobald's near Waltham, and was made a Justice
of Peace. He set up a great Meeting of the Baptists at Theobald's- Park; for
he, and some other Officers had purchased it. They were exceeding High, and
railed against Friends and Truth; and threatened to apprehend me with their
Warrants, if ever I came there. Yet after I was set at Liberty, I was moved of
the Lord God to go down to Theobalds, and appoint a Meeting hard by them;
Theobalds.
to which many of his People came: and diverse of his Hearers were Convinced of
the Way of Truth, and received Christ, the free Teacher, and came off from him;
and that made him Rage the more. But the Lord's Power came over him so, that he
had not Power to meddle with me. Then I went to Waltham hard by him, Waltham.
and had a Meeting there; but the People were very rude, and gathered about the
House, and brake the Windows. Whereupon I went out to them, with the Bible in
my Hand, and desired them to come in; and told them, I would show them
Scripture both for our Principles and Practices. And when I had done so, I
showed them also, That their Teachers were in the Steps of such, as the
Prophets, and Christ, and the Apostles cried against. Then I directed them to
the Light of Christ, and Spirit of God in their own Hearts, that by it they
might come to know their free Teacher, the Lord Jesus Christ. The Meeting being
ended, they went away quieted and satisfied; and a Meeting has since been
settled in that Town. 1654. London.
But this was sometime after I was set at Liberty by O. Cromwell.

For when I came from White Hall to the Mermaid at Charing Cross (which had
been my Prison) I staid not long there: but went into the City of London, where
we had great and powerful Meetings; and so great were the Throngs of People,
that I could hardly get to and from the Meetings for the Crowds of People: And
the Truth spread exceedingly. Thomas Aldam and Robert Craven (who had been
Sheriff of Lincoln) and diverse Friends, came up to London after me: but
Alexander Parker abode with me.

Then after a while I went to White Hall again, and was moved to declare the
Day of the Lord amongst them; White Hall.
and that the Lord was come to teach his People himself: So I preached Truth
both to the Officers, and to them that were called Oliver's Gentlemen, who were
of his Guard. But there was a Priest, that Opposed, while I was declaring the
Word of the Lord amongst them: For Oliver had several Priests about him, of
which this was his News-monger; an envious Priest, and a light, scornful,
chaffy man. I bid him Repent; and he put it in his News-book the next Week,
That I had been at White Hall, and had bid a Godly Minister there Repent. When
I went thither again, I met with him; and abundance of People gathered about
me. Then I manifested the Priest to be a Liar in several things, that he had
affirmed; and so he was put to Silence. He put in the News-book, That I wore
Silver-Buttons; which was false: for they were but Alchimy. Afterward he put in
the News-book, That I hung Ribbands on People's Arms, which made them to follow
me: This was another of his Lies; for I never wore, nor used Ribbands in my
Life. Three Friends* went to examine this Priest, that gave forth this false
Intelligence; and to know of him, where he had that Information? He told them,
It was a Woman, that told him so; and that if they would come again, he would
tell them the Woman's Name. When they came again, he said; It was a Man, but
would not tell them his Name then; but if they would come again, he said, he
would tell them his Name, and where he lived. They went the Third Time; and
then he would not tell, who told him: but offered, If I would give it under my
Hand, that there was no such thing, he would put that into the News-book.
Thereupon the Friends carried it to him under my Hand; but when they came, he
brake his Promise, and would not put it in: but was in a Rage, and threatened
them with the Constable. This was the deceitful doing of this Forger of Lies:
And these Lies he spread over all the Nation in the News-books, to render Truth
Odious, and to put Evil into People's Minds against Friends and Truth; of which
a more large Account may be seen in a Book printed soon after this time, for
the clearing of Friends and Truth from the Slanders, Lies and false Reports
raised and cast upon them. These Priests, the News-Mongers, were of the
Independent Sect, like them in Leicester: But the Lord's Power came over all
their Lies, and swept them away; and many came to see the Naughtiness of these
Priests. The God of Heaven carried me over all in his Power, and his blessed
Power went over the Nation: Insomuch, that many Friends about this time were
moved to go up and down, to sound forth the Everlasting Gospel, in most parts
of this Nation, and also into Scotland; 1654. White Hall.
and the Glory of the Lord was felt over all to his Everlasting Praise. And a
great Convincement there was in London, and some in the Protector's House and
Family: I went to have seen him again, but could not get to him; the Officers
were grown so Rude.

The Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists were in a great Rage: for many of
their People came to be turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and sat down under
his Teachings, and received his Power, and felt it in their Hearts; and then
they were moved of the Lord to declare against the rest of them.

I appointed a Meeting in the Fields near Acton, in which the Word of Life, and
the Saving Truth was declared freely; and the Lord's Power was eminently
manifested, and his blessed Day exalted over all.

About this time I was moved to write a Paper, and send it forth among the
Professors; a Copy of which here follows.

To all Professors of Christianity.
ALL they, that professed Jesus Christ in Words, and yet heard him not, when he
was come, they said; he was a Deceiver and a Devil: The Chief Priests were
they, that called him so. So the Jews said; He has a Devil, and is mad; why do
ye hear him? But others said; These are not the Words of him, that has a
Devil: Can a Devil open the Eyes of the Blind? The Jews then doubted, whether
he were the Christ, or no; and so all, like the Jews, in the Knowledge, in the
Notion, that profess a Christ without only, where Christ is risen within, they
do not own him, but do doubt of him; though Christ be the same now and for
ever. Jesus Christ said, I and my Father are one; then the Jews took up Stones
to stone him: And where Jesus Christ is now spiritually come and made manifest,
the Jews, such as are Christians in outward Profession only, have the same hard
Hearts inwardly now, as they had then; and do Cast Stones at him, where he is
Risen. Jesus said, For which of these good works do ye stone me? The Jews
answered, for thy good works we stone thee not; but for Blasphemy, in that thou
being a Man, make thy self God. Jesus answered them; Is it not written in
your Law, I said, you are Gods? and the Scripture cannot be broken. Say ye of
him, whom the Father has sanctified, and sent into the World, Thou
blasphemest, because I said, I am the Son of God? The Jews said to him, say we
not well, that thou have a Devil? Jesus answered, I honor my Father, and ye
dishonor me. And they that were in the Synagogue, rose up, and thrust him out
of the City; and took him up to the edge of the Hill, whereon their City was
built, to cast him down headlong. The Pharisees said of him, He casts out
Devils by the Prince of Devils. Jesus Christ was called a Glutton and a
Wine-bibber, a Friend of Publicans and Sinners: But Wisdom is justified of her
Children. The Officers, when the Highpriests and Pharisees asked them, Why
have ye not brought him, said; Never Man spoke, like this Man. The Pharisees
said, Are ye also deceived? Do any of the Rulers or of the Pharisees believe on
him? 1654. London.
but this People, which know not the Law, are accursed. Nicodemus said unto
them (he that came unto Jesus by Night) does our Law judge any Man, before it
hear him? When Stephen confessed Jesus, the Substance of all Figures and Types,
and was brought before the Chief-Priests to his Trial, he told them; The
Most-High dwells not in Temples made with Hands: and brought the Prophets
Words to witne^s, and told them; They were stiff-necked, and uncircumcised in
Heart and Ears, and always resisted the Holy Ghost, as their Fathers had done.
Stephen was full of the Holy Ghost, and said; he saw Jesus: and they ran upon
him, and stoned him to Death, as he was calling upon the Lord. When Paul
Confessed Jesus Christ, and his Resurrection, Festus said, he was Mad When Paul
preached the Resurrection, some mocked: The Jews persuaded the People, and they
stoned him; and drew him out of the City, thinking, he had been dead. The Jews
stirred up the Gentiles, to make their Minds Evil-affected toward the
Brethren. The Jews stirred up the Devout and Honorable Women, and the Chief of
the City; and raised up Persecution against Paul and Barnabas, and expelled
them out of their Coasts: And there was an Assault made both of the Gentiles
and of the Jews, with their Rulers, to use them despitefully, and to stone
them. In like manner all in the nature of those Jews now, whose Religion stands
in Notions, do stir up the Rulers, and do stir up the ignorant People, and
incense them against Jesus Christ, where he is risen, to stone them all with
one Consent, in whom he is risen. This is, that the Scripture might be
fulfilled, and the blindness of the People might be discovered. And the same
Power now is made manifest, and does overturn the World, as did overturn the
World, to the exalting of the Lord, and to the pulling down of the Kingdom of
Satan, and of this World; and setting up his own Kingdom, to his everlasting
Praise. The Lord is now exalting Himself, and throwing down Man's self: The
Proud one's Head is aloft, fearing he should lose his Pride, and his Crown; the
Priests, they incense the ignorant People, for fear their Trade should go down;
and the Professors, they show forth, what is in them, being full of Rage: which
shows, that Jesus Christ, the Substance is not there; but a stony Heart, to
stone the Precious, where it is risen. The Carnal Mind feeds upon the outward
Letter, and Earth feeds upon Earth; and that Vineyard is not dressed, but is
full of Briars, and Nettles: and Ravenous Beasts, Swine and Dogs, Wolves and
Lions, and all venomous Creatures lodge in that Habitation. That House is foul,
and is not swept: And these are the Persecutors of the Just, and Enemies of the
Truth, and the Enemies of Christ. These are Blasphemers of God and his Truth:
These are they, that call upon God with their Lips, but their Hearts are far
from him. These are they, that feed on Lies, Priests and People: These are
they, that Incense all the People, and stir up Envy; for it begets its own, one
like it self. These are they, that are the Waves of the Sea, foaming out their
own Shame. These are they, that have double Eyes; whose Bodies are full of
Darkness. These are they, that paint themselves with the Prophets, with
Christ's, and with the Apostles Words most fair: whited Walls you are; painted
Sepulchers you are; Murderers of the Just you are. Your Eyes are double, your
Minds are double, your Hearts are double: Ye Flatterers, Repent from your
carnal Ends, who are full of Mischief; pretending God and Godliness, taking him
for your Cloak: But he will uncover you, and he has uncovered you to his
Children. He will make you bare, and discover your Secrets, and take off your
Crown; and take away your Mantle, and your Vail, and strip you of your
Clothing; that your Nakedness may appear, and how you sit deceiving the
Nations. Your Abomination, and your Falseness is now made manifest to them, who
are of God; who in his Power Triumph over you, Rejoice over you, the Beast, the
Dragon, the false Prophet, the Seducer, the Hypocrite; the Mother of all
Harlots: now thou must have thy Cup double; Give it to her double. Sing over
her, ye Righteous Ones, sing over them all, ye Saints; Triumph in Glory,
Triumph over the Deceit: Sing the Song of the Lamb; Triumph over the World:
spread the Truth abroad. Come ye Captive ones out of Prison, and Rejoice with
one accord; for the Joyful Days are coming: Let us be glad, and Rejoice for
ever! Singleness of Heart is come; Pureness of Heart is come: Joy and Gladness
is come. The glorious God is exalting himself: and Truth has been talked of;
but now it is possessed. Christ has been talked of; but now he is come, and
possessed. The Glory has been talked of; but now it is possessed, and the
Glory of Man is defacing. The Son of God has been talked of; but now he is
come, and has given us an Understanding. Unity has been talked of; but now it
is come. Virgins have been talked of; but now they are come with Oil in their
Lamps. He will be glorified alone: Where Pride is thrown down, Earth and the
fleshly Will is thrown down, and the Pure is raised up; there alone is the Lord
Exalted. Let the Heavens Bow down to him, and the Earth Reel to and fro, and
Stagger up and down: The Lord is setting up his Throne and his Crown, and
throwing down the Crown of Man; and he alone will be glorified: To whom be all
Honor and Glory, all Praises and all Thanks. Who gives his Children Wisdom and
Strength, Knowledge and Virtue, Power and Riches, Blessings and durable
Substance; and an Eye to discern, and an Ear to hear things singly: and brings
down the Pride of Man's Heart, and turns the Wicked out of the Kingdom. The
Righteous Ones inherit Righteousness; the Pure Ones Pureness, the Holy Ones
Holiness: Praises, Praises be to the Lord, whose Glory now shines, whose Day is
broken forth; which is hid from the World, hid from all worldly wise Ones, and
from all the Prudent of this World: hid from the Fowls of the Air: hid from all
Vultures Eyes, and all venomous Beasts; and all Liars, and all Dogs, and all
Swine. But to them that fear his Name, the Secrets of the Lord are made
manifest, the Treasures of Wisdom are opened, and the Fullness of Knowledge: For
thou, O Lord! do make thy self manifest to thy Children.

G. F.

My Spirit was greatly burdened to see the Pride, that was got up in the
Nation, even amongst the Professors; and in the sense thereof I was moved to
give forth the following Paper, directed -- To such, as follow the World's
Fashions.
WHAT a World is this! How does the Devil garnish himself! and how obedient are
People to do his Will and Mind, that they are altogether carried away with
Fooleries and Vanities, both Men and Women, that they have lost the hidden Man
of the Heart, and the meek and quiet Spirit; which with the Lord is of great
price. They have lost the Adorning of Sarah; they are putting on Gold and gay
Apparel: Women plaiting the Hair, Men and Women powdering it, making their
Backs look, like Bags of Meal. They look so strange* that they can scarce look
at one another; they are so lifted up in Pride. Pride is flown up into their
Head, and has so lifted them up, that they Snuff up, like Wild Asses, and like
Ephraim: they seed upon Wind; and are gotten to be like Wild Heifers, who feed
upon the Mountains. Pride has puffed up every one of them: They are out of the
Fear of God, Men and Women. Young and Old; one puffs up another. They must be
in the Fashion of the World, else they are not in esteem; else they shall not
be respected, if they have not Gold or Silver upon their Backs, or if his Hair
be not powdered. But if he have store of Ribbands hanging about his Waste, and
at his Knees, and in his Hat, of diverse Colors, Red or White, or Black or
Yellow, and his Hair be powdered; then he is a brave Man, then he is accepted,
then he is no Quaker, because he has Ribbands on his Back and Belly and Knees,
and his Hair powdered: This is the Array of the World. But is not this from the
Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, or the Pride of Life? Likewise the
Women having their Gold, their Spots on their Faces, Noses, Cheeks, Foreheads,
having their Rings on their Fingers, wearing Gold, having their Cuffs double,
under and above, like unto a Butcher with his white Sleeves; having their
Ribbands tied about their Hands, and three or four Gold-Laces about their
Cloths; This is no Quaker, say they. This is that, that pleases the World;
this Array, this Attire pleases the World: and if they cannot get these
things, they are discontented. But this is not the Attire of Sarah, whose
Adorning was in the hidden Man of the Heart, of a quiet and meek Spirit: This
is the Adorning of the Heathen; not of the Apostle, nor of the Saints, whose
Adorning was, not wearing of Gold, nor plaiting of Hair, but a meek and quiet
Spirit; which was and is of great price with the Lord. And here was the
Sobriety and good Ornament, which was of the Lord accepted. This was Paul's
Exhortation and Preaching: But we see, the Talkers of Paul's Words live out of
Paul's Command, and out of the Example of Sarah; and are found in the steps of
the great Heathen, who comes to examine the Apostles in his gorgeous Apparel.
Now, are not all these, that have got their Ribbands hanging about their Arms,
Hands, Back, Waists, Knees, Hats, like unto Fidlers-Boys? Which shows, that you
are gotten into the basest and most contemptible Life, who be in the Fashion of
the Fidlers-Boys and Stage Players, quite out of the Paths and Steps of solid
Men; and in the very Steps and Paths of the wild Heads, who give themselves up
to every Invention and Vanity of the World, that appears; and is inventing, how
to get it upon their Backs, Heads, Feet and Legs, and say, If it be out of the
Fashion, it is nothing worth. Are not these the Spoilers of the Creation, who
have the fat and the best of it, and waste and destroy it? Do not these Cumber
God's Earth? Let that of God in all Consciences Answer, and who are in the
Wisdom, judge. And further: If one get a pair of Britches like a Coat, and hang
them about with Points, and up almost to the Middle, a pair of double Cuffs
upon his Hands, and a Feather in his Cap, here is a Gentleman; bow before him,
put off your Hats, bow, get a Company of Fiddlers, a set of Music, and Women to
dance. This is a brave Fellow: up in the Chamber; up in the Chamber without,
and up in the Chamber within. Are these your fine Christians? Yea, say they,
They are Christians: Yea, but, say the serious People, They are out of Christ's
Life, and out of the Apostles Command, and out of the Saints Ornament. And to
see such, as are before described, as are in the Fashions of the World
beforementioned, a Company of them playing at Bouls, or at Tables, or at
Shovel-Board; or Each taking his Horse, that has Bunches of Ribbands on his
Head, as the Rider has on his own, (who, perhaps, has a Ring in his Ear too)
and so go to Horse-racing, to spoil the Creatures; Oh, these are Gentlemen
indeed, these are bred up Gentlemen, these are brave Fellows, and they must
take their Recreation; for Pleasures are lawful. And these in their Sports set
up their Shouts, like unto the wild Asses; they are like unto the Kine or
Beasts, when they are put to Grass, Lowing, when they are full. And here is the
Glorying of them beforementioned; but it is in the Flesh, not in the Lord:
These are bad Christians, and show, that they are gluttoned with the Creatures,
and then the Flesh rejoiceth. And here is bad breeding of Youth and young
Women, who are carried away with the Vanities of the Mind in their own
Inventions, Pride, Arrogance, Lust, Gluttony, Uncleanness: so Eat and Drink,
and rise up to Play. This is the Generation, which God is not well pleased
withal; but their Eyes are full of Adultery, who cannot cease from Evil. These
be they, that live in Pleasures upon Earth: These be they, who are dead, while
they live; who glory not in the Lord, but in the Flesh. These be they, that be
from the Life, that the Scriptures were given forth from; who live in the
Fashions and Vanities of the World, out of Truth's Adorning in the Devil's
Adorning (who is out of the Truth) and not in the Adorning of the Lord, which
is a meek and quiet Spirit, which is with the Lord of great price. But this
Ornament and this Adorning is not put on by them, that be adorned, and have the
Ornament of him that is out of the Truth; and that is not accepted with the
Lord, which is accepted in their Eye.

G. F.



Moreover it came upon me about this time from the Lord, to write a short Paper
and send forth, as An Exhortation and Warning to the Pope, and all Kings and
Rulers in Europe; a Copy of which here follows: Friends,
YE Heads, and Rulers, and Kings, and Nobles of all sorts, Be not bitter, nor
hasty in persecuting the Lambs of Christ, neither turn your selves against the
Visitation of God, and his tender Love and Mercies from on high, who sent to
visit you; lest the Lord's Hand, Arm and Power take hold swiftly upon you,
which is now stretched over the World; that is turned against Kings, and shall
turn Wise Men backward, and will bring off their Crowns to the Dust, and lay
them low and level with the Earth. God and Christ will be King, who gives
Crowns, to whomsoever obey his Will: and this is the Age, wherein the Lord God
of Heaven and Earth is staining the Pride of Man, and defacing his Glory. So
you, that profess Christ, and do not love your Enemies, but on the contrary, do
shut up and Imprison them, who are his Friends; these be Marks, that you be out
of his Life, and do not love Christ, who do not the things he commands. The day
of the Lord's Wrath is kindling, and his Fire is going forth to burn up the
Wicked; which will leave neither Root nor Branch. They that have lost their
Habitation with God, be out of the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, and
from the Light, that Jesus Christ has enlightened them withal; and so from the
true Foundation. Therefore be swift to hear, and slow to speak, and slower to
persecute: For the Lord is bringing his People to himself, from off all the
World's Ways, to Christ the Way; and from off all the World's Churches, to the
Church which is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; and from off all
the World's Teachers, to teach his People himself by his Spirit; and from off
all the World's Images, into the Image of himself; and from their Likenesses,
into his own Likeness; and from off all the World's Crosses of Stone or Wood,
into his Power, which is the Cross of Christ. For all these Images, and
Crosses, and Likenesses are among them, that are Apostatized from the Image of
God, the Power of God, which is the Cross of Christ, which now fathoms the
World, and is throwing down that, which is contrary to it; which Power of God
never changes.

Let this go to the Kings of France, and of Spain, and to the Pope, for them to
prove all things, and to hold that which is good. And first to prove, that they
have not quenched the Spirit: for the mighty Day of the Lord is come, and
coming upon all Wickedness, and Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness of Men, who
will plead with all Flesh by Fire and by Sword. And the Truth, and the Crown of
Glory, and the Scepter of Righteousness over all shall be exalted; which shall
Answer that of God in every one upon the Earth, though they be from it. Christ is
come a Light into the World, and does enlighten every one, that comes into the
World; that all through him might believe. He that feels the Light, that
Christ has enlightened him withal, he feels Christ in his Mind, and the
Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God; and he shall not need to have a
Cross of Wood or Stone, to put him in mind of Christ, or of his Cross, which is
the Power of God manifest in the inward Parts.

G. F.



Besides this I was moved to write a Letter to the Protector (so called) To
warn him of the mighty Work, the Lord has to do in the Nations, and shaking of
them; and to beware of his own Wit, Craft, Subtilty and Policy, or seeking any
By-Ends to himself.

There was about this time an Order for the Trying of Ministers (so called) and
for Approving, or Ejecting them out of their Places or Benefices; whereupon I
writ a Paper To the Justices, and other Commissioners, who were appointed to
that Work. Of which Paper the Copy here follows: Friends,
YOU that be Justices, and in Commission to Try Ministers, who have so long
been in the Vineyard of God, now see, whether they be such, as are mentioned
in the Scriptures, whom the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles did Dis-approve
of? And if they be such, as they Dis-approved then; see, how ye can stand
Approved in the sight of God, to let such go into his Vineyard, and Approve of
them: who will admire your Persons, because of Advantage; and if you do not
give them advantage, they will not admire your Persons: Such Jude speaks of.
See, if they be not such, as teach for filthy Lucre, for the love of Money,
Covetous, such as love themselves, who have a Form of Godliness, but deny the
Power; from such the Apostle bids Turn away. The Apostle said, Their Mouths
should be stopped, who served not the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies; being
Evil Beasts, slow Bellies, who mind Earthly Things. Paul gave Timothy an Order
to Try Ministers by: He said, They must not be Covetous, nor given to Wine, nor
filthy Lucre, nor a Novice; lest being lifted up into Pride, they fall into the
Condemnation of the Devil: These he was to Try and Prove without Partiality.
Now take heed of your Approving such, as he disapproved; for since the Apostles
days, such as he disapproved, have had their Liberty: and they have told us,
The Tongues were their Original; and that they were Orthodox Men: and that the
Steeple-house, with a Cross on the top of it, was the Church (the Papists
Mass-house; you may look on the Top of it, and see the Sign.) But the
Scriptures tell us; All the Earth was of one Language before the Building of
Babel: And when Pilate crucified Christ, he set the Tongues, Hebrew, Greek and
Latin on the top of him. And John tells us, That the Beast had power over the
Tongues, Kindreds and Nations; and that the Whore sits upon the Tongues, of
whose Cup all Nations have drunk, and the Kings of the Earth have committed
Fornication with her: and John said, The Tongues are Waters. Christ gives marks
to his Disciples, and to the Multitude, how to Try such as these, that you are
to Try. They are called of Men Master; they love the Chiefest Seat in the
Assemblies; they be Sayers, but not Doers: And, said he, They shall put you out
of the Synagogues; and seven Woes he denounced against them, and so disapproved
them. Christ said, False Prophets should come; and John saw, They were come:
for they went forth from them; and since the World has gone after them. But
Babylon must be confounded, the Mother of Harlots; and the Devil must be taken,
and with him the Beast, and the false Prophet must be cast into the Lake of
Fire: for the Lamb and his Saints over all must reign, and have the Victory.
The Lord God sent his Prophets of Old, to cry against the Shepherds, that
sought for the Fleece, Ezekiel. 34. and to cry against such Shepherds, as seek for
their Gain from their Quarter, and never have enough; Isa. 5.6. and to cry
against the Prophets, that prophesied falsely; and the Priests, that bore rule
by their Means: which was the filthy and horrible thing, Jer. 5. And if you
would forbear to give them Means, you would see, how long they would bear Rule.
There was in the Old Time a Storehouse for the Fatherless, Strangers and
Widows, to come to and be filled; and they did not prosper then, who did not
bring their Tithes to the Storehouse. But did not Christ put an end to that
Priesthood, Tithes, Temple and Priests? And does not the Apostle say, that the
Priesthood is changed, the Law is changed, and the Commandment disannulled?
Might not they have pleaded the Law of God, that gave them Tithes? Have ever
any of the Priests prospered, that take Tithes since, by the Law of Man? Was
not the first Author of them since Christ's time the Pope, or some of his
Church? Did the Apostles cast Men into Prison for Tithes, as your Ministers do
now? As Instance: Ralph Hollingworth, Priest of Phillingham, for petty Tithes
not exceeding six Shillings, has cast into Lincoln-Prison a poor Thatcher,
named Thomas Bromby; where he has been about Eight and Thirty Weeks, and still
remains a Prisoner: And the Priest petitioned the Judge, That the poor Man
might not labor in the City, to get a little Money toward his maintenance in
Prison. Is this a good Savor amongst you, that are in Commission to choose
Ministers? Is this glad Tidings? to cast in Prison a Man, that is not his
Hearer, because he could not put into his Mouth? Can such, as be in the fear of
God, and in his Wisdom, own such things? The Ministers of Christ are to plant a
Vineyard, and then Eat of the Fruit; to Plow, Sow and Thresh, and get the
Corn; and then let them Reap: but not cast them into Prison, for whom they do
no Work. Christ, when he sent forth his Ministers, bid them Give freely, as
they had Received freely: and into what City or Town soever they came, Inquire,
who were Worthy, and there abide; and what they set before you (said He) that
Eat. And when these came back again to Christ, and he asked them, If they
wanted any thing, They said, No: They did not go to a Town, and call the People
together, to know, How much they might have by the Year? as these that are in
the Apostasy do now. The Apostle said, Have I not power to Eat and to Drink?
But he did not say, To take Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, Midsummer-Dues,
Augmentations and great Sums of Money; But, have I not power to Eat and to
Drink? 1655. London.
And yet he did not use that Power among the Corinthians. But they that are
Apostatized from him, will take Tithes, great Sums of Money, Easter-Reckonings
and Midsummer-Dues; and cast them into Prison, that will not give it them, whom
they do no work for. The Oxe's Mouth must not be muzz'led, that treads out the
Corn; But see, if the Corn be trodden out in you, and the Wheat be in the
Garner? This is from a Lover of your Souls, and one that desires your Eternal
Good.

G. F.



Now after I had made some stay in the City of London, and had given forth the
several foregoing Papers, and cleared my self, of what Service lay upon me at
that time there; I was moved of the Lord to go down into Bedford-shire to John
Crook's House, Bedford-shire. Luton.
where there was a great Meeting, and People generally Convinced of the Lord's
Truth. When I was come thither, John Crook told me, that the next day several
of those, that were called the Gentlemen of the Country, would come to dine
with him, and to discourse with me: They came; and I declared to them God's
Eternal Truth. Several Friends went to the Steeple Houses that day. And there
was a Meeting in the Country, which Alexander Parker went to: and toward the
middle of the day it came upon me, to go to it, though it was several Miles
from me. John Crook went with me; and when we came there, there was one --
Gritton, that had been a Baptist; but he was gotten higher than they, and
called himself a Trier of Spirits. He used to tell People their Fortunes, and
pretended to discover to People, when their Goods were stolen, or Houses
broken up, who the Persons were, that did it: by which he had gotten into the
Affections of many People thereabout. This Man was got into that Meeting, and
was speaking, and making an hideous Noise over the Young-convinced Friends,
when I came in; and he bid Alexander Parker, give a reason of his Hope. Alex.
Parker told him, Christ was his Hope: but because he did not Answer him so
soon, as he expected, he boastingly cried; His Mouth is stopped. Then this
Gritton directed his Speech to me: for I stood still, and heard him; and he
spoke many things, which were not agreeable to Scripture. I asked him, Whether
he could make those things out by Scripture, which he had spoken? and he said,
Yes, yes. Then I bid the People, Take out their Bibles, to search the Places he
should quote for proof of his Assertions: But he could not make good by
Scripture, that which he had said. So he was shamed, and fled out of the House;
and his People were generally Convinced: for his Spirit was discovered, and he
came no more amongst them. And when his People were Convinced, and settled in
God's Truth, they gave forth a Book against him; and denied his Spirit, and his
false Discoveries. Many were turned to Christ Jesus that day, and came to sit
under his Teaching; insomuch that the Judges were in a great Rage, and many of
the Magistrates in Bedford-shire: because there were so many turned from the
Hireling-Priests to the Lord Jesus Christ's free Teaching. But John Crook was
kept by the Power of the Lord: Yet he was turned out from being a Justice.

After some time I turned up through the Country to London again; where Friends
were finely established in the Truth, and great Comings in there were. And
about this time several Friends went beyond the Seas, to declare the
everlasting Truth of God. Now when I had stayed a while in the City, Kent.
Rochester
I went into Kent. And when I came to Rochester, there was a Guard kept to
examine Passengers: Cranbrook
but we passed by, and were not stopped. So I went to Cranbrook, where there
was a great Meeting, and several Soldiers were at it; and many were turned to
the Lord that day. After the Meeting, some of the Soldiers were somewhat Rude;
but the Lord's Power came over them. One Thomas Howsigoe, an
Independent-Preacher, who lived not far from Cranbrook, was Convinced, and
became a faithful Minister for the Lord Jesus. Some Friends had traveled into
Kent before, as John Stubbs and William Caton; and the Priests and Professors
had stirred up the Magistrates at Maidstone to Whip them, for declaring God's
Truth unto them: as may be seen at large in the Journal of William Caton's
Life. There was also one Captain Dunk Convinced in Kent, Sussex. Ry.
and he went with me to Ry; where we had a Meeting, to which the Mayor and
Officers, and several Captains came: and they took, what I said, in Writing,
which I was well pleased with: All was quiet, and the People affected with the
Truth.

Rumney.
From Ry I went to Rumney, where, the People having had notice of my Coming some
time before, there was a very large Meeting. Thither came Samuel Fisher, who
was an Eminent Preacher among the Baptists, and had had a Parsonage reputed
worth about Two hundred Pounds a Year; which for Conscience Sake he had given
up: And there was also the Pastor of the Baptists, and abundance of their
People. And the Power of the Lord was so mightily over the Meeting, that many
were reached by the Power of God, and one greatly shaken; and the Life sprang
up in diverse. One of the Pastors of the Baptists, being amazed at the Work of
the Lord's Power, bid one of our Friends, that was so wrought upon, Have a good
Conscience: Whereupon I was moved of the Lord to bid him, Take heed of
Hypocrisy and Deceit: and he was silent. A great Convincement there was that
day, and many were turned from the Darkness to the divine Light of Christ, and
came to see their Teachers Errors, and to sit under the Lord Jesus Christ's
Teaching, and to know him their Way, and the Covenant of Light, which God had
given to be their Salvation: And they were brought to the One Baptism, and to
the One Baptizer, Christ Jesus. When the Meeting was done, Samuel Fisher's Wife
said; Now we may discern this day betwixt Flesh and Spirit, and distinguish
Spiritual Teaching from Fleshly. The People were generally well satisfied, with
what had been declared; but the Two Baptist-Teachers, and their Company, when
they were gone from the Meeting, fell to Reasoning amongst the People. Samuel
Fisher, with diverse others, reasoned for the Word of Life, which had been
declared that day; and the other Pastor, and his Party, reasoned against it: So
it divided them asunder, and cut them in the midst. A Friend came and told me,
that the Baptists were disputing one with another; 1655. Rumney.
and desired me to go up to them: but I said, Let them alone, the Lord will
divide them; and they that Reason for Truth, will be too hard for the other:
And so it was. This Samuel Fisher received the Truth in the Love of it, and
became a faithful Minister of it; and preached Christ freely, and labored much
in the Work and Service of the Lord; being moved of the Lord to go, and declare
the word of Life at Dunkirk, and in Holland, and in diverse parts of Italy, as
Leghorn, and Rome it self: And yet the Lord preserved him and his Companion
John Stubbs, out of their Inquisitions.

From Rumney I passed to Dover, and had a Meeting there; Dover.
where several were Convinced. And near unto Dover there was a Governor and
his Wife Convinced, who had been Baptists; and the Baptists thereabouts were
much offended, and grew very envious: but the Lord's Power came over all. Luke
Howard of Dover was Convinced sometime before, and became a faithful Minister
of Christ.

Returning from Dover, I went to Canterbury, Canterbury.
where there were a few honest-hearted People turned to the Lord; who sat down
under Christ's Teaching. Thence I passed to Cranbrook again, Cranbrook
where I had a great Meeting: A Friend that was with me, went to the
Steeple-house; and was cast into Prison: But the Lord's Power was manifested,
and his Truth spread.

From thence I passed into Sussex, and lodged near Horsham, Sussex. Horsham.
where there was a great Meeting; and many were Convinced. Also at Stenning we
had a great Meeting in the Market-House; Stenning.
and several were Convinced there, and thereaways; for the Lord's Power was
with us. Several Meetings I had thereabouts: and among the rest, there was a
Meeting appointed at a Great Man's House; and he and his Son went to fetch
several Priests, that had threatened to come and dispute. But when the time
came, none of them came; for the Lord's Power was mighty in us. A glorious
Meeting we had; and the Man of the House and his Son were vexed, because none of
the Priests would come. So the Hearts of People were opened by the Spirit of
God, and they were turned from the Hirelings to Christ Jesus, their Shepherd,
who had purchased them without Money, and would feed them without Money or
Price. Many that came, expecting to hear a Dispute, were Convinced that day;
amongst which Nicholas Beard was one.

Thus the Lord's Power came over all, and his Day many came to see. There were
abundance of Ranters in those parts, and Professors, that had been so Loose in
their Lives, that they began to be Weary of it; and had thought to have gone
into Scotland, to have lived privately. But the Lord's Net catched them, and
their Understandings were opened by his Light, Spirit and Power, through which
they came to receive the Truth, and to be settled upon the Lord; and so became
very sober Men, and good Friends in the Truth. And great Blessing and Praising
the Lord there was amongst them; and great Admiration in the Country.

Out of Sussex I traveled through the Country, till I came to Reading; Reading.
where I found a few, that were Convinced of the Way of the Lord. There I
stayed, 1655. Reading.
till the First Day, and then had a Meeting in George Lamboll's Orchard; and a
great part of the Town came to it. A glorious Meeting it was, and a great
Convincement there was that day; and the People were mightily satisfied.
Thither came Two of Judge Fell's Daughters to me; and George Bishop of Bristol
came with his Sword by his side (for he was a Captain.) After the Meeting many
Baptists and Ranters came privately, reasoning and discoursing: but the Lord's
Power came over them. The Ranters pleaded, That God made the Devil: But I
denied it, and told them; I was come into the Power of God, the Seed Christ,
which was, before the Devil was, and bruised the Head of him: And he became a
Devil by going out of Truth; and so became a Murderer, and a Destroyer. So I
showed them, That God did not make the Devil; for God is a God of Truth, and he
made all things good, and blessed them: But God did not bless the Devil. And
the Devil is bad, and was a Liar and a Murderer from the beginning; and spoke
of himself, and not from God. And so the Truth stopped them, and bound them, and
came over all the highest Notions in the Nation, and Confounded them. For by
the Power of the Lord God I was manifest, and sought to be made manifest to the
Spirit of God in all; that by it, (which they vexed, and quenched, and grieved)
they might be turned to God; as many were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, by
the Spirit of God, and were come to sit under his Teaching.

London.
After this Meeting at Reading, I passed up to London; where I stayed a while,
and had large Meetings: and then went into Essex, and came to Cogshall. Essex.
Cogshall.
And there was a Meeting of about Two Thousand People, as it was judged; which
lasted several hours: and a glorious Meeting it was; for the Word of Life was
freely declared, and People were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher
and their Savior, the Way, the Truth and the Life.

Near Colchester.
On the sixth day of that Week I had a Meeting near Colchester, to which many
Professors, and the Independent-Teachers came. After I had done speaking, and
was stepped down from the place, on which I stood, One of the
Independent-Teachers began to make a Jangling; which Amor Stoddart (who was
with me) perceiving, he said to me, Stand up again, George: for I was going
away, and did not at the first hear them. But when I heard the Jangling
Independent, I stood up again: and after a while the Lord's Power came over him
and his Company, and they were confounded; and the Lord's Truth went over all.
And a great Flock of Sheep has the Lord Jesus Christ in that Country, that
feed in his Pastures of Life. On the First Day following we had a very large
Meeting at another place, not far from Colchester, wherein the Lord's Power was
eminently manifested; and the People were very well satisfied: for they were
turned to the Lord Jesus Christ's free Teaching; and they received it gladly.
Many of these People had been of the Stock of the Martyrs.

As I passed through Colchester, I went to visit James Parnel in Prison; but
the Cruel Jailer would hardly let us come in, or stay with him. Very Cruel they
were unto him: The Gaoler's Wife threatened to have his Blood; and in that Jail
they did destroy him: 1655. Colchest.
as the Reader may see at large in a Book printed soon after his Death, giving
an Account of his Life and Death: and also in an Epistle printed with his
Collected Books and Writings.

From Colchester I went to Ipswich; where we had a little Meeting, Ipswich.
and very rude: but the Lord's Power came over them. After the Meeting I said;
If any had a desire to hear further, they might come to the Inn: And there
came-in a Company of Rude Butchers, that had abused Friends; but the Lord's
Power so chained them, that they could not do Mischief. Then I writ a Paper,
and gave it forth to the Town, warning them of the Day of the Lord, that they
might Repent of the Evils they lived in: and directing them to Christ, their
Teacher and Way; exhorting them to forsake their hireling-Teachers.

We passed from Ipswich to Mendlesham, where Robert Duncon lived, Suffolk.
Mendlesham.
in Suffolk, where we had a large Meeting, that was quiet: and the Lord's Power
was preciously felt amongst us. Then we passed to a Meeting at one Captain
Lawrence's in Norfolk; where, it was judged, Norfolk.
were above a Thousand People; and all was quiet. Many Persons of Note were
there, and a great Convincement there was: for they were turned to Christ,
their Way and their Teacher; and many of them received him, and sat down under
him, their Vine. Here we parted with Amor Stoddart, and some more Friends; who
intended to meet us again in Huntingtonshire.

About the Second Hour in the Morning we took Horse for Norwich, Norwich.
where Christopher Atkins, that dirty Man, had run out, and brought dishonor
upon the blessed Truth and Name of the Lord. But he had been judged and denied
by Friends: and afterward he gave forth a Paper of Condemnation of his Sin and
Evil. So we came to Yarmouth, yarmouth
and there stayed a while; where there was a Friend, one Thomas Bond in Prison,
for the Truth of Christ. There we had some Service for the Lord; and some were
turned to the Lord in that Town. From thence we rode to another Town, about
Twenty Miles off, where were many tender People; and I was moved of the Lord to
speak to the People, as I sat upon my Horse, in several Places as I passed
along. We went on to another Town, about Five Miles from thence, and set up our
Horses at an Inn; having traveled Five and forty Miles that Day, Richard
Hubberthorn and I. There were some friendly People in the Town; and we had a
tender, broken Meeting amongst them, in the Lord's Power, to his Praise.

We bid the Hostler have our Horses ready by the Third Hour in the Morning; for
we intended to ride to Lyn, about three and Thirty Miles, next morning. But
when we were in Bed at our Inn, about the Eleventh Hour at Night came the
Constable and Officers, with a great Rabble of People into the Inn, and said;
They were come with an Hue and Cry from a Justice of Peace (that lived near
that Town about five Miles off, where I had spoken to the People in the
Streets, as I rode along) to search for two Horsemen, that rid upon gray Horses,
and in gray Clothes; an House having been broken up upon the Seventh Day before
at Night, as they said. We told them, We were honest and innocent Men, and
abhorred such things: Yet they Apprehended us, 1655. Norfolk.
and set a Guard with Halberts and Pikes upon us that Night; making some of
those Friendly People, with others, to watch us. Next Morning we were up
betimes, and the Constable with his Gua^ ^arried us before a Justice of Peace
about five Miles off; and we took Two or three of the sufficient men of the
Town with us, who had been with us at the great Meeting at Captain Lawrence's,
and could testify, that we lay both the seventh Day Night, and the first Day
Night at Captain Lawrence's; and it was the seventh Day Night, that they said,
the House was broken up. Now the Reader is to be Informed, that during the
time, that I was a Prisoner at the Mermaid at Charing Cross (of which an
Account is given before) this Captain Lawrence brought several
Independent-Justices to see me there, with whom I had a great deal of
Discourse; which they took Offense at. For they pleaded for Imperfection, and
to Sin, as long as they lived; but did not like to hear of Christ's Teaching
his People himself, and making People as Clear, whilst here upon the Earth, as
Adam and Eve were, before they fell. Now these Justices had plotted together
this mischief against me in the Country, pretending, an House was broken up;
that so they might send their Hue and Cry after me: so great was their Malice
against the Righteous and the Just. They were vexed also, and troubled, to hear
of the great Meeting at John Lawrence's aforesaid; for there was a Colonel
Convinced there that Day, that lived and died in the Truth. But Providence so
ordered it, that the Constable carried us to a Justice about five miles onward
in our way toward Lyn, who was not an Independent-Justice, as the rest were.
When we were brought before him, he began to be angry, because we did not put
off our Hats to him. I told him, I had been before the Protector, and he was
not offended at my Hat; and why should he be offended at it, who was but one of
his Servants? Then he read the Hue and Cry: And I told him, That that Night,
wherein the House was said to be broken up, we were at Captain Lawrence's
House; and that we had several Men here present could Testify the Truth
thereof. Thereupon the Justice, having Examined us and them, said; He believed,
we were not the men, that had broken the House; but he was sorry, he said, that
he had no more against us. We told him, He ought not to be sorry for not having
Evil against us; but rather to be glad: for to Rejoice, when he got Evil
against People, as for house-breaking, or the like, was not a good mind in him.
It was a good while yet, before he would Resolve, Whether to let us go, or send
us to Prison: and the wicked Constable stirred him up against us, telling him,
We had good Horses; and that if it pleased him, he would carry us to
Norwich-Jail. But we took hold of the Justice's Confession, That he believed,
we were not the men, that had broken the House, and after we had admonished him
to Fear the Lord in his Day; the Lord's Power came over him, so that he let us
go: and so their Snare was broken. A great People were after ward gathered to
the Lord in that Town, where I was moved to speak to them in the Street; and
from whence the Hue and Cry came.

Lyn.
Being set at Liberty, we traveled to Lyn; whither we came about the third Hour
in the Afternoon. And having set up our Horses, we met with Joseph Fuce, who
was an Ensign: and we wished him to speak to as many of the People of the Town,
as he could, 1655. Lyn.
that feared God; and to the Captains and Officers to come together: which he
did. And we had a very glorious Meeting amongst them, and turned them to the
Spirit of God, by which they might know God and Christ, and understand the
Scriptures; and so learn of God and of Christ, as the Prophets and Apostles
did. Many were Convinced there that Day: and a fine Meeting there is, of them
that are come off from the Hirelings Teaching; and sit under the Teaching of
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Lyn being then a Garrison, we desired Joseph Fuce to get us the Gate opened by
the third hour next Morning (for we had forty Miles to ride next day.) And by
that means getting out early, we came next Day by the Eleventh or Twelfth hour
to a Town, near the Isle of Ely, called Sutton; where Amor Stoddart, Sutton.
and the Friends that were with him, met us again. A multitude of People was
gathered thither; and there were no less than four Priests. The Priest of the
Town made a great Jangle; but the Lord's Power so confounded him, that he went
away: The other three Priests stayed; and one of them was Convinced. One of the
other Two, whilst I was speaking, came to lean upon me: but I bid him, Sit
down, seeing he was so slothful. A great Convincement there was that Day: and
many hundreds were turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of
Satan unto God, and from the Spirit of Error to the Spirit of Truth, to be led
thereby into all Truth. People came to this Meeting from Huntington, and
beyond; and the Mayor's Wife of Cambridge was there also. A glorious Meeting it
was, and many were settled under Christ's Teaching, and knew him, their
Shepherd to feed them: for the Word of Life was freely declared, and gladly
received by them. The Meeting ended in the Power of the Lord, and in Peace; and
after it was done, I walked out, and went into a Garden: where I had not been
long, before a Friend came to me, and told me, Several Justices were come to
break up the Meeting. But many of the People were gone away; so they missed of
their Design: and after they had stayed a while, they went away also, in a Fret.

That Evening I passed to Cambridge: Cambridg
And when I came into the Town, the Scholars hearing of me, were up, and were
exceeding Rude. I kept on my Horse's Back, and rid through them in the Lord's
Power: but they Unhorsed Amor Stoddart, before he could get to the Inn. When we
were in the Inn, they were so rude there in the Courts, and in the Streets,
that the Miners, the Colliers and Carters could never be Ruder. The People of
the House asked us, What we would have for Supper? as is the usual way of
Innkeepers: Supper! said I, were it not, that the Lord's Power is over them,
these Rude Scholars look, as if they would pluck us in pieces, and make a
Supper of us. They knew, I was so against their Trade, the Trade of Preaching,
which they were there as Apprentices to learn; that they raged as had, as ever
Diana's Crafts-men did against Paul. At this Place John Crook met us. When it
was within Night, the Mayor of the Town, being friendly, came and fetched me to
his House: and as we walked through the Streets, there was a Bustle in the
Towm; but they did not know me, it being darkish. But they were in a Rage not
only against me, but against the Mayor also; 1655. Cambridg
so that he was almost afraid to walk the Streets with me, for the Tumult. We
sent for the Friendly People, and had a fine Meeting there in the Power of God;
and I stayed there all Night. Next Morning, having ordered our Horses to be
ready by the sixth Hour, we passed peaceably out of Town; and the Destroyers
were disappointed: for they thought, I would have stayed longer in the Town,
and intended to have done us Mischief; but our passing away early in the
Morning, frustrated their Evil-Purposes against us.

Bishop-Starford. Hertford.
Then rode we through the Countries to Bishop-Starford; where were some
Convinced: And so to Hertford, where also there were some Convinced; and where
now there is a large Meeting.

London.
From thence we returned to London, where Friends received us gladly; the Lord's
Power having carried us through many Snares and Dangers. And great Service we
had for the Lord: for ma^y hundreds were brought to sit under the Teaching of
the Lord Jesus Christ, their Savior, and to praise the Lord through him. James
Nailer also was come up to London; and Richard Hubberthorn and I stayed
sometime in the City, visiting Friends, and Answering Gainsayers: for we had
great Disputes with Professors of all sorts. Many Reproaches they cast upon
Truth, and lying, slanderous Books they gave forth against us: But we Answered
them all, and cleared God's Truth, and set it over them all; and the Lord's
Power was over all.

Amongst other Services for the Lord, which then lay upon me in the City, I was
moved to give forth a Paper to those, That made a scorn at Trembling and
Quaking; of which a Copy here follows: THE Word of the Lord to all you, that
scorn Trembling and Quaking, who scoff at them, and scorn them, and throw
Stones at them, and belch forth Oaths against them, who are Trembling and
Quaking, threatening them, and beating them; Strangers ye are to all the
Apostles and Prophets, and are in the Generation, that stoned them, and mocked
them then in those Ages. Now, ye are the Scoffers which they spoke of, that are
come in the last times: Be ye Witnesses against your selves. To the Light in
all your Consciences I speak, that with it you may see your selves to be from
the Life of the holy Men of God.

Moses, who was a Judge over all Israel, he trembled, feared and Quaked: when
the Lord said unto him, I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God
of Jacob; then he trembled, and durst not behold. This, which makes to Tremble
now, ye Teachers and People scoff at, and scorn them in your Streets, who
witness the Power of the Lord. Moses forsook the Pleasures of the World, which
he might have enjoyed for a Season: He might have been called the Son of
Pharaoh's-Daughter; he refused it, and forsook Pharaoh's House; yet was no
Vagabond. And David, a King, he trembled; he was mocked, they made Songs on
him, they wagged their Heads at him. Will you profess David's Words, and Moses
his Words, who are in the Generation of your Fathers, 1655. London.
Mockers, Scoffers, Wonderers and Despisers, which are to perish? O blush, and
be ashamed of all your Profession, and be Confounded! Job trembled, his Flesh
trembled, and they mocked him: So do you now mock them, in whom the same Power
of God is made manifest; and yet you profess Job's Words. O deceitful
Hypocrites! will ye not own Scripture? O for shame, never profess
Scripture-words, and deny the Power, which, according to the Scripture, makes
the Keepers of the House to tremble, and the strong Man to bow himself. These
things both Priests, Magistrates and People scoff at; but with the Power ye are
judged, and by the Power and Life condemned.

The Prophet Jeremiah trembled, he shook, his Bones quaked, he reeled to and
fro, like a drunken Man, when he saw the Deceits of the Priests and Prophets,
who were turned from the way of God; and they were not ashamed, neither could
they blush: Such were gone from the Light; and such were they, that ruled over
the People. But he was brought to Cry, O foolish People! that had Eyes, and
could not see, that had Ears, and could not hear, that did not fear the Lord,
and tremble at his Presence, who placed the Sands for Bounds to the Sea by a
perpetual Decree, that the Waves thereof cannot pass! And he said, A horrible
thing is committed in the Land; The Prophets prophesy falsely, and the Priests
bear rule by their means. Shall not I arise for these things, says the Lord?
Shall not my Soul be avenged upon such a Nation as this? They were such, as did
not Tremble at the Word of the Lord; therefore he called them a foolish People.
Hear all ye the Word of the Lord, ye foolish People, who scorn Trembling, and
Quaking, and Shaking: Give over professing the Prophet Jeremiah's Words, and
making a Trade of them; for with his Words you are judged to be among the
Scoffers, and Scorners, and Stockers. For he was stocked by your Generation;
and you now stock them, that tremble at the word of the Lord, at the Power of
the Mighty God, which raises up the Seed of God, and throws down the Earth,
which has kept it down. So you, that are in the Fall, where Death reigns,
Enemies of the Truth, despising the Power of God, as those of your Generation
ever did, Woe and Misery is your Portion, except you speedily Repent. Isaiah
said; Hear the Word of the Lord, all ye, that Tremble at his Word: And he said,
This was the Man, that God did regard, that was of a broken and contrite Heart,
and trembled at his Word. When their Brethren hated them, and persecuted them,
saying, Let the Lord be glorified; he shall appear to your Joy, but they shall
be ashamed, Isa. 66.5. Now all ye Scoffers and Scorners, that despise
Trembling, you regard not the Word of the Lord: They are not regarded by you,
that Tremble at the Word; which are regarded by the Lord: therefore you are
contrary to Isaiah's Words. Therefore profess him and his Words no more for
shame, nor make a Trade of his Words. Ye that seek for your Gain from your
Quarter, ye greedy, dumb Dogs, that never have enough, ye are they, that
despise Trembling; ye are such, as Isaiah cried against, who himself witnessed
Trembling. Here therefore be ye Witnesses against your selves, that with the
Light in your Consciences ye may see, ye are out of the Prophet Isaiah's
Spirit, and are Haters of them that Tremble, whom the Lord regards; but such
you regard not, but hate and persecute, mock and rail against them. But it is
manifest, that you walk in the steps of your Forefathers, that persecuted the
Prophet^. Habak^uk, the Prophet of the Lord trembled; and Joel, the Prophet of
the Lord, said, Blow the Trumpet in Sion, and let all the Inhabitants of the
Earth Tremble: The People shall Tremble, and all Faces shall gather Blackness;
and the People shall be much pained. And now, this Trembling is witnessed by
the Power of the Lord: This Power of the Lord is come; the Trumpet is sounding,
the Earth is shaking; the Inhabitants of the Earth are trembling; the Dead is
arising; and the Living is praising God: And the World is Raging; and the
Scoffers are Scorning; and they that witness Trembling and Quaking wrought in
them by the Power of the Lord, can scarce pass up and down the Streets, but
with Stones, and Blows, and Fists, and Sticks, or Dogs set at them, or pursued
with Mocks and Reproaches. Thus you vent forth your Malice against them, that
witness the Power of the Lord, as the Prophets did; who are come to the broken
Heart and contrite Spirit, and who Tremble at the Word of the Lord, whom the
Lord regards: These you stone, these you stock, these you set your Dogs at,
these you scoff and scorn, these you revile and reproach: but those Reproaches
are our Riches; praised be the Lord, who has given us power over them. And if
you see one, as Habakkuk, whose Lips quivered, whose Belly shock; who said,
Rottenness was entered into his Bones, and who trembled in himself; if you see
such an one in this Condition now, ye say, He is Bewitched. Here again you show
your selves Strangers to that Power, to that Life, that was in the Prophet:
Therefore for shame, never make a Profession of his Words, nor a Trade of his
Words; nor of Joel's, who witnessed Trembling, which ye scorn and scoff at. Ye
proud Scoffers and Scorners, Misery, Misery is your End, except you speedily
Repent. Daniel, a Servant of the most-high God, he Trembled, his Strength and
his Breath was gone: He was Prisoned, He was hated, he was persecuted; they
laid Baits and Snares for him, in whom the holy Spirit of God was. Now for
shame, all you, that make a Profession of Daniel's Words, give over your
Profession, Priests and People, who scoff and scorn at Trembling: with the
Light you are seen to be out of Daniel's Life, and by the same Power you are
judged, at which you scorn and scoff. And so here again be ye Witnesses against
your selves, that you are Scorners and Scoffers against the Truth: And with the
Scripture you are judged to be contrary to the Life of the holy Men of God.
Paul, a Minister of God, made by the Will of God, a Messenger of the Lord
Jesus, a Vessel of the Lords, to carry his Name abroad into several Nations,
when the dark, blind World have got some of his Words and Epistles, you filthy
Teachers make a Trade of them, and get great Sums of Money for it, and so
destroy Souls for dishonest Gain; making a Trade of his Words, and of the rest
of the Apostles, and Prophets, and of Christ's Words, but denying the Spirit
and Life, that they were guided by, and that Power, which shook the Flesh and
the Earth, which the Apostle witnessed, who said, When he came among the
Corinthians, he was then with them in weakness and fear, and in much Trembling,
that their Faith might not stand in the Wisdom of Words, but in the Power of
God; in that Power, which made him to Tremble. This Power it is, that the
World, and all the scoffing Teachers, scoff at and scorn in your Towns, in your
Villages, in your Assemblies, in your Alehouses (for shame lay away all your
Profession of the Apostle's Words and Conditions!) And some of them, that scoff
at this Power, call it the Power of the Devil; and some persecute them, and
Stone and Stock, Imprison and Whip them, in whom that Power is made manifest,
and lade them with Reproaches, as not worthy to walk on the Earth; hated and
persecuted, as the Offscouring of all things. Here you may see, you are in the
steps of your Forefathers, who persecuted the Apostles, and acted so against
them; stocked them, mocked them, prisoned them, stoned them, whipped them,
haled them out of the Synagogues, reproached them, and shamefully entreated
them. Do not you here fulfill the Scripture, and Christ's saying, who said; If
they kill you, they will think, they do God Service? Yet you make a Profession
of Christ's Words, of the Prophets and Apostles Words, and call your selves
Churches, and Ministers of the Gospel: I charge you in the presence of the
Living God, to be silent, who act such things! And mind the Light in your
Consciences (ye Scoffers and Scorners) which Christ has enlightened you
withal; that with it ye may see your selves, what ye Act, and what ye have
Acted: for who Act such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God; for all
such things are by the Light condemned.

And who come to witness Trembling and Quaking, the Powers of the Earth to be
shaken, the Lustful Nature come to be destroyed, the scorning and scoffing
Nature judged by the Light; In it Wait to receive Power from him, who shakes
the Earth. That Power we own, and our Faith stands in it, which all the World
scoffs at; the Lofty Ones, the Proud Ones, the Presumptuous Ones, which live in
Presumption, and yet make a Profession of the Scriptures, as your Fathers, the
Pharisees did, who were painted Sepulchers and Serpents; and as the Scribes
did, who had the Chiefest Places in the Assemblies, stood praying in the
Synagogues, and were called of Men Masters, which Christ cried WOE against; who
are not come so far as the Trembling of Devils, who believed and trembled: Let
that Judge you. The Light and Life of the Scripture is seen and made manifest,
and with it all you Scoffers, and all you Scorners, and all you Persecutors and
Railers are seen.

Take Warning, all ye Powers of the Earth, how ye persecute them, whom the
World Nickname and call Quakers, who dwell in the Eternal Power of God; lest
the Hand of the Lord be turned against you, and ye be all Cut off. To you this
is the Word of God, Fear and Tremble, and take Warning! For this is the Man,
whom the Lord does regard, who trembles at his Word; which you, who are of the
World, scoff and scorn, stock, persecute and imprison. Here ye may see, ye are
contrary to God, contrary to the Prophets; and are such as hate, what the Lord
regards; which we, whom the World scorns, and calls Quakers, own. And we exalt
that Power, and honor that Power, that makes the Devils tremble, and shakes
the Earth, and throws down the Loftiness of Man, and the Haughtiness of Man,
and which makes the Beasts of the Field to Tremble, and makes the Earth Reel to
and fro, and cleaves the Earth asunder, and over-turneth the World. This Power
we own, and honor, and preach up, whom the World scornfully calls Quakers: But
all Scoffers and Persecutors, Railers and Scorners, Stockers and Whippers we
deny by that Power, which throws down all that Nature; as seeing, that all,
who act such things without Repentance, shall not inherit the Kingdom of God,
but are for Destruction.

So Rejoice, all ye Righteous ones, who are persecuted for Righteousness sake;
for great is your Reward in Heaven. Rejoice, ye that suffer for Well-doing; for
ye shall not lose your Reward. And wait you in the Light, that you may grow up
in the Life, that gave forth the Scriptures; that with it ye may see the Saints
Conditions, and with it ye may see all that, which they testified against: and
there with it ye will see the state of those, that did reproach and scoff them;
and did mock them, and persecute them; and did whip and stock them, and haled
them out of the Synagogues before Magistrates. So to you, who are in the same
Light and Life, the same things do they now; that they may fill up the measure
of their Fathers. With the Light now they are seen, where the Light and Life,
and Power of God is made manifest: for as they did unto them, so will they do
unto you. Here is our Joy; and the Scripture is fulfilled, and fulfilling: and
with the Light, which was before the World was, which is now made manifest in
the Children of Light; with it they see the World, and comprehend it, and the
Actions of it: for he that loves the World, and turns from the Light, is an
Enemy to God; he turns into Wickedness: for the whole World lies in
Wickedness. He who turns from the Light, turns into the Works of Evil, which
the Light of Christ testifies against: And by this Light, where it is made
manifest, all the Works of the World are seen and made manifest.

G. F.
This is to go abroad among the scattered Ones, and among the World.





Great was the Rage and Enmity of the People, Professors as well as Profane,
against the Truth and People of God at this time; and great the Contempt and
Disdain they showed of Friends plainness. Wherefore I was moved to write the
following Paper, and send it forth, directed as -- An Epistle to gathered
Churches into outward Forms, upon the Earth.

ALL ye gathered Churches into outward Forms upon the Earth, the Son of God is
come to Reign, and he will tread and trample, and will shake, and make you
Quake and Quiver, you that be found without his Life, out of his Light, and
without his Power. His Day has appeared; Mortar and Clay will you be found.
Breaking and Shaking, and Quaking is coming among you! Your high Building is to
be laid desolate; your professed Liberty shall be your Bondage: the Mouth of
the Lord of Hosts has spoken it. Tremble, ye Hypocrites, ye Notionists! The
fenced Cities shall be laid desolate, the fruitful Fields shall become a
Wilderness; your false Joy shall become your Heaviness: the time of Weeping
and Desolation draws nigh! Come ye witty Ones, see, how ye can stand before
the Almighty, who is now come to plead with you: you will fall like Leaves, and
wither like Weeds! Come you, that have boasted of my Name (says the Lord) and
have gloried in the Flesh, ye shall fade like a Flower: who have slain my
VVitness, yet boast of my Words, which have been as a Song unto you. Come ye
Novelty-Ones, who love Novelties, changeable Suits of Apparel, who be in the
Fashions, outward and inward, putting on one thing this day; and another the
other day; I Will strip thee, says the Lord, I Will make thee bare, I Will make thee
naked and thou shall know, that I am the Lord. What! have thou professed the
Prophets words? have thou professed the Apostles words, and my Son's words? have
thou Covered thy self with their Expressions? think thou not, that I see
thee out of my Life? think thou, thou witty One, to hide thy self, where
none can see thee? think thou, if thou fliest to the uttermost parts of the
Earth, that I am not there? Is not the Earth mine, and the fullness of it, says
the Lord? Come all ye, that have trusted in your own conceited Notions, and
Knowledge, and Wisdom, who were never yet out of the Earth, and the Lusts of
it, and never yet got the Load of thick Clay off you, and never were out of the
drunken Spirit, whose Imperfection appears, who must be come upon, as a
Potter's Vessel, broken Cisterns; and ye that have been made Wise in your own
Conceit, and wise in your own Eyes, in which Pride has lifted you up, and not
the Humility; you must be Abased. You have run on with every one after his own
Invention, and every Man has done that thing, that was right in his own Eyes,
and that which did please himself: This has been the Course of People upon
Earth. Ye have run on without a King, without Christ, the Light of the World,
which has enlightened every one, that is come into the World: but now is Truth
risen, now are your Fruits withering. And you that are fortified, and have
fortified your strong Houses, called your Churches, make you your Cords strong,
the Lord will break you asunder, ye that are gathering in, and ye that are
gathered. For the Lord is risen to scatter you, his Witness is risen in the
Hearts of his People, they will not be fed with dead Words, nor with that which
dies of it self; nor will they be satisfied with the Husk, which the Swine
seeds upon. And all ye Priests in the Nation, and Teachers, that now stand
against the Light, your Envy shows, that ye be in Cain's Way; your Greediness
shows, that ye be in Balaam's Way: your standing against the Light, which has
enlightened every man, that comes into the world, does manifest, that you are
in Core's Way, that spoke the great high Words of Vanity; ye, whose Consciences
are seared as with an hot Iron, whose Judgment does not linger, whose Damnation
does not slumber, who serve not the Lord Jesus Christ, but your own Bellies;
who are the Evil Beasts spoken of, which have destroyed many Families, taken
away their Cattle, their Horses, their Goods, even their Household-Goods;
destroyed many poor men, even whole Families, taking their whole Estates from
them, whom you do no Work for. O! the grievous Actions, that are seen done by
you, the Ministers of Unrighteousness; whose fruits declare to the whole
Nation, that you are the Devil's Messengers! your Actions declare it; your
taking Tithes, Augmentations, treble Damages, Midsummer-Dues (as ye call them)
of them ye do no Work for, nor Minister to.

And all ye Powers of the Earth, beware of holding such up, that be
Unrighteous. Let not the Words of the Unrighteous overcome you, lest the
righteous Judge, the righteous God, the Judge of Heaven and Earth upon you take
hold; whose Judgment is according to that of God in you, which will let you
see, when you Transgress. Come you proud and lofty ones, who have not
considered the handy-works of the Lord, but have destroyed them; nor have
regarded the way of the Lord, but have had plenty of the Creatures, and have
therewith fatted up your selves, and forgot the Lord and his way: O let Shame
cover your Faces here upon Earth! Come ye, that are given to Pleasures, and
spend your Time and Days in Sports, and Idleness and Fullness; your Fruits
declare the Sins of Sodom: yet you will make a Talk of my Name, and of my
Saints Words. But I behold you afar off, says the Lord: you are Proud and
Lofty; you are bad Patterns, and bad Examples, that be full, and rich, and
Idle; who say, Others are Idle, that cannot maintain your Lusts. Oh! the
unrighteous Balances, that are among People! Oh the Iniquity in Measuring! Oh
the Oppression in Ruling and Governing! Therefore, because of these things my
Hand shall come upon you, says the Lord. For the Oppression is entered into the
Ears of the Lord, who gives Rest to the wearied, to the burdened, to the
oppressed; who feeds the Hungry, and clothes the Naked; who brings the Mighty
from their Seats, and beats the Lofty to Ground, and makes the Haughty to bend.
Come, says the Lord, ye Mockers and Scorners, and Rebellious ones, light and
wild People, vain and heady; you have had your Day of Joy, you have Scoffed,
you have Mocked and derided my Messengers and my Ambassadors, who have preached
in your Streets, and cried in your Synagogues and Temples; a Day of Trembling
and Lamentation shall on you come, when you are not aware. I Will take away your
Pride and your Height; I Will shake you as a Leaf, and bring you to be as Men
distracted. I Will distract you, and make you, that you shall not trust one
another in the Earth; who have joined hand in hand against my Servants in the
Truth. I Will smite you with Terrors, and bring Frets and Fears upon you: the Cup
of my Indignation and Fury shall you drink. Where will you appear, when
Repentance is hid from your Eyes; when profane Esau, your Father, it set
before you, and Ishmael and Cain, wild and envious, whose Fruits declare the
Stock? Come ye proud Priests, who have eaten up the Fat of the Nation, who by
Violence have taken other Men's Goods, whose Envy has slain many, whose
Wickedness and Darkness has abounded, and whose Unrighteousness daily appears:
Your Fruits every day declare it, in summoning up by Writs and Subpoena's from
most parts of the Nation, for Wages and Tithes, such as you do no work for. Oh
the Abominable Unrighteousness! how is the State of Man lost, that these things
they do not take to Heart, to feel them! What havoc is made in most parts of
the Nation with such! And all ye Priests and Teachers, who are railing and
brawling in the Pulpit, setting People at variance one against another, Haters
and Hateful, provoking People to Hate one another; here is the Seed of Enmity
seen, which you have sown, and are sowing; whose Seed must be bruised by the
Seed of the Woman, which a top of your Heads is set.

G. F.

This Year came out the Oath of Abjuration, by which many Friends suffered: and
several Friends went to speak with the Protector about it; but he began to
harden. And Sufferings increasing upon Friends, by reason, that envious
Magistrates made use of that Oath as a Snare to catch Friends in, who they
knew, could not swear at all; I was moved to write to the Protector about it,
and other suffering Friends, as follows.

THE Magistrate is not to bear the Sword in vain, which ought to be a Terror to
the Evildoers: but the Magistrate, that does bear the Sword in vain, as he is
not a Terror to the Evildoers, so he is not a Praise to them that do well. Now
has God raised up a People by his Power, whom People, Priests and Magistrates,
who are out of the Fear of God, scornfully call Quakers, who do cry against
Drunkenness (for Drunkards destroy God's Creatures) and do cry against Oaths
(for because of Oaths the Land mourns) and they, Drunkards and Swearers, to
whom the Magistrate's Sword should be a Terror, are, we see, at liberty; but
for crying against such, many are cast into Prison, and for crying against
their Pride and Filthiness, their deceitful Merchandise in Markets, their
Cozening and their Cheating, their Excess and Naughtiness, their playing at
Bouls and Shovel-boards, at Cards and at Dice, and their other vain and wanton
Pleasures: for who live in Pleasures, are dead while they live; and who live in
Wantonness, kill the Just. This we know by the Spirit of God, which gave forth
the Scriptures; which God the Father has given to us, and has placed his
Righteous Law in our Hearts, which Law is a Terror to Evildoers, and answers
that which is of God in every Man's Conscience. They which act contrary to the
Measure of God's Spirit in every Man's Conscience, cast the Law of God behind
their Backs, and walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace. The
Magistrate's Sword, we see, is born in vain, whilst the Evildoers are at
Liberty to do Evil; and they that cry against such, are for so doing punished
by the Magistrate, who has turned his Sword backward against the Lord. And now
the Wicked one fenceth himself, and persecutes the Innocent, as Vagabonds and
Wanderers, for crying against Sin, and against Unrighteousness and Ungodliness
openly, in the Markets and in the Highways; or as Railers, because they tell
them, what Judgment will follow them, that follow such Practices: And here they
that depart from Iniquity, are become a Prey; and few lay it to heart. But God
will thresh the Mountains, and beat the Hills, and cleave the Rocks, and cast
into his Press, which is trodden without the City, and will bathe his Sword in
the Blood of the Wicked and Unrighteous. So they, that have drunk the Cup of
Abominations, an hard Cup have you to drink, you who are the Enemies of God;
and of you he will be avenged, who be his Enemies. Now ye, in whom something of
God is remaining, consider; If the Sword was not born in vain, but turned
against the Evildoers, then the Righteous would not suffer, and be cast into
Holes, Dungeons, Corners and Prisons, and Houses of Correction, as
Peace-Breakers, for crying against Sin openly, as they are commanded of the
Lord, and for crying against the Covetousness of the Priests, and their false
Worships; who exact Money now of poor People, whom they do no work for. Oh!
where will you appear in the Day of the Lord? or how will you stand in the Day
of his righteous Judgment? How many Jails and Houses of Correction are now made
Places to put the Lambs of Christ in, for following him, and obeying his
Commands, which are too many to mention! The Royal Law of Christ, To do, as ye
would be done by, is trodden down under foot: So that Men can profess him in
Words and Talk; but Crucify him, wheresoever he appears, and cast him into
Prison, as the Talkers of him always did in the Generations and Ages past. And
the Laborers, which God (the Master of the Harvest) has sent into his
Vineyard, do the Chief of the Priests, and the Rulers now take Counsel
together against, to cast them into Prison: And here is the Fruits of Priests,
and People, and Rulers, without the Fear of God. The Day is come and coming,
that every Man's Work does appear, and shall appear; glory be to the Lord God
for ever! So see, and consider the Days you have spent, and the Days you do
spend: for this is your Day of Visitation. Many have suffered great Fines of
Money, because they could not Swear, but do abide in Christ's Doctrine, who
says, Swear not at all: and by that means are they made a Prey upon, for
abiding in the Command of Christ. And now many are cast into Prison, and are
made a Prey upon, because they cannot take the Oath of Abjuration, though they
denied all, that is contained in it; and by that means many of the Messengers
and Ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ are cast into Prison, because they will
not Swear, nor go out of Christ's Command. Therefore, O Man, Consider; to the
Measure of the Life of God in thee I speak. Many also lie in Jails, because
they cannot pay the Priests Tithes; and many have their Goods spoiled and
treble Damages taken of them; and many are whipped and beaten in the Houses of
Correction, without Breach of any Law: And these things are done in thy Name,
to Protect them in these Actions. If Men fearing God did bear the Sword, and
Covetousness were hated, and Men of Courage for God were set up, then they
would be a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to them that do well; and not
cause them to suffer. Here Equity would be heard in our Land, and Righteousness
would stand up and take Place; which gives not place to the Unrighteous, but
judges it. To the measure of God's Spirit in thee I speak, that thou may
consider, and come to Rule for God: That thou may answer that which is of
God in every Man's Conscience: For that is that, which brings to Honor all
Men in the Lord. Therefore consider, for whom thou do Rule, that thou may
come to receive Power from God to Rule for him; and all that is contrary to
God, may by his Light be Condemned.

From a Lover of thy Soul, who desires thy Eternal Good. G. F.


But Sufferings, and Imprisonments Continuing and Increasing, and the
Protector, (under whose Name they were Inflicted) hardening himself against the
Complaints that were made unto him; I was moved to give forth the following
Lines amongst Friends, to bring the Weight of their Sufferings more heavy upon
the Heads of the Persecutors.

WHO is moved by the Power of the Lord to offer himself to the Justice for his
Brother or Sister, that lies in Prison; and to go lie in Prison in their stead,
that his Brother or Sister may come forth of Prison, and so to lay down his
Life for his Brother or Sister? And who lies in Prison for Tithes,, witnessing
the Priesthood changed, that took Tithes, and the unchangeable Priesthood come;
If any Brother in the Light, who witnesses a Change of the Old Priesthood,
that took Tithes, and a disannulling of the Commandment for Tithes, be moved of
the Lord to go to the Priest or Impropriator, to offer himself to lie in Prison
for his Brother, and to lay down his Life, that he may come forth, he may
cheerfully do it; and heap Coals of Fire upon the Head of the Adversary of God.
Likewise where any suffer for the Truth, by them who be in the Untruth, If any
Brother be moved of the Lord to go to the Magistrate, Judge, General or
Protector, and offer up themselves to the Prison, to Lay down their Lives for
the Brethren, as Christ has laid down his Life for you, so lay down your Lives
one for another; here you may go over the Heads of the Persecutors, and reach
the Witness of God in them all. And this shall lie a Judgment upon them all for
ever, and be witnessed to by that which is of God in their Consciences. Given
forth from the Spirit of the Lord through

G. F.


Besides this, I writ also a short Epistle to Friends, as An Encouragement to
them in their several Exercises; which was, as follows: My dear Friends,
IN the Power of the Everlasting God, which comprehends the Power of Darkness,
and all the Temptations, and that which comes out of it: In that Power of God
dwell, which will bring and keep you to the Word in the Beginning; which will
keep you up to the Life, and to feed upon the same, in which you are over the
Power of Darkness: in that you will find and feel Dominion and Life. And that
will let you see, before the Tempter was, and over him; and in that the Tempter
cannot come: for the Power and Truth he is out of. Therefore in that Life
dwell, in which you will know Dominion; and let your Faith be in the Power, and
over the Weakness and Temptations, and look not at them: but in the Light and
Power of God look at the Lord's Strength; which will be made perfect in your
Weakest State. So in all Temptations look at the Grace of God, to bring your
Salvation, which is your Teacher to teach you: for when you do look or hearken
to the Temptations, you do go from your Teacher, the Grace of God; and so are
darkened in going from that Teacher, which should bring your Salvation, the
Grace of God, which is sufficient in all Temptations, to lead out of them, and
to keep over them.

G. F.




After I had cleared my self of those Services for the Lord, which lay upon me
in the City of London, I passed down through the Countries into Bedfordshire,
Bedfordshire. Northamptonshire. Wellingborough.
and Northamptonshire. And at Wellingborough in Northamptonshire I had a great
Meeting, in which the Lord's Everlasting Power and Truth was over all; and many
in that Country were turned to the Lord. A great Rage was amongst the
Professors; for the wicked Priests, Presbyterians and Independents raised Lies
upon us, as That we carried Bottles about with us, which we gave People to
drink of, which made them to follow us: But the Power and Spirit, and Truth of
God kept Friends over the Rage of the People. Great Spoiling also there was of
Friends Goods for Tithes, by the Independent and Presbyterian Priests, and some
Baptist-Priests, that had gotten into the Steeple Houses; as Books of Friend's
Sufferings do at large declare.

Leicestershire.
From Wellingborrough I went into Leicestershire, where Coll. Hacker had
threatened, That if I came there, he would Imprison me again, although the
Protector had set me at liberty: But when I was come to Whetston (the Meeting,
Whetston.
from which he took me before) all was quiet there. And thither came Coll.
Hacker's Wife, and his Marshal to the Meeting, and were Convinced: for the
glorious, powerful Day of the Lord was exalted over all, and many were
Convinced that day at that Meeting. There were at that Meeting Two, 1655.
Whetston.
that came out of Wales, who were Justices of Peace, their Names were Peter
Price, and Walter Jenkin; who came both to be Ministers of Christ.

I went from thence to Sileby, to William Smith's, Sileby.
where was a great Meeting, to which several Baptists came; and one of them, a
Baptist-Teacher, was Convinced, and came to sit under the Lord's Teaching by
his Spirit and Power. This Baptist said, he had Baptized Thirty in a day.

From thence I went to Drayton, my Native Town, Drayton.
where so many Priests and Professors had formerly gathered together against
me; but now never a Priest nor Professor did appear. I asked some of my
Relations, Where were all the Priests and Professors now? They said, The Priest
of Non-Eaton was dead; and there were Eight or Nine of them seeking to get into
his Benefice. They will let you alone now (said they:) for they are like a
Company of Crows, when a rotten Sheep is dead, they all gather together to pull
out the Puddings; and so do the Priests for a fallen Benefice. These were some
of their own Hearers, that said so of them: But they had spent their Venom
against me; and the Lord delivered me by his Power out of their Snares.

Then I went to Badgley, Badgley.
where there was a great Meeting from many parts; many came far to it, and many
were Convinced, and turned to the Lord: And they that were Convinced, came
under Christ's Teaching, and were settled upon him their Foundation, and their
Rock.

From thence I passed into Nottinghamshire, Nottingham-shire. Darbyshire.
and had large Meetings there: and so into Darbyshire, where the Lord's Power
came over all; and many were turned from the Darkness to the Light, and from
the Power of Satan unto God, and came to receive the Holy Ghost. And great
Miracles were wrought in many Places, by the Power of the Lord through several.

In Darbyshire James Nailer met me, and told me, Seven or Eight Priests had
challenged him to a Dispute. I had a Travel in my Spirit for him, and the Lord
answered me; and I was moved to bid him Go on, and God Almighty would be with
him, and give him the Victory in his Power. And the Lord did so; insomuch that
the People saw, the Priests were foiled; and they cried, A Nailer, a Nailer
has confuted them all. After the Dispute was over, he came to me again,
praising the Lord. Thus was the Lord's Day proclaimed, and set over all their
Heads; and People began to see the Apostasy and Slavery, they had been under to
their Hireling-Teachers for Means: and they came to know their Teacher, the
Lord Jesus, who had bought them, and purchased them, and made their Peace
betwixt God and them. While we were here, Friends came out of Yorkshire to see
us, and were glad of the Prosperity of Truth.

After this I passed into Warwickshire, through Friends, Warwickshire.
Worcestershire. Birmingham.
visiting their Meetings; and so into Worcestershire, and had a Meeting at
Brummingham, as I went, where several were Convinced, and turned to the Lord.
At length I came to one Cole's House in Worcestershire, near Chattan. 1655.
Near Chattan.
This Cole had given an Independent-Preacher a Meeting Place, and the
Independent came to be Convinced; and after he was Convinced he laid aside his
Preaching: Whereupon the Old Man -- Cole gave him an hundred Pounds a Year. I
had a Meeting at that Meeting Place, and a very great Meeting it was, insomuch
that the Meeting Place would not hold the People; and many were turned to the
Lord that day. Afterward, when the time of Trials came, this Independent did
not stand to that, which had Convinced him; but turned back: Whereupon the Old
Man took away his 100 l. a Year from him again. But this Old Man Cole himself
died in God's Truth.

Now I heard, that at Evesholme the Magistrates had cast several Friends into
Prison, in several Prisons; and that, hearing of my coming, they made a pair of
high Stocks. So I sent for Edward Pittaway, a Friend, that lived near
Evesholme, and asked him the Truth of the thing; and he said, It was so. Then I
went that Night with him to Evesholme; Evesholme
and in the Evening we had a large, precious Meeting, wherein Friends and
People were refreshed with the Word of Life, and with the Power of the Lord.
Next Morning I got up, and rid to one of the Prisons, and visited Friends
there; and encouraged them. Then I rid to the other Prison, where there were
several Prisoners, and amongst them one Friend, that had been a Priest, but was
now become a free Minister of Christ; his Name was Humphrey Smith. So when I
had visited the Friends at both Prisons, and was turned away from the Prison,
to go out of Town, I espied the Magistrates coming up the Town, to have seized
me in Prison. But the Lord frustrated their Intents, that the Innocent escaped
their Snare; and the Lord God's blessed Power came over them all. But exceeding
Rude and Envious were the Priests and Professors about this time in those Parts.

Worcester
I went from Evesholme to Worcester, and had a precious Meeting there, and
quiet. But after the Meeting, as we came down the Street toward our Inn, some
of the Professors fell to discourse with Friends, and were like to have made a
Tumult in the City; and as we went into the Inn, they all cluttered into the
Yard: but I went among them, and got them quieted. The next day I walked forth
into the Town, and had a great deal of Discourse with some of the Professors,
concerning Christ and the way of Truth. One of them denied, That Christ was of
Abraham, according to the Flesh; and that he was declared to be the Son of God,
according to the Spirit: But I proved from Romans 1. that he was of the Seed of
Abraham, being made of the Seed of David, according to the Flesh; and that
according to the Spirit, he was declared to be the Son of God. Afterward I
writ a Paper concerning it.

Tewksbury.
From Worcester we went to Tewksbury, where in the Evening we had a great
Meeting. And there came in the Priest of the Town, with a great Rabble of rude
People; and the Priest boasted, That he would see, whether he or I should have
the Victory. I turned the People to the Divine Light, which Christ, the
heavenly and spiritual Man, had enlightened them withal; that with that Light
they might see their Sins, and that they were in Death and Darkness, and
without God in the World: 1655. Tewksbury.
And with the same Light they might see Christ, from whom it came, their
Savior and Redeemer, who had shed his Blood for them, and died for them; and
who was the Way to God, the Truth, and the Life. Here the Priest began to Rage
against the Light, and denied it; for neither Priest, nor Professor could
endure to hear the Light spoken of. So the Priest, having railed at the Light,
went away, and left his rude Company amongst us: but the Lord's Power came over
them; though Mischief was in their Hearts.

Leaving Tewksbury, we passed back through the Country, and came to Warwick,
Warwick.
where in the Evening we had a Meeting at a Widow-woman's House, whither many
sober People came together: and a precious Meeting we had in the Lord's Power,
and several were Convinced, and turned to the Lord. After the Meeting was done,
and I was walking out, a Baptist in the Company began to Jangle; and the
Bailiff of the Town, with his Officers came in, and said, What do these People
here at this time of the Night? So he secured John Crook and Amor Stoddart, and
Gerrard Roberts and me; but we had leave to go to our Inn (all that were
Strangers) and to be forthcoming in the Morning The next Morning there came
many rude People into the Inn, and into our Chambers, desperate Fellows: but
the Lord's Power gave us Dominion over them. Gerrard Roberts and John Crook
went up to the Bailiff to speak with him, and to know, What he had to say to
us? He said, We might go our ways; for he had little to say to us Then, as we
rid out of Town, it lay upon me to ride to his H^^se, to speak to him, and to
let him know; That the Protector, having given forth an Instrument of
Government, in which Liberty of Conscience was granted; it was very much, that
contrary to that Instrument of Government, he would trouble peaceable People,
that feared God. The Friends went with me; but the rude People gathered about
us with Stones: And one of them took hold of my Horse's Bridle, and brake it;
but the Horse drawing back, threw him under him. Though the Bailiff saw this,
yet did he not stop, nor so much as Rebuke the Rude Multitude; so that it was
much, we had not been slain, or hurt in the Streets amongst them: for the
People threw Stones, and struck at us, as we Rode along the Town.

When we were come quite out of the Town, I told Friends, It was upon me from
the Lord, that I must go back into the Town again: and if any one of them felt
any thing upon him from the Lord, he might follow me; and the rest that did
not, might go on to Dun-Cow. So I passed up through the Market in the dreadful
Power of God, declaring the Word of Life to them; and John Crook followed me.
Some struck at me; but the Lord's Power was over them, and gave me Dominion
over all: And I showed them their Unworthiness of the Name of Christians, and
the Unworthiness of their Teachers, that had not brought them into more
Sobriety; and what a shame they were to Christianity!

Having cleared my self, I turned back out of the Town again, and passed to
Coventry: but when we came thither, Coventry.
we found the People closed up with Darkn^ss. I went to a Prof^ssor's House,
that I had formerly been at; 1655. Coventry.
and he was drunk: which grieved my Soul so, that I did not go into any House
in the Town; but rode into some of the Streets of the Town, and into the
Marketplace; and I felt, the Power of the Lord God was over the Town.

Duncow.
Then I went on to Duncow, and had a Meeting there in the Evening, and some were
turned to the Lord by his Spirit, as some also were at Warwick and Tewksbury
beforementioned. We lay at the Duncow that Night; and there we met with John
Cham, a faithful Minister of the Everlasting Gospel. In the Morning there was
gathered together a Rude Campany of Priests and People, who behaved themselves
more like Beasts, than Men; for some of them came Riding on Horseback into the
Room, where we were: But the Lord gave us Dominion over them.

Leicestershire. Warwickshire. Badgley.
From thence we passed into Leichestershire, where we had a great Meeting again,
at the place, where I had been taken formerly: And after that, we came back
into Warwickshire to Badgley. Here William Edmundson, a Friend that lived in
Ireland, having some drawings upon his Spirit to come over into England to see
me, met with me; and by him I writ a few Lines to those few Friends, that were
then Convinced in the North of Ireland, as follows: Friends,
IN that which Convinced you, Wait; that you may have that removed, you are
Convinced of. And all my Dear Friends, dwell in the Life and Love, and Power
and Wisdom of God, in Unity one with another, and with God: and the Peace and
Wisdom of God fill all your Hearts, that nothing may rule in you, but the Life,
which stands in the Lord God.

G. F




When these few Lines were read amongst the Friends in Ireland, at their
Meeting, the Power of the Lord seized upon them all, that were in the Room.

Swannington. Higham. Northamptonshire. Bedfordshire. Hertfordshire. Baldock.
From Badgley we passed to Swannington and Higham, and so through the Countries
into Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire, having great Meetings; and many were
turned to the Lord by his Power and Spirit. When we came to Baldock in
Hertfordshire, I asked, If there was nothing in that Town, no Profession? and
it was Answered me, There were some Baptists and a Baptist-woman sick John Rush
of Bedfordshire went along with me to visit her; and when we came in, there
were many People in the House, that were Tender about her: And they told me,
She was not a Woman for this World; but if I had any thing to comfort her
concerning the World to come, I might speak to her. So I was moved of the Lord
God to speak to her;
and the Lord raised her up again, to the astonishment of the Town and Country:
Her Husband's Name was Baldock. This Baptist-woman and her Husband came to be
Convinced; and many hundreds of People have been at Meetings at their House
since. Great Meetings and Convincements there were up and down in those Parts
afterward, and many People received the Word of Life, 1655. Baldock.
and sat down under the Teaching of Christ, their Savior.

When we had visited this sick Woman, we went back to our Inn; and there were
Two desperate Fellows fighting, so furiously, that none durst come nigh them to
part them. But I was moved in the Lord's Power to go to them: and when I had
loosed their Hands, I held one of them by one Hand, and the other by the other
Hand; and I showed them the Evil of their doings, and reconciled them one to
the other, that they were loving, and very thankful to me: so that People
admired at it.

From thence I passed through the Country to Market-street, Market-street.
Albans. London.
where God had a People; and so through Albans to London, where Friends were
glad of the Prosperity of Truth, and the manifestation of the Lord's glorious
Power, that had delivered us, and carried us through many dangers and
difficulties: and I was glad, to find Truth prosper in the City, and all things
well amongst Friends there. Only there was one man, whose Name was John
Toldervey, that had been Convinced of Truth, and run out from it; and the
envious Priests took occasion from thence to write a wicked Book against
Friends, which they stuffed with many Lies, to render Truth and Friends odious
in People's Eyes and Minds: and they Entitled their Book, The Foot out of the
Snare. But this poor man came to see his Folly, and returned, and Condemned his
Backsliding; and answered the Priests Book, and manifested all their Lies and
Wickedness. Thus the Lord's Power came over them, and his Everlasting Seed
reigned, and reigns to this Day.

Now after I had tarried some time in London, and had visited Friends in their
Meetings there, I went out of Town again; leaving James Nayler in the City. And
as I passed from him, I cast my Eyes upon him, and a Fear struck into me
concerning him: But I went away, and rode down to Rygate in Surrey, Surrey.
Rygate.
where I had a little Meeting. There the Friends told me of one Thomas Moore, a
Justice of Peace, that lived not far from Rygate, and was a friendly, moderate
man: whereupon I went to visit him at his House, and he came to be a
serviceable man in Truth.

We passed on to one Thomas Pachin's, where we had a Meeting, unto which
several Friends came from London; and John Bolton and his Wife came thither on
foot in frost and snow. After we had parted with Friends there, we went toward
Horsham-park; Horsham-park. Arundel. Chicester.
and having visited Friends there, we passed on to Arundel and C^^chester,
where we had Meetings. At Chichester many Professors came in, and some jangling
they made; but the Lord's Power was over them. The Woman of the House, where
the Meeting was, though she was Convinc^d of Truth, yet not keeping her Mind
close to that which Convinced her; she fell in love with a man of the World,
that was there that time. When I knew it, I took her aside, and was moved to
speak to her, and to pray for her: But a light thing got up in her Mind, and
she slighted it. Afterward she Married that man; and soon after went
distracted: for the Man was greatly in Debt, and she greatly disappointed. Then
was I sent for to her; and the Lord was entreated, and Raised her up again, and
settled her Mind by his Power. And afterward her Husband died; and she
acknowledged, the just Judgments of God were come upon her, for slighting the
Exhortation and Counsel I had given her.

After we left Chichester, we traveled on through the Countries, till we came
to Portsmouth. Portsmouth.
There the Soldiers had us to the Governor's House; and after some
Examination, the Lord's Power came over them, and we were set at Liberty, and
had a Meeting in the Town. Ringwood
After which we passed away, and came to Ringwood, where in the Evening we had
a Meeting; at which several were Convinced, and turned to the Spirit of the
Lord, and to the Teaching of Christ Jesus, their Savior.

Pool.
From Ringwood we came to Pool: and having set up our Horses at an Inn, we sent
into the Town to inquire for such, as feared the Lord, and such who were
worthy; and we had a Meeting there with several sober People: And William
Baily, a Baptist-Teacher, was convinced there at that time. The People received
the Truth in the inward Parts, and were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their
Rock and Foundation, their Teacher and Savior: And there is become a great
Gathering in the Name of Jesus of a very tender People, who continue under
Christ's Teaching.

Southampton.
We went also to Southampton, and had a Meeting there; and several were
Convinced there also. Edward Pyot of Bristol traveled with me all this Western
Journey.

Dorchester.
From thence we went to Dorchester, and alighted at an Inn, that was a Baptist's
house: And we sent into the Town to the Baptists, to let us have their
Meeting House to meet in, and to invite the sober People to the Meeting; but
they denied it us. And we sent to them again to know, Why they would deny us
their Synagogue? so the thing was noised in the Town. Then we sent them Word,
If they would not let us come to their house, They, or any People that feared
God, might come to our Inn, if they pleased: But they were in a great Rage, and
their Teacher, and many of them came up; and they flapped their Bibles on the
Table. I asked them, Why they were so Angry? were they Angry with the Bible?
But they fell into a Discourse about their Water Baptism. I asked them, Whether
they could say, they were sent of God to baptize People, as John was? And
whether they had the same Spirit and Power, that the Apostles had? And they
said, They had not. Then I asked them, How many Powers there are? Whether there
are any more, than the Power of God, and the Power of the Devil? And they said,
There was not any other Power, than those Two. Then said I, If you have not the
Power of God, that the Apostles had, then you act by the Power of the Devil.
There were many sober People present, who said; They have thrown themselves on
their Backs. Many substantial People were Convinced that Night; and a precious
Service we had there for the Lord, and his Power came over all. Next Morning,
as we were passing away, the Baptists being in a Rage, began to shake the Dust
from off their Feet after us. 'What, said I, in the Power of Darkness! We, who
are in the Power of God, shake off the Dust of our feet against you.

Thus leaving Dorchester, we came to Weymouth; 1655. Weymouth.
where also we inquired after the sober People: and about four score of them
gathered together at a Priest's House, all very sober People; and most of them
received the Word of Life, and were turned to their Teacher, Christ Jesus, who
had enlightened them with his Divine Light, by which they might see their Sins,
and him, who saved them from their Sins. A blessed Meeting we had with them,
and they received the Truth in the Love of it, with gladness of Heart. The
Meeting held for several Hours; and the state of their Teachers, and the
Apostasy was opened to them; and the state of the Apostles, and of the Church
in their Days; and the state of the Law and of the Prophets before Christ, and
how Christ came to fulfill them, and how he was their Teacher in the Apostles
Days: and how he was come now to teach his People again himself by his Power
and Spirit. All was quiet, and the Meeting brake up peaceably; and the People
were very loving: and a Meeting is continued in that Town to this Day, and many
are added to them; and some that had been Ranters, came to own the Truth, and
to live very soberly.

There was at that Time a Captain of Horse in the Town, and he sent to me, and
would fain have had me to have stayed longer in the Town: But I was not to
stay. So he and his Man rode out of Town with me about seven Miles; Edward Pyot
also being with me. This Captain was the fattest, merriest, cheerfullest Man,
and the most given to Laughter, that ever I met with; insomuch, that I was
several Times moved of the Lord, to speak in the dreadful Power of the Lord to
him: and yet it was become so customary to him, he would presently laugh at any
thing, that he saw. But I still admonished him to come to Sobriety, and the
fear of the Lord, and Sincerity. We lay at an Inn that Night; and the next
Morning I was moved to speak to him again, when he parted from us. Next time I
saw him, he told me, that when I spoke to him at parting, the Power of the Lord
so struck him, that before he got home, he was serious enough, and had left his
laughing. He afterward was Convinced, and became a serious and good Man; and
died in the Truth.

Parting from him, we went to Honitone; Honitone.
and at our Inn inquired, What People there were in the Town, that feared God;
and sent for them. There came to us some of the Particular Baptists, with whom
we had a great deal of Reasoning. I told them, They held their Doctrine of
Particular Election in Esau's, Cain's and Ishmael's nature, and not in Jacob,
the second Birth: But they must be born again, before they enter the Kingdom of
God. And that as the Promise of God was to the Seed, not as many, but as one,
which was Christ; so the Election and Choice stands in Christ: and they must be
such, as walk in his Light, Grace, Spirit and Truth. And many more Words we had
with them.

From thence we passed to Topsham, Topsham.
and stayed there on the First Day; but the Innkeeper and his People were
rude. The next Morning we gave forth some Queries to the Priests and
Professors: whereupon some Rude Professors came into our Inn; and had we not
gone, when we did, they had stopped us. I wore a Girdle, which through
forgetfulness I left behind me at the Inn, and afterward sent to the
Innkeeper for; 1655. Topsham.
but he would not let me have it again. Afterward, when he was Tormented in
his Mind about it, he took it and burnt it; lest he should be bewitched by it,
as he said: Yet when he had burnt it, he was more tormented, than before. Some,
notwithstanding the Rudeness of the Place, were Convinced there; and a Meeting
was afterward settled in that Town, which has continued ever since.

After this we passed to Totnes, which was a dark Town: We lodged there one
Night at an Inn, Totnes.
and that Night Edward Pyot was Sick; but the Lord's Power healed him, King's
Bridge.
so that the next Day we got to King's-bridge, and at our Inn inquired for the
sober People of the Town. They directed us to one Nicholas Tripe and his Wife;
and we went down to their house. When we were come there, they sent for the
Priest, with whom we had some Discourse; but he being Confounded, quickly left
us. But Nicholas Tripe and his Wife were Convinced; and since there is a good
Meeting of Friends in that Country. In the Evening we returned to our Inn: and
there being many People drinking in the House, I was moved of the Lord to go
amongst them, and to direct them to the Light, which Christ, the heavenly Man,
had enlightened them withal; by which Light they might see all their Evil Ways,
Words and Deeds, and by the same Light they might also see Christ Jesus, their
Savior. The Innkeeper stood uneasy, seeing, it hindered his Guests from
drinking; and as soon as the last Words were out of my Mouth, he snatched up the
Candle, and said, Come, here is a Light for you to go into your Chamber. Next
Morning, when he was Cool, I spoke to ^im of it, and told him, What an Uncivil
Thing it was for him so to do: Then Warning him of the Day of the Lord, we got
ready, and passed away.

Plymouth.
We came next Day to Plymouth: and after we had refreshed our selves at our Inn,
we went to Robert Cary's House, where we had a very precious Meeting. There was
at this Meeting one Elizabeth Trelawny, daughter to one that was called a
Baronet: She being somewhat thick of hearing, came close up to me, and clapped
her Ear very nigh me, while I spoke; and she was Convinced. After the Meeting
was ended, there came in some Jangling Baptists; but the Lord's Power came over
them, and this Elizabeth Trelawny gave Testimony thereto. A fine Meeting was
settled there in the Lord's Power, which has continued ever since; and many
faithful Friends have been Convinced there.

Cornwall. Menhenniot.
From thence we passed into Cornwall, and came to an Inn in the parish of
Menhenniot. At Night we had a Meeting at Edward Hancock's House; to which came
one Thomas Mounce, and a Priest, and a great deal of People. We made the Priest
confess, That he was a Minister made by the States, and maintained by the
States; and he was Confounded, and went his way: but many of the People stayed.
I directed them to the Light of Christ, by which they might see their Sins, and
see their Savior Christ Jesus, who was the way to God, and their Mediator to
make Peace betwixt God and them; and was their Shepherd to feed them, and their
Prophet to teach them. And I directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves,
by which they might know the Scriptures, and be led into all Truth; and by the
Spirit might know God, and in it have unity one with another. Many were
Convinced at that Time, and came under Christ's Teaching; and there are fine
Gatherings in the Name of Jesus, in those Parts at this Day.

We traveled from thence through the Country, Penryn. Helston.
and through Penryn, and came to Helston; but could not get to the knoweldge of
any sober People, through the Badness of the Innkeepers. At length we came to
a Village, where some Baptists and sober People lived, with whom we had some
Discourse; and some of them were brought to confess, That they stumbled at the
Light of Christ. They would have had us to have stayed with them; Market-Jew.
but we passed thence to Market-Jew: and having taken up our Lodging at an Inn
there, we sent out over night to inquire for any People, that feared the Lord.
Next Morning the Mayor and Aldermen gathered together, with the High Sheriff of
the County; and they sent first the Constables to us, to bid us come before
them. We asked them for their Warrant: and they saying, they had none; we told
them, we should not go along with them without a Warrant. Upon the Return of
the Constables without us, they sent their Sergeants, and we asked them for
their Warrant, and they said, they had none; but they told us, the Mayor and
Aldermen stayed for us. We told them, the Mayor and his Company did not well to
trouble us in our Inn; and we should not go with them without a Warrant. So
they went away, and came again; and when we asked them for their Warrant, one
of them plucked his Mace from under his Cloak: We asked them, Whether this was
their Custom, to molest and trouble Strangers in their Inns and Lodgings? After
some time Edward Pyot went to the Mayor and Aldermen, and a great deal of
Discourse he had with them; but the Lord's Power gave him Dominion over them
all. When he came back, there came several of the Officers to us: and we laid
before them the Incivility and Unworthiness of their Carriage toward us, who
were the Servants of the Lord God, thus to stop and trouble us in our Inns and
Lodgings; and what an Unchristian Act it was. Before we left the Town, I writ a
little Paper, to be sent to the seven Parishes at the Land's End, to declare,
'That the Lord was come to teach his People himself by his Son Christ Jesus. A
Copy of which Paper here follows:

THE mighty Day of the Lord is come, and coming, wherein all Hearts shall be
made manifest, and the Secrets of every one's Heart shall be revealed by the
Light of Jesus, which comes from Jesus Christ, who Lights every Man, that
comes into the World, that all Men through him might believe, and that the
World might have Life, through him, who says, Learn of me; and of whom God
says, This is my beloved Son, hear ye him. And Christ is come to teach his
People himself; and every one, that will not hear this Prophet, which God has
raised up, and which Moses spoke of, when he said, Like unto me will God raise
you up a Prophet, him shall you hear: Every one (I say) that will not hear this
Prophet, is to be Cut off. They that despised Moses's Law, died under the Hand
of two or three Witnesses; but how much greater Punishment will come upon them,
1655. Market-Jew.
that neglect this great Salvation, Christ Jesus, who says, Learn of me, I am
the Way, the Truth and the Life; who lights every Man, that comes into the
World: which Light lets him see his evil Ways, and his evil Deeds that he has
done. But if you hate that Light, and go on in Evil, this Light will be your
Condemnation, says Christ. Therefore, now ye have Time, prize it: for this is
the Day of your Visitation, and Salvation profer'd to you. Every one of you
has a Light from Christ; which lets you see, you should not lie, nor do wrong
to any, nor Swear, nor Curse. nor take God's Name in vain, nor Steal. It is the
Light, that shows you these evil Deeds: which if you love, and come unto it,
and follow it, it will lead you to Christ, who is the way to the Father, from
whence it comes; where no Unrighteousness enters, nor Ungodliness. But if you
do this Light hate, this Light will be your Condemnation; but if you do it
love, and come to it, you will come to Christ; and it will bring you off from
all the World's Teachers and VVays, to learn of Christ, and will preserve you
from the Evils of the World, and all the Deceivers in it.

G. F.

This Paper a Friend, who was then with me, had; and when we were gone some
three or four Miles from Market-Jew toward the West, he meeting with a Man
upon the Road, gave him a Copy of the Paper. That Man proved to be a Servant to
one, Peter Ceely, who was Major in the Army, and a Justice of Peace in that
County; and he riding before us to a Place called St. Ives, showed the Paper to
his Master Major Ceely. Ives.
When we came to Ives, Edward Pyot's Horse having cast a Shoe, we staid there
to have a Shoe set; and while he was getting his Horse shod, I walked down to
the Seaside. When I came back, I found the Town in an Vproar; and they were
haling Edward Pyot and the other Friend before Major Ceely. I followed them
into the Justice's House, though they did not lay H^nds upon me. When we came
in, the House was full of Rude People: Whereupon I asked, Whether there were
not an Officer among them, to keep the People Civil? Major Ceely said, he was a
Magistrate. I told him, He should show forth Gravity and Sobriety then, and use
his Authority to keep the People Civil: for I never saw any People ruder: The
Indians were more like Christians, than they. After a while they brought forth
the Paper aforesaid, and asked, Whether I would own it? I said, Yes. Then he
tendered the Oath of Abjuration to us: Whereupon I put my Hand in my Pocket,
and drew forth the Answer to it, which had been given to the Protector. After I
had given him that, he Examined us severally, one by one. He had with him a
silly, young Priest, who asked us many frivolous Questions: and amongst the
rest he asked To cut my Hair, which then was pretty long; and I was not to Cut
it, though many times many were Angry at it. I told them, I had no Pride in it;
and it was not of my own putting on. At length the Justice put us under a Guard
of Soldiers, who were hard and wild, 1655. Ives.
like the Justice himself: Nevertheless we Warned the People of the day of the
Lord, and declared the Truth to them. On the next day he sent us guarded with a
Party of Horse, with Swords and Pistols, and they carried us to Redruth.
Redruth.
On the First Day the Soldiers would have carried us away; but we told them, It
was their Sabbath, and it was not usual to Travel on that day. Several of the
Town's People gathered about us; and whilst I held the Soldiers in Discourse,
Edward Pyot spoke to the People; and afterward Edward Pyot held the Soldiers
in Discourse, whilst I spoke to the People: And in the mean time the other
Friend got out into the Backside, and went to the Steeplehouse, to speak to the
Priest and People there; and the People were exceeding desperate, in a mighty
Rage against him, and Abused him. The Soldiers also missing him, were in a
great Rage, ready to kill us: But I declared the Day of the Lord, and the Word
of Eternal Life to the People, that gathered about us. In the Afternoon the
Soldiers were Resolved, and would have us away from thence; so we took Horse:
And when we were rid to the Towns-end, I was moved of the Lord God to go back
again, to speak to the Old Man of the House. The Soldiers drew out their
Pistols, and swore, that I should not go back: I heeded them not, but Rid back;
and they Rid after me. So I cleared my self to the Old Man and the People; and
then returned back again with them, and Reproved them for being so Rude and
Violent.

At Night we were brought to a Town called Smethick then, (Smithick) Falmouth.
but since Falmouth; and it being the Evening of the First Day, there came in
to our Inn the Chief-Constable of the Place, and many sober People; and some of
them began to inquire concerning us. We told them, We were Prisoners for
Truth's sake: and a great deal of Discourse we had with them concerning the
Things of God. They were very sober, and very loving to us; and some of them
were Convinced, and stood faithful ever after.

After the Constable and People aforesaid were gone, other People came in; who
also were very Civil, and went away very loving. When all were gone, we went to
our Chamber to go to Bed: and about the Eleventh Hour Edward Pyot said; I will
shut the Door, it may be some may come to do us a Mischief. Afterward we
understood that Capt. Keat, who commanded the Party, had a purpose to have done
us some Mischief that Night: but the Door being bolted, they missed their
Design at that time. Next Morning Capt. Keat brings in a Brother or Kinsman of
his, a rude, wicked Man, and put him into the Room; he himself standing
without. This evil-minded Man walking huffing up and down the Room, I bid him
Fear the Lord. Whereupon he ran upon me, and struck me with both his Hands; and
clapping his Leg behind me, would fain have thrown me down, if he could; but he
could not: for I stood stiff and still, and let him strike. And as I looked
toward the Door, I saw Capt. Keat look on, and see his Brother or Kinsman thus
bent and abuse me. Whereupon I said to him, Keat, Do thou allow this? and he
said, He did. Is this Manly or Civil, said I, to have us under a Guard, and put
a Man to abuse and beat us? Is this manly, civil or Christian? So I desired one
of our Friends to send for the Constables; 1655. Falmouth.
and they came. Then I desired the Captain to let the Constables see his
Warrant or Order, by which he was to carry us; which he did: and his Warrant
was To conduct us safe to Captain Fox, Governor of Pendennis- Castle, and if
the Governor should not be at home, then he was to Convey us to Lanceston-
Gaol. I told him, He had broken his Order concerning us: for we, who were his
Prisoners, were to be safely Conducted; but he had brought a Man to beat and
abuse us: so he having broken his Order, I wished the Constable to keep the
Warrant. Accordingly he did, and told the Soldiers, They might go their ways,
for he would take charge of the Prisoners; and if it cost twenty Shillings in
Charges to Carry us up, they should not have the Warrant again. I showed the
Soldiers the baseness of their Carriage toward us; and they walked up and down
the House in their Dumps, being pitifully blankt, and down. The Constables went
to the Castle, and told the Officers, what they had done. The Officers showed
great dislike of Captain Keat's base Carriage toward us; and told the
Constables, that Major General Desborow was coming to Bodmin, and that we
should meet him; and that it was likely, he would free us. Mean while our old
Guard of Soldiers came by way of Entreaty to us, and promised, That they would
be Civil to us, if we would go with them. Thus the Morning spent, till it was
about the Eleventh Hour: and then, upon the Soldiers Entreaty, and Promise to
be more Civil, the Constables gave them the Order again; and we went with them.
Great was the Civility and Curtesy of the Constables, and People of that Town
toward us, who did kindly entertain us; and the Lord did reward them with his
Truth, that many of them have since been Convinced thereof, and are gathered
into the Name of Jesus, and sit under Christ, their Teacher and Savior.

Captain Keat, who commanded our Guard, understanding, that Captain Fox, who
was the Governor of Pendennis-Castle, was not at home, but was gone to meet
Major General Desborow, did not have us thither; but went with us directly to
Bodmin, a Town in the way to Lanceston. And as we went, we met Major General
Desborow on the way: The Captain of his Troop, that rode before him, knew me,
and said, Oh Mr. Fox, what do you here? I replied, ' I am a Prisoner. Alack,
said he, for what? I told him, 'I was taken up, as I was traveling. Then, said
he, I will speak to my Lord, and he will set you at Liberty. So he came from
the Head of his Troop, and rode up to the Coach, and spoke to the Major
General: We also gave him an Account, how we were taken. He began to speak
against the Light of Christ; for which I Reproved him: Then he told the
Soldiers, They might carry us to Lanceston; for he could not stay to talk with
us, l^st his Horses should take Cold.

Bodmin.
So to Bodmin we were had that Night: And when we were come to our Inn, Captain
Keat, who was gone in thither before us, put me into a Room, and went his way.
When I was come in, there stood a Man with a naked Rapier in his Hand.
Whereupon I turned out again, and called for Captain Keat, and said unto him;
What now, Keat, what Trick have thou played now, to put me into a Room, where
there is a Man with his naked Rapier? 1655. Bodmin.
What is thy End in this? Oh, said he, pray hold your Tongue; for if you speak
to this Man, we cannot all rule him, he is so devilish. Then said I, Do thou
put me into a Room, where there is such a Man with a naked Rapier, that thou
say, You cannot all rule him? What an unworthy, bad Trick is this? and to
put me single into this Room from the rest of my Friends, that were
Fellow Prisoners with me? Thus his Plot was discovered, and the Mischief they
intended, was prevented. And afterward we got another Room, where we were
together all Night: And in the Evening we declared the Truth to the People; but
they were an hardened, dark People. And the Soldiers, notwithstanding their
fair Promises, were very rude and wicked to us again, and sat up drinking and
roaring all Night.

Next day we were brought to Lanceston; Lanceston Prison.
and there Captain Keat delivered us to the Jailer. Now was the^e no Friend,
nor friendly People near us; and the People of the Town was a dark, hardened
People. The Jailer required us to pay seven Shillings a Week for ou^
Horse-meat, and seven Shillings a Week for our Diet a piece: But after some
time several sober People came to see us, and some of the Town came to be
Convinced; and many friendly People out of several parts of the Country came to
visit us, and were Convinced. Then got up a great Rage among the Professors and
Priests against us; and they said, This People Thou and Thee all Men without
Respect, and they will not d^ff their Hats, nor bow the Knee to any Man: This
made them fret. But, said they, we shall see, when the Assize comes, whether
they will dare to Thou and Thee the Judge, and keep on their Hats before him:
And they expected, we should all be hanged at the Assize. But all this was
little to us; for we saw, how God would stain the World's Honor and Glory: And
we were commanded not to seek that Honor, nor give it; but knew the Honor,
that came from God only, and sought that.

It was Nine Weeks from the time of our Commitment to the Assizes: 1556.
Lanceston Assizes.
And when the Assize came, abundance of People came from far and near, to hear
the Trial of the Quakers. There was one Captain Bradden, that lay with his
Troop of Horse there at that time whose Soldiers, and the Sheriff's men
guarded us up to the Court through the Multitude of People, that filled the
Streets; and much ado they had to get us through them: besides the Doors and
Windows were filled with People looking out upon us. When we were brought into
the Court, we stood a pretty while with our Hats on, and all was quiet; and I
was moved to say, Peace be amongst you! After that, Judge Glyn, a Welch-man,
who was then Chief Justice of England, said to the Jailer, What be these you
have brought here into the Court? Prisoners, my Lord, said he. Why do not you
put off your Hats, said the Judge to us? We said nothing. Put off your Hats,
said the Judge again: still we said nothing. Then said the Judge, The Court
commands you to put off your Hats. Then I spoke, and said, Where did ever any
Magistrate, King or Judge, from Moses to Daniel, command any to put off their
Hats, when they came before them in their Courts, either amongst the Jews (the
People of God) or amongst the Heathens? And if the Law of England does command
any such thing, show me that Law either Written or Printed. Then the Judge grew
very Angry, and said; I do not carry my Law Books on my Back. But, said I, tell
me, where it is printed in any Statute-book, that I may read it. Then said the
Judge, Take him away, Praevaricator! I Will ferk him. So they tock us away, and
put us among the Thieves. Pres^ntly after he calls to the Jailer; Bring them up
again. Come, said he, where had they Hats from Moses to Daniel? Come Answer me;
I have you fast now, said he. I replied, Thou may read in the Third of
Daniel, that the Three Children were cast into the fiery Furnace by
Nebuchadnezzar's Command, with their Coats, their Hose, and their Hats on. This
plain Instance stopped him: so that not having any thing else to say, He cried
again, Take them away, Jailer. Accordingly we were taken away, and thrust in
among the Thieves; where we were kept a great while: and then, without being
called again, the Sheriff's men and the Troopers made way for us (but we were
almost spent) to get through the Crowd of People; Lanceston Prison.
and so guarded us to the Prison again, a Multitude of People following us,
with whom we had much Discourse and Reasoning at the Gaol. We had got some very
good Books, to set forth our Principles, and to Inform People of the Truth;
which the Judge and Justices hearing of, they sent Captain Bradden for them;
who came into the Gaol to us, and violently took our Books from us, some out of
Edward Pyot's Hands, and carried them away: so that we never got them again.

In the Afternoon we were had up again into the Court by the Jailer and
Sheriff's men, and Troopers; who had a mighty Toil to get us through the Crowd
of People. When we were in the Court, waiting to be called, I seeing both the
Jurymen, and such a Multitude of others Swearing, it grieved my Life to see,
that such, as professed Christianity, should so openly disobey, and break the
Command of Christ, and the Apostle. And I was moved of the Lord God to give
forth a Paper against Swearing, which I had about me, to the Grand and Petty
Juries, which was, as follows:

Concerning SWEARING.
TAKE heed of giving People Oaths to swear: for Christ our Lord and Master
says, Swear not at all; but let your Communications be Yea Yea, and Nay Nay:
for whatsoever is more than these, comes of Evil. And if any Man was to suffer
Death, it must be by the Hand of two or three Witnesses; and the Hands of the
Witnesses were to be put first upon him to put him to Death. And the Apostle
James says, My Brethren, above all things swear not, neither by Heaven, nor by
Earth, nor by any other Oath, least ye fall into Condemnation. Now you may see,
those that Swear, fall into Condemnation, and are out of Christ's and the
Apostle's Doctrine. Therefore every one of you having a Light from Christ, who
says, I am the Light of the World, and does enlighten every Man, that comes
into the World; who says, Learn of me, whose Doctrine is not to Swear; and the
Apostle's Doctrine is not to Swear; but Let your Yea be Yea, and your Nay be
Nay in all your Communications; for whatsoever is more, comes of Evil: So
then, they that go into more than Yea and Nay, go into the Evil, and are out of
the Doctrine of Christ. Now if you say, That the Oath was the End of
Controversy and Strife: they who be in Strife, are out of Christ's Doctrine;
for he is the Covenant of Peace: and who be in it, are in the Covenant of
Peace. And the Apostle brings that but as an Example: As, Men swearing by the
greater; and, The Oath was the end of Controversy and Strife among Men; and
said, Verily, Men swear by the greater: but God could not find a greater; but
swears by himself, concerning Christ; which when he was come, taught not to
swear at all: So such as be in him, and follow him, cannot but abide in his
Doctrine. Now, if you say, They swore under the Law, and under the Prophets:
Christ is the End of the Law, and of the Prophets to every one, that does
believe, for Righteousness sake. Now mark; If you believe, I am the Light of
the World, which does enlighten every Man, that comes into the World, says
Christ, by whom it was made; now every Man of you, that is come into the World,
being enlightened with a Light, that comes from Christ, by whom the World was
made, that all of you through him might believe, That is the End, for which he
does enlighten you. Now if you do believe in the Light, as Christ Commands, and
says, Believe in the Light, that you may be Children of Light; you believe in
Christ, and come to learn of him, who is the Way to the Father. And this is the
Light, which shows the Evil Actions you have all acted, the ungodly Deeds you
have ungodly Committed, and all the ungodly Speeches you have spoken, and all
your Oaths and cursed Speaking, and ungodly Actions. Now if you hearken to this
Light, it will let you see all the Actions, that you have done contrary to it;
and loving it, it will turn you from your evil Deeds, evil Actions, evil Ways,
evil Words to Christ, who is not of the World; who is the Light, which lights
every Man, that comes into the World: who testifies against the World, that
the Deeds thereof are evil. And so does the Light in every Man, that he has
received from him, testify against his Works and Deeds, that be Evil, that
they be contrary to the Light; which he shall give an Account of at the day of
Judgment for every idle Word, that is spoken. Which Light shall bring every
Tongue to Confess, yea, and every Knee to bow at the Name of Jesus Which Light,
if you believe in, you shall not come into Condemnation; but come to Christ,
who is not of the World; to him, by whom it was made: but if you believe not in
the Light, this is your Condemnation, the Light, says Christ.

G. F.

This Paper passing among them from the Jury to the Justices, they presented it
to the Judge; so that when we were called before the Judge, he bid the Clerk
give me that Paper; and then asked me, Whether that Seditious Paper was mine? I
told him, If they would read it up in open Court, that I might hear it, if it
was mine, I would own it, and stand by it. He would have had me to have taken
it, and looked upon it in my own Hand: But I again desired, That it might be
read, that all the Country might hear it, and Judge, whether there was any
Sedition in it, or no: for if there were, I was willing to suffer for it. At
last, the Clerk of the Assize read it with an Audible Voice, that all the
People might hear it: and when he had done, I told them, It was my Paper, and I
would own it; and so might they too, except they would deny the Scripture: for
was not this Scripture Language, and the Words and Commands of Christ and the
Apostle, which all true Christians ought to obey? Then they let fall that
Subject: and the Judge fell upon us about our Hats again, bidding the Jailer,
Take them off; which he did, and gave them unto us: and we put them on again.
Then we asked the Judge and the Justices, What we had lain in Prison for these
nine Weeks, seeing, they now Obj^cted nothing to us, but about our Hats? And as
for putting off our Hats, I told them, That was the Honor, which God would lay
in the Dust, though they made so much ado about it; the Honor, which is of
Men, and which Men seek one of another, and is the mark of Unbelievers. For How
can ye believe, says Christ, who receive Honor one of another, and seek not
the Honor, that comes from God only? And Christ says, I receive not Honor
from Men: and all true Christians should be of his Mind. Then the Judge began
to make a great Speech, how he Represented the Lord Protector's Person; and he
had made him Lord Chief Justice of England, and sent him to come that Circuit,
etc. We desired him then, that he would do us Justice for our false
Imprisonment, which we had suffered Nine Weeks wrongfully. But instead of that,
they brought in an Indictment, that they had framed against us, such a strange
thing, and so full of Lies, that I thought, it had been against some of the
Thieves: How That we came by Force and Arms, and in an hostile manner into the
Court; who were brought, as aforesaid. I told them, It was all false: and still
we cried for Justice for our false Imprisonment; being taken up in our Journey
without Cause, by Major Ceely. Then this Peter Ceely spoke to the Judge, and
said; May it please you, My Lord, This Man (pointing to me) went aside with me
and told me, how serviceable I might be for his Design; that he could raise
Forty Thousand Men at an Hours warning, and involve the Nation into Blood, and
so bring in King Charles: and I would have aided him out of the Country, but he
would not go. And, if it please you, My Lord, I have a Witness to swear it: and
so he called upon his Witness. But the Judge not being forward to Examine the
Witness, I spoke to the Judge, and desired, That he would be pleased to let my
Mittimus be read in the face of the Court and Country, in which my Crime was
signified, for which I was sent to Prison. The Judge said, It should not be
Read: I said, It ought to be, seeing, it concerned my Liberty and my Life. The
Judge said again, It shall not be read; but I said, It ought to be read: for if
I have done any thing worthy of Death, or of Bonds, let all the Country know
it. Then seeing, they would not read it, I spoke to one of my Fellow Prisoners,
'Thou have a Copy of it, Read it up, said I. It shall not be read, said the
Judge; Jailer, said he, Take him away: I Will see, whether He or I shall be
Master. So I was taken away; and a while after called for again: And I still
cried, to have my Mittimus read up; for that signified the Cause of my
Commitment. Wherefore I again spoke to the Friend, that was my Fellow-Prisoner,
and bid him, Read it up; and he did Read it up, and the Judge, Justices and
whole Court were silent: for the People were eager to hear it. Which is as
follows: Peter Ceely, Cornwall ss.
one of the Justices of the Peace of this County, To the Keeper of His
Highness's Gaol at Lanceston, or his Lawful Deputy in that behalf, Greeting.
I Send you here-withal by the Bearers hereof, the Bodies of Edward Pyot of
Bristol, and George Fox of Drayton and Clea in Leicestershire, and William Salt
of London, which they pretend to be the Places of their Habitations, who go
under the Notion of Quakers, and acknowledge themselves to be such; who have
spread several Papers, tending to the disturbance of the Public Peace, and
cannot render any Lawful Cause of coming into these Parts, being Persons
altogether unknown, and having no Pass for their Traveling up and down the
Country, and refusing to give Sureties of their good Behavior, according to
the Law in that behalf provided, and refuse to take the Oath of Abjuration,
etc. These are therefore, in the Name of His Highness the Lord Protector, to
Will and Command you, that when the Bodies of the said Edward Pyot, George Fox
and William Salt, shall be unto you brought, you them receive, and in His
Highness's Prison aforesaid you safely keep them, until by due Course of Law
they shall be delivered. Hereof fail you not, as you will Answer the contrary
at your Perils.

Given under my Hand and Seal, at St. Ives the Eighteenth day of January, 1655.
P. Ceely.




When it was read, I spoke thus to the Judge and Justices, Thou that say,
thou art Chief Justice of England, and you, that be Justices, ye know, that if
I had put in Sureties, I might have gone, whether I pleased; and have carried
on the Design (if I had had one) which Major Ceely has charged me with: And if
I had spoken those Words to him, which he has here declared, then judge ye,
whether Bail or Mainprize could have been taken in that Case. Then turning my
Speech to Major Ceely, I said, When or where did I take thee aside? Was not thy
House full of rude People, and thou as Rude, as any of them at our Examination,
so that I asked for a Constable or some other Officer, to keep the People
civil? But if thou art my Accuser, why sit thou on the Bench? That is not a
place for thee to sit in; for Accusers do not use to sit with the Judges: Thou
ought to come down, and stand by me, and look me in the Face. Besides, I
would ask the Judge and Justices this Question; Whether or no Major Ceely is
not guilty of this Treason, which he charges against me, in Concealing it so
long, as he has done? Dos he understand his place, either as a Soldier, or a
Justice of the Peace? For he tells you here, That I went aside with him, and
told him, what a Design I had in hand, and how serviceable he might be for my
Design: That I could raise Forty Thousand Men in an Hour's time, and bring in
King Charles, and involve the Nation in Blood. He says moreover, He would have
aided me out of the Country, but I would not go; and therefore he committed me
to Prison for want of Sureties for the good Behavior, as the Mittimus
declares. Now do not you see plainly, that Major Ceely is guilty of this Plot
and Treason, that he talks of, and has made himself a Party to it, by desiring
me to go out of the Country, and demanding Bail of me; and not charging me with
this pretended Treason, till now, nor discovering it? But I deny and abhor his
Words, and am Innocent of his Devilish Design. So, that Business was let fall:
for the Judge saw clear enough, that instead of Ensnaring me, he has Ensnared
himself.

Then this Major Ceely got up again, and said; If it please you, my Lord, to
hear me: This Man struck me, and gave me such a Blow, as I never had in my
Life. At this I smiled in my Heart, and said; Major Ceely, art thou a Justice
of Peace, and a Major of a Troop of Horse, and tells the Judge here in the Face
of the Court and Country, That I (who am a Prisoner) struck thee, and gave thee
such a Blow, as thou never had the like in thy Life? What! Art thou not
ashamed? Prithee, Major Ceely, said I, where did I strike thee? and who is thy
Witness for that? who was by? He said; It was in the Castle-green, and that
Captain Bradden was standing by, when I 'struck him. I desired the Judge to let
him produce his Witness for that: And I called again upon Major Ceely to come
down from off the Bench, telling him; It was not fit, that the Accuser should
sit as Judge over the Accused. Now when I called again for his Witness, he
said; Captain Bradden was his Witness. Then I said, speak Captain Bradden,
Did thou see me give him such a Blow, and strike him, as he says? Captain
Bradden made no answer; but bowed his Head toward me. I desired him to speak
up, if he knew any such thing: but he only bowed his Head again. 'Nay, said I,
speak up, and let the Court and Country hear, and let not bowing of the Head
serve the Turn. If I have done so, let the Law be Inflicted on me; I fear not
Sufferings, nor Death it self, for I am an Innocent Man concerning all his
Charge. But Captain Bradden never Testified to it: And the Judge finding, those
Snares would not hold, cried, Take him away, Jailer: and then, when we were
taken away, he fined us Twenty Marks a piece for not putting off our Hats; and
to be kept in Prison, till we paid it: and so sent us back to the Gaol again.

At Night Captain Bradden came to see us, and Seven or Eight Justices with him,
who were very Civil to us, and told us; They did believe, neith^r the Judge,
nor any in the Court did believe those Charges, which Major Ceely had charged
upon me in the Face of the Country And Capt. Bradden said, Major Ceely had an
Intent to have taken away my Life, if he could have got another Witness. But,
said I, Captain Bradden, why did not thou witness for me, 1656. Lanceston
Prison.
or against me, seeing Major Ceely produced thee for a Witness, that thou
saw me strike him? And when I desired thee to speak either for me, or
against me, according to what thou saw or knew, thou would not speak
Why, said he, when Major Ceely and I came by you, as you were walking in the
Castle-green, he put off his Hat to you, and said, How do you Mr. Fox? your
Servant Sir. Then you said to him, Major Ceely, take heed of Hypocrisy, and of
a rotten Heart: for when came I to be thy Master, and thou my Servant? Do
Servants use to cast their Masters into Prison? This was the great Blow he
meant, that you gave him. Then I called to mind, that they walked by us, and
that he spoke to me as aforesaid; and I spoke those Words to him
beforementioned: which Hypocrisy and Rotten-heartedness he manifested openly,
when he complained or this to the Judge in open Court, and in the Face of the
Country; and would have made them all believe, that I struck him outwardly with
my Hand.

Now were we kept in Prison, and diverse People came, from far and nigh, to see
us; of whom some were People of Account in the World: for the Report of our
Trial was spread abroad, and our Boldness and Innocence in our Answers to the
Judge and Court was talked of in Town and Country. Among others, that came to
visit us, there was one Humphry, Lower, a grave, sober, ancient Man, who had
been a Justice of Peace formerly: and he was very sorry, we should lie in
Prison; telling us, how serviceable we might be, if we were out of Prison. But
we reasoned with him concerning Swearing: and having acquainted him, how they
tendered the Oath of Abjuration to us, as a Snare, because they knew, we could
not swear; we showed him, That No People could be serviceable to God, if they
disobeyed the Command of Christ: and that they, that Imprisoned us for the
Hat-Honour, which was of Men, and which Men sought for, they prisoned the Good,
and vexed and grieved the Spirit of God in themselves, which should have turned
their Minds to God. So we turned him to the Spirit of God in his Heart, and to
the Light of Christ Jesus; and he was thoroughly Convinced, and continued so to
his Death, and was very serviceable to us.

There came also to see us one Colonel Rouse, a Justice of Peace, with a great
Company with him; and he was as full or Words and Talk, as ever I heard any Man
in my Life, so that there was no speaking to him. At length I asked him,
'Whether he had ever been at School, and knew, what belonged to Questions and
Answers? (this I said, to stop him) At School! said he, yes. At School! said
the Soldiers; Does he say so to our Colonel, that is a Scholar? Then said I,
If he be so, let him be still, and receive Answers, to what he has said. Then
I was moved of the Lord so speak the Word of Life to him in God's dreadful
Power; which came so over him, that he could not open his Mouth: his Face
swelled, and was red like a Turkey; and his Lips moved, and he mumbled
something: but the People thought, he would have fallen down. I stepped to him;
and he said, He was never so in his Life before: For the Lord's Power stopped the
Evil Power and Air in him; so that he was almost choked. The Man was ever after
very Loving to Friends, and not so full of Airy Words to us; though he was a
Man full of Pride: but the Lord's Power came over him, and the rest that were
with him.

Another time there came another Officer of the Army, a very malicious, bitter
Professor, whom I had known in London: And he was full of his airy Talk also,
and spoke slightly of the Light of Christ, and against the Truth, as Colonel
Rouse had done, and against the Spirit of God being in Men, as it was in the
Apostles Days; till the Power of God, that bound the Evil in him, had almost
Choked him also, as it did Colonel Rouse: for he was so full of Evil Air, that
he could not speak; but blubbered and stuttered. But from that time, that the
Lord's Power struck him, and came over him, he was ever after more Loving to us.

Now the Assize being over, and we settled in Prison upon such a Commitment, as
we were not likely to be soon Released, we broke off from giving the Jailer
Seven Shillings a Week a piece for our Horses, and Seven Shillings a Week for
our selves; and sent our Horses out into the Country. Upon which the Jailer
grew very Wicked and Devilish, Dooms-Dale.
and put us down into Dooms-dale; a nasty, stinking Place, where they used to
put Witches and Murderers, after they were Condemned to Die. The Place was so
Noisome, that it was observed, few that went in, did ever come out again in
Health: for there was no House of Office in it; and the Excrements of the
Prisoners, that from time to time had been put there, had not been carried out
(as we were told) for many Years. So that it was all like Mire, and in some
Places to the Top of the Shoes in Water and Piss; and he would not let us
Cleanse it, neither would he let us have Beds, or Straw to lie on. At Night
some friendly People of the Town brought us a Candle, and a little Straw; and
we went to burn a little of our Straw to take away the Stink. The Thieves lay
over our Heads, and the Head-Gaoler lay in a Room by them over our Heads also.
Now it seems, the Smoke went up into the Room, where the Jailer lay: which put
him into such a Rage, that he took the Pots of Excrements of the Thieves, and
poured them down through a Hole upon our Heads in Dooms-dale; so that we were
so bespattered with the Excrements, that we could not touch our selves, nor one
another. And the Stink Increased upon us; so that what with Stink, and what
with Smoke, we had like to have been choked and smothered in Dooms-dale: For we
had the Stink under our Feet before; but now we had it on our Heads and Backs
also: And he having quenched our Straw with the Filth he poured down, had made
a great Smother in the Place. Moreover he railed on us most hideously, calling
us Hatchet-faced Dogs, and such strange Names, as we had never heard of. In
this manner were we fain to stand all Night, for we could not sit down; the
Place was so full of filthy Excrements: And a great while he kept us after this
manner, before he would let us cleanse it, or suffer us to have any Victuals
brought in, but what we got through the Grate. One time a Lass brought us a
little Meat; and he Arrested her for breaking his House, and sued her in the
Town-Court for breaking the Prison: and a great deal of Trouble he put the
Young-woman to; whereby others were so discouraged, that we had much a do to
get Water, or Drink or Victuals. Near this Time we sent for a Young-woman, one
Ann Downer from London, (that could write, 1656. Lanceston Doomsdale
and take things well in Shorthand,) to buy and dress our Meat for us; which
she was very willing to, it being also upon her Spirit to come to us in the
Love of God: and she was very serviceable to us.

This Head-Gaoler, we were Informed, had been a Thief, and was burnt both in
the Hand, and in the Shoulder: His Wife too had been burnt in the Hand. The
Vnder-Gaoler had been burnt both in the Hand, and in the Shoulder; and his Wife
had been burnt in the Hand also: And Colonel Bennet, who was a Baptist-Teacher,
having purchased the Gaol and Lands belonging to the Castle, had placed this
Head-Gaoler therein. The Prisoners, and some wild People would be talking of
Spirits, that haunted Doomsdale, and walked there, and how many had died in it;
thinking perhaps, to terrify us therewith. But I told them and Friends, That if
all the Spirits and Devils in Hell were there, I was over them in the Power of
God, and feared no such thing: for Christ our Priest, would sanctify the Walls
and the House to us, he who bruised the Head of the Devil. The Priest was to
cleanse the Plague out of the Walls of the House under the Law, which Christ,
our Priest, ended; who sanctifies both inwardly and outwardly the Walls of the
House, and the Walls of the Heart, and all things to his People.

By this time the General Quarter Sessions drew nigh; and the Jailer still
carrying himself basely and wickedly toward us, we drew up our Sufferings, and
sent it to the Sessions at Bodmin: upon the reading of which, the Justices gave
Order; That Doomsdale-Door should be opened, and that we should have liberty to
Cleanse it, and to buy our Meat in the Town. We sent up a Copy also of our
Sufferings to the Protector, setting forth, how we were taken and Committed by
Major Ceely; and how we were abused by Capt. Keat as aforesaid, and the rest in
Order: Whereupon the Protector sent down an Order to Capt. Fox, Governor of
Pendennis-Castle, to Examine the Matter about the Soldiers abusing us, and
striking me. There were at that time many of the Gentry of the Country at the
Castle: and Capt. Keat's Kinsman, that struck me, was sent for up before them,
and much Threatened. They told him, That if I should change my Principle, I
might take the Extremity of the Law against him, and might recover sound
Damages of him. Capt. Keat also was checked, for suffering the Prisoners under
his Charge to be abused. This was of great Service in the Country: for
afterward Friends might have spoken in any Market or Steeple-house
thereabouts, and none would meddle with them. I understood, that Hugh Peter's,
who was one of the Protector's Chaplains, told him; They could not do George
Fox a greater Service for the spreading of his Principles in Cornwall, than to
Imprison him there. And indeed, my Imprisonment there was of the Lord, and for
his Service in those parts: For after the Assizes were over, and it was known,
we were likely to continue Prisoners; several Friends from most parts of the
Nation, came into the Country to visit us. And those parts of the West were
very dark Countries at that time: But the Lord's Light and Truth brake forth,
and shined over all; and many were turned from Darkness to the Light, and from
Satan's Power unto God. And many were moved to go to the Steeple Houses; and
several were sent to Prison to us: and a great Convincement there began to be
in the Country. For now we had Liberty to come out, and to walk in the
Castle-Green; and diverse People came to us on the First-days, to whom we
declared the Word of Life: and great Service we had among them, and many were
turned to God, here and there, up and down the Country; but a great Rage got up
in the Priests and Professors against the Truth and us. One of the envious
Professors had gathered together many Scripture-Sentences, to prove, That we
ought to put off our Hats to the People; and he invited the Town of Lanceston
to come into the Castle-Yard to hear him read them: Amongst other Instances,
that he there brought, one was; That Saul bowed to the Witch of Endor. When he
had done, we got a little Liberty (whether the Jailer would or no) to speak;
and we showed both him and the People, That Saul was gone from God, and had
disobeyed God, like them, when he went to the Witch of Endor: That neither the
Prophets, nor Christ, nor the Apostles ever taught People to bow to a Witch.
The Man went away with his rude People; but some of the People staid with us:
and we showed them; That this was not Gospel-Instructions, to teach People to
bow to a Witch. For now People began to be affected with the Truth, and now the
Devil's Rage increased; so that we were in great dangers many times.

One time there came a Soldier to us; and one of our Friends was admonishing
of him, and exhorting him to Sobriety, etc. and I saw him begin to draw his
Sword at him. Whereupon I stepped to him, and told him, What a shame it was to
offer to draw his Sword upon a naked Man, and a Prisoner; and how unfit and
unworthy he was to carry such a Weapon: and that, if he should have offered
such a thing to some Men, they would have taken his Sword from him, and have
broken it to pieces. So he was ashamed, and went his way; and the Lord's Power
preserved us.

Another time, about the Eleventh Hour at Night, the Jailer being half-drunk,
came and told me, That he had gotten a Man now to dispute with me (this was,
when we had leave to go a little into the Town:) As soon as he spoke those
Words, I felt, there was Mischief intended to my Body. All that Night, and the
next day I lay down on a Grass-plat to slumber, and I felt something still
about my Body; and I started up, and struck at it in the Power of the Lord, and
yet still it was about my Body. Then I arose, and walked into the Castle-green;
and the Vnder-Keeper came to me, and told me, There was a Maid would speak with
me in the Prison. I felt a Snare in his Words too, therefore I went not into
the Prison; but went to the Grate, and looked in: and there I saw a Man, that
was lately brought to Prison for being a Conjurer; and he had a naked Knife in
his Hand. So I spoke to him, and he threatened to cut my Chaps (as his
Expression was;) but he being within the Gaol, could not come at me: This was
the Gaoler's great Disputant. I went soon after into the Gaoler's House, and
found him at Breakfast; and he had then gotten his Conjurer out with him: So I
told the Jailer, his Plot was discovered. Then he got up from the Table, and
cast his Napkin away in a Rage; and I left them, and went away to my Chamber:
for at this time we were out of Doomsdale. At the time the Jailer had said,
1656. Lanceston Gaol.
the Dispute should be, I went down and walked in the Court (the place
appointed) till about the Eleventh Hour; but no Body came: then I went up to my
Chamber again; and after a while I heard one call for me. I stepped to the
Stairs-head; and there I saw the Gaoler's Wife upon the Stairs, and the
Conjurer at the bottom of the Stairs, holding his Hand behind his Back, and in
a great Rage. I asked him; Man, what have thou in thy Hand behind thy Back?
Pluck thy Hand before thee, said I; Let Us see thy Hand, and what thou have in
it? Then in a Rage he plucked forth his Hand with a naked Knife in it. Then I
showed the Gaoler's Wife the wicked Design of her Husband and her against me:
for this was the Man they had brought to dispute of the things of God. But the
Lord discovered their Plot, and prevented their Evil Design; and they both
raged, and the Conjurer threatened. Then I was moved of the Lord to speak
sharply to him in the dreadful Power of the Lord: and the Lord's Power came
over him, and bound him down; so that he never after durst appear before me, to
speak unto me. I saw, it was the Lord alone, that did preserve me out of their
bloody Hands: for the Devil had a great Enmity to me, and stirred up his
Instruments to seek my hurt. But the Lord prevented them; and my Heart was
filled with Thanksgivings and Praises unto him.

Now while I was exercised with People of diverse sorts, that came some out of
good will to visit us, some out of an envious, carping Mind to wrangle and
dispute with us, and some out of Curiosity to see us; Edward Pyot, who before
his Convincement had been a Captain in the Army, and had a good Understanding
in the Laws and Rights of the People, being sensible of the Injustice and Envy
of Judge Glyn to us at our Trial, and willing to lay the Weight thereof upon
him, and make him sensible thereof also, writ an Epistle to him, on behalf of
us all, which was thus; and thus directed: To John Glyn, Chief Justice of
England.
Friend,
WE are Freemen of England, Freeborn; our Rights and Liberties are according
to Law, and ought to be defended by it: And therefore with thee, by whose Hand
we have so long and yet do suffer, let us a little plainly reason concerning
thy Proceedinos against us, whether they have been according to Law, and
agreeable to thy Duty and Office, as Chief Minister of the Law, or Justice of
England? And in Meekness and Lowliness abide; that the Witness of God in thy
Conscience may be heard to speak and judge in this Matter: For Thou and We must
all appear before the Judgment Seat of Christ, that every one may receive,
according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad. Therefore, Friend,
in Moderation and Soberness Weigh, what is herein laid before thee.

In the Afternoon, before we were brought before thee at the Assize at
Lanceston, thou did cause diverse Scores of our Books to be violently taken
from us by Armed Men, without due Process of Law; which Books being perused (to
see, if any thing in them could have been found to have laid to our Charge, who
were Innocent Men: and them upon our Legal Issue) thou have detained from us to
this very day. Now, our Books are our Goods, and our Goods are our Property;
and our Liberty it is to have and enjoy our Property: and of our Liberty and
Property the Law is the defense; which says, No Freeman shall be disseized of
his Freehold, Liberties or free Customs, etc. nor any way otherwise destroyed:
Nor we shall not pass upon him, but by lawful Judgment of his Peers, or by the
Law of the Land; Magna Charta, cap. 29. Now Friend, Consider, Is not the taking
away of a Man's Goods violently, by force of Arms, as aforesaid, contrary to
the Law of the Land? Is not the K^eping of them so taken away, a disseizing him
of his Property, and a destroying of it and his Liberty, yea, his very Being,
so far as the Invading of the Guard the Law sets about him, is in order
thereunto? Calls not the Law this, a Destroying of a Man? Is there any more
than one common Guard or Defense to Property, Liberty and Life, viz. the Law?
And can this Guard be broken on the former, (viz. Property and Liberty;) and
the Latter (viz. Life) be sure? Does not he, that makes an Invasion upon a
Man's Property and Liberty (which he does, who contrary to Law, which is the
Guard, acts against either) make an Invasion upon a Man's Life; since that
which is the Ground of the One, is also of the Other? If a Penny, or
Penny's-worth be taken from a Man contrary to Law, may not by the same Rule all
a Man has, be taken away? If the Bond of the Law be broken upon a Man's
Property, may it not on the same ground be broken upon his Person? And by the
same Reason, as it is broken on One Man, may it not be broken upon all, since
the Liberty and Property, and Beings of all Men under a Government are
Relative, a Communion of Wealth, as the Members in the Body, but one Guard and
Defense to all, the Law? One Man cannot be injured therein, but it redounds to
all. Are not such things in order to the Subversion and Dissolution of
Government? Where there is no Law, what is become of Government? And of what
value is the Law made, when the Ministers thereof break it at pleasure upon
Men's Properties, Liberties and Persons? Can thou Clear thy self of these
things, as to us? To that of God in thy Conscience, which is Just, do I speak:
Have thou acted, like a Minist^r, the Chief Minister of the Law, who have taken
our Goods, and yet detainest them, without so much as going by lawful Warrant,
grounded upon due Information, which in this our Case thou could not have;
for none had perused them, whereby to give thee Information? Shoul^'st thou
exercise Violence and Force of Arms on Prisoners Goods, in their
Prison-Chamber, instead of proceeding Orderly and Legally, which thy Place
calls upon thee above any Man, to tender, defend and maintain against the
other, and to preserve entire the Guard of every Man's Being, Liberty, Life and
Livelihood? Should thou, whore Duty it is to punish the Wrong-doer, do wrong
thy self? Who ought to see the Law be kept and observed, break the Law, and
turn aside the due Administration thereof? Surely, from Thee, considering Thou
art Chief Justice of England, other things were expected both by Us, and by the
People of this Nation.

And Friend, when we were brought before thee, and stood upon our Legal Issue,
and no Accuser, or Accusation came in against us; as to what we had been
wrongfully Imprisoned, and in Prison detained for the Space of Nine Weeks,
should not thou have caused us to have been Acquitted by Proclamation? Says
not the Law so? Ought thou not to have Examined the Cause of our Commitment?
And there not appearing a lawful Cause, ought thou not to have discharged
us? Is it not the Substance of thy Office and Duty, To do Justice according so
the Law and Custom of England? Is not this the End of the Administration of the
Law? of the General Assizes? of the Gaol-Deliveries? of the Judges going the
Circuits? H^st not thou, by doing otherwise, acted Contrary to all these, and
to Magna Charta? which, Cap. 29 says, " We shall sell to no Man, we shall
Deny, or Defer to no Man either Justice or Right: Have thou not both Deferred
and Denied to us, who had been so long oppressed, this Justice and Right? And
when of thee Justice we demanded, sayd'st thou not, " If we would be uncovered,
thou would hear us, and do us Justice? -- We shall sell to no Man, we shall
deny or defer to no Man either Justice or Right, says Magn. Chart. as
aforesaid: Again; " We have commanded all our Justices, that they shall from
henceforth do even Law, and Execution of Right to all our Subjects, Rich and
Poor, without having Regard to any Man's Person; and without letting to do
Right for any Letters or Commandments, which may come to them from Us, or from
any other, or by any other Cause, etc upon Pain to be at our Will, Body, Lands
and Goods, to do therewith, as shall please us, in case they do contrary, says
Stat. 20. Edw. 3. cap. 1. Again, " Ye shall swear, that ye shall do even Law
and Execution of Right to all, Rich and Poor, without having regard to any
Person; and that ye deny to no Man Common Right by the King 's Letters, nor
none other Man's, nor for none other Cause. And in Case any Letter come to you
contrary to the Law, that ye do nothing by such Letter; but Certify the King
thereof, and go forth to do the Law notwithstanding those Letters. And in case
ye be from henceforth found in default in any of the Points aforesaid, ye shall
be at the King 's Will of Body, Lands and Goods, thereof to be done, as shall
please him: Says the Oath, appointed by the Statute to be taken by all the
Judges, Stat. 18. Edw. 3. But none of these, nor none other Law has such an
Expression, or Condition in it, as this, viz. Provided, he will put off his Hat
to you, or be Uncovered: Nor does the Law of God so say, or that your Persons
be respected; but the contrary. From whence then comes this New Law, If ye will
be uncovered, I will hear you, and do you Justice? This hearing Complaint of
Wrong, this doing of Justice, Upon Condition; wherein lies the Equity and the
Reasonableness of that? When were these Fundamental Laws Repealed, which were
the Issue of much Blood and War; which to uphold, cost the Miseries and Blood
of the late Wars, that we shall now be heard, as to Right, and have Justice
done us but upon Condition, and that too such a Trifling one, as the Putting
off the Hat? Does thy saying so, who art Commanded, as aforesaid, Repeal them,
and make them of none Effect, and all the Miseries undergone, and the Blood
shed for them of old, and of late Years? Whether it be so or no indeed, and to
the Nation, thou have made it so to Us; to whom thou have denied the Justice of
our Liberty (when we were before thee, and no Accuser, nor Accusation came in
against us) and the Hearing of the Wrong done to us, who are Innocent; and the
Doing us Right. And Bonds have thou cast, and continued upon us until this Day,
under an Unreasonable and Cruel Jailer, for not performing That thy Condition,
for Conscience sake. But think thou, that this thine own Conditional Justice
makes void the Law? or can it do so? or absolve thee before God or Man? or
acquit the Penalty mentioned in the Laws aforesaid? unto which, have thou not
Consented and Sworn? viz. And in case ye be from henceforth found in Default,
in any of the points aforesaid, ye shall be at the King 's Will, of Body, Lands
and Goods, thereof to be done, as shall please him. And is not Thy Saying, If
ye will be uncovered (or put off your Hats) I will hear you, and do you
Justice; and (because we could not put them off for Conscience Sake) Thy
denying us Justice, and refusing to hear us, as to Wrong (who had so unjustly
suffered) a Default in thee against the very Essence of those Laws, yea, an
Overthrow thereof, for which things sake (being of the highest Importance to
the well-being of Men) so just, so equal, so necessary, those Laws were made,
and all the Provisions therein? To make a Default in any one Point of which
Provisions, exposes to the said Penalty. Do not thou by this time see, where
thou art? Art thou sure, thou shall never be made to understand and feel the
Justice thereof? Is thy Seat so high, and thy Fence so great, and art thou so
certain of thy Time and Station, above all that have gone before thee, whom
Justice has Cut down, and given them their due, that thou shall never be
called to an Account, nor with its long and sure stroke be reached? Deceive not
thy self, God is come nearer to Judgment, than the Workers of Iniquity in this
Age Imagine; who persecute and evil-intreat those, that witness the Just and
Holy One, for their Witnessing of him, who is come to Reign for ever and ever.
Says he not, he will be a swift Witness against the false Swearers? God is not
mocked.

Surely, Friend, that must needs be a very great Offense, which deprives a Man
of Justice, of being heard as to Wrong, of the Benefit of the Law, and of those
Laws afore-rehearsed; to defend the Justice and Equity of which, a Man has
adventured his Blood, and all that is Dear to him. But to stand Covered (or
with the Hat on) in Conscience to the Command of the Lord, is made by thee such
an Offense (which is none in Law) and rendered upon us (who are Innocent,
serving the Living God) effectual to deny us Justice; though the Laws of God,
and of Man, and the Oath, and Equity, and Reason says the Contrary, and on it
pronounces such a Penalty. If ye will be Uncovered (Uncovered, said thou) I
will hear you, and do you Justice: But Justice we had not, nor were we heard,
because Jesus Christ, who is the Higher Power, the Lawgiver of his People, in
our Consciences Commanded us not to Respect Persons; whom to Obey we choose
rather than Man. And for our Obedience unto him have thou cast us into Prison,
and continuest us there, till this very Day; having showed us neither Law for
it, nor Scripture, nor Instances of either, nor Example of Heathens or others.
Friend, Come down to that of God, that is Just in thee, and Consider, was ever
such a thing, as this, heard of in this Nation? What Is become of Seriousness,
of true Judgment, and of Righteousness! An unrighteous Man, standing before
thee with his Hat off, shall be heard; but an Innocent Man, appearing with his
Hat on in Conscience to the Lord, shall neither be heard, nor have Justice. Is
not this regarding of Persons contrary to the Laws aforesaid, and the Oath, and
the Law of God? Understand, and Judge: Did we not own Authority and Government
oftentimes before the Court? Did not Thou say in the Court, Thou wast glad to
hear so much from us of our owning Magistracy? Pleaded we not to the
Indictment, though it was such a newfound One, as England never heard of
before? Came we not, when thou sentest for us? Went we not, when thou bid'st us
go? And are we not still Prisoners at thy Command, and at thy Will? If the Hat
had been such an Offense to thee, Could not thou have caused it to have been
taken off, when thou heard'st us so often declare, we could not do it in
Conscience to the Commands of the Lord; and that for that Cause we forbore it,
not in Contempt of thee, or of Authority, nor in Disrespect to thine, or any
Man's Person: (For we said, We honored all Men in the Lord, and owned
Authority, which was a Terror to Evildoers, and a Praise to them that do well;
And our Souls were subject to the Higher Powers for Conscience Sake) as thou
caused'st them to be taken off, and to be kept so, when thou called'st the Jury
to find us Transgressors without a Law? What ado have thou made to take away
the Righteousnes^ of the Righteous from him, and to cause us to suffer further,
whom thou knew, to have been so long wrongfully in Prison contrary to Law?
Is not Liberty of Conscience a Natural Right? Had there been a Law in this
Case, and we bound up in our Consciences, that we could not have obeyed it, was
not Liberty of Conscience there to take place? For where the Law says not
against, there needs no Plea of Liberty of Conscience: But the Law have we not
offended; yet in thy Will have thou caused, and do thou yet cause us to
suffer for our Consciences, where the Law requires no such thing: and yet for
Liberty of Conscience has all the Blood been spilt, and the Miseries of the
late Wars undergone, and (as the Protector says) this Government undertaken,
to preserve it; and a Natural Right, he says, it is; and he that would have
it, he says, ought to give it. And if it be a natural Right, as is undeniable;
then to attempt to force it, or to punish a Man for not doing contrary to it,
is to act against Nature: which as it is unreasonable, so it is the same, as to
offer Violence to a Man's Life. And what an Offense that is in the Law, thou
know; and how, by the Common Law of England, all Acts, Agreements and Laws,
that are against Nature, are mere Nullities: and all the Judges cannot make one
Case to be Law, that is against Nature. But put the Case, our standing with our
Hats on, had been an Offense in Law, and we wilfully, and in Contempt, and not
out of Conscience had stood so (which we deny, as aforesaid) yet that is not a
ground, wherefore we should be denied Justice, or to be heard, as to the Wrong
done to us. If ye will not Offend in one Case, I will do you Justice in
another: This is not the Language of the Law, or of Justice, which distributes
to every one their Right; Justice, to whom Justice is due; Punishment, to whom
Punishment is due. A Man who does Wrong, may also have Wrong done to him; shall
he not have Right, wherein he is wronged unless he Right him, whom he has
wronged? The Law says not so: but the Wrong-doer is to suffer, and the
Sufferer of Wrong to be righted. Is not otherwise to do, a Denying, a Letting,
or Stopping of Even Law, and Execution of Justice, and a bringing under the
Penalties aforesaid? Mind and Consider.

And should Thou have Accused, when no Witness appeared against us, as in
the particulars of striking Peter Ceely, and Dispersing Books (as thou said)
against Magistracy and Ministry, with which thou did falsely Accuse one of u^?
says not the Law, The Judge ought not to be the Accuser? much less a false
Accuser. And wast not thou such an one, in Affirming, That he dispersed Books
against Magistracy and Ministry, when as the Books were Violently taken out of
our Chamber, (as has been said) undispersed by him, or any of us? Nor did
thou make it appear in one particular, wherein those Books, thou so Violently
did cause to be taken away, were against Magistracy or Ministry? or gave
one Instance, or Reply, when he denied, what thou charged'st therein; and spoke
to thee to bring forth those Books, and make thy Charge appear. Is not the
Sword of the Magistrate of God to pass upon such Evil-Doing? And according to
the Administration of the Law, ought not Accusations to be by way of
Indictment, wherein the Offense is to be charged, and the Law expressed,
against which it is? Can there be an Issue without an Indictment? Or can an
Indictment be found, before Proof be made of the Offense charged therein? And
have not thou herein gone contrary to the Law, and the Administration thereof,
and thy Duty, as a Judge? What just cause of Offense gave George Fox to thee,
when, upon thy producing a Paper concerning Swearing, sent by him (as thou
said) to the Grand Jury, and requiring him to say, Whether it was his
Handwriting? he answered, Read it up before the Country; and when he heard it
read, if it were his, he would own it? Is it not equal, and according to Law,
that what a Man is charged with before the Country, should be read in the
hearing of him and of the Country? When a Paper is delivered out of a Man's
Hand, Alterations may be made in it to his Prejudice, which, on a sudden
looking over it, may not presently be discerned; but by hearing it read up, may
be better understood, whether any such Alterations have been made therein?
Could thou in Justice have expected, or required him otherwise to do?
Considering also, that he was not unsensible, how much he had suffered already,
being Innocent; and what Endeavors there were used, to cause him further to
suffer? Was not, what he said, as aforesaid, a plain and single Answer, and
sufficient in the Law? Though (as has been demonstrated) contrary to Law thou
did act, and to thy Office, in being his Accuser therein, and producing the
Paper against him. And in his Liberty it was, whether he would have made thee
any Answer at all, to what thou did exhibit, or demand out of the due Course
of Law: for to the Law Answer is to be made; not to thy Will. Wherefore then
wast thou so filled with Rage and Fury upon that his Reply? Calmly, and in the
Fear of the Lord consider: Wherefore did thou Revile him, particularly with
the reproachful Names of Juggler, and Prevaricator? Wherein did he juggle?
wherein did he prevaricate? Wherefore did thou use such Threatening Language,
and such Menacings to him and us, saying, Thou would Ferk us, with such
like? Does not the Law forbid Reviling, and Rage, and Fury, and Threatening and
Menacing of Prisoners? Soberly mind; Is this to act like a Judge, or a Man? Is
not this Transgression? Is not the Sword of the Magistrate of God to pass on
this as Evil-doing, which the righteous Law condemns, and the Higher Power is
against, which judges for God? Take heed, what ye do; for ye judge not for
Man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the Judgment. Wherefore now, let the
Fear of the Lord be upon you; take heed, and do it: For there is no Iniquity
with the Lord our God, nor Respect of Persons, nor taking of Gifts, said
Jehoshaphat to the Judges of Judah. Pride, and Fury, and Passion, and Rage, and
Reviling, and Threatening is not the Lord's: It, and the Principle, out of which
it springs, is for Judgment, and must come under the Sword of the Magistrate of
God; and it is of an ill Savor, especially such an Expression, as to threaten
to Ferk us. Is not such a Saying more becoming a Pedant, or Schoolmaster with
his Rod or Ferula in his Hand, than Thee, who art the Chief Justice of the
Nation, who sit in the highest Seat of Judgment; who ought to give a
good Example, and so to Judge, that others may hear and fear? Weigh it soberly,
and Consider, Does not threatening Language demonstrate an Inequality, and
Partiality in him, who sits as Judge? Is it not a Deterring of a Prisoner from
standing to, and pleading the Innocence of his Cause? Provides not the Law
against it? Says it not, That Irons, and all other Bonds shall be taken from
the Prisoner, that he may plead without Amazement, and with such freedom of
Spirit, as if he were not a Prisoner? But when he, who is to judge according to
the Law, shall beforehand threaten, and Menace the Prisoner contrary to the
Law, how can the Mind of the Prisoner be free, to plead his Innocence before
him? or expect Equal Judgment from him, who, before he hears him, threatens,
what he will do unto him? Is not this the Case between Thee and Us? Is not this
the Measure we have received at thy Hands? Have thou herein dealt according to
Law? or to thy Duty? Or as thou would be done unto? Let that of God in thy
Conscience Judge.

And did not thou say, There was a Law for putting off the Hat; and that
thou would show a Law? and did not thou often so express thy self? But
did thou produce any Law? or show, where that Law might be found? or any
Judicial President, or in what King's Reign, when we so often desired it of
thee; having never heard of, or known any such Law, by which thou did Judge
us? Was not, what we demanded of thee, reasonable and just? Was that a Savoury
Answer, and according to Law, which thou gave us, viz. I am not to carry the
Law Books at my Back, up and down the Country; I am not to Instruct you? Was
ever such an Expression heard before these days, to come out of a Judge's
Mouth? Is he not to be of Counsel in the Law for the Prisoner, and to Instruct
him therein? Is it not for this cause, that the Prisoner, in many Cases, is not
allowed Counsel by the Law? In all Courts of Justice in this Nation, has it
not been known so to have been? And to the Prisoner has not this been often
declared, when he has demanded Counsel, alleging his Ignorance in the Law, by
reason of which his Cause might miscarry, though it were righteous, viz. The
Court is of Counsel for you? Ought not he, that judges in the Law, to be
Expert in the Law? Could thou not tell, by what Act of Parliament it was
made, or by what Judicial President, or in what King's Reign, or when it was
adjudged so by the Common Law (which are all the Grounds, the Law of England
has) had there been such a Law; though the words of the Law thou could not
remember? Surely, To Inform the Prisoner, when he desired it, especially as to
a Law, which was never heard of, by which he proceeds to Judge him, that he may
know, what Law it is, by which he is to be Judged, becomes him who Judges for
God: for so the Law was read to the Jews, by which they were to be Judged, yea,
every Sabbath Day; this was the Commandment of the Lord. But instead thereof to
say, I am not to carry the Law Books at my Back up and down the Country; I am
not to Instruct you: To say, There is a Law, and to say, Thou will show it; and
yet not to show it, nor to tell, where it is to be found; Consider, whether it
be Consistent with Savouriness, or with Truth, or Justice?

Have not thy whole Proceedings against us made it evidently to appear, that
thy desire was to Cause us to suffer, not to deliver us, who, being Innocent,
suffered; to have us aspersed and reproached before the Country, not to have
our Innocence cleared and vindicated? Does not thy taking away our Books, as
aforesaid, and the perusing of them in such haste before our Trial, and thy
Accusing us with something, which thou said was contained in them, make it
to appear, that Matter was sought out of them, where-withal to Charge us, when
the Et Caetera-Warrant would not stand in Law, by which we stood Committed, and
were then upon our Delivery, according to due Course of Law? Does it not
further appear, by thy refusing to take from our Hands a Copy of the strange Et
Caetera-Warrant, by which we were Committed, and of the Paper, for which we
were Apprehended, to read it, or cause it to be read; that so our long
Sufferings by reason of both, might be looked into, and weighed in the Law,
whether Just or Righteous, and the Country might as well see our Innocence, and
Sufferings without a Cause, and the manner of Dealing with us, as to hear such
Reports, as went of us, as great Offenders, when we called upon thee often so
to do, and which thou ought to have done, and said, Thou would do, but
did it not; nor so much as took notice before the Country, that we had been
falsely Imprisoned, and had wrongfully suffered? But what might Asperse and
Charge us, thou brought in thy self, contrary to Law, and did call to
have us charged therewith. Is not this further manifest, in that thou did
cause us on a sudden to be withdrawn, and the Petty-Jury to be called in with
their Verdict; whereupon Peter Ceely's falsely accusing George Fox, with telling
him privately of a Design, and persuading him to join therein, It was by G. Fox
made so Clear to be a manifest Falsehood, and so plainly to be perceived, that
the Cause of our Sufferings was not any Evil we had done, or Law that we had
transgressed, but Malice and Wickedness? And is it not abundantly clear from
thy not permitting us to Answer, and clear our selves of the many foul Slanders
charged upon us in the New-found-Indictment, of which no Proof was made? but
when we were Answering thereunto, and Clearing our selves thereof, thou did
stop us, saying; Thou mindest not those things, but only the putting off the
Hat: when as, before the Country, the Newfound Indictment charged us with
those things, and the Petty-Jury brought in their Verdict, Guilty of the
Trespasses and Contempts mentioned therein; of which (except as to the Hat) not
one Witness or Evidence was produced; and as to the Hat, not any Law, or
judicial President, upon the Transgression of which all legal Indictments are
only to be grounded? Now the Law seeks not for Causes, whereby to make the
Innocent to suffer; but helps him to Right, who suffers Wrong, and relieveth
the Oppressed, and searches out the Matter, Whether that, of which a Man
stands Accused, be so or no; seeking Judgment, and hastening Righteousness: and
it says, The Innocent and the Righteous slay thou not. But whether thou have
done so to us, or the contrary, let the Witness of God in thee search and
judge; as these thy Fruits do also make manifest.

And Friend, Consider, how abominably wicked, and how highly to be abhorred,
denied and witnessed against, and how Contrary to the Laws such a Proceeding
is, as to Charge a Man with many Offenses in an Indictment, which they, who
draw the Indictment, they who Prosecute, and they who find the Bill, know to be
false, and to be set in purposely to Reproach, and Wound his good Name; whom
with some small Matter, which they can prove, they Charge and Indict; as is the
Common Practice at this day. Prove but one particular Charge in the Indictment,
and it must stand (say they) for a True Bill; though there be never so many
Falsehoods and Lies therein, on set purpose to wrong him, who is maliciously
prosecuted: This is known to the Judges; and almost to every Man, who has to
do with, and attends their Courts. How contrary is this to the End and
Righteousness of the Law, which Clears the Innocent, and Condemns the Guilty,
and condemns not the Righteous with the Wicked! Much it is Cried out of; but
what Reformation is there thereof? How else shall Clerks of Assize, and other
Clerks of Courts fill up their Bags (out of which perhaps their Master must
have a secret Consideration) and be heightened in Pride and Impudence; that even
in open Court they take upon them to Check and Revile Men without Reproof, when
a few Lines might serve instead of an hundred? How else shall the Spirit, that
is in Men, that lusts unto Envy, Malice, Strife and Contention, be cherished
and nourished to feed the Lawyers and Dependents on Courts, with the Bread of
Men's Children, and the Ruin of their Families, to maintain their long Suits and
malicious Contentions! For a Judge to say, I mind not these things; I Will not
hear you clear your selves, of what you are falsely accused of: One thing I
mind in your Charge, the rest are but Matter of Form, set there to render you
such wicked Men before the Country, as the thing, that is to be proved against
you, is not sufficient to make out. Oh, abominable Wickedness, and perverting
of the Righteous End of the Law, which is so careful and tender of every Man's
Peace and Innocence! How is the Law in the Administration thereof adulterated
by the Lawyers, as the Scriptures are mangled by the Priests! And that which
was made to preserve the Righteous, and to punish the Wicked, perverted to the
Punishing of the Righteous, and the Preserving of the Wicked! An Eye for an
Eye; a Tooth for a Tooth; Life for Life; Burning for Burning; Wound for Wound;
a Stripe for a Stripe; he that Accuses a Man falsely, to suffer the same, as
he should have suffered, who was falsely Accused, if he had been guilty; This
says the righteous Law of God: which is agreeable to that of God in every
Man's Conscience. Are not such Forms of Iniquity to be denied, which are so
contrary to the Law of God and Man? Which serve for the gendering of Strife,
and the kindling of Contention? And of this Nature was not that, with which
thou did cause us to be Indicted? And this Form did not thou uphold, in
not permitting us to Answer to the many foul Slanders therein; saying, Those
things thou mindest not? Will not the Wrath of God be revealed from Heaven
against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men, who hold the Truth in
Unrighteousness; who are so far from the Power of Godliness, that they have not
the Form, but the Form of Iniquity, which is set up and held up instead of, and
as a Law, to overthrow and destroy the Righteousness of the Righteous, and so
to shut him up, as by the Law he can never get out? Is not the Cry, think
thou, gone up? It is time for thee, to set to thine Hand, O Lord, for thine
Enemies have made void thy Law! Draws not the hour nigh? Fills not up the
Measure of Iniquity apace? Surely the day is coming, and hastneth. Warned ye
have been from the presence, and by the Mouth of the Lord; and clear will he
be, when he comes to Judgment, and upright, when he gives Sentence. That of
God in every one of your Consciences shall so to him bear witness and confess,
and your Mouths shall be stopped, and before your Judge shall ye be silent,
when he shall divide you your Portion, and render unto you according to your
Deeds. Therefore, whilst Thou have Time, prize it, and Repent: for verily, Our
God shall come, and shall not keep silence; a Fire shall devour before him, and
it shall be very Tempestuous round about him. He shall call to the Heavens from
above, and to the Earth, that he may judge his People; and the Heavens shall
declare his Righteousness: for God is Judge himself. Consider this, ye that
forget God, lest he tear you in pieces, and there be none to deliver.

And Friend, should thou have given Judgment against us, (wherein thou did
fine us Twenty Marks a piece, and Imprisonment till Payment) without causing
us, being Prisoners, to be brought before thee, to hear the Judgment, and to
Move, what we had to say in Arrest of Judgment? Is not this contrary to the
Law, as is manifest to those, who understand the Proceedings thereof? Is not
the Prisoner to be called, before Judgment be given? And is not the Indictment
to be read? and the Verdict thereupon? And is not Liberty to be given him to
move in Arrest of Judgment? And if it be a Just Exception in the Law, ought not
there to be an Arrest of Judgment? For the Indictment may not be drawn up
according to Law, and may be wrong placed, and the Offense charged therein may
not be a Crime in Law; or the Jury may have been corrupted, or menaced, or set
on by some of the Justices; with other Particulars, which are known to be legal
and just Exceptions. And the Judgment ought to be in the Prisoner's hearing,
not behind his Back; as if the Judge were so Conscious of the Error thereof,
that he dares not give it to the Face of the Prisoner. But these Privileges of
the Law, this Justice, we (who had so long, and so greatly suffered contrary to
Law) received not, nor could have at thy Hands; no, not so much as a Copy or
Sight of that long and Newfound Indictment (which in England was never heard
of before, nor that the Matter contained therein was an Offense in Law, nor
ever was there any Law, or judicial President, that made it so;) though Two
Friends of ours in our Names and Behalfs that Night, and the next day, and the
day following often desired it of the Clerk of the Assize, and his Assistant
and Servants: but it they could not have, nor so much liberty, as to see it.
And it is like, it was not unknown, or unperceived by thee, that, had we been
Called, as we ought to have been, or had known, when it was to be given, Three
or Four Words might have made a sufficient, legal Arrest of the Judgment given
on that Newfound Indictment, and the Verdict thereupon. Therefore, as our
Liberties, who are Innocent, have not (in thy Account) been worth the minding,
and esteemed fit for nothing, but to be trampled under foot, and destroyed; so,
if we find fault, with what thou have done, thou have taken care, that no Door
be left open to us in the Law, but a Writ of Error: The Consideration whereof,
and the Judgment to be given thereon, is to be had only, where thy self is
Chief; of whom such Complaint is to be made, and the Error Assigned for the
Reverse of thy Judgment. And what the Fruit of that may be well expected to be,
by what we have already mentioned, as having received at thy Hands, thou have
given us to understand. And here thou may think, thou have made thy self
secure, and sufficiently barred up our Way of Relief, against whom (though thou
knew'st, we had done nothing contrary to the Law, or worthy of Bonds; much less
of the Bonds and Sufferings, we had sustained:) thou have proceeded, as has
been rehearsed; notwithstanding that thou art (as are all the Judges of the
Nation) Entrusted not with a Legislative Power, but to Administer Justice, and
to do Even Law, and Execution of Right to all, High and Low, Rich and Poor,
without having regard to any Man's Person; and art sworn so to do, as has been
said: And wherein thou do Contrary, art li^ble to Punishment, as ceasing from
being a Judge, and becoming a Wrong-doer, and an Oppressor; which what it is to
be, many of thy Predec^ssors have understood, some by Death, others by Fine and
Imprisonment. And of this thou may not be Ignorant, that to deny a Prisoner
any of the Privileges the Law allows him, is to deny him Justice; to Try him
in an Arbitrary Way; to rob him of that Liberty, which the Law gives him, which
is his Inheritance, as a Freeman: And which to do, is in effect To subvert the
Fundamental Laws and Government of England, and to Introduce an Arbitrary and
Tyrannical Government against Law; which is Treason by the Common Law: and
Treasons by the Common Law are not taken away by the Statutes of 25 Edw. III. 1
H. IV. 1, 2. m. See O. St. John's, now Chief Justice of the Common Pleas, his
Argument against Strafford, fol. 65. etc. in the Case.

These things, Friend, We have laid before thee in all plainness; to the End,
that (with the Light of Jesus Christ, who lights every one, that comes into
the World, a Measure of which thou have, which shows thee Evil, and reproves
thee for Sin, for which thou must be accountable) thou being still and cool,
may consider and see, what thou have done against the Innocent; and shame
may overtake thee, and thou may Turn unto the Lord, who now calls thee to
Repentance by his Servants, whom, for witnessing his living Truth in them, thou
have Cast into, and yet continuest under Cruel Bonds and Sufferings.

From the Gaol in Lanceston, the 14th day of the 5th Month, 1656. Edw. Pyot.




By the foregoing Letter the Reader may Observe, how contrary to Law we were
made to suffer: But the Lord, who saw the Integrity of our Hearts to him, and
knew the Innocence of our Cause, was with us in our Sufferings, and bore up our
Spirits through, and made them Easy to us; and gave us Opportunities of
publishing his Name and Truth amongst the People: so that several of the Town
came to be Convinced, and many were made Loving to us; and Friends from many
Parts came to visit us. There came Two out of Wales, who had been Justices of
the Peace there: -- Also Judge Hagget's Wife of Bristol came to visit us; and
she was Convinced, and several of her Children: and her Husband was very kind
and serviceable to Friends, and had a great Love to God's People, which he
retained to his Death.

Now in Cornwall, Devonshire, Dorsetshire and Somersetshire Truth began
mightily to spread; and many were turned to Christ Jesus, and his free
Teaching: for many Friends, that came to Visit us, were drawn forth to declare
the Truth in those Countries; which made the Priests and Professors rage, and
they stirred up the Magistrates to ensnare Friends. Then they set up Watches in
the Streets, and in the Highways, on pretense of taking up all suspicious
Persons; under which Color they stopped, and took up those Friends, that
traveled in and through those Countries, coming to visit us in Prison: which
they did, that the Friends might not pass up and down in the Lord's Service.
But that, which they thought to have stopped the Truth by, was the Means of
spreading it so much the more: for then Friends were frequently moved to speak
to one Constable, and the other Officer, and to the Justices they were brought
before; and this caused the Truth to spread the more amongst them in all their
Parishes. And when Friends were got among the Watches, it would be a Fortnight
or three Weeks, before they could get out of them again: for no sooner had one
Constable taken them, and carried them before the Justices, and they had
discharged them; but another would take them up, and carry them before other
Justices: Which put the Country to a great deal of needless Trouble and Charges.

As Thomas Rawlinson was coming up out of the North, to visit us, a Constable
^o Devonshire took him up; and at Night took Twenty Shillings out of his
Pocket: And after they had thus robbed him, he was cast into Exeter-Gaol. They
cast Henry Pollexfen also into Prison in Devonshire, for being a Jesuit; who
had been a Justice of Peace for the most part of Forty Years before. Many
Friends were cruelly beaten many times by them: Nay, some Clothiers, that were
but going to Mill with their Cloth, and other Men about their outward
Occasions, they took up and Whipped; though Men of about Eighty or an hundred
Pounds by the Year, and not above four or five Miles from their Families.

The Mayor of Lanceston too was a very Wicked Man; for he would take up all he
could get, and cast them into Prison: And he would search substantial, grave
Women, their Petticoats and their Headcloaths. There came a Friend, a
Young Man, to ^ee us, who came not through the Town: So I drew up all the
Gross, Inhuman and Unchristian Actions of the Mayor (for his Carriage was more
like an Heathen, than a Christian) and I gave it the Young Man, and bid him,
Seal it up, and go out again the back-way; and then come into the Town through
the Gates. He did so: and the Watch took him up, and carried him before the
Mayor; who presently searched his Pockets, and found the Letter, wherein he saw
all his Actions Characterized: Which shamed him so, that from that time forward
he meddled little with the Servants of the Lord.

Now, from the sense I had of the Snare, that was laid, and Mischief intended
against the Servants of the Lord, in setting up those Watches at that time, to
stop and take up Friends; it came upon me to give forth the following Lines, as
-- An Exhortation and Warning to the Magistrates.
ALL ye Powers of the Earth, Christ is come to Reign, and is among you, and ye
know him not; who does Enlighten every one of you, that are come into the
World, that ye all through him might believe: who is the Light, who treads the
Wine Press alone, without the City; whose Feet are upon it. Therefore see all,
and examine with the Light, what ye are Ripe for; for the Press is ready for you.

Before Honor is Humility: And all you, that would have Honor, before ye have
Humility (mark, before ye have Humility) are ye not as the Heathen are? Ye
would have Honor, before ye have Humility; Did not all the Persecutors, that
ever were upon the Earth, want this Humility? And so they wanted the Honor;
and yet would have the Honor, before they had the Humility, and had learned
that. And so ye, that be out of the Humility, be out of the Honor; and ye are
not to have the Honor, who have not the Humility: for before Honor is
Humility, mark, before it.

Now, ye pretend Liberty of Conscience, yet shall not one carry a Letter to a
Friend; nor Men visit their Friends; nor visit Prisoners; nor carry a Book
about them, either for their own Use, or for their Friends: and yet ye pretend
Liberty of Conscience. Men shall not see their Friends; but Watches are set up
against them, to catch and stop them: and these must be Well-armed Men too,
against an Innocent People, that have not so much as a Stick in their H^nds,
who are in scorn called Quakers. And yet ^m^ng such, as set up these Watches,
is pretended Liberty of Conscience; who take up them, whose Consciences are
exercised toward God and Men, who worship God in their Way, which is the
Truth, which they, that be out of the Light, call Heresy. Now these, who set up
the Watches against them, whom they in scorn call Quakers, it is. Because they
confess and witness the true Light, that lights every one, that comes into
the World, amongst People, as they pass through the Country, or among their
Friends. This is the dangerous Doctrine, which the Watchmen are set up against,
to subdue Error, as they call it; which is the Light, that does enlighten every
Man, that comes into the World, Him, by whom the World was made: who was
glorified with the Father, before the World began. For them, whom they in
scorn call Quakers, have they set up their Watches, Able Men, well-Armed, to
take up these, that bear this Testimony either in Words, Books or Letters. So
that is the Light you hate, that does Enlighten every man, that comes into the
World; and these that witness to this Light, are they that you put in Prison:
And after you have Imprisoned them, you set up your Watches, to take up all,
that go to Visit them; and to Imprison them also: So that by setting up your
Watches, ye would stop all Relief from coming to Prisoners. Therefore this is
the Word of the Lord God to you, and a Charge to you all, in the presence of
the living Go^ of Heaven and Earth: Every Man of you being enlightened with a
Light, that comes from Christ, the Savior of People's Souls, from whom the
Light comes, that enlightens you, To the Light all take heed; that with it you
may all see Christ, from whom the Light comes, you may all see him to be your
Savior, by whom the World was made, who says; Learn of me. But if ye hate
this Light, which Christ has enlightened you withal, ye hate Christ; who does
Enlighten you all, that you all through him (who is the Light) might believe.
But not believing in the Light, nor bringing your Deeds to the Light, which
will make them manifest, and reprove them; this is your Condemnation, even the
Light. Remember, you are warned in your Lifetime; for this is your Way to
Salvation, the Light, if you walk in it: And this is your Condemnation, the
Light, if you reject and hate it. And you can never come to Christ, the Second
Priest, unless you come to the Light, which the Second Priest has enlightened
you withal. So ye, that come not to the Light, ye go to the Priests, that take
Tithes, as did the First Priesthood; and so hale out of your Synagogues and
Temples (as some call them) as that Priesthood did, that took Tithes: which
they, that were of the Second Priesthood, did not. Was there ever such a
Generation! Or ever did such a Generation of Men appear, as does now in this
Age, who are so full of Madness, Envy and Persecution, that they stand up in
Watches with Bills and Weapons against the Truth, to persecute it; as the
Towns and Countries do declare: which Rings as Sodom, and like Gomorrah! And
this has its Liberty, and Truth is stood against: And to Reprove Sin, is
accounted a Breach of the Peace, as they say; who be out of the Truth, and set
up their Watches against it.

G. F.



Besides this General Warning, there coming to my Hand a Copy of a VVarrant
Issued out from the Sessions of Exon, in express Terms, For the apprehending of
all Quakers; wherein Truth and Friends were reproached and vilified, I was
moved to write an Answer thereunto, and send it abroad, for the Clearing of
Truth and Friends from the Slanders therein cast upon them: and to manifest the
wickedness of that persecuting Spirit, from whence it proceeded. And that which
I writ, was after this manner: WHereas there was a VVarrant granted forth the
last Sessions holden at Exon, on the Eighteenth Day of the Fifth Month, 1656.
which VVarrant is For the Apprehending and taking up all such, as are Quakers,
or call themselves Quakers, or go under the Notion of Quakers; And is directed
to the Chief-Constables, to be sent by them to the Petty-Constables, requiring
them to set Watches, able Men with Bills, to take up all such Quakers, as
aforesaid. And whereas in your said VVarrant you speak of the Quakers spreading
Seditious Books and Papers; I Answer: They, whom ye in scorn call Quakers, have
no Seditious Books or Papers; but their Books are against Sedition, and
Seditious Men, and Seditious Books, and Seditious Teachers, and Seditious
VVays. And so, ye have numbered them, who are honest Men, Godly Men, holy Men,
Men that fear God, among Beggars, Rogues and Vagabonds: Thus putting no
Difference between the Precious and the Vile, you are not fit to judge; who
have set up your Bills, and armed your Men to stand up together in Battle
against the Innocent People, the Lambs of Christ, which have not lifted up an
Hand against you. But if ye were sensible of the State of your own Country,
your Cities, your Towns, your Villages, how the Cry of them is like Gomorrah,
and the Ring, like Sodom, and the Sound, like the Old World, where all Flesh
had Corrupted its way, which God overthrew with the Flood! If you did this
consider with your selves, you would find something to turn the Sword against,
and not against the Lambs of Christ, and not make a Mock upon the Innocent,
that stand a Witness against all Sin and Unrighteousness in your Towns and
Steeple Houses. Noah, the Eighth Person, a Preacher of Righteousness, was
grieved with the filthy Conversation of the Wicked: So are we now. So likewise
Just Lot was grieved with their unmerciful Deeds, and the filthy Conversation
of Sodom. And were not these hated of the World, and of them that lived in
Filthiness? And whereas you speak of those, whom you in scorn call Quakers,
that they are a Grief to those, whom you call Pious and Religious People, and
their Religion. Such as be in the Religion that is Vain, whose Tongues are not
bridled, I believe, the Quakers are a Grief to; but are not a Grief to such, as
be in the pure Religion, which keeps unspotted of the World: which sets not
up Bills, nor Watches, to maintain it by the World; for they are not of the
World, which be in the pure Religion, which keeps them unspotted of the World:
Mark, the pure Religion, which keeps unspotted of the World. But such as be in
the Religion, that is not pure, which have a Form of Godliness, and not the
Power, such as you call Pious, the Truth it self to such was always a Grief;
and so it is in this Age. And now, your Fruits do appear, the End of your
Religion and Profession, and what you do possess: But you are in the Error, and
have been but in the Profession, out of the Possession of the Spirit, who are
not in the Spirit of Truth. For where did ever it set Stints, and Bounds, and
number the Just and Innocent with the Wicked? But the Wicked set Stints, and
Bounds, and Limits to the Just, and number them among the Wicked; yea, speak
all manner of Evil they did of them, as ye are doing now of us: they did so,
who did profess that, which ye do profess in Words. Nay, according as it was
foretold in the Scripture, such as tremble at the Word of God, you cast out and
hate, you that have your Temple-worship; and you say, The Quakers come to
disturb you in your Churches (as you call them:) Was it not the Practice of the
Apostles, to go into the Synagogues and Temples, to witness against the
Priesthood, that took Tithes? And was it not the Practice of the Jews to hale
them out, and persecute them, and stone them, that witnessed Christ the Second
Priest, and went to bring People off from the First Priesthood? Was it not the
practice of the Prophets, to go and cry against the High Places? And was it not
the Practice of the Jews, when they were back-slidden, and of the Heathen, to
Imprison, and Persecute the Prophets, and send after them into other Countries?
And is not this the Practice of you now, who are holding up your High Places,
which the Papists set up, which ye now call your Churches; where ye beat and
persecute? What Religious People are you, that are filled with so much Madness?
Did not Paul Confess, he was Mad, while he was in your Practice, haling,
beating, prisoning, putting out of the Synagogues, having his Authority from
the Chief Priests? And are not the Chief Priests the cause of this? Was there
ever such a Cry made in any Age past, as there is now in the Pulpits, Railing
against an Innocent People, whom ye in scorn call Quakers, who lift not up an
Hand against you; and who are indeed the Pious, that are of the pure Religion,
who fear God, and worship him in the Spirit and in the Truth, but cannot Join
with you in your Religion? And do not the Ministers of God say, That the
Scriptures are a Declaration, which you call the Word? Do not you rob Christ of
his Title, and of his Honor, and give it to the Letter, and show your selves
out of the Doctrine of the Ministers of God, who called the Scriptures by the
name of Writings and Treatises, and Declarations, and said; Christ's Name is
called the Word of God? Are not you here in the Error you speak of, which is
your Common Talk among you? There was talk among some of you of your
Gospel-shining: Does your Gospel, which you profess, persecute? Did ever any of
them, that did possess it, cast into Prison, and not suffer others to go to
Visit them? Are you like Christians in this, or like Heathen, who set Bounds
and Watches over the Land, that they should not pass to Visit them, that be in
Prison? Was ever the like heard in any Age? Search and see, if you have not
outstript them all in your Watches, if not in your manner of Persecution, and
in your Imprisonments: And oh! never talk, that we are a Grief to them, that
are in the pure Religion. And whereas in your Warrant we are represented, as
Disaffected to Government; I say, the Law, that is a Terror to the Evil-Doer,
we own; the Higher Power, to which the Soul must be subject: But we deny the
Evil-Doer, the malicious Man reigning, and the Envious Man seeking for his
Prey, whose Envy is against the Innocent; who raises up the Country against
honest Men, and so becomes a Trouble to the Country, in raising them up to take
the Innocent: but that we leave to the Lord to Judge. Your false Accusations of
Heresy and Blasphemy we do deny: you should have laid them down in Particulars,
what they had been, that People might have seen them; and not have slandered
behind our Backs: The Law says, The Crime should be mentioned in the Warrant.
Then for your saying, We deny the godly Ministers to be a true Ministry of
Christ; that is false: for we say, that the Godly Ministers are the Ministers
of Christ. But which of your Ministers dare say, that they are truly Godly? And
for your charging us with seducing many weak People, that is false also; for we
seduce none: But you, that deny the Light, which lights every Man, that
comes into the World, are seduced from the Anointing, which should Teach you:
and if ye would be Taught by it, ye would not need, that any Man should Teach
you. But such, as are taught by the Anointing, which abides in them, and deny
Man's Teaching, these ye call Seducers, quite contrary to John's Doctrine, 1 John 2. You speak quite contrary to him: that which is Truth, ye call Seducing;
and that which he calls Seducing, you call Truth: Read the latter part of the
Chapter. And beware, I warn you all from the Lord God of Glory, set not any
Bound against him; Stint him not, Limit not the Holy one of Israel: for the
Lord is rising in Power and great Glory, who will rule the Nations with a Rod
of Iron, which to him are but as the drop of a Bucket; he that measures the
Waters in the Hollow of his Hand, will dash Nations together, as a Potter's
Vessel. And know, you that are found in this his day blaspheming his Work, that
God has brought forth, calling it Blasphemy, fighting against it, setting up
your Carnal Weapons, making your Bonds strong; God will break asunder, that
which your Carnal Policy has invented, and which by your Carnal Weapons ye
would uphold: and make you to know, there is a God in Heaven, who carries his
Lambs in his Arms, which are come among Wolves, and are ready to be torn in
pieces in every place, yea, in your Steeple Houses; where are People without
Reason, and that have not natural Affection. Therefore all ye Petty-Constables,
Sheriffs and Justices, take Warning; and take heed, what ye do against the
Lambs of Christ: for Christ is come, and coming, who will give to every one of
you a Reward according to your Works, you which have the Letter, which speaks
of Christ; but now ye are persecuting that, which the Scripture speaks of: so
your Fruits make you manifest. Therefore every one, Sheriff, Justices,
Constables, etc. see, what ye do possess; Consider, what ye do possess, and
what a Profession ye are now in, that all these Carnal Weapons are now set up
against the Innocent, yea, against the Truth. Which shows, that ye have not the
Spiritual Weapons; that they are not among you: and that ye want the Counsel of
Gamaliel, yea, ye want the Counsel of such a Man among you, who said; Let the
Apostles alone: If it be of God, it will stand; if it be not, it will come to
naught. But ye may see your selves on the Contrary, in the Spirit of them that
came with Judas, with Swords and Staves from the Chief-Priests against Christ:
still it is against Christ, where he is made manifest. Paul (while Saul) went
against him, though he professed a Christ, that was to come; and the Jews
professed a Christ, that was to come: Yet Paul persecuted him, where he was
manifested in his Saints. So ye profess a Christ, that is come, but persecute
him, where he is manifest. You that have the Letter, the High Places, the
Synagogues, you persecute him, where he is made manifest in his Saints, as the
Jews did. They who were in the Letter, out of the Life, persecuted them, that
were in the Life of that, which they profess in the Letter: So now do you
persecute them, that are in the Life, and are your selves Strangers to it; as
your Fruits make appear. You have numbered the People of God amongst
Transgressors; but have you prisoned any of the Rogues and Transgressors you
speak of? you have prisoned the Innocent, and let the others go free.

G. F.



When I had sent abroad the foregoing Papers concerning the Watches, that were
then set up to Intercept and Stop Friends in their Travels in the Work of tho
Lord; so great a sense came upon me of the Darkness and Vail, that was over the
Priests and Professors of Christianity, that I was moved to give forth the
following Paper, as An Awakening Warning to them.

BLindness has happened to the professed Christians of the Letter now a days,
as Blindness happened to the Jews; who professed the Letter, but owned not the
Life, which the Letter speaks of: As the Christians now, to whom this Blindness
has happened, who profess the Scripture, but own not the Life, which the
Scripture speaks of. For against the Life the Jews stood, who professed the
Letter of the Scripture; but they were Blind, they gathered Counsel against the
Life: they were in an Vproar, when the Babe was born in Bethlehem, Herod and
all the Chief Priests. And Herod sought to destroy all the young Children in
Bethlehem, yet missed the Babe; Herod, that Fox, though he slew John, and put
him to death. And you may here see, how the Literal Professors did stand up,
not for the Truth, but quite against it: Furthermore, the Chief-Priests
consulted together, how they might take Jesus by Subtilty, and put him to
death; mark, by their Subtilty. The Professors of a Christ that was to come,
they preached of a Messiah, of a Christ, of a Savior; but denied the Life,
when he was made manifest. The Chief-Priests and the Council gathered together,
they professed his words; and the Chief-Priests, who were gathered together with
the Council, said: That his Disciples had stolen him away by Night; and gave
large Moneys to the Soldiers to declare this. Likewise in the day, when the
Children of Israel were in Egypt, and they with their Children began to spread
and multiply; Come, said the Egyptians, Let us deal wisely with them to Afflict
them, and tax them: Which held, until the Lord overthrew their Oppressors, and
brought out his Seed by his mighty Power from under the Oppressor, and exalted
his Son above all; though the Heathen raged, and the People imagined vain
things: and he made his Power known, that all might see, that there was no God
upon the Earth, but himself. This Power now has brought forth the Work of the
Lord! Many, who be turned to the Light, Christ, have received the Power of God,
and are thereby become the Sons of God. Now this Birth, that is born of God,
are all the Powers of the World joined together to Crucify, to put to Death
those Jews in the Spirit, as they did put Christ to Death in the Flesh
formerly. This is the Birth, that all the Wicked World is enraged against, and
mad at: Against this they set their Watches, this Birth, brought forth by the
Mighty God of Jacob, who rides upon the High Places of the Earth: This is the
Birth, that the professed Christians without the Life in our Days and Age rage
against, and lay out all their Wisdom about. Are not the Chief-Priests and Wise
Men of the Earth consulting together, how they might destroy this Birth? Is not
this the Birth, that is banished out of your Hearts, you that profess the
Scripture, and are Talkers of it, but do not own the Light and Life, which the
Scripture speaks of, as the Jews would not; and so will not have Christ to
Reign over you, as they would not? Do you not hale out of your Synagogues, and
before Magistrates? Do you not herein fulfill Christ's Words, who said to his
Disciples; They should be haled out of the Synagogues, and before Rulers? Do
you not Persecute them from City to City? Do you not almost fill your Prisons
with them? And now set your Watches, that none should go to Visit them, whom ye
have put into Prison? Is not this an Unchristian Spirit? How can you for shame
say, You are Vpholders of Truth? Or how can you for shame say, that Truth has
been professed among you? Yet we say, We Grant, that you have talked of it. And
how can you for shame say, The Gospel shines among you, when you will not own
it, the Life of it, when you call it Error, and the evil Seed? Yea, the very
Truth, yea, the very Life of Truth ye have blasphemed against now, as the Jews
did against Christ, calling him a Devil; you now call it Error, and the Evil
Seed, and stand up against it, and turn the Sword against it. As it was in the
days of the Jews, who turned the Sword against Christ; so it is in these days
of the Professed Christians of the Scripture, but out of the Life, that gave it
forth; as it was with the Jews outward in the Flesh, who were not the Jews in
the Spirit. And is it not a shame to all the Ministers of the Gospel, (as they
are called) that they can find no better Way to maintain that, which they call
the Truth, and their Gospel, than by Carnal Weapons, Stocks and Prisons, and
Whips, Watches and Wards, and Powers of the Earth? Were these the Apostles
Weapons? Carnal Watches and Wards, Stocks and Prisons, and haling out of the
Synagogues, when they came to speak? Judge your selves, what an Antichristian
Spirit you have. Never talk of defending Truth, with that which is against
Truth. For are you not setting up the Rabble of the World against it? Do they
not Join with you, with Swords and Staves against it? And is this the Life of
Christians? Is not this the Life of Error, and of the Evil Seeds-man? Surely,
ye would find Work enough, if ye were in the Fear of the Lord, to turn your
Swords against the Profaneness, the Oaths and Wickedness, that is in your
Streets and Highways: How do they ring like Sodom, and give a sound like
Gomorrah! But they are become a Prey in this your Age, that Reprove in your
Gate Sin, Wickedness and Profaneness: They are become your Byword. Against
them your Councils are gathered, and them you cast into Prison, and hale them
out of your Synagogues: and cast them likewise into Prison, that write against
it, and speak against it; and set your Guards to stop and hinder any from
Visiting them, whom you cast into Prison, and give them the Names of Vagabonds
and Wanderers. Was ever the like heard in the days of the Heathen against the
Apostles, who witnessed the Gospel? Did they set Guards and Watches in every
Town, in every City, to take the Disciples, the Brethren, the Believers, that
heard, that the Apostles were cast into Prison, and came to see, what they
wanted? Show ye not as much Rage and Fury now in your Age, as was in those,
that were in that Age? And how can you talk of the Gospel, and of defending the
Gospel, when you are setting Guards and Watches against it, and are defending
that, which stands against it; and the Lambs of Christ are almost torn to
pieces amongst you, who are like Wolves? for the Lord has now sent his Lambs
amongst Wolves. And have not you professed the words of Christ, and of the
Prophets and Apostles, as the Jews had long professed the Scriptures, the words
of Moses, and of the Prophets, that prophesied of Christ, that was to come; and
stood against him, when he was come? as you do in this Day of his Reign, and in
this Day of his glorious Gospel, who are persecuting the Messengers of it,
imprisoning them, persecuting them in your Streets and Highways, and now
setting up your Watches against them, who bring you the glad Tidings of Peace
to your Souls; whose Feet are beautiful a Top of the Mountains; Mark, a Top of
the Mountains, that, against which the Mountains rage and swell: but God will
make them to melt; the Sun is risen, which will make them to melt. And God will
cleave the Rocks and Mountains asunder, and make the Hills to bow perpetually:
for his Son he will exalt, and his Glory he will give to him, and not to
another. Therefore be awakened, ye Rulers of the Earth, and take Counsel of the
Lord, and take not Counsel together against him. Make not your Bonds strong;
and set not your selves in Battle against him: for ye will be found but as
Briers and Thorns before him, which the Fire shall consume. Therefore be
awakened, all ye that be Talkers of the Scripture, and that gather your selves
together by your Multitudes and Meetings, and have had your Teachers; but not
having the Spirit, that gave forth the Scriptures, the Lord God of Glory, the
Father of Spirits will scatter you: all your Bonds will not hold you together,
who are out of the Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace. The Threshing Instrument
is gone forth, which will beat the Hills to pieces: Sion is risen to Thresh;
out of the holy Mountain is the Trumpet sounded. Stand not up against the Lord:
for all Nations are with the Lord as the Drop of a Bucket. He that measures the
Waters in the hollow of his Hand, and weighs the Earth in Scales, the Lord of
Hosts is his Name; who is now risen and rising, to plead the Cause of the
Innocent: who is exalting his Son, and bringing his Sheep to him. Now are they
seen and known, that feed upon wind, that are lifted up, given up to believe
Lies; who report, and say, Report, and we will report it. Now are they seen,
who have a Form of Godliness, but the Power is denied by them; so Christ is
denied, the Power it self is denied: for Christ is the Power of God. And the
Power being denied by you, that have a Form of Godliness, that have the words
of the Scriptures, the Gospel is denied: for the Gospel is the Power of God.
And thus it is among you, that have the Knowledge and Wisdom that is sensual,
earthly and devilish: Does it not appear so? Let your Gaols and Watches
witness your Fruits in every Town. Your Wisdom is earthly, sensual and
Devilish: so you have a Knowledge and Wisdom, but not that which is from
above; for that is pure and gentle, and so is not your knowledge: But to know
Christ, is Life Eternal. Now your Fruits have manifested, that you are not of
this; and so out of the Power of God, which is the Cross of Christ: For you are
found in the World, out of the Power of God, out of the Cross of Christ,
persecuting. So that which does persecute, and send forth VVritings and Decrees
to stop all, and take up all, and set Watches, and prepare Bonds to stint the
Lord, to Imprison and persecute, and suffer none to go to visit them; This
shows, you are not Christians, but stand against a Christian's Life, which is
to love your Enemies. Where is your Heaping up Coals of Fire? your Love to your
Enemies, who are thus persecuting your Friends? He came to his own, and his own
received him not: Here is a turning the Sword against the Just. Do you show
here a Christian's Life, or your selves Christians, who are filling your Gaols
with the Christians in the Spirit, you that be in the Letter (in Shadows) as
the Jews in the Letter did put the Jews in the Spirit into Prison? Is not this
the Fruit in our Days of the Christians in the Letter, to put the Christians in
the Spirit into Prison? And does not this show, that your Decrees, which you
have sent forth, proceed from Death, who thus Act against the Life, and them
that be in it; which the Scriptures were given forth from? Is it not here, as
it was with Saul, when he went to persecute, to hale to Prison, and bind all,
that he could find, calling upon that Name, who were Christians in the Life,
the Spirit, such as now you are persecuting, because they are in the Life,
though you profess their Words? Are not your Decrees gone forth from the same
Spirit of Envy, against the same Spirit of Christ they were in? Is it not
manifest to all, that fear God, and to the sober-minded and honest-hearted
People, that see your Practices, your Decrees, your Letters to stop, to molest,
to hinder, to Imprison them that are moved of the Lord to do his Will, or to go
to Visit Prisoners, whom you have Imprisoned? Does this show you to have a
Spirit like Paul, yea, or nay? or are you not quite contrary, like to them,
that persecuted Paul? The Day has declared it. To that of God in you all I
speak, which shall witness it at the Last Day, in the Day of Judgment.
Persecution was blind in all Ages; and Madness and Folly led it: Yet
Persecution got always a Form or Presence of Godliness, or to talk of Religion,
as in the Days of Moses, in the Days of Jeremy, in the Days of Christ, and of
the Apostles. Come, says the Council, Let us crush them, while they are Young;
they have almost overspread the Nation in every Corner. This is as much as to
say; Let us put this Birth to Death, as Pharaoh and Herod did the Children: But
the Lord caused his Truth the more to spread. For you may read, what Numbers
came out of Egypt! and what Multitudes followed Christ! Therefore, with
Consideration read these Lines, and not with Fury; and let not Foolishness
appear: But consider in Humility your Ways you act in, and your Paths you go
in; and what Spirit you are of, and what the End of your Conversation is, now
see: For in Love to your Souls I write, that in the Day of your Visitation you
may consider it.

From him who loves Righteousness, and the establishing of it, and Truth, and
Peace, and Faith, which is by Christ Jesus (Mercy and Peace be multiplied among
such!) But a Witness against all Hypocrites, and all who have a Profession, but
live out of the Possession; who are in an Hypocritical Religion, in the Lusts
and Fashions of the World, having a Form of Godliness, but standing against the
Power with might and main, Sword and Staff. Which things declare your
Conversation and Practices to be out of Christ 's Life, against the
Gospel-practice, and contrary to the Manner and Order of the Saints.

G. F

We were continued in Prison, till the next Assize: 1656. Lanceston Assize.
before which time diverse Friends, both Men and Women, were sent to Prison,
that had been taken up by the Watches. When the Assize was come, several of
these were called before the Judge, and Indicted: and though the Jailer brought
them into Court, yet they Indicted them, that they came in by Force of Arms,
and in an hostile manner: And the Judge fined them, because they would not put
off their Hats. But we were not called before the Judges any more; but they let
us alone.

Great Work we had, and Service for the Lord, both between the Assizes, and
after, amongst the Professors and People of all sorts: for many came to see us,
and to reason with us. And Elizabeth Trelawny of Plymouth (who was the Daughter
of one called a Baronet) being Convinced, (as was formerly mentioned) the
Priests and Professors, and some great Persons of her Kindred were in a great
Rage concerning her; and writ Letters to her. And she being a Wise and Tender
Woman, and fearing to give them any Advantage, sent their Letters to me; and I
answered them, and returned them to her again, for her to send the Answers to
them. Which she did: till growing in the Power and Spirit, and Wisdom of God,
she came her self to be able to Answer the wisest Priest and Professor of them
all; and had a Dominion over them all in the Truth, through the Power of the
Lord, by which she was kept faithful to her Death.

Now, while I was in Prison here, Lanceston Gaol.
the Baptists and Fifth-Monarchy-Men prophesied, That this Year Christ should
come, and Reign upon Earth a Thousand Years. And they looked upon this Reign to
be Outward: When as he was come inwardly in the Hearts of his People, to Reign
and Rule there; and these Professors would not Receive him there: So they
failed in their Prophecy and Expectation, and had not the Possession of him.
But Christ is come, and does dwell in the Hearts of his People; and Reigns
there: And Thousands, at the Door of whose Hearts he has been knocking, have
opened to him; and he is come in, and does Sup with them, and they with him,
the heavenly Supper with the heavenly and spiritual Man. So many of these
Baptists and Monarchy-People turned the greatest Enemies to the Possessors of
Christ: But he Reigns in the Hearts of his Saints over all their Envy.

At the Assize diverse Justices came to us, and were pretty Civil, and Reasoned
of the things of God pretty soberly; expressing a Pity to us. There came also
Capt. Fox, who was Governor of Pendennis-Castle, and looked me in the Face, and
said never a word; but went his ways to his Company: and told them; He never
saw a simpler Man in his Life. I called after him, and said; Stay Man, we will
see, who is the simpler Man. But he went his way: A light, Chaffy Man.

There came also at the Assize, one Thomas Lower to Visit us: and he offered to
give us Money, which we refused; accepting nevertheless of his Love. He asked
us many Questions concerning our denying the Scriptures to be the Word of God?
and concerning the Sacraments, and such like: To all which he received
Satisfaction. And I spoke unto him; and he afterward said: 1656. Lanceston
Gaol.
My Words were as a flash of Lightning, they ran so through him. And he said,
He never met with such wise Men in his Life, for they knew the Thoughts of his
Heart; and were, as the wise Master Builders of the Assemblies, that fastened
their Words, like Nails. He came to be Convinced of the Truth, and remains a
Friend to this Day. When he came home to his Aunt Hambley's (where he then
lived) and made Report to her concerning us; She, with her Sister Grace
Billing, hearing the sound of Truth, came afterward to Visit us in Prison, and
was Convinced also. And great Sufferings and Spoilings of Goods both he and his
Aunt have undergone for the Truth's sake.

About this time I was moved to give forth the following Paper to Friends in
the Ministry.

Friends,
IN the Power of life and wisdom, and dread of the Lord God of life, and Heaven
and Earth dwell; that in the wisdom of God over all ye may be preserved, and be
a Terror to all the Adversaries of God, and a Dread, answering that of God in
them all, spreading the Truth abroad, awakening the VVitness, confounding the
Deceit, gathering up out of Transgression into the Life, the Covenant of Light
and Peace with God. Let all Nations hear the sound by Word or Writing: Spare no
Place, spare no Tongue, nor Pen; but be obedient to the Lord God: go through
the Work, and be valiant for the Truth upon Earth; tread and trample all that
is Contrary, under. Ye have the Power, do not Abuse it; and Strength and
Presence of the Lord, eye it, and the Wisdom: that with it you may all be
ordered to the Glory of the Lord God. Keep in the Dominion, keep in the Power
over all Deceit; tread over them in that, which lets you see to the Worlds
End, and the utmost Parts of the Earth. Reign and Rule with Christ, whose
Scepter and Throne is now set up, whose Dominion is over all to the Ends of the
Earth; whose Dominion is an everlasting Dominion, Throne an everlasting Throne,
Kingdom an everlasting Kingdom, Power above all Powers. Therefore this is the
Word of the Lord God to you all: Keep in the wisdom of God, that spreads over
all the Earth; the wisdom of the Creation, that is Pure from Above, not
destructive. For now shall Salvation go out of Zion, to Judge the Mount of
Esau: and now shall the Law go forth from Jerusalem, to Answer the Principle of
God in all; to hew down all Inventors and Inventions. For all the Princes of
the Earth is but as Air to the Power of the Lord God, which you are in, and
have tasted of: Therefore Live in it, that is the Word of the Lord God to you
all; and do not Abuse it: And keep down and Low; and take heed of false Joys,
that will Change.

Bring all into the Worship of God: Plow up the fallow Ground, thresh and get
out the Corn; that the Seed, the Wheat, may be gathered into the Barn: that to
the Beginning all People may come, to Christ, that was, before the World was
made. For the Chaff is come upon the Wheat by Transgression: he that treads
it out, is out of Transgression, and fathoms Transgression; and puts a
difference between the precious and the vile; and can pick out the Wheat from
the Tares, and gather into the Garner: so brings to the lively Hope the
Immortal Soul into God, out of which it came. And none worships God, but who
comes to the Principle of God, which they have transgressed; and none are
plowed up, but who comes to the Principle of God in him, that he has
transgressed: then he does service to God, then is the planting and the
watering; and the Increase from God comes. So the Ministers of the Spirit must
minister to the Spirit, that is in Prison, which has been in Captivity in
every one; that with the Spirit of Christ People may be led out of Captivity up
to God, the Father of Spirits, and do service to him, and to have Unity with
him, with the Scriptures, and one with another. And this is the Word of the
Lord God to you all, and a Charge to you all in the presence of the living God,
Be Patterns, be Examples in all Countries, Places, Islands, Nations, wherever
you come; that your Carriage and Life may preach among all sorts of People, and
to them: then you will come to walk Cheerfully over the World, Answering that
of God in every one, whereby in them ye may be a Blessing, and make the Witness
of God in them to bless you: Then to the Lord God you will be a sweet Savor,
and a Blessing.

Spare no Deceit, lay the Sword upon it; go over it: Keep your selves clear of
the Bloods of all Men, either by Word, or Writing, or Speaking; and keep your
selves clean, that you may stand in your Throne, and every one have his Lot,
and stand in the Lot in the Ancient of Days. And so the Blessing of the Lord be
with you, and keep you over all the Idolatrous Worships and Worshippers: let
them know the Living God; for Teachings, Churches, Worships must be thrown down
with the power of the Lord God, set up by Man's earthy Understanding, Knowledge
and Wills. For this all must be thrown down with that, which gave forth
Scripture; and who be in that, Reigns over it all: That is the Word of the Lord
God to you all. In that is God Worshipped, that brings to declare his Will; and
brings to the Church in God, the Ground and Pillar of Truth: for now is the
mighty Day of the Lord appeared, and the Arrows of the Almighty gone forth;
which shall stick in the Hearts of the Wicked. Now will I Arise, says the Lord
God Almighty, to trample and Thunder down Deceit, which has long reigned, and
stained the Earth: Now will I have my Glory out of every one. The Lord God
Almighty over all in his Strength and Power you keep, to his Glory, that you
may come to Answer that of God in every one in the World. Proclaim the mighty
Day of the Lord of Fire and Sword, who will be worshipped in Spirit and in
Truth; and keep in the Life and Power of the Lord God, that the Inhabitants of
the Earth may tremble before you: That the Lord God's Power and Majesty may be
Admired among the Hypocrites and Heathens, and ye in the Wisdom, Dread, Life,
Terror and Dominion Preserved to his Glory: that nothing may Rule or Reign, but
Power and Life it self; and in the Wisdom of God ye may be preserved in it. And
this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, and the Call is now Out of
Transgression; the Spirit bids, Come: and the Call is now from all false
Worships and Gods, and from all Inventions and dead Works to serve the living
God; and the Call to Repentance, to the Amendment of Life, whereby
Righteousness may be brought forth; which shall go throughout the Earth.
Therefore ye, that be Chosen and Faithful, which are with the Lamb, go through
your Work faithfully, and in the Strength and Power of the Lord: and be
obedient to the Power; for that will save you out of the Hands of unreasonable
Men, and preserve you over the World to himself: hereby you may live in the
Kingdom, that stands in Power, which has no end; where glory and life is.

For Tho. Mounts.

G. F.


After the Assize, the Sheriff, with some Soldiers came to guard a Woman to
Execution, that was sentenced to die; and we had a great deal of Discourse with
them. One of them wickedly said, That Christ was as passionate a Man, as any
that lived upon the Earth: for which wicked Saying we rebuked him. Another time
we asked the Jailer, what Doings there were at the Sessions? and he said, Small
Matters; only about Thirty for Bastardy. We thought it very strange, that they,
who professed themselves Christians, should make small Matters of such things:
But this Jailer was very bad himself, and I often admonished him to Sobriety;
but he would Abuse People, that came to Visit us. Edward Pyot had a Cheese sent
him from Bristol from his Wife; and the Jailer took the Cheese from him, and
carried it to the Mayor, to search it for Treasonable Letters, as he said: And
though they found no Treason in the Cheese, they kept it from us. This Jailer
might have been made Rich, if he had carried himself Civilly; but he sought his
own Ruin. Which soon after came upon him: For the next Year he was turned out
of his Place, and for some wickedness was cast into the Jail himself; and there
begged of our Friends. And for some Vnruliness in his Carriage, he was by the
succeeding Jailer put into Doomsdale, and locked in Irons, and beaten; and bid
to Remember, how he had abused those good Men, whom he had wickedly, without
any Cause, cast into that nasty Dungeon: and told, That now he deservedly
should suffer for his wickedness; and the same Measure he had meted to others,
he should have meted out to himself. He grew to be very poor, and died in
Prison; and his Wife and Family came to Misery.

While I was in Prison in Lanceston, there was a Friend went to Oliver Cromwell,
and offered himself Body for Body, to lie in Doomsdale-Prison for me, or in my
stead; if he would take him, and let me go at Liberty. Which thing so struck
him, that he said to his great Men and Council; Which of you would do so much
for me, if I were in the same Condition? And though he did not accept of the
Friend's Proffer, but said, He could not do it, for that it was contrary to
Law; yet however, the Truth thereby came mightily over him. A good while after
this he sent down Major General Desborow, pretending to set us at Liberty: And
when he came, he proffered us, If we would say, We would go home, and preach
no more, we should have our Liberty; but we could not promise him so. Then he
urged, that we should promise to go home, if the Lord permit: Whereupon Edward
Pyot writ him this following Letter.

To Major General Desborow.
Friend,
THough much might be said, as to the Liberty of Englishmen, to Travel in any
part of the Nation of England, it being as the English-man's House by the Law,
and he to be protected in any part of it; and if he transgress the Law, the
penalty upon the Transgressor is to be inflicted. And as to Liberty of
Conscience, which is a natural Right, and a Fundamental; and the Exercise of
it, by those who profess Faith in God by Jesus Christ, is to be protected: as
by the Instrument of Government appears; though they differ in Doctrine,
Worship and Discipline: provided, the Liberty extend not to Popery, or Prelacy,
nor to Licentiousness. Where these Rights are denied is, our Liberties are
infringed; which are the Price of much Blood and Treasure in the late Wars. Yet
in the Power of God over all, by which all are to be ruled, are we, and in it
dwell, and by it alone are guided to do the Will of God; whose Will is free:
and we, in the freedom of his Will walk by the Power, either as it Commands or
Permits, without any Condition or Enforcement thereunto by Men; but as the
Power moves either by Command, or Permission. And although we cannot Covenant
or Condition to go forth of these Parts, or to do this or that thing, if the
Lord permit (for that were to do the will of Man by God's Permission) yet it is
like, we may pass forth of these Parts in the liberty of the will of God, as we
may he severally moved, and guided by the pure Power, and not of Necessity. We,
who were first Committed, were passing homewards, when we were apprehended;
and, as far as I know, we might pass, if the Prison-Doors were Commanded to be
Opened, and we freed of our Bonds. Should we stay, if the Lord commands us to
go; or should we go, if the Lord command us to stay; Or having no Command to
stay, but being permitted to pass from hence, the pure Power moving thereto,
and we yet stay; or go, when as before commanded to stay; we should then be
Wanderers indeed: for such are Wanderers, who wander out from the Will and
Power of God, abroad, at large, in their own Wills and earthly Minds. And so,
in the fear of the Lord God well weigh and consider, with the just Weight and
just Balance, that Justice thou may do to the Just and Innocent in Prison.

Edward Pyot.


Some time having passed, after the foregoing was delivered him, and he not
giving any Order for our Discharge, I also writ unto him, as follows: To
Major General Desborow.
Friend,
WE, who be in the Power of God, the Ruler of all, the Vpholder of all things,
and know and dwell in his Power, ^o it we must be Obedient; which brings us to
stand out of all Men's Wills, not limited. To say, We will, if the Lord permit,
in a Case of Buying and Selling to get gain, if the Intent be so to do, may be
done: but we standing in the Power of God to do his Will, and to stand out of
Man's will, If Man propound, We shall have our Liberty, if we will say, we
will go to our outward Being, if the Lord permit, if it be the Will of God.;
and because we cannot say these Words in this case, shall not have our Liberty;
when we know, that the will of God is, we shall go to speak at some other
Place: here we cannot say these Words truly. For to say, We will go to our
outward Habitation, if it be according to the will of God, when we know, the
will of God is otherwise; we cannot speak so truly and clearly. Neither can any
Man say so to him, that requires it of him; who stands in the Power, and knows
the Power of God to lead him, according to God's will, and it leads him to
another place, than that which is called the outward Home. But the Son of God,
who came to do, and did the will of God, had no place, whereon to lay his Head:
And the Apostles, and many of the Followers of Christ, had no certain
dewlling place. Now, if these should have been restrained, because they could
not say, they would go to that which the world calls their outward Homes, if it
were the will of God; when they knew, it was the will of God, they should not;
and they could not do the will of God in doing so: and therefore could not
speak those words, to satisfy man's mind and will; would not that have been
Evil? Abraham could not do the will of God, but in going from his Native
Country: And who are of Faith, are of Abraham, of whom Christ came according to
the Flesh. Now, if thou allege and say, This is to let all loose, and at
Liberty to Idleness; I say, No: such as be in the Power of God, who do the will
of God, come to receive his wisdom, by which all his Creatures were created; by
which to use them to his Glory. So this I shall say: who are moved by the Lord
God of Glory and Power, to go to their outward Beings or Habitations, such of
us may go to our outward Beings or Homes; and there be diligent in serving the
Lord God, that they may be a Blessing from the Lord God in their Generation;
diligently serving him in Life and Doctrine, in Manners, in Conversation, in
all things. And who are moved of the Lord to go to any other Place; we standing
in his will, and being moved by his Power, which comprehends all things, and is
not to be limited; we shall do his will, which we are commanded to do. So the
Lord God open your Understandings, that you may see this great Power of the
Lord, which he is now manifesting among his Children in this his Day; that ye
may not withstand it in our Friends, that are come into the Power of God, and
to God, and know him, by whom the world was made: by whom all things were
Created, that were created; and there was not any thing made, of all that was
made, but what was made for him, and to him, and by him: who is the Power of
God, who does Enlighten every Man, that comes into the world. Now, our Friends
being come to this Light, which comes from Christ, and having received Power
from him, by whom all things were Created, who has all Power in Heaven and
Earth given to him, who is the wisdom of God; we have received wisdom and power
from him: by which the Lord does give us to know, how to use and order the
Creatures to the glory of him, who is the Creator of all things. So, our
Friends here are taught of the Lord to be diligent, serving him; and who come
into the Life, the Scriptures were given forth from, are given up to serve the
Lord: And of this I have in all your Consciences a Witness. So, if thou open
the Prison-Door, we shall not stay there. If thou send a Liberate, and set us
free, we shall not stay in Prison: for Israel is to go out free, whose freedom
is purchased by the Power of God, and the Blood of Jesus. But who goes out of
the Power of God, loses his Freedom.

The 13th of the 6th Month. 1656. George Fox, and the rest who are Sufferers
for the Truth in Lanceston-Gaol.




After this Major Desborow came to the Castle-green, and there played at Bowls
with the Justices and others. And several Friends were moved to go to him, and
admonish him and them of their spending their Time so vainly; bidding them
Consider, That though they professed themselves to be Christians, yet they gave
themselves up to their Pleasures, and kept the Servants of God mean while in
Prison: and told them; The Lord would plead with them, and visit them for such
things. But notwithstanding what was writ or said unto him, he went away, and
left us in prison: Yet we understood afterward, that he left the Business to
Colonel Bennet; who had the Command of the Gaol. For sometime after Bennet
would have set us at Liberty, if we would have paid his Gaoler's Fees: But we
told him, We could give the Jailer no Fees; for we were innocent Sufferers: and
how could they expect Fees of us, who had suffered so long wrongfully? After a
while this Colonel Bennet coming to Town, sent for us to an Inn, and insisted
again upon Fees; which we refused: And at last the Power of the Lord came so
over him, that he freely set us at Liberty. It was on the Thirteenth Day of the
Seventh Month, 1656. that we were set at Liberty: and we had been Prisoners
Nine Weeks at the first Assize, called the Lent-Assize, which was in the Spring
of the Year.

Observing, while I was here a Prisoner, how much the People (they especially,
who were called the Gentry) were addicted and given to Pleasures, and vain
Recreations; I was moved, before I left the Place, to give forth several
Papers, as a Warning unto them, and unto all, that so Mispend their Time. One
of which was thus directed: This to go abroad among them, who are given to
Pleasures and Wantonness.
SOdom and Gomorrah their Sins were Pride, Fullness of Bread and abundance of
Idleness; whose filthy Conversation vexed the righteous Soul of the Just Lot
Day by Day, and would not take Warning: on whom God sent Fire, and turned them
into Ashes. And in Spiritual Sodom and Egypt was our Lord Jesus Christ
crucified; And it is written, The People sat down to eat and to drink, and
rose up to play: with whom God was not well-pleased; and there fell three and
twenty thousand in one Day: These the Apostle commanded the Saints, that they
should not follow; for these things happened to them for Examples, and are
written for our Admonition. And God spared not the Old World; but reserving
Noah, a Preacher of Righteousness, brought the Flood upon the World of the
Ungodly, making them an Example to all, that after should live Ungodly. Mark,
ye Ungodly ones, who are as natural brute Beasts, who speak great swelling
Words of Vanity, alluring through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much
Wantonness, as they that count it Pleasure to Riot in the Daytime, sporting
your selves with your own deceivings; ye shall receive the Reward of
Unrighteousness. Ye are as Dogs and Swine turned to the Vomit, and wallowing in
the Mire, speaking evil of things that ye know not; and unless ye Repent, ye
shall utterly perish in your own Corruptions. Ye have lived in Pleasure on the
Earth, and been wanton; ye have nourished your Hearts, as in a Day of
Slaughter: ye have condemned and killed the Just, and he does not resist you.
Go to, Weep and Houl for the Misery, that is coming upon you; and she that
lives in Pleasures, is dead, while she lives. God condemned the Cities of
Sodom and Gomorrah, making them an Example to all those, that after should live
Ungodly, in the wicked, filthy Conversation: Mark, here is your Example. Hear
this, ye that are given to Pleasures, and read your Examples.

G. F.



Another Paper, upon my taking Notice of the Bowlers, that came to sport
themselves in the Castle-green, was as follows: THE Word of the Lord to all
you vain and idle-minded People, who are Lovers of Sports, Pleasures, and
foolish Exercises, and Recreations, as you call them; Consider of your Ways,
what it is you are doing. Was this the End of your Creation? Did God make all
things for you, and you to serve your Lusts and Pleasures? Did not the Lord
make all things for you, and you for himself, to fear and worship him in Spirit
and in Truth, in Righteousness and true Holiness? But where is your Service of
God, so long as your Hearts run after Lusts and Pleasures? ye cannot serve God,
and the foolish Pleasures of the World, as Bowling, Drinking, Hunting, Hawking,
and the like: If these have your Hearts, God will not have your Lips: Consider,
for it is true. Therefore from the Lord must you all witness VVo and Misery,
Tribulation and Wrath, who continue in the Love and Practice of your vain
Sports, Lusts and Pleasures. Now is the Day, when all everywhere are exhorted
to Repentance: O foolish People, wicked and slow of Heart to believe the
Threatenings of the Great Jehovah against the wicked! What will you do in the
Day of the Lord's fierce wrath, that makes haste to Come upon the world of
ungodly Men! And what good have your foolish Sports and Delights done you, now
they are past? Or what good will they do you, when the Lord calls for your
Souls? Therefore all now Awake from Sleep, and see where you are: And let the
Light of Jesus Christ, that shines in every one of your Consciences, search you
thoroughly; and it will let you clearly see, for all your Profession of God,
Christ and the Scriptures, you are Ignorant of them, and Enemies to them all,
and your own Souls also: And being found living in Pleasures, you are dead,
while you live. And therefore does the Lord by many Messengers forwarn you, and
calls you to Repentance and deep Humiliation; that you may forsake the Evil of
your Doings, and so own this Day of your Visitation, and while you have Time,
to prise it: lest the things, which belong to your Peace, be hid from your
Eyes, for your Disobedience and Rebellion against the Holy One. And then had it
been good, that you never had been born: Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is
at hand; again I say, Repent!

To the Bowlers in the Green.

Given forth in Lanceston-Gaol in Cornwall.


Being Released, we got Horses, Cornwall.
and rid up into the Country toward Humphry Lower's; and met him upon the Road
coming toward us. He told us, He was much troubled in his Mind concerning us,
and could not rest at home; but was going to Colonel Bennet to seek our
Liberty. But when we told him, We were set at liberty, and were going to his
House; he was exceeding glad. So to his House we went: and there we had a fine,
precious Meeting; and many were Convinced, and turned by the Spirit of the
Lord, to the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching.

From his House we went to Loveday Hambleys, where also we had a fine large
Meeting: and the Lord's Power was over all, and many were Convinced there also;
and turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher.

After we had tarried there Two or Three Days, we came to Thomas Mounce's,
where we had a general Meeting for the whole County; which, being very large,
was held in his Orchard. Friends from Plymouth were there, and from many
Places; and the Lord's Power was over all: and a great Convincement there was
in many Places of the County. And all their Watches were down in all those
Countries; and all was plain and open: 1656. Cornwall.
for the Lord had let me see, before I was set at Liberty, that he would make
all the Country plain before us. Now Thomas and Ann Curtis, with another, an
Alderman of Reading, who was Convinced, had come to Lanceston to see us, while
I was a Prisoner: And when Ann, and the other man returned, Thomas Curtis staid
behind in Cornwall, and did good Service for the Lord there at that Time.

Lanceston
From Thomas Mounce's we passed to Lanceston again, and visited that little
Remnant of Friends, that had been raised up there, while we were there in
Prison; and the Lord's Plants grew finely, and were established on Christ,
their Rock and Foundation. As we were going out of Town again, the Constable of
Lanceston came running to us with the Cheese, that had been taken from Edward
Pyot; which they had kept from us all this while, and were tormented with it.
But we, being now set at Liberty, would not receive it.

Okington.
From Lanceston we came to Okington; and lay at an Inn, which the Mayor of the
Town kept. He had stopped and taken up several Friends, but was very Civil to us;
and was Convinced in his Judgment.

Exeter.
From thence we came through the Countries to Exeter, where many Friends were in
Prison; and amongst the rest James Nayler. For a little before the Time, that
we were set at Liberty, James run out into Imaginations, and a Company with
him; and they raised up a great Darkness in the Nation. And he came to Bristol,
and made a Disturbance there: And from thence he was coming to Lanceston, to
see me; but was stopped by the Way, and Imprisoned at Exeter: As were also
several others, that were coming to see me; one of whom, an honest, tender Man,
died in Prison there: whose Blood lies on the Heads of his Persecutors.

That Night, that we came to Exeter, I spoke with James Nayler: for I saw, he
was out, and wrong; and so was his Company. The next day, being the First Day
of the week, we went to the Prison, to visit the Prisoners; and had a Meeting
with them in the Prison: but James Nayler, and some of them could not stay the
Meeting. There came a Corporal of Horse into the Meeting, and was Convinced;
and remained a very good Friend. The next day I spoke to James Nayler again;
and he slighted, what I said, and was dark, and much out: yet he would have
come, and kissed me. But I said, Since he had turned against the Power of God,
I could not receive his show of Kindness: So the Lord God moved me to slight
him, and to set the Power of God over him. So after I had been warring with the
World, there was now a wicked Spirit risen up amongst Friends to war against:
and I admonished him and his Company. And when he was come to London, his
Resisting the Power of God in me, and the Truth that was declared to him by me,
became one of his greatest Burdens, but he came to see his Out-going, and to
Condemn it; and after some Time he returned to Truth again: as in the printed
Relation of his Repentance, Condemnation and Recovery may be more fully seen.

We passed from Exeter through Collumpton and Taunton, 1656. Collumpton.
Taunton. Puddimoor.
visiting Friends; and had Meetings amongst them, and declared the Word of Life
unto them. And from thence we came to Puddimoor, to William Beaton's; and on
the First Day we had a very large Meeting there. For a great Convincement there
was all up and down that Country, and many Meetings we had, and the Lord's
Power was over all; and many were turned, by the Power and Spirit of God, to
the Lord Jesus Christ, who died for them, and they came to sit under his free
Teaching.

From thence we went to John Dandy's, where we had another precious Meeting;
and the Lord's Power was over all, and many were Convinced of God's Eternal
Truth. Some Contention was raised by Professors and Baptists, in some Places;
but the Lord's Power came over them. -- near Bristol.
From thence we came to Edward Pyot's house near Bristol. It was the
Seventh-day at Night, that we came thither: And it was quickly noised over the
Town, that I was come. Now I had never been there before.

On the First Day Morning I went to the Meeting in Broadmead at Bristol; and a
great Meeting there was, and quiet. Bristol- Meeting.
Notice was given of a Meeting to be in the Afternoon in the Orchard. There was
at Bristol a rude Baptist, named Paul Gwin, who had used before to make great
disturbance in our Meetings; being encouraged and set on by the Mayor, who, as
it was reported, would sometimes give him his Dinner to Encourage him. And such
multitudes of rude People would he gather after him, that it was thought, there
had been sometimes Ten thousand people at our Meeting in the Orchard. As I was
going along into the Orchard, the People told me, That Paul Gwin, the rude,
jangling Baptist, was going to the Meeting: But I bid them, Never heed; It was
nothing to me, who went to it. When I was come into the Orchard, I stood upon
the Stone, that Friends used to stand on, when they spoke: and I was moved of
the Lord, to put off my Hat, and to stand a pretty while; and let the People
look at me: for some Thousands of People were there. While I thus stood silent,
this Rude Baptist began to find Fault with my Hair; but I said nothing to him.
Then he run on into Words; and at last, Ye wise men of of Bristol, said he, I
strange at you, that you will stand here, and hear a Man speak and affirm that,
which he cannot make good. Then the Lord opened my Mouth (for as yet I had not
spoken a Word) And I asked the People, Whether they ever heard me speak before:
or ever saw me before? And I bid them, 'Take notice, what kind of Man this was
amongst them, that should so Impudently say, That I spoke and Affirmed, that
which I could not make good; and yet neither he, nor they ever heard me, or saw
me before. Therefore that was a lying, envious, malicious Spirit, that spoke in
him; and it was of the Devil, and not of God. Therefore I charged him in the
Dread and Power of the Lord, to be silent: And the Mighty Power of God came
over him, and all his Company. And then a glorious, peaceable Meeting we had,
and the Word of Life was divided amongst them; and they were turned from the
Darkness to the Light, and to Jesus their Savior. And the Scriptures were
largely opened to them; and the Traditions, and Rudiments, and ways, 1656.
Bristol.
and Doctrines of Men were laid open before the People, which they had been in;
and they were turned to the Light of Christ, that with it they might see them,
and see him to lead them out of them. I opened also to them the Types, and
Figures, and Shadows of Christ in the time of the Law; and showed them, That
Christ was come, and had ended the Types, and Shadows, and Tithes, and Oaths,
and put down Swearing; and had set up Yea and Nay instead of it, and a free
Ministry: for he was now come to Teach People himself, and his heavenly Day was
springing from on high. So for many hours did I declare the Word of Life
amongst them in the Eternal Power of God; that by him they might come up into
the Beginning, and be Reconciled to him. And having turned them to the Spirit
of God in themselves, that would lead into all Truth, I was moved to pray in
the mighty Power of God; and the Lord's Power came over all. But when I had
done, this Fellow began to babble again; and John Audland was moved to bid him
Repent, and fear God. So his own People and Followers being ashamed of him, he
passed away, and never came again to disturb the Meeting. And the Meeting brake
up quietly, and the Lord's Power and Glory shined over all: a blessed Day it
was, and the Lord had the Praise. After a while this Paul Gwin went beyond the
Seas; and many Years after, I met with him again at Barbado's: of which in its
Place.

From Bristol we returned to Edward Pyot's, where we had a great Meeting; and
the Lord's Power was over all, and Truth was declared and spread abroad, and
many were turned to Christ Jesus, their Life, their Prophet to teach them,
their Shepherd to feed them, and their Bishop to oversee them. After the
Meeting was done, I had some Reasoning with some Professors; and the Lord's
Truth and Power came over them.

Slattenford.
From Edward Pyot's we passed to Slattenford, where we had a very large Meeting
(Edward Pyot and another Friend being still with me;) and a great turning of
People there was to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher: and People were glad,
that they were brought to know their Way, and their free Teacher, and their
Savior Christ Jesus.

Wiltshire.
On the First Day following we went to Nathaniel Crips his House, who had been a
Justice of Peace in Wiltshire; where it was supposed, there were between Two
and Three Thousand People at a Meeting, and all was quiet: And the mighty Power
of God was manifest, and People were turned to the Grace and Truth in their
Hearts, that came by Jesus Christ, which would Teach them to deny all
Ungodliness and wordly Lusts, and to live soberly and godly in this present
world. So that every Man and Woman might know the Grace of God, which had
appeared to all Men, and which was saving, and sufficient to bring their
Salvation. This was to be their Teacher, the Grace of God, which would teach
them how to live, what to do, and what to deny: and would season their Words,
and establish their Hearts. And this was a free Teacher to every one of them:
so that they might come to be Heirs of this Grace, and of Christ, by whom it
came; who has ended the Prophets, and the Priests that took Tithes, and the
Jewish Temple. And as for these Hireling-Priests that take Tithes now, 1656.
Wiltshire.
and their Temples (which Priests were made a^ Schools and Colleges of Man's
setting up, and not by Christ) they, with all their Inventions were to be
denied. For the Apostles denied the true Priesthood and Temple, which God had
commanded, after Christ had put an End thereto. So the Scriptures, and the
Truths therein contained were largely opened, and the People turned to the
Spirit of God in their Hearts; that by it they might be led into all Truth, and
understand the Scriptures, and know God and Christ, and come to have Unity with
them, and one with another in the same Spirit. And the People went away
generally satisfied, and were glad, that they were turned to Christ Jesus,
their Teacher and Savior.

The next day we went from thence to Marlborough, Marleborough.
where we had a little Meeting. And the Sessions being in that Town that day,
they were granting forth a Warrant to send for me: But one Justice Stooks being
at the Sessions, stopped them; telling them, There was a Meeting at his House
yesterday, at which were several Thousands. So the Warrant was stopped, and our
Meeting was quiet; and several received Christ Jesus their Teacher, and came
into the New Covenant, and abode in it.

From hence we went to Newberry, where we had a large, Newberry
blessed Meeting; and several were Convinced there. Thence we passed on to
Reading, where we had a large, Reading.
precious Meeting in the Lord's Power amongst the Plants of God; and many of
the World came in, and were reached, and added to the Meeting: and all was
quiet, and the Lord's Power was over all. Kingston upon Thames.
We went from Reading to Kingston upon Thames, where a few came in to us, that
were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ: but since, it is become a Larger Meeting.

Leaving Kingston, we rode to London. Hide-park
And when we came near Hide-Park, we saw a great Concourse of People: and
looking toward them, we espied the Protector coming in his Coach. Whereupon I
rode up to his Coach-side: and some of his Lifeguard would have put me away;
but he forbad them. So I rode down by his Coach-side with him, declaring, what
the Lord gave me to say unto him, of his Condition, and of the Sufferings of
Friends in the Nation; showing him, 'how contrary this Persecution was to
Christ and his Apostles, and to Christianity. London.
When we were come to James's Park-gate, I left him; and at parting he desired
me to come to his House. The next Day, one of his Wife's Maids, whose Name was
Mary Sanders, came up to me at my Lodging, and said; Her Master came to her,
and told her, he would tell her some good News: And when she asked him, What it
was? He told her, George Fox was come to Town. She replied, That was good News
indeed (for she was one, that had received Truth) but she said, She could
hardly believe him; till he told her, how I met him, and rode from Hide-Park
down to James 's Park with him.

After a little time Edward Pyot and I went to Whitehall: Whitehal.
And when we came before him, there was one called Dr. Owen, Vicechancellor of
Oxford, with him. We were moved to speak to Oliver Cromwell concerning the
Sufferings of Friends, and laid them before him; and directed him to the Light
of Christ, who had enlightened (...) appeared to all Men. 1656. London.
Jude says; Behold, the Lord comes with Ten Thousands of his Saints, to
execute Judgment upon all, and to convince all that are Ungodly among them, of
all their ungodly Deeds, which they have ungodly committed, and of all their
hard Speeches, which ungodly Sinners have spoken against him, (ver. 15.) Here
mark again; Him that comes with ten Thousands of his Saints, to Convince all
of their ungodly Deeds, and hard Speeches: Here it is, All of their ungodly
Deeds; and All of their hard Speeches: none left out, but All to be Convinced
and Judged, the World Reproved, by him who comes with ten Thousands of his
Saints, and will Reign, and be King and Judge. And have not ye all something in
you, that does Reprove you for your hard Speeches, and your ungodly Deeds, the
Ungodliest of you all, who live in your hard Speeches against him, and against
his Light and spiritual Appearance in his People?

Again, the Apostle writing to the Gentiles, says, But unto every one of us is
given Grace, according to the Measure of the gift of Christ, (Ephesians. 4.7) Now
mark, Here is the Measure of the Gift of Christ, who lights every Man, that
comes into the World, (Joh. 1.9.) that all Men through him might believe. He
that believes on him, is not condemned: but he that believes not, is
condemned, etc. And this is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the
World, etc. (Joh. 3.18.19.) Now every Man, that comes unto the World, being
enlightened, One, he loves it, and brings his Deeds to the Light, that with the
Light he may see, whether they be wrought in God: The Other, he hates the
Light, because his Deeds are Evil; and he will not bring his Deeds to the
Light, because he knows, the Light will reprove him. So he that hates the
Light, wherewith Christ has enlightened him, knows, the Light will reprove him
for his evil Deeds; and therefore he will not come to the Light.

Again, the Lord by his Prophet says concerning Christ; I will give him for a
Light to the Gentiles, that he may be my Salvation to the Ends of the Earth,
(Isa. 49.6.) And what is that, which the Children, that walk according to the
Course of this World, according to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the
Spirit, that now works in the Children of Disobedience, (Ephesians. 2.2.) are
disobedient to? Mark, and read your selves, who being disobedient, walk
according to the Course of the World, according to the Power of the Prince of
the Air; Mark, I say, what it is, that all such are disobedient to? He that
has an Ear, let him hear. The Apostle says to the Colossians, The wrath of
God comes upon the Children of Disobedience, (Col. 3.6.) Come ye Professors,
let us see, Is not this something of God, that is disobeyed? Is it not that
which is of God manifest in them, which God has showed them, which lets them
see, God's Judgments are upon such, when they act unrighteously? Is not this
the Measure of God, (Mark) and the Spirit that is in Prison? and the Spirit of
God, that is grieved?

And ye Professors, come, let us read the Parable of the Talents, and reckon
with you, and see, who it is, that has hid the Lord's Money in the Earth? Come
ye, that have gained, enter ye into your Master's Joy: Go thou, that have hid
the Lord's Money in the Earth, into utter Darkness; Take it from him, and give
it to him that has: and every Man shall have his Reward. For the Lord has
given to every Man, according to ^is several Ability (Mat. 25.15.) Mark that,
To every Man according to his several Ability: Read this, if you can: And now
is the Lord coming to call every Man severally to Account, to whom he has
given severally, according to their Ability. And now the wicked and slothful
Servant, who hid the Lord's Money in the Earth, will be found out; and the
Lord's Money will be taken from him, although he has hidden it: To him the
Lord's Commands have been grievous; but to us they are not, who love God and
keep his Commandments. And, says the Apostle to the Romans, I say, through the
Grace given unto me to every Man that is among you, not to think of himself
more highly, than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God
has dealt to every Man the measure of Faith, (Romans 12.3.) Read and mark, here
is a Measure of Faith.

And, says another Apostle, As every one has received the Gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold grace of
God, (1 Pet. 4.10.) For the grace of God has appeared to all Men. Now, the
good Stewards can give their Account with Joy: But ye bad Stewards, that turn
the grace of God into Lasciviousness, now ye will be reckoned withal; now ye
shall have your Reward. But, say the World, Must every one minister, as he has
received the Gift? Yea, say I, but let him speak, as the Oracles of God; and
let him do it, as of the Ability, which God gives, (ver. 11.) John in the
Revelation says, They were judged every Man according to their works, (Rev.
20.13.) Christ says; Every idle Word, that Men shall speak, they shall give
Account thereof in the day of Judgment, (Mat 12.36.) So ye, that name the Name
of Christ, depart from Iniquity, (2 Timothy 2.19.) The Son of Man shall come in
the glory of his Father, with his Angels; and then he shall reward every Man
according to his Works, (Mat 16.27.) He who is gone into a far Country, and
has given the Talents to every one of you, according to your several Ability,
will render to every Man according to his Deeds, (Romans 2.6.) And further I say
unto you, If any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if
Christ be in you, the Body is dead because of Sin; but the Spirit is Life,
because of Righteousness, (Rom 8.9, 10.) So let the Light, which comes from
Christ, Examine: for the Lord is appearing. Ye that have received according to
your Ability, smite not your Fellow Servants; and think not, that the Lord
delayeth the Time of his Coming: Be not, as they that said, Let us Eat and
Drink, for to Morrow we shall die.

The Apostle tells the Ephesians, that unto him this grace was given -- to make
all Men see, what is the Fellowship of the Mystery, which from the beginning of
the World has been hid in God, who created all things by Jesus Christ, (Ephesians.
3.9.) Read and understand every one with the Light, which comes from Christ,
the Mystery; which will be your Condemnation, if ye believe not in it. This is
to all, who stumble at the work of the Spirit of God, the manifestation of it,
which is given to every Man, to profit withal. Come, ye Professors, who stumble
at it; Let us read the Parables. A Sower went forth to sow; and some Seed fell
on the High-way-ground, and some on stony ground, and some on thorny ground:
The Seed is the word, the Son of Man is the Seeds-man. He that has an Ear, let
him hear, (Mat. 13.) Now look, all ye Professors, which Ground ye are? And what
ye have brought forth? And whether the wicked Seeds-man has not got his Seed
into your Ground? He that has an Ear, let him hear it. And come, read another
Parable, of the Householder, hiring Laborers to go into the Vineyard, and
agreeing with every Man for a Penny, (Mat. 20.) Every Man is to have his Penny;
the Last that went in, as well as the First: and the Last shall be First, and
the First shall be Last; for many are called, but few are chosen. He that has
an Ear, let him hear. There is a Promise spoken to Cain, that if he did well,
he should be accepted, (Genesis 4.7.) And Esau had a Birthright, but despised it.
Yet is it not of him that wills, (Romans 9.16.) but by grace ye are saved,
(Ephesians. 2.8.) And stand still, and see your Salvation, (Exodus 14.13.) And ye
that be Children of Light, put on the Armor of Light, that ye may come into
the Unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God; unto a perfect
Man, unto the measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ: that henceforth
ye be no more Children tossed to and fro, (Ephesians. 4.13.)

And the Lord said, he would make a new Covenant, by writing his Law in
People's Hearts, and putting his Spirit in their inward parts; whereby they
should all come to know the Lord, him by whom the World was made. Now every one
of you mind the Law written in your Hearts, and this Spirit put in your inward
parts; that it need not be said to you, Know the Lord: but that ye may witness
the Promise of God fulfilled in you. But, say the World and Professors, If
every one must come to witness the Law of God written in their Hearts, and the
Spirit put in the inward parts; what must we do with all our Teachers? As we
come to witness that, we need not any Man to Teach us to know the Lord, having
his Law written in our Hearts, and his Spirit put in our inward parts. This is
the Covenant of Life, the everlasting Covenant, which decays not, not changes
not: and here is the way to the Father, without which no Man comes unto the
Father. And here is the Everlasting Priesthood, the End of the Old Priesthood,
whose Lips were to preserve Knowledge: but now says Christ, Learn of me; who
is the High Priest of the New Priesthood. And, says the Apostle, -- That ye
may grow up in the Knowledge of Jesus Christ, in whom are hid the Treasures of
Wisdom and Knowledge. So we are brought off from the Old Priesthood, that did
change, to Christ, to the New Priesthood, that does not change; and off from
the first Covenant, that does decay, to the Everlasting Covenant, that does not
decay, Christ Jesus, the Covenant of Light, from whom every one of you have a
Light, that ye might believe in the Covenant of Light. If ye do not believe, ye
are condemned: for Light is come into the World; and Men love Darkness rather
than Light, because their Deeds are evil. I am come a Light into the World,
says Christ, that whosoever believes in me, should not abide in Darkness, but
have the Light of Life, (Joh. 12.46.) And, Believe in the Light, that ye may be
Children of the Light. But ye, who do not believe in the Light, but hate it,
because it manifests your Deeds to be evil; ye are they, that are condemned by
the Light. Therefore while ye have Time, prize it: Seek the Lord, while he may
be found, and call upon him, while he is nigh; lest ye say, Time is past: for
the Rich Glutton's Time was past. Therefore while Time is not quite past,
consider and search your selves, and see, if ye be not they, that hate the
Light; and so are Builders, that stumble at the Cornerstone: for they that
hated the Light, and did not believe in the Light, did so in Ages past. I am
the Light of the World, says Christ, and who does enlighten every Man, that
comes into the World: and he also says, Learn of me; and of him God says,
This is my beloved Son, hear ye him: Here is your Teacher. But ye that hate the
Light, do not learn of Christ, and will not have him to be your King, to reign
over you; him, to whom all Power in Heaven and Earth is given, who bears his
Government upon his Shoulders, who is now come to reign: who lights every
Man, that comes into the World; and who will give to every Man a Reward,
according to his Works, whether they be good or evil. So every Man, with the
Light that comes from Christ, will see his Deeds, both he that hates it, and he
that loves it. And he that will not bring his Deeds to the Light, because the
Light will reprove him, that is his Condemnation; and he shall have a Reward
according to his Deeds. For the Lord is come to reckon with you, and he looks
for Fruits; and now the Ax is laid to your Root, and every Tree of you, that
bears not good Fruit, must be hewn down, and cast into the Fire.

G. F.



Having staid sometime in London, and visited the Meetings of Friends in and
about the City, and cleared my self, of what Services the Lord had at that time
laid upon me there, I left the Town; and traveled into Kent, Sussex and
Surrey, Kent. Sussex. Survey.
visiting Friends in those Counties: amongst whom I had great Meetings; and
many times met with Opposition from Baptists, and other jangling Professors:
but the Lord's Power went over them.

We lay one Night at Farnham, where we had a little Meeting; Farnham.
and the People were exceeding Rude: But at last the Lord's Power came over
them. After Meeting we went to our Inn, and gave notice, That any, that feared
God, might come to our Inn to us: And there came abundance of rude People, and
the Magistrates of the Town also; and some Professors. I declared the Truth
unto them; and those of the People, that behaved themselves rudely, the
Magistrates put out of the Room. When they were gone, there came up another
Rude Company of Professors, and some of the Chief of the Town: and they called
for Faggots and Drink, though we forbad them; and were as Rude a carriaged
People, as ever I met withal. The Lord's Power chained them, that they had not
power to do us any Mischief: but when they went away, they left all their
Faggots and Beer, which they had called for into the Room, for us to pay for in
the Morning. We showed the Innkeeper, what an Unworthy thing it was; but he
told us, we must pay it: and pay it we did. And before we left the Town, I writ
a Paper to the Magistrates and Heads of the Town, and to the Priest, showing
them and him, how he had taught his People; 1656. Basingstoke.
and laying before them their rude and uncivil Carriage to Strangers, that
sought their good.

Then leaving that Place, we came to Basingstoke, a very Rude Town; where they
had formerly very much abused Friends. There I had a Meeting in the Evening,
which was quiet; for the Lord's Power chained the Unruly. At the Close of the
Meeting I was moved to put off my Hat, and to pray to the Lord to open their
Understandings: upon which they raised a Report, That I put off my Hat to them,
and bid them Good Night; which was never in my Heart. After the Meeting, when
we came to our Inn, I sent for the Innkeeper (as I used to do;) and he came
into the Room to us, and showed himself a very Rude Man. I admonished him to be
sober, and fear the Lord: but he called for Faggots, and a pint of Wine, and
drank it off himself; and then called for another: and called up half a dozen
men into our Chamber. Thereupon I bid him go out of the Chamber, and told him,
he should not drink there; for we sent for him up to speak to him concerning
his Eternal good: And he was exceeding mad, rude and drunk. When he continued
his Rudeness, and would not be gone, I told him, The Chamber was mine, for the
Time I lodged in it; and I called for the Key: and then he went away in a great
Rage. In the Morning he would not be seen: but I told his Wife of his
Unchristian and Rude Carriage toward us.

Bridport.
After this we passed through the Country, till we came to Bridport; having
Meetings in the way. We went to an Inn there, and sent into the Town for such
as feared God, to come to us: and there came a Shopkeeper, a Professor, and
put off his Hat to us: and seeing, we did not the like to him again, but said
Thou and Thee to him, he told us; He was not of our Religion: and after some
discourse with him, he went away; his Wife (who came with him) being somewhat
loving. Then went he, and stirred up the Priest and Magistrates against us: and
after a while sent to the Inn to us, to desire us to come to his House; for
there were some would speak with us, he said. Thomas Curtis was then with me,
and he went down to the Man's House: where when he came, the Man had laid a
snare for him; for he had gotten the Priest and Magistrates thither: and they
boasted much, that they had catched George Fox, taking him for me. When they
perceived their Mistake, they were in a great Rage: yet the Lord's Power came
over them, so that they let him go again. Mean while I had an Opportunity of
speaking to some sober People, that came to the Inn. And when Thomas was come
back, and we were passing out of the Town, some of them came to us, and said;
The Officers were coming to fetch me: But the Lord's Power came over them all,
so that they had not power to touch me. There were some Convinced in the Town
that time, who were turned to the Lord; and have stood faithful in their
Testimony to the Truth ever since, and a fine Meeting there is there.

1657. Portsm. Pool. Ringwood Weym. Dorchester.
Passing from hence we visited Portsmouth and Pool, where we had glorious
Meetings; and many were turned to the Lord. And at Ringwood we had a large
general Meeting, where the Lord's Power was over all. And at Weymouth we had a
Meeting: and from thence came to Dorchester, and so to Lime, where the Inn we
went to, was taken up with Mountebanks; 1657. Lime.
so that there was hardly any room for us, or our horses. In the Evening we
drew up some Queries concerning the ground of all Diseases, and the Natures and
Virtues of Medicinable Creatures, and sent them to the Mountebanks; letting
them know, If they would not answer them, we would stick them on the Cross next
Day: This brought them down, and made them Cool; for they could not answer
them: But in the Morning they reasoned a little with us: And we left the
Queries with some friendly People, that were Convinced in the Town, to stick
upon the Market-Cross. And the Lord's Power reached some of the sober People in
that place, who were turned by the Light and Spirit of Christ to his free
Teaching.

Then traveled we on through the Country, till we came to Exeter: Exeter.
and there, at the Sign of the Seven Stars, an Inn at the Bridge-foot, we had a
general Meeting of Friends out of Cornwall and Devonshire; to which came Humphry
Lower, and Thomas Lower, and John Ellis from the Land's End, and Henry
Pollexfen, and Friends from Plymouth, Elizabeth Trelawny, and diverse other
Friends. A blessed, heavenly Meeting we had, and the Lord's everlasting Power
came over all; in which I saw, and said, That the Lord's power had surrounded
this Nation round about, as with a Wall and Bulwark; and his Seed reached from
Sea to Sea: And Friends were established in the everlasting Seed of Life,
Christ Jesus, their Life, Rock, Teacher and Shepherd.

The next Morning after the Meeting, Major Blackmore sent Soldiers to
apprehend me; but I was gone, before they came: and as I was riding up the
Street, I saw the Officers going down. So the Wolf missed the Lamb; and the
Lord crossed them in their Design: and Friends passed away peaceably and
quietly. The Soldiers examined some Friends, after I was gone, What they did
there? but when they told them, They were in their Inn, and had occasions and
business in the City; they passed away without meddling any further with them.

From Exeter I traveled through the Countries, taking Meetings as I went, till
I came to Bristol; and was at the Meeting there. Bristol.
After the Meeting was done, I did not stay in the Town; but passed up into
Wales, and had a Meeting at the Slone: WALES, Slone. Cardiff.
and so passed through the Country to Cardiff; where a Justice of Peace sent to
me, desiring, I would come up, with half a dozen of my Friends to his House. So
I took a Friend or two, and went up to him; and he and his Wife received us
very civilly. The next Day we had a Meeting in Cardiff in the Town Hall; and
that Justice sent about seventeen of his Family to the Meeting. There came some
disturbers; but the Lord's Power was over them: and many were turned to the
Lord there. There were some, that had run out with James Naylor, that did not
come to Meetings; to whom I sent Word, That the Day of their Visitation was
over: and they never prospered after.

We traveled from Cardiff through the Country, to Swanzey, Swanzey.
where we had a blessed Meeting: and a Meeting was settled there in the Name of
Jesus. In our way thither we passed over in a Passage-boat with the
High Sheriff of the County: and the next Day I went to have spoken with him;

From thence we went to another Meeting in the Country; where the Lord's
Presence was much with us. And from thence we went to a Great Man's House, who
received us very lovingly; but the next Morning he would not be seen: One, that
in the mean time came to him, had so estranged him, that we could not get to
him to speak with him again, he was so Changed; and yet overnight was
exceeding Loving.

We passed still on through the Countries, having Meetings, and gathering
People in the Name of Christ, to him their heavenly Teacher; Brecknock.
till we came to Brecknock: where we set up our Horses at an Inn. There went
with me Thomas Holmes, and John ap John; who was moved of the Lord to speak in
the Streets. I walked out but a little into the Fields: and when I came in
again, the Town was up in an Vproar. When I came into the Chamber in the Inn,
it was full of People; and they were speaking in Welsh: I desired them to speak
in English; and they did: and much discourse we had. After a while they went
away. But toward Night the Magistrates gathered together in the Streets, with
a multitude of People; and they bid them shout: and gathered up the Town: So
that for about Two Hours together, there was such a Noise, as the like we had
not heard; and the Magistrates set them on to shout again, when they had given
over. We thought, it looked like the Vproar, which we read was amongst Diana's
Handicrafts-Men: This Tumult continued, till it was within Night; and if the
Lord's Power had not limited, them, they seemed likely to have pulled down the
House, and us to pieces.

After it was Night, the Woman of the House would have had us go to Supper in
another Room: but we discerning her Plot, refused. Then she would have had half
a dozen Men come into the Room to us, under pretense of discoursing with us:
but we told her; That no Persons should come into our Room that Night, neither
would we go to them. Then she told us, we should sup in another Room: but we
told her, we would have no Supper, if we had it not in our own Room. At length
when she saw, she could not get us out; she brought up our Supper in a great
Rage. So She and They were crossed in their Design: for they had an Intent to
have done us Mischief; but the Lord God prevented them. Next Morning I writ a
Paper to the Town concerning their Unchristian Carriages; showing the Fruits of
their Priests and Magistrates: and as I passed out of the Town, I spoke to the
People, and told them; They were a shame to Christianity, and Religion.

From this Place we went to a great Meeting in a Steeple-house-yard; where was
a Priest, and Walter Jenkin, who had been a Justice, and another Justice: and a
blessed, glorious Meeting we had. And there being many Professors, I was moved
of the Lord to open the Scriptures to them, and to Answer the Objections, which
they stuck at in their Profession (for I knew them very well;) and to turn them
to Christ, who had enlightened them: with which Light they might see their Sins
and Trespasses they had been dead in, and their Savior, him that came to
Redeem them out of them, 1657. Brechnock.
who was to be their Way to God, the Truth and the Life to them, and their
Priest made higher than the Heavens, so that they might come to sit under his
Teaching. A peaceable Meeting we had; and many were Convinced, and settled in
the Truth that day. After the Meeting was over, I went with Walter Jenkin to
the other Justice's House; and he said unto me, You have this day given great
satisfaction to the People, and answered all the Objections, that were in their
Minds. For the People had the Scriptures, but they were not turned to the
Spirit, which should let them see that, which gave them forth, the Spirit of
God; which is the Key to open them.

From hence we passed to Pontamile, to Richard Hamborow's, Pontamile
where was a great Meeting; to which there came another Justice of Peace, and
several Great People: whose Understandings were opened by the Lord's Spirit and
Power, and the Light of Jesus Christ; and they came to be turned to the Lord
Jesus Christ, from whence it came. A great Convincement there was; and a large
Meeting is gathered in those parts, and settled in the Name of Jesus.

After this we returned back to England, and came to Shrewsbury, England.
Shrewsbury.
where we had a great Meeting: and visited Friends all up and down the
Countries in their Meetings, till we came to William Gandy's in Cheshire;
Cheshire.
where we had a Meeting of between two and three thousand People (as it was
thought:) and the everlasting Word of Life was held forth, and received that
day. A blessed Meeting it was; for Friends were settled by the Power of God
upon Christ Jesus, the Rock and Foundation.

At this time there was a great Drought: And after this general Meeting was
ended, there fell so great a Rain, that Friends said; they thought we could not
Travel, the Brooks and Waters would be so risen. But I believed, the Rain had
gone so far, as they had come that day to the Meeting. And the next day in the
Afternoon, when we turned back into some parts of Wales again, the ways were
dusty; and no Rain had fallen thereabouts.

And when Oliver Cromwell set forth a Proclamation for a Fast throughout the
Nation, for Rain, when there was a very great Drought, it was observed, that as
far as Truth had spread in the North, there were pleasant Showers and Rain
enough; when in the South, in many places, they were almost spoiled for want of
Rain. At that time I was moved to write an Answer to the Protector's
Proclamation; wherein I told him: If he had come to own God's Truth, he should
have had Rain: And that Drought was a Sign unto them of their Barrenness, and
Want of the Water of Life. And about the same time was writ the following Paper
to Distinguish betwixt the true and false Fasts.

1656. London.
Concerning the True Fast and the False.
TO all you, that be keeping Fasts, who smite with the fist of wickedness, and
f^st for Strife and Debate; against you has the Voice cried aloud, like a
Trumpet, that you may come to know the true fast, which is accepted; and the
fast, which is in the Strife and the Debate, and smiting with the fists of
wickedness: Which fast is not required of the Lord. Behold, in the day of your
fast you find Pleasure, and exact all your Labor: Behold (mark, take notice)
ye fast for Strife and Debate, and to smite with the fist of wickedness: Ye
shall not fast, as ye do this day, to make your Voice known on High Is it such
a fast, that I have chosen, says the Lord, a day for a Man to afflict his
Soul? Is it to bow down his Head, like a Bulrush, and to spread Sackcloth
under him? Will thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord?

Consider all you, that do fast, see, if it be not hanging down the Head for a
day, like a Bulrush; and are in Strife and Debate, and to smite with the fists
of wickedness, to make your Voice to be known on high? But this fast is not
with the Lord accepted: but that, which leads you from Strife, from Debate,
from Wickedness; which is not the bowing down of the Head, as a Bulrush for a
day, and yet live in Exacting and Pleasure; this is not accepted with the Lord:
but that which separates from all these beforementioned. Which separates from
Wickedness, Debate, Strife, Pleasures, smiting with the fist of wickedness,
that which separates from that, brings to know the true fast, which breaks the
bonds of Iniquity, and deals the bread to the hungry; brings the poor, that are
cast out, to his own House; and when he sees any Naked, he covers them, and
hides not himself from his own Flesh. Here is the true fast, which separates
from them, where the bonds of Iniquity are standing, and the heavy burdens of
the Oppressed remaining, and the Yoke not broken; who deals not the Bread to
the Hungry, and brings not the Poor to their own House; and sees the Naked, but
lets him go uncloathed, and hides himself from his own Flesh. Yet such will
make their Voice to be heard on high, as Christ speaks of the Pharisees, which
sounded a Trumpet before them, and disfigured their Faces, to appear to Men to
fast; but the bonds of Iniquity were standing, Strife and Debate was standing,
striking with the fists of wickedness standing; that made their Voice heard on
high, who had their Reward.

But that which brings to the true fast, which appears not to Men to fast, but
unto the Father, which sees in secret; and the Father, that sees in secret,
shall reward thee openly. This fast separates from the Pharisees-fast, and them
that bow the Head for a day, like a Bulrush: And this is it, which brings to
deal the Bread to the hungry, and cloth thine own flesh, when thou see them
naked; and bring the Poor to thine House, and to loose the bonds of Wickedness,
mark, this is the fast; and to undo every heavy burden (mark again) and to let
the oppressed go free; this is the fast: and to break every Yoke. And thou,
that observest this fast, Then shall thy light break forth, 1657. London.
as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily, and thy
Righteousness shall go before thee: the glory of the Lord shall be thy
Re-reward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer; thou shall cry, and
he shall say, here I am: If thou take away from the midst of thee the Yoke, the
putting forth of the Finger, and speaking Vanity: and if thou draw out thy Soul
to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul; then shall thy light arise in
obscurity, and thy darkness be as the Noonday. The Light brings to know this
fast; and walking in it, this fast is kept: and he that believes in the Light,
in darkness abides not. And again; The Lord shall guide thee continually, and
satisfy thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy Bones; and thou shall be like a
watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not, Isa. 58.11.
These are them, that are guided with the Light, which comes from Christ, where
the Springs are.

And again: They that shall be of thee, (that keeps this fast) shall build the
old waste Places, and thou shall raise up the foundations of many Generations;
and thou shall be called the Repairer of the breach, the Restorer of paths to
dwell in, Isa. 58.12. Now that, which gives to see the foundation of many
Generations, is the Light, which separates from all, which is out of the Light:
and they that go out of the Light, though they may pretend a fast, and bowing
down the Head for a time; yet they are far from this fast, that does raise up
the Foundation of many Generations; and is the Repairer of the breach, and
Restorer of the paths to dwell in. That which does give to see this foundation
of many Generations, and these Breaches, that are to be repaired and restored,
and Paths to dwell in, is the Light, which brings to know the true fast: and
where this fast is known, which is from Wickedness, from Debate, from Strife,
from Pleasures, from Exacting, from the Voice that is heard on high, from the
speaking of Vanity, from the bonds of Iniquity, which breaks every Yoke, and
lets the Oppressed go free; here the Health grows. Where the Morning is known,
Righteousness goes forth; the Glory of the Lord is the Re-reward, and the Light
rises, and the Soul is drawn out to the Hungry, and satisfies the afflicted
Soul; and the Springs of living Water are known and felt. The Waters fail not
here; the Lord guides continually, and the Foundation of many Generations comes
to be seen and raised up: And the Repairer of Breaches is here witnessed, and
the Restorer of Paths to dwell in.

But all such, as be from the Light, which the Prophets were in, with which
they saw Christ, and such to be in Fasts, where was Strife, where was
Wickedness, where was Debate, where was bowing down the Head like a Bulrush for
a day, lifting their Voice on high, and the bonds of wickedness yet standing,
and the Burdens unloosed, and the Oppressed not let go free, and the Yoke not
broken, the Nakedness not clothed, the Bread not dealt to the Hungry, and this
foundation of many Generations, not raised up; until these things
beforementioned be broken down, on such the Light breaks not forth, as the
Morning, and the Lord hears them not. And such have their Reward, and their
Iniquities have separated them from their God, and their Sins have hid his Face
from them, that he will not hear: and such their Hands are defiled with Blood,
and their Fingers with Iniquity; whose Lips have spoken Lies, and Tongues have
muttered Perverseness. None calls for Justice, nor any Plead for Truth; they
trust in Vanity, and speak Lies, they conceive Mischief, and bring forth
Iniquity. They hatch Cockatrice-Eggs, and weave the Spiders-Web: he that eats
of their Eggs, dies; and that which is crushed, breaks out into a Viper: their
Webbs shall not become Garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their
Works. Mark and take notice; Their works are works of Iniquity, and the Act of
Violence is in their Hands: Their Feet run to do evil, and they make haste to
shed innocent Blood. Their Thoughts are Thoughts of Iniquity, Wasting and
Destruction are in their Paths; the way of Peace they know not, and there is no
Judgment in their Doings. They have made them a crooked Path; whosoever goes
therein, shall not know Peace: Mark: Such go from the Light, therefore is
Judgment far; neither does Justice overtake. And here is Obscurity, and here is
the walking in Darkness; and here is the groping, like blind Men, as though
they had no Eyes, and their stumbling at Noonday in the desolate Places, like
blind Men. And here is the roaring like Bears, and mourning sorely like Doves;
and here Judgment is looked for, but there is none, and Salvation is put far
off: For the Light is denied, which gives to see it. But here the multiplying
of Transgression, and their Sins testifying against them, and the Transgression
that was within them, and their Iniquities, which they knew in transgressing
and lying against the Lord, speaking the things they should not; when that they
knew with that of God in them, they should not speak it. So departing from the
way of God, speaking Oppression, revolting, conceiving and uttering forth from
the Heart words of Falsehood; here is Judgment turned away backward, and Justice
stands afar off: Truth is fallen in the Streets, and Equity cannot enter. Yea,
Truth fails; and he that departs from Evil, makes himself a Prey: Yea, the
Lord saw it, and it displeased him. These are such, that are in the Fast, which
God does not accept; and are not in the true fast, whose Light breaks forth as
the Morning: but these are such, that be in the false fast, who grope, like
blind Men.

And that which gives to know the true fast, and the false fast, is the Light,
which is the Eye, that gives to see each fast; where the true Judgment is, and
the Iniquity stands not, nor the Transgressor, nor the Speaker of Lies: but
that is judged and condemned with the Light, which makes it manifest. And who
be in this fast, when they call upon the Lord, the Lord will answer them, here
am I: and here Truth is pleaded for, and Falsehood flies away. But who be out of
this fast in the Perverseness, Tongues uttering perverse things; are stumbling
and groping like blind Men, which be from the Light in the Iniquity, which
separates from God, who hides his Face from them, that he will not hear: going
from the Light, goes from the Lord, and his Face. So this is it, which must be
fasted from; for this is it, which separates from God: and here comes the
Reward openly, which condemns all that beforementioned, which is contrary to
the Light; Injustice, Iniquity, Transgression, Vanity, and that which brings
forth Mischief; which hatcheth the Cockatrice-Eggs and weaves the Spiders Web:
he that eats of these Eggs, dies. Mark, That which is crushed, breaks out
into a Viper: mark again, Their Web shall not become Garments, neither shall
they cover themselves with their Works of Vanity: Acts of Violence are in their
Hands: This is all from the Light in the wickedness. Their Feet run to do evil,
and they make haste to shed innocent blood; their thoughts are thoughts of
Vanity, wasting and destruction is in their Path: This is all from the Light.
Again: The way of Peace they know not, there is no Judgment in their Goings:
they have made them crooked Paths, whosoever goes therein, shall not know
Peace. Mark; who goes in their way, that know not the way of Peace, shall they
know Peace? Whose Path is crooked, where there is no Judgment in their Goings;
Take notice, No Judgment in their Goings: And this is all from the Light, which
manifests that, which is to be judged; where the Covenant of Peace is known,
where all that, which is contrary to it beforementioned, is kept out. Which
all, who live in those things beforementioned contrary to the Light, in the
false fast, they may mark their Path, and behold their Reward; who be out of
the Light, stumbling and groping like blind Men. Which they that be in the true
fast, are from all them separated; their words, their actions and fruits, and
their fast: whose fast breaks the bonds of Iniquity, and whom the Lord hears,
and to whom Righteousness springs forth, and goes before them, the Glory of the
Lord is the Re-reward.

G. F.

We passed up into Wales through Montgomeryshire, Montgomeryshire. Radnorshire.
and so into Radnorshire, where there was a Meeting like a Leaguer, for
Multitudes. I walked a little aside, whilst the People were gathering: and
there came to me John ap John, a Welch-man, whom I spoke to, to go up to the
People; and if he had any thing upon him from the Lord to speak to them, he
might speak to them in Welsh, and thereby gather them more together. Then came
Morgan Watkins to me, who was then become loving to Friends; And, said he, the
People lie like a Leaguer, and the Gentry of the Country is come in. I bad him
go up also, and leave me: for I had a great Travel upon me for the Salvation of
the People. When they were well gathered together, I passed up into the
Meeting, and stood upon a Chair about three Hours. And I stood a pretty while,
before I began to speak: After some time I felt the Power of the Lord went over
the whole Assembly; and the Lord's Everlasting Life and Truth shined over all:
and the Scriptures were opened to them, and the Objections they had in their
Minds, were Answered. And they were every one directed to the Light of Christ,
the heavenly Man; that by it they might all see their Sins, and Christ Jesus to
be their Savior, their Redeemer, their Mediator, and come to feed upon him,
the Bread of Life from Heaven. Many were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, and
to his free Teaching that Day; and all were bowed down under the Power of God:
1657. Radnorshire
so that, though the Multitude was so great, that many sat on Horseback to
hear; there was no Opposition made by any. And a Priest sat with his Wife on
horseback, and heard Attentively; and made no Objection: but the People parted
peaceably and quietly, with great Satisfaction; many of them saying, They never
heard such a Sermon before, and the Scriptures so opened. For the New Covenant
was opened, and the Old, and the Nature and Terms of each; and the Parables
were explained: and the State of the Church in the Apostles Days was set forth,
and the Apostasy since laid open; and the free Teaching of Christ and the
Apostles was set a top of all the hireling-Teachers: and the Lord had the
Praise of all, for many were turned to him that Day.

Lemster.
I went back from thence to Lemster, where there was a great Meeting in a Close;
many hundreds of People being gathered together. There were a Matter of six
Congregational Preachers and Priests amongst the People; and Thomas Tailor, who
had been a Priest, but was now become a Minister of Christ Jesus, was with me.
I stood up, and declared about three Hours; and none of the Priests were able
to open their Mouths in Opposition: the Lord's Power and Truth so reached them,
and bound them down. At length one Priest went off about a Bow-shot from me;
and drew several of the People after him, and there set a preaching to them: So
I kept our Meeting, and he kept his. But after a while Thomas Tailor was moved
to go to him, and spoke to him; and he gave over: and then he, and the People
he had drawn off, came up to us again; and the Lord's Power went over them all.
At last a Baptist, that was Convinced, said; Where Is Priest Tombs? how chance,
he does not come out? This Tombs was Priest of Lemster. Hereupon some went, and
told the Priest; and up comes he with the Bailiffs and other Officers of the
Town: And when he was come, they set him upon a Stool over against me. Now I
was speaking of the heavenly, divine Light of Christ, which he Enlightens every
one, that comes into the World withal; and turning them to it, to give them
the Knowledge of the glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus, their Savior.
When Priest Tombs heard this, he cried out; That is a Natural Light, and a made
Light. Then I desired the People to take out their Bibles: and I asked the
Priest, Whether he did Affirm, that that was a Created, natural, made Light,
which John, a Man that was sent from God, did bear witness to, and did speak
of, when he said; In him (to wit, in the Word) was life, and that life was the
Light of Men, Joh. 1.4. Do thou affirm and mean, said I, that this Light here
spoken of, was a Created, Natural, Made Light? And he said, Yes. Then said I,
Before I have done with thee, I will make thee bend to the Scriptures. Then I
showed by the Scriptures, that the Natural, created, made Light is the outward
Light in the outward Firmament, proceeding from the Sun, Moon and Stars: And
do thou Affirm (said I) that God sent John to bear witness to the Light of
the Sun, Moon and Stars? Then said he, Did I say so? I replied, 'Didst thou not
not say, it was a Natural, Created, Made Light, that John bore witness unto? If
thou do not like thy Words, take them again and mend them. Then he said, That
Light, which I spoke of, was a natural, created Light. I told him, 1657.
Lemster.
He had not at all mended his Cause: for that Light, which I spoke of, was the
very same, that John was sent of God to bear witness to; which was the Life in
the Word, by which all the natural Lights, as Sun, Moon and Stars were made. In
him (to wit, the Word) was Life, and that Life was the Light of Men. So I
directed the People to turn to the Place in their Bibles, and I recited to them
the Words of John, how that In the Beginning was the Word, and the Word was
with God, and the Word was God. The same was in the beginning with God: All
things were made by him, and without him was not any thing made, that was made.
(So all natural, created Lights were made by Christ the Word.) In him was life,
and the life was the light of Men: And that was the true light, which lights
every Man, that comes into the World. And Christ says of himself ( John
8.12.) I am the light of the World: And bids them, Believe in the light (John
12.36.) And God said of him by the Prophet Isaiah (chapter 49.6.) I will also give
thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation to the Ends
of the Earth: So Christ in his Light is saving. And the Apostle said, The
light, which shined in their Hearts, was to give them the light of the
knowledge of the Glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ: And that was their
Treasure in their earthen Vessels. 2 Cor. 4.6, 7.

When I had thus opened the matter to the People, the Priest cried to the
Magistrates; Take this man away, or else I shall not speak any more. But, said
I, 'Priest Tombs, deceive not thy self, thou art not in thy Pulpit now, nor in
thy Old Mass-house; but we are in the Fields. So he was shuffling to be gone:
and Thomas Tailor stood up, and undertook to make out our Principle by Christ's
Parable concerning the Sower, Matthew. 13. Then said the Priest, Let that Man
speak, and not the other. So he got up into a little Jangling for a while; till
the Lord's Power catched him again, and stopped and confounded him. Afterward a
Friend stood up and told him, How he had sued him for Tithe-Eggs, and other
Friends for other Tithes: for he was an Anabaptist Preacher, and yet had a
Parsonage at Lemster; and had several Journey-men under him. And he said; He
had a Wife, and he had a Concubine; and his Wife was the Baptized People, and
his Concubine was the World. But the Lord's Power came over him and them all,
and the everlasting Truth was declared that Day; and many were turned by it to
the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher and Way to God: And of great Service that
Meeting was in those Parts. The next day Thomas Tailor went to this Priest, and
reasoned with him; and came over him by the Power of the Word.

From this place I traveled on in Wales, Tenby.
having several Meetings as I went, till I came to Tenby: where, as I rode up
the Street, a Justice of Peace came out of his House, and desired me to alight,
and stay at his House: and I did so. On the First Day the Mayor and his Wife,
and several others of the Chief of the Town came in about the tenth Hour, and
stayed all the Time of the Meeting: and a glorious Meeting it was. John ap John
being then with me, left the Meeting, and went to the Steeple-house; and the
Governor cast him into Prison. On the Second-day Morning the Governor sent
one of his Officers to the Justice's House to fetch me: which grieved the Mayor
and the Justice; for they were both with me in the Justice's House, 1657. Tenby.
when the Officer came. So the Mayor and the Justice went up to the Governor
before me; and a while after I went up with the Officer. When I came in, I
said; Peace be unto this House: And before the Governor could Examine me, I
asked him, Why he did cast my Friend into Prison? He said; For standing with
his Hat on in the Church. I said, Had not the Priest two Caps on his Head, a
black one, and a white one? and cut of the brims of the Hat, and then my Friend
would have but one; and the brims of the Hat were but to defend him from
Weather. These are frivolous things, said the Governor: 'Why then, said I,
do thou cast my Friend into Prison for such frivolous things? Then he asked
me, Whether I owned Election and Reprobation? Yes, said I, and thou art in the
Reprobation. At that he was in a Rage, and said; He would send me to Prison,
till I proved it: But I told him, I would prove that quickly, if he would
confess Truth. Then I asked him, Whether Wrath, Fury and Rage, and Persecution
were not Marks of Reprobation? for he that was born of the Flesh, persecuted
him that was born of the Spirit; but Christ and his Disciples never persecuted,
nor imprisoned any. Then he fairly Confessed, That he had too much Wrath, Haste
and Passion in him: And I told him, Esau was up in him, the first-Birth; not
Jacob, the second-Birth. The Lord's Power so reached the Man, and came over
him, that he confessed to Truth; and the other Justice came, and shook me
kindly by the Hand.

As I was passing away, I was moved to speak to the Governor again; and he
Invited me to Dinner with him; and set my Friend at Liberty. I went back to the
other Justice's House: And after some time the Mayor and his Wife, and the
Justice and his Wife, and diverse other Friends of the Town went about half a
Mile out of Town with us, to the Waterside, when we went away; and there, when
we parted from them, I was moved of the Lord to kneel down with them, and pray
to the Lord to preserve them. So after I had recommended them to the Lord Jesus
Christ, their Savior and free Teacher, we passed away in the Lord's Power; and
the Lord had the Glory: And there is a Meeting continues in that Town to this
Day.

Pembrockshire. Pembrock Haverford west.
So we traveled through the Country to Pembrockshire; and in Pembrock Town we
had some Service for the Lord. From thence we passed to Haverford-west, where
we had a great Meeting, and all was quiet; and the Lord's Power came over all,
and many were settled in the New Covenant, Christ Jesus, and built upon him,
their Rock and Foundation: and they stand a precious Meeting to this Day. The
next day, being their Fair-day, we passed through their Fair, and sounded the
Day of the Lord, and his Everlasting Truth amongst them.

After this we came into another County: and at Noon came into a great
Market Town; and went into several Inns, before we could get any Meat for our
Horses. At last we came to an Inn, where we did get some Meat for our Horses:
and then John ap John being with me, went, and spoke through the Town,
declaring the Truth to the People; and when he came to me again, he said he
thought, All the Town was as people asleep. After a while he was moved to go
and declare Truth in the Streets again; and then the Town was all in an Vproar,
1657. WALES.
and cast him into Prison. Presently after, several of the Chief of the Town
came down, with others, to the Inn where I was, and said; They have cast your
Man into Prison. For what? said I; He preached in our Streets, said they. Then
I asked them, What did he say? Had he reproved some of the Drunkards and
Swearers, and warned them to Repent, and leave off their evil Doings, and turn
to the Lord? I asked them, Who cast him into Prison? And they said, The
High Sheriff, and the Justices, and the Mayor. I asked the Names of them, and
whether they did understand themselves? And whether that was their Carriage to
Travelers, that passed through their Town; and to Strangers, that did admonish
them, and exhort them to fear the Lord, and reproved Sin in their Gates? So
these went back, and told the Officers, what I said: And after a while they
brought down John ap John guarded with Halberts, to the Inn-door, in order to
put him out of the Town. I being at the Inndoor, bid the Officers, take their
Hands off of him: They said; The Mayor and Justices had commanded them to put
him out of Town. I told them, I would talk with their Mayor and Justices anon,
concerning their uncivil and unchristian Carriage toward him. So I spoke to
John to go look after the Horses, and get them ready; and charged the Officers
not to touch him. And after I had declared the Truth to them, and showed them
the Fruits of their Priests, and their Incivility and unchristian-like
Carriage, they went away and left us. They were a kind of Independents; but a
very wicked Town, and false. We bid the Innkeeper give our Horses a Peck of
Oats; and no sooner had we turned our Backs, but the Oats were stolen from our
Horses. After we had refresht our selves a little, and were ready; we took
Horse, and rode up to the Inn, where the Mayor, and Sheriff and Justices were:
And I called to speak with them, and asked them the Reason, Wherefore they had
Imprisoned John ap John, and kept him in Prison two or three hours? But they
would not answer me a Word; only looked out at the Windows upon me. So I showed
them, how unchristian their Carriage was to Strangers and Travelers, and
manifested the Fruits of their Teachers; and I declared the Truth unto them,
and warned them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all the
Evildoers: and the Lord's Power came over them, that they looked ashamed; but
not a Word could I get from them in Answer. So when I had warned them to
Repent, and Turn to the Lord, we passed away: And at Night came to a little
Inn, very poor, but very cheap; for our own Provision, and our two Horses cost
but Eight Pence: But the Horses would not eat their Oats. We declared the Truth
to the People of the Place, and sounded the Day of the Lord through the
Countries.

Traveling from thence, we came to a great Town, and went to an Inn. And
Edward Edwards went into the Market, and declared the Truth amongst the People;
and the People followed him down to the Inn, and filled the Inn-yard, and were
exceeding rude: Yet a good Service he and we had for the Lord amongst them. For
the Life of Christianity, and the Power of it tormented their chaffy Spirits,
and came over them, so that some were reached and Convinced; and the Lord's
Power came over all: and the Magistrates were bound, they had no Power to
meddle with us.

After this we passed away, and came to another great Town on a Market day; and
John ap John declared the Everlasting Truth through the Streets, and proclaimed
the Day of the Lord amongst them. In the Evening many People gathered about the
Inn; and some of them being drunk, they would fain have had us forth into the
Street again: but we seeing their Design, I told them; If there were any, that
feared God, and desired to hear Truth, they might come into our Inn: or else we
might have a Meeting with them next Morning. So some Service for the Lord we
had amongst them, both over Night and in the Morning: And though the People was
hard to receive the Truth, yet the Seed was sown; and thereabouts the Lord has
a People gathered to himself. In that Inn also I turned but my Back to the Man,
that was giving Oats to my Horse; and I looked back again, and he was filling
his Pockets with the Provender, that was given to my Horse. A wicked, theevish
People, to rob the poor, dumb Creature of his Food! I had rather they had
robbed me.

Leaving this Town, and traveling on, there was a Great Man overtook us on the
Way; and he purposed (as he told us afterward) to have taken us up at the next
Town for High-way-men. But before we came to the Town, I was moved of the Lord
to speak to him: And what I spoke, reached to the Witness of God in the Man;
and he was so affected therewith, that he had us to his House, and entertained
us very civilly. And he and his Wife desired us to give them some Scriptures,
both for proof of our Principles, and against the Priests. We were glad of the
Service, and furnished him with Scriptures enough: And he writ them down, and
was Convinced of the Truth, both by the Spirit of God in his own Heart, and by
the Scriptures, which were a Confirmation to him. Afterward he set us on in
our Journey: And as we traveled, we came to an Hill, which the People of the
Country say, is two or three Miles high; from the Side of this Hill I could see
a great Way. And I was moved to set my Face several ways, and to sound the Day
of the Lord there: And I told John ap John (a faithful Welsh Minister) in what
Places God would raise up a People to himself, to sit under his own Teaching.
Those Places he took notice of; and since there has a great People arisen in
those Places. The like I have been moved to do in many other Places and
Countries, which have been rude Places; and yet I have been moved to declare,
the Lord had a Seed in those Places: and afterward there has been a brave
People raised up in the Covenant of God, and gathered in the Name of Jesus;
where they have Salvation and free Teaching.

Dalgelthly
From this Hill we came down to a Place called Dalgelthly: and we went to an
Inn; and John ap John declared through the Streets: and the Town's People rose,
and gathered about him. And there being two Independent-Priests in the Town,
they both came out, and discoursed with him both together. I went up to them:
and finding them speaking in Welsh, I asked them, What was the Subject they
spoke upon, and why they were not more moderate, and spoke one by one? For the
things of God, I told them, were weighty, and they should speak of them with
Fear and Reverence. Then I desired them to speak in English, that I might
discourse with them: and they did so. Now they affirmed, That the Light, which
John came to bear witness of, was a created, natural, made Light. But I took
the Bible, and showed them (as I had done to others before) That the Natural
Lights, which were made and created, were the Sun, Moon and Stars: but this
Light, which John bare witness to, and which he called the True Light, that
lights every Man, that comes into the World, is the Life in Christ the Word,
by which all things were made and created. The same, that is called the Life in
Christ, is called the Light in Man: and this is an heavenly, divine Light,
which lets Men see their evil Words and Deeds, and shows them all their Sins;
and (if they would attend unto it) would bring them to Christ (from whom it
comes,) that they might know him to save them from their Sin, and to blot it
out. This Light, I told them, shined in the Darkness in their Hearts, and the
Darkness in them could not comprehend it: but in those Hearts, where God had
commanded it to shine out of Darkness, it gave unto such the Knowledge of the
glory of God, in the face of Christ Jesus, their Savior. Then I opened the
Scriptures largely to them, and turned them to the Spirit of God in their
Hearts; which would reveal the Mysteries in the Scriptures to them, and would
lead them into all the Truth thereof, as they became subject thereunto. I
directed them to that, which would give every one of them the Knowledge of
Christ, who died for them; that he might be their Way to God, and might make
Peace betwixt God and them. The People were attentive, and I spoke to John ap
John to stand up, and speak it in Welsh to them; which he did: and they
generally received it, and with Hands lifted up, blessed and praised God. The
Priest's Mouths were stopped, so that they were quiet all the while: for I had
brought them to be sober at the first, by telling them, That when they speak of
the things of God and of Christ, they should speak with Fear and Reverence.
Thus the Meeting brake up in peace in the Street: and many of the People
accompanied us to our Inn, and rejoiced in the Truth, that had been declared
unto them; that they were turned to the Light and Spirit in themselves, by
which they might see their Sin, and know Salvation from it. And when we went
out of the Town, the People were so affected, that they lifted up their Hands,
and blessed the Lord for our Coming. A precious Seed the Lord has there-aways;
and a great People in those Parts is since gathered to the Lord Jesus Christ,
to sit down under his free Teaching; and have suffered much for him.

From this place we passed to a City, like a Castle: Where when we had set up
our Horses at an Inn, and refreshed our selves, John ap John went forth, and
spoke through the Streets; which were so strait and short, that one might stand
in the Midst of the Town, and see both the Gates. I followed John ap John, and
a multitude of People were soon gathered about him; amongst whom a very dark
Priest began to babble: but his Mouth was soon stopped. So when John had
cleared himself, I declared the word of Life amongst the People; directing them
to the Light of Christ in their Hearts, that by it they might see all their own
Ways, Religions and Teachers, and might come off from them all, to Christ, the
true and living Way, and the Free Teacher. Some of the People were rude, but
the greater part were civil; and told us, They had heard, how we had been
persecuted, and abused in many places, but they would not do so to us there. I
commended their Moderation and Sobriety, and warned them of the Day of the
Lord, that was coming upon all Sin and Wickedness; testifying unto them, that
Christ was now come to Teach his People himself, by his Spirit and by his Power.

Beaumorris.
From hence we went to Beaumorris; a Town, wherein John ap John had formerly
been Preacher to a Congregation. After we had put up our Horses at an Inn, John
went forth, and spoke through the Street: and there being a Garrison in the
Town, they took him, and put him into Prison. The Inn-keeper's Wife came, and
told me, That the Governor and Magistrates were sending for me, to send me to
Prison also: I told her, They had done more, than they could answer already;
and had acted contrary to Christianity in Imprisoning him for Reproving Sin in
their Streets and Gates, and for declaring the Truth. Soon after came other
friendly People, and told me; If I went out into the Street, they would
Imprison me also: and therefore they desired me to keep within the Inn. Upon
this I was moved to go, and walk up and down in the Streets; and told the
People, What an uncivil and un-Christian thing they had done, in casting my
Friend into Prison. And, they being high Professors, I asked them, If this was
the Entertainment they had for Strangers? And if they would willingly be so
served themselves? And whether they, who looked upon the Scriptures to be their
Rule, had any Example in the Scriptures from Christ or his Apostles, for what
they had done? So after a while they set John ap John at Liberty again.

Next Day, being Market Day, we were to cross over a great Water: and not far
from the place, where we were to take Boat, many of the Market-People drew to
us; amongst whom we had good Service for the Lord, declaring the word of Life
and Everlasting Truth unto them, and proclaiming the Day of the Lord amongst
them, which was coming upon all wickedness: and directing them to the Light of
Christ, which he, the heavenly Man, had enlightened them withal; by which they
might see all their sins, and all their false Ways, Religions, Worships and
Teachers: and by the same Light might see Christ Jesus, who was come to save
them, and lead them to God So after the Lord's Truth had been declared to them
in the Power of God, and Christ the free Teacher set over all the
Hireling-Teachers; I bid John ap John get his Horse into the Boat, which was
then ready. But there being a Company of wild Gentlemen (as they called them)
got into it (whom we found very rude, and far from gentleness; they, with
others, kept his Horse out of the Boat. So I rode to the Boat's-side, and spoke
to them, showing them, What an unmanly and unchristian Carriage it was; and
told them, they showed an unworthy Spirit, below Christianity or Humanity. As I
spoke unto them, I leapt my Horse into the Boat amongst them; thinking, John's
Horse would have followed, when he had seen mine go in before him: but the
Water being pretty deep, John could not get his Horse into the Boat. Wherefore
I leapt out again on Horseback into the Water, and staid with John on that
side, till the Boat returned. There we tarried from the Eleventh Hour of the
Fore-noon, to the Second in the Afternoon, before the Boat came to fetch us;
and then had we forty and two Miles to ride that Evening: and by that time we
had paid for our Passage, we had but one groat left between us both, in Money.
We rode about sixteen Miles, and then got a little Hay for our Horses: and
setting forward again, we came in the Night to a little Alehouse, where we
thought to have staid and baited. But finding, we could have neither Oats nor
Hay there, we traveled on all Night: And about the fifth Hour in the Morning
got to a place within six Miles of Rexam; Near Rexam.
where that Day we met with many Friends, and had a glorious Meeting, and the
Lord's Everlasting Power and Truth was over all: and a Meeting is continued
there to this day. Very weary we were with traveling so hard up and down in
Wales; and in many places we found it difficult to get meat either for our
Horses or Our selves.

The next Day we passed from thence into Flintshire, Flintshire. Rexam.
sounding the Day of the Lord through the Towns: and came into Rexam at Night.
Here many of Floyd's People came to us; but very rude, wild and airy they were,
and little Sense of Truth they had: Yet some were Convinced in that Town. Next
Morning one, called a Lady, sent for me, who kept a Preacher in her House. I
went to her House, but found both her and her Preacher very light and airy; too
light to receive the weighty Things of God. In her Lightness she came, and
asked me, If she should cut my Hair? But I was moved to reprove her, and bid
her Cut down the Corruptions in her self with the Sword of the Spirit of God.
So after I had admonished her to be more grave and sober, we passed away: and
afterward in her frothy mind she made her Boast, That she came behind me, and
cut off the Curl of my Hair; but she spoke falsely.

From Rexam we came through the Country to West-chester; West-Chester.
and it being the Fair-time, we stayed there a while, and visited Friends. For
I had traveled through every County in Wales, preaching the Everlasting Gospel
of Christ; and a brave People there is now, which has received it, and sits
under Christ's Teaching. But before I left Wales, I writ a Paper to the
Magistrates of Beaumorris concerning their Imprisoning of John ap John; letting
them see their Conditions, and the Fruits of their Christianity, and of their
Teachers: And afterward I met with some of them near London; but oh! how
ashamed they were of their Action!

From West-chester we came through the Country to Leverpool, Liverpool
where was at that time a Fair also. And as I rode through the Fair, there
stood a Friend upon the Cross, declaring the Truth to the People: Who seeing me
ride by, and knowing, I had appointed a Meeting to be the next Day upon an Hill
not far off, gave Notice to the People, That George Fox, the Servant of the
Lord, would have a Meeting next day upon such an Hill; and if any feared the
Lord, they might come there, and hear him declare the Word of Life to them. We
went that Night to Richard Cubban's, who himself was Convinced, but not his
Wife; 1657. Liverpool.
but at that time his Wife was Convinced also.

Next Day we went to the Meeting on the Top of the Hill, which was very large:
and some Rude People with a Priest's Wife came, and made a Noise for a while;
but the Lord's Power came over them, and the Meeting became quiet, and the
Truth of God was declared amongst them: And many were that Day settled upon the
Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus, and under his Teaching; who made Peace
betwixt God and them.

Malpoth.
We had a small Meeting, with a few Friends and People, at Malpoth. And from
thence we came to another place, where we had another Meeting; and there came a
Bailiff with a Sword, and was rude: but the Lord's Power came over him; and
Friends were established in the Truth.

Manchester.
From thence we came to Manchester: and the Sessions being there that Day, many
rude People were come to the Town out of the Country. In the Meeting they threw
at me Coals, and Clods, and Stones, and Water: Yet the Lord's Power bore me up
over them, that they could not strike me down. At last, when they saw, they
could not prevail by throwing Water, Stones and Dirt at me, they went and
Informed the Justices in the Sessions; who thereupon sent Officers to fetch me
before them. The Officers came in, while I was declaring the Word of Life to
the People; and they plucked me down, and haled me up into their Court. When I
came there, all the Court was in a Disorder and a Noise: Wherefore I asked;
Where were the Magistrates, that they did not keep the People civil? Some of
the Justices said, They were Magistrates. I asked them, Why then they did not
appease the People, and keep them sober? For one cried I Will swear, and another
cried, I Will swear. So I declared to the Justices, How we were abused in our
Meeting by the rude People, who threw Stones, and Clods, and Dirt, and Water:
and how I was haled out of the Meeting, and brought thither, contrary to the
Instrument of Government, which said; None should be molested in their
Meetings, that professed God, and owned the Lord Jesus Christ: which I did. So
the Truth came over them, that when one of the rude Fellows cried, He would
swear; one of the Justices checked him, saying, What will you swear? hold your
Tongue. At last they bid the Constable, Have me to my Lodging; and there I
should be secured, till to morrow Morning, that they sent for me again. So the
Constable had me to my Lodging: And as we went, the People were exceeding rude;
but I let them see the Fruits of their Teachers, and how they shamed
Christianity, and dishonored the Name of Jesus, which they professed. At Night
we went to a Justice's House in the Town, who was pretty moderate; and I had a
great deal of Discourse with him. Next Morning we sent to the Constable to
know, If he had any thing more to say to us? And he sent us Word, He had
nothing to say to us, but that we might go, whither we would. The Lord has
since raised up a People to stand for his Name and Truth in that Town, over
those chaffy Professors.

We passed from? Manchester through the Country, 1657. Preston.
having many precious Meetings in several Places, till we came to Preston;
between which and Lancaster I had a general Meeting: From which I went to
Lancaster. There at our Inn I met with Colonel West, Lancaster
who was very glad to see me: and he meeting with Judge Fell, told him, That I
was mightily grown in the Truth; when as indeed he was come nearer to the
Truth, and so could better discern it.

We came from Lancaster to Robert Widders: and on the First Day after I had a
general Meeting near the Sands-side, Sands-side.
of Friends of Westmorland and Lancashire, where the Lord's Everlasting Power
was over all; in which the Word of Eternal Life was declared, and Friends were
settled upon the Foundation, Christ Jesus, under his free Teaching: And many
were Convinced, and turned to the Lord.

Next day I came over the Sands to Swarthmore, Swarthmore.
where Friends were glad to see me: and I stayed there two first Days, visiting
Friends in their Meetings there-aways; who rejoiced with me in the Goodness of
the Lord, who by his Eternal Power had carried me through, and over many
Difficulties and Dangers in his Service: to him be the Praise for ever!

Having gotten a little Respit from Travel, I was moved to write an Epistle to
Friends, as follows: ALL Friends of the Lord every where, whose Minds are
turned in toward the Lord, take heed and hearken to the Light within you,
which is the Light of Christ; which, as ye love it, will call your Minds
inward, that are abroad in the Creatures: so your Minds may be renewed by it,
and turned to God in this which is pure, to worship the living God, the Lord of
Hosts over all the Creatures. That which calls your Minds out of the Lusts of
the World, it will call them out of the Affections and Desires, and turn you to
set your Affections above. The same that calls the mind out of the World, will
give judgment upon the World's Affections and Lusts, that which calls out your
Minds from the World's Teachers, and the Creatures; and so to have your minds
renewed. There is your Obedience known and found, and there the Image of God is
renewed in you; and ye come to grow up in it. That which calls your minds out
of the Earth, turns them toward God, where the pure Babe is born of the
Virgin; and the Babe's food is known, the Children's Bread, which comes from
the living God, and nourishes up to Eternal Life: Which Babes and Children
receive their Wisdom from above, from the pure, living God, and not from the
Earthly Ones; for that is trodden under Foot with such. And all who hate this
Light, whose minds are abroad in the Creatures, in the Earth, and in the Image
of the Devil, get the Words of the Saints (that received their Wisdom from
above) into the old Nature, and their corrupted minds: Such are they, that are
Murderers of the just, Enemies to the Cross of Christ, in whom the Prince of
the Air lodges; Sons of perdition, Betrayers of the just. Therefore take heed
to that Light, which is oppressed with that Nature; which Light, as it arises,
shall condemn all that cursed Nature, and shall turn it out, and shut it out of
the House: 1657. Swarthmore.
And so ye will come to see the Candle lighted, and the House sweeping and
swept. Then afterward the pure Pearl arises; and then the Eternal God is
exalted. The same Light, that calls in your minds out of the World (that are
abroad) the same turns them to God, the Father of Lights. Here in the pure mind
is the pure God waited upon for Wisdom from above; and the pure God is seen
Night and Day, and the Eternal Peace, of which there is no end, enjoied. People
may have Openings, and yet their minds go into the Lusts of the Flesh; but
there the Affections are not mortified. Therefore hearken to that, and take
heed to that, which calls your minds out of the Affections and Lusts of the
World, to have them renewed: The same will turn your minds to God; the same
Light will set your Affections above, and bring you to wait for the pure Wisdom
of God from on high, that it may be justified in you. VVait all in that, which
calls in your minds, and turns them to God; Here is the true Cross: that mind
shall feed upon nothing, that is earthly; but be kept in the pure Light of God
up to God, to feed upon the living Food, which comes from the living God. So
the Lord God Almighty be with you all, Dear Babes, and keep you all in his
Strength and Power to his Glory, over all the world, ye whose minds are called
out of it, and turned to God, to worship the Creator, and serve him, and not
the Creature. And the Light of God, which calls the mind out of the Creatures,
and turns it to God; brings into a Being of Endless Joy and Peace: And here is
always a Seeing God present, which is not known to the world, whose minds are in
the Creatures, whose Knowledge is in the Flesh, whose minds are not renewed.
Therefore all Friends, the Seed of God mind and dwell in, to reign over the
Unjust: and the Power of the Lord dwell in, to keep you clear in your
Understandings, that the Seed of God may reign in you all; the Seed of God,
which is but one in all, which is Christ in the male and in the female, which
the Promise is to. VVait upon the Lord for the Just to reign over the Unjust,
and for the Seed of God to reign over the Seed of the Serpent, and be the Head;
and all that is mortal, may die: for out of that will rise Presumption. So Fare
ye well, and God Almighty bless, and guide, and keep you in his Wisdom.

G. F.




About this time Friends, that were moved of the Lord to go to the
Steeple Houses and Markets, to reprove Sin, and warn People of the Day of the
Lord, suffered much hardship from the rude People, and also from the
Magistrates; being commonly pulled down, buffeted and beaten, and many Times
sent to Prison. Wherefore I was moved to give forth the following Paper, to be
spread abroad amongst People, to show them, How contrary they acted therein to
the Apostles Doctrine and Practice; and to bring them to more moderation. Thus
it was:

IS it not better for you, that have cast into Prison the Servants and Children
of the Lord God, for speaking, as they are moved, in Steeple Houses or Markets,
Is it not better, I say, for you to Try all things, and hold fast that which is
good? Is it not of more Honor and Credit, to prove all things, and try all
things, than to pluck down in the Steeple Houses, and pull off the Hair of
their Heads, and cast them into Prison? Is this an Honor to your Truth and
Gospel you profess? Does it not show, that ye be out of Truth, and are not
they, that are ready to Instruct the Gainsayers? Has not the Lord said, He
will pour out of his Spirit upon all Flesh, and his Sons and his Daughters
shall prophesy, and old Men shall dream Dreams, and young Men see Visions, and
on his Handmaids he will pour forth of his Spirit? Was not this Prophecy in
Ages past stood against by the Wise, learned Men in their own Wisdom, and by
the Synagogue-Teachers? And were not such haled out of the Synagogues and
Temple, who witnessed the Spirit poured forth upon them? Does not this show,
that ye have not received the pourings forth of this Spirit upon you, who fill
the Gaols with so many Sons and Daughters, and hold up such Teachers, as are
bred up in Learning at Oxford and Cambridge, and are made by the Will of Man?
Does not this show, that ye, that are bred up there, and are made Teachers by
the Will of Man, and do persecute for Prophesying, are Strangers to the Spirit,
that is poured forth upon Sons and Daughters, by which Spirit they come to
minister to the Spirits, that are in Prison? The Lord has a Controversy with
you, who are found prisonings and persecuting such, as the Lord has poured
forth of his Spirit upon. Do not all your Fruits show, in all the Nation, where
ye come, in Towns, Cities, Villages and Countries, that ye are the Seeds-men
made by the Will of Man, who to the Flesh do sow, of which nothing but
Corruption is reaped in Nations, Countries, Cities and Villages? Ye are looked
upon, and your Fruits; and that which may be gathered, is seen by all that be
in the Light, as they pass through your Countries, Towns, Cities and Villages,
that ye are all the Seeds-men, that have sown to the Flesh. Mark, and of this
take ye Notice, who are of that Birth, that is born of the Flesh; and so ye sow
to your own, persecuting him, that is born of the Spirit, who sows to the
Spirit, and of the Spirit reaps Life Eternal: Such ye, who sow to the Flesh,
cast into Prison. Do ye not hale out of the Synagogues? and persecute and beat
in the Synagogues, and knock down? Are not these the Works of the Flesh? Have
not many been almost murdered and smothered in your Synagogues? And have not
some been haled out of your Synagogues, for but looking at the Priest, and
after cast into Prison? Does not all this make manifest, what Spirit ye are of,
and your Fruits to be of the Flesh? What Pleasures and Sports in every Town are
to be seen among your Flocks, that sow to the flesh, and are born of it!
Whereas the Ministers of the Spirit cried against such, as sported in the
daytime; and such, as ate and drank, and rose up to play; and such, as lived
wantonly upon Earth in Pleasures; and such, as lived in fullness of Bread and
Idleness; such as defile the Flesh: Examples to all them, that after should
live Ungodly. But are not the Fruits of this reaped in every Town? Cannot we
from hence see, that here is sowing to the flesh? Again, what Scorning,
Scoffing, Mocking, Derision and Strife! What Oaths, Drunkenness, Uncleanness
and cursed Speaking! What Lust and Pride is seen in the Streets! These fruits,
we see, are reaped of the flesh. So here we see the Seeds-man, him that sows to
this flesh, of which nothing but Corruption is reaped; as the Countries, Towns,
Cities and Villages make manifest. But the Ministers of the Spirit, who sow to
the Spirit, come to reap Life Eternal: These discern the other Seeds-man, who
sows to the flesh, and of the flesh reaps Corruption. For the Day has
manifested each Seeds-man, and what is reaped from each, is seen; Glory be to
the Lord God for ever! The Ministers of the Spirit, which be born of the
Spirit, Sons and Daughters, which have the Spirit poured forth upon them, and
witness the promise of God fulfilled in them; by the Spirit of God preach and
minister to the Spirit in Prison in every one, in the sight of God, the Father
of Spirits. God's Hand is turned against you all, that have destroyed God's
Creatures upon your Lust: And God's Hand is turned against you, that have
wronged by unjust Dealing, and defrauded, and have oppressed the Poor, and have
respected the Persons of the Proud, (such as be in gay Apparel;) and lend not
your Ear to the Cry of the Poor. The Lord's Hand and Arm against you all is
turned, and his righteous Judgment and Justice upon you all will be
accomplished and repayed; who shall have a Reward every one, according to your
Works. Oh the Abomination and hypocritical Profession, that is upon the Earth,
where God and Christ, Faith, Hope, the holy Spirit and Truth is professed; but
the fear of God, and the Faith, that purifies and gives Victory over the World,
not lived in! Does it not appear, that the Wisdom, that rules in all those,
whom the Seeds-man, that sows to the flesh, sows for, and who are born of the
Flesh, is from below, earthly, sensual and devilish, and their Understanding
brutish, and their knowledge natural as the brute Beasts? For Men and Women in
that state have not patience, to speak one to the other of the Scriptures,
without much Corruption and Flesh appearing, yet they have a feigned Humility,
a Will Worship, and Righteousness of Self; but they own not the Light, which
lights every Man, that comes into the World, Christ Jesus, the Righteousness
of God: Which Light being owned, Self, and the Righteousness of Self comes to
be denied. Here is the Humility, that is contrary to the Light, and that is
below and feigned: Here is the Wisdom, that is from below, earthly, sensual and
devilish: for People can scarce speak one to another, without destroying one
another, prisoning and persecuting one another, when they speak of the
Scriptures. Now, this is the Devilish Wisdom, murdering and destroying: This
is not the Wisdom that is from above, which is pure and peaceable, gentle and
easy to be entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits. Here all may read each
Seeds-man, which has each Wisdom: He that sows to the Flesh, and is born of
that, has the wisdom that is earthly, sensual and devilish; He that sows to
the Spirit; a Minister of the Spirit, has the Wisdom from above, which is
pure, peaceable, which is gentle, which is easy to be entreated; the Wisdom,
by which all things were made and created. Now is each Wisdom discovered, and
each Seeds-man: the Day, which is the Light, has discovered them.

G. F.

As the foregoing Paper was sent forth amongst the World's People, to let them
see, from whence their Imprisoning and Persecuting, Cruelty and violent Dealing
sprang; so I was also moved to give forth the following Epistle to Friends, to
stir them up to be bold and valiant for the Truth, and to encourage them in
their Sufferings for it.

ALL Friends and Brethren every where, Now is the Day of your Trial, and now is
the Time for you to be Valiant; and to (...), that the Testimony of the Lord
does not fall: For now is the Day of Exercise of your Gifts, of your Patience,
and of your Faith. Now is the Time to be armed with Patience, with the Light
and with Righteousness, and with the Helmet of Salvation: And now is the Trial
of the Slothful Servant, who hides his Talent, and will judge Christ hard. Now,
happy are they that can say, The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof,
and he gives the Increase: And therefore, who takes it from you? Is it not the
Lord still, that suffers it? For the Lord can try you, as he did Job, whom he
made Rich, whom he made Poor; and whom he made Rich again: who still kept his
Integrity in all Conditions. So learn Paul's Lesson, In all State^ to be
content: And have his Faith, That nothing is able to separate us from the Love
of God, which we have in Christ Jesus. Therefore be Rich in Life, and in Grace,
which will endure, ye who are Heirs of Life, and born of the Womb of Eternity,
that Noble Birth, that cannot stoop to that, that is born in Sin, and conceived
in Iniquity; who are better bred and born: whose Religion is from God, above
all the Religions, that are from below; and who walk by Faith, by that which
God has given you, and not by that which Men make, who walk by Sight, from the
Mass Book to the Directory: Such are subject to stumble and fall, who walk by
Sight, and not by Faith. Therefore mind him, that destroys the Original of Sin,
the Devil and his Works, and cuts off the Entail of Satan, viz. Sin; who would
have by Entail an Inheritance of Sin in Men and Women from Generation to
Generation, and pleads for it by all his Lawyers and Counselors. For though
the Law did not cut it off, which made nothing perfect; yet Christ being come,
destroys the Devil and his Works, and cuts off the Entail of Sin: This angers
all the Devil's Law^ers and Counselors, that Satan shall not hold Sin by
Entail in thy Garden, in thy Field, in thy Temple, thy Tabernacle. So keep your
Tabernacles, that there ye may see the Glory of the Lord appear at the Doors
thereof. And be faithful: for ye see, what the Worthies and Valiants of the
Lord did attain unto by Faith. Enoch by Faith was translated: Noah by Faith was
preserved over the Waters in his Ark: Abraham by Faith forsook his Father's
House and Religion, and all the Religions of the World: Isaac and Jacob by
Faith followed his Steps. And see, how Samuel, and other of the Lord's
Prophets, with David, by Faith were preserved to God, over God's Enemies! And
Daniel, and the Three Children by Faith escaped the Lions and the Fire, and
preserved their Worship clean, and by it were kept over the Worships of the
World. And the Apostles by Faith traveled up and down the World, and were
preserved from all the Religions of the World, and h^ld forth the pure Religion
to the dark World, which they had received from above, from God (for the Way
they walked in, and the Worship they performed and taught, was received from
above, from God and from Christ Jesus) and likewise their Fellowship was
received from above, which is in the Gospel, that is Everlasting. And in this
neither Powers, Principalities, nor Thrones, Dominions nor Angels, nor things
present, nor things to come, nor Heights, nor Depths, nor Death, Mockings, nor
spoiling of Goods, nor Prisons, nor Fetters, were able to separate them from
the Love of God, which they had in Christ Jesus. And Friends, Quench not the
Spirit, nor despise Prophesying, where it moves; neither hinder the Babes and
Sucklings from crying Hosannah: for out of their Mouths will God ordain
Strength. There were some in Christ's Day, that were against such; whom he
reproved: And there were some in Moses his Day, who would have stopped the
Prophets in the Camp; whom Moses reproved, and said in Way of Encouragement to
them, Would God, that all the Lord's People were Prophets! So I say now to you.
Therefore ye, that stop it in your selves, do not quench it in others, neither
in Babe nor Suckling; for the Lord hears the Cries of the Needy, and the Sighs
and Groans of the Poor. Judge not that, nor the Sighs and Groans of the Spirit,
which cannot be uttered; lest ye judge Prayer: for Prayer as well lies in Sighs
and Groans to the Lord, as otherwise. So let not the Sons and Daughters, nor
the Hand-maidens be stopped in their Prophesyings, nor the Young Men in their
Visions, nor the Old-men in their Dreams: but let the Lord be glorified in and
through all, who is over all, God blessed for ever! So that every one may
improve their Talents, and every one exercise their Gifts; and every one speak,
as the Spirit gives them Utterance. Thus every one may minister, as he has
received the Grace, as a good Steward to him, that has given it him; so that
all Plants may bud, and bring forth Fruit to the glory of God: for the
manifestation of the Spirit is given to every one to profit withal. So see,
that every one has profited in heavenly things: Male and Female, look into
your own Vineyards, and see, what Fruit ye bear to God; look into your own
Houses, see how they are decked and trimmed, and see, what Odors, Mirrh and
Frankincense ye have therein, and what a Smell and Savor ye have to ascend to
God, that he may be glorified. So bring your Deeds all to the Light, which ye
are taught to believe in by Christ, your Head, the heavenly Man; and see, how
they are wrought in God. And every Male and Female, let Christ dwell in your
Hearts by Faith (Christ in the Male and in the Female;) and let your Mouths be
opened to the Glory of God the Father, that he may rule and reign in you. We
must not have Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life, put any more in a Stable, amongst
the Horses and Asses: but he must now have the best Chamber, the Heart; and the
rude, debauched Spirit must be turned out. Therefore let him reign, whose Right
it is, who was conceived by the Holy Ghost; by which Holy Ghost ye call him
Lord, in which Holy Ghost ye pray, and by which Holy Ghost ye have Comfort, and
Fellowship with the Son and with the Father. Therefore know the Triumph in it,
and in God and his Power (which the Devil is out of) and in the Seed, which is
first and last, the beginning and ending, the Top-and Cornerstone: in which is
my Love to you, and in which I rest --

Your Friend, G. F.
POSTSCRIPT.
And Friends, be careful, how ye set your feet among the tender Plants, that
are springing up out of God's Earth; lest ye do tread upon them, and hurt them,
and bruise them, or crush them in God's Vineyard.




Now after I had tarried two first-Days at Swarthmore, and had visited Friends
in their Meetings thereabouts, I passed from thence into Westmorland, visiting
Friends Meetings there; Westmorland.
till I came to John Audland's, where there was a general Meeting. The Night
before I had a vision of a desperate Creature, that was coming to destroy me;
but I got Victory over it. And the next Day in the Meeting-time there came one
Otway, with some rude fellows with him; and he rode round about the Meeting
with his Sword or Rapier, and would fain have gotten in, through the Friends to
me: but the Meeting being great, the Friends stood thick; so that he could not
easily come at me. Then when he had rid about several Times raging, and found,
he could not get in, being limited by the Lord's Power; he at length went away.
It was a glorious Meeting, and ended peaceable; and the Lord's everlasting
Power came over all. But this wild Man went home, and became distracted; and
not long after died. I sent a Paper to John Blaykling to read to him, while he
lay ill, showing him his wickedness; and he did acknowledge something of it.

Going from hence, I went through Kendal, Kendal.
where a Warrant had long lain to apprehend me: and the Constables seeing me,
ran to fetch their Warrant, as I was riding through the Town: but before they
could come with it, I was gone past the Town; and so escaped their Hands.

I traveled on Northwards, visiting Friends Meetings, as I went; till I came
to Strickland-head, where I had a great Meeting. Strickland head.
And most of the Gentry of that Country being gathered to an Horse-Race, not
far off from the Meeting, I was moved to go, and declare the Truth unto them;
1657. Strickland head.
and a Chief-Constable, that was there, did also admonish them. Our Meeting was
quiet, and the Lord was with us; and by his Word and Power Friends were settled
in the Eternal Truth.

Cumberland.
From hence we passed into Cumberland, where we had many precious, living
Meetings. And after we had traveled through to Gilsland, Gilsland. Carlisle.
and had a Meeting there; we came to Carlisle, where they had used to put
Friends out of the Town: but there came a great Flood, while we were there,
that they could not put us out of the Town; so we had a Meeting there on the
First Day. After which we passed through the Country to Abby-holm, Abbey-holm.
and had a little Meeting there. This is a Place, where I told Friends long
before, there would a great People come forth to the Lord; which has since
come to pass, and a large Meeting there is gathered to the Lord in those Parts.

Langlands.
I passed from hence to a general Meeting at Langlands in Cumberland, which was
very large: for most of the People had so forsaken the Priests, that the
Steeple Houses in some places stood empty. And John Wilkinson, a Preacher, that
I have often named before, who had three Steeple Houses, had so few Hearers
lest, that giving over preaching in the Steeple Houses, he first set up a
Meeting in his House, and preached there to them that were left. Afterward he
set up a silent Meeting (like Friends,) to which came a few: for most of his
Hearers were come off to Friends. Thus he held on, till he had not past half a
Dozen left; the rest still forsaking him, and coming away to Friends. At last,
when he had so very few left, he would come to Pardsey-Crag (where Friends had
a Meeting of several hundreds of People, who were all come to sit under the
Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching) and he would walk about the Meeting on the
first-Days, like a man that went about the Commons to look for Sheep. Now
during this time, I came to this Pardsey-Crag-meeting, and he with three or
four of his followers, that were yet left to him, came to the Meeting that Day;
and they were all thoroughly Convinced. After the Meeting was done, Priest
Wilkinson asked me two or three Questions, which I answered him to his
Satisfaction: and from that time he came amongst Friends to their Meetings, and
became an Able Minister; and preached the Gospel freely, and turned many to
Christ's free Teaching. And after he had continued many Years in the free
Ministry of Christ Jesus, he died in the Truth.

SCOTLAND.
I had for some time felt Drawings on my Spirit to go into Scotland; and had
sent to one Colonel William Osborn of Scotland, desiring him to come and meet
me: and he, with some others with him, were come out of Scotland to this
Meeting. So after the Meeting was over (which, he said, was the most-glorious
Meeting, that ever he saw in his life) I passed with him, and those others that
were with him, into Scotland; having Robert Widders with me, who was a
Thundering man against Hypocrisy and Deceit, and the Rottenness of the Priests.

The first Night we came into Scotland. we lodged at an Inn; and the Innkeeper
told us: There was an Earl lived about a Quarter of a Mile off, who had a
desire to see me; and had left word at his House, that if ever I came into
Scotland, he should send him word. He told us, there were three Draw-bridges to
his House; and that it would be Nine a Clock, before the third Bridge was
drawn. So finding, 1657. Scotland.
we had time in the Evening, we walked down to his House. He received us very
lovingly; and said, He would have gone with us on our Journey, but that he was
before engaged to go to a Funeral. After we had spent some time with him, we
parted very friendly; and returned to our Inn. Next Morning we traveled on,
and passing through Dumfreeze, Dumfreez Douglass.
we came to Douglas; where we met with some Friends: and from thence we passed
to the Heads, Heads.
where we had a blessed Meeting in the Name of Jesus, and felt him in the midst.

Leaving Heads, we went to Badcow, and had a Meeting there; Badcow.
to which abundance of People came, and many were Convinced: amongst whom there
was one, that was called a Lady, Convinced. Highlands
From thence we passed toward the High-lands to William Osburn's House; where
we gathered up the Sufferings of Friends, and the Principles of the Scotch
Priests, which may be seen in a Book called, The Scotch-Priests Principles.

Afterward we came back again to Heads and Badcow, Heads. Badcow. Garshore.
and Garshore, where the said Lady Margaret Hambleton was Convinced; who
afterward went to warn O. Cromwell and Charles Fleetwood of the Day of the
Lord, that was coming upon them.

On the First Day we had a great Meeting, and several Professors came to it.
Now, the Priests had frighted the People with the Doctrine of Election and
Reprobation; telling them: That God had ordained the greatest part of Men and
Women for Hell; and that, let them Pray, or Preach, or Sing, and do what they
could, it was all to no purpose, if they were ordained for Hell. And that God
had a certain Number, which were Elected for Heaven; and let them do what they
would, as David an Adulterer, and Paul a Persecutor, yet elected Vessels for
Heaven. So the fault was not at all in the Creature, less or more; but God had
ordained it so. Now I was lead to open to the People the falseness and folly of
their Priests Doctrines, and showed them; How the Priests had abused those
Scriptures, which they had brought and quoted to them, as in Jude, and other
Places. For whereas they said, There was no fault at all in the Creature; I
showed them, that they, who Jude speaks of, to wit Cain, Core and Balaam, who,
he says, were ordained of old to Condemnation, the fault was in them. For did
not God warn Cain and Balaam, and gave a Promise to Cain, If he did well, he
should be accepted? And did not the Lord bring Core out of Egypt, and his
Company? And yet did not he gainsay both God and his Law, and his Prophet
Moses? So here People might see, that there was a fault in Cain, Corah and
Balaam; and so there is in all them, that go in their ways. For if they, who
are called Christians, resist the Gospel, as Core did the Law, and err from the
Spirit of God, as Balaam did; and if they do Evil, as Cain did, is not here a
fault? Which fault is in themselves, and is the Cause of their Reprobation, and
not God. Does not Christ say, Go, preach the Gospel to all Nations? Which is
the Gospel of Salvation. He would not have sent them out into all Nations, to
preach the Doctrine of Salvation, if the greatest part of Men had been ordained
for Hell. Was not Christ a Propitiation for the sins of the whole World, for
those that become Reprobates, as well as for the Saints? He died for all Men,
the Ungodly as well as the Godly, as the Apostle bears witness, (2 Cor. 5.15.
Romans 5.6.) And he enlightens every Man, that comes into the World, that
through him they might all believe. And Christ bids them believe in the Light:
But all they, that hate the Light, which Christ bids all believe in; they are
Reprobated. Again, The Manifestation of the Spirit of God is given to every Man
to profit withal: But they that vex, quench and grieve it, are in the
Reprobation; and the fault is in them, as it is also in them that hate his
Light. The Apostle says, The grace of God, which brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all Men, teaching us, (says he) that denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
World, (Tit. 2.11.12.) Now all those Men and Women, that live Ungodly, and in
the Lusts of the World, that turn this grace of God into Wantonness, and walk
despitefully against it, and so deny God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that
bought them; the fault is in all such, that turn the grace into Wantonness, and
walk despitefully against that, which would bring their Salvation, and save
them out of the Reprobation. But the Priests, it seems, can see no fault in
such as deny God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, that has bought them, such as
deny his Light, which they should believe in, and his grace, which should teach
them to live godly, and which should bring them their Salvation. Now all that
believe in the Light of Christ, as he commands, are in the Election; and sit
under the Teaching of the grace of God, which brings their Salvation. But such,
as turn this grace into Wantonness, are in the Reprobation: and such as hate
the Light, are in the Condemnation. Therefore I exhorted all the People to
believe in the Light, as Christ commands, and own the grace of God their free
Teacher; and it would assuredly bring them their salvation: for it is
sufficient. Many other Scriptures were opened concerning Reprobation, and the
People were opened to see; and a spring of Life rose up among them.

These things soon came to the Priests Ears: for the People, that sat under
their dark Teachings, began to see Light, and to come into the Covenant of
Light. So the Noise was spread over Scotland, amongst the Priests, That I was
come thither; and a great Cry was among them, that all would be spoiled: for
they said, I had spoiled all the honest Men and Women in England already (so,
upon their own account, the worst were left to them.) Upon this they gathered
great Assemblies of Priests together, and drew up a Company Articles of Curses
to be read in their several Steeple Houses; and that all the People should say,
Amen to them. Some few of these I will here set down; the rest may be read in
the Book beforementioned of The Scotch Priests Principles.

The first was; Cursed is he, that says, Every Man has a Light within him
sufficient to lead him to Salvation: And let all the People say, Amen.

The second; Cursed is he that says, Faith is without Sin: And let all the
People say, Amen.

The third; Cursed is he, that denies the Sabbath Day: And let all the People
say, Amen.

In this last they make the People Curse themselves: for on the Sabbath Day
(which is the Seventh-day of the Week, which the Jews kept by the Command of
God to them) they kept Markets and Fairs; and so brought the Curse of God upon
their own Heads.

And as to the first, concerning the Light, Christ says; Believe in the Light,
that ye may become Children of the Light: and he that believes, shall be
saved; he that believes, shall have everlasting Life: He that believes,
passes from Death to Life, and is grafted into Christ. And ye do well, said the
Apostle, that ye take heed unto the Light, that shines in the dark place, until
the day dawn, and the Day Star arise in your Hearts. So the Light is sufficient
to lead unto the Day Star.

And as concerning Faith, it is the gift of God; and every gift of God is pure.
The faith, which Christ is the Author of, is precious, divine and without Sin:
And this is the faith, which gives Victory over Sin, and Access to God; in
which faith they please God. But they are Reprobates themselves concerning this
faith, and are in their dead faith, who Charge sin upon this faith under pain
of a Curse: which faith gives victory over their Curse, and returns it into
their own Bowels.

There were a Company of Scots near Badcow, Badcow.
who challenged a Dispute with some of our Scotch Friends (for with me they
would not dispute:) so some of the Scotch Friends met them at the Marketplace.
The Dispute was to be concerning the Sabbath Day, and some other of their
Principles beforementioned: And I having gotten their Principles and
Assertions, showed the Friends, where they might easily be overthrown; and a
Scotch Friend, a Smith, overthrew them clearly.

There were two Independent Churches in Scotland, of which many were Convinced:
But the Pastor of the other was in a great Rage against Truth and Friends. They
had their Elders, who sometimes would exercise their Gifts amongst the
Church Members, and would sometimes be pretty tender: but their Pastor speaking
so much against the Light, and us, who are the Friends of Christ, he darkened
his Hearers; so that they grew dark, and blind, and dry, and lost their
Tenderness. And he continued preaching against Friends, and against the Light
of Christ Jesus, calling it natural: At last one Day in his Preaching he Cursed
the Light; and fell down dead in his Pulpit. The People carried him out, and
laid him upon a Gravestone, and poured Strong Water into him; which fetched
him to Life again: and they carried him home, but he was Mopish. After a while
he stripped off his Cloths, and put on a Scotch Plod; and went into the Country
amongst the Dairy-women: and when he had staid there about two Weeks, he came
home, and went into the Pulpit again. Whereupon the People expected some great
Manifestation or Revelation from him: but instead thereof he began to tell
them, what Entertainment he had met with; how One Woman gave him Skim'd Milk,
Another gave him Butter-milk, and Another gave him good Milk: So the People
were fain to take him out of the Pulpit again, and carry him home. He that gave
me this Account, was one Andrew Robinson, who was one of his Chief Hearers; and
came afterward to be Convinced, and received the Truth: And he said, He never
heard, that he recovered his Senses again. By this People may see the Vengeance
of God, which came upon him, that cursed the Light; which Light was the Life in
Christ, the Word: And it may be a Warning to all others, that speak Evil
against the Light of Christ.

Now were the Priests in such a Rage, that they posted up to Edenborough, to O.
Cromwell's Council there, with Petitions against me. And the Noise was, That all
was gone: for several Friends were come out of England, and spread over
Scotland, Sounding the Day of the Lord, and preaching the everlasting Gospel of
Salvation, and turning People to Christ Jesus, who died for them, that they
might receive his free Teaching. After I had gathered up the Principles of the
Scotch Priests, and the Sufferings of Friends, and had seen the Friends in that
part of Scotland settled, by the Lord's Power, upon Christ their Foundation; I
went up to Edenborough; Lithgow.
and in the way came to Lithgow: Where lodging at an Inn, the Inkeeper's Wife,
who was blind, received the Word of Life, and came under the Teaching of Christ
Jesus, her Savior. At Night there came in abundance of Soldiers, and some
Officers, with whom we had much Discourse; and some were rude: One of the
Officers said, He would obey the Turk 's or Pilate 's Command, if they should
command him to guard Christ to crucify him. So far he was from all Tenderness,
or Sense of the Spirit of Christ, that he would rather crucify the Just, than
suffer for or with the Just; whereas many Officers and Magistrates have lost
their Places, before they would turn against the Lord and his Just one.

Edenburg Leith.
When I was come to Edenborough, and had stayed there a while, I went from
thence to Leith, where many Officers of the Army came in with their Wives; and
many were convinced. Among those that came, Edward Billing's Wife was one: She
brought a great Deal of Coral in her Hand, and threw it on the Table before me,
to see, whether I would speak against it, or no? I took no notice of it, but
declared the Truth to her; and she was reached. There came in many Baptists
also, who were very rude; but the Lord's Power came over them, so that they
went away confounded. Then there came in another sort; and one of them said, He
would dispute with me: and for Argument's sake, would deny, There was a God. I
told him, He was one of those fools, that said in his Heart, There is no God:
but he should know him in the Day of his Judgment. So he went his way: and a
fine precious time we had afterward with several People of Account; and the
Lord's Power came over all. William Osburn was with me: And Colonel Lidcot's
Wife and William Welch's Wife, and several of the Officers themselves also,
that were there, were convinced at that Time. Now Edward Billing and his Wife
were at that time separated, and lived apart; and she being reached by Truth,
and become loving to Friends, we sent for her Husband, and he came: and the
Lord's Power reached unto them both, and they joined together in it, and agreed
to live together in Love and Unity, as Man and Wife.

After this we went back to Edenborough again, where many Thousands of People
were gathered together, with abundance of Priests among them, about burning of
a Witch; and I was moved to declare the Day of the Lord amongst them. Which
when I had done, I went from thence to our Meeting, whither many rude People
and Baptists came. The Baptists began to vaunt with their Logic and
Syllogisms: but I was moved, in the Lord's Power, to thresh their chaffy,
Edenborough.
light minds; and showed the People, That, after that fallacious way of
discoursing, they might make White seem Black, and Black seem White: as, That
because a Cock had two Legs; And each of them had two Legs; therefore they were
all Cocks. Thus they might turn any thing into Lightness and Vanity: but it was
not the Way of Christ, or his Apostles, to Teach, Speak or Reason after that
manner. Hereupon those Baptists went their way; and after they were gone, we
had a blessed Meeting in the Lord's Power, which was over all.

I mentioned before, that many of the Scotch Priests, being greatly disturbed
at the Spreading of Truth, and Loss of their Hearers thereby; were gone up to
Edenborough, to Petition the Council against me. Now, when I came back from the
Meeting to the Inn, where I lodged, an Officer belonging to the Council, came
to me, and brought me the following Order: Thursday, the 8th of October, 1657.
at his Highness's Council in Scotland. Ordered,
THat George Fox do appear before the Council on Tuesday, the 13th of October
next, in the Fore-noon.

E. Downing, Clerk of the Council.



When he had delivered me the Order, he asked me, Whether I would Appear or no?
I did not tell him, whether I would or no; but asked him, If he had not forged
the Order? He said, No; it was a real Order from the Council, and he was sent
as their Messenger with it. When the Time came, I Appeared, and was had up into
a great Room; where many great Persons came, and looked at me. After a while
the Doorkeeper came, and had me into the Council Chamger: Edenborough- Council.
and as I was going in, he took off my Hat. I asked him, Why he did so? and who
was there, that I might not go in with my Hat on? for I told him, I had been
before the Protector with my Hat on: But he hung up my Hat, and had me in
before them. When I was come in, and had stood a while, and they said nothing
to me; I was moved of the Lord to say, Peace be amongst you, and Wait in the
Fear of God, that ye may receive his Wisdom from above, by which all things
were made and created; that by it ye may all be Ordered, and may Order all
things under your Hands to God's Glory. After I had done speaking, they asked
me; What was the Occasion of my coming into that Nation? I told them, I came to
visit the Seed of God, which had long lain in Bondage under Corruption: and the
Intent of my Coming was, that all in the Nation, that did profess the
Scriptures, the Words of Christ, and of the Prophets and Apostles, 1657.
Scotland. Edenborough- Council.
might come to the Light, Spirit and Power, which they were in, who gave them
forth; that so in and by the Spirit they might understand the Scriptures, and
know Christ and God aright, and have fellowship with them, and one with
another. They asked me, Whether I had any outward Business there? I said, Nay.
Then they asked me, How long I intended to stay in the Country? I told them, I
should say little to that: My Time was not to be long; yet in my freedom in the
Lord I stood, in the Will of him, that sent me. Then they bid me withdraw; and
the Doorkeeper took me by the Hand, and led me forth. In a little time they
sent for me in again, and told me; I must depart the Nation of Scotland by that
day Seven-night. I asked them, Why? What had I done? What was my Transgression,
that they passed such a Sentence upon me to depart out of the Nation? They told
me, They would not dispute with me. Then I desired them to hear, what I had to
say to them: but they said; They would not hear me. I told them, Pharaoh heard
Moses and Aaron, and yet he was an Heathen, and no Christian; and Herod heard
John Baptist: and they should not be worse, than these. But they cried,
Withdraw, withdraw: Whereupon the Doorkeeper took me again by the Hand, and
led me out. Then I returned to my Inn, and continued still in Edenborough;
visiting Friends there and thereabouts, and strengthening them in the Lord. And
after a little time I writ a Letter to the Council, to lay before them their
Unchristian Dealing, in banishing me, an innocent Man, that sought their
Salvation and Eternal Good; A Copy of which Letter here follows, directed --
To the Council of Edenborough.
YE that sit in Council, and bring before your Judgment Seat the Innocent, the
Just, without showing the least Cause, what Evil I have done, or convicting me
of any Breach of any Law; and afterward ye banish me out of your Nation and
Country, without telling me, for what, or what Evil I had done: though I told
you, when ye asked me, How long I would stay in the Nation? That my Time was
not long (I spoke it innocently;) and yet ye banish me. Will not all, think ye,
that fear God, judge this to be wickedness? Consider, did not they sit in
Council about Stephen, when they stoned him to Death? Did not they sit in
Council about Peter and John, when they haled them out of the Temple, and put
them out of their Council for a little Season, and took Counsel together; and
then brought them in again, and threatened them, and charged them To speak no
more in that Name? Was not this to stop the Truth from spreading in that Time?
And had not the Priests an hand in these things, with the Magistrates? and in
examining Stephen, when he was stoned to Death? Was not the Council gathered
together against Jesus Christ, to put him to Death? and had not the Chief
Priests an hand in it? When they go to persecute the Just, and crucify the
Just, do they not then neglect Judgment, and Mercy, and Justice, and the
weighty Matters of the Law, which is just? Was not the Apostle Paul tossed up
and down by the Priests and the Rulers, and Prisoned? And was not John Baptist
cast into Prison? 1657. Scotland. Edenborough.
Are not ye doing the same Work, showing, what Spirit ye are of? Now, do not ye
show the End of your Profession, the End of your Prayers, the End of your
Religion, and the End of your Teaching, who are now come to banish the Truth,
and him that is come to declare it unto you? Does not this show, that ye be but
in the Words, out of the Life of the Prophets, Christ and his Apostles? for
they did not use such Practice, as to banish any. How do ye receive Strangers,
which is a Command of God among the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles? some by
that means have entertained Angels at unawares; but ye banish one, that comes
to Visit the Seed of God, and is not chargeable to any of you. Will not all,
that fear God, look upon this to be Spite, and Wickedness against the Truth?
How are ye like to love Eemies, that banish your Friend? How are ye like to do
Good to them that hate you, when ye do Evil to them that love you? How are ye
like to heap Coals of Fire on their Heads that hate you, and to Overcome Evil
with Good, when ye banish thus? Do ye not manifest to all, that are in the
Truth, that ye have not the Christian Spirit? How did ye do Justice to me, when
ye could not convict me of any Evil, yet banish me? This shows, that Truth is
banished out of your Hearts, and ye have taken part against the Truth with
Evildoers, and the wicked, envious Priests, and Stoners, Strikers and Mockers
in the Streets; with these, ye that banish, have taken part: whereas ye should
have been a Terror to these, and a Praise to them that do well, and Succourers
of them that be in the Truth; then might ye have been a Blessing to the Nation,
and not have banished him, that was moved of the Lord to visit the Seed of God,
and thereby have brought your Names upon Record, and made them to stink in Ages
to come, among them that fear God. Were not the Magistrates stirred up in
former Ages to persecute or banish, by the corrupt Priests? and did not the
corrupt Priests stir up the rude Multitude against the Just in other Ages?
Therefore are your Streets like Sodom and Gomorrha. Did not the Jews and the
Priests make the Gentiles Minds envious against the Apostles? And who were
they, that would not have the Prophet Amos to prophecy at the King's Chapel;
but bad him, fly his way? And when Jeremiah was put in the Prison, in the
Dungeon, and in the Stocks, had not the Priests an Hand with the Princes in
doing it? Now see all, that were in this Work of banishing, prisoning,
persecuting, Whether they were not all out of the Life of Christ, the Prophets
and Apostles? To the Witness of God in you all I speak: Consider, Whether or no
they were not always the blind Magistrates, which turned their Sword always
backward, that knew not their Friends from their Foes, and so hit their
Friends? Such Magistrates were deceived by Flattery.

G. F.




When this was delivered, and read amongst them, some of them, as I heard, were
troubled, at what they had done; being made sensible, that they would not be so
served themselves. But it was not long, 1657. Scotland. Edenborough- Council.
before they that banished me, were banished themselves, or glad to get away;
who would not do good in the Day when they had Power, nor suffer others, that
would.

After I had spent some time among Friends at Edenborough, and thereabouts,
Heads.
I passed from thence to Heads again, where Friends had been in great
Sufferings: for the Presbyterian Priests had Excommunicated them, and given
Charge, That none should Buy or Sell with them, nor Eat nor Drink with them. So
they could neither Sell their Commodities, nor Buy what they wanted; which made
it go very hard with some of them: for if they had bought Bread or other
Victuals of any of their Neighbors, the Priests threatened them so with Curses,
that they would run, and fetch it from them again. But Colonel Ashfield, being
a Justice of Peace in that Country, put a stop to the Priests Proceedings. This
Colonel Ashfield was afterward convinced himself, and had a Meeting settled at
his House; and declared the Truth, and lived and died in it.

After I had visited Friends at Heads and there-aways, and had encouraged them
in the Lord, Glascow.
I went to Glascow, where a Meeting was appointed; but not One of the Town came
to it. As I went into the City, the Guard at the Gates had me up before the
Governor, who was a moderate Man; and a gread deal of Discourse I had with
him: but he was too light to receive the Truth; yet he set me at Liberty, and
so I passed to the Meeting. But seeing, none of the Town's People came to the
Meeting, we declared Truth through the Town, and so passed away; and visited
Friends in their Meetings thereabouts: Badcow.
and then returned toward Badcow. Several Friends went, and declared Truth in
their Steeple Houses; and the Lod's Power was with them. And one time, as I was
going with William Osburn to his House, there lay a Company of rude Fellows by
the Way-side, who had hid themselves under the Hedges and in Bushes; and I
spying them, asked him, What they were? Oh, said he, they are Thieves. Now
Robert Widders being moved to go to speak to a Priest, was left behind,
intending to come after. So I said to William Osburn, I will stay here in this
Valley; and do thou go look after Robert Widders: But he was unwilling to go,
being afraid to leave me there alone, because of those Fellows; till I told
him, 'I feared them not. Then I called to them, asking them, What they lay
lurking there for? and I bid them, Come up to me: but they were loath to come
up. I charged them to come up to me, or else it might be worse with them: Then
they came trembling to me; for the Dread of the Lord had struck them. I
admonished them to be honest; and directed them to the Light of Christ in their
Hearts, that by it they might see, what an Evil it was to follow after Theft
and Robbery: and the Power of the Lord came over them. So I stayed there, till
William Osburn and Robert Widders came up; and then we passed on together. But
it is likely, that if we two had gone away before, they would have robbed
Robert Widders, when he had come after alone; there being three or four of them.

We went to William Osburn's House, where we had a good Opportunity to declare
the Truth to several People, that came in there. And then we went among the
Highlanders; Highlands
who were so Devilish, they had like to have spoiled us and our Horses: for
they run at us with Pitch-forks; but through the Lord's Goodness we escaped
them, being preserved by his Power.

From thence we passed to Starling, where the Soldiers took us up, Starling
and had us to the Main-guard; and after a few Words with their Officers, the
Lord's Power coming over them, we were set at Liberty: But no Meeting could we
get amongst them in the Town, they were so closed up in Darkness. Next Morning
there came a Man with an Horse, that was to run a Race; and most of the Town's
People, and the Officers went to see it. As they came back from the Race, I had
a brave Opportunity, to declare the Day of the Lord, and his Word of Life
amongst them: Some Confessed to it, and some Opposed: but the Lord's Truth and
Power came over them all.

Leaving Starling, we traveled through the Country, till we came to
Burnt-Island, Burnt-Island.
where I had two Meetings at one Captain Pool's House; one in the Morning, and
the other in the Afternoon. Whilst they went to Dinner, I walked to the
Seaside, not having freedom to eat with them. Both he and his Wife were
Convinced, and became good Friends afterward; and several Officers of the Army
came in, and received the Truth.

We passed from thence through several other Places in the Country, till we
came to Johnston's; where were several Baptists, Johnstons
that were very bitter, and came in a Rage to dispute with us: Vain Janglers
and Disputers indeed they were. And when they could not prevail by disputing,
they went, and informed the Governor against us; and next Morning they raised
a whole Company of foot, and banished me, and Alexander Parker, and James
Lancaster and Robert Widders out of the Town. As they guarded us through the
Town, James Lancaster was moved to Sing with a Melodious Sound in the Power of
God; and I was moved to proclaim the Day of the Lord, and preach the
Everlasting Gospel to the People. For the People generally came forth, so that
the Streets were filled with them: and the Soldiers were so ashamed, that they
said, They had rather have gone to Jamaica, than have guarded us so. But we
were put into a Boat, with our Horses; and carried over the Water, and there
left. And the Baptists, who were the Cause of our being thus put out of this
Town, were themselves, not long after, turned out of the Army; and he that was
then Governor, was turned out also, when the King came in.

Being thus thrust out of Johnstons, we went to another Market Town, where
Edward Billing and many Soldiers quartered. We went to an Inn, and desired to
have a Meeting in the Town, that we might preach the Everlasting Gospel amongst
them. The Officers and Soldiers said, We should have it in the Town Hall; but
the Scotch Magistrates in spite appointed a Meeting there that Day, for the
Business of the Town. Which when the Officers of the Soldiery understood, and
perceived, that it was done in Malice, they would have had us to have gone into
the Town Hall nevertheless. But we told them, No, by no means; for then the
Magistrates might inform the Governor against them, and say, They took the
Town Hall from them by force, when they were to do their Town-business therein.
But we told them, 'We would go to the Marketplace: They said, It was
Market Day; We replied, 'It was so much the better: for we would have all
People to hear the Truth, and know our Principles. So Alexander Parker went up,
and stood upon the Market-cross, with a Bible in his Hand, and declared the
Truth amongst the Soldiers and Market-people; but the Scots, being a dark,
carnal People, gave little heed, nor hardly took notice, what was said. After a
while I was moved of the Lord God to stand up at the Cross, and to declare with
a loud Voice the Everlasting Truth, and the Day of the Lord, that was coming
upon all Sin and Wickedness. Whereupon the People came running out of the
Town Hall; and they gathered so together, that at last we had a large Meeting:
for they sat in the Court but only for a Color, to hinder us from having the
Hall to Meet in. When the People were come away, the Magistrates followed them;
and some walked by, but some staid and heard: and the Lord's Power came over
all, and kept all quiet. And the People were Turned to the Lord Jesus Christ,
who died for them, and had enlightened them; that with his Light they might all
see their evil Deeds, and be saved from their Sins by him, and might come to
know him to be their Teacher. But if they would not receive Christ, and own
him, it was told them, that this Light, which came from him, would be their
Condemnation.

Several of them were made loving to us, especially of the English People, and
some came afterward to be Convinced. But there was a Soldier, that was very
envious against us, and hated both us and the Truth, and spoke Evil of the
Truth, and very despitefully against the Light of Christ Jesus, which we bore
Testimony to; and mighty Zealous he was for the Priests, and their Hearers. As
this Man was hearing the Priest, holding his Hat before his Face, while the
Priest prayed;
one of the Priest's Hearers stabbed him to Death: So he, who had rejected the
Teachings of the Lord Jesus Christ, and cried down the Servants of the Lord,
was murdered amongst them, whom he had so cried up, and by one of them.

Leith.
We traveled from this Town through the Country to Leith, warning and exhorting
People, as we went, to turn to the Lord. At Leith the Innkeeper told me, that
the Council had granted forth Warrants to apprehend me, because I was not gone
out of the Nation, after the seven Days were expired, that they had ordered me
to depart the Nation in; several friendly People also came, and told me the
same. To whom I said: What do ye tell me of their Warrants against me? if there
were a Cartload of them, I do not heed them; for the Lord's Power is over them
all.

Edenborough.
So I went from Leith up to Edenborough again, where they said, the Warrants
from the Council were out against me; and I went to the Inn, where I had lodged
before: and no Man offered to meddle with me. After I had visited the Friends
in the City, I desired those Friends, that traveled with me, to get ready
their Horses in the Morning; and we rode out of Town together. There were with
me at that time Thomas Rawlinson, Alexander Parker and Robert Widders. When we
were come out of Town, they asked me, Whether I would go? I told them, It was
upon me from the Lord, to go back again to Johnston (the Town, Johnstons
out of which we had been lately thrust) and to set the Power of God and his
Truth over them also. Alexander Parker said, he would go along with me: and I
wished the other Two to stay at a Town, about three Miles from Edenborough, till
we returned. Then Alexander Parker and I got over the Water, Johnstons.
which was about three Miles over; and rid on through the Country: but in the
Afternoon, his Horse being weak, and not able to hold up with mine, I put on,
and got into Johnston's, just as they were drawing up the Bridges; the Officers
and Soldiers never questioning me. So I rid up the Street to Capt. Davenport's
House, from which House we had been banished before. There were many Officers
with him: and when I came amongst them, they lifted up their Hands, admiring,
that I should come again; but I told them, The Lord God had sent me amongst
them again. So they went their Way: And the Baptists sent me a Letter, by way
of Challenge, That they would discourse with me the next day: I sent them Word,
I would Meet them at such an House, about half a Mile out of the Town, at such
an Hour. For I considered, if I should stay in Town to discourse with them they
might, under pretense of discoursing with me, have raised Men, to put me out of
the Town again, as they had done before. At the Time appointed I went to the
Place appointed, Capt. Davenport and his Son accompanying me; and there I
stayed some Hours, but never a one of them came. But while I stayed there
waiting for them, I spied Alexander Parker coming; who not being able to reach
the Town, had lain out the Night before: and when I saw him, I was exceeding
glad, that we were met again.

This Captain Davenport was then loving to Friends; but afterward coming more
into the Obedience to Truth, he was turned out of his Place, for not putting
off his Hat, and for saying Thou and Thee to them.

Now when we had waited, beyond reasonable Ground to expect any of their
Coming, we departed: And Alexander Parker being moved to go again to the Town,
where we had the Meeting at the Market-Cross; I passed alone through the
Country to Lieutenant Foster's Quarters, where there were several Officers,
that were Convinced. From thence I went up to the Town, where I had left the
other two Friends; and they and I went back to Edenborough together.

When we were come to the City, I bid Robert Widders follow me; and in the
Dread and Power of the Lord we came up to the two first Sentries: and the
Lord's Power came so over them, that we passed by them without any Examination.
Then we rode up the Street to the Marketplace, and by the Main-guard out at
the Gate by the third Sentry: and so clear out at the Suburbs, and there came
to an Inn, and set up our Horses; it being the seventh Day of the Week. Now I
saw and felt, that we had rid, as it were, against the Canon's Mouth, or the
Sword's Point; but the Lord's Power and immediate Hand carried us over the
Heads of them all. Next day I went up to the Meeting in the City, Friends
having notice, that I would be at it: There came many Officers and Soldiers to
it, and a glorious Meeting it was; and the Everlasting Power of God was set
over the Nation, and his Son reigned in his glorious Power: and all was quiet,
and no Man offered to meddle with me. 1657. Edenborough.
When the Meeting was ended, and I had visited Friends, I came out of the City
to my Inn again; and the next day, being the second day of the Week, we set
forward, through the Country, toward the Borders of England.

As we traveled along the Country, I spied a Steeple-house; and it struck at
my Life. I asked, what Steeple-house it was? and was Answered, Dunbar.
that it was Dunbar. When I came thither, and had set up at an Inn, I walked up
to the Steeple-house, having a Friend or two with me. When we came into the
Steeple-house-yard, one of the chief Men of the Town was walking there: So I
spoke to one of the Friends, that was with me, To go to him, and tell him, that
about the Ninth Hour next Morning there would be a Meeting there of the People
of God called Quakers; of which we desired, he would give notice to the People
of the Town. He sent me Word, That they were to have a Lecture there by the
Ninth Hour; but that we might have our Meeting there by the Eighth Hour, if we
would. We concluded so; and desired him to give Notice of it. Accordingly in
the Morning both Poor and Rich came: And there being a Captain of Horse
quartered in the Town, He and his Troopers came also; so that we had a large
Meeting: And a glorious Meeting it was, the Lord's Power being set over all.
After some time the Priest came, and went into the Steeple-house: but we being
in the Steeple-house-yard, most of the People staid with us. And Friends were
so full, and their Voices so high in the Power of God, that the Priest could do
little in the Steeple-house; but came quickly out again, and stood a while, and
then went his Way. For after I had opened to the People, Where they might find
Christ Jesus, having turned them to the Light, which he had enlightened them
withal, that in the Light they might see Christ, that died for them, and turn
to him, and know him to be their Savior and free Teacher; and had let them
see, that all the Teachers they had hitherto followed, were Hirelings, who made
the Gospel chargeable; and had showed them the wrong Ways they had walked in,
in the Night of Apostasy, and had directed them to Christ, the new and living
Way to God; and had manifested unto them, how they had lost the Religion and
Worship, which Christ set up in Spirit and Truth, and had hitherto been in the
Religions and Worships of Men's making and setting up; and after I had turned
the People to the Spirit of God, which led the holy Men of God to give forth
the Scriptures; and showed them, that they must also come to receive and be led
by the same Spirit in themselves (a Measure of which was given unto every one
of them) if ever they came to know God and Christ, and the Scriptures aright:
perceiving, the other Friends, that were with me, to be full of the Power and
Word of the Lord, I stepped down; giving way for them to declare, what they had
from the Lord to say unto the People. Toward the latter End of the Meeting
some Professors began to jangle: Whereupon I stood up again, and answered their
Questions, so that they seemed to be satisfied; and our Meeting ended in the
Lord's Power, quiet and peaceable. This was the last Meeting I had in Scotland:
And the Truth and the Power of God was set over that Nation; and many, by the
Power and Spirit of God were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Savior and
Teacher, whose Blood was shed for them: And since there is a great Increase;
1657. Scotland. Dunbar.
and great there will be in Scotland. For when first I set my Horses Feet upon
the Scottish Ground, I felt the Seed of God to sparkle about me like
innumerable Sparks of Fire. Not but that there is Abundance of thick, Cloddy
Earth of Hypocrisy and Falseness, that is a top, and a briary, brambly Nature,
which is to be burnt up with God's Word, and plowed up with his Spiritual Plow,
before God's Seed brings forth heavenly and spiritual Fruit to his glory. But
the Husbandman is to wait in Patience.

From Dunbar we came to Berwick, Northumberland. Berwick.
where we were questioned a little by the Officers; but the Governor was
loving toward us: and in the Evening we had a little Meeting, in which the
Power of the Lord was manifested over all.

Leaving Berwick, we came to Morpeth; and so through the Country, Morpeth.
Newcastle
visiting Friends, to New Castle, where I had been once before: For the
Newcastle-Priests had written many Books against us; and one Ledger, an
Alderman of the Town, was very envious against Truth and Friends. He and the
Priests had said; The Quakers would not come into any great Towns, but lived in
the Fells, like Butterflies. So I took Anthony Pearson with me, and went to
this Ledger, and several others of the Aldermen; desiring, to have a Meeting
amongst them, seeing they had written so many Books against us: for we were now
come, I told them, into their great Town. But they would not yield we should
have a Meeting, neither would they be spoken withal, save only this Ledger, and
one other. I told them; Had they not called Friends Butterflies, and said, We
would not come into any great Towns? And now we were come into their Town, they
would not come at us, though they had printed Books against us. Who are the
Butterflies now, said I? Then Ledger began to plead for the Sabbath Day: but I
told him They kept Markets and Fairs on that which was the Sabbath Day, for
that was the seventh day of the Week; whereas that Day, which the professed
Christians now Meet on, and call their Sabbath, is the First day of the Week.
So when we could not have a public Meeting among them, we got a little Meeting
among Friends and friendly People, at the Gate-side; where a Meeting is
continued to this day, in the Name of Jesus. As I was passing away by the
Marketplace, the Power of the Lord rose in me, To warn them of the Day of the
Lord, that was coming upon them. And not long after, all those Priests of
Newcastle, and their Profession, were turned out, when the King came in.

From New Castle we traveled through the Countries, Northumberland. Bishopric.
having Meetings, and visiting Friends as we went, in Northumberland and
Bishopric; and a very good Meeting we had at Lieutenant Dove's, where many
were turned to the Lord and his Teaching. After the Meeting I went to visit a
Justice of Peace, a very sober, loving Man; and he confessed to the Truth.

From thence we came to Durham, Durham.
where was a Man come down from London, to set up a College there, to make
Ministers of Christ, as they said: I went, with some others, to reason with the
Man, and to let him see, That to teach Men Hebrew, Greek and Latin, and the
Seven Arts, which was all but the Teachings of the Natural Man, was not the Way
to make them Ministers of Christ. For the Languages began at Babel: 1657.
Durham.
and to the Greeks, that spoke Greek, as their Mother Tongue, the Preaching of
the Cross of Christ was foolishness; and to the Jews, that spoke Hebrew, as
their Mother Tongue, Christ was a Stumbling Block. And as for the Romans, who
had the Latin and Italian, they persecuted the Christians; and Pilat, one of
the Roman Governors, set Hebrew, Greek and Latin a top of Christ, when he
Crucified him. So he might see, the many Languages began at Babel, and they set
them a top of Christ, the Word, when they Crucified him. And John the Divine,
who preached the Word, that was in the beginning, said, That the Beast, and the
Whore have Power over Tongues and Languages, and they are as Waters. Thus, I
told him, he might see, the Whore and Beast have Power over the Tongues and the
many Languages, which are in Mystery Babylon: for they began at Babel; and the
Persecutors of Christ Jesus set them over him, when he was Crucified by them:
but he is Risen over them all, who was before them all. Now (said I to this
Man) Do thou think to make Ministers of Christ by these natural, confused
Languages, which sprang from Babel, are admired in Babylon, and set a top of
Christ, the Life, by a Persecutor? Oh no! So the Man confessed to many of these
things. Then we showed him further, That Christ made his Ministers himself, and
gave Gifts unto them; and bid them Pray to the Lord of the Harvest, to send
forth Laborers. And Peter and John, though unlearned and ignorant (as to
School-learning) preached Christ Jesus the Word, which was in the beginning,
before Babel was. Paul also was made an Apostle not of Man, nor by Man, neither
received he the Gospel from Man, but from Jesus Christ; who is the same now,
and so is his Gospel, as it was at that Day. When we had thus Discoursed with
the Man, he became very loving and tender: and after he had considered further
of it, he never set up his College.

Cleveland Yorkshire. Holderness. Hull. Pomfret
From Durham we went to Anthony Pearson's, and from thence into Cleaveland; and
so passed through Yorkshire to the further End of Holderness, and had mighty
Meetings, the Lord's Power accompanying us.

After we parted from Anthony Pearson's: we went by Hull and Pomfret through
the Countries to George Watkinson's House, and visited most of the Meetings all
up and down in these Parts, Scalehouse Swarthmore.
till we came to Scale-house, and so on to Swarthmore; the everlasting Power
and Arm of God carrying us through, and preserving us. After I had visited
Friends up and down there-aways, Yorkshire. Cheshire. Derbishire.
Nottinghamshire. Nottingham.
I passed through the Countries into Yorkshire again, and into Cheshire; and so
through other Counties into Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire: and glorious
Meetings we had, the Lord's Presence being with us.

At Nottingham I sent to Rice Jones, desiring him To make his People
acquainted, that I had something to say to them from the Lord. He came and told
me, Many of them lived in the Country, and he could not tell, how to send to
them. I told him, He might acquaint them about the Town of it, and send to as
many in the Country, as he could. So the next Day we Met at the Castle, there
being about fourscore People; to whom I declared the Truth for about the space
of two Hours: And the Lord's Power was over them all, so that they had not
Power to open their Mouths in Opposition. When I had done, one of them asked me
a Question, which I was loath to have answered; for I saw, it might lead into
Jangling, and I was unwilling to go into Jangling, 1657. Nottingham.
for some of the People were tender: yet I could not tell, how well to escape
it. Wherefore I answered the Question: and was moved forthwith to speak to Rice
Jones, and lay before him, How that he had been the Man, that had scattered
such, as had been Tender, and some that had been Convinced, and had been led
out of many Vanities of the World, which he had formerly judged; but now he
judged the Power of God in them, and they, being simple, turned to him: and so
he and they were turned to be vainer than the World: for many of his Followers
were turned to be the greatest Foot-ball-players and Wrestlers in the Country.
So I told him, it was the Serpent in him, that had scattered, and done hurt to
such as were Tender toward the Lord. Nevertheless, if he did wait in the Fear
of God, for the Seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, to bruise the Serpent's Head
in him, that had scattered, and done the hurt; by the Seed Christ Jesus, (he
coming into him) he might come to gather them again by this heavenly Seed:
though it would be an hard work for him, to gather them again out of those
Vanities, he had led them into. At this Rice Jones said, Thou lie, it is not
the Seed of the Woman, that bruises the Serpent's Head. No! said I, What is it
then? I say, it is the Law, said he. But, said I, the Scripture speaking of the
Seed of the Woman, says, It shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his
Heel: Now, has the Law an Heel; said I, to be bruised? Then Rice Jones and all
his Company were at a stand: and I was moved in the Power of the Lord to speak
to him, and say; This Seed, Christ Jesus, the Seed of the Woman, which should
bruise the Serpent's Head, shall bruise thy Head, and break you all to pieces.
Thus I did leave on the Heads of them the Seed, Christ: and not long after he
and his Company scattered to pieces; and several of them came to be Friends,
and stand to this Day. For many of them had been Convinced about eight Years
before, but had been led aside by this Rice Jones: For they denied the Inward
Cross, the Power of God, and so went into Vanity. And it was about eight Years,
since I had been formerly amongst them; in which time I was to pass over them
and by them, seeing they had slighted the Lord's Truth and Power, and the
Visitation of his Love unto them. But now was the time, that I was moved to go
to them again, and it was of great Service; for many of them were brought to
the Lord Jesus Christ, and were settled upon him, sitting down under his
Teaching and Feeding, where they were kept fresh and green: and the others,
that would not be gathered to him, soon after withered. This was that Rice
Jones, that some Years before had said; I was then at the highest, and should
fall: But, poor Man! he little thought, how near his own Fall was.

We left Nottingham, and went into Warwickshire: 1658. Warwicksh.
Northamptonshire. Leicestersh. Bedfordsh. Yearly Meeting.
and thence passing through some parts of Northamptonshire and Leicestershire,
visiting Friends, and having Meetings with them, as we traveled, we came into
Bedfordshire; where we had large Gatherings in the Name of Jesus. After some
time we came to John Crook's House, where a General Yearly Meeting for the
whole Nation was appointed to be held. This Meeting lasted Three Days, and many
Friends from most Parts of the Nation came to it; so that the Inns and Towns
round thereabouts were filled: for many Thousands of People were at it. And
although there were some Disturbance by some rude People, 1658. Bedfordshire.
Yearly Meeting.
that had run out from Truth; yet the Lord's Power came over all, and a
glorious Meeting it was. And the Everlasting Gospel was preached, and many
received it, (for there were many sorts of Professors came to the Meeting;)
which Gospel brought Life and Immortality to Light in them, and shined over all.

Then was I moved, by the Power and Spirit of the Lord, to open unto them the
Promise of God, how that it was made to the Seed, not to Seeds, as many, but to
One; which Seed was Christ: And that all People, both Males and Females, should
feel this Seed in them, which was Heir of the Promise; that so they might all
witness Christ in them, the Hope of Glory, the Mystery, which had been hid from
Ages and Generations, which was revealed to the Apostles, and is revealed again
now, after this long Night of Apostasy. So that all might come up into this
Seed, Christ Jesus, and walk in it, and sit down together in the heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus; who was the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles,
and the Rock of Ages, and is our Foundation now. And all sitting down in him,
sit down in the Substance, the First and the Last, that changes not, the Seed
that bruises the Serpent's Head, and was, before he was; who ends all the
Types, Figures and Shadows, and is the Substance of them all, in whom there is
no Shadow. Now, these things were upon me to open unto all, that they might
mind and see, what it is, they sit down in.

For First, They that sit down in Adam in the Fall, sit down in Misery, in
Death, in Darkness and Corruption.

Secondly, They that sit down in the Types, Figures and Shadows, and under the
first Priesthood, Law and Covenant, sit down in that which must have an End;
and which made nothing perfect.

Thirdly, They that sit down in the Apostasy, that has gotten up since the
Apostles Days, sit down in spiritual Sodom and Egypt; and are drinking of the
Whore's Cup, under the Beast's and Dragon's Power.

Fourthly, They that sit down in the State, in which Adam was before he fell,
sit down in that which may be fallen from; for he fell from that State, though
it was perfect.

Fifthly, They that sit down in the Prophets, sit down in that which must be
fulfilled: And they that sit down in the Fellowship of Water, Bread and Wine,
these being temporal things, they sit down in that which is short of Christ,
and of his Baptism.

Sixthly, To sit down in a Profession of all the Scriptures from Genesis to the
Revelations, and not be in the Power and Spirit, which they were in, that gave
them forth; That was to be turned away from, by them that came into the Power
and Spirit, which they were in, that gave forth the Scriptures.

Seventhly, They that sit down in the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, these
sit down in him, that never fell, nor never changed. Here is the safe sitting
for all his Elect, his Church, his Spiritual Members, of which he is the living
Head, his living Stones, the Household of Faith; of which House he is the
Cornerstone, that stands and abides all Weathers. For, as the Apostle said, He
has quickened us, who were dead in Sins and Trespasses, etc. and made us to sit
together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus; that in the Ages to come he
might show the exceeding Riches of his Grace, in his Kindness toward us,
through Jesus Christ. Now, the Ages are come, that his Kindness and exceeding
Riches toward us through Jesus Christ is truly manifested in us, as it was in
the Apostles days; even in us, who have been dead in Sins and Trespasses, as
they were: but now are quickened, and made alive, and made to sit together in
the heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, the First and the Last, by whom all things
were created; who is ascended above all, and is over all, and whose glorious
presence is now known. And all that sit down here, in Christ Jesus, they see,
where all other People sit, and in what. So the Promise of God being to the
Seed, which is one, Christ Jesus, every Man and Woman must come to witness this
Seed, Christ in them, that they may be Heirs of the Promise; and inheriting
that, they will inherit Substance. These things were largely declared of, and
the state of the Church, and the state of the false Church since the Apostles
days, opened; and how the true Church fled into the Wilderness: and the state
of the false Prophets, which Christ said should come, and John saw were come,
and how all the World wondered after them; and how they had filled the World
with false Doctrines, Ways, Worships and Religions: and how the Everlasting
Gospel was now preached again to all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People; for
all Nations, Kindreds, Tongues and People had drunk the Whore's Cup, and she
was over them, and sat upon them. And in this Night of Apostasy the pure
Religion and Worship in Spirit, which was in the Apostles days, and the way of
Life and living Faith, and the Power and Holy Ghost were lost: but now they
came to be set up again by Christ Jesus, and his Messengers and Ministers of
the Gospel, as in the Apostles days. For as Christ sent his Disciples to go and
preach the Gospel, into all the World; and after that, the false Prophets and
Antichrists went over the World, and preached their false Doctrines and
Traditions, and Heathenish and Jewish Rudiments: So now again, the Everlasting
Gospel must be preached to all Nations, and to every Creature, that they may
come into the pure Religion, to worship God in the Spirit and Truth, and may
know Christ Jesus, their Way to God, and him to be the Author of their Faith,
and may receive the Gospel from Heaven, and not from Men; in which Gospel,
received from Heaven, is the Heavenly Fellowship, which is a Mystery to all the
Fellowships in the World. Now after these things had been largely opened, with
many other things concerning Christ Jesus, and his Kingdom, and the People were
turned to the divine Light of Christ, and his Spirit, by which they might come
both to know God and Christ, and the Scriptures, and to have Fellowship with
them, and one with another in the same Spirit; I was moved to declare and open
diverse other things to those Friends, who had received a part of the Ministry,
concerning the Exercise of their Spiritual Gifts in the Church: Which, being
taken in writing, by one that was present, was after this manner; Friends,
TAke heed of destroying that, which ye have begotten: for that which destroys,
goes out, and is the Castaway. And though that be true, yea, and may be the
pure Truth, which such an one speaks; yet if he does not remain in that, and
live in that in his own particular, but goes out, the same, which he is gone
out from, comes over him. So that, that calms the Spirits, and cools the
Spirits, that goes over the World, and brings to the Father, to inherit the
Life Eternal; and reaches to the Spirits in Prison in all. Therefore in the
living, immovable Word of the Lord God dwell, and in the Renown thereof; and
remain on the Foundation, that is pure, and that is sure: for whosoever goes
out from the Pure, and Ministers not in and from that, he comes to an End, and
does not remain; though he may have had a Time, and may have been serviceable
for a Time, while he lived in the Thing.

And take heed of many Words, but what reaches to the Life, that settles in
the Life: That which comes from the Life, and is received from God, that
reaches to the Life, and settles others in the Life: For the Work is not now,
as it was at first; but the Work now is, to settle and stay in the Life. For as
Friends have been led to minister in the Power, and the Power has gone
through, so that there has grown an Understanding among both People of the
World, and Friends; so Friends must be kept in the Life, which is pure, that
with that they may answer the pure Life of God in others. For if Friends do not
live in the pure Life, which they speak of, to answer the Life in those, that
they speak to, the other part steps in; and so there comes up an Outward
Acquaintance, and he lets that come over him. But as every one is kept living
in the Life of God, over all that which is contrary, they are in their places;
then they do not lay Hands on any suddenly, which is the Danger now: for if any
one do, he may lose his Discerning, and may lay Hands on the wrong Part, and so
let the Deceit come too near him; and the Deceit will steal over, so that it
will be an hard thing for him, to get it down. There is no one strikes his
Fellow Servants, but first he is gone from the pure in his own particular: for
when he goes from the Light, he is enlightened withal, then he strikes; and
then he has his Reward: the Light, which he is gone from, Christ, he comes,
and gives him his Reward. This is the state of the evil Servants: the
boisterous, and the hasty and rash beget nothing to God; but the Life, which
does reach the Life, is that which begets to God. Now when all are settled in
the Life, they are in that which remains for ever; and what is received there,
is received from the Lord: and what one receives from the Lord, he keeps,
and so he sits still, and cool, and quiet in his own Spirit, and gives it
forth, as he is moved; but to the Harlots, Judgment.

So Friends, this is the Word of the Lord to you all, be Watchful and Careful
in all Meetings ye come into; for where Friends are sitting together in
silence, they are many times gathered into their own measures. Now, when a Man
is come newly out of the World, from ministering to the World's People, he
comes out of the Dirt; and then he had need take heed, that he be not Rash.
For now, when he comes into a Silent Meeting, that is another State; then he
must come, and feel his own Spirit, how it is, when he comes to them, that sit
silent: for if he be Rash, they will judge him; that having been in the World,
and amongst the World, the Heat is not yet off him. For he may come in the Heat
of his Spirit out of the World; whereas the others are still and cool: and his
Condition in that, not being agreeable to theirs, he may rather do them Hurt,
by begetting them out of the Cool State into the Heating State; if he be not in
that, which commands his own Spirit, and gives him to know it.

There is a great Danger too in Traveling abroad in the World: The same Power,
that moves any to go forth, is that which must keep them. For it is the
greatest Danger to go abroad, except a Man be moved of the Lord, and go in the
Power of the Lord: for then, he keeping in the Power, is kept by it in his
Journey, and in his Work; and it will enable him to answer the Transgressed,
and keep above the Transgressor. And every one feeling the Danger to his own
particular in Traveling abroad, there the pure Fear of the Lord will be
placed, and kept in. For now, though they that Travel, may have Openings, when
they are abroad, to Minister to others; yet as for their own particular Growth,
they must dwell in the Life, which does open: and that will keep down that,
which would boast. For the Minister comes into the Death to that, which is in
the Death and in Prison; and so returns up again into the Life, and into the
Power, and into the Wisdom, to preserve him clean.

So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all; Feel, that ye stand in the
Presence of the Lord: for every Man's Word shall be his Burden; but the Word of
the Lord is pure, and answers the pure in every one. The word of the Lord is
that, which was in the Beginning, and brings to the Beginning: It is an Hammer,
to beat down the Transgressor (not the Transgressed) and as a Fire to burn up
that, which is contrary to it. So Friends, come into that, which is over all
the Spirits of the world, and fathoms all the Spirits of the world, and stands
in the Patience; with that ye may see, where others stand, and reach that which
is of God in every one. So here is no Strife, no Contention, out of
Transgression: for he that goes into the Strife, and into the Contention, he
is from the ' pure Spirit. For where any goes into the Contention, if any
thing has been begotten by him before, then that contentious Nature does get a
top, and spoil that, which was begotten; and q^encheth his own Prophesying. So
if that be not subjected by the Power in the Particular, which would arise into
the Strife, that is dangerous.

Now, if any one have a Moving to any Place, and have spoken, what they were
moved of the Lord; let them return to their Habitation again, and live in the
pure Life of God, and in the Fear of the Lord: and so will ye in the Life, and
in the solid and seasoned Spirit be kept, and preach as well in Life, as with
Words (for none must be light, or wild.) For the Seed of God is weighty, and
brings to be solid; and leads into the Wisdom of God, by which the Wisdom of
the Creation is known. But if that Part be up, which runs into the
Imaginations, and that Part be standing, in which the Imaginations come up, and
the pure Spirit be not thoroughly come up to rule and reign, then that will run
out, and that will glory, and will boast and vapor; and so will such an one
spoil that, which opened to him: And this is for Condemnation. So every one
mind that, which feels through and commands his Spirit, whereby every one may
know, what Spirit he is of: for he should first Try his own Spirit, and then
he may Try others; and he should first know his own Spirit, and then he may
know others. Therefore that, which does command all these Spirits, where the
Heats and Burnings come in and get up, in that wait, which chains them down and
cools: That is the Elect, the Heir of the Promise of God. For no hasty, rash,
brittle Spirits (though they have Prophecies) have held our, and gone through,
they not being subjected in the Prophecy. The Earthly will not abide, for it is
brittle; and in that State the Ministry was another's, not the Son's: for the
Son has Life in himself, and the Son has the Power; which Man being obedient
to, he may be serviceable: but if he go from the pure Power, then he falls, and
abuses it. Therefore let your Faith stand in the pure Power of the Lord God,
and do not abuse it; but let that search through, and work through: and let
every one stand in the Power of the Lord God, which reaches the Seed of God;
which is the Heir of the Promise of Life without End. And let none be hasty to
speak; for ye have Time enough, and with an Eye ye may reach the witness:
Neither let any be backward, when ye are moved; for that brings Destruction.
Now, Truth has an Honor in the Hearts of People, which are not Friends; so
that all Friends being kept in the Truth, they are kept in the Honor, they are
honorable, and that will honor them: but if any lose the Power, they lose the
Life, they lose their Crown, they lose their Honor, they lose the Cross, which
should crucify them, and they crucify the Just; and by losing the Power, the
Lamb comes to be slain. And as it is here, so will it be in other Nations: for
all Friends, here and there, are as one Family; the Seed, the Plants, they are
as a Family. Now all being kept in that which subjects all, and keeps all
under, to wit, the Seed it self, the Life it self, that is the Heir of the
Promise; and that is the Bond of Peace: for there is the Unity in the Spirit
with God, and with one another. For he that in the Life is kept, hears God, and
sees Man's Condition; and with that he answers the Life in others, that hear
God also: Thus one Friend, that is come into that, comprehends the world. But
that which Friends do speak, they must live in; so may they look, that others
may come into that, which they speak, to live in the same. For the Power of the
Lord God has been abused by some, and the worth of Truth has not been minded:
there has been a Trampling on, and Marring with the Feet, and that abuses the
Power. But now every Friend is to keep in the Power, and to take heed to that:
for that must be kept down, which would trample and mar with the Feet, and the
pure Life and Power of God is to be lived in over that; that none with the Feet
might foul or mar, but every one may be kept in the pure Power and Life of the
Lord: Then the water of Life comes in; then he that Ministers, drinks
himself, and gives others to drink.

Now, when any shall be moved to go to speak in a Steeple-house or Market, turn
in to that which moves, and be Obedient to it; that that which would not go,
may be kept down: for that which would not go, will be apt to get up. And take
heed on the other Hand, that the lavishing Part do not get up, for it is a bad
Savor; therefore that must be kept down, and be kept subject. So wait in the
Light of the Lord God, that ye may be all kept in the wisdom of God. For when
the Seed is up in every particular, then there is no Danger: But when there is
an Opening and Prophecy, and the Power stirs, before the Seed comes up, then
there is something, that will be apt to run out rashly; there is the Danger, and
there must be the Patience in the Fears. For it is a weighty Thing to be in the
work of the Ministry of the Lord God, and to go forth in that: It is not as a
customary Preaching; but it is to bring People to the End of all outward
Preaching. For when ye have declared the Truth to People, and they have
received it, and are come into that, which ye spoke of; the uttering of many
Words, and long Declarations out of the Life, may beget them into a Form. And
if any should run on rashly into Words again, without the savor of Life, then
they, that are come into the Thing, that he spoke of, will judge him; whereby
he may hurt again that, which he had raised up before. So Friends, ye must all
come into the Thing, that is spoken in the Openings of the heavenly Life among
you; and walk in the Love of God, that ye may answer the Thing spoken to.

And take heed all of running into Inordinate Affections: For when People come
to own you, then there is Danger of the wrong Part to get up. There was a
Strife among the Disciples of Christ, who should be the Greatest? Christ told
them, The Heathen exercise Lordship, and have Dominion over one another; but it
shall not be so among you: For Christ the Seed was to come up in every one of
them; so then, where is the Greatest? For that part in the Disciples, which
looked to be Greatest, was the same, that was in the Gentiles. But who comes
here to live in the Word, that sanctified him, having the Heart sanctified, the
Tongue and Lips sanctified, living in the Word of Wisdom, that makes clean the
Heart, and reconciles to God, all things being upheld by the Word and Power; as
there is an abi^ing in the Word of God, that upholds Times and Seasons, and
gives all things Increase, here dwelling in the Word of Wisdom, if there be but
Two or Three agreed in this on Earth, it shall be done for them in Heaven. So
in this must all things be ordered by the Word of Wisdom and Power, that
upholds all things, the Times and the Seasons, that are in the Father's Hand;
to the glory of God, whereby his Blessing may be felt among you: and this
brings to the Beginning. So this is the Word of the Lord God to you all, Keep
down, Keep low, that nothing may rule nor reign in you, but Life it self.

Now, the Power being lived in, the Cross is lived in: and wherever Friends
come in this, they draw the Power and the Life over; and they leave a Witness
behind them, answering the Witness of God in others. And where this is lived
in, there is no want of Wisdom, no want of Power, no want of Knowledge: but he
that Ministers in this, sees with the Eye, which the Lord opens in him,
what is for the Fire, and what is for the Sword; and what must be fed with
Judgment, and what must be nourished. This brings all down, and to be Low,
every one keeping to the Power: for let a Man get up never so high, yet he must
come down again to the Power, where he left; and what he went from, he must
come down again to that. So new, before all these wicked Spirits be got down,
which are rambling abroad, Friends must have patience, and must wait in the
Patience, and in the cool Life: and who is in this, doing the work of the Lord,
he has the Tasting and the Feeling of the Lamb's Power and Authority.
Therefore all Friends, keep cool and quiet in the power of the Lord God; and
all that is contrary, will be subjected: the Lamb has the victory, in the
Seed, through the Patience.

If any have been moved to speak, and have quenched that, which moved them; let
none such go forth afterward into Words, until they feel the Power to arise and
move them thereto again: for after the first Motion is quenched, the other part
will be apt to get up; and if any go forth in that, he goes forth in his own,
and the Betrayer will come into that. -- And all Friends, be Careful not to
meddle with the Powers of the Earth; but keep out of all such things: and as ye
keep in the Lamb's Authority, ye will answer That of God in them, and bring
them to do Justice, which is the End of the Law. And keep out of all Jangling:
for all that be in the Transgression, they be out from the Law of Love; but all
that be in the Law of Love, come to the Lamb's Power, in the Lamb's Authority,
who is the End of the Law outward. For the Law being added because of
Transgression, Christ, who was glorified with the Father, before the world
began, is the End of the Law; bringing them that live in the Law of Life, to
live over all Transgression: which every Particular must feel in himself.

More was then spoken to many of these Particulars; which were not taken at
large, as they were delivered.

After this Meeting was over, and most of the Friends gone away, as I was
walking in John Crook's Garden, there came a Party of Horse, with a Constable,
to seize on me. I heard them ask, Who was in the House? And somebody made them
Answer, I was there: They said, I was the Man, they looked for; and went
forthwith into the House, where they had many Words with John Crook, and some
few Friends, that were with him. But the Lord's Power so confounded them, that
they never came into the Garden to look for me; but went their Way in a Rage.
When I came into the House, Friends were very glad to see them so confounded,
and that I had escaped them. Next day I passed from thence: and after I had
visited Friends in several places, as I went, I came to London; the Lord's
Power accompanying me, and bearing me up in his Service.

London.
I had not been long come to London, before I heard, that a Jesuit, who came
over with an Ambassador from Spain, had challenged all the Quakers, to dispute
with them at the Earl of Newport's House: whereupon some Friends let him know,
That we would meet him. Then he sent us word, He would meet with Twelve of the
Wisest Learned-Men we had: A while after he sent us word, He would meet with
but Six; and after that he sent us word again, He would have but Three to come.
We hast'ned what we could, lest, for all his great Boast, he should put it
quite off at last. When we were come to the House, I bid Nicholas Bond and
Edward Borough go up, and enter the Discourse with him; and I would walk a
while in the Yard, and then come up after them. I advised them to state this
Question to him, Whether or no the Church of Rome, as it now stood, was not
degenerated from the true Church, which was in the Primitive Times, from the
Life and Doctrine, and from the Power and Spirit, that they were in? They
stated the Question accordingly; and the Jesuit affirmed, That the Church of
Rome now was in the Virginity and Purity of the Primitive Church. By this time
I was come to them. Then we asked him, Whether they had the Holy Ghost poured
out upon them, as the Apostles had? and he said, No. Then said I, If ye have
not the same Holy Ghost poured forth upon you, and the same Power and Spirit,
that the Apostles had, then ye are degenerated from the Power and Spirit, which
the Primitive Church was in. So there needed little more to be said to that.
Then I asked him, What Scripture they had for setting up Cloisters for Nuns,
Abbeys and Monasteries for Men, and for all their several Orders; and for their
Praying by Beads, and to Images, and for making Crosses, and for forbidding of
Meats and Marriages, and for putting People to Death for Religion? If (said I)
ye are in the Practice of the Primitive Church, 1658. London.
in its Purity and Virginity, then let us see by Scriptures, wherever they
practiced any such things? (For it was agreed on both hands, that both he and
we should make good by Scriptures, what we said.) Then he told us of a written
Word, and an unwritten Word. I asked him, What he called his unwritten Word? He
said; The written Word is the Scriptures: and the unwritten Word is that, which
the Apostles spoke by Word of Mouth; which (said he) are all those Traditions,
that we practice. Ibid him, Prove that by Scripture. Then he brought that
Scripture, where the Apostle says (2 Thessalonians. 2.5.) When I was with you, I told
you these things. That is, said he, I told you of Nunneries and Monasteries,
and of putting to death for Religion, and of Praying by Beads, and to Images,
and all the rest of the Practices of the Church of Rome; which, he said, was
the unwritten Word of the Apostles, which they told then, and have since been
continued down by Tradition unto these Times. Then I desired him to read that
Scripture again, that he might see, how he had perverted the Apostle's Words;
for that, which the Apostle there tells the Thessalonians, he had told them
before, is not an unwritten Word, but is there written down; namely, That the
Man of Sin, the Son of Perdition shall be revealed, before that great and
terrible Day of Christ, which he was writing of, should come: so this was not
telling them any of those things, that the Church of Rome practices. In like
manner, the Apostle in the third Chapter of that Epistle, tells the Church of
some disorderly Persons, he heard, were amongst them, busybodies, who did not
work at all; concerning whom he had commanded them by his unwritten Word, when
he was among them, that if any would not work, neither should he eat: which now
he commands them again in his written Words in this Epistle, 2 Thessalonians. 3. So
this Scripture afforded no Proof for their invented Traditions; and he had no
other Scripture Proof to offer. Therefore I told him, This was another
Degeneration of their Church into such Inventions and Traditions, as the
Apostles and primitive Saints never practiced.

After this he came to his Sacrament of the Altar, beginning at the Paschal
Lamb, and the Shewbread: and so came to the Words of Christ, This is my Body,
and to what the Apostle writ of it to the Corinthians; Concluding, That after
the Priest had Consecrated the Bread and Wine, it was Immortal and Divine, and
he that received it, received the whole Christ. I followed him through the
Scriptures he brought, till I came to Christ's Words and the Apostle's; and I
showed him, That the same Apostle told the Corinthians, after they had taken
Bread and Wine in Remembrance of Christ's Death, that they were Reprobates, if
Christ was not in them: But if the Bread they ate, was Christ, he must of
necessity be in them, after they had eaten it. Besides, if this Bread and this
Wine, which the Corinthians ate and drank, was Christ's Body; then how has
Christ a Body in Heaven? I observed to him also, That both the Disciples at the
Supper, and the Corinthians afterward were to eat the Bread, and drink the
Wine in Remembrance of Christ, and to show forth his Death, till he come;
which plainly proves, the Bread and Wine, which they took, was not his Body.
For if it had been his Real Body, that they ate, then he had been Come, and was
then there present; and it had been improper, to have done such a thing in
Remembrance of him, if he had been then present with them: as he must have
been, if that Bread and Wine, which they ate and drank, had been his Real
Body. Then as to those Words of Christ, This is my Body, I told him, Christ
calls himself a Vine, and a Door, and is called in Scripture a Rock; Is Christ
therefore an outward Rock, Door or Vine? O, said the Jesuit, Those words are to
be interpreted; So, said I, are those words of Christ, This is my Body. Now
having stopped his Mouth as to Argument, I made the Jesuit a Proposal thus: That
seeing he said, The Bread and Wine was Immortal and Divine, and the very
Christ; and that whosoever received it, received the whole Christ: Let a
Meeting be Appointed between some of them (whom the Pope and his Cardinals
should Appoint) and some of us; and let a Bottle of Wine and Loaf of Bread be
brought, and divided each into two Parts, and let them Consecrate, which of
those Parts they would. And then set the Consecrated and the Unconsecrated
Bread and Wine in a safe Place, with a sure VVatch upon it; and let Trial thus
be made: Whether the Consecrated Bread and Wine would not lose its Goodness,
and the Bread grow dry and moldy, and the Wine turn dead and sour, as well
and as soon, as that which was Unconsecrated? By this means, said I, the Truth
of this matter may be made manifest. And if the Consecrated Bread and Wine
change not, but retain their Savor and Goodness; this may be a Means to draw
many to your Church: If they change, decay and lose their Goodness; then ought
you to confess, and forsake your Error, and shed no more Blood about it: for
much Blood has been shed about these things; as in Queen Mary's Days. To this
the Jesuit made this Reply: Take (said he) a piece of New Cloth, and cut it
into two pieces, and make two Garments of it; and put one of them upon King
David 's Back, and the other upon a Beggar's: and the one Garment shall wear
away, as well as the other. Is this thy Answer, said I? Yes, said he. Then
(said I) by this the Company may all be satisfied, that your Consecrated Bread
and Wine is not Christ. Have ye told People so long, that the Consecrated
Bread and Wine was Immortal and Divine, and that it was the very and real Body
and Blood of Christ, and do thou now say, it will wear away, or decay, as
well as the other! I must tell thee, Christ remains the same to day, as
yesterday, and never decays; but is the Saints heavenly Food in all
Generations, through which they have Life. He replied no more to this, being
willing to let it fall: for the People, that were present, saw his Error, and
that he could not defend it. Then I asked him, Why their Church did persecute,
and put People to Death for Religion? He replied, It was not the Church did it,
but the Magistrates. I asked him, Whether those Magistrates were not counted
and called Believers and Christians? He said, Yes: Why then, said I, Are they
not Members of your Church? Yes, said he. Then I left it to the People to judge
from his own Concessions, Whether the Church of Rome does not persecute, and
put People to Death for Religion? Thus we parted; and his Subtilty was
comprehended by Simplicity.

Now, during the Time that I was at London, I had many Services lay upon me;
for it was a Time of much Suffering. And I was moved to write to O. Cromwell,
and lay before him the Sufferings of Friends both in this Nation, and in
Ireland. There was also a Talk about this time of making Cromwell King:
Whereupon I was moved to go to him, and warned him against the same, and of
diverse Dangers; which if he did not avoid, I told him, He would bring a Shame
and Ruin upon himself and his Posterity. He seemed to take well, what I said to
him, and thanked me: Yet afterward I was moved to write unto him more fully
concerning that matter.



About this time the Lady Claypool (so called) was sick, and much troubled in
Mind, and could receive no Comfort from any that came to her; which, when I
heard of, I was moved to write unto her this following Letter: Friend,
BE Still and Cool in thy own Mind and Spirit from thy own Thoughts, and then
thou will feel the Principle of God, to turn thy Mind to the Lord God, from
whom Life comes; whereby thou may receive his Strength and Power to allay
all Blustrings, Storms and Tempests. That is it, which works up into Patience,
into Innocence, into Soberness, into Stilness, into Stayedness, into Quietness
up to God, with his Power. Therefore mind, that is the Word of the Lord God
unto thee, that the Authority of God thou may feel, and thy Faith in that, to
work down that which troubles thee: For that is it, which keeps Peace, and
brings up the Witness in thee, which has been transgressed, to feel after God
with his Power and Life, who is a God of Order and Peace. When thou art in the
Transgression of the Life of God in thy own particular, the Mind flies up in
the Air, and the Creature is led into the Night, and Nature goes out of its
Course, and an old Garment goes on, and an uppermost Clothing; and thy Nature
being led out of its Course, it comes to be all on a Fire, in the
Transgression; and that defaceth the Glory of the First Body. Therefore be
still a while from thy own Thoughts, searching, seeking, Desires and
Imaginations, and be stayed in the Principle of God in thee, that it may raise
thy Mind up to God, and stay it upon God, and thou will find Strength from him,
and find him to be a God at hand, a present Help in the time of Trouble, and of
Need. And thou being come to the Principle of God, which has been
transgressed, it will keep thee humble; and the humble God will teach his way,
which is Peace, and such he does Exalt. Now as the Principle of God in thee
has been transgressed, come to it, that it may keep thy Mind down low to the
Lord God; and deny thy self, and from thy own Will, that is the Earthly, thou
must be kept? Then thou will feel the Power of God, which will bring Nature
into its Course, and give thee to see the Glory of the First Body. And there
the Wisdom of God will be received (which is Christ, by which all things were
made and Created) to be thereby preserved and ordered to God's Glory. There
thou will come to receive and feel the Physician of Value, who clothes People
in their right Mind; whereby they may serve God, and do his Will. For all
Distractions, Unruliness and Confusion is in the Transgression; which
Transgression must be brought down, before the Principle of God, which has
been Transgressed against, be lifted up; whereby the Mind may be seasoned and
stilled, and a right understanding of the Lord may be received; whereby his
Blessings enter, and are felt, over all that is contrary, in the Power of the
Lord God, which raises up the Principle of God within, and gives a feeling
after God, and in time gives Dominion. Therefore keep in the Fear of the Lord
God; that is the Word of the Lord God unto thee: for all these things happen to
thee for thy Good, and for the Good of those concerned for thee, to make you
know your selves, and your own Weakness, and that ye may know the Lord's
Strength and Power, and may trust in him. Therefore Let the time, that is past,
be sufficient to every one, who in any thing has been lifted up in
Transgression, out of the Power of the Lord: For he can bring down and abase
the Mighty, and lay them in the Dust of the Earth. Therefore all keep low in
his Fear, that thereby ye may receive the Secrets of God and his Wisdom, and
may know the Shadow of the Almighty, and sit under it, in all Tempests, and
Storms, and Heats. For God is a God at hand, and the Most-High rules in the
Children of Men. So then, this is the Word of the Lord God unto you all, what
the Light does make manifest and discover, as Temptations, Distractions,
Confusions, do not look at the Temptations, Confusions, Corruptions; but at the
Light, which discovers them, and makes them manifest. And with the same Light
you may feel over them, to receive Power to stand against them. The same Light,
which lets you see Sin and Transgression, will let you see the Covenant of God,
which blots out your Sin and Transgression, which gives Victory and Dominion
over it, and brings into Covenant with God. For looking down at Sin, and
Corruption, and Distraction, ye are swallowed up in it: But looking at the
Light, which discovers them, ye will see over them. That will give Victory; and
ye will find Grace and Strength: and there is the first Step to Peace. That
will bring Salvation, and by it ye may see to the beginning, and the Glory that
was with the Father before the World began; and so come to know the Seed of
God, which is the Heir of the Promise of God, and of the World which has no
end; and which bruises the Head of the Serpent, who stops People from coming to
God. That ye may feel the Power of an endless Life, the Power of God, which is
Immortal; which brings the Immortal Soul up to the Immortal God, in whom it
does rejoice. So in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ, God Almighty
strengthen thee.

G. F.




When the foregoing Paper was read to her, she said, It stayed her Mind for the
present. Afterward many Friends got Copies of it, both in England and Ireland,
and read it to People, that were Troubled in Mind; and it was made useful for
the settling of the Minds of several.

About this time came forth a Declaration from O. Cromwell, the Protector, for a
Collection toward the Relief of diverse Protestant Churches (so called) driven
out of Poland; and of Twenty Protestant-Families driven out of the Confines of
Bohemia. And there having been a like Declaration published some time before,
to invite the Nation to a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, in Order to a
Contribution to be made for the suffering Protestants of the Valleys of Lucern,
Angrona, etc. who were persecuted by the Duke of Savoy: I was moved to write to
the Protector and Chief Magistrates on this occasion, both to show them the
Nature of a true Fast (such as God requires and accepts;) and to make them
sensible of their Injustice and Self-Condemnation, in blaming the Papists for
persecuting the Protestants abroad, while they themselves, calling themselves
Protestants, were at the same time persecuting their Protestant Neighbors and
Friends at home. That which I writ to them, was after this manner: To the Heads
and Governors of this Nation, who have put forth a Declaration for the keeping
of a Day of Solemn Fasting and Humiliation, for the Persecution (as you say) of
diverse People beyond the Seas, professing the Reformed Religion, which, ye say,
has been transmitted unto them from their Ancestors.
A Profession of the Reformed Religion may be transmitted to Generations, and
so holden by Tradition; and in that, wherein the Profession and Tradition is
holden, is the Day of Humiliation kept; which stands in the Will of Man, which
is not the Fast, that the Lord requires, To bow down the Head like a Bulrush,
for a Day, and the Day following be in the same Condition, as they were the Day
before. To the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences do I speak, which
testifies for God every Day, and witnesses against all Sin and Persecution;
which Measure of God, if ye be guided by it, does not limit God to a Day, but
leads to the Fast, which the Lord requires, which is To loose the Bonds of
Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens, to break every Yoke, and to let the
oppressed go free, Isa. 58.6, 7. This is the Fast the Lord requires; and this
stands not in the Transmission of Times, nor in the Traditions of Men: But this
stands in that which was before Times were, and which leads out of Time, and
shall be, when Time shall be no more. And these that teach for Doctrine the
Commandments of Men, are they that ever persecuted the Life and Power, when it
came. And whereas ye mention a Decree or Edict, that was made against the said
Persecuted Protestants; all such Decrees or Edicts proceed from the Ground of
the Pope's Religion and Supremacy, and therein stands his Tyranny and Cruelty,
acted in that Will, which is in that Nature, which exercises Lordship over one
another, (as ye may read, Mark 10.42. Luke 22.25.) as all the Heathen do, and
ever did; and in the Heathenish Nature is all the Tyranny and Persecution
exercised, by them that are out of the Obedience to the Light of Christ Jesus
in the Conscience, which is the Guider and Leader of all, who are tender of
that of God in the Conscience. But who are not led by this, know not what it is
to suffer for Conscience sake. Now, whereas ye take into your Consideration the
sad Persecution, Tyranny and Cruelty exercised upon them, whom ye call your
Protestant Brethren, and do Contribute and Administer to their Wants outwardly;
this is good in its place, and we own it; and see it good to administer to the
Necessities of others, and to do good to all: and we, who are Sufferers by a
Law derived from the Pope, are willing to join, and to contribute with you to
their outward Necessities. For the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness
thereof; who is good to all, and gracious to all, and willing, that all should
be saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth. But in the mean time, while
ye are doing this, and taking notice of others Cruelty, Tyranny and
Persecution, turn your Eye upon your selves, and see, what ye are doing at
home? To the Light of Christ Jesus in all your Consciences I speak, which
cannot Lie, nor cannot Err, nor cannot bear False Witness; but does bear
Witness for God, and cries for Equity, and Justice, and Righteousness to be
executed. See what ye are doing, who profess the Scriptures, which were given
forth by the Saints in Light, who dwelt in the Light and in the Life of them.
For them, who do now witness the same Light, the same Life, and the same Power,
which gave forth the Scriptures, which ye in Words profess, them ye persecute,
them ye hale out of your Synagogues and Markets; them ye beat, stock, and
Imprison. Now let that of God, in your Consciences, which is just, and
righteous, and equal, examine and try, whether ye have any Example, or Precedent
to exercise this Persecution, which now many in this Nation suffer under, who
are a People harmless and innocent, walking in Obedience toward God and Man?
And though ye account the way of Truth, they walk in, Heresy; yet therein do
they exercise themselves, to have always a Conscience void of Offense toward
God and Man; as ye may read, the Saints of Old did; ( Acts 24.14, 15, 16.) not
wronging any Man, neither giving any just Cause of Offense; only being obedient
to the Commands of the Lord, to declare as they are moved by the Holy Ghost;
and standing for the Testimony of a Good Conscience, speaking the Truth in
Christ, their Consciences bearing them witness, that they lie not: For this do
they suffer under you, who in Words profess the same thing, for which they
suffer. Now see, if any Age or Generation did ever persecute, as ye do? For ye
profess Christ Jesus, who Reveals the Father; and persecute them, that witness
the Revelation of the Father by Christ Jesus unto them. Ye profess Christ
Jesus, who is the Light of the World, that enlightens every one, that comes
into the World; and yet persecute them, that bear Witness and give Testimony to
this Light. Ye profess, that the Word is become Flesh; and yet persecute them
that witness it so. Ye profess, that whosoever confesses not, that Jesus
Christ is come in the Flesh, is an Antichrist; and yet persecute them, that do
Confess him come in the Flesh, and call them Antichrists and Deceivers. Ye
profess, that the Kingdom of Christ is come; and yet persecute them, that
witness it come. Ye profess Christ Jesus, the Resurrection and the Life; and
yet persecute them, that witness him to be so. If ye say, How shall we know,
that these People, who say, they witness these things, do so, or no? I answer:
Turn your Minds to the Light, which Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal,
which is one in all; and if ye walk in the Light, ye shall have the Light of
Life, and then ye will know and see, what ye have done, who have persecuted the
Lord of Glory (in his People) in whom is Life, and the Life is the Light of
Men. To no other Touchstone shall we turn you, but into your own Consciences,
and there shall ye find the Truth, of what we have declared unto you, and of
what we bear Testimony to, according to the Holy Scriptures. And when the Books
of Consciences are opened, and all judged out of them, then shall ye Witness us
to be of God, and our Testimony to be true; though now ye may stop your Ears,
and harden your Hearts, while it is called to day: But then ye shall know, what
ye have done, and whom ye have transgressed against; and then ye will see, that
no Persecutors, in any Age or Generation, that ever went before you, did ever
Transgress against that Light, and Measure of God made manifest, in such manner
as ye have done. For though Christ and the Apostles were persecuted in their
times, the Jews (for the most part of them) did not know, that he was the
Christ, when he came, notwithstanding that they had the Scriptures, which
prophesied of him; neither did they believe, that he was Risen again, when the
Apostles preached his Resurrection. But ye say, Ye believe he is come; and ye
say, Ye believe his Resurrection; and yet ye persecute those that witness him
come in the Flesh, those that are buried with him in Baptism, those that are
conformable to his Death, and know the Power of his Resurrection, those ye
persecute, those ye hale before Magistrates, and suffer to be beaten in your
Synagogues; those ye cause to be whipped, and stock't, and shamefully entreated,
and into Prison cast, and kept; as many Goals in this Nation at this day
testify to your Faces. Therefore honestly consider, what ye are doing, while
ye are taking notice of others Cruelties, lest ye overlook your own. There is
some difference, in many things, between the Popish Religion, and that which ye
call the Protestant; but in this Persecution of yours there is no difference:
For ye will Confess, that the Foundation of your Religion is grounded upon the
Scriptures; and yet now ye are persecuting them that be in the same Life, which
they were in, who spoke forth the Scriptures; your selves being the mean while
under a Profession of the Words they spoke: and this ye shall one day witness.
So ye have a Profession and Form, and persecute them that are in the
Possession, Life and Power. Therefore know assuredly, that ye must come to
Judgment; for he is made manifest, to whom all Judgment is committed. Therefore
to the Light of Christ Jesus in your Consciences, which searches and tries
you, turn your Minds, and stand still, and wait there to receive the Righteous
Law, which is according to that of God in the Conscience, which is now rising,
and is bearing witness against all Ungodliness and Unrighteousness of Men; and
they whom ye persecute, are manifest to God, and that of God in all Consciences
shall bear witness for us, that we are of God: And this ye shall one day
witness, whether ye will hear or forbear. Our Rejoicing is in the Testimony of
our Consciences, that in Simplicity and Godly Sincerity (not with Fleshly
Wisdom, but by the Grace of God) we have had our Conversation in the World, not
handling the Word of God deceitfully, but, in the Manifestation of the Truth;
commending our selves to every Man's Conscience in the sight of God: and if our
Gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost. And for the witnessing the
holding the Mystery of Faith in a pure Conscience, do we suffer, and are
subject for Conscience sake. This is thank-worthy, if a Man, for Conscience
sake, endure Griefs and Suffering wrongfully. And in this is our Joy and
Rejoicing, having a good Conscience, that whereas we are evil spoken of, as
Evildoers, they may be ashamed, that falsely accuse our good Conversation in
Christ; which is not only the putting away of the Filth of the Flesh, but the
Answer of a good Conscience toward God, by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ.
And this we Witness made manifest, (Eternal Praises to the Living God) and bear
Testimony to that, which spoke it in the Apostle in Life and Power: And
therefore do we bear witness and testify against those, who, being got into a
Form and Profession of it, do persecute the Life and Power. Therefore to the
Eternal Light of Christ Jesus, the Searcher and Trier of all Hearts, turn your
Minds, and see what ye are doing; lest ye overturn your Foundation, and Bottom,
whereon ye pretend to stand, while ye are professing the Scriptures, and
persecuting the Life, Light and Power, which they were in, who gave them forth.
For the Stone, cut out of the Mountains without Hands, is now striking at the
Feet of the Image, the Profession, which is set up, and stands in the Will of
Man. Now is that made manifest, unto which all must answer, and appear before
the Judgment Seat of Christ; that every one may receive the things done in his
Body, according to that he has done, whether it be good or bad. Knowing
therefore the Terror of the Lord, we persuade Men; but we are made manifest
unto God, and shall be made manifest in all your Consciences, which ye shall
witness.

G. F.




Diverse times, both in the time of the Long Parliament, and of the Protector
(so called) and of the Committee of Safety, when they proclaimed Fasts, I was
moved to write to them, and tell them, their Fasts were like unto Jesabels: For
commonly, when they proclaimed Fasts, there was some Mischief contrived against
us: And I knew, their Fasts were for Strife and Debate, to smite with the Fist
of Wickedness; as the New-England-Professors soon after did; who, before they
put our Friends to Death, proclaimed a Fast also.

Now was it a time of great Suffering, and many Friends being in Prisons, many
other Friends were moved to go to the Parliament, to offer up themselves to lie
in the same Dungeons, where their Friends lay, that they, that were in Prison,
might go forth, and not perish in the stinking Dungeons and Goals. And this we
did in Love to God and our Brethren, that they might not die in Prison; and in
love to them, that cast them in, that they might not bring Innocent Blood upon
their own Heads; which we knew would cry to the Lord, and bring his Wrath,
Vengeance and Plagues upon them. But little Favor could we find from those
Professing Parliaments; but instead thereof they would be in a Rage, and
sometimes threaten those Friends, that thus attended them, that they would whip
them, and send them home. Then commonly soon after the Lord would turn them
out, and send them home; who had not an Heart to do good in the Day of their
Power. But they went not off without being forewarned: For I was moved to write
to them, in their several turns, as I did to the Long-Parliament, unto whom I
declared, before they were broken up, That thick Darkness was coming over them
all, even a Day of Darkness that should be felt.

And because the Parliament, that now sat, was made up mostly of high
Professors, who pretending to be more Religious than others, were indeed
greater Persecutors of them, that were truly Religious, I was moved to send
them the following Lines, as a Reproof of their Hypocrisy: O Friends, do not
cloak and Cover your selves: There is a God, that knows your Hearts, and that
will Uncover you. He sees your way: Woe be to him that Covers, but not with
my Spirit, says the Lord. Do ye do contrary to the Law, and then put it from
you! Mercy and true Judgment ye neglect. Look, what was spoken against such: My
Savior spoke against such; I was sick, and ye visited me not; I was hungry,
and ye fed me not; I was a Stranger, and ye took me not in; I was in Prison,
and ye visited me not. But they said, When saw we thee in Prison, and did not
come to thee? Inasmuch as ye did it not unto one of these Little Ones, ye did
it not unto me. Friends, ye Prison them that be in the Life and Power of Truth,
and yet profess to be the Ministers of Christ: But if Christ had sent you, ye
would bring out of Prison, and out of Bondage, and receive Strangers. Ye have
lived in Pleasure on the Earth, and been Wanton; ye have nourished your Hearts,
as in a Day of Slaughter: Ye have condemned, and killed the Just, and he does
not Resist you.

G. F.




After this, as I was going out of Town, having two Friends with me, when we
were gone little more than a Mile out of the City, there met us Two Troopers,
belonging to Col. Hacker's Regiment; and they took me, and the Friends that
were with me, and brought us back to the Mews, and there kept us Prisoners a
little while: But the Lord's Power was so over them, that they did not have us
before any Officer; but after a while set us at liberty again. The same Day,
taking Boat, I went down to Kingston, Kingston.
and from thence went afterward toward Hampton Court, Hampton Court.
to speak with the Protector about the Sufferings of Friends. I met him Riding
into Hampton-Court-Park; and before I came at him, as he rode in the Head of
his Lifeguard, I saw and felt a Waft (or Apparition) of Death go forth against
him; and when I came to him, he looked, like a dead Man. After I had laid the
Sufferings of Friends before him, and had warned him, according as I was moved
to speak to him; he bid me, come to his House. So I went back to Kingston, and
the next day went up to Hampton Court again, to have spoken further with him.
But when I came, he was sick, and -- Harvey, who was one that waited on him,
told me, The Doctors were not willing I should come in to speak with him. So I
passed away, and never saw him any more.

1658. Bucks. London. Essex.
From Kingston I went to Isaac Penington's, in Buckinghamshire, where I had
appointed a Meeting; and the Lord's Truth and Power was preciously manifested
amongst us. After I had Visited Friends in those parts, I returned to London:
And soon after went into Essex; where I had not been long, before I heard, that
the Protector was dead, and his Son Richard made Protector in his Room.
Whereupon I came up to London again. London.


And before this time the Church-Faith (so called) was given forth, which was
said to be made at the Savoy in Eleven Days time. I got a Copy of it, before it
was published, and writ an Answer to it: And when their Book of Church-Faith
was sold up and down the Streets, my Answer to it was sold also. This angered
some of the Parliament Men; so that one of them told me, They must have me to
Smithfield. I told him, I was over their Fires, and feared them not. And
reasoning with him, I wished him to consider; Had all People been without a
Faith these Sixteen hundred Years, that now the Priests must make them one? Did
not the Apostle say, that Jesus was the Author and Finisher of their Faith? And
since Christ Jesus was the Author of the Apostles Faith, and of the Churches
Faith in the Primitive Times, and of the Martyrs Faith, should not all People
look unto him to be the Author and Finisher of their Faith, and not unto the
Priests? A great deal of work we had about the Priests made Faith: For they
called us House-creepers, leading silly Women Captive, because We Met in
Houses, and would not hold up their Priests and Temples, which they had made
and set up. But I told them, that it was they, that Led silly Women Captive,
and Crept into Houses, who kept People always Learning under them, who were
Covetous, and had got a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power and Spirit,
which the Apostles were in. Such began to Creep in the Apostles Days; but now
they had got the Magistrates on their side, who upheld those Houses for them,
which they had Crept into, their Temples, with their Tithes: Whereas the
Apostles brought People off from even that Temple, and those Tithes and
Offerings, which God had for a time Commanded. And the Apostles Met in several
private Houses, being to Preach the Gospel in all Nations; which they did
freely, as Christ had commanded them. And so do we, who bring People off from
these Priests, Temples and Tithes (which God never Commanded) to Meet in
Houses, or on Mountains, as the Saints of old did, who were gathered in the
Name of Jesus; and Christ was their Prophet, Priest and Shepherd.

There was present, with the Parliament Man, that I discoursed with, one Major
Wiggan, a very envious Man; yet he bridled himself before the Parliament Man,
and some others that were there in Company. He took upon him to make a Speech,
and said, Christ had taken away the Guilt of Sin, but had left the Power of Sin
remaining in us. I told him, that was strange Doctrine: For Christ came to
destroy the Devil and his Works, and the Power of Sin, and so to cleanse Men
from Sin.

So Major Wiggan's Mouth was stopped at that time. But the next day desiring to
speak with me again, I took a Friend or two with me, and went to him. Then he
vented a great deal of Passion and Rage, beyond the Bounds of a Christian, or
Moral Man: 1658. London.
Whereupon I was made to reprove him: And having brought the Lord's Power over
him, and let him see, what Condition he was in, I left him.

After some time I passed out of London, and had a Meeting at Sergeant
Birkheads at Twitnam; to which many People came, Twitnam.
and some of considerable Quality in the World. A glorious Meeting it was,
wherein the Scriptures were largely and clearly opened, and Christ exalted
above all, to the great Satisfaction of the Hearers.

But there was great Persecution in many places, both by Imprisoning, and
breaking up of Meetings, At a Meeting about Seven Miles from London, the Rude
People usually came out of several Parishes round about, to abuse Friends, and
did often beat and bruise them exceedingly. One day they beat and abused about
Eighty Friends, that went to that Meeting out of London, tearing their Coats
and Cloaks from off their Backs, and throwing them into Ditches and Ponds; and
when they had besmeared them with Dirt, then they said, They looked like
Witches. The next First Day after this, A Meeting near London.
I was moved of the Lord to go to that Meeting, though at that time I was very
weak. When I came there, I bid Friends bring a Table, and set it in the Close,
where they used to Meet, to stand upon. According to their wonted course, the
Rude People came, and I having a Bible in my hand, showed them theirs and their
Priests and Teachers Fruits; and the People came to be ashamed, and was quiet:
And so I opened the Scriptures to them, and our Principles agreeing therewith;
and I turned the People from the Darkness, to the Light of Christ, and his
Spirit, by which they might understand the Scriptures, and see themselves and
their Sins, and know Christ Jesus to be their Savior. So the Meeting ended
quietly, and the Lord's Power came over all, to his Glory. But it was a time of
great Sufferings; for besides the Imprisonments, (through which many died in
Prisons) our Meetings were greatly disturbed: For they have thrown Rotten Eggs
and Wildfire into our Meetings, and have brought in Drums beating, and
Kettles, to make Noises with, that the Truth might not be heard; and among
these, the Priests as Rude as any: as may be seen in the Book of the Fighting
Priests, wherein a List is given of some of the Priests, that had actually
beaten and abused Friends.

Many also of our Friends were brought up to London, Prisoners, to be Tried
before the Committee; where Henry Vane being Chairman, would not suffer Friends
to come in, except they would put off their Hats: but at last the Lord's Power
came over him, so that, through the Mediation of some others, that persuaded
him, they were admitted. Now many of us having been Imprisoned upon Contempts
(as they called them) for not putting off our Hats, it was not a likely thing,
that Friends, who had suffered so long for it from others, should put off their
Hats to him. But the Lord's Power came over them all, and wrought so, that
several Friends were set at Liberty by them. Now inasmuch as Sufferings grew
very sharp, I was moved of the Lord to write a few Lines, and send abroad
amongst Friends, to encourage them to go on faithfully and boldly through the
Exercises of the day; of which a Copy here follows: My Dear Friends, every
where abroad, scattered in Prison, or out of Prison; Fear not, because of the
Reports of Sufferings; let not the Evil Spies of the Good Land make you afraid,
if they tell you, the Walls are high, and that there be Anakims in the Land:
For at the blowing of the Ram's-Horns did the Walls of Jericho fall down; and
they that brought the Evil Report, perished in the Wilderness. But dwell ye in
the Faith, Patience and Hope, having the Word of Life to keep you, which is
beyond the Law; and having the Oath of God, his Covenant, Christ Jesus, which
divides the Waters asunder, and makes them to Run all on Heaps; in that stand:
and ye will see all things work together for good, to them that love God. And
in that Triumph, when Sufferings come, whatever they be: Your Faith, your
Shield, your Helmet, your Armor you have on: ye are ready to skip over a
Mountain, or a Wall, or an Hill, and to walk through the deep Waters, though
they be Heaps upon Heaps. For the Evil Spies of the good Land may preach up
hardness: but Caleb, which signifies an Heart, and Joshua, a Savior, Triumph
over all.

G. F.




Now after a while I passed into the Country, and went to Reading, Reading.
and was there under great Sufferings and Exercises, and in a great Travel in
my Spirit for about Ten Weeks time: For I saw, there was great Confusion and
Distraction amongst the People, and that the Powers were plucking each other to
pieces. And I saw, how many Men were destroying the Simplicity, and betraying
the Truth, and a great deal of Hypocrisy, and Deceit, and Strife was got
uppermost in the People, so that they were ready to sheath their Swords in one
another Bowels. There had been a Tenderness in many of them formerly, when
they were low; but when they were got up, and had killed, and taken Possession,
they came to be as bad as others: So that we had much to do with them about our
Hats, and saying Thou and Thee to them. For they turned their Profession of
Patience and Moderation into Rage and Madness; and many of them would be like
distracted Men for this Hat-Honour. For they had hardened themselves by
persecuting the Innocent, and were at this time Crucifying the Seed, Christ,
both in themselves and others; till at last they fell a biting and devouring
one another, until they were Consumed one of another; who had turned against,
and judged, that which God had wrought in them, and showed unto them. So
shortly after God overthrew them, and turned them upside down, and brought the
King over them, who were often surmising, that the Quakers Met together to
bring in King Charles, (when as Friends did not concern themselves with the
outward Powers, or Government.) But at last the Lord brought him in, and many
of them (when they saw, he would be brought in) Voted for the bringing him in
So with Heart and Voice praise the Name of the Lord, to whom it does belong;
who over all has the Supremacy, 1658. Reading.
and who will Rock the Nations, for he is over them. Now I had a Sight and
Sense of the King's Return a good while before, and so had some others. I writ
to Oliver several times, and let him know, that while he was persecuting God's
People, they whom he accounted his Enemies, were preparing to come upon him.
And when some forward Spirits, that came amongst us, would have bought
Somerset House, that we might have Meetings in it; I forbad them to do so: For
I did then foresee the King's Coming in again. Besides, there came a Woman to
me in the Strand, who had a Prophecy concerning King Charles 's coming in,
three Years before he came; and she told me, she must go to him to declare it.
I advised her to wait upon the Lord, and keep it to her self: For if it should
be known, that she went on such a Message, they would look upon it to be
Treason: But she said, She must go, and tell him, that he should be brought
into England again. I saw, her Prophecy was true, and that a great Stroke must
come upon them in Power: For they that had then gotten Possession, were so
exceeding high, and such great Persecution was acted by them, who called
themselves Saints, that they would take from Friends their Copyhold-Lands,
because they could not Swear in their Courts. And sometimes, when we laid these
Sufferings before Oliver Cromwell, he would not believe it. Wherefore Thomas
Aldam and Anthony Pearson were moved to go through all the Goals in England,
and to get Copies of Friends Commitments under the Goalers Hands, that they
might lay the Weight of Friends Sufferings upon Oliver Cromwell. And when he
would not give Order for the Releasing of them, Thomas Aldam was moved to take
his Cap from off his Head, and to Rend it in pieces before him, and to say unto
him, So shall thy Government be Rent from Thee and thy House. Another Friend
also, a Woman, was moved to go to the Parliament (that was envious against
Friends) with a Pitcher in her hand, which she brake into pieces before them,
and told them, So should they be broken to pieces: Which came to pass shortly
after. And in my great Suffering, and Travel of Spirit for the Nation, being
grievously burdened, and almost choked with their Hypocrisy, Treachery and
Falsness, I saw, God would bring that a top of them, which they had been a top
of; and that all must be brought down to that, which did Convince them, before
they could get over that bad Spirit within and without: For it is the pure,
Invisible Spirit, that does, and only can work down all Deceit in People.

Now while I was under that sore Travel at Reading, by reason of Grief and
Sorrow of Mind, and the great Exercise that was upon my Spirit, my Countenance
was altered, and I looked poor and thin; and there came a Company of Unclean
Spirits to me, and told me; The Plagues of God were upon me: But I told them,
It was the same Spirit spoke that in them, that said so of Christ, when he was
stricken and smitten; they hid their Face from him. But when I had traveled
with the Witness of God, which they had quenched, and had gotten through with
it, and over all that Hypocrisy, which the Outside-Professors were run into,
and saw, how that would be brought down, and turned under, and that Life would
rise over it, I came to have Ease; and the Light, Power and Spirit shined over
all. And then, having Recovered, and got through my Travels and Sufferings, my
Body and Face swelled, when I came abroad into the Air; and then the bad
Spirits said, I was grown fat; and they Envied at that also: So I saw, that no
Condition nor State would please that Spirit of theirs. But the Lord preserved
me by his Power and Spirit, through and over all; London.
and in the Lord's Power I came to London again.

Now was there a great Pudder made about the Image or Effigies of Oliver
Cromwell lying in State, Men standing and sounding with Trumpets over his Image,
after he was dead. At this my Spirit was greatly grieved, and the Lord, I
found, was highly offended. Then did I write the following Lines unto them, and
sent among them, to Reprove their Wickedness, and warn them to Repent.

Oh Friends, what are ye doing! and what mean ye to sound before a^ Image! Will
not all sober People think, ye are like mad People? Oh, how am I grieved with
your Abominations! Oh, how am I wearied! My Soul is wearied with ^ou, says the
Lord, Will I not be avenged of you, think ye, for your Abominations? Oh, how
have ye plucked down and set up! On how are your Hearts made whole, and not
Rent! And how are ye turned to Fooleries! Which things in times past, ye stood
over: Therefore, how have ^e left my Dread, says the Lord! O! Therefore Fear,
and Repent, lest the Snare and the Pit take you all. The great Day of the Lord
is come upon all your Abominations, and the swift Hand of the Lord is turned
against them all. The sober People in the Nations, stand amazed at your Doings,
and are ashamed, as if ye would bring in Popery.

G. F.


Plotting and Contriving there was by the several Factions, to carry on their
several Interests. And a great Care being upon me, lest any Young or Raw
People, that might sometimes come amongst us, should be drawn into that Snare,
I was moved to give forth the following Epistle, as a Warning unto all such.

All Friends every where, keep out of Plots, and Busling, and the Arm of Flesh;
for all that is amongst Adam's Sons in the Fall, where they are destroying Men's
Lives like Dogs, and Beasts, and Swine, goaring, renting, and biting one
another, and destroying one another, and wrestling with Flesh and Blood. From
whence arise Wars and Killing, but from the Lusts? Now all this is in Adam in
the Fall, out of Adam, that never fell, in whom there is Peace and Life. Ye are
called to Peace, therefore follow it; and that Peace is in Christ, not in Adam
in the Fall. All that pretend to fight for Christ, they are deceived; for his
Kingdom is not of this World, therefore his Servants do not fight. Therefore
Fighters are not of Christ's Kingdom, but are without Christ's Kingdom: For his
Kingdom stands in Peace and Righteousness; but Fighters are in the Lust: And
all that would destroy Men's Lives, 1659. London.
are not of Christ's Mind, who came to save Men's lives. Christ's Kingdom is
not of this World; it is peaceable: and all that be in Strife, are not of his
Kingdom. And all that pretend to fight for the Gospel, are deceived: For the
Gospel is the Power of God, which was before the Devil, or Fall of Man was; and
the Gospel of Peace was, before Fighting was. Therefore they, that pretend
Fighting, and talk of Fighting so, are Ignorant of the Gospel. And all that
talk of Fighting for Sion, are in Darkness: For Sion needs no such Helpers. And
all such as profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ, or Christians, and go
about to beat down the Whore with outward, carnal Weapons, the Flesh and the
Whore are got up in themselves, and they are in a blind Zeal: For the Whore got
up by the Inward Ravening from the Spirit of God; and the beating down of the
Whore must be by the inward Stroke of the Sword of the Spirit within. All such
as pretend Christ Jesus, and confess him, and yet run into the use of Carnal
Weapons, wrestling with Flesh and Blood, throw away the Spiritual Weapons. They
that would be Wrestlers with Flesh and Blood, throw away Christ's Doctrine, and
Flesh is got upon them, and they are weary of their Sufferings. And such as
would Revenge themselves, be out of Christ's Doctrine. And such as being
stricken on the one Cheek, would not turn the other, be out of Christ's
Doctrine. And such as do not love one another, and love Enemies, be out of
Christ's Doctrine. Therefore ye, that be Heirs of the Blessings of God, which
were before the Curse and the Fall was, come to Inherit your Portions: And ye
that be Heirs of the Gospel of Peace, which was before the Devil was, live in
the Gospel of Peace, seeking the Peace of all Men, and the Good of all Men: and
live in Christ, who came to save men's lives, out of Adam in the Fall, where
they destroy men's lives, and live not in him. For the Jews Sword outwardly, by
which they cut down the Heathen, was a Type of the Spirit of God within, which
cuts down the Heathenish Nature within. So live in the peaceable Kingdom of
Christ Jesus, and live in the Peace of God, and not in the Lusts, from whence
Wars arise, and live in Christ, the Prince of Peace, the Way of God, who is the
Second Adam, that never fell; but live not in Adam in the Fall, in the
Destruction, where they destroy one another. Therefore come out of Adam in the
Fall, into the Adam that never fell; and so live in Love and Peace with all
Men: and keep out of all the Buslings in the World, and meddle not with the
Powers of the Earth; but mind the Kingdom, the Way of Peace. Ye that be Heirs
of Grace, and Heirs of the Kingdom, and Heirs of the Gospel, and Heirs of
Salvation, and Saints of the most-High, and Children of God, whose
Conversations are in Heaven, that is above the Combustions of the Earth, let
your Conversation Preach to all Men, and your Innocent Lives, that they which
speak Evil of you, beholding your Godly Conversation, may glorify your Father,
which is in Heaven. And all Friends every where, this I charge you, which is
the Word of the Lord God unto you all, Live in Peace, in Christ the way of
Peace; and therein seek the Peace of all Men, and no Man's Hurt. As I said
before, in Adam in the Fall is no Peace; but in Adam out of the Fall, in him is
the Peace: So ye being in Adam, which never fell, it is Love that overcomes,
and not Hatred with Hatred, nor Strife with Strife. Therefore live all in the
peaceable Life, doing good to all Men, and seeking the Good and Welfare of all
Men.

G. F.


It was not long after this, before George Booth rose in Arms in Cheshire, and
Lambert went down against him. At which time some foolish rash Spirits, that
came sometimes amongst us, were ready to have taken up Arms: But I was moved of
the Lord to warn them, and forbid them, and they were quiet. In the time of the
Committee of Safety, (so called) we were Invited by them to have taken up Arms,
and great Places and Commands were offered some of us; but we denied them all,
and declared ag^^^st it both by Word and Writing; testifying, that our Weapons
and A^^^^r were not Carnal, but Spiritual. And lest any, that came among^^ ^s,
should be drawn into that Snare, it came upon me from the Lord, to write a few
Lines on that occasion, and send them forth, as a Caution to all amongst us. Of
which this is a Copy: All Friends every where, Take heed to keep out of the
Powers of the Earth, that Run into the Wars and Fightings, which make not for
Peace, but go from that; such will not have the Kingdom. And Friends, take heed
of Joining with this or the other, or meddling with any, or being busy with
other Men's matters; but mind the Lord, and his Power, and his Service. And so
let Friends keep out of other Men's matters, and keep in that which answers the
Witness in them all, out of the Mans-matters-part, where they must expect Wars,
and the Dishonor. And all Friends every where, dwell in your own, in the Power
of the Lord God, to keep your Minds up to the Lord God, from falling down to
the Strength of Egypt, or going thither for Strength, after ye are come out of
it, like the Children of Israel, after they were come out of outward Egypt. But
dwell in the Power of the Lord God that ye may keep over all the Powers of the
Earth, amongst whom the just Hand of God is come: For they have turned against
the Just, and disobeyed the Just in their own particulars, and so gone on in
one against the Just; therefore the Just sets them one against another. Now he
that goes to help among them, is from the Just in himself, in the mad and
unstay'd state, and does not know by the All-seeing Eye, (that beholds) him
that recompenseth and rewards, and lives not in the Hand, in the Power, that
mangles and overturns, which vexes the Transgressors, that come to be blind,
and zealous for they do not know what. Therefore keep in Peace, and in the Love
and Power of God, and in Unity and Love one to another, lest any go out, and
fall with the Uncircumcised: That is, they that are from the Spirit in
themselves, and they that go from it, go into the Pit together. Therefore stand
in that (it is the Word of the Lord God to you all) in the Fear and Dread of
the Lord God, his Power, Life, Light, Seed and Wisdom, by which ye may take
away the occasion of Wars, and so know a Kingdom which has no end, and fight
for that with Spiritual Weapons, which takes away the occasion of the Carnal:
and there gather Men to War, as many as ye can, and set up as many as ye can
with these Weapons.

G. F.




Now after I had staid some time in London, and had visited Friends Meetings
there and there-abouts, and the Lord's Power was set over all, I traveled into
the Countries again, Essex. Suffolk. Norfolk. Norwich.
passing through Essex and Suffolk into Norfolk, visiting Friends; till I came
to Norwich, where we had a Meeting about the time called Christmas. The Mayor
of Norwich, having got notice beforehand of the Meeting I intended to have
there, granted out a Warrant to apprehend me. Wherefore when I was come
thither, and heard of the Warrant, I sent some Friends to the Mayor to Reason
with him about it. His Answer was, The Soldiers should not Meet; and did We
think to Meet? He would have had us gone out and Met without the City: For he
said, the Towns-People were so rude, that he could hardly order them, and he
feared, that our Meeting would make Tumults in the Town. But our Friends told
him, we were a peaceable People, and that he ought to keep the Peace; for we
could not but Meet to Worship God, as our manner was. So he became pretty
moderate, and did not send his Officers to the Meeting. A large Meeting it was,
and abundance of rude People came, with an intent to have done Mischief: But
the Lord's Power came over them, so that they were Chained by it, though
several Priests were there, and Professors, and Ranters. Among the Priests,
one, whose Name was Townsend, stood up and Cried; Error, Blasphemy and an
Ungodly Meeting? I bad him not burden himself with that, which he could not
make good; and I asked him, what was our Error and Blasphemy: For I told him,
he should make good his Words, before I had done with him, or be shamed. As for
an Ungodly Meeting, I said, I did believe there were many People there, that
feared God, and therefore it was both Unchristian and Uncivil in him, to charge
Civil, Godly People with an Ungodly Meeting. He said, My Error and Blasphemy
was, in that I said, that People must wait upon God by his Power and Spirit,
and feel his Presence, when they did not speak Words: I asked him then, Whether
the Apostles, and Holy Men of God, did not hear God speak to them in their
Silence, before they spoke forth the Scripture, and before it was written? He
replied, Yes: David and the Prophets did hear God, before they did Pen the
Scriptures, and felt his Presence in Silence, before they spoke them forth.
Then said I, All People take notice, he said, this was Error and Blasphemy in
me to say these Words; and now he has confessed, it is no more, than the Holy
Men of God in former times witnessed. So I showed the People, that as the Holy
Men of God, who gave forth the Scriptures, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost, did hear and learn of God, before they spoke them forth: So must They
all hearken, and hear what the Spirit says, which will lead them into all
Truth, that they may know God, and Christ, 1659. Norwich.
and may understand the Scriptures. O said the Priest, this is not that George
Fox I would speak withal; this is a subtle Man, said he. So the Lord's Power
came over all, and the rude People were made moderate, and were reached by it;
and some Professors, that were there, called to the Priests, saying, Prove the
Blasphemy and Errors, which ye have charged them with: Ye have spoken much
against them behind their Backs, but nothing ye can prove now (said they) to
their Faces. But the Priest began to get away: Whereupon I told him, we had
many things to charge him withal, therefore let him set a time and place to
answer them; which he did, and went his ways. A glorious Day this was: For
Truth came over all, and People were turned to God by his Power and Spirit, and
to the Lord Jesus Christ, their free Teacher, who was Exalted over all. And as
we passed away, generally Peoples Hearts were filled with Love toward us; yea,
the Ruder sort of them desired another Meeting: For the evil Intentions that
they had against us, were thrown out of their Hearts. At Night I passed out of
Town to a Friend's House, Col. Dennis.
and from thence to Col. Dennis's, where we had a great Meeting: And afterward
traveled on through the Countries, visiting Friends up and down in Norfolk,
Norfollk. Hunts. Cambridgeshire.
Huntingtonshire and Cambridgeshire, But George Whitehead and Richard
Huberthorn staid about Norwich, to meet the Priest, who was soon Confounded and
down, the Lord's Power came so over him.

After I had traveled through many Countries in the Lord's Service, and many
were Convinced, notwithstanding that in some places the People were very Rude;
I returned to London again, when General Monk was come up thither, London.
and the Gates and Posts of the City were pulling down. Long before this I had
a Vision, wherein I saw the City lie in heaps, and the Gates down; and it was
then reprepresented to me, just as I saw it, several Years after lying in
heaps, when it was burned.

Diverse times had I, both by Word and Writing, forewarned the several Powers,
both in Oliver's time and after, of the Day of Recompense, that was coming upon
them: But they rejecting Counsel, and slighting those Visitations of Love to
them, I was moved now, before they were quite overturned, to lay their
Backsliding, Hypocrisy and Treacherous Dealing before them, thus: Friends,
Now are the Prophecies fulfilled and fulfilling upon you, which have been
spoken to you by the People of God in your Courts, in your Steeple Houses, in
your Towns, Cities, Markets, Highways, and at your Feasts, when ye were in your
Pleasures, and puffed up, that ye would neither hear God nor Man; when ye were
in your Highness and Height of Authority, though raised up from a mean State,
none might come nigh you without bowing, or the Respect of Persons, for ye were
in the World's Way, Complements and Fashions, which, for Conscience sake
toward God, they could not go into, being redeemed there from: Therefore they
were by you hated for that Cause. But how are ye to be brought Low, who Exalted
your selves above your Brethren, and threw the Just and Harmless less from
among you, until at last God has thrown you out: 1658. London.
And when ye cast the Innocent from among you, then ye fell a biting one
another, until ye were Consumed one of another. And so the Day is come upon
you, which before to you was told, though before ye would not believe it. And
are not yet your Hearts so hardened, that ye will hardly yet believe, though
ready to go into Captivity? Was it not told you, when ye spilt the Blood of the
Innocent in your Steeple houses, in your Markets, in your Highways and Cities,
yea, and even in your Courts also, because they said the Word Thou to you, and
could not put off their Hats to you, That if something did not arise up amongst
your selves, to avenge the Blood of the Innocent. there would come something
from beyond the Seas, which lay reserved there; which, being brought by the Arm
of God, the Arm of Flesh, and strongest Mountain cannot withstand? Yet ye would
not consider, nor regard, nor hear; but cried, Peace, Peace, and feasted your
selves, and sat down in the Spoil of your Enemies, being Treacherous both to
God and Man; And who will trust you now? Have ye not taken Covenants and Oaths?
And broken Covenants and Oaths betwixt God and Man, and made the Nations
Breakers both of Covenants and Oaths; so that nothing but Hypocrisy, and
Rottenness, and Falsehood under fair Pretense, was amongst you? When ye
pretended to set up the Old Cause, it was but your selves; for which ye long
stunk to sober People, who saw, that no good ye would do. But it was a Joy for
any of you to get up into Authority, that ye might have Praise, and Honor, and
Respect; and they that were in the Self-denial, were a Derision to you; from
amongst whom that was banished. Thus ye became the Nations Masters, and not
Servants; whereas the Greatest of all, should be the Servants of all. But there
ye lost your Authority, not considering your Estates, from whence ye were, and
to what end God had raised you up; but forgot the Lord, and quenched that which
was Good in your selves, and persecuted them, that lived in it: And so are
grown so gross and perverse, that at last ye are fit for neither God nor Man.
Have not ye used to call the Quakers the Fanatic People, and the Giddy Heads?
But whither now are ye Giddying? Into Cain's City Nod, which signifies
Fugitive, or Wandering? Have not ye Persecuted, and Imprisoned to Death, such as
God had Respect to, and is now Reproving you for their sakes, by them whom ye
have hated? Were not many amongst you cut off for your Persecution, and yet the
rest of you would not take Warning? Was there not a Book of Examples set out
unto you, of what sudden and strange Deaths happened upon the Persecutors of
the Innocent? And yet ye would not take Warning, until the Overflowing Scourge
is now coming upon you. Are not ye They, that have killed like Cain, who have
killed about your Sacrifice, and mingled the Blood of the Innocent with it?
Has not God now Vagabonded you, that ye should become a Curse upon the Earth,
who have persecuted Friends to Death? Did not the Blood of the Righteous cry
out of the Ground for Vengeance? And will not the Blood of the Righteous be
required? Could ye think, that the Lord would let you sit always with Bloody
Hands, and Fists of Wickedness! Ah! What Is become of all your Feasts and your
Fasts, the Prayers and Blessings of your Priests!

G. F.



Being now clear of the City, and finding my Spirit drawn to Visit Friends in
the Western Parts of England, I went out of Town; and passing first into Surrey
and Sussex, Surrey. Sussex.
came to a great Town, where there was a large Meeting, to which several
Friends from Reading came; and a blessed Meeting it was. The Priest of the Town
was in a great Rage, but did not come out of his House; wherefore, hearing him
make a great Noise in his House, as we were passing from the Meeting, we bid
him Come out into the Street, and we would discourse with him; but he would
not. So the Lord's Power being over all, Friends were refreshed in the Lord's
Power and Truth. From thence I went to another Market Town, where in the
Evening we had a precious Meeting; and the fresh Sense of the Presence of the
Lord God was sweetly felt amongst us. Hampshire. Dorsetshire. Ringwood. Pool.
Then turning into Hampshire and Dorsetshire, I went to Ringwood and Pool,
visiting Friends in the Lord's Power, and had great Meetings amongst them.

Dorchester
At Dorchester we had a great Meeting in the Evening at our Inn, to which many
Soldiers came, and were pretty Civil. But the Constables and Officers of the
Town came, under pretense to look for a Jesuit, whose Head (they said) was
shaved: And they would have all to put off their Hats, or else they would take
them off, to look for the Jesuit's shaven Crown. So they took off my Hat (for I
was the Man they aimed at) and they looked very narrowly; but not finding any
bald or shaven place on my Head, they went away with shame; and the Soldiers,
and other sober People were greatly offended with them. But it was of good
Service for the Lord, and all things wrought together for good; for it affected
the People: and after the Officers were gone, we had a fine Meeting; and People
were turned to the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher, who had bought them, and
would reconcile them to God.

From thence we passed into Somersetshire, where the Presbyterians, and other
Professors were very wicked, and often used to disturb Friends Meetings.
Example.
One time especially (as we were then informed) there was a very wicked Man,
whom they had got to come to the Quakers Meeting. This Man put a Bears-Skin on
his Back, and undertook with that to play Pranks in the Quakers Meeting.
Accordingly, setting himself just opposite to the Friend, that was speaking, he
Lolled his Tongue out of his Mouth, having his Bears-Skin on his Back, and so
made sport to his Wicked Followers, and caused a great Disturbance in the
Meeting. But an Eminent Judgment overtook him, and his Punishment slumbred not:
For as he went back from the Meeting, there was a Bull-baiting in the way,
which he stayed to see; and coming within the Bulls reach, the Bull struck his
Horn under the Man's Chin into his Throat, and struck his Tongue out of his
Mouth, so that it hung Lolling out, as he had used it before, in Derision, in
the Meeting. And the Bull's Horn running up into the Man's Head, he swung him
about upon his Horn, 1659. Example.
in a most remarkable and fearful manner. Thus he that came to do Mischief
amongst God's People, was Mischieved himself: and well would it be, if such
apparent Examples of Divine Vengeance would teach others to beware.

We traveled through Somersetshire, and Devonshire, Devonshire. Plymouth.
Cornwall.
till we came to Plymouth, and so went up into Cornwall, visiting the Meetings
of Friends, till we came to Land's-End. Many precious and blessed Meetings we
had, all along through the Countries as we went, wherein they that were
Convinced, were established, and many others were added to them. At the
Land's-End in Cornwall, Lands End.
there was an honest Fisherman Convinced, who became a Faithful Minister of
Christ. I took notice of him to Friends, and told them, He was like Peter.

While I was in Cornwall, there were great Ship-wracks about the Lands-End. Now
it was the Custom of that Country, that at such a time both Rich and Poor went
out, to get as much of the Wrack, as they could, not caring to save the Peoples
Lives: And in some parts of the Country, they called Shipwracks, God's Grace.
These things troubled me, and grieved my Spirit, to hear of such unchristian
Actions, considering, how far they were below the Heathen at Melita, who
received Paul, and made him a Fire, and were courteous toward him, and them,
that had suffered Shipwreck with him. Wherefore I was moved to write a Paper,
and send it to all the Parishes, Priests and Magistrates, High and Low, to
reprove them for such greedy Actions. and to Warn and Exhort them, that, if
they could assist to save Peoples Lives, and preserve their Ships and Goods,
they should use their Diligence therein, and consider, if it had been their own
Condition, they would judge it hard; if they should be upon a Wrack, and People
should strive to get what they could from them, and not matter their Lives. A
Copy of that Paper here follows: All Friends and People,
TAke heed of Greediness, and Covetousness: for that is Idolatry; and the
Idolater must not enter into the Kingdom of God. Take heed of Drunkenness, and
Oaths, and Cursings; for such are Destroyers of the Creation, and make it to
groan. Lay away all Fightings, and Quarrellings, and Brawlings, and Evil
Speakings, which are the Works of the Flesh, and not of the Spirit: for who
follow such things, are not like to have the Kingdom of God. Put away all
Corrupt Words, which be unsavory; and misnaming one another: for ye must give
an Account for every idle Word. Lay aside all Profession and Religion that is
vain, and come to the Possession, and the pure Religion, which is to visit the
Fatherless, the Widow and the Stranger, and receive them: For some thereby may
entertain Angels unawares, and the Servants of the Lord, as Paul was
entertained, after the Shipwreck at Melita. And do not ye take Peoples Goods
from them, by force, out of their Ships, which be the Seamens, or others,
neither covet ye after them; but rather endeavor to preserve their Lives and
their Goods for them: For that shows a Spirit of Compassion, and a Spirit of a
Christian. But if ye be greedy, and covetous after other men's Goods, 1659.
^ands End.
not mattering, what becomes of the Men; would ye be served so your selves? If
ye should have a Ship cast away in other places, and the People should come to
tear the Goods and Ship in pieces, not regarding to save the Men's Lives, but
be ready to fight one with another for your Goods, do not ye believe, such
Goods would become a Curse to them? And may ye not as well believe, such kind
of Actions will become a Curse unto you? When the Spoil of one Ships Goods is
idly spent, and consumed upon the Lusts in Alehouses, Taverns, and otherwise,
then ye gape for another. Is this to do, as ye would be done by; which is the
Law and the Prophets? Therefore, Priest Hull, Are these thy Fruits? What do
thou take Peoples Labor and Goods for? Have thou taught the People no better
Manners and Conversation, who are so Brutish and Heathenish? Now all such
things we judge in whomsoever. But if any Friend, or others, do preserve Men's
Lives, and endeavor to save their Goods and Estates, and restore, what they
can save of a Wrack, to the Owners; and then if they consider them for their
Labor, doing in that case unto them, what they would have done unto
themselves; that we own. And if they buy or sell, and do not make a Prey; that
is allowed of still, in the way of doing, as ye would be done by, keeping to
the Law and to the Prophets: (that is) that if ye should be in another Country,
ye would have other People to save your Lives and Goods, and have your Goods
restored to you again, and you to consider them for so doing. All ye, that do
otherwise, that wait for a Wrack, and get the Goods for your selves, not
regarding the Lives of the Men; but if any of them escape drowning, let them go
a begging up and and down the Country; and if any escape with a little,
sometimes they are robbed of it in the Country: All such, that do so, are not
for the preserving of the Creation, but for the destroying of it: And those
Goods which are so gotten, shall be a Curse, and a Plague, and a Judgment to
them; and them the Judgments of God will follow, for acting such things: The
Witness in your Consciences shall Answer it. Therefore all ye, who have done
such things, do so no more, lest a worse thing come unto you. But that which is
good, do; to preserve Men's Lives and Estates, and labor to restore the Loss
and Breach; that the Lord requires. Be not like a Company of Greedy Dogs, and
worse than Heathens, as if ye had never heard tell of God, nor Christ, nor the
Scriptures, nor pure Religion. And Priest Hull, Have People spent their Money
upon thee, for that which is no Bread? For a thing of naught, that thou have
such Fruits? All such Teachers, that make a Trade of the Scriptures, (which are
given forth from the Spirit of God, to be believed, and read, and practiced,
and Christ, whom they testify of, enjoyed) we utterly deny; who own Christ,
and are come off from all your Steeple Houses, which were the Old Mass-houses:
For there are their bad Fruits harbored; those are the Cages of them. But come
to the Church, which is in God, (1 Thessalonians. 1.) and come all to the Light, which
Christ Jesus has enlightened you withal, which shows you all the Ungodly Words
ye have spoken, the ungodly Thoughts which ye have thought, the ungodly
Actions, which ye have done. This will be your Teacher, if ye love it; your
Condemnation, if ye hate it. For the mighty Day of the Lord is coming upon all
Wickedness and Ungodliness: Therefore your Whoredoms and Fornications lay
aside. And ye Magistrates, who are to do Justice, think ye not, that the Hand
of the Lord God is against you, and that his Judgments will come upon you, who
do not look after these things, and stop them with the Law, which is, To do
unto all men, as they would have done unto them, whereby ye might be a good
Savor in your Country? Is not the Law to preserve Men's Lives and Estates,
Doing unto all Men, as they would Men should do unto them? For all Men would
have their Lives and Estates preserved: Therefore, should not ye preserve
others, and not suffer them to be devoured and destroyed? The Evil of these
things will lie upon you, both Priests and Magistrates?

G. F.
POSTSCRIPT.
ALL Dear Friends, which fear the Lord God, keep out of the Ravenous World's
Spirit, whose Spirit is to Raven and Destroy; which is out of the Wisdom of
God. That when Ships are wrackt, ye do not run to destroy and make Havoc of
Ship and Goods with the World; but rather, that ye do run to save the Men, and
the Goods for them: and so deny your selves, and do unto them, as ye would they
should do unto you.

G. F.





This Paper had a good Service among People: 1660.
And Friends have endeavored much to save the Lives of the Men in times of
Wracks, and to preserve the Ships and Goods for them. And when some, that have
suffered Shipwreck, have been almost dead and starved, some Friends have taken
them to their Houses, to succor them and recover them; which is an Act to be
practiced by all true Christians.

Now turned I back again from the Lands-End; and after I had had many precious
and blessed living Meetings in Cornwall, several Eminent People being Convinced
in that County, whom neither Priests nor Magistrates, by spoiling Goods or
Imprisonments, could make to forsake their Shepherd, the Lord Jesus Christ that
had bought them; and all Friends, who were turned to Christ their Teacher and
Savior, being settled in Peace and Quietness upon him, their Fundation, we left
them unto the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching and Ordering, fresh and green; and
Thomas Lower, who had accompanied me through all that County, brought me over
Horse-Bridge into Devonshire again. Devonshire.
And after several Meetings up and down in Devonshire, we came into
Somersetshire, where we had diverse large and peaceable Meetings; Somersetshire.
and so passing through the County visiting Friends, till we came to Bristol.

1660. Bristol.
I came into Bristol on the Seventh Day of the Week, and the Day before, the
Soldiers came with their Muskets into the Meeting, and were exceeding rude,
beating and striking Friends with their Muskets, and drove them out of the
Orchard in a great Rage, threatening, what they would do, if Friends came there
again. For the Mayor and the Commander of the Soldiers had (it seems) combined
together to make a Disturbance amongst Friends. Now when I came to Bristol, and
Friends told me, what a Rage there was in the Town, how they were threatened by
both the Mayor and Soldiers, and how unruly the Soldiers had been to Friends
the day before; I sent for several Friends, as George Bishop, Thomas Gouldney,
Thomas Speed and Edward Pyot, and desired them, to go to the Mayor and
Aldermen, and desire them, seeing he and they had broke up our Meetings, to let
Friends have the Town Hall to Meet in; and for the use of it Friends would give
them Twenty Pounds a Year, to be distributed amongst the Poor: and when the
Mayor and Aldermen had business to do in it, Friends would not Meet in it, but
only on the First Days. Those Friends were astonished at this, and said, The
Mayor and Aldermen would think, that they were Mad: But I said, Nay; for they
should offer them a considerable Benefit to the Poor. And it was upon me from
the Lord to bid them Go; and at last they Consented, and went, though in the
Cross to their own Wills. When they had laid the thing before the Mayor, it
came so over him, that he said, For his part, he could consent to it; but he
was but one: And he told Friends of another Great Hall they might have; but
that they did not accept of, it being inconvenient: So Friends came away,
leaving the Mayor in a very loving Frame toward them: For they felt, the
Lord's Power had come over him. When they came back, I spoke to them to go also
to the Colonel, that Commanded the Soldiers, and lay before him the rude
Carriage of his Soldiers, how they came Armed amongst naked innnocent People,
who were waiting upon, and worshipping the Lord: But they were backward to go
to him. Next Morning, being the First Day of the Week, we went to the Meeting
in the Orchard, where the Soldiers had so lately been so rude. And after I had
declared the Truth a pretty while in the Meeting, there came in many rude
Soldiers and People, some with Drawn Swords. The In-keepers had made some of
them drunk; and one of them had bound himself with an Oath, to cut down and
kill the Man that spoke. So he came pressing in, through all the Crowd of
People, to within two Yards of me, and stopped at those Four Friends
beforementioned, (who should have gone to the Colonel, as I would have had
them) and fell a jangling with them. On a sudden I saw, his Sword was put up
and gone: For the Lord's Power came over all, and chained him and the rest, and
we had a blessed Meeting, and the Lord's Everlasting Power and Presence was
felt amongst us. On the Day following, those Four Friends went and spoke with
the Colonel, and he sent for the Soldiers, and Cut and Slasht some of them
before the Friends Faces. Which when I heard of, I blamed the Friends for
letting him do so; and also for that they did not go on the Seventh Day, as I
would have had them, which might have prevented this Cutting of the Soldiers,
and the Trouble they gave at our Meeting. But thus the Lord's Power came over
all those persecuting, bloody Minds, and the Meeting there was settled in
Peace, for a good while after without Disturbance.

I had then also a General Meeting at Edw. Pyot's near Bristol, at which it was
judged, there were diverse Thousands of People: For besides Friends from many
parts thereabouts, some of the Baptists and Independents, with their Teachers,
came to it, and very many of the sober People of Bristol; insomuch that the
People, that staid behind, said, The City looked naked, there were so many gone
out of it to this Meeting. It was a very quiet Meeting, and many glorious
Truths were opened to the People, and the Lord Jesus Christ was set up, who was
the End of all Figures and Shadows, and the Law, and the first Covenant. And it
was declared to the People, how that all Figures and Shadows were given to Man,
after Man fell; and how that all the Rudiments and Inventions of Men, which
have been set up in Christendom, many of which were Jewish and Heathenish
Ceremonies, were not set up by the Command of Christ; and all Images and
Likenesses Man has made to himself, or for himself, whether of things in Heaven
or things in Earth, have been, since he lost the Image and Likeness of God,
which God made him in. But now Christ was come to Redeem, Translate, Convert
and Regenerate Man out of all these things, that he has set up in the Fall,
and out of the true Types, Figures and Shadows also, and out of Death and
Darkness, up into the Light, and Life, and Image and Likeness of God again,
which Man and Woman were in, before they fell. Therefore all now should come,
and all might come to receive Christ Jesus, the Substance, by his Light,
Spirit, Grace and Faith; and should live and walk in him, the Redeemer and
Savior.

And whereas we had had a great deal of work with the Priests and Professors,
who pleaded for Imperfection: I was opened to declare and manifest unto them,
how that Adam and Eve were perfect, before they fell; and all that God made, he
saw that it was good, and he blessed it. But the Imperfection came in by the
Fall, through Man's and Woman's hearkening to the Devil, who was out of Truth.
And though the Law made nothing perfect, yet it made way for the bringing in of
the better Hope; which Hope is Christ, who destroys the Devil and his Works,
that made Man and Woman Imperfect. Now Christ says to his Disciples, Be ye
perfect, even as your Heavenly Father is perfect: And he, who himself was
perfect, comes to make Man and Woman perfect again, and brings them again to
the State, which God made them in. So he is the Maker up of the Breach, and the
Peace betwixt God and Man. That this might the better be understood by the
lowest Capacities, I used a Comparison of Two Old People, that had their House
broken down by an Enemy, so that they, with all their Children, were liable to
all Storms and Tempests. And there came some to them, that pretended to be
Workmen, and offered to build up their House again, if they would give them so
much a Year: But when they had gotten their Money, they left their House, as
they found it. After this manner came a First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and
Sixth, each with his several pretense, to build up the Old House, and each got
the Peoples Money; and then cried, They could not rear up the House, nor the
Breach could not be made up: For there is no Perfection here. Cry they; the
House can never be perfectly built up again in this Life: Though they have
taken the Peoples Money for the doing of it. For all the Sects in Christendom
(so called) have pretended to build up Adam's and Eve's fallen House; and when
they have got Peoples Money, they tell them, the Work cannot be perfectly done
here; and so their House lies, as it did. But I told the People, Christ was
come to do it freely, who, by one Offering, has perfected for ever all them
that are sanctified, and renews them up into the Image of God, which Man and
Woman were in, before they fell, and makes Man's and Woman's House as perfect
again, as God had made them at the first: And this Christ, the Heavenly Man,
has done freely. Therefore all are to look unto him, and all that have received
him, are to walk in him, the Life, the Substance, the First and the Last, The
Rock of Ages, and Foundation of many Generations. Largely were these, and many
other things opened and declared unto the People, and the Word of Life was
Preached, which does live and abide; and all were Exhorted to hear and obey
that, which did live and abide, that by it all might be born again of the
Immortal Seed, and feed of the Milk of the Word. A glorious Meeting there was,
wherein the Lord's Everlasting Seed, Christ Jesus, was set over all, and
Friends parted in the Power and Spirit of the Lord, in Peace, and in his Truth,
that is over all.

About this time the Soldiers, under General Monk's Command, were rude and
troublesome at Friends Meetings in many places: Whereof Complaint being made to
him, he gave forth the following Order, which did somewhat restrain them:

St. James's the 9th. of March, 1659.
I Do Require all Officers and Soldiers, to forbear to disturb the peaceable
Meetings of the Quakers, they doing nothing prejudicial to the Parliament or
Commonwealth of England.

GEORGE MONK.

Oldeston. Nailsworth.
After this Meeting at Edward Pyott's I passed through the Countries to
Oldeston, and to Nailsworth, and to Nathaniel Crisp's, where there was a large
Meeting, and several Soldiers at it, but quiet. And from thence we passed
through Friends to Gloucester, Gloucester
visiting their Meetings. And in Gloucester we had a Meeting, that was
peaceable, though the Town was very rude, and divided: For one part of the
Soldiers were for the King, and another for the Parliament: 1660. Glouceser
And as I passed out of the Town over the Bridge, Edward Pyott being with me,
the Soldiers there said, They were for the King. But after we were gone past
them, and they understood, it was I, they were in a great rage, that I had
escaped them; and said, Had they known it, it had been I, they would have shot
me with Hail-shot, rather than I should have escaped them. But the Lord
prevented their Devilish Design, and brought me safe to Col. Grimes his House,
where we had a large general Meeting, Col. Grimes
and the Lord's Truth and Power was set over all, and Friends were established
upon the Rock, and settled under the Lord Jesus Christ's Teaching.

We passed from thence to Tewksburg, and so to Worcester, Tewksbury. Worcester.
visiting Friends in their Meetings in the Towns as we went. And in all my time
I never saw the like Drunkenness, as then in the Towns: For they had been then
choosing Parliament Men. But at Worcester the Lord's Truth was set over all, and
People were finely settled therein, and Friends praised the Lord; Nay, I saw,
the very Earth Rejoiced. Yet great fears and troubles were in many People, and
a looking for the King's Coming in, and that all things should be altered: and
they would ask me, what I thought of Times and Things? I told them the Lord's
Power was over all, and his Light shined over all; and that the Fear would take
hold only on the Hypocrites, such as had not been faithful to God; and on our
Persecutors. For in my Travel and Sufferings at Reading, when People were at a
stand, and could not tell, what might Come in, and who might Rule; I told them,
the Lord's Power was over all (for I had traveled through in it) and his Day
shined, whosoever should come in; and whether the King came in or no, all would
be well, to them that loved the Lord, and were faithful to him. Therefore I bid
all Friends; Fear none but the Lord, and keep in his Power, that was over all.

From Worcester I came through the Countries, Badgely. Leicestershire. Drayton.
visiting Friends in their Meetings, till I came to Badgely; and from thence I
went to Drayton in Leicestershire, to visit my Relations, While I was there,
one Burton, a Justice, hearing that I had a good Horse, sent forth a Warrant to
search for me and my Horse: But I was gone, before they came, and so he missed
of his wicked End. I passed on to Twy Cross, Twy-Cross Swanington. Darby.
and Swanington, and so to Darby, where I visited Friends, and found my old
Jailer amongst them, who had formerly kept me in the House of Correction there,
and was now Convinced of the Truth, which I then suffered under him for.
Passing still further up into Darbyshire, Darbyshire. Nottinghamshire.
Synderhillgreen. Yorkshire. Balby. Yearly Meeting.
and Nottinghamshire, I came to Synderhill-green, visiting Friends through all
those parts in their Meetings; and so passed on to Balby in Yorkshire, where
our Yearly Meeting at that time was holden, in a great Orchard of John Killams,
where it was supposed, some Thousands of People and Friends were gathered
together. In the Morning I heard, that a Troop of Horse was sent from York,
about Thirty Miles off, to break up our Meeting, and that the Militia newly
raised, was to join with them. So I went into the Meeting, and stood up on a
great Stool; and, after I had spoken sometime, Two Trumpeters came up, sounding
their Trumpets pretty near me; and the Captain of the Troop cried, Divide to
the Right and Left, and make way: Then they rid up to me. 1660. Balby Yearly
Meeting.
Now I was declaring the Everlasting Truth, and Word of Life, in the mighty
Power of the Lord. The Captain bid me, Come down, for he was come (he said) to
disperse our Meeting. After some time I spoke to him, and told him, He, and
they all knew, we were a peaceable People, and that we used to have such great
Meetings: But if he did question, that we Met in an hostile Way, I desired him
to make search among us, and if he found either Sword or Pistol about any
there, let such suffer. He told me, he must see us dispersed; for he came all
Night on purpose to disperse us. I asked him, What Honor it would be to him,
to Ride with Swords and Pistols, amongst so many Unarmed Men and Women, as
there was? But if he would be still and quiet, our Meeting probably might not
continue above two or three Hours; and when it was done, as we came Peaceably
and Civilly together, so we should part: For he might perceive, the Meeting was
so large, that all the Country thereabouts could not entertain them, but that
they intended to depart toward their Homes at Night. He said, He could not
stay to see the Meeting ended, but must disperse them, before he went. I
desired him then, if he himself could not stay, that he would let a dozen of
his Soldiers stay, and see the Order and Peaceableness of our Meeting. He
said, He would permit us an Hour's time; and left half a dozen Soldiers to
stay with us. Then went the Captain away with his Troop, and Friends of the
House gave those Soldiers, that staid, and their Horses, some Meat. When the
Captain was gone, the Soldiers, that were left, told us, We might stay till
Night, if we would. But we staid but about three Hours after, and had a
glorious, powerful Meeting: For the presence of the Living God was manifest
amongst us, and the Seed, Christ, was set over all, and Friends were built upon
him the Foundation, and settled under his glorious, heavenly Teaching. And
after the Meeting was done, Friends passed away in Peace, greatly refreshed
with the Presence of the Lord, and filled with Joy and Gladness, that the
Lord's Power had given them such Dominion. For many of the Militia-Souldiers
staid also, and were much vexed, that the Captain and Troopers had not broken
up our Meeting; and Cursed the Captain and his Troopers: For it was reported,
that they intended to have done us some Mischief that day; but the Troopers,
instead of Assisting them, were rather Assistant unto us, in not joining with
them, as they expected; but preventing them from doing the Mischief, they
designed. And yet this Captain was a desperate Man: For it was he, that had
said to me in Scotland, That he would obey his Superiors Commands, and if it
were to Crucify Christ, he would do it; or execute the Great Turk's Commands
against the Christians, if he were under him. So that it was an Eminent Power
of the Lord, which chained down both him, and all his Troopers, and those
envious Militia-Souldiers also; so that they went away, not having power to
hurt any of us, nor to break up our Meeting.

Warmsworth.
The next day we had an heavenly Meeting at Warmsworth, of Friends in the
Ministry, and several others; and then Friends parted: And as they passed
through the Countries, several were taken up. For that day, that our first
Meeting was on, Lambert was Routed; and it made a great Blunder in the Country:
but Friends were not kept long in Prison at that time, 1658. Nottinghamshire.
Skegby.
As I went to this Meeting at Balby, there came several to me at Skegby in
Nottinghamshire, that were then going to be Soldiers under Lambert, and would
have bought my Horse of me; and because I would not sell him to them, they were
in a great Rage against me, using many Threatening Words: But I told them, God
would confound and scatter them; and within two or three Days after, they were
scattered indeed.

From Warmsworth I passed, in the Lord's Power, to Barton-Abby, Barton-Abby. T.
Taylor's Skipton- General Meeting of Men-Friends.
where I had a great Meeting; and from thence to Thomas Tailor s, and so to
Skipton, where there was a General Meeting of Men-Friends out of many Counties,
concerning the Affairs of the Church. There was a Friend went Naked through the
Town, declaring Truth; and he was much beaten: Some other Friends also came to
me all bloody. And as I walked in the Street, there was a desperate Fellow, had
an Intent to have done me a Mischief: But he was prevented, and our Meeting was
quiet. To this Meeting came many Friends out of most parts of the Nation: for
it was about Business relating to the Church, both in this Nation, and beyond
the Seas, Several Years before, when I was in the North, I was moved to
recommend to Friends the setting up of this Meeting for that Service: For many
Friends suffered in diverse parts of the Nation, and their Goods were taken from
them, contrary to the Law, and they understood not, how to help themselves, or
where to seek Redress. But after this Meeting was set up, several Friends, that
had been Justices and Magistrates, and others, that understood something of the
Law, came thither, and were able to Inform Friends, and to assist them in
gathering up the Sufferings, that they might be laid before the Justices,
Judges, or Parliament. Now this Meeting had stood several Years, and diverse
Justices and Captains had come to brake it up; but when they have understood
the Business Friends Met about, and have seen Friends Books, and Accounts of
Collections for Relief of the Poor, how we took Care one County to help
another, and to help our Friends beyond the Seas, and provide for our Poor,
that none of them should be chargeable to their Parishes, etc. The Justices and
Officers would Confess, that we did their Work; and would pass away peaceably
and lovingly, Commending Friends Practices. And sometimes there would come Two
hundred of the World's Poor People, and wait there, till the Meeting was done
(for all the Country knew, we met about the Poor) and then after the Meeting
was over, Friends would send to the Bakers for Bread. and give every one of
those Poor People a Loaf, how many soever there were of them: For we were
taught to do good unto all; though especially to the Household of Faith.

After this Meeting I passed through the Countries, visiting Friends in their
Meetings, till I came to Lancaster; Lancaster. Arnside. General Meeting.
from whence I went to Robert Withers, and so to Arnside, where I had a General
Meeting for all the Friends in those Countries, as Westmorland, Cumberland and
Lancashire. This Meeting was quiet and peaceable, and the living Presence of
the Lord was amongst us. After Meeting I went back with Robert Withers, and
Friends all passed away, R. W.
fresh in the Life and Power of Christ, in which they had Dominion, being
settled upon him, the Heavenly Rock and Foundation. But after the Meeting,
there came several Rude Fellows (Serving-men, 1660. Arnside.
belonging to one called Sir George Middleton, a Justice, that lived not far
off) to have made some disturbance (as it was thought;) but the Meeting being
ended, they did nothing there: But lighting on Three Women-Friends, who were
going from the Meeting, they set upon them with impudent Scoffs, and one of
them (whose Name was Thomas --) said, He would kiss one of them; and carried
himself very abusively and immodestly toward them. The same Man did abuse
other Friends also, and was so outrageous, that he would have Cut Friends with
an Ax; but that he was restrained by some of his Fellows. At another time, the
same Man set upon Six Friends, that were going to a Meeting to wait upon the
Lord, at a place called Yellan, and beat and abused them very much; so that he
bruised their Faces, and shed much of their Blood, wounding them very sore, and
one of them in several parts of his Body; yet they lifted not up an Hand
against him, but gave him their Backs and their Cheeks to beat.

Swarthmore.
From Robert Withers's I went next day to Swarthmore, Francis Howgil and Thomas
Curtis being with me. I had not been long there, before one Henry Porter, who
was called a Justice, sent a Warrant by the Chief Constable, and Three Petty
Constables, to apprehend me. I had a sense of the thing beforehand; and being
in the Parlour with Richard Richardson and Margaret Fell, some of her Servants
came, and told her, that there were some come to search the House for Arms: and
they went up into some of the Chambers under that Pretense. It came upon me to
go out to them; and as I was going by some of them, I spoke some Words to them:
whereupon they asked me my Name. G.F. taken Prisoner.
I readily told them my Name: and then they laid hold on me, saying, I was the
Man they looked for; and led me away to Vlverstone. Ulverstone
There they kept me all Night, at the Constables House, and set a Guard of
Fifteen or Sixteen Men to watch me; some of whom sat in the Chimney, for fear
I should go up the Chimney: such dark Imaginations possessed them. They were
very Rude and Uncivil to me, and would neither suffer me to speak to Friends,
nor suffer Friends to bring me Necessaries; but with Violence thrust out
Friends, and kept a strong Guard upon me. Very Wicked and Rude they were, and a
great Noise they made about me. One of the Constables, whose Name was
Askburnham, said, He did not think, a Thousand Men could have taken me. Another
of the Constables, whose Name was Mount, a very wicked Man, said, He would have
served Judge Fell himself so, if he had been alive, and he had a Warrant for
him. Next Morning, about the Sixth Hour, I was putting on my Boots and Spurs,
to go with them before some Justice; but they pulled off my Spurs, and took my
Knife out of my Pocket, and so hastened me away along the Town, with a Party of
Horse, and abundance of People; not suffering me to stay, till my own Horse
came down. When I was gone about a quarter of a Mile with them, some Friends,
with Margaret Fell and her Children came toward me; and then a great Party of
Horse gathered about me in a mad Rage and Fury, crying out, Will they rescue
him! Will they rescue him! Whereupon I said unto them, Here is my Hair, here is
my Back, here are my Cheeks, strike on! With which Words their Heat was a
little assuaged. Then they brought a little Horse, and two of them took up one
of my Legs, 1660. Ulverstone.
and put my Foot in the Stirrup, and two or three lifting over my other Leg,
set me upon the little Horse, behind the Saddle; and so led the Horse by the
Halter: but I had nothing to hold by. When they were come a pretty way out of
the Town, they beat the little Horse, and made him kick and gallop: Whereupon I
slipped off him, and told them, They should not abuse the Creature. They were
much enraged at my getting off, and took me by the Legs and Feet, and set me
upon the same Horse, behind the Saddle again; and so led the Horse on, about
two Miles, till they came to a great Water, called the Carter-Ford. By this
time my own Horse was come to us, Carterford
and the Water being deep, and their little Horse scarce able to have carried
me through, they let me get upon my own Horse, through the Persuasion of some
of their own Company; they leading him through the Water. There was one Wicked
Fellow kneeled down, and lifting up his Hands, blessed God, that I was taken.
When I was come over the Sands, I told them, I had heard, I had liberty to
choose, what Justice I would go before: But Mount, and the other Constables
cried No, I should not. Then they led me on to Lancaster, about Fourteen Miles,
and a great Triumph they thought to have had: but as they led me, I was moved
to sing Praises to the Lord, in his triumphing Power over all. When I was come
to Lancaster, Lancaster.
the Spirits of the People being mightily up, I stood and looked earnestly upon
them; and they cried, Look at his Eyes! After a while I spoke to them; and then
they were pretty sober. Then came a Young Man, and had me to his House: and
after a little time the Officers had me to Major Porter's House, who was called
a Justice, and who had sent forth the Warrant against me; and he had several
others with him. When I came in, I said; Peace be amongst you. Then Porter
asked me, Why I came down into the Country that troublesome time? I told him,
To visit my Brethren. But, said he, you have great Meetings up and down. I told
him, Though we had so, our Meetings were known throughout the Nation to be
peaceable, and we were a peaceable People. He said, We saw the Devil in Peoples
Faces. I told him, If I saw a Drunkard, or a Swearer, or a peevish heady Man, I
could not say, I saw the Spirit of God in him. And I asked him, If he could see
the Spirit of God? He said, We cried against their Ministers. I told him, While
we were as Saul, sitting under the Priests, and running up and down with their
Packets of Letters, we were never called Pestilent Fellows, nor Makers of
Sects; but when we were come to exercise our Consciences toward God and Man,
then we were called Pestilent Fellows, as Paul was. He said, We could Express
our selves well enough; and he would not Dispute with me: but he would restrain
me. I deslred to know, for what, and by whose Order he sent forth his Warrant
for me? And I complained to him of the Abuse of the Constables, and other
Officers to me, after they had taken me, and in their bringing me thither. He
would not take notice of that, but told me, He had an Order, but would not let
me see it; for he would not reveal the King's Secrets, he said: And besides, A
Prisoner (he said) was not to see, for what he was Committed. I told him, That
was not Reason: For how should he make his Defense then? I said, I ought to
have a Copy of it. 1660. Lancaster.
But he said, there was a Judge once, that fined one, for letting a Prisoner
have a Copy of his Mittimus: And, said he, I have an Old Clerk, though I am a
young Justice. Then he called to his Clerk, saying, Is it not ready yet? Bring
it; meaning the Mittimus: But it not being ready, he told me, I was a Disturber
of the Nation. I told him, I had been a Blessing to the Nation, in and through
the Lord's Power and Truth; and the Spirit of God in all Consciences would
answer it. Then he charged me to be an Enemy to the King, that I endeavored to
raise a new War, and imbrue the Nation in Blood again. I told him, I had never
learned the Postures of War; but was Clear and Innocent, as a Child, concerning
those things; and therefore was bold. Then came the Clerk with the Mittimus,
and the Jailer was sent for, and commanded to take me, and put me into the
Dark-House; and to let none come at me, but to keep me there a Close Prisoner,
until I should be delivered by the King or Parliament. Then the Justice asked
the Constables, where my Horse was? For I hear, said he, that he has a good
Horse; have ye brought his Horse? I told him, where my Horse was; but he did
not meddle with him. As they had me to the Jail, the Constable gave me my Knife
again; and then asked me, to give it him: But I told him, Nay; he had not been
so civil to me. So they put me into the Jail, and the Under-Goaler, one Hardy,
a very wicked Man, was exceeding Rude and Cruel, and many times would not let
me have Meat brought in; but as I could get it under the Door. Many of the
World's People came to look at me; some in great Rage, and very uncivil and
rude. One time there came Two Young Priests, and very abusive and rude they
were; the worst of People could not be worse. Amongst those that came in this
manner, old Preston of Howker his Wife was one; and she used many abusive Words
to me, telling me, my Tongue should be cut out, and that I should he hanged;
showing me the Gallows. But the Lord God Cut her off, and she died in a
miserable Condition.

Lancaster Jail.
Being now a Close Prisoner in the Common Jail at Lancaster, I desired Two
Friends, Thomas Cummings and Tho. Green, to go to the Jailer, and desire of him
a Copy of my Mittimus; that I might know, what I stood Committed for. They
went; and the Jailer answered them, He could not give a Copy of it; for another
had been Fined for so doing: but he gave them liberty to read it over. And to
the best of their remembrance, the Matters therein charged against me, were,
That I was a Person generally suspected to be a common Disturber of the Peace
of the Nation, an Enemy to the King, and a chief Vpholder of the Quakers Sect:
And that I, together with others of my Fanatic Opinion, have of late
endeavored to raise Insurrections in these parts of the Country, and to
imbroil the whole Kingdom in Blood. Wherefore the Jailer was commanded to keep
me in safe Custody, till I should be released by Order from the King and
Parliament.

When I had thus gotten the Heads of the Charge, contained in the Mittimus, by
which I stood committed, I writ a plain, downright Answer, in Vindication of
my Innocence, to each Particular, as follows: I am a Prisoner at Lancaster,
committed by Justice Porter. 1660. Lancaster Jail.
A Copy of the Mittimus I cannot get; but such like Expressions I am told are
in it; which are very untrue. As that I am generally supected to be a common
Disturber of the Nations Peace, an Enemy to the King and that I with others
should endeavor to raise Insurrections, to imbroil the Nation in Blood. All
which is utterly false; and I do, in every part thereof, deny it. For I am not
a Person generally suspected to be a Disturber of the Nations Peace; nor have
given any Cause for any such Suspicion: For through the Nation I have been
tried of these things formerly. In the days of Oliver I was taken up, on
pretense of Raising Arms against him; which was also false: for I meddled not
with Raising Arms at all. Yet I was then carried up Prisoner to London, and
kept Prisoner, till I was brought before him; and then I cleared my self, and
denied the drawing of a Carnal Weapon against him, or any Man upon the Earth:
For my Weapons are Spiritual, which take away the occasion of War, and lead
into Peace: And upon my declaring this to Oliver, I was set at liberty by him.
After this I was taken, and sent to Prison by Major Ceely in Cornwall, who,
when I was brought before the Judge, informed against me, That I took him
aside, and told him, that I could raise Forty Thousand Men in an hours time, to
involve the Nation in Blood, and bring in King Charles. This also was utterly
false, and a Lie of his own inventing; as was then proved upon him: For I never
spoke any such Word to him. I never was found in any Plot; I never took any
Engagement, or Oath, nor ever learned War-Postures. And as those were False
Charges against me then, so are these, which come from Major Porter now, who is
lately appointed to be Justice, but wanted Power formerly, to exercise his
Cruelty against us: Which is but the Wickedness of the Old Enemy. For the Peace
of the Nation I am not a Disturber of, nor ever was; but seek the Peace of it,
and of all Men, and stand for all Nations Peace, and all Men's Peace upon the
Earth; and wish, that all Nations, and Men knew my Innocence in these things.

And whereas Major Porter says, I am an Enemy to the King; this is false: For
my Love is to him, and to all Men; though they be Enemies to God, to
themselves, and to me. And I can say, It is of the Lord, that he is come in, to
bring down many unrighteously set up; of which I had a Sight Three Years before
he came in. It is much, he should say, I am an Enemy to the King; for I have no
reason so to be, he having done nothing against me. But I have been often
Imprisoned and Persecuted these Eleven or Twelve Years, by them that have been
against both the King, and his Father; even the Party, that Porter was made a
Major by, and bore Arms for: but not by them, that were for the King. I was
never an Enemy to the King, nor to any Man's Person upon the Earth; but I am in
the Love, that fulfils the Law, which thinks no Evil, but loves even Enemies;
and would have the King saved, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth, and be
brought into the Fear of the Lord, to receive his Wisdom from above, by which
all things were made and created; that with that Wisdom he may order all things
to the Glory of God, by whom they were Created.

Whereas he calls me, A Chief Vpholder of the Quakers Sect. I Answer: The
Quakers are not a Sect, but are in the Power of God, which was, before Sects
were, and witness the Election, before the World began; and are come to live in
the Life, which the Prophets and Apostles lived in, who gave forth the
Scriptures: Therefore are we hated by envious, wrathful, wicked and persecuting
Men. But God is the Vpholder of us all, by his mighty Power, and preserves us
from the Wrath of the Wicked, that would swallow us up.

And whereas he says, That I, together with others of my Fanatic Opinion (as
he calls it) have of late endeavored to raise Insurrections, and to imbroil
the whole Kingdom in Blood: I say, this is altogether false; to these things I
am as a Child, and know nothing of them. The Postures of War I never learned:
My Weapons are Spiritual and not Carnal; for with Carnal Weapons I do not
fight: I am a Follower of him, who said, My Kingdom is not of this World. And
though these Lies and Slanders are raised upon me, I deny drawing of any Carnal
Weapon against the King or Parliament, or any Man upon the Earth: For I am come
to the end of the Law, To love Enemies, and wrestle not with Flesh and Blood;
but am in that, which saves Men's Lives: And a Witness I am against all
Murderers, Plotters, and all such as would Imbrue the Nation in Blood; for it
is not in my Heart to have any Man's Life destroyed. And as for the Word
Fanatic, which signifies furious, foolish, mad, etc. He might have considered
himself, before he had used that Word; and have learned the Humility, which
goes before the Honor: For we are not furious, foolish or Mad; but through
Patience and Meekness have born Lies and Slanders, and Persecutions many Years,
and undergone great Sufferings. The Spiritual Man, that wrestles not with Flesh
and Blood, and the Spirit, that reproves Sin in the Gate, which is the Spirit
of Truth, Wisdom, and sound Judgment; this is not mad, foolish, furious, which
Fanatic signifies: But all are of a mad, furious, foolish Spirit, that wrestle
with Flesh and Blood with Carnal Weapons, in their Furiousness, Foolishness and
Rage. This is not the Spirit of God, but of Error, that persecutes in a mad,
blind Zeal, like Nebuchadnezer and Saul.

Now, inasmuch as I am ordered to be kept Prisoner, till I be delivered by
Order from the King or Parliament; therefore have I written these things to be
laid before you, the King and Parliament, that ye may Consider of them, before
ye act any thing therein: that ye may weigh, in the Wisdom of God, the Intent
and End of Men's Spirits; lest ye act the thing, that will bring the hand of
the Lord upon you, and against you: as many have done before you, who have been
in Authority, whom God has overthrown; in whom we trust, whom we fear and cry
unto Day and Night: Who has heard us, and does hear us, and will hear us; and
avenge our Cause. For much Innocent Blood has been shed, and many have been
persecuted to Death, by such as have been in Authority before you; whom God
has vomited out, because they turned against the Just. Therefore consider your
Standing, now that ye have the Day; 1660. Lancaster-Castle.
and receive this as a Warning of Love to you,

From the Innocent, a Sufferer in Bonds, and close Prisoner in
Lancaster-Castle, called GEORGE FOX.



Upon my being taken, and forcibly carried away from Margaret Fell's House, and
charged with things of so high a Nature, she was concerned; as looking upon it,
to be an Injury offered to her. Whereupon she writ the following Lines, and
sent them abroad, directed thus:

To all Magistrates, concerning the wrong taking up, and Imprisoning of George
Fox at Lancaster.
I Do Inform the Governors of this Nation, that Henry Porter, Major of
Lancaster, sent a Warrant with Four Constables to my House, for which he had no
Authority, nor Order. They searched my House, and apprehended George Fox in it;
who was not guilty of the Breach of any Law, or of any Offense against any in
the Nation. After they had taken him, and brought him before the said Henry
Porter; there was Bail offered, what he would demand for his Appearance, to
Answer, what could be laid to his Charge: But he (contrary to Law, if he had
taken him lawfully) denied to accept of any Bail; and clapped him up in Close
Prison. After he was in Prison, a Copy of his Mittimus was demanded: which
ought not to be denied to any Prisoner; that so he may see, what is laid to his
Charge: But it was denied him; a Copy he could not have: only they were
suffered to read it over. And every thing that was there charged against him,
was utterly false; he was not guilty of any one Charge in it; as will be
proved, and manifested to the Nation. So, let the Governors consider of it. I
am concerned in this thing, inasmuch as he was apprehended in my House; and if
he be guilty, I am so too. So I desire to have this searched out.

MARGARET FELL.


After this, Margaret Fell determined to go to London, to speak with the King
about my being taken; and to show him the manner of it, and the Unjust Dealing
and Evil Usage I had received. Which when Justice Porter heard of, he vapoured,
that he would go, and meet her in the Gap. But when he came before the King, he
having been a Zealous Man for the Parliament against the King, several of the
Courtiers spoke to him concerning his plundering of their Houses: So that he
had quickly enough of the Court, and soon returned into the Country. Mean while
the Jailer seemed very fearful, and said, he was afraid, Major Porter would
hang him, because he had not put me in the Dark-House, But when the Jailer went
to wait on him, after he was come back from London, he was very blank and down;
and asked, how I did? pretending, that he would find a way to set me at
Liberty. But having overshot himself in his Mittimus, by ordering me to be kept
Prisoner, till I should be delivered by the King or Parliament, he had put it
out of his Power to Release me, if he would. He was the more down also, upon
reading a Letter, which I sent him. For when he was in the height of his Rage
and Threats against me, and thought to ingratiate himself into the King's
Favor, by Imprisoning me, I was moved to write to him, and put him in mind,
How fierce he had been against the King and his Party, though now he would be
thought zealous for the King. And among other Passages in my Letter, I called
to his remembrance, how, when he held Lancaster-Castle for the Parliament,
against the King, he was so rough and fierce against those that favored the
King, that he said, He would leave them neither Dog nor Cat, if they did not
bring him in Provision to his Castle. I asked him also, Whose great Bucks-Horns
those were, that were in his House? and where he had both them and the
Wainscot, that he Ceiled his House withal? Had he them not from Hornby-Castle?

About this time Ann Curtis of Reading came to see me: and understanding, how I
stood Committed; it was upon her also to go to the King about it. For her
Father, who had been Sheriff of Bristol, was hanged near his own Door, for
endeavoring to bring the King in: Upon which Consideration she had some hopes,
that the King might hear her on my behalf. Accordingly when she returned to
London, she and Margaret Fell went to the King together: Who, when he
understood, whose Daughter she was, received her kindly. And her Request to him
being To send for me up, and hear the Cause himself; he promised her, he would:
and commanded his Secretary to send down an Order, for the bringing me up. But
when they came to the Secretary for the Order, he (being no Friend to us) said,
It was not in his Power; but that he must go according to Law, and I must be
brought up by an Habeas Corpus before the Judges. So he writ to the Judge of
the King's Bench, signifying, That it was the King's Pleasure, that I should be
sent for up by an Habeas Corpus. Accordingly a Writ was sent down, and
delivered to the Sheriff; but because it was directed to the Chancellor of
Lancaster, the Sheriff put it off to him: On the other hand, the Chancellor
would not make the Warrant upon it; but said, the Sheriff must do that. At
length both Chancellor and Sheriff were got together: But being both Enemies to
Truth, they sought occasion for Delay; and found (they said) an Error in the
Writ, which was, that being directed to the Chancellor, it said, Geo. Fox in
Prison under YOUR Custody; whereas the Prison I was in, was not (they said) in
the Chancellor's Custody, but in the Sheriff's: So the Word YOUR should have
been HIS. Upon this they Returned the Writ to London again; only to have that
one Word altered. When it was altered, and came down again, the Sheriff refused
to carry me up; unless I would Seal a Writing to him, and become bound, and pay
for the Sealing, and the Charge of carrying me up: Which I denied; telling
them, I would not Seal any thing to them, nor be Bound: So the matter rested a
while; and I continued in Prison. Mean while the Assize came on: But inasmuch
as there was a Writ come down for removing me up, I was not brought before the
Judge. At the Assize many People came to see me, and I was moved to speak out
at the Jail-Window to them, and show them, How uncertain their Religion was,
and that every sort that had been uppermost, persecuted the rest. For when
Popery was uppermost, People had been persecuted for not following the Mass;
and they that did hold up the Mass, cried then, It was the Higher Power, and
People must be subject to the Higher Power. Afterward, they that held up the
Common Prayer, persecuted others for not following that; and they said, It was
the Higher Power then also, and we must be subject to that. Since that, the
Presbyterians and Independents cried each of them, We must be subject to the
Higher Power, and submit to the Directory of the one, and the Church-Faith of
the other. Thus all, like the Apostate-Jews, have cried, Help Men of Israel
against the True Christians: So People might see, how uncertain they are of
their Religions. But I directed them to Christ Jesus, that they might be built
upon him, the Rock and Foundation that changes not. Much, on this wise, I
declared to them, and they were quiet, and very attentive. Afterward I gave
forth a little Paper concerning True Religion, as follows:

TRue Religion is the True Rule, and right way of serving God. And Religion is
a pure Stream of Righteousness, flowing from the Image of God, and is the Life
and Power of God planted in the Heart and Mind by the Law of Life in the Heart,
which brings the Soul, Mind, Spirit and Body to be Conformable to God, the
Father of Spirits, and to Christ; so that they come to have Fellowship with the
Father and the Son, and with all his Holy Angels and Saints. And this Religion
is pure from Above, undefiled before God, and is to visit the Fatherless, and
Widows, and Strangers, and keeps from the Spots of the World. So this Religion
is above all the defiled, spotted Religions in the World, that keep not
themselves from Defilement and Spots, but are Impure, and below, and spotted;
whose Fatherless, and Widows, and Strangers do beg up and down the Streets.

G. F.

Soon after this, I gave forth another Paper against Persecution, as follows:

THe Papists, Common-Prayer-Men, Presbyterians, Independents and Baptists
persecute one another about their Inventions, which they have invented, their
Mass, their Common Prayer, their Directory, their Church-Faith, which they have
made and framed; their Inventions and Handy-works, and not for the Truth: For
they know not, what Spirit they be of, who persecute, and would have Men's Lives
destroyed about Church-Worship and Religion, as says Christ; who also said, He
came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. Now they, that know not,
what Spirit they be of, but will persecute and destroy Men's Lives, and not
save them; we cannot trust our Bodies, Souls nor Spirits into their hands: They
know not, what Spirit they be of themselves; and therefore they are not fit to
be trusted with others. They would destroy by a Law, as the Disciples once
would have done by Prayer; who would have commanded Fire to come down from
Heaven, to destroy them that would not receive Christ. But Christ rebukes them,
and tells them, They did not know, what Spirit they were of. And if they did
not know, what Spirit they were of; do these, who have persecuted about Church
and Religion since the Apostles days, who would Compel Men's Bodies, Goods,
Lives, Souls and Estates into their hands by a Law, or make them suffer else?
Those that destroy Men's Lives, are not the Ministers of Christ, the Savior:
And seeing, they know not what Spirit they be of; the Lives, Bodies and Souls
of Men are not to be trusted in their hands. And ye, that do persecute, shall
have no Resurrection to Life with God, except ye repent. But they that do know,
what Spirit they are of themselves, they are in the unrebukable Zeal; and by
the Spirit of God they offer up their Spirits, Souls and Bodies to the Lord,
which are his, to keep them.

G. F.

While yet I was kept in Lancaster-Jail, I was moved to give forth the
following Paper, For the Staying the Minds of any such, as might be burried, or
troubled about the Change of Government.

ALL Friends, Let the Dread and Majesty of God fill you! And as concerning the
Changing of Times and Governments, let not that trouble any of you; for God
has a mighty Work and Hand therein. And he will yet Change again, until that
come up, which must Reign; and in vain shall Powers and Armies withstand the
Lord: for his determined Work shall come to pass. But what is now come up, it
is just with the Lord, that it should be so; and he will be served by it.
Therefore let none murmur, nor distrust God; for God will provoke many to Zeal
against Unrighteousness, and for Righteousness, through things, which are
suffered now to work for a Season: yea many, whose Zeal was even dead, shall
revive again; and they shall see their Backslidings, and bewail them bitterly.
For God shall thunder down from Heaven, and break forth in a mighty Noise; and
his Enemies shall be astonished, and the Workers of Iniquity confounded: and
all, that have not on the Garment of Righteousness, shall be amazed at the
mighty and strange Work of the Lord, which shall be certainly brought to pass.
But, my Babes, look ye not out, but be still in the Light of the Lamb; and he
shall fight for you. So the Almighty Hand, which must break, and split, and
divide your Enemies, and take away Peace from them, preserve and keep you
whole, and in Unity and Peace with itself, and one with another. Amen.

G. F.

I was moved also to write To the King, both to Exhort him to exercise Mercy
and Forgiveness toward his Enemies, and to warn him to Restrain the
Profaneness and Looseness, that was gotten up in the Nation upon his Return.
It was thus: To the KING.
King Charles,
THou came not into this Nation by Sword, nor by Victory of War; but by the
Power of the Lord: Now if thou do not live in it, thou will not prosper. And
if the Lord has showed thee Mercy, and forgiven thee, and thou do not show
Mercy, and forgive; the Lord God will not hear thy Prayers, nor them that pray
for thee. And if thou do not stop Persecution, and Persecutors, and take away
all Laws, that do hold up Persecution about Religion; but if thou do persist in
them, and uphold Persecution; that will make thee as blind, as them that have
gone before thee. For Persecution has always blinded those, that have gone
into it: And such God by his Power overthrows, and does his Valiant Acts upon;
and brings Salvation to his Oppressed ones. And if thou do bear the Sword
in vain, and let Drunkenness, Oaths, Plays, May-games, (with Fiddlers, Drums,
Trumpets, to play at them) with such like Abominations and Vanities be
encouraged, or go unpunished; as setting up of May-poles, with the Image of the
Crown a top of them, etc. the Nations will quickly turn like Sodom and
Gomorrah, and be as bad as the Old World; who grieved the Lord, till he
overthrew them: And so he will you, if these things be not suddenly prevented.
Hardly was there so much Wickedness at Liberty before now, as there is now at
this day; as though there was no Terror, nor Sword of Magistracy: which does
not grace a Government, nor is a Praise to them that do well. Our Prayers are
for them that are in Authority; that under them we may live a Godly Life, in
which we have Peace: and that we may not be brought into Ungodliness by them.
So hear, and consider, and do good in thy time, whilst thou have Power: and be
Merciful and forgive; that is the way to Overcome, and obtain the Kingdom of
Christ.

G. F.




It was long, before the Sheriff would yield to Remove me to London; unless I
would Seal a Bond to him, and bear their Charges: which I still refused to do.
Then they Consulted, how to convey me up; and at first concluded, to send up a
Party of Horse with me. And I told them, If I were such a Man, as they had
represented me to be, they had need send a Troop or two of Horse to Guard me.
When they considered, what a Charge it would be to them, to send up a Party of
Horse with me, they altered their purpose; and concluded, to send me up guarded
only by the Jailer and some Bailiffs. But upon further Consideration they
found, that would be a great Charge to them also: and thereupon sent for me
down from the Prison into the Jailer's House, and told me, If I would put in
Bail, that I would be in London such a Day of the Term, I should have leave to
go up with some of my own Friends. I told them, I would neither put in any
Bail, nor give one piece of Silver to the Jailer; for I was an Innocent Man,
and they had Imprisoned me wrongfully, and laid a false Charge upon me.
Nevertheless, I said, If they would let me go up with one or two of my Friends,
to bear me Company, I might go up, and be in London such a Day, if the Lord did
permit; and if they desired it, I, or any of my Friends, that went with me,
would carry up their Charge against my self. So at last, when they saw, they
could do no otherwise with me, the Sheriff yielded, and came under; consenting,
that I should come up, with some of my Friends, without any other Engagement,
than my Word, as aforesaid, to appear before the Judges at London such a day of
the Term, if the Lord did permit. Swarthmore.
Whereupon I was set out of Prison, and went to Swarthmore; where I stayed two
or three days; and from thence went to Lancaster again, Lancaster. Preston.
Cheshire.
and so to Preston; having Meetings amongst Friends in the way, till I came
into Cheshire to William Gandy's; where was a large Meeting without Doors (the
House not being sufficient to contain it.) That Day the Lord's everlasting Seed
was set over all, and Friends were turned to it, who is the Heir of the
Promise. Thence passing on, Staffordshire. Warwickshire. Non-Eaton.
I came into Staffordshire and Warwickshire, till I came to Anthony Bickliff's;
and at Non-Eaton, at a Priest's Widow's House, we had a blessed Meeting,
wherein the everlasting Word of Life was powerfully declared, and many settled
in it. Then Traveling on again through the Countries, visiting Friends
Meetings, as I went, in about three Weeks time from my coming out of Prison,
London.
I came to London; Richard Huberthorn and Robert Withers being with me.

When we came to Charing Cross, there were Multitudes of People gathered
together, to see the Burning of the Bowels of some of them, that had been the
Old King's Judges, and had been hanged, drawn and quartered.

We went next Morning to Judge Mallet's Chamber, who was putting on his Red
Gown, to go sit upon some more of the King's Judges: He was then very peevish
and froward; and said, I might come another time. We went another time to his
Chamber, and then there was with him Judge Foster, who was called the Lord
Chief Justice of England: With me was one called Esquire Marsh, who was one of
the Bedchamber to the King. When we had delivered to the Judges the Charge,
that was against me, and they had read to those Words, That I and my Friends
were Imbroiling the Nation in Blood, etc. they struck their Hands on the Table.
Whereupon I told them, 1660. London.
I was the Man, whom that Charge was against; but I was as Innocent of any such
thing, as a newborn Child, and had brought it up my self: and some of my
Friends came up with me without any Guard. As yet they had not minded my Hat;
but now, seeing my Hat on, they said, What, did I stand with my Hat on! I told
them, I did not stand so in any Contempt to them. Then they commanded one to
take it off: And when they had called for the Marshal of the King's Bench, they
said to him; You must take this Man, and secure him: but you must let him have
a Chamber, and not put him amongst the Prisoners. My Lord, said the Marshal, I
have no Chamber to put him into; my House is so full, that I cannot tell where
to provide a Room for him, but amongst the Prisoners. Nay, said the Judges, you
must not put him amongst the Prisoners. But when he still answered, He had no
other place to put me in; Judge Foster said to me, Will you appear to morrow
about Ten of the Clock, at the King's Bench-Bar in Westminster Hall? I said,
Yes, if the Lord give me Strength. Then said Judge Foster to the other Judge,
If he say Yes, and promises it, you may take his Word: So I was dismissed for
that time. And next day I appeared at the King's Bench-Bar at the hour
appointed, Robert Withers, King's-Bench-Bar.
Richard Huberthorn, and that Esquire Marsh before named going with me. I was
brought into the middle of the Court; and as soon as I was come in, I was moved
to look about, and turning to the People, said, Peace be among you; and the
Power of the Lord sprang over the Court. The Charge against me was read openly:
the People were moderate, and the Judges cool and loving; and the Lord's Mercy
was to them. But when they came to that part of it, which said, That I and my
Friends were Imbroiling the Nation in Blood, and raising a new War; and that I
was an Enemy to the King, etc. they lifted up their hands. Then, stretching out
my Arms, I said, I am the the Man, whom that Charge is against; but I am as
Innocent, as a Child, concerning the Charge, and have never learned any
War-Postures. And, said I, do ye think, that if I and my Friends had been such
Men, as the Charge declares, that I would have Brought it up my self against my
self? Or that I should have beed suffered to come up with only one or two of my
Friends with me? For had I been such a Man, as this Charge sets forth, I had
need have been guarded up with a Troop or two of Horse. But the Sheriff and
Magistrate of Lancashire had thought fit to let me and my Friends come up with
it our selves, almost two hundred Miles, without any Guard at all; which ye may
be sure, they would not have done, if they had looked upon me to be such a Man.
Then the Judge asked me, Whether it should be Filed? or what I would do with
it? I answered, Ye are Judges, and able (I hope) to Judge in this matter:
therefore do with it, what ye will: for I am the Man these Charges are against;
and here ye see, I have brought them up my self: Do ye what ye will with them,
I leave it to you. Then Judge Twisden beginning to speak some angry Words, I
appealed to Judge Foster and Judge Mallet, who had heard me overnight.
Whereupon they said, They did not accuse me, for tney had nothing against me.
Then stood up he that was called Esquire Marsh, who was of the King's
Bedchamber, and told the Judges, It was the King's Pleasure that I should be
set at Liberty, seeing no Accuser came up against me. 1660. King's Bench-Bar.
Then they asked me, Whether I would put it to the King and Council. I said,
Yes, with a good Will. Thereupon they sent the Sheriff's Return, which he made
to the Writ of Habeas Corpus, containing the matter charged against me in the
Mittimus, to the King, that he might see, for what I was Committed. Now the
Return of the Sheriff of Lancaster was thus:

BY Virtue of his Majesty's Writ to me directed, and hereunto annexed, I
certify, that before the Receipt of the said Writ, George Fox, in the said
Writ mentioned, was committed to his Majesty's Jail, at the Castle of
Lancaster, in my Custody, by a Warrant from Henry Porter, Esquire one of his
Majesty's Justices of Peace within the County Palatine aforesaid, bearing Date
the Fifth of June now last past; for that he, the said George Fox, was
generally suspected to be a common Disturber of the Peace of this Nation, an
Enemy to our Sovereign Lord the King, and a chief Vpholder of the Quakers Sect;
and that he, together with others of his Fanatic Opinion, have of late
endeavored to make Insurrections in these parts of the Country, and to Imbroil
the whole Kingdom in Blood. And this is the Cause of his taking and detaining.
Nevertheless, the Body of the said George Fox I have ready before Thomas Mallet
Knight, one of his Majesty's Justices, assigned to hold Pleas before his said
Majesty, at his Chamber in Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, to do and receive
those things, which his Majesty's said Justice shall determine concerning him in
this behalf, as by the aforesaid Writ is required.

GEORGE CHETHAM, Esquire Sheriff.

Upon Perusal of this, and Consideration of the whole matter, the King, being
satisfied of my Innocence, commanded his Secretary to send an Order to Judge
Mallet for my Release; which the Secretary did, thus: IT is his Majesty's
Pleasure, That you give Order for the Releasing, and setting at full Liberty,
the Person of George Fox, late a Prisoner in Lancaster-Goal, and commanded
hither by an Habeas Corpus. And this signification of his Majesty's Pleasure
shall be your sufficient Warrant.

For Sir Thomas Mallet, Knight. one of the Justices of the King's Bench.

Dated at Whitehall the 24th of October, 1660. EDWARD NICHOLAS.



When this Order was delivered to Judge Mallet, he forthwith sent his Warrant
to the Marshal of the King's Bench, for my Release. Which Warrant was thus
Worded:

BY Virtue of a Warrant, which this morning I have received from the Right
Honorable Sir Edward Nicholas, 1660. King's Bench-Prison.
Knight. one of his Majesty's Principal Secretaries, for the releasing and setting
at Liberty of George Fox, late a Prisoner in Lancaster-Jail, and from thence
brought hither by Habeas Corpus, and yesterday committed unto your Custody; I
do hereby require you accordingly to Release, and set the said Prisoner George
Fox at Liberty: For which this shall be your Warrant and Discharge.

To Sir John Lenthal Knight, Marshal of the King's Bench, or his Deputy. Given
under my Hand the 25th day of October, in the Year of our Lord God 1660. THOMAS
MALLET.

Thus, London.
after I had been a Prisoner somewhat more than Twenty Weeks, I was freely set
at liberty, by the King's Command; the Lord's Power having wonderfully wrought
for the clearing of my Innocence; and Porter, who committed me, not daring to
Appear, to make good the Charge he had falsely suggested against me. But after
it was known, I was discharged, there was a Company of envious, wicked Spirits,
that were troubled I was set at Liberty; and Terror took hold of Justice
Porter: For he was afraid, I would take the advantage of the Law against him
for my wrong Imprisonment, and thereby undo him, his Wife and Children. And
indeed, I was put on by some in Authority, to have made him, and the rest,
Examples: But I said, I should leave them to the Lord; if the Lord did forgive
them, I should not trouble my self with them.

Now did I see the End of the Travel, which I had had in my sore Exercise at
Reading: for the everlasting Power of the Lord was over all, and his blessed
Truth, Life and Light shined over the Nation, and great and glorious Meetings
we had, and very quiet; and many flocked in unto the Truth. For Richard
Hubberthorn had been with the King, and the King said, None should molest us,
so long as we lived peaceably; and promised this to us upon the Word of a King;
telling him, We might make use of his Promise. Some Friends also were admitted
to go into the House of Lords, before them and the Bishops, and had liberty
given them to declare their Reasons, Why they could not pay Tithes, nor Swear,
nor go to the Steeplehouse-Worship, or join with others in Worship: and they
heard them moderately. And there being about Seven Hundred Friends in Prison in
the Nation, who had been committed under Oliver's and Richard's Government,
upon Contempts (as they call them,) when the King came in, he set them all at
Liberty. For there seemed at that time an Inclination and Intention in the
Government to have granted Friends Liberty, because they were sensible, that we
had suffered, as well as they, in the former Power's days. But still, when any
thing was going forward in order thereunto, some dirty Spirits or other, that
would seem to be for us, threw something in the way to stop it. It was said,
there was an Instrument drawn up, for Confirming our Liberty, and that it only
wanted Signing; when on a sudden that wicked Attempt of the
Fifth-Monarchy-People brake forth, 1660. London.
and put the City and Nation in an Uproar. This was on a First Day Night; and
very glorious Meetings we had had that Day, wherein the Lord's Truth shined
over all, and his Power was exalted above all: But about Midnight, or soon
after, the Drums beat, and the Cry was, Arm, Arm. I got up out of Bed, and in
the Morning took Boat, and Landing at Whitehall Stairs, walked through
Whitehall. Whitehall.
They looked strangely on me there; but I passed through them, and went to the
Pell-Mell, Pell-mell.
whither diverse Friends came to me, though it was now grown dangerous passing
the Streets: For by this time both the City and Suburbs were up in Arms, and
exceeding rude the People and Soldiers were; insomuch that a Friend, Henry
Fell, going to a Friends House, the Soldiers knocked him down: and he had been
killed, if the Duke of York had not come by. Great Mischief was done in the
City this Week; and when the next First Day came, that Friends went to their
Meetings, as they used to do, many were taken Prisoners. I stayed at the
Pell-mell, intending to be at the Meeting there: But on the Seventh-Day at
Night, a Company of Troopers came, and knocked at the Door. The Maid letting
them in, they rushed into the House, and strait laid hold upon me: and there
being amongst them one, that had served under the Parliament, he clapped his Hand
to my Pocket, and asked, Whether I had any Pistols? I told him, He knew, I did
not use to carry Pistols; why therefore did he ask such a Question of me, whom
he knew to be a Peaceable Man? Others of the Soldiers run up into the
Chambers, and there found in Bed that Squire Marsh before mentioned; who, though
he was one of the King's Bedchamber, out of his love to me, came, and lodged
where I did. When they came down again, they said, Why should we take this Man
away with us? We will let him alone. Oh, said the Parliament-Souldier, he is
one of the Heads, and a chief Ringleader. Upon this the Soldiers were taking
me away; but -- Marsh hearing of it, he sent for him that Commanded the Party,
and desired him to let me alone; for he would see me forthcoming in the
Morning. In the Morning, before they could fetch me, and before the Meeting was
gathered, there came a Company of Foot to the House; and one of them drawing
out his Sword, held it over my Head. I asked him, Wherefore he drew his Sword
at a Naked Man? At which his Fellows being ashamed, bid him, put up his Sword.
These Foot-Souldiers took me away to Whitehall, G F. taken Prisoner. Whitehall.
before the Troopers came for me. As I was going out, several Friends were
coming in to the Meeting, whose Boldness and Cheerfulness I commended, and
encouraged them to persevere therein. When I was brought to Whitehall, the
Soldiers and People were exceeding rude; yet I declared Truth to them: But some
great Persons coming by, who were very full of Envy, What, said they, do ye let
him Preach? Put him into such a place, where he may not stir. So into that
place they put me, and the Soldiers watched over me: I told them, Though they
could confine my Body, and shut that up; yet they could not stop up the Word of
Life. Some thereupon came, and asked me, What I was? I told them, I was a
Preacher of Righteousness. After I had been kept there two or three Hours, --
Marsh spoke to him, that was called the Lord Gerrard; and he came, and bid them
set me at liberty. Then the Marshal, when I was discharged, demanded Fees. I
told him, 1660. Whitehall.
I could not give him any; neither was it our Practice: And I asked him, How he
could demand Fees of me, who was Innocent? Nevertheless, I told him, in my own
Freedom I would give him Two Pence, to make him and the Soldiers drink: But
they shouted at that, and took it disdainfully. So I told them, If they would
not accept it, choose they: for I should give them no Fees. Then went I through
the Guards, the Lord s Power being over them; and after I had declared Truth to
the Guards and Soldiers, I went up the Streets with two Irish Colonels, that
came from Whitehall, and went to an Inn, where many Friends were at that time
Prisoners under a Guard. I desired those Colonels to speak to the Guard to let
me go in, to visit my Friends, that were Prisoners there: but they would not.
Then I stepped to the Centry, and desired him to let me go up; and he did so.
While I was there, the Soldiers went to the Pell-Mell again, to search for me
there: but not finding me, they turned toward the Inn, and bid all come out,
that were not Prisoners; so they went out. But I asked the Soldiers, that were
within, Whether I might not stay there a while with my Friends? And they said,
Yes. I stayed a while, and so escaped their Hands again. Toward Night I went
down to the Pell-Mell, to see, how it was with the Friends there; and after I
had stayed a while, I went up into the City. London.
Great Rifling of Houses there was at this time, to search for People: but I
went to a private Friend's House, and Richard Huberthorn was with me. There we
drew up a Declaration against Plots and Fightings, to be presented to the King
and Council: But when we had finished it, and sent it to the Press, it was
taken in the Press.

Upon this Insurrection of the Fifth Monarchy-Men, great Havoc was made both
in City and Country, so that it was dangerous for sober People to stir abroad
for several Weeks after; and hardly could either Men or Women go up and down
the Streets to buy Provisions for their Families, without being abused. In the
Countries they dragged Men and Women out of their Houses, and some Sick Men out
of their Beds by the Legs. Nay, one Man, that was in a Fever, the Soldiers
dragged out of his Bed to Prison; and when he was brought thither, he died. His
Name was Thomas Pachyn.

Margaret Fell went to the King, and told him, what sad Work there was in the
City, and in the Nation; and showed him, that we were an Innocent, peaceable
People, and that we must keep our Meetings, as we used to do, whatever we
suffered: but that it concerned him to see, that Peace was kept, that so no
Innocent Blood might be shed.

Now were the Prisons every where filled with Friends, and others, in City and
Country; and the Posts were so laid, for the searching of Letters, that none
could pass unsearched: Yet we heard of several Thousands of our Friends, that
were cast into Prison in several places throughout the Nation; and Margaret
Fell carried an Account of them to the King and Council. The next Week we had
an Account of several Thousands more, that were cast into Prison: and she went,
and laid them also before the King and his Council. They wondered, how we could
have such Intelligence, seeing they had given such strict Charge for the
intercepting of all Letters: But the Lord did so order it, that we had an
Account, notwithstanding all their Stoppings. For in the deep Sense I had of
the grievous Sufferings, Friends underwent, and of their Innocence toward God
and Man, I was moved to send the following Epistle to them, as a Word of
Consolation, and to put them upon sending up their Sufferings.

My Dear Friends,
IN the Immortal Seed of God, which will plead its own Innocence, who be
Inheritors of an Everlasting Kingdom, that is Incorruptible; and of a World and
Riches, that fade not away, Peace and Mercy be multiplied amongst you in all
your Sufferings, who never feared them; whose Backs were not unready, but your
Hair and Cheeks prepared; who never feared Sufferings, as knowing it is your
Portion in the World, from the Foundation of which the Lamb was slain; who
reigns in his Glory, which he had with his Father, before the World began: who
is your Rock in all Floods and Waves, upon which ye can stand safe, with a
cheerful Countenance, beholding the Lord God of the whole Earth on your side.
So in the Seed of God, which was before the Unrighteous World, in which the
Sufferings are, live and feed, wherein the Bread of Life is felt, and no cause
of Complaint of Hunger or Cold. Friends, your Sufferings all, that are or have
been of late in Prison, I would have you send up an Account of them, and how
things are amongst you; that it may be delivered to the King and his Council;
for things are pretty well here, after the Storm.

London, the 28th of the Eleventh Month, 1660. G. F.


Having lost our former Declaration in the Press; we made haste, and drew up
another against Plots and Fighting, and got it Printed; and sent some of them
to the King and Council: others of them were sold up and down the Streets, and
at the Exchange. Which Declaration was some Years after Reprinted, and is as
follows:

A Declaration from the Harmless and Innocent People of God, called Quakers,
against all Sedition, Plotters and Fighters in the World: For the removing of
the Ground of Jealousy and Suspicion from both Magistrates and People in the
Kingdom, concerning Wars and Fightings. Presented unto the King, upon the 21th
day of the 11th Month, 1660.
OUR Principle is, and our Practices have always been, to seek Peace, and ensue
it, and to follow after Righteousness, and the Knowledge of God; seeking the
Good and Welfare, and doing that which tends to the Peace of All. We know, that
Wars and Fightings proceed from the Lusts of Men, as Jam. 4.1, 2, 3. out of
which Lusts the Lord has redeemed us; and so out of the Occasion of War: the
occasion of which War, and the War itself (wherein envious Men, who are lovers
of themselves more than lovers of God, Lust, Kill, and desire to have Men's
Lives or Estates) arises from the Lust. All Bloody Principles and Practices We
(as to our own particular) do utterly deny; with all outward Wars and Strife,
and Fightings with Outward Weapons, for any end, or under any pretense
whatsoever: and this is our Testimony to the whole World.

And whereas it is Objected:

But although you now say, That you cannot Fight, nor take up Arms at all; yet
if the Spirit do move you, then you will change your Principle, and then you
will sell your Coat, and buy a Sword, and Fight for the Kingdom of Christ.

Answ. As for this, we say to you, that Christ said to Peter, Put up thy Sword
in his place; though he had said before, he that had no Sword, might sell his
Coat and buy one, (to the fulfilling of the Law and Scripture) yet after, when
he had bid him put it up, he said, He that takes the Sword, shall perish with
the Sword. And further, Christ said to Pilate, Think thou, that I cannot now
pray to my Father, and he shall presently give me more than twelve Legions of
Angels? And this might satisfy Peter, Luke 22.36. after he had put up his
Sword, when he said to him, He that took it, should perish by it; which
satisfies us, Mat. 26.51, 52, 53. And in the Revelation it is said; He that
kills with the Sword, shall perish with the Sword; and here is the Faith and
the Patience of the Saints. And so Christ's Kingdom is not of this World,
therefore do not his Servants Fight; as he told Pilate the Magistrate, who
Crucified him: and did they not look upon Christ, as a Raiser of Sedition? and
did not he say, Forgive them? But thus it is, that we are numbered amongst
Transgressors, and numbered amongst Fighters, 1660. London.
that the Scriptures might be fulfilled.

That Spirit of Christ, by which we are guided, is not changeable, so as once
to command us from a thing, as Evil, and again to move unto it; and we do
certainly know, and so testify to the World, That the Spirit of Christ, which
leads us into all Truth, will never move us to Fight and War against any Man
with outward Weapons, neither for the Kingdom of Christ, nor for the Kingdoms
of this World.

First, Because the Kingdom of Christ God will exalt, according to his Promise,
and cause it to grow and flourish in Righteousness; Not by Might, nor by Power
(of outward Sword) but by my Spirit, says the Lord, Zech. 4.6. So those that
use any Weapon to Fight for Christ, or for the establishing of his Kingdom or
Government, both the Spirit, Principle and Practice in that, we deny.

Secondly, We do earnestly desire and wait, That (by the Word of God's Power,
and its effectual Operation in the Hearts of Men) the Kingdoms of this World
may become the Kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ; that he might Rule and
Reign in Men by his Spirit and Truth: that thereby all People out of all
different Judgments and Professions, might be brought into Love and Unity with
God, and one with another; and that they might all come to witness the Prophets
Words, who said, Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation, neither shall
they learn War any more, Isa. 2.4. Mich. 4.3.

So we, whom the Lord has called into the Obedience of his Truth, have denied
Wars and Fightings, and cannot again any more learn it. And this is a certain
Testimony unto all the World, of the Truth of our Hearts in this particular,
that as God persuades every Man's Heart to believe, so they may receive it.
For we have not (as some others) gone about cunningly with devised Fables; nor
have we ever denied in Practice, what we have professed in Principle; but in
Sincerity and Truth, and by the Word of God have we labored to be made
manifest unto all Men, that both we and our ways might be witnessed in the
Hearts of all People. And whereas all manner of Evil has been falsely spoken of
us, we hereby speak forth the plain Truth of our Hearts, to take away the
occasion of that Offense: that so we being Innocent, may not suffer for other
Men's Offenses, nor be made a Prey upon by the Wills of Men for that, of which
we were never Guilty; but in the Uprightness of our Hearts we may, under the
Power ordained of God for the Punishment of Evildoers, and for the Praise of
them that do well, live a peaceable and godly Life, in all Godliness and
Honesty. For although we have always suffered, and do now more abundantly
suffer; yet we know, that it is for Righteousness sake: For our rejoicing is
this, the Testimony of our Consciences, that in Simplicity and godly Sincerity,
not with fleshly Wisdom, but by the Grace of God we have had our Conversation
in the World, 2 Cor. 1.12. Which for us is a Witness, for the convincing of our
Enemies. For this we can say to all the World, we have wronged no Man's Persons
or Possessions; we have used no Force nor Violence against any Man; we have
been found in no Plots, nor guilty of Sedition; when we have been wronged, we
have not sought to revenge our selves; we have not made resistance against
Authority: but wherein we could not obey for Conscience Sake, we have suffered
even the most of any People in the Nation. We have been counted as Sheep for
the Slaughter, Persecuted and Despised, Beaten, Stoned, Wounded, Stocked,
Whipped, Imprisoned, Haled out of Synagogues, cast into Dungeons and Noisome
Vaults, where many have died in Bonds, shut up from our Friends, denied needful
Sustenance for many days together; with other the like Cruelties. And the Cause
of all these our Sufferings is not for any Evil, but for things relating to the
Worship of our God, and in obedience to his Requirings of us; For which Cause
we shall freely give up our Bodies a Sacrifice, rather than disobey the Lord:
For we know, as the Lord has kept us Innocent, so he will plead our Cause,
when there is none in the Earth to plead it. So we, in Obedience unto his
Truth, do not love our Lives unto Death, that we may do his Will, and wrong no
Man in our Generation; but seek the Good and Peace of all Men. And he that has
commanded us, That we shall not Swear at all, Matthew. 5.34. has also commanded
us, That we shall not Kill, Matthew. 5. So that we can neither Kill Men, nor
Swear for, nor against them. And this is both our Principle and Practice, and
has been from the Beginning; so that if we suffer, as suspected to take up
Arms, or make War against any, it is without any Ground from us: For it neither
is, no^ ever was in our Hearts, since we owned the Truth of God; neither shall
we ever do it: because it is contrary to the Spirit of Christ, his Doctrine,
and the Practices of his Apostles; even contrary to him, for whom we suffer all
things, and endure all things.

And whereas Men come against us with Clubs, Staves, Drawn Swords, Pistols
cock't, and do beat, cut and abuse us; yet we never resisted them, but to them
our Hair, Backs and Cheeks have been ready: But it is not an Honor to Manhoood
or Nobility, to run upon harmless People, who lift not up an Hand against them,
with Arms and Weapons.

Therefore consider these things, ye Men of Understanding: For Plotters,
Raisers of Insurrections, Tumultuous Ones, and Fighters, running with Swords,
Clubs, Staves and Pistols one against another; we say, these are of the World,
and have their Foundation from this Unrighteous World; from the Foundation of
which, the Lamb has been slain: which Lamb has redeemed us from this
unrighteous World, and we are not of it; but are Heirs of a World, in which
there is no End; and of a Kingdom, where no corruptible thing enters. And our
Weapons are Spiritual, and not Carnal, yet Mighty through God, to the pulling
down of the Strong Holds of Sin and Satan, who is Author of Wars, Fighting,
Murder, and Plots; and our Swords are broken into Plow shares, and Spears into
Pruning Hooks; as Prophesied of in Micah 4. Therefore we cannot learn War any
more, neither rise up against Nation or Kingdom with outward Weapons, though you
have numbered us amongst the Transgressors and Plotters: the Lord knows our
Innocence herein, and will plead our Cause with all Men and People upon Earth,
at the day of their Judgment, when all Men shall have a Reward according to
their Works.

Therefore in love we warn you for your Souls good, not to wrong the Innocent,
nor the Babes of Christ, which he has in his Hand, which he tenders as the
Apple of his Eye; neither seek to destroy the Heritage of God, neither turn
your Swords backward, upon such as the Law was not made for, i. e. the
Righteous; but for the Sinners and Transgressors, to keep them down. For those
are not the Peacemakers, neither the Lovers of Enemies; neither can they
overcome Evil with Good, who wrong them that be Friends to You and All Men, and
wish Your Good, and the good of all People on the Earth. If you oppress us, as
they did the Children of Israel in Egypt; and if you oppress us, as they did,
when Christ was Born, and as they did the Christians in the Primitive Times; we
can say, The Lord forgive you: and leave the Lord to deal with you, and not
revenge our selves. And if you say, as the Council said to Peter and John, You
must speak no more in that Name; and if you serve us, as they served the Three
Children spoken of in Daniel; God is the same, as ever he was, that lives for
Ever and Ever, who has the Innocent in his Arms.

Oh Friends! Offend not the Lord and his Little Ones, neither afflict his
People; but consider, and be moderate. And do not run hastily into things; but
mind, and consider Mercy, Justice and Judgment: that is the way for you to
prosper, and get the Favor of the Lord. Our Meetings were stopped and broken
up in the days of Oliver, in pretense of Plotting against him; and in the days
of the Committee of Safety we were looked upon, as Plotters, to bring in KING
CHARLES: and now our Peaceable Meetings are termed Seditious. Oh that Men
should lose their Reason, and go contrary to their own Conscience; knowing,
that we have suffered all things, and have been accounted Plotters all along,
though we have declared against them both by Word of Mouth, and Printing, and
are clear from any such thing! Though we have suffered all along, because we
would not take up Carnal Weapons to fight withal against any; and are thus made
a Prey upon, because we are the Innocent Lambs of Christ, and cannot avenge our
selves! These things are left upon your Hearts to consider: But we are out of
all those things, in the Patience of the Saints: and we know, that as Christ
said, He that takes the Sword, shall perish with the Sword, Mat, 26.52. Rev.
13.10.

This is given forth from the People called Quakers, to satisfy the King and
his Council, and all those, that have any Jealousy concerning Us; that all
occasion of Suspicion may be taken away, and our Innocence cleared.

Given forth on the behalf of the whole Body of the Elect People of God, who
were called Quakers, in the Year 1660.


POSTSCRIPT.
THough we are numbered amongst Transgressors, and so have been given up to all
Rude, Merciless Men, by which our Meetings are broken up, in which we Edified
one another in our Holy Faith, and prayed together to the Lord, that lives for
ever; yet he is our Pleader for us in this Day. The Lord says, They that
feared his Name, spoke often together, (as in Malachy) which were as his
Jewels: And for this Cause, and no Evil-doing, are we cast into Holes,
Dungeons, Houses of Correction, Prisons, (they sparing neither Old nor Young,
Men nor Women) and made a Prey on in the sight of all Nations, under pretense
of being Seditious, etc. so that all rude People run upon us to take
Possession: For which we say, The Lord forgive them, that have thus done to us;
who does, and will enable us to suffer; and never shall we lift up hand against
any Man, that does thus use us: But that the Lord may have mercy upon them,
that they may consider, what they have done. For how is it possible for them,
to requite us for the Wrong they have done to us? Who to all Nations have
sounded us abroad as Seditious, or Plotters, who were never found Plotters
against any Power or Man upon the Earth, since we knew the Life and Power of
Jesus Christ manifested in us, who has redeemed us from the World, and all
Works of Darkness, and Plotters that be in it; by which we know our Election,
before the World began. So we say, The Lord have Mercy upon our Enemies, and
forgive them, for that they have done unto us.

Oh! do as you would be done by; and do unto all Men, as you would have them do
unto you; for this is but the Law and the Prophets.

And all Plots, Insurrections and Riotous Meetings we do deny, knowing them to
be of the Devil, the Murderer; which we in Christ (who was before they were)
Triumph over them. And all Wars and Fightings with Carnal Weapons we do deny,
who have the Sword of the Spirit: and all that wrong us, we leave them to the
Lord. And this is to clear our Innocence from that Aspersion cast upon us, That
we are Seditious or Plotters.

Added in the Reprinting.
Courteous Reader,
THis was our Testimony above Twenty Years ago; and since then we have not been
found Acting contrary to it, nor ever shall: For the Truth, that is our Guide,
is unchangeable. And this is now Reprinted to the Men of this Age, many of whom
were then Children; and does stand, as our certain Testimony against all
Plotting and Fighting with Carnal Weapons: And if any by departing from the
Truth, should do so, this is our Testimony in the Truth against them, and will
stand over them, and the Truth will be clear of them.


This Declaration did somewhat clear the Dark Air, that was over the City and
Country. And soon after the King gave forth a Proclamation, That no Soldiers
should go to search any House, but with a Constable. But the Jails were still
full, many Thousands of Friends being in Prison in the Nation: Which Mischief
was occasioned by that wicked Rising of those Fifth-Monarchy-Men. But when
those of them, that were taken, came to be executed, they did us that Right, to
clear us openly, from having any hand in, or knowledge of their Plot. And after
that the King, being continually Importuned thereunto, Issued forth a
Declaration, That Friends should be set at liberty, without paying Fees. But
great Labor and Travel, Care and Pains was taken in it, before this was
obtained; for Thomas Moor and Margaret Fell went often to the King about it.

Much Blood was shed this Year; many of them, that had been the Old King's
Judges, being hanged, drawn and quartered. And amongst them, that so suffered,
Col. Hacker was one; he who sent me Prisoner from Leicester to London in
Oliver's time: of which an Account is given before. A sad Day it was, and a
Repaying of Blood with Blood. For in the time of O. Cromwell, when several Men
were put to Death by him, being hanged, drawn and quartered for pretended
Treasons; I felt from the Lord God, that their Blood would not be put up, but
would be required: And I said as much then to several. And now, upon the King's
Return, when several of them that had been against the King, were put to Death,
as the others, that were for the King, had been before by Oliver: This was sad
Work, destroying of People contrary to the Nature of Christians, who have the
Nature of Lambs and Sheep. But there was a Secret Hand in bringing this Day
upon that Hypocritical Generation of Professors; who being got into Power, grew
Proud, Haughty and Cruel beyond others, and persecuted the People of God
without pity. Therefore when Friends were under cruel Persecutions and
Sufferings in the Commonwealth's time, I was moved of the Lord to write unto
Friends, to draw up their Sufferings, and lay them before the Justices at their
Sessions. And if they would not do them Justice, then to lay it before the
Judges at the Assize: And if they would not do them Justice, then to lay it
before the Parliament, and before the Protector and his Council; that they
might all see, what was done under their Government: And if they would not do
Justice, then to lay it before the Lord; who would hear the Cries of the
Oppressed, and of the Widows and Fatherless, that they had made so. For that
which we suffered for, and which our Goods were spoiled for, it was for our
Obedience to the Lord in his Power and in his Spirit, who was able to help and
to succor; and we had no Helper in the Earth, but him. And he did hear the
Cries of his People, and did bring an overflowing Scourge over the Heads of all
our Persecutors; which brought a Quaking, and a Dread, and a Fear amongst and
on them all: So that they, who had nicknamed us (who are the Children of
Light) and in scorn called us Quakers, the Lord made them Quake; and many of
them would have been glad to have hid themselves amongst us: and some of them,
through the Distress that came upon them, did at length come to Confess to the
Truth. Oh! the daily Reproaches, Revilings and Beatings we underwent amongst
them, even in the Highways, because we could not put off our Hats to them; and
for saying Thou and Thee to them! Oh! the Havoc and Spoil the Priests made of
our Goods, because we could not put into their Mouths, and give them Tithes!
Besides casting into Prisons; and besides the great Fines laid upon us, because
we could not Swear! But for all these things did the Lord God plead with them.
Yet some of them were so hardened in their Wickedness, that, when they were
turned out of their Places and Offices, they said; If they had Power, they
would do the same again. And when this Day of overturning was come upon them,
they said; It was all long of us. Wherefore I was moved to write to them, and
to ask them, Did we ever resist them, when they took away our Ploughs and
Plough-Gears, our Carts and Horses, our Corn and Cattle, our Kettles and
Platters from us, and whipped us, and set us in the Stocks, and cast us into
Prison; and all this only for serving and worshipping God in Spirit and Truth,
and because we could not Conform to their Religions, Manners, Customs and
Fashions? Did we ever resist them? Did we not give them our Backs to beat, and
our Cheeks to pull off the Hair, and our Faces to spit on? Had not their
Priests, that prompted them on to such Work, plucked them with themselves into
the Ditch? Why then would they say, It was all long of us? when it was long of
themselves, and their Priests, their blind Prophets, that followed their own
Spirits, and could foresee nothing of these times and things, that were come
upon them, which we had long forewarned them of; as Jeremiah and Christ had
forewarned Jerusalem. And they thought to have wearied us out, and undone us;
but they undid themselves: Whereas we could praise God, notwithstanding all
their plundering of us, that we had a Kettle, and a Platter, and an Horse, and
Plow still.

Many ways were these Professors warned, both by Word, by Writing and by Signs;
but they would believe none, till it was too late. William Sympson was moved of
the Lord to go at several times for Three Years, Naked and Barefoot before
them, as a Sign unto them, in Markets, Courts, Towns, Cities, to Priest's
Houses, and to Great Men's Houses, telling them; So should they be all stripped
Naked, as he was stripped Naked! And sometimes he was moved to put on
Hair-Sack-cloth, and to besmear his Face, and to tell them; So would the Lord
God besmear all their Religion, as he was besmeared! Great Sufferings did that
poor Man undergo, sore Whippings with Horse-whips and Coach-whips on his bare
Body, grievous Stonings and Imprisonments in three years time, before the King
came in, that they might have taken Warning, but they would not; but rewarded
his Love with cruel Usage. Only the Major of Cambridge did nobly to him; for he
put his Gown about him, and took him into his House.

Another Friend, one Robert Huntington, was moved of the Lord to go into
Carlisle-Steeple-house with a White Sheet about him, amongst the great
Presbyterians and Independents there, to show them, that the Surplice was
coming up again: and he put an Halter about his Neck, to show them, That an
Halter was coming upon them: which was fulfilled upon some of our Persecutors
not long after.

Another, whose Name was Richard Sale, living near West-Chester, and being
Constable of the place, where he lived, had a Friend sent to him with a Pass,
(whom those wicked Professors had taken up for a Vagabond, because he traveled
up and down in the Work of the Ministry) and this Constable being convinced by
the Friend, that was thus brought to him, gave him his Pass and Liberty; and
was afterward himself cast into Prison. After this, on a Lecture-day, this
Richard Sale was moved to go to the Steeple-house in the time of their Worship,
and to carry those persecuting Priests and People a Lanthorn and Candle, as a
Figure of their Darkness: But they cruelly abused him, and like dark
Professors, as they were, they put him into their Prison, called Little-Ease;
and so squeezed his Body therein, that not long after he Died. Many Warnings of
many sorts were Friends moved in the Power of the Lord to give unto that
Generation; which they not only rejected, but abused Friends, calling us
Giddy-headed Quakers: But God brought his Judgments upon those Persecuting
Priests and Magistrates. For when the King came in, most of them were turned
out of their Places and Benefices; and the Spoilers were Spoiled: And then we
could ask them, Who were the Giddy-heads now? Then many did confess, we had
been True Prophets to the Nation; and said, Had we cried against some Priests
only, they should have liked us then; but we crying against All, that made them
dislike us: But now they did see, that those Priests, which then were looked
upon to be the best, were as bad as the Rest. For indeed, some of those, that
were counted the most-Eminent Priests, were the bitterest and greatest Stirrers
up of the Magistrates to Persecution: And it was a Judgment upon them, to be
denied the Free Liberty of their Consciences, when the King came in; because
when they were uppermost, they would not have had Liberty of Conscience been
granted unto others. For there was one Hewes of Plymouth, a Priest of great
Note in Oliver's Days, who, when some Liberty was granted, prayed, That God
would put it into the Hearts of the Chief Magistrates of the Nation, to remove
this cursed Toleration: And others of them prayed against it, by the name of
Intolerable Toleration. But a while after, when the King was come in, and
Priest Hewes turned out of his great Benefice, for not Conforming to the
Common Prayer; a Friend of Plymouth meeting with him, asked him, Whether he
would account Toleration Accursed now? And Whether he would not now be glad of
a Toleration? To which the Priest returned no Answer, save by the shaking of
his Head. But as stiff as this sort of Men were then against Toleration, it is
well known, that many of them petitioned the King for Toleration, and for
Meeting-Places; and paid for Licenses too. But to return to the present Time,
the latter end of the Year 1660. and beginning of 1661.

Although those Friends, that had been Imprisoned upon the Rising of those
Monarchy-Men, were set at Liberty; yet Meetings were much disturbed, and great
Sufferings Friends went under: For besides what was done by Officers and
Soldiers, many wild Fellows and rude People often came in. There came one
time, when I was at Pell-Mell, an Ambassador with a Company of Irish Men with
rude Fellows: The Meeting was done before they came, and I was gone up into a
Chamber, where I heard one of them say, he would kill all the Quakers. So I
went down to him, and was moved in the Power of the Lord to speak to him: and I
told him, The Law said, An Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth for a Tooth: but thou
threatens to kill all the Quakers, though they have done thee no hurt. But said
I, here is Gospel for thee: Here Is my Hair, and here is my Cheek, and here is my
Shoulder, turning it to him. This came so over him, that he and his Companions
stood as Men amazed, and said; If that was our Principle, and if we were as we
said, they never saw the like in their Lives. I told them, What I was in Words,
I was the same in Life. Then the Ambassador came in (for he had stood without;
for he said, that Irish Colonel was such a desperate Man, that he durst not
come in with him, for fear, he should have done us some Mischief:) but Truth
came over him, and he carried himself lovingly toward us; and so did the
Ambassador also: for the Lord's Power was over them all.

At Mile-End Friends were kept out of their Meeting Place by Soldiers; but
Friends stood Nobly in the Truth, and were Valiant for the Lord's Name: and at
last the Truth gave them Dominion.

About this time we had Account, that John Love, a Friend, that was moved to go
and bear Testimony against the Idolatry of the Papists, was dead in Prison at
Rome: and it was suspected, he was privately put to Death in Prison. John
Perrot was also Prisoner there; and being released, came over again: But after
his Arrival here, he with Charles Baily, and some others, turned aside from the
Unity of Friends and Truth. Whereupon I was moved to give forth a Paper,
declaring, how the Lord would blast them all, both him and his Followers (if
they did not Repent and Return) and that they should wither, like the Grass on
the Housetop: and so many of them did; but others of them returned and
repented.

Also before this time we received Account from New England, That the
Government there had made a Law to Banish the Quakers out of their Colonies,
upon pain of Death, in case they returned; and that several of our Friends,
having been so banished, and returning, were thereupon taken, and actually
Hanged: and that diverse more were in Prison, in danger of the like Sentence to
be executed upon them. When those were put to Death, I was in Prison at
Lancaster, and had a perfect Sense of their Sufferings, as though it had been
my self; and as though the Halter had been put about my own Neck; though we had
not at that time heard of it. But as soon as we heard of it, Edward Borough
went to the King, and told him; There was a Vein of Innocent Blood opened in
his Dominions, which, if it were not stopped, would overrun all. To which the
King replied, But I will stop that Vein. Edward Borough said; Then do it
speedily; for we know not, how many may soon be put to Death. The King
answered, As speedily, as ye will. Call (said he to some present) the
Secretary, and I will do it presently So the Secretary being called, a Mandamus
was forthwith granted. A Day or two after, Ed. Borough going again to the
King, to desire, the matter might be expedited; the King said, He had no
Occasion at present to send a Ship thither: but if we would send one, we might
do it, as soon as we would. Ed. Borough then asked the King, If it would
please him, to grant his Deputation to one called a Quaker, to carry the
Mandamus to New England, (which is hereafter inserted.) He said, Yes, to whom
ye will. Whereupon E. B. named one Samuel Shattock (as I remember) who being an
Inhabitant of New England, was banished by their Law, to be hanged, if he came
again: and to him the Deputation was granted. Then we sent for one Ralph
Goldsmith, an honest Friend, who was Master of a good Ship; and with him we
agreed for Three Hundred Pounds, (Goods, or no Goods) to Sail in Ten Days. He
forthwith prepared to set Sail; and with a prosperous Gale, in about Six Weeks
time, arrived before the Town of Boston in New England, upon a First Day
Morning, called Sunday. With him went many Passengers, both of New and Old
England, that were Friends, whom the Lord did move to go to bear their
Testimony against those Bloody Persecutors, who had exceeded all the World in
that Age, in their Bloody Persecutions. The Townsmen at Boston, seeing a Ship
come into the Bay with English Colors, soon came on Board, and asked for the
Captain: Ralph Goldsmith told them, He was the Commander. They asked him, if he
had any Letters? He said, Yes. They asked, If he would deliver them? He said,
No, not to day. So they went ashore, and reported, There was a Ship full of
Quakers, and that Samuel Shattock was among them; who they knew, was by their
Law to be put to Death, for coming again after Banishment: but they knew not
his Errand, nor his Authority. So all being kept close that day, and none of
the Ships-Company suffered to go on Shore; next morning Samuel Shattock, the
King's Deputy, and Ralph Goldsmith, the Commander of the Vessel, went on Shore;
and sending back to the Ship the Men that landed them, they two went through
the Town to the Governor's, John Endicott's, Door, and knocked. He sent out a
Man, to know their Business: They sent him Word, their Business was from the
King of England, and they would deliver their Message to none, but the
Governor himself. Thereupon they were admitted to go in, and the Governor
came to them; and having received the Deputation and the Mandamus, he laid off
his Hat, and looked upon them: then going out, he bid the Friends follow him.
So he went to the Deputy Governor; and after a short Consultation, came out to
the Friends, and said, We shall obey his Majesty's Commands. After this the
Master gave liberty to the Passengers to come on Shore; and presently the Noise
of the business flew about the Town: and the Friends of the Town, and the
Passengers of the Ship Met together, to offer up their Praises and Thansgivings
to God, who had so wonderfully delivered them from the Teeth of the Devourer.
While they were thus met, in came a poor Friend, who being Sentenced by their
bloody Law to Die, had lain some time in Irons, expecting Execution. This added
to their Joy, and caused them to lift up their Hearts in High Praises to God,
who is worthy for ever to have the Praise, the Glory and the Honor; for he
only is able to deliver, and to save, and to support all, that sincerely put
their Trust in him. Here follows a Copy of the said Mandamus.

CHARLES R. 1661. London.

TRusty and Well Beloved. We Greet you Well. Having been Informed, that several
of Our Subjects amongst you, called Quakers, have been and are Imprisoned by
you, whereof some have been Executed, and others (as has been represented unto
Us) are in Danger to undergo the like; We have thought fit to signify our
Pleasure in that behalf for the future: And do hereby require, That if there be
any of those People called Quakers amongst you, now already Condemned to suffer
Death, or other Corporal Punishment; or that are Imprisoned, and obnoxious to
the like Condemnation, you are to forbear to proceed any further therein; but
that you forthwith send the said Persons (whether Condemned or Imprisoned) over
into this our Kingdom of England, together with the respective Crimes or
Offenses laid to their Charge: to the end such Course may be taken with them
here, as shall be agreeable to our Laws, and their Demerits. And for so doing,
these our Letters shall be your sufficient Warrant and Discharge. Given at Our
Court at Whitehall, the 9th day of September, 1661. in the Thirteenth Year of
Our Reign.

Subscribed: To Our Trusty and Well Beloved John Endicot, Esquire and to all and
every other the Governor or Governors of our Plantations of New England, and
of all the Colonies thereunto belonging, that now are, or hereafter shall be;
and to all and every the Ministers and Officers of our Plantations and Colonies
whatsoever, within the Continent of New England.

By His Majesty's Command. WILLIAM MORRIS.

Some time after this, several of New-England's Magistrates came over hither,
and one of their Priests; and we had several Discourses with them, at several
times, concerning their Murdering our Friends, the Servants of the Lord: but
they were ashamed to stand to their Bloody Actions. At one of those Meetings I
asked Simon Broadstreet, (who was one of the New England-Magistrates) Whether
he had not an hand in putting to Death those Four Servants of God, whom they
hanged for being Quakers only, as they had nicknamed them? And he confessed,
he had. I then asked him, and the rest of his Associates, that were present;
Whether they would acknowledge themselves to be Subjects to the Laws of
England? And if they did, By what Law they had put our Friends to Death? They
said; They were Subjects to the Laws of England; and they had put our Friends
to Death by the same Law, as the Jesuits were put to Death here in England. I
asked them then; Whether they did believe, that those Friends of ours, whom
they had put to Death, were Jesuits, or Jesuitically affected? And the said,
Nay. Then, said I, Ye have murdered them, if ye have put them to Death by the
Law. that Jesuits are put to Death here in England; and yet confess, they were
no Jesuits. By this it plainly appears, ye have put them to Death in your own
Wills, without any Law. Then Simon Broadstreet, finding himself and his Company
ensnared by their own Words, said; Did we come to Catch them? I told them, they
had Catched themselves, and they might justly be questioned for their Lives;
and if the Father of William Robinson (who was one of them, that was put to
Death) were in Town, it was probable, he would question them, and bring their
Lives into Jeopardy. Hereupon they began to excuse themselves, saying; There
was no Persecution now amongst them: But next morning we had Letters from
New England, giving us Account, that our Friends were persecuted there afresh.
Thereupon we went to them again, and showed them our Letters; which put them
both to Silence and to Shame: and in great Fear they seemed to be, lest some
should call them to Account, and prosecute them for their Lives; especially
Simon Broadstreet: for he had at first, before so many Witnesses, confessed, He
had a hand in putting our Friends to death; that he could not get off from it;
though he afterward through Fear shuffled, and would have unsaid it again. But
after this, he and the rest of them soon left the City, and got back to
New England again. I went also to Governor Winthrop, and discoursed with him
about these matters: but he assured me, he had no hand in putting our Friends
to Death, or in any way persecuting of them; but was one of them that protested
against it. Now these stingy Persecutors of New England were a People, that
fled out of Old England thither, from the Persecution of the Bishops here: But
when they had got Power into their hands, they so far exceeded the Bishops in
Severity and Cruelty, that whereas the Bishops had made them pay Twelve Pence a
Sunday (so called) for not coming to their Worship here, they imposed a Fine of
Five Shillings a Day upon such, as should not conform to their Will Worship
there; and spoiled the Goods of Friends, that could not pay it. Besides, many
they Imprisoned, diverse they Whipped, and that most Cruelly; of some they Cut off
Ears, and some they Hanged: as the Books of Friends Sufferings in New England
largely show; particularly, A Book written by Geo. Bishop of Bristol,
Entitled, New England judged. (In Two Parts.) Some of the old Royalists were
earnest with Friends to have prosecuted them; but we told them, we left them to
the Lord, to whom Vengeance belonged, and he would Repay it. And the Judgments
of God have since fallen heavy on them: For the Indians have been raised up
against them, and have Cut off many of them.

About this time I lost a very good Book, being taken in the Printer's Hands:
It was a useful, teaching Book, containing the Signification and Explanation of
Names, Parables, Types and Figures in the Scriptures. They who took it, were so
affected with it, that they were loath to have destroyed it; but thinking to
have made a great Advantage of it, they would have let us have had it again, if
we would have given them a great Sum of Money for it: which we were not free to
do.

And some time before this, while I was Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, the Book
called the Battledoor came forth, which was written to show, that in all
Languages Thou and Thee is the proper and usual Form of Speech to a Single
Person; and You to more than one. This was set forth in Examples or Instances
taken out of the Scriptures, and out of Books of Teaching, in about Thirty
Languages. John Stubbs and Benjamin Furly took great Pains in the Compiling of
it, which I put them upon; and some things I added to it. When it was finished,
some of them were presented to the King and his Council, to the Bishops of
Canterbury and London, and to the Two Universities one a piece; and many bought
of them. The King said, It was the proper Language of all Nations: And the
Bishop of Canterbury being asked what he thought of it, was so at a stand, that
he could not tell what to say to it. For it did so Inform and Convince People,
that few afterward were so Rugged toward us, for saying Thou and Thee to a
single Person, which before they were exceeding fierce against us for. For this
Thou and Thee was a sore Cut to proud Flesh, and them that sought Self-honour;
who though they would say it to God and Christ, would not endure to have it
said to themselves. So that we were often Beaten and Abused, and sometimes in
danger of our Lives, for using those Words to some proud Men; who would say,
What, you ill-bred Clown, do you Thou me! as though there lay Breeding in
saying You to one; which was contrary to all their Grammars and Teaching-Books,
by which they had taught and instructed their Youth.

Now the Bishops and Priests being busy and eager, to settle and (...) up
their Form of Worship, and Compel all to come to it; I was m^^^d to give forth
the following Paper, to open unto People the Nature of the True Worship, which
Christ set up, and which God accepts; Thus:

CHrist's Worship is free in the Spirit to all Men; and such as Worship in the
Spirit and in the Truth, are they, that God seeks to Worship him: for he is the
God of Truth, and is a Spirit* and the God of the Spirits of all Flesh. And he
has given to all the Nations of Men and Women Breath and Life, to live, and
move, and have their Being in him; and has put into them an Immortal Soul. So
all the Nations of Men and Women are to be Temples for him to dwell in; and
they that defile his Temple, them will he destroy. Now as the outward Jews,
while they had their outward Temple at outward Jerusalem, were to go up thither
to Worship (which Temple God has long since thrown down, and destroyed that
Jerusalem, the Vision of Peace; and cast off the Jews and their Worship: and in
the room thereof has set up his Gospel Worship in the Spirit and in the
Truth;) so now all are to Worship in the Spirit and in the Truth. And this is a
free Worship: for where the Spirit of the Lord is, and rules, there is
Liberty; and the Fruits of the Spirit are seen, and will manifest themselves:
and the Spirit is not to be limited, but to be lived and walked in; that the
Fruits of it may appear. The Tares are such, as hang upon the Wheat to weigh it
down; and thereby to draw it down to the Earth: yet the Tares and the Wheat
must grow together, till the Harvest; lest they, that take upon them to pluck
up the Tares, should pluck up the Wheat with the Tares. The Tares are such, as
Worship not God in the Spirit and in the Truth; but do grieve the Spirit, and
vex it, and quench it in themselves, and walk not in the Truth: yet will scraul
and hang about the Wheat, the true Worshippers in the Spirit and in the Truth.
Christ's Church was never established by Blood, nor held up by Prisons; neither
was the Foundation of it laid by Carnal, Weaponed Men, nor is it preserved by
such. But when Men went from the Spirit and Truth, then they took up Carnal
Weapons to maintain their outward Forms; and yet cannot preserve them with
their Carnal Weapons: For one plucketh down another's Form with his outward
Weapons. And this Work and Doing has been among the Christians in Name, since
they lost the Spirit, and Spiritual Weapons, and the true Worship, which Christ
set up, that is in the Spirit and in the Truth; which Spirit and Truth they
that Worship in, are over all the Tares. All that would be plucking up the
Tares, are forbidden by Christ, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to
him: for the Tares and the Wheat must grow together till the Harvest; as Christ
has commanded. The Stone, that smote the Image, became a great Mountain, and
filled the whole Earth: Now, if the Stone do fill the whole Earth, all Nations
must be Temples for the Stone. And all that say, they do travel for the Seed,
and yet bring forth nothing but a Birth of Strife, and Contention, and
Confusion; their Fruit shows their Travel to be wrong: for by the Fruit the End
of every one's Work is seen of what sort it is.

G. F.

About this time many Papists and Jesuits began to fawn upon Friends, and
talked up and down, where they came, that of all the Sects the Quakers were the
best and most self-denying People: And said, It was great pity, that they did
not return to the Holy Mother Church, Thus they made a Busz among the People,
and said; They would willingly discourse with Friends. But Friends were loath to
meddle with them, because they were Jesuits; looking upon it to be both
dangerous and scandalous. But when I understood it, I said to Friends; Let us
discourse with them, be they what they will. So a time being appointed at
Gerrard Roberts his House, there came two of them, like Courtiers. When we were
come together, they asked our Names; which we told them: But we did not ask
their Names: for we understood, they were called Papists; and they knew, we
were called Quakers. I asked them the same Question, that I had formerly asked
a Jesuit, namely; Whether the Church of Rome was not degenerated from the
Church in the Primitive Times, from the Spirit, and Power, and Practice, that
they were in in the Apostles times? He to whom I put this Question, being
subtle, said, He would not Answer it. I asked him, Why? But he would show no
Reason. His Companion said, he would answer me: and he said, They were not
degenerated from the Church in the Primitive times. I asked the other, Whether
he was of the same Mind? And he said, Yes. Then I told them, that for the
better understanding one another, and that there might be no Mistake, I would
repeat my Question over again after this manner; Whether the Church of Rome now
was in the same Purity, Practice, Power and Spirit, that the Church in the
Apostle's time was in? When they saw, we would be exact with them; they flew
off, and denied that, saying: It was Presumption in any to say, they had the
same Power and Spirit, which the Apostles had. But I told them: It was
Presumption in them, to meddle with the Words of Christ and his Apostles, and
make People believe, they succeeded the Apostles, and yet be forced to Confess,
They were not in the same Power and Spirit, that the Apostles were in: This,
said I, is a Spirit of Presumption, and rebuked by the Apostles Spirit. Then I
showed them, how different their Fruits and Practices were from the Fruits and
Practices of the Apostles. Then got up one of them, and said; Ye are a Company
of Dreamers. Nay, said I, ye are the filthy Dreamers, who dream, ye are the
Apostles Successors; and yet Confess, Ye have not the same Power and Spirit,
which the Apostles were in. And are not they Defilers of the Flesh, who say, It
is Presumption for any to say, they have the same Power and Spirit, which the
Apostles had? Now, said I, if ye have not the same Power and Spirit, which the
Apostles had; then it is manifest, that ye are led by another Power and Spirit,
than the Apostles and Church in the Primitive times were led by. Then I began
to tell them, how that Evil Spirit, which they were led by, had led them to
Pray by Beads, and to Images; and to set up Nunneries, and Frieries, and
Monasteries, and to put People to Death for Religion: and this Practice of
theirs I showed them, was below the Law, and far short of the Gospel, in which
is Liberty. They were soon weary of this Discourse, and went their way; and
gave a Charge (as we heard) to the Papists, That they should not dispute with
us, nor read any of our Books: So we were rid of them. But we had Reasonings
with all the other Sects, as Presbyterians, Independents, Seekers, Baptists,
Episcopal-men, Socinians, Brownists, Lutherans, Calvinists, Arminians,
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, Familists, Muggletonians and Ranters; none of which would
Affirm, they had the same Power and Spirit, that the Apostles had, and were in:
So in that Power and Spirit the Lord gave us Dominion over them all.

As for the Fifth-Monarchy-Men, I was moved to give forth a Paper to them, to
manifest their Error to them: For they looked for Christ's Personal Coming in
an outward Form and Manner; and they fixed the time of it to the Year 1666; at
which time some of them did prepare themselves, when it Thundered and Rained,
thinking Christ was then come to set up his Kingdom: and then they imagined,
they were to kill the Whore without them. But I told them, the Whore was alive
in them, and was not burnt with God's Fire, nor judged in them with the same
Power and Spirit, the Apostles were in. And their looking for Christ's Coming
outwardly, to set up his Kingdom, was like the Pharisees Lo here, and Lo there.
But Christ was come, and had set up his Kingdom above Sixteen Hundred Years ago
(according to Nebuchadnezzar's Dream, and Daniel's Prophecy) and he had dashed
to pieces the Four Monarchies, the great Image, with its Head of Gold, Breast
and Arms of Silver, Belly and Thighs of Brass, Legs of Iron, and Feet part of
Iron, part of Clay: and they were all blown away with God's Wind, as the Chaff
in the Summer-threshing-Floor. And when Christ was on Earth, he said, his
Kingdom was not of this World: If it had been, his Servants would have fought;
but it was not, therefore his Servants did not fight. And therefore all the
Fifth-Monarchy-Men, that be Fighters with Carnal Weapons, are none of Christ's
Servants, but the Beast's and the Whore's. Christ said, All Power in Heaven and
in Earth is given to me: So then, his Kingdom was set up above Sixteen Hundred
Years ago, and he Reigns. And we see Jesus Reign, said the Apostle, and he
shall Reign, till all things be put under his Feet; though all things are not
yet put under his Feet, nor subdued.

This year several Friends were moved to go beyond the Seas, to publish Truth
in Foreign Countries. John Stubbs, and Henry Fell, and Richard Costrop were
moved to go toward China, and Prester John's Country; but no Masters of Ships
would carry them. With much ado they got a Warrant from the King; but the
East-India-Company found ways to avoid it, and the Masters of their Ships would
not carry them. Then they went into Holland, hoping to have got Passage there;
but no Passage could they get there neither. Then John Stubs and Henry Fell
took Shipping to go to Alexandria in Egypt, intending to go by the Carravans
from thence. Mean while Daniel Baker being to go to Smirna, he drew Richard
Costrop, contrary to his own Freedom, to go along with him. And in the passage
Richard falling sick, D. Baker left him sick in the Ship; where he died: But
that hard-hearted Man afterward lost his own Condition.

John Stubbs and Henry Fell got to Alexandria in Egypt; but they had not been
long there, before the English Consul banished them from thence: Yet before
they came away, they dispersed many Books and Papers there, for the opening the
Principles and Way of Truth to the Turks and Grecians. They gave the Book
called, The Popes Strength broken, to an Old Friar, for him to give or send to
the Pope: which Book, when the Friar had perused, he clapped his Hand upon his
Breast, and confessed, What was written therein, was Truth: but, said he, if I
should confess to it openly, they would burn me. So John Stubs and Henry Fell
not being suffered to go farther, returned to England; and came to London
again. And John had a Vision, that the English and Dutch, who had joined
together not to carry them, would fall out one with the other: And so it came
to pass.

Having now stayed in London some time, I felt drawings to visit Friends in
Essex. Essex. Colchester Cogshall.
So I went down to Colchester, where I had very large Meetings: and from thence
to Cogshall; not far from which there was a Priest Convinced, and I had a
Meeting at his House. And so traveling a little up and down in those Parts,
and visiting Friends in their Meetings there-aways, London.
I returned pretty quickly to London, where I found great Service for the Lord:
For a large Door was opened, and many flocked in to our Meetings, and the
Lord's Truth spread mightily this Year. Yet Friends had great Travels, and sore
Labors; the rude People having been so heightened by the Monarchy-Men's Rising
a little before. But the Lord's Power was over all, and in it Friends had
Dominion: though we had not only those Sufferings without, but Sufferings
within also by John Perrot and his Company; who giving heed to a Spirit of
Delusion, sought to introduce and set up among Friends that evil and uncomely
Practice of keeping on the Hat in time of public Prayers. Now Friends had
spoken to him, and diverse of his Followers about it; and I had written to them
concerning it; but He and some others rather strengthened themselves against
Friends therein. Wherefore feeling the Judgment of Truth rise against it, I
gave forth the following Lines, as a Warning to all, that were concerned
therein.

WHosoever is tainted with this Spirit of John Perrot, it will perish. Mark
theirs and his End, that are turned into those outward things and Janglings
about them, and that which is not savoury; all which is for perpetual Judgment,
and is to be swept and cleansed out of the Camp of God's Elect. This is to that
Spirit, that is gone into Jangling about that, which is below, (the Rotten
Principle of the old Ranters) and gone from the Invisible Power of God, in
which is the Everlasting Fellowship: and so many are become like the Corn on
the Housetop, and like the untimely Figs; and now clamor and speak against
them, that be in the Power of God. O consider, the Light and Power of God goes
over you all, and leaves you in the fretting Nature, out of the Unity, which is
in the Everlasting Light, Life and Power of God. Consider this, before the Day
be gone from you; and take heed, that your Memorial be not rooted out from
among the Righteous.

G. F.

Among the Exercises and Troubles, that Friends had from without, one was
concerning Friends Marriages, which sometimes were ^^lled in question. And in
this Year there happened to be a Cause Tried at the Assize at Nottingham
concerning a Friend's Marriage: The Case was thus. Some Years before, Two
Friends were joined together in Marriage amongst Friends, and lived together as
Man and Wife about two Years. Then the Man died, leaving his Wife with Child;
and leaving an Estate in Lands of Copyhold. When the Woman was delivered, the
Jury presented the Child Heir to its Father's Lands; and accordingly the Child
was admitted: Afterward another Friend married the Widow. And after that a
Man, that was Near of Kin to her former Husband, brought his Action against the
Friend, that had last married her; endeavoring to dispossess them, and deprive
the Child of the Inheritance, and to possess himself thereof, as next Heir to
the Woman's first Husband. And to effect this, he endeavored to prove the
Child Illegitimate, alleging; The Marriage was not according to Law. In
opening the Cause, the Plaintiff's Counsel did use unseemly Words concerning
Friends, saying; That they went together like Brute Beasts: with other ill
Expressions. After the Counsels on both sides had pleaded, the Judge (viz.
Judge Archer) took the matter in hand, and opened it to the Jury, telling them;
That there was a Marriage in Paradise, when Adam took Eve, and Eve took Adam;
and that it was the Consent of the Parties that made a Marriage. And for the
Quakers, (he said) he did not know their Opinions; but he did not believe, they
went together, as Brute Beasts, as had been said of them; but as Christians:
and therefore he did believe, the Marriage was lawful, and the Child lawful
Heir. And the better to satisfy the Jury, he brought them a Case to this
purpose. A Man, that was weak of Body, and kept his Bed, had a desire in that
Condition to Marry; and did declare before Witnesses, that he did take such a
Woman to be his Wife; and the Woman declared, that she took that Man to be her
Husband. This Marriage was afterward called in Question; and (as the Judge
said) all the Bishops did at that time conclude it to be a Lawful Marriage.
Hereupon the Jury gave in their Verdict for the Friend's Child, and against the
Man, that would have deprived it of its Inheritance.

About this time the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy were tendered unto
Friends, as a Snare, because it was known, we could not Swear; and thereupon
many were Imprisoned, and diverse Premunired. Upon that occasion Friends
published in Print the Grounds and Reasons, why they refused to swear: Besides
which I was moved to give forth these few Lines following, to be given to the
Magistrates:

THE World says, Kiss the Book: But the Book says, Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry. And the Son says, Swear not at all; but keep to Yea and Nay in all your
Communications: for whatsoever is more than this, comes of Evil. Again, the
World says, Lay your hand on the Book; but the Book says, Handle the Word:
And the Word says, Handle not the Traditions, nor the Inventions, nor the
Rudiments of the World. And God says, This is my beloved Son, hear him; who is
the Life, and the Truth, and the Light, and the Way to God.

G. F.

Frionds in Prison in the Nation, Richard Hubberthorn and I drew up a Paper
concerning them; and got it delivered to the King, that he might understand,
how we were dealt with by his Officers. It was directed thus:

For the KING.
FRiend, who art the Chief Ruler of these Dominions, here is a List of some of
the Sufferings of the People of God, in scorn called Quakers, that have
suffered under the Changeable Powers before thee, by whom there have been
Imprisoned, and under whom there have suffered for good Conscience Sake, and
for bearing Testimony to the Truth as it is in Jesus, Three Thousand, One
Hundred, Seventy Three Persons: And there lie yet in Prison in the Name of the
Commonwealth, Seventy Three Persons, that we know of. And there have died in
Prison in the time of the Commonwealth, and of Oliver and Richard the
Protectors, through cruel and hard Imprisonments, upon Nasty Straw, and in
Dungeons, Thirty Two Persons. There have been also Imprisoned in thy Name,
since thy Arrival, by such as thought to ingratiate themselves thereby to thee,
Three Thousand, Sixty and Eight Persons. Besides this, Meetings are daily
broken up by Men with Clubs and Arms, (though we Meet peaceably, according to
the Practice of God's People in the Primitive times) and our Friends are thrown
into Waters; and trod upon, till the very Blood gusheth out of them: the number
of which Abuses can hardly be uttered. Now this we would have of Thee, to set
them at Liberty, that lie in Prison in the Names of the Commonwealth, and of
the two Protectors, and them that lie in Thy own Name, for speaking the Truth,
and for good Conscience sake; who have not lifted up an Hand against thee, nor
any Man: and that the Meetings of our Friends, who meet peaceably together in
the Fear of God, to Worship him, may not be broken up by rude People with their
Clubs, and Swords, and Staves. One of the greatest things, that we have
suffered for formerly, was, because we could not Swear to the Protectors, and
all the changeable Governments; and now we are Imprisoned, because we cannot
take the Oath of Allegiance. Now, if Yea be not Yea, and Nay, Nay to thee, and
to all Men upon the Earth, let us suffer as much for breaking of that, as
others do for breaking an Oath. We have suffered these many years, both in
Lives and Estates under these Changeable Governments, because we cannot Swear;
but obey Christ's Doctrine, who commands, We should not swear at all: (Matthew.
5. Jam. 5.) and this we Seal with our Lives and Estates, with our Yea and Nay,
according to the Doctrine of Christ. Hearken to these things, and so consider
them in the Wisdom of God, that by it such Actions may be stopped, Thou that
have the Government, and may do it. We desire, that all that are in Prison,
may be set at Liberty; and that for the time to come they may not be Imprisoned
for Conscience, and for the Truth's sake: And if thou question the Innocence of
their Sufferings, let them and their Accusers be brought up before thee; and we
shall produce a more particular and full Account of their Sufferings, if
required.

G. F. and R. H.

I mentioned before, how that in the Year 1650. I was kept Prisoner Six Months
in the House of Correction at Darby, and that the Keeper of the Prison, being a
Cruel Man, and one that had dealt very wickedly by me, was smitten in himself,
the Plagues and Terrors of the Lord falling upon him because thereof; this Man
being afterward Convinced of Truth, wrote me the following Letter.

Dear Friend:
HAving such a Convenient Messenger, I could do no less, than give thee an
Account of my present Condition; remembering, that to the first Awakening of me
to a Sense of Life, and of the Inward Principle, God was pleased to make use of
thee as an Instrument: So that sometimes I am taken with Admiration, that it
should come by such a means, as it did, that is to say; That Providence should
order thee to be my Prisoner, to give me my first, real sight of the Truth: It
makes me many times to think of the Jailer's Conversion by the Apostles. O
happy George Fox! 1662. London.
that first breathed that Breath of Life within the Walls of my Habitation!
Notwithstanding my outward Losses are since that time such, that I am become
nothing in the World; yet I hope, I shall find, that all these light
Afflictions, which are but for a moment, will work for me a far more exceeding
and eternal Weight of Glory. They have taken all from me: and now instead of
keeping a Prison, I am rather waiting, when I shall become a Prisoner my self.
Pray for me, that my Faith fail not; but that I may hold out to the Death, that
I may receive a Crown of Life. I earnestly desire to hear from thee, and of thy
Condition, which would very much rejoice me. Not having else at present, but my
kind Love unto thee, and all Christian Friends with thee; in haste, I rest,

Derby, the 22th of the 4th Month, 1662. Thine in Christ Jesus, Thomas Sharman.


There were Two of our Friends in Prison in the Inquisition at Malta; they were
both Women: The name of the one was Katharine Evans, and of the other Sarah
Chevers. I was told, that One, called the Lord D' Aubeny, could procure their
Liberty; wherefore I went to him: And having Informed him concerning their
Imprisonment, desired him to write to the Magistrates there for their Release.
He readily promised me, he would; and said, If I would come again within a
Month, he would tell me of their Discharge. I went aga^n about that time; and
he said, he thought, his Letters had Miscarried, because he had received no
Answer. But he promised, he would write again; and he did so: and thereupon
they were both set at Liberty.

With this Great Man I had a great deal of Reasoning about Religion; and he did
confess, that Christ has enlightened every Man, that comes into the World,
with his Spiritual Light; and that he had tasted Death for every Man; and that
the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has appeared to all Men; and that it
would teach them, and bring their Salvation, if they did obey it. Then I asked
him, What would They (the Papists) do with all their Relics and Images, if
they did own and believe in this Light, and receive the Grace to teach them,
and bring their Salvation? And he said, Those things were but Policies, to keep
People in Subjection. Very free he was in Discourse; and I never heard a Papist
Confess so much as he did. Now though several about the Court began to grow
Loving to Friends, yet the Persecution was very hot; and several Friends died
in Prison. Whereupon I gave forth a little Paper, concerning the Grounds and
Rise of Persecution; which was thus:

ALL the Sufferings of the People of God in all Ages were, because they could
not Join to the National Religions and Worships, which Men had made and set up;
and because they would not forsake God's Religion, and his Worship, which he
had set up. And ye may see through all Chronicles and Histories, how that the
Priests joined with the Powers of the Nations: The Magistrates, and
Soothsayers, and Fortune Tellers, all these joined against the People of God,
and did imagine vain things against them in their Counsels. And when the Jews
did badly, they turned against Moses; and when the Jewish Kings transgressed
the Law of God, then they persecuted the Prophets: as may be seen in the
Prophets Writings. And when Christ the Substance came, then the Jews persecuted
Christ and his Apostles, and Disciples: And when the Jews had not Power enough
of themselves to persecute answerable to their Wills; then they got the
Heathen-Gentiles to help them against Christ, and against his Apostles and
Disciples, who were in the Spirit and Power of Christ.

G. F.

Now after I had made some stay in London, and had cleared my self of those
Services, that at that time lay upon me there, I went into the Country; having
with me Alexander Parker and John Stubbs (who was lately come back from
Alexandria in Egypt, as was mentioned before.) We traveled down through the
Countries, visiting Friends Meetings, till we came to Bristol. Bristol.
When we were come thither, we understood, that the Officers were likely to
come, and break up the Meeting. Broadmead- Meeting.
Yet on the First Day we went to the Meeting at Broadmead: And Alexander Parker
standing up first to Declare, while he was speaking, the Officers came up, and
took him away. After he was gone, I stood up in the Eternal Power of God, and
declared the Everlasting Truth of the Lord God; and the Heavenly Power came
over all, and the Meeting was quiet the rest of the time, and brake up
peaceably. I tarried, till the First Day following; visiting Friends, and being
visited by Friends. On the First Day in the Morning several Friends came to me
to Edward Pyot's House, (where I lay the Night before) and used great
Endeavors to persuade me, not to go to the Meeting that day; for the
Magistrates (they said) had threatened to take me, and had raised the Trained
Bands. I wished them to go their way to the Meeting; not telling them, what I
intended to do: but I told Ed. Pyot, I intended to go to the Meeting; and he
sent his Son with me, to show me the Way from his House by the Fields. As I
went, I met diverse Friends, who were coming to me to prevent my going; and did
what they could, to stop me: What, said one, Will thou go into the Mouth of the
Beast! Will thou go into the Mouth of the Dragon, said another! But I put them
by, and went on. When I came into the Meeting, Margaret Thomas was speaking;
and when she had done, I stood up. Now I saw a Concern and Fear upon Friends
for me; but the Power of the Lord, in which I declared, soon struck the Fear
out of them: and Life sprang, and an Heavenly, Glorious Meeting we had. After I
had Cleared my self, of what was upon me from the Lord to the Meeting, I was
moved to Pray: and after I had prayed, and was stepped down; I was moved to stand
up again, and tell Friends, Now they might see, there was a God in Israel, that
could deliver. A very large, full Meeting this was, and very hot: but Truth was
over all, and the Life was up, which carried through all; and the Meeting broke
up in Peace. For the Officers and Soldiers had been breaking up another
Meeting, which had taken up their time; so that our Meeting was ended, 1662.
Broadmead-Meeting.
before they came. But I understood afterward, they were in a great Rage, that
they had missed me; for they were heard to say one to another before, I Will
warrant, we shall have him: but the Lord prevented them. I went from the
Meeting to Joan Hily's, where many Friends came to see me; rejoicing and
blessing God for our Deliverance. In the Evening I had a fine fresh Meeting
among Friends, at a Friend's House over the Water, where Friends were much
refreshed in the Lord. After this I stayed most part of that Week in Bristol,
Bristol.
and at Edward Pyott's. Edward was brought so low and weak with an Ague, that
when I came first thither, he was looked upon as a Dying Man: but it pleased the
Lord to raise him up again; so that, before I went away, his Ague left him, and
he was finely well.

Now having been two First-Days together at the Meeting at Broadmead, and
feeling my Spirit clear of Bristol; I went next First Day to a Meeting in the
Country not far from Bristol, And after the Meeting was over, some Friends,
that came from Bristol, told me, that the Soldiers that day had beset the
Meeting House round at Bristol; and then went up, saying. They would be sure to
have me now: But when they came up, and found me not there, they were in a
great Rage; and kept the Friends in the Meeting House most part of the day,
before they would let them go home; and queried of them, Which way I was gone,
and how they might send after me? For the Major, they said, would fain have
spoken with me. But I had a Vision of a great Mastiff Dog, that would have
bitten me: but I put one hand above his Jaws, and the other hand below, and
tore his Jaws to pieces. So the Lord by his Power tore their Power to pieces,
and made way for me to escape them. Then passed I through the Countries,
visiting Friends in Wiltshire and Barkshire, Wiltshire. Barkshire. London.
till I came to London; and had great Meetings amongst Friends, as I went: and
the Lord's Power was over all; and a blessed time it was for the spreading of
his glorious Truth. It was indeed the Immediate Hand and Power of the Lord,
that did preserve me out of their hands at Bristol, and over the Heads of all
our Persecutors; and the Lord alone is worthy of all the Glory, who did uphold
and preserve for his Name and Truth's sake.

At London I staid not long this time; but was drawn in my Spirit to visit
Friends Northward, Leicestershire. Nottinghamshire. Skegby. Barnet-hills.
as far as Leicestershire; John Stubbs being with me. So we traveled down
through the Countries, having Meetings amongst Friends, as we went; and at
Skegby we had a great Meeting. Thence passing on, we came to a place called
Barnet-Hills, where lived then one Captain Brown, a Baptist, whose Wife was
Convinced of Truth. This Captain Brown, after the Act for breaking up Meetings
came forth, being afraid, lest his Wife should go to Meetings, and be cast into
Prison, left his House at Barrow, and took a place on these Hills, saying; His
Wife should not go to Prison. And this being a free Place, many, both Priests
and others, got thither, as well as he. But he, who would neither stand to
Truth himself, nor suffer his Wife; was in this place, where he thought to be
safe, found out by the Lord: whose hand fell heavy upon him for his
Unfaithfulness; so that he was sorely plagued, and grievously judged in himself
for flying, and drawing his Wife into that private place. We went to see his
Wife; and being come into the House, I asked him, 1662. Barnet-Hills.
How he did? How do I? said he, The Plagues and Vengeance of God are upon me, a
Runnagate, a Cain as I am: God may look for a Witness for me, and such as me;
for if all were no faithfuller, than I, God would have no Witness left in the
Earth. In this Condition he lived there on Bread and Water; and thought, it was
too good for him. At length he got home again with his Wife, to his own House
at Barrow; where afterward he came to be Convinced of God's Eternal Truth, and
died in it. A little before his Death be said; Though he had not born a
Testimony for Truth in his Life, he would bear a Testimony in his Death, and
would be buried in his Orchard: and was so. He was an Example to all the Flying
Baptists in the time of Persecution; who could not bear Persecution themselves,
and yet persecuted us, when they had Power.

From Barnet-Hills we came to Swanington in Leicestershire, Leicestershire.
Swanington.
where Will. Smith, and some other Friends came to me; but they passed away
toward Night, leaving me at a Friend's House in Swanington. At Night, as I was
sitting in the Hall, speaking to a Widow-Woman and her Daughter, there came one
called Lord Beaumont, with a Company of Soldiers, who slapping their Swords on
the Door, rusht into the House with their Swords and Pistols in their hands,
crying, Put out the Candles, and make fast the Doors. Then they seized upon the
Friends in the House, and asked; If there were no more about the House? The
Friends told them, there was one Man more in the Hall. Now there being some
Friends, that came out of Darbyshire, one of them was named Thomas Fauks; and
this Lord Beaumont (so called) after he had asked all their Names, bid his Man,
set down that Man's Name Thomas Fox: but the Friend said, Nay; his Name was not
Fox, but Fauks. In the mean time some of the Soldiers came, and fetched me out
of the Hall, and brought me to him; and he asked me my Name: I told him, my
Name was George Fox, and that I was well known by that Name. Ay, said he, you
are known all the World over: I said, I was known for no Hurt, but for Good.
Then he put his Hands into my Pockets to search them, and plucked out my
Comb-Case: and afterward commanded one of his Officers to search further, for
Letters, as he pretended. I told him, I was no Letter-Carrier: and asked him,
Why would he come amongst a Peaceable People with Swords and Pistols, without a
Constable; which was contrary to the King's Proclamation, and to the late Act?
For he could not say, there was a Meeting; I being only talking with a poor
Widow-Woman and her Daughter. By reasoning thus with him, he came somewhat
down: yet sending for the Constables, he gave them Charge of us that Night; and
to bring us before him next Morning. Accordingly the Constables set a Watch of
the Town's People upon us that Night; and had us up next Morning to his House,
about a Mile from Swanington. When we came before him, he told us, We Met
contrary to the Act: Whereupon I desired him to show us the Act. Why, says he,
you have it in your Pocket. I told him, he did not find us in a Meeting. Then
he asked us, Whether we would take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? I
told him, I never took any Oath in all my Life, nor Engagement, nor the
Covenant: Yet still he would force the Oath upon us. Then I desired him to show
us the Oath, that we might see, whether we were the Persons the Oath was to be
tendered to; 1662. ^waning^on.
and whether it was not for the Discovery of Popish Recusants. At length he
brought forth a little Book: but we called for the Statute-Book. He would not
show us that; but caused a Mittimus to be made, which mentioned, That we were
to have had a Meeting: And with this Mittimus he delivered us to the Constables
to Convey us to Leicester-Jail. But when the Constables had brought us back to
Swanington, it being Harvest-time, it was hard to get any body to go with us;
for the People were loath to go with their Neighbors to Prison, especially in
such a busy time. They would have given us our Mittimus, to have carried it
our selves to the Jail; for it had been usual for Constables, to give Friends
their own Mittimus, (for they durst trust Friends;) and they have gone
themselves with their Mittimus to the Jailer. But we told them, though our
Friends had sometimes done so, yet we would not take this Mittimus; but some of
them should go with us to the Jail. At last they hired a poor, laboring Man to
go with us; who yet was loath to have gone, though hired. So we rid through the
Country to Leicester, being Five of us in number; some carried their Bibles
open in their hands, declaring the Truth to the People, as we rode, in the
Fields and through the Towns, and telling them; We were the Prisoners of the
Lord Jesus Christ, going to suffer Bonds for his Name and Truth-sake: and one
Woman's Friend carried her Wheel on her Lap, to spin on in Prison: and the
People were mightily affected. At Leicester we went to an Inn; ^
and the Master of the House seemed to be troubled, that we should go to
Prison: and being himself in Commission, he sent for Lawyers in the Town to
advise with; and would have taken up the Mittimus, and kept us in his own
House, and not have let us gone into the Jail. But I told Friends, it would be
great Charge to lie at an Inn, and many Friends and People would be coming to
Visit us; and it might be hard for him to bear our having Meetings in his
House: and besides, we had many Friends in the Prison already; and we had
rather be with them. So we let the Man know, that we were sensible of his
Kindness: and to Prison we went; Leicester- Prison.
the Poor Man, that brought us thither, delivering both the Mittimus and us to
the Jailer. This Jailer had been a very wicked, cruel Man: and there being Six
or Seven Friends in Prison, before we came, he had taken some occasion to
quarrel with them, and had thrust them into the Dungeon amongst the Fellons;
where was hardly room for them to lie down, they were so thronged. We stayed
all that day in the Prison-Yard, and desired the Jailer to let us have some
Straw: He surlily answered, You do not look like Men that would lie on Straw.
After a while William Smith, a Friend, came to me; and he being acquainted in
the House, I asked him, What Rooms there were in the House, and what Rooms
Friends usually had been put into, before they were put into the Dungeon? I
asked him also, Whether the Jailer or his Wife was Master? He said, The Wife
was Master; and that, though she was Lame, and sat mostly in her Chair, not
being able to go but on Crutches; yet she would beat her Husband, when he came
within her reach, if he did not do as she would have him do. Now I considered,
that probably many Friends might come to Visit us; and that, 1662.
Leicester-Prison.
if we had a Room to our selves, it would be better for them to speak to me,
and for me to speak to them, as there should be occasion. Wherefore I desired
William Smith to go speak with the Woman, and let her know, if she would let us
have a Room, and let our Friends come up out of the Dungeon; and leave it to us
and them, to give her what we would, it might be better for her. He went: and
after some reasoning with her, she consented; and we were had into a Room. Then
we were told, that the Jailer would not suffer us to fetch any Drink out of the
Town into the Prison; but that what Beer we drank, we must take of him. I told
them, I would remedy that, if they would: for we would get a Pale of Water, and
a little Wormwood once a day; and that might serve us: So we should have none
of his Beer; and the Water he could not deny us.

Before we came there, when those few Friends, that were Prisoners there, did
Meet together on the First-Days, if any of them was moved to pray to the Lord,
the Jailer would come up with his great Quarter-staff in his Hand, and his
Mastiff-Dog at his Heels, and would pluck them down by the Hair of the Head,
and strike them with his Staff: but when he struck Friends, the Mastiff-Dog,
instead of falling upon Friends, would take the Staff out of his Hand. Now when
the First Day came, after we came in, I spoke to one of my Fellow Prisoners, to
carry down a Stool, and set it in the Yard; and give notice to the Debtors and
Fellons, that there would be a Meeting in the Yard; and they that would hear
the Word of the Lord declared, might come thither. So the Debtors and Prisoners
went into the Yard, and we went down, and had a very precious Meeting: the
Jailer not meddling. Thus every First Day we had a Meeting there, as long as we
stayed in Prison: and several came in out of the City and Country, and many
were Convinced; and some received the Lord's Truth there, who stood faithful
Witnesses for it ever since.

When the Sessions came, we were had up before the Justices; Leicester-
Sessions.
with many more Friends, that were sent to Prison, whilst we were there, to the
number of about Twenty. Being brought into the Court, the Jailer put us into
the Place, where the Thieves were put; and then some of the Justices began to
tender the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to us. I told them: I never took
any Oath in my Life; and they knew, we could not Swear, because Christ and his
Apostle forbad it: and therefore they put it but as a Snare to us. But we told
them, if they could prove, that after Christ and the Apostle had forbid
Swearing, they did ever command Christians to Swear, then we would take these
Oaths; otherwise we were resolved, to obey Christ's Command, and the Apostle's
Exhortation. They said, We must take the Oath, that we might manifest our
Allegiance to the King. I told them, I had been formerly sent up a Prisoner by
Col. Hacker, from that Town to London, under pretense, that I held Meetings to
plot to bring in King Charles. I also desired them to read our Mittimus, which
set forth the Cause of our Commitment to be, that we were To have a Meeting;
and I said, he that was called Lord Beaumont, could not by that Act send us to
Jail, unless we had been taken at a Meeting, and found to be such Persons, as
the Act speaks of: therefore we desired, they would read the Mittimus, 1662.
Leicester- Sessions.
and see, how wrongfully we were Imprisoned. They would not take notice of the
Mittimus; but called a Jury, and Indicted us for Refusing to take the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy. When the Jury was Sworn and Instructed, as they were
going out, one, that had been an Alderman of the City, spoke to them, and bid
them Have a good Conscience: and one of the Jury, being a peevish Man, told the
Justices, There was One affronted the Jury: Whereupon they called him up, and
tendered him the Oath also; and he took it.

While we were standing in the Place, where the Thieves used to stand, there
was a Cutpurse had his Hand in several Friends Pockets; and Friends declared
it to the Justices, and showed them the Man: They called him up before them;
and upon Examination he could not deny it: yet they set him at Liberty.

It was not long, before the Jury Returned, and brought us in Guilty: and then,
after some Words, the Justices Whispered together, and bid the Jailer take us
down to Prison again: But the Lord's Power was over them, and his Everlasting
Truth, which we declared boldly amongst them. And there being a great Concourse
of People, most of them followed us; so that the Crier, and Bailiffs were sain
to call the People back again to the Court: We declared the Truth, as we went
down the Streets all along, Leicester- Jail.
till we came to the Jail, the Streets being full of People. When we were in
our Chamber again, after some time the Jailer came to us, and desired all to go
forth, that were not Prisoners. And when they were gone, he said, Gentlemen, it
is the Court's Pleasure, that ye should all be set at liberty, except those
that are in for Tithes: and you know, there are Fees due to me; but I shall
leave it to you, to give me what you will.

Thus were we all set at Liberty on a sudden. And being thus set at Liberty,
the rest passed every one into their Services; only Leonard Fell (being come
thither) stayed with me, and we two went again to Swanington. Swanington.
I had a Letter from him they called the Lord Hastings; who hearing of my
Imprisonment, had written from London to the Justices at the Sessions, to set
me at Liberty. Now I had not delivered this Letter to the Justices; but whether
they had any knowledge of his Mind from any other hand, which made them
discharge us so suddenly, I know not. But this Letter I carried to him called
the Lord Beaumont, who had sent us to Prison; and when he had broken it open,
and read it, he seemed much troubled: but at last came a little lower; yet
threatened us, if we had any more Meetings at Swanington, he would break them
up, and send us to Prison again. But notwithstanding his Threats, we went to
Swanington, and had a Meeting with Friends there: and he came not, nor sent not
to break it up.

From Swanington we passed through the Country, and came to a Place called
Twy-Cross; Twy-Cross
where that Great Man formerly mentioned, whom the Lord God had raised up from
his Sickness in the Year 1649, (and whose Serving-man came at me with a Drawn
Sword, to have done me a Mischief) He and his Wife came to see me. From thence
we traveled through Warwickshire, Warwickshire.
where we had brave Meetings; and so into Northamptonshire and Bedfordshire,
visiting Friends, 1662. Northamptonshire. Bedfordshire. London. Essex. Norfolk.
Norwich. Sutton. Cambridgeshire.
till we came to London.

I stayed not long at this time in London, but went into Essex, and so into the
East, and to Norfolk; having great Meetings. At Norwich, when I came to Capt.
Lawrence's, there was great Threatening of Disturbance; but the Meeting was
quiet. Passing from thence to Sutton, and so into Cambridgeshire, there I heard
of Edward Burrough's Decease. And being sensible, how great a Grief and
Exercise it would be to Friends to part with him, I writ the following Lines to
Friends, for the staying and settling of their Minds.

Friends,
BE still and quiet in your own Conditions, and settled in the Seed of God,
that does not Change; that in that ye may feel Dear E. B. among you in the
Seed, in which and by which he begat you to God, with whom he is: and that in
the Seed ye may all see and feel him, in which is the Unity with him in the
Life. And so Enjoy him in the Life, that does not Change, which is Invisible.

G. F.


From thence I passed to Little-Port, and the Isle of Ely; where he, Isle of
Ely. Little-port
that had been the Major, with his Wife, and the Wife of the then present Major
of Cambridge came to the Meeting. So traveling on into Lincolnshire and
Huntingtonshire, I came to Thomas Parnel's, Lincolnshire. Huntingtonshire.
Fen-Country.
where the Major of Huntington came to see me, and was very loving. From thence
passing on, I came into the Fen-Country, where we had large and quiet Meetings.
While I was in that Country, there came so great a Flood, that it was dangerous
to get out; yet we did get out, and went to Lyn, where we had a blessed
Meeting. Lyn.
Next Morning I went to visit some Prisoners there; and then went back to the
Inn, and took Horse: And as I was riding out of the Yard, the Officers (it
seems) came to search the Inn for me. I knew nothing of it then; only I felt a
great Burden come upon me, as I rid out of the Town, till I was got without
their Gates: and when some Friends, that came after, overtook me, they told me,
that the Officers had been searching for me in the Inn, as soon as I was gone
out of the Yard. So, by the good Hand of the Lord, I escaped their Cruel Hands.
After this we passed through the Countries, visiting Friends in their Meetings.
And the Lord's Power carried us over the Persecuting Spirits, and through many
Dangers; and his Truth spread and grew, and Friends were established therein:
Praises and Glory to his Name for ever!

And so having passed through Norfolk, Suffolk, Essex and Hertfordshire,
Norfolk. Suffolk. Essex. Hertfordshire. London. Kent. Ashford. Cranbrook
Tenterden
we came to London again; where I staid a while, visiting Friends in their
Meetings, which were very large, and the Lord's Power was over all. After some
time I left the City again, and traveled into Kent, having Thomas Briggs with
me; and we went to Ashford, where we had a quiet and a very blessed Meeting:
and on the First Day we had a very good and peaceable Meeting at Cranbrook.
Then we went to Tenterden, and had a Meeting there, 1663. Tenderden.
to which many Friends came from several parts; and many of the World's People
came in, and were reached by Truth. When the Meeting was done, I walked with
Thomas Briggs into a Close, while our Horses were got ready; and turning my
Head, I spied a Captain coming, and a great Company of Soldiers with lighted
Matches and Muskets. Some of the Soldiers came to Thomas and me, and said; We
must go to their Captain: and when they had brought us before him, he asked,
Where was George Fox? Which was he? I said, I am the Man. Then he came to me,
and was somewhat struck, and said; I will secure you among the Soldiers. So he
called for the Soldiers to take me; and then he took Thomas Briggs, and the
Man of the House, and many more: but the Power of the Lord was mightily over
him and them all. Then he came to me again, and said; I must go along with him
to the Town; and he carried himself pretty civilly, bidding the Soldiers,
bring the rest after. As we walked, I asked him; Why they did thus? for I had
not seen so much ado a great while: and I bid him be Civil to his Neighbors,
who were peaceable. When we were come to the Town, they had us to an Inn, that
was the Jailer's House; and after a while the Major of the Town, and this
Captain, and the Lieutenant, who were Justices, came together, and Examined me;
Why I came thither to make a Disturbance? I told them, I did not come to make a
Disturbance; neither had I made any Disturbance, since I came. They said, There
was a Law, which was against the Quakers Meetings, made only against them. I
told them, I knew no such Law. Then they brought forth the Act, that was made
against Quakers and others: I told them; That was against such, as were a
Terror to the King's Subjects, and were Enemies, and held dangerous Principles
to the Government; and therefore that was not against us: for we held Truth,
and our Principles were not dangerous to the Government, and our Meetings were
peaceable, as they knew, who knew their Neighbors were a peaceable People.
They told me, I was an Enemy to the King: I told them, We loved all People, and
were Enemies to none: and that I, for my own part, had been cast into
Darby-Dungeon many years ago, about the time of Worcester-Fight, because I
would not take up Arms against him; and that I was afterward brought up by Col.
Hacker to London, as a Plotter to bring in King Charles; and was kept Prisoner
at London, till I was set at liberty by Oliver. They asked me, Whether I was
Imprisoned in the time of the Insurrection? I said, Yes, I had been Imprisoned
then, and since that also; and had been set at Liberty by the King's own
Command. So I opened the Act to them, and showed them the King's late
Declaration, and gave them the Examples of other Justices; and told them also,
what the House of Lords had said of it. I spoke also to them concerning their
own Conditions; Exhorting them to live in the Fear of God, and to be tender
toward their Neighbors, that feared God; and to mind God's Wisdom, by which
all things were made and created, that they might come to receive it, and be
ordered by it; and by it order all things to God's Glory. They demanded Bond of
us for our Appearance at the Sessions; but we pleading our Innocence, refused
to give Bond. Then they would have had us promise to come no more there: But we
kept clear of that also. When they saw, they could not bring us to their Terms;
they told us, We should see, they were civil to us: for it was the Mayor 's
Pleasure, we should all be set at liberty. I told them. Their Civility was
Noble: and so we parted.

Then leaving Tenterden, we went into Sussex, Sussex. Newick.
and came to Newick, where were some Friends, whom we visited; and from thence
passed on through the Country, visiting Friends, and having great Meetings; and
all quiet and free from Disturbance (except by some Jangling Baptists) till we
came into Hampshire: Hampshire.
Where after we had had a good Meeting at Southampton, Southampton.
Ringwood-Parish. Pulner Mo. Meeting
we went to a place called Pulner in the Parish of Ringwood, where there was to
be a Monthly Meeting next day, to which many Friends came from Southampton,
Pool, and other places; and the Weather being very hot, some of them came
pretty early in the Morning. I took a Friend, and walked out with him into the
Orchard, inquiring of him, how the Affairs of Truth stood amongst them? (For
many of them had been Convinced by me, before I was Prisoner in Cornwall.) While
we were discoursing, another Young Man came to us, and told us, the Trained
Bands were raising; and he heard, they would come, and break up the Meeting. It
was not yet Meeting-time by about three hours; and there being other Friends
walking in the Orchard also, the Friend that I was discoursing with before,
desired me to walk into a Corn-Field adjoining to the Orchard; and so we did.
After a while the Young Man, that spoke of the Trained Bands, left us, and went
away: and when he was gone a pretty way, he stood, and waved his Hat. Whereupon
I spoke to the other Young Man, that was with me, to go see, what he ailed? and
he went, but came not to me again: for the Soldiers, it seems, were come, and
were in the Orchard. And as I kept walking, I could see the Soldiers; and some
of them (as I heard afterward) did see me but had no mind to meddle. So the
Soldiers coming so long before the Meeting-time, they did not Tarry; but took,
what Friends they found at the House, and some that they met in the Lane
coming, and (...) th m away. After they were gone, and it grew toward the E
eventh Hour, Friends began to come in apace; and a large and glorious Meeting
we had: for the Everlasting Seed of God was set over all, and the People were
settled in the New Covenant of Life, upon the Foundation Christ Jesus. Toward
the latter part of the Meeting there came a Man in gay Apparel, and looked into
the Meeting, while I was declaring; and went away again presently. This Man
came with an evil Intent: for he went forthwith to Ringwood, and told the
Magistrates: They had taken two or three Men at Pulner, and had left George F^x
there preaching to two or three hundred People. Upon this (...) Magistrates
sent the Officers and Soldiers again: but the Meeting being near ended, when
that Man looked in; and he having about a Mile and an half to go with his
Information to Ringwood, to fet^h the Soldiers, and they as much to come back,
after they had received their Orders; before they could come, our Meeting was
over: ending about the third hour peaceably and orderly. After the Meeting I
spoke to the Friends of the House, where this Meeting was; (the Woman of the
House lying then dead in the House) and then some Friends had me to another
Friend's House at a little distance from the Meeting Place: where, after we had
refreshed our selves, I took Horse, 1663. Wiltshire at Frye's
having about Twenty Miles to ride that Afternoon, to one -- Frye's House in
Wiltshire, where a Meeting was appointed to be next day.

After we were gone, the Officers and Soldiers came in a great Heat: and when
they found, they were come too late, and had missed their Prey, they were much
Enraged: and the Officers were offended with the Soldiers, that they had not
seized my Horse in the Stable, the first time they came. But the Lord by his
good Providence did deliver me, and prevented them of their Mischievous Design.
For the Officers were envious Men, and had an evil Mind against Friends: but
the Lord brought his Judgments upon them; so that it was taken notice of by
their Neighbors. Example.
For whereas before they were Wealthy Men; after this their Estates wasted
away: and John Line, who was the Constable, (and who was not only very forward
in putting on the Soldiers to take Friends; but also carried those that were
taken, to Prison, and took a False Oath against them at the Assize, upon which
they were Fined, and continued Prisoners) he was a sad Spectacle to behold. For
his Flesh rotting away, while he lived, he died in a very miserable Condition,
wishing, he had never meddled with the Quakers; and confessing, that he never
prospered, since he had an hand in persecuting them: and that he thought, the
Hand of the Lord was against him for it.

At -- Frye's in Wiltshire we had a very blessed Meeting, and quiet; though the
Officers had a purpose to have broken it up, and were coming on their way in
order thereunto. But before they were got to the Meeting, Word was brought
after them, that there was an House newly broken up by Thieves; and they were
required to go back again with speed, to search after and pursue the Thieves:
by which means our Meeting escaped Disturbance, and we were delivered out of
their Hands.

We passed through Wiltshire into Dorsetshire, having large and good Meetings,
Dorsetshire.
and the Lord's Everlasting Power was with us, and carried us over all; in
which we sounded forth his saving Truth, and Word of Life, which many gladly
received. Thus traveling through the Countries, Devonshire. Topsham.
we visited Friends, till we came to Topsham in Devonshire, traveling some
Weeks Eight or Ninescore Miles a Week, and had Meetings every day. At Topsham
we met with Margaret Fell, and two of her Daughters, Sarah and Mary, and with
Leonard Fell and Thomas Salthouse. Totness. Kingsbridge. To H. Pollexfen 's.
Plymouth. Cornwall.
From thence we passed to Totness, where we visited some Friends; and then on
to Kingsbridge, and so to old Henry Pollexfen's, who had been an Ancient
Justice of Peace. There we had a large Meeting. And from thence this old
Justice passed with us to Plymouth and so into Cornwall, to one Justice
Porters; and from thence to Thomas Mount's, where we had another large Meeting.
After which we went to Humphrey Lower's, where also we had a large Meeting; and
from thence to Loveday Hamblye's, where we had a General Meeting for the whole
Country: and all was quiet.

A little before this, there had been in those parts Joseph Hellen and G.
Bewly, and they had been at Loo, to visit one Blanch Pope, a Ranting Woman,
under pretense to Convince and Convert her; but before they came from her, she
had so darkened them with her Principles, that they seemed to be like her
Disciples, especially Joseph Hellen. 1663. Cornwall.
For she had asked them, Who made the Devil? Did not God? This Idle Question so
puzzled them, that they could not Answer her. They afterward asked me that
Question; and I told them, No: for all that God made, was good, and was blessed;
so was not the Devil. And he was called a Serpent, before he was called a Devil
and an Adversary; and then he had the Title of Devil given to him: And
afterward he was called a Dragon, because he was a Destroyer. The Devil abode
not i^ the Truth; and by departing from the Truth, he became a Devil: and so
the Jews, when they went out of the Truth, were said to be of the Devil; and
were called Serpents. Now, there is no Promise of God to the Devil, that ever
he shall return into Truth again: but to Man and Woman, who have been deceived
by him, the Promise of God is, that The Seed of the Woman shall bruise the
Serpent's Head; shall break his Power and Strength to pieces. Now, when these
things were opened more at large to the satisfaction of Friends; those Two, who
had let up the Spirit of that Ranting Woman, were judged by the Truth: and one
of them, viz. Joseph Hellen, run quite out from Truth, and was denied by
Friends: But George Bewly was recovered; and came afterward to be serviceable
to Truth.

We passed from Loveday Hambley's to Francis Hodges, Falmouth. Penryn. Helstone.
near Falmouth and Penryn, where we had a large Meeting; and from thence we
went to Helstone that Night, where some Friends came to visit us: and the next
day we passed to Thomas Teage's, where we had another large Meeting, at which
many were Convinced: for I was led to open the state of the Church in the
Primitive Times, and the state of the Church in the Wilderness, and the state
of the False Church, that was got up since; and to show, that now the
Everlasting Gospel was preached again over the Head of the Whore, Beast and
false Prophets, and Antichrists, which had got up since the Apostles days: and
now the Everlasting Gospel was received and receiving, which brought Life and
Immortality to Light; that they might see over the Devil, that had darkened
them. And the People received the Gospel and the Word of Life gladly, and a
glorious, blessed Meeting we had for the exalting the Lord's everlasting Truth,
and his Name. After the Meeting was done, I walked out; and as I was coming in
again, I heard a Noise in the Court: and coming nearer, I found the Man of the
House speaking to the Tinners, and others of the World's People, and telling
them; It was the Everlasting Truth, that had been declared there that day: and
the People generally confessed to it.

From thence we passed to the Land's End, to John Ellis's house, Lands End
where we had a precious Meeting: and there was a Fisherman, one Nicholas Jose,
that was Convinced; and he spoke in Meetings, and declared the Truth amongst
the People: and the Lord's Power was over all. I was glad, that the Lord had
raised up his Standard in those dark parts of the Nation, where since there is
a fine Meeting of honest-hearted Friends; and many there are come to sit under
Christ's Teaching: and a great People the Lord will have in that Country.

From thence we returned to Redruth; and the next day to Truro, Redruth. Truro.
where we had a Meeting. Next Morning some of the Chief of the Town desired to
speak with me, and I went to them; amongst whom was Col. Rouse. 1663. Truro.
A great deal of Discourse I had with them concerning the things of God; and in
their Reasoning they said, The Gospel was the Four Books of Matthew, Mark, Luke
and John; and they called it Natural. But I told them, the Gospel was the Power
of God; which was preached, before Matthew, Mark, Luke and John or any of them
were printed or written: And it was preached to Every Creature, (of which a
great part might never see nor hear of those Four Books;) so that Every
Creature was to obey the Power of God: for Christ, the Spiritual Man, would
Judge the World according to the Gospel, that is, according to his Invisible
Power. When they heard this, they could not gainsay; for the Truth came over
them. So I directed them to their Teacher, the Grace of God, and showed them
the Sufficiency of it; which would teach them how to live, and what to deny;
and being obeyed, would bring them their Salvation. And so to that Grace I
recommended them, and left them.

Then returned we through the Country, visiting Friends, and had Meetings at
Humphrey Lower's again, and at Thomas Mount's. And afterward at George Hawkins
at Stoke we had a large Meeting, Stoke.
to which Friends came from Lanceston, and several other places; and a living,
precious Meeting it was, in which the Lord's Presence and Power was richly
manifested amongst us: and I left Friends there under the Lord Jesus Christ's
Teaching.

Example.
In Cornwall I was Informed, that there was one Col. Robinson, a very wicked
Man, who after the King came in, was made a Justice of the Peace, and became a
Cruel Persecutor of our Friends; of whom he sent many to Prison. And hearing,
that they had some little Liberty, through the Favor of the Jailer, to come
home sometimes, to visit their Wives and Children, he made a great Complaint
thereof to the Judge at the Assize against the Jailer: Whereupon the Jailer was
fined an Hundred Marks, and Friends were kept very strictly up for a while.
After he was come home from the Assize, he sent to a Neighboring Justice, to
desire them to go a Fanatick-hunting with him. So on the Day, that he intended
and was prepared to go a Fanatick-hunting, he sent his Man about with his
Horses, and walked himself on Foot from his Dwelling House to a Tenement, that
he had, where his Cows and Dairy were kept, and where his Servants were then
milking. When he came there, he asked for his Bull; and the Maidservants said,
They had shut him into the Field, because he was Unruly amongst the Kine, and
hindered their Milking. Then went he into the Field to his Bull; and having
formerly accustomed himself to play with the Bull, he began to fence at him
with his Staff, as he used to do. But the Bull snufft at him, and passed a
little back; and then turning upon him again, ran fiercely at him, and struck
his Horn into his Thigh, and heaving him upon his Horn, threw him over his
Back, and so tore up his Thigh to his Belly. And when he came to the Ground
again, he gored him with his Horns, and would run them into the Ground in his
Rage and Violence; and roared, and licked up his Master's Blood. The
Maidservant hearing her Master Cry out, came running into the Field, and came
to the Bull, and took him by the Horns, to pull him off from her Master. The
Bull, without hurting her, put her gently by with his Horns; but still fell to
goring of him, 1663. Cornwall.
and licking up his Blood. Then she ran, and got some Workmen, that were at
Work not far off, to come in and rescue her Master: but they could not at all
beat off the Bull, till they brought Mastiff-Dogs to set on him; and then the
Bull fled in a great Rage and Fury. Upon notice of it his Sister came, and said
to him; Alack Brother, what a heavy Judgment is this, that is befallen you! And
he Answered, Ah, Sister, It is an heavy Judgment indeed: Pray let the Bull be
killed, and the Flesh given to the Poor, said he. So they carried him home; but
he died soon after. And the Bull was grown so fierce, that they were forced to
shoot him with Guns: for no Man durst come near him, to kill him. Thus does the
Lord sometimes make some Examples of his just Judgment upon the Persecutors of
his People, that others may fear, and learn to beware.

Now after I had cleared my self of Cornwall, and Thomas Lower (who had rid
with us from Meeting to Meeting through that County) had brought us over
Horse-bridge into Devonshire again, Horse-bridge. Devonshire
we took our leave of him. And Thomas Briggs, Robert Widders and I came through
the Country to Tiverton: and it being their Fair, Tiverton.
and many Friends there, we had a Meeting amongst them; and the Magistrates
gathered in the Street, but the Lord's Power stopped them: I saw them in the
Street over against the Door; but they had not Power to come in to meddle with
us, though they had Will enough to have done it.

After the Meeting was done, Collumpton. Wellington.
we passed to Collumpton and to Wellington: For we had appointed a Meeting Five
Miles off; where we had a large Meeting at a Butcher's House, and a blessed
Meeting it was: for the People were directed to their Teacher, the Grace of
God, which would bring them Salvation; and many were settled under it is
Teaching: and the Lord's Presence was amongst us, and we were refreshed in him,
in whom we labored and traveled; and the Meeting was quiet. There had been
very great Persecution in that Country, and in that Town a little before,
insomuch that some Friends questioned the Peaceableness of our Meeting; but the
Lord's Power chained all, and his Glory shined over all. The Friends told us,
how they had broken up their Meetings by Warrants from the Justices, and how by
their Warrants they were required to carry Friends before the Justices; and
Friends bid them, Carry them then. The Officers told Friends, they must Go: but
Friends said Nay, that was not according to their Warrants, which required them
to Carry them. Then they were fain to hire Carts and Wagons, and Horses, and to
lift Friends up into their Wagons and Carts, to carry them before a Justice.
And when they came to a Justice's House, sometimes he happened to be from home:
and if he were a Moderate Man, he would get out of the way; and then they were
forced to Carry them before another: So that they were Many Days Carting and
Carrying Friends up and down from place to place. And when afterward the
Officers came to lay their Charges for this upon the Town, the Town's People
would not pay it; but made them bear it themselves: and that brake the Neck of
their Persecution there for that time. The like was done in several other
places, till the Officers had shamed and tired themselves; and then were fain
to give over.

At one place they warned Friends to come to the Steeple-house; 1663.
Wellington.
and the Friends met together to consider of it; and had freedom to go to the
Steeple-house, and Meet together there. Accordingly when they came thither,
they sat down together, to Wait upon the Lord in his Power and Spirit, and
minded the Lord Jesus Christ, their Teacher and Savior; but did not mind the
Priest. When the Officers saw that, they came to them to put them out of the
Steeple-house again; but the Friends told them, it was not time for them to
break up their Meeting yet. A while after, when the Priest had done his Stuff,
they came to the Friends again, and would have had them go home to Dinner; but
the Friends told them: They did not use to go to Dinner; but were feeding upon
the Bread of Life. So there they sat, Waiting upon the Lord, and enjoying his
Power and Presence, till they found Freedom in themselves to depart. Thus the
Priest's People were offended, because they could not get them to the
Steeple-house: and when they were there, they were offended, because they could
not get them out again.

Taunton.
From the Meeting near Collumpton we went to Taunton, where we had a large
Meeting; and the next day we came to a General Meeting in Somersetshire,
Somersetshire.
which was very large; and the Lord's everlasting Word of Life and Truth was
largely declared, and the People were refreshed thereby, and settled upon
Christ their Rock and Foundation, and brought to sit under his Teaching: and
the Meeting was peaceable. But about the Second Hour in the Night there came a
Company of Men about the House, and knocked at the Door, and bid, Open the
Door, or they would break it open; for they wanted a Man, that they came to
search the House for. I heard the Noise, and got up; and at the Window saw a
Man at the Door with his Sword by his Side, When they had let him in, he came
into the Chamber, where I was, and looked on me, and said; You are not the Man
I look for: and so went his way.

Street. Puddimore.
We came from thence to Street, and so to Puddimore to William Beaton's, where
we had a very large General Meeting; wherein the Lord's everlasting Truth was
declared, and the People refreshed thereby, and all quiet. From thence we went
to John Dandy's, where we had another large and very precious Meeting; and then
passed on to Bristol, Bristol.
where we had good Service for the Lord, and all quiet. Here we met with
Margaret Fell and her Daughters again. And after some time we went to
Slattenford in Wiltshire, Wiltshire. Slattenford.
where was a very large Meeting in a great Barn; and good Service we had there:
for the Truth, as it is in Jesus, was published amongst them, and many were
gathered by it into the Name of the Lord.

Gloucestershire. Herefordshire. Hereford.
After this I passed into Gloucestershire and Herefordshire, having large
Meetings in each. In Hereford I had a Meeting in the Inn; and after the Meeting
was over, and I was gone, the Magistrates hearing, there had been a Meeting,
came to search the Inn for me; and were vexed, that they had missed of me. But
the Lord so ordered it, that I escaped their Snare; and Friends were
established upon Christ their Foundation, and the Rock of Ages.

Then went I into Wales, into Radnorshire, 1663. WALES. Radnorshire. At a
Market Town toward ENGLAND.
and had several precious Meetings there: and the Lord's Name and Standard was
set up, and many were gathered to it; and are settled under the Teaching of
Christ Jesus, their Savior, who has bought them.

After I was clear of Wales, I turned toward England again, and came to a
Market Town betwixt England and Wales, where was a great Fair that day: and
several Friends being at the Fair, we went to an Inn, and Friends came to us.
And after we had had a fine Opportunity with Friends, we parted from them, and
went on our way. The Officers of the Town took notice (it seems) of our being
there, and Friends gathering together to us; and they began also to get
together to Consult among themselves, how to ensnare us, though it was the
Fair-time: but before they could do any thing, we were gone on our Journey, and
so escaped them.

From thence we came into Shropshire, Shropshire.
where we had a large and precious Meeting: And after we had had many Meetings
in those parts, we came into Warwickshire, and visited Friends there:
Warwickshire. Darbyshire. Staffordshire. White-Haugh. At Captain Lingard 's.
and so came into Darbyshire and Staffordshire, visiting Friends Meetings as we
went. At a place called White-Haugh we had a large blessed Meeting, and quiet:
And after the Meeting was done, we took Horse, and rode about Twenty Miles that
Night to one Captain Lingard's. We heard afterward, that when we were gone,
the Officers came to have seized on us; and were much disturbed, that they mist
us: but the Lord disappointed them, and delivered us out of their wicked Hands;
and Friends were joyful in the Lord, that we escaped them.

At Captain Lingard's we had a blessed Meeting, the Lord's Presence being
wonderfully amongst us. After this Meeting we passed through the Peak-Country
in Darbyshire; Darbyshire. Peak- Country. Sunderhil-Green.
and after we had been at a Friend's House there, we went on to
Sunderhill-Green, where we had a large Meeting. Here John Whitehead came to me,
and several other Friends; and then I passed through the Country, visiting
Friends, till I came into Holderness. We went to the farther End of Holderness,
Holderness Scarborough. Whitby. Malton.
and so passed down by Scarborough and Whitby, and near Malton, and then to
York, having many Meetings in the way, and the Lord's everlasting Power was
over all.

At York I heard of a Plot: York.
whereupon I was moved to declare against all Plots and Plotters, both in
public and private; and also to give forth a Paper against Plotting; of which
a Copy here follows:

ALL Friends every where: Keep out of Plots and Buslings, and the Arm of Flesh;
for all that is among Adam's Sons in the Fall, where they are destroying Men's
Lives like Dogs and Beasts, and Swine; Goring, rending, biting and destroying
one another, and wrestling with Flesh and Blood. From whence rises Wars and
Killings, but from the Lusts? And all this is in Adam in the Fall, out of Adam,
that never fell; in whom there is Peace and Life. And ye are called to Peace,
therefore follow it; and Christ is that Peace: for all that pretend to Fight
for Christ, they are deceived; and are in Adam, in the Fall; for Christ's
Kingdom is not of this World, therefore his Servants do not Fight. Therefore
Fighters are not of Christ's Kingdom, and are without Christ's Kingdom; for his
Kingdom stands in Peace and Righteousness. 1663. York.
And so Fighters are in the Lust: and all that would destroy Men's Lives, are
not of Christ's Mind, who comes to save Men's Lives. Christ's Kingdom is not of
this World, it is peaceable; and all that be in Strifes, are not of his
Kingdom; nor any such, as pretend to Fight for the Gospel. The Gospel is the
Power of God, which was, before the Devil or Fall of Man was, or Fighters
either; which is the Gospel of Peace: and they that pretend to Fighting, and
talk so for Fighting, are Ignorant of the Gospel of Peace. And all that talk of
Fighting for Sion, are in Darkness; for Sion needs no such Helpers: And all
such as profess themselves to be Ministers of Christ and Christians, and to
beat down the Whore with outward Carnal Weapons; the Flesh and the Whore are
got up in themselves, in a blind Zeal. That which beats down the Whore, which
got up by the Inward Ravening from the Spirit of God, the Beating down of the
Whore, must be by the Inward Rising of the Sword of the Spirit within. All
such, as pretend Christ Jesus, and Confess him, and run into Carnal Weapons,
wrestling with Flesh and Blood, throw away the Spiritual: That are Wrestlers
with Flesh and Blood, they throw away Christ's Doctrine, and Flesh is got up in
them; and they are weary of their Sufferings. And such as would Revenge
themselves, be out of Christ's Doctrine: and such as would be stricken on the
one Cheek, and would not turn the other, be out of Christ's Doctrine: and such
as do not love one another, and Love Enemies, be out of Christ's Doctrine. And
therefore you, that be Heirs of the Blessings of God; (which was before the
Curse and the Fall was) come to Inherit your Portions. And you that be Heirs of
the Gospel of Peace, before the Devil was, live in the Gospel of Peace, seeking
the Peace of all Men, and the Good of all Men. And Live in Christ, which comes
to save Men's Lives, out of Adam in the Fall, where they destroy Men's Lives,
and live not in him. For the Jews Sword outwardly, by which they cut down the
Heathen, was a Type of the Spirit of God within, which Cuts down the Heathenish
Nature within: So live in the Peaceable Kingdom of Christ Jesus, and in the
Peace of God; and not in the Lusts, from whence Wars arise. And Live in Christ
the Way of God, who is the Second Adam, who never fell; and live not in Adam in
the Fall, in the Destruction, where they destroy one another: Therefore come
out of Adam in the Fall, into that Adam that never fell; and so live in Love
and Peace with all Men. And keep out of all the Buslings in the World, and
meddle not with the Powers of the Earth; but mind the Kingdom, and the way of
Peace. You that be Heirs of Grace, and Heirs of the Kingdom, and Heirs of the
Gospel, and Heirs of Salvation, and Saints of the Most-High, and Children of
God, whose Conversations are in Heaven, that is above the Combustions of the
Earth, let your Conversations preach to all Men, and your Innocent Lives; that
they beholding your Godly Conversation, may glorify your Father, which is in
Heaven. And all Friends every where, this I charge you, which is the Word of
the Lord God unto you all, Live in Peace in Christ, the way of Peace, in which
seek the Peace of all Men, and no Man's Hurt; as I said before. In Adam in the
Fall is no Peace; but in Adam out of the Fall, in him is the Peace: So you
being in Adam, that never fell; it is Love, that overcomes the Evil, and not
Hatred with Hatred, nor Strife with Strife. And therefore Live in the Peaceable
Life, doing Good to all Men, and seeking the Good and Welfare of all Men.

Let this go among Friends every where. G. F.

We went from York to Burrowbridge, Burrowbridge.
where I had a glorious Meeting. Thence we passed into the Bishopric, to one
Richmond's, where there was a General Meeting: and the Lord's Power was over
all; Bishopric of Durham
though People were grown exceeding Rude about this time. After the Meetting we
went to Henry Draper's, where we stayed all Night: and the next Morning a
Friend came to me, as I was passing away, and told me; If the Priests and
Justices (for many Priests were made Justices in that Country at that time)
could light on me, they would Destroy me.

But I being clear of the Bishopric, Stainmoor Yorkshire. Sedberg.
Westmoreland. Lancashire Swarthmore. Arnside.
went over Stainmoore into part of Yorkshire, and to Sedberg; where having
visited Friends, I went into Westmorland, visiting Friends there also. From
thence I passed into Lancashire, and came to Swarthmore, where I staid but a
little while, before I went over the Sands to Arnside; where I had a General
Meeting. After that Meeting was ended, there came some Men to have broken it
up; but understanding, before they got thither, that the Meeting was over, they
turned back. I went to Robert Widder's, and from thence to Vnderbarrow,
Underbarrow.
where I had a glorious Meeting; and the Lord's Power was set over all. From
thence I passed to Grayrigge: and having visited Friends there, I went to Ann
Audland's; Grayrigge
where they would have had me to have staid their Meeting the next day: but I
felt a stop in my Spirit, and it was upon me to go to John Blaykling's in
Sedberg, and to be next day at the Meeting there; Sedberg.
which is large, and a precious People there is. So we had a very good Meeting
next day at Sedberg; but the Constables went to Ann Audland's to their Meeting,
to look for me. Thus by the good Hand and Disposing Providence of the Lord I
escaped their Snare.

I went from John Blaykling's with Leonard Fell to Strickland-head,
Strickland-head.
where on the First Day we had a very precious Meeting on the Common. That
Night we staid amongst Friends there; and the next day passed into
Northumberland. Northumberland.
After the Justices had heard of this Meeting at Strickland-head, they made
Search for me: but by the good hand of the Lord I escaped them again; though
there were some very wicked Justices. We went to Hugh Hutchinson's House in
Northumberland (a Friend in the Ministry) from whence we visited Friends
thereabouts; and then went to Darwin-Water, Darwin-water.
where we had a very glorious Meeting. There came an Ancient Woman to me, and
told me, her Husband remembered his Love to me; and she said, I might call him
to mind by this Token, that I used to call him, the Tall White Old Man. She
said, he was Six score and two Years old; and that he would have come to the
Meeting, but that his Horses were all employed upon some urgent Occasion. I
heard, he lived some Years after.

1663. Darwinwater. Cumberland.
Now when I had visited Friends in those parts, and they were settled upon
Christ, their Foundation, their Rock and their Teacher; I passed through
Northumberland, and came into Cumberland to old Thomas Bewley's. And Friends
came about me, and said, Would I come there, to go into Prison! For there was
great Persecution in that Country at that time: Yet I had a General Meeting at
Thomas Bewley's, which was large and precious: and the Lord's Power was over
all.

One Musgrave was at that time Deputy Governor of Carlisle, and I passing
along the Country, came to a Man's House, that had been Convinced, whose Name
was Fletcher; and he told me, If Musgrave knew, that I was there, he would be
sure to send me to Prison; he was such a severe Man. But I staid not there;
only called on the way to see this Man: Wigton.
and then went on to one William Pearson's near Wigton, where the Meeting was;
which was very large and precious Some Friends were then Prisoners at Carlisle;
whom I visited by* Letter, which Leonard Fell carried. From William Pearson's I
passed through the Countries, Pardsey-Crag.
visiting Friends, till I came to Pardsey-Crag, where we had a General Meeting,
which was large; and all was quiet and peaceable, and the glorious, powerful
Presence of the Everlasting God was with us.

So eager were the Magistrates about this time to stir up Persecution in those
parts, that they offered some Five Shillings, some a Noble a day, to any that
could apprehend the Speakers amongst the Quakers: but it being now the time of
the Quarter Sessions in that County, the Men, who were so hired, were gone to
the Sessions, to see to get their Wages; and so all our Meetings were at that
time quiet.

Westmoreland. Keswick.
From Pardsey-Crag we went into Westmorland; calling in the way upon Hugh
Tickell near Keswick, and upon Thomas Laythes, where Friends came to visit us:
and we had a fine opportunity to be refreshed together. At Fr. Benson 's.
We went that Night to one Francis Benson's in Westmorland, near Justice
Fleming's House. This Justice Fleming was at that time in a great Rage against
Friends, and me in particular; insomuch that in the open Sessions at Kendal
just before, he had bid Five Pounds to any Man, that should take me; that
Friend Francis Benson told me. And it seems, as I went to this Friend's House,
I met one Man coming from the Sessions, that had this Five Pounds offered him
to take me, and he knew me; for as I passed by him, he said to his Companion,
That is George Fox: Yet he had not Power to touch me; for the Lord's Power
preserved me over them all. And the Justices being so eager to have me; and I
being so often nigh them, and yet they missing me, it tormented them the more.

Lancashire. Cartmel.
I went from thence to James Taylor's at Cartmel in Lancashire, where I staid
the First Day, and had a precious Meeting; and after the Meeting was done, I
came over the Sands to Swarthmore.

Swarthmore.
When I came there, they told me, Col. Kirby had sent his Lieutenant thither to
search for me; and that he had searched Trunks and Chests for me. That Night,
as I was in Bed, I was moved of the Lord to go next day to Kirby-Hall,
Kirby-Hall
which was Col. Kirby's House, about Five Miles off, to speak with him; and I
did so. When I came thither, I found there the Flemmings, and several others of
the Gentry (so called) of the Country, who were come to take their Leave of
Col. Kirby, he being then to go up to London to the Parliament. 1663.
Kirby-Hall.
I was had into the Parlour amongst them; but Col. Kirby was not then within,
being gone forth a little way: So they said little to me, nor I much to them.
But after a little while Col. Kirby came in; and then I spoke to him, and told
him; I came to Visit him, understanding, that he would have seen me; and to
know, what he had to say to me, and whether he had any thing against me? He
said before all the Company; As he was a Gentleman, he had nothing against me.
But, said he, Mistress Fell must not keep great Meetings at her House; for they
meet contrary to the Act. I told him; That Act did not take hold on us, but on
such as did Meet to Plot and Contrive, and to raise Insurrections against the
King; whereas we were no such People: for he knew, that they, that met at
Margaret Fell's House, were his Neighbors, and a Peaceable People. After many
Words had passed, he shook me by the hand, and said again, He had nothing
against me; and others of them said, I was a deserving Man. So we parted, and I
returned to Swarthmore.

Shortly after, when Col. Kirby was gone to London, Swarthmore.
there was a private Meeting of the Justices and Deputy Lieutenants at
Houlker-Hall, where Justice Preston lived; and there they granted forth a
Warrant to Apprehend me. I heard over Night both of their Meeting, and of the
Warrant; and so could have gone away, and got out of their reach, if I would:
for I had not appointed any Meeting at that time; and I had cleared my self of
the North; and the Lord's Power was over all. But I considered, there being a
Noise of a Plot in the North, if I should go away, they might fall upon poor
Friends; but if I gave up my self to be Taken, it might stop them and Friends
should escape the better. So I gave up my self to be Taken, and prepared my
self against they came. Next Day an Officer came with his Sword and Pistols, to
Take me: I told him, I knew his Errand before, and had given up my self to be
Taken; for if I would have escaped their Imprisonment, I could have been gone
Forty Miles off, before he came: but I was an Innocent Man. and so mattered
not, what they could do to me. He asked me, How I heard of it, seeing the Order
was made privately in a Parlour? I said, it was no matter for that; it was
sufficient, that I heard of it. Then I asked him to let me see his Order;
whereupon He laid his Hand on his Sword, and said, I must go with him before
the Lieutenants, to answer such Questions, as they should propound to me. I
told him, It was but civil and reasonable for him to let me see his Order; but
he would not. Then said I, I am ready. So I went along with him; and Margaret
Fell went with us to Houlker-Hall. And when we came thither, Houlker-Hall.
there was one Rawlinson, called a Justice, and one called Sir George
Middleton, and many more, that I did not know; besides Old Justice Preston, who
lived there. They brought one Thomas Atkinson, a Friend of Cartmel, as a
Witness against me, for some Words which he had told to one Knipe, who had
Informed them; which Words were; That I had written against the Plotters, and
had knocked them down: Which Words they could not make much of; for I told them.
I had heard of a Plot, and had written against it. Then Old Preston asked me,
Whether I had an hand in that Script? I asked him what he meant? He said, in
the Battledoor? I answered, Yes. Then he asked me, Whether I did understand
Languages? I said, Sufficient for my self: and that I knew no Law, that was
transgressed by it. I told them also, That to understand those outward
Languages, was no matter of Salvation: for the many Tongues began but at the
Confusion of Babel: And if I did understand any thing of them, I Judged and
knocked them down again, for any matter of Salvation, that was in them.
Thereupon he turned away, and said, George Fox knocks down all the Languages:
Come, said he, we will examine you of higher matters.

Then said George Middleton, You deny God, and the Church, and the true Faith.
I replied, Nay: I own God, and the true Church, and the true Faith. But what
Church do thou own, said I? (for I understood, he was a Papist.) Then he
turned again, and said, You are a Rebel, and a Traitor. I asked him, Whom he
spoke to? or whom did he call Rebel? He was so full of Envy, that for a while
he could not speak; but at last he said, He spoke it to me. With that I struck
my Hand on the Table, and told him; I had suffered more than Twenty such as he,
or than any that was there: for I had been cast into Darby-Dungeon for Six
Months together; and had suffered much, because I would not take up Arms
against this King before Worcester-Fight: And I had been sent up Prisoner out
of my own Country by Col. Hacker to O. Cromwell, as a Plotter to bring in King
Charles, in the Year 1654; and I had nothing but Love and Good Will to the
King, and desired the Eternal Good and Welfare of him and all his Subjects. Did
you ever hear the like, said Middleton? 'Nay, said I, ye may hear it again, if
ye will. For ye talk of the King, a Company of you; but where were ye in
Oliver's days? and what did ye do then for him? But I have more Love to the
King for his Eternal Good and Welfare, than any of you have.

Then they asked me, Whether I had heard of the Plot? And I said, Yes, I had
heard of it. They asked me, How I had heard of it? and whom I knew in it? I
told them, I had heard of it through the High Sheriff of Yorkshire, who had
told Dr. Hodgson, That there was a Plot in the North; and that was the way I
heard of it: But I never heard of any such thing in the South; nor till I came
into the North. And as for knowing any in the Plot, I was as a Child in that;
for I knew none of them. Then said they; Why would you Write against it, if you
did not know some, that were in it? I said, My Reason was, Because you are so
forward to mash the Innocent and Guilty together; therefore I writ against it
to clear the Truth from such things, and to stop all forward, foolish Spirits,
from running into such things. And I sent Copies of it into Westmorland,
Cumberland, Bishopric and Yorkshire, and to you here: And I sent another Copy
of it to the King, and his Council; and it is like, it may be in Print by this
time. One of them said, O! this Man has great Power! I said, Yes, I had Power
to write against Plotters. Then said one of them: You are against the Laws of
the Land. I answered, Nay; for I and my Friends direct all the People to the
Spirit of God in them, to mortify the Deeds of the Flesh: This brings them
into the Well-doing, and from that which the Magistrate's Sword is against;
which eases the Magistrates, who are for the Punishment of the Evildoers. So
People being turned to the Spirit of God, which brings them to mortify the
Deeds of the Flesh, this brings them from under the occasion of the
Magistrate's Sword; and this must needs be one with Magistracy, and one with
the Law, which was added, because o^ Transgression, and is for the Praise of
them that do well. So in this we establish the Law, and are an Ease to the
Magistrates; and are not against, but stand for all Good Government.

Then Geo Middleton cried, Bring the Book, and put the Oaths of Allegiance and
Supremacy to him. Now he himself being a Papist, I asked him, Whether he had
taken the Oath of Supremacy, who was a Swearer? But as for us, we could not
Swear at all, because Christ and the Apostle had forbidden it. Some of them
would not have had the Oath put to me; but have let me have my Liberty: but the
rest would not agree to that: For this was their last Snare, and they had no
other way to get me into Prison; for all other things had been cleared to them.
But this was like the Papists Sacrament of the Altar, by which they ensnared
the Martyrs. So they tendered me the Oath, and I could not take it: Whereupon
they were about to make my Mittimus, to send me to Lancaster-Jail: But
considering together of it, they only engaged me to Appear at the Sessions; and
so for that time dismissed me. Then I went back with Margaret Fell to Swarthmore:
and soon after there came Col. West to see me; Swarthmore.
who was at that time a Justice of the Peace. He told us, He told some of the
rest of the Justices, that he would come over to see me and Margaret Fell; but
it may be, said he to them, some of you will take Offense at it. I asked him,
What he thought, they would do with me at the Sessions? And he said, They would
tender the Oath to me again.

Now whilst I was at Swarthmore, there came William Kirby into
Swarthmore-Meeting, and brought the Constables with him. I was sitting with
Friends in the Meeting, and he said to me; How now, Mr. Fox! you have a fine
Company here. Yes, said I, we do meet to Wait upon the Lord. So he began to
take the Names of Friends; and them that did not readily tell him their Names,
he committed to the Constables hands, and sent some to Prison. The Constables
were unwilling to take them without a Warrant; whereupon he threatened to set
them by the Heels: But the Constable told him; He could keep them in his
Presence; but after he was gone, he could not keep them without a Warrant.

The Sessions now coming on, I went to Lancaster, Lancaster.
and Appeared according to my Engagement. There was upon the Bench that Justice
Flemming, that had bidden Five Pounds in Westmorland to any Man, that would
apprehend me: for he was a Justice both in Westmorland and Lancashire. There
was also Justice Spencer and Col. West, and Old Justice Rawlinson the Lawyer;
who gave the Charge, and was very Sharp against Truth and Friends: but the
Lord's Power stopped them. The Session was large, and the Concourse of People
great: Lancaster- Sessions.
and way being made, for me, I came up to the Bar, and stood there with my Hat
on; they looking earnestly upon me, and I upon them for a pretty space. Then
Proclamation being made for all to keep Silence upon pain of Imprisonment: And
all being quiet, I said twice, Peace be among you. Then spoke the Chairman,
and asked; If I knew, where I was? 1663. Lancaster- Sessions.
I said, Yes, I do; but it may be, said I, my Hat offends you: that is a low
thing, that is not the Honor, that I give to Magistrates; for the true Honor
is from Above, which, said I, I have received; and I hope, it is not the Hat,
which ye look upon to be the Honor. The Chairman said, They looked for the
Hat too; and asked. Wherein I showed my Respect to Magistrates, if I did not
put off my Hat? I replied; In coming, when they called me. Then they bid one,
Take off my Hat. After which it was some time, before they spoke to me; and I
felt the Power of the Lord to arise. After some pause, old Justice Rawlinson
(the Chairman) asked me. If I did know of the Plot? I told him, I had heard of
it in Yorkshire by a Friend, that had it from the High Sheriff. Then they asked
me, Whether I had declared it to the Magistrates? I said, I had sent Papers
abroad against Plots and Plotters: and also to you, as soon as I came into the
Country, to take all Jealousies out of your Minds concerning me and my Friends:
For it was and is our Principle, to declare against such things. They asked me
then, If I knew not of an Act against Meetings? I said, I knew, there was an
Act, that took hold of such as met to the terrifying of the King's Subjects,
and were Enemies to the King, and held dangerous Principles; but I hoped, they
did not look upon us to be such Men: for our Meetings were not to terrify the
King's Subjects, neither are we Enemies to him, or any Man. Then they tendered
me the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. I told them, I could not take any
Oath at all, because Christ and his Apostle had forbid it: And they had had
sufficient Experience of Swearers, (I told them) first one way, then another;
but I had never taken any Oath in my Life. Then Rawlinson the Lawyer asked me,
Whether I held, it was unlawful to Swear? This Question he put on purpose to
ensnare me; for by an Act that was made, such were liable to Banishment, or a
great Fine, that should say, it was Unlawful to Swear. But I seeing the Snare,
avoided it; and told him, That in the time of the Law, amongst the Jews, before
Christ came, the Law commanded them to Swear: but Christ, who does fulfill the
Law, in his Gospel-time commands, not to swear at all; and the Apostle James
forbids Swearing, even to them that were Jews, and that had the Law of God. So
after much other Discourse had passed, they called for the Jailer, G. F.
committed to Prison.
and committed me to Prison. I had about me that Paper, which I had written as
a Testimony against Plots, which I desired they would read, or suffer to be
read in open Court; but they would not. So I being Committed for refusing to
Swear, I bid them and all the People take notice, that I suffered for the
Doctrine of Christ, and for my Obedience to his Command. Afterward I
understood, the Justices did say, that they had private Instructions from Col.
Kirby to prosecute me, notwithstanding his fair Carriage and seeming Kindness
to me before, when he declared before many of them, That he had nothing against
me. There were several Friends besides Committed to Prison, some for Meeting to
Worship God, and so^^e for not Swearing; so that the Prison was very full. And
many of them being poor Men, that had nothing to maintain their Families by,
but their Labor, which now they were taken off from; several of their Wives
went to the Justices, that had committed their Husbands to Jail, and told them.
1663. Lancaster- Prison.
If they kept their Husband's in Jail, for nothing but the Truth of Christ, and
for good Conscience Sake, they would bring their Children t them, to be
maintained. A mighty Power of the Lord rose in Friends, and gave them great
Boldness; so that they spoke much to the Justices: Friends also, that were
Prisoners, writ unto the Justices, laying the Weight of their Sufferings upon
them; and showing them both their Injustice, and want of Pity and Compassion
toward their poor Neighbors, whom they knew to be honest, conscientious and
peaceable People, that in tenderness of Conscience could not take any Oath; yet
they sent them to Prison, for refusing to take the Oath of Allegiance. Though
several of them, who were Imprisoned on that Account, were known to be Men,
that had served the King in his Wars, and had hazarded their Lives in the Field
in his Cause, and had suffered great Hardships, with the loss of much Blood for
him; and had always stood faithful to him from First to Last, and had never
received any Pay for their Service: and to be thus requited for all their
Faithful Services and Sufferings, and that by them, that pretended to be the
King's Friends, was hard, unkind and ungrateful Dealing. At length the
Justices, being continually attended with Complaints of Grievances, released
some of the Friends, that were Prisoners, but kept diverse of them still in
Prison.

Amongst those that were then in Prison, there were Four Friends Prisoners for
Tithes, who were sent to Prison at the Suit of the Countess of Derby (so
called) and had lain there then near Two Years and an half. One of these, whose
Name was Oliver Atherton, being a Man of a Weakly Constitution, was through his
long and hard Imprisonment in a cold, raw, unwholsom place, brought so low and
weak in his Body, that there appeared no hopes of his Recovery, or Life, unless
he might be removed from thence. Wherefore a Letter was written on behalf of
the said Oliver Atherton to the said Countess, and sent by his Son Godfrey
Atherton, wherein was laid before her the Reasons, why he, and the rest, could
not pay Tithes; because if they did, they should deny Christ come in the Flesh,
who by his coming had put an end to Tithes, and to the Priesthood, to which
they had been given, and to the Commandment, by which they had been paid under
the Law. And his Weak Condition of Body was also laid before her, and the
apparent likelihood of his Death, if she did continue to hold him there: that
she might be moved to Pity and Compassion; and also warned, not to draw the
Guilt of his Innocent Blood upon her self. But when his Son went to her with
his Father's Letter, a Servant of hers abused him; and plucked off his Cap, and
threw it away, and put him out of the Gate. Nevertheless the Letter was
delivered into her own hand; but she shut out all Pity and Tenderness, and
continued him in Prison, till Death. So when his Son came back to his Father in
Prison, and told him, as he lay on his Dying-Bed, that the Countess denied his
Liberty, he only said: She has been the Cause of shedding much Blood; but this
will be the heaviest Blood, that ever she spilt: and soon after he died. Then
Friends having his Body delivered to them to bury, as they carried it from the
Prison to Ormskirk, the Parish, wherein he had lived, they stuck up Papers upon
the Crosses at Garstang, Preston, and other Towns, through which they passed,
with this Inscription:

This is Oliver Atherton of Ormskirk-Parish, persecuted to Death by the
Countess of Derby for good Conscience sake toward God and Christ, because he
could not give her Tithes, etc.

Setting forth at large the Reasons of his refusing to pay Tithes, the Length
of his Imprisonment, the Hardships he underwent, her hard-heartedness toward
him, and the manner of his Death. After his Death, Richard Cubban, another of
the said Countess her Prisoners for Tithe, writ a large Letter to her, on
behalf of himself, and his other Fellow Prisoners at her Suit; laying their
Innocence before her: And that it was not out of Wilfulness, Stubbornness or
Covetousness, that they refused to pay her Tithes; but purely in good
Conscience toward God and Christ: and letting her know, that if she should be
suffered to keep them there, till they every one died there, as she had done
their Fellow-Sufferer, Oliver Atherton; yet they could not yield to pay her.
And therefore desired her to consider their Case in a Christian Spirit, and not
bring their Blood upon her self also. But she would not show any Pity or
Compassion toward them, who had now suffered hard Imprisonment about two Years
and an half under her; but instead thereof she sent to the Town of Garstang,
and threatened to complain to the King and Council, and bring them into trouble,
for suffering the Paper concerning Oliver Atherton 's Death to be stuck upon
their Cross. The Rage, that she expressed, made the People take the more notice
of it; and some of them said, The Quakers had given her a Bone to pick. But
she, that regarded not the Life of an Innocent Sufferer for Christ, lived not
long after her self: For That day three Weeks, that Oliver Atherton 's Body was
carried through Ormskirk to be buried, she died; and her Body was carried dead
that day Seven Weeks through the same Town to her Burying Place. And thus the
Lord pursued the hard-hearted Persecutor.

Lancaster- Assize.
As for me, I was kept to the Assize: and then Judge Turner and Judge Twisden
coming that Circuit, I was brought before Judge Twisden, on the 14th day of the
Month called March, in the latter end of the Year 1663. When I was set up to
the Bar, I said, Peace be amongst you all. The Judge looked upon me, and said;
What! do you come into the Court with your Hat on! Upon which Words the Jailer
taking it off, I said, 'The Hat is not the Honor, that comes from God. Then
said the Judge to me, Will you take the Oath of Allegiance, George Fox? I said,
I never took any Oath in my Life, nor any Covenant or Engagement. Well, said
he, will you Swear, or no? I answered, I am a Christian: and Christ commands me
not to swear; and so does the Apostle James likewise: and whether I should obey
God or Man, do thou Judge. I ask you again, said he, Whether you will Swear, or
no? I answered again, I am neither Turk, Jew nor Heathen, but a Christian, and
should show forth Christianity. And I asked him, If he did not know, that
Christians in the Primitive times, under the Ten Persecutions, 1663. Lancaster-
Assize.
and some also of the Martyrs in Queen Mary's days refused Swearing, because
Christ and the Apostle had forbidden it? I told him also; They had had
Experience enough, how many Men had first sworn for the King, and then against
the King. But as for me, I had never taken an Oath in all my Life: and my
Allegiance did not lie in Swearing, but in Truth and Faithfulness; for I honor
all Men, much more the King. But Christ, who is the Great Prophet, who is the
King of Kings, who is the Savior of the World, and the great Judge of the
whole World, he says, I must not Swear: Now, whether must I obey Christ, or
Thee? For it is in tenderness of Conscience, and in Obedience to the Commands
of Christ, that I do not Swear: And we have the Word of a King for tender
Consciences. Then I asked the Judge, If he did own the King? Yes, said he, I do
own the King. Why then, said I, do thou not observe his Declaration from
Breda, and his Promises made, since he came into England, That no man should be
called in question for matters of Religion, so long as they lived peaceably?
Now, if thou ownest the King, said I, why do thou call me into question, and
put me upon taking an Oath, which is a matter of Religion; seeing thou nor none
else can charge me with unpeaceable living? Then he was moved; and looking
angrily at me, said: Sirrah, Will you Swear. I told him, I was none of his
Sirrahs; I was a Christian: and for him, that was an Old Man and a Judge, to
sit there, and give Nicknames to Prisoners; it did not become either his Gray
Hairs, or his Office. Well, said he, I am a Christian too. 'Then do Christians
Works, said I. Sirrah! said he, Thou think to frighten me with thy Words.
Then catching himself, and looking aside, he said; Hark! I am using the word
[Sirrah] again; and so checked himself. I said, I spoke to thee in love; for
that Language did not become thee, a Judge: Thou ought to Instruct a
Prisoner in the Law, if he were Ignorant, and out of the way. And I speak in
Love to thee too, said he. But, said I, Love gives no Nicknames. Then he
roused himself up, and said; I will not be afraid of thee, George Fox: Thou
speak so loud, thy Voice drowns mine and the Court's; I must call for three
or four Criers, to drown thy Voice: Thou have good Lungs. I am a Prisoner here,
said I, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake; for his sake do I suffer, and for him
do I stand this day: and if my Voice were five times louder, yet I should lift
it up, and sound it out for Christ's sake, for whose Cause I stand this day
before your Judgment Seat, in Obedience to Christ, who commands not to Swear;
before whose Judgment Seat you must all be brought, and must give an Account.
Well, said the Judge, George Fox say, Whether thou will take the Oath, Yea or
Nay? I replied, I say, as I said before, Whether ought I to obey God or Man,
Judge thou? 'If I could take any Oath at all, I should take this: for I do not
deny some Oaths only, or on some Occasion; but all Oaths, according to Christ's
Doctrine, who has commanded his, Not to swear at all. Now if thou, or any of
you, or any of your Ministers or Priests here will prove, that ever Christ or
his Apostle, after they had forbidden all Swearing, commanded Christians to
Swear, then I will Swear. I saw several Priests there; but never an one of them
offered to speak. Then said the Judge, I am a Servant to the King, and the King
sent me not to dispute with you, but to put the Laws in Execution: Therefore
tender him the Oath of Allegiance. If thou love the King, said I, why do thou
break his Word, and not keep his Declarations and Speeches, wherein he promised
Liberty to Tender Consciences? I am a Man of a tender Conscience; and in
obedience to Christ's Command I cannot Swear. Then you will not Swear, said the
Judge: Take him away, Jailer. I said, It is for Christ's sake, that I cannot
Swear, and for Obedience to his Command I Suffer; and so the Lord forgive you
all. So the Jailer took me away: but I felt, the mighty Power of the Lord was
over them all.

Upon the Sixteenth Day of the same Month I was brought before Judge Twisden
again, and he was somewhat offended at my Hat; but it being the last Morning of
the Assize, before he was to go out of Town, and not many People there, he made
the less of it. He asked me, Whether I would Traverse, or stand Mute, or
Submit? But he spoke so fast, and in such haste, that it was hard to know, what
he said. However, I told him, I desired, I might have Liberty to Traverse the
Indictment, and Try it. Then said he, Take him away, I will have nothing to do
with him, take him away. I said, Well, live in the Fear of God, and do Justice.
Why, said he, have not I done you Justice? I replied, That which thou have
done, has been against the Command of Christ. Lancaster- Prison.
So I was taken away, and had to the Jail again; and there kept Prisoner, till
the next Assizes.

Sometime before this Assize, Margaret Fell was sent Prisoner to Lancaster-Jail
by Flemming, Kirby and Preston Justices; and at the Assize the Oath was
tendered to her also, and she was committed again to Prison, to lie till the
next Assize.

Now Justice Flemming being one of the fiercest and most-violent Justices in
Persecuting Friends, and sending his honest Neighbors to Prison for Religion's
sake; and there being many Friends at this time in Lancaster-Jail committed
thither by him, and some having died in Prison; we that were then Prisoners,
had it upon us to write to him, as follows.

O Justice Fleming!
MErcy, and Compassion, and Love, and Kindness adorns and graces Men and
Magistrates. Oh! do thou not hear the Cry of the Widows, and the Cry of the
Fatherless, who were made so through Persecution! Were they not driven, like
Sheep, from Constable to Constable, as though they had been the greatest
Transgressors, or Malefactors in the Land? Which grieved and tendered the
Hearts of many sober People, to see, how their Innocent Neighbors and
Countrymen (who were of a peaceable Carriage, and honest in their Lives and
Conversations amongst Men) were used and served! One more is dead, whom thou
sentest to Prison, having left Five Children, both Fatherless and Motherless.
Now, how can thou do otherwise, than take Care of these Fatherless Infants,
and also of the other's Wife and Family? Is it not thy place? Consider Job, (c.
29th.) how he was a Father to the Poor; he delivered the Poor that cried, and
the Fatherless, that had none to help: 1663. Lancaster- Prisons.
how he brake the Jaws of the Wicked, and plucked the Spoil out of his Teeth.
But Oh! measure thy Life and his, and take heed of the day of God's Eternal
Judgment, which will come; and the Sentence and Decree from Christ, when every
Man must give an Account, and receive a Reward according to his Deeds: and then
it will be said, Oh, where are the Months, that are past! Again, Justice
Fleming, consider; when John Stubbs was brought before thee, having a Wife and
four small Children, and little to live on, but what they honestly got by their
own Diligence; as soon as he appeared, thou cried'st out, Put the Oath to that
Man. And when he confessed, he was but a poor Man; yet then thou had no
regard: but cast away Pity, not hearing, what he would say. And now he is kept
up in Prison, because he could not Swear, and break the Command of Christ and
the Apostle: It is to be hoped, thou will take Care for his Family, that his
Children do not starve; and see, that they do not want Bread. Can this be
Allegiance to the King, to do that, which Christ and his Apostle say, is Evil,
and brings into Condemnation? And would not you have cast Christ and the
Apostle into Prison, who command not to Swear, if they had been in your days?
Consider also thy poor Neighbor William Wilson, who was known to all the
Parish and Neighbors to be an Industrious Man, and careful to maintain his
Wife and Children; but had little, but what he got with his Hands in Diligence
and Travels, to supply himself: How should his Wife maintain her Children, when
thou have cast her Husband into Prison, and thereby made him incapable of
working for them? Therefore it may be expected, thou will have a care of his
Wife and Children, and see, they do not want: for how should they live, having
no other way to be sustained, but by the little that he got? Surely, the noise
of this is in the very Markets; and the Death of thy two Neighbors, and the
Cry of the Widows, and the Cry of the Fatherless is heard: And all those
Fatherless, and those Widows are made so for Righteousness sake. For might not
John Stubbs and William Wilson have had their Liberty still, if they would have
Sworn; though they had been such as go after Mountebanks and Stage Plays, or
run a hunting? O consider! for the Lord's Mind is otherwise; for he is tender:
And the King has declared his Mind to be, that there should be no Cruelty
inflicted upon his peaceable Subjects. Besides, several poor, honest People
were Fined, who had need to have something given them: And it had been more
honorable, to have given them something; than to Fine them, and send them to
Prison: some of whom live upon the Charity of other People. Now, what Honor or
Grace can it be to thee, to cast thy poor Neighbors into Prison, who be
peaceable; seeing thou know, these People cannot do that, which thou
requirest of them, if it were to save their Lives, or all that they have?
because in tenderness they cannot take any Oath, Thou make that a Snare to
them. What, think thou, do the People say concerning this? We know (say
they) the Quakers Principle, that keep to Yea and Nay; but we see others Swear
and Forswear: For many of you have Sworn first one way, and then another. So we
leave it to the Spirit of God in thy Conscience, Justice Fleming, who was it so
eager for the taking of George Fox, and so offended with them, that had not
taken him; and now have fallen upon thy poor Neighbors. But Oh! where is thy
Pity for their poor, Fatherless Children, and Motherless Infants? O take heed
of Herod's Hard-heartedness, and casting away all Pity! Esau did so, not Jacob.
Here is also Thomas Walters of Boulton cast into Prison, and the Oath Imposed
on him through Thee; and for denying to Swear at all, in Obedience to Christ's
Command, he is continued in Prison: who has Five small Children, and his Wife
near down-lying. Surely, thou should take Care for them also; and see, that his
Wife and small Children do not want: who are as Fatherless, and she as a Widow
through Thee. Do thou not hear in thy Ears the Cry of the Fatherless, and the
Cry of the Widows, and the Blood of the Innocent speak, who through thee have
been persecuted to Prison, and now dead? Oh! heavy Sentence at the Day of
Judgment! How will thou Answer, when Thou and thy Works come to be Judged, when
thou shall be brought before the Judgment Seat and Bar of the Almighty, who in
thy Prosperity have made Widows and Fatherless for Righteousness sake, and for
Tenderness of Conscience toward God? The Lord knows and sees it! O Man!
Consider in thy Lifetime, how thou have stained thy self with the Blood of the
Innocent! When thou had Power, and might have done Good amongst thy
peaceable Neighbors, thou would not; but used'st thy Power not to a good
Intent, but contrary to the Lord's Mind, and to the King's. The King's Favor,
and his Mercy and Clemency to sober People, and to tender Consciences has been
manifested by Declarations and Proclamations; which thou have abused and
slighted, by persecuting his peaceable Subjects. For at London, and in other
parts the Quakers Meetings are peaceable: and if thou look but as far as
Yorkshire, where the Plot has been, Friends Innocence has cleared it self in
the Hearts of sober Justices; and for you here to fall upon your peaceable
Neighbors and People, and to be rigorous and violent against them, that are
tender, godly and righteous, it is no Honor to you. How many Drunkards, and
Swearers, and Fighters, and such as are subject to Vice, have you caused to be
brought before you to your Courts? It were more honorable for you to look
after such: for the Law was not made for the Righteous, but for Sinners and
Transgressors. Therefore Consider, and be humbled for these things; for the
Lord may do to thee, as thou have done to others: and thou do not know, how
soon there may be a Cry in thy own Family, as the Cry is amongst thy
Neighbors, of the Fatherless and Widows, that are made so through thee. But
the Quakers can and do say; The Lord forgive thee, and lay not these things to
thy Charge, if it be his Will.


Besides this, which went in the Name of Many, I sent him also a Line or two,
subscribed by my self only, and directed --

To Daniel Fleming. 1664. Lancaster-Prison.

Friend,
THou have Imprisoned the Servants of the Lord, without the Breach of any Law:
Therefore take heed, what thou do, (for in the Light of the Lord God thou art
seen) lest the Hand of the Lord be turned against thee!

G. F.


It was not long after this, e're Fleming's Wife died, and lest him Thirteen or
Fourteen Motherless Children.

When I was Prisoner at Lancaster, there was Prisoner also one Major Wiggan, a
Baptist-Preacher. He boasted much beforehand, what he would say at the Assize,
if the Oath should be put to him; and that he would refuse to Swear. But when
the Assize came, and the Oath was tendered him, he desired Time to consider of
it: and that being granted him, till the next Assize; he got leave to go to
London, before the Assize came again: and came no more back, but staid at
London, till the Plague brake forth: and there both he and his Wife were Cut
off. He was a very Wicked Man, and the Judgments of God came upon him: For he
had published a very wicked Book against Friends, full of Lies and Blasphemies;
the Occasion of which was this. Whilst he was in Lancaster-Castle, he
challenged Friends to have a Dispute with them: Whereupon I got leave of the
Jailer to go up to them. And entering into Discourse with him, he affirmed: That
some Men never had the Spirit of God; and that the true Light, which
enlightneth every one, that comes into the world, is natural. For Proof of his
first Assertion, he instanced Balaam, affirming; That Balaam had not the Spirit
of God. I affirmed and proved, That Balaam had the Spirit of God; and that
Wicked Men have the Spirit of God, else how could they quench it, and vex it,
and grieve it, and resist the Holy Ghost, like the stiff-necked Jews? To his
Second Assertion I answered; That the true Light, which enlightneth every Man,
that comes into the World, was the Life in the Word; and that was Divine and
Eternal, and not Natural. And he might as well say, that the Word was Natural,
as that the Life in the Word was Natural. And Wicked Men were enlightened by
this Light, else how could they hate it? Now it is expressly said, that they did
hate it: And the Reason given, why they did hate it, was, because their Deeds
were evil; and they would not come to it, because it reproved them: and that
must needs be in them, that reproved them. Besides, that Light could not be the
Scriptures of the New Testament; for it was testified of, before any part of
the New Testament was written: So it must be the Divine Light, which is the
Life in Christ the Word, before Scriptures were. And the Grace of God, which
brought Salvation, had appeared unto all Men; and taught the Saints: but they
that turned it into Wantonness, and walked despitefully against the Spirit of
Grace, were the Wicked. Again, the Spirit of Truth, the Holy Ghost, the
Comforter, which leads the Disciples of Christ into all Truth; the same should
Reprove the World of Sin, of Righteousness, and of Judgment, and of their
Unbelief. So the Wicked World had it to reprove them; and the true Disciples
and Learners of Christ, that believed in the Light, as Christ commands, they
had it to lead them. But the World, that did not believe in the Light, though
they were lighted; but hated the Light, which they should have believed in, and
loved the Darkness rather than it, this World had a Righteousness and a
Judgment, which the Holy Ghost reproved them for, as well as for their
Unbelief. So having proved, that the Good and the Bad were enlightened, and that
the Grace of God had appeared unto them all, and that all had the Spirit of
God, else they could not vex and grieve it; I told Major Wiggan, The least Babe
there might see him: and presently stood up one Richard Cubham, and proved him
an Antichrist, and a Deceiver, by Scripture. Then the Jailer had me away to my
Prison again. And afterward Wiggan wrote a Book of this Dispute, and put in
abundance of abominable Lies: But his Book was soon Answered in Print; and he
himself not long after was cut off, as before is said.

This Wiggan was poor; and while he was a Prisoner at Lancaster, he sent into
the Country, and got Money gathered for Relief of the Poor People of God in
Prison: and many People gave freely, thinking it had been for Us; when as
indeed it was for himself. But when we heard of it, we laid it upon him: and
writ also into the Country, that ' Friends might let the People know the Truth
of the Matter; that it was not our manner to have Collections made for us: and
that those Collections were only for Wiggan and another, a drunken Preacher of
his Society; who would be so drunk, that once he lost his Britches.

After this it came upon me to write a Paper to the Judges, and other
Magistrates, concerning their Giving Evil Words and Nicknames to such, as were
brought before them. And that which I writ, was after this manner, and thus
directed: To all you, that be Judges, or other Officers whatsoever, in the
whole World, who profess your selves to be Christians.
Friends,
HErein and by reading the Scriptures, ye may see both your own Words and
Carriage, and the Words, Carriage, and Practice of both Jews and Heathens; and
of the great King of Kings, the great Lawgiver, and Judge of the whole World.
First, For the Words and Carriage of the Jews, when such as were worthy of
Death, were brought before such as were Rulers amongst them. When Achan had
taken the Babylonish Garment, and the two hundred Shekels of Silver, and the
Wedge of Gold of Fifty Shekels weight, and Joshua, who was then Judge of
Israel, had by the Lot found him out; he did not say unto him, Sirrah, nor, You
Rascal, Knave, Rogue, as some, that are called Christian Magistrates, are too
apt to do. But Joshua said unto Achan, My Son; Mark his clean Language and
Savoury Expression, and gracious Words, My Son, said he, give, I pray thee,
Glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make Confession unto him; and tell me now,
what thou have done; hide it not from me. Then Achan confessed, that he had
sinned against the Lord God of Israel; and thus and thus he had done. And then
Joshua, the Judge, said; Why have thou troubled Israel? The Lord shall trouble
thee this day: and they stoned him and his with Stones, and burnt his Goods
with Fire. But there was no unsavory Word given to him, that we read of;
though he was worthy of Death. Josh. 7.

So when the Man, that gathered Sticks upon the Sabbath Day, was taken, and
brought before Moses, the Judge in Israel, and put in Ward, until the Mind of
the Lord was known concerning him; We read not of any reviling Language given
him: but the Lord said to Moses, and Moses to the People; The Man shall surely
be put to Death, Numb. 15.35.

So likewise in the Rebellion of Corah, Dathan and Abiram, where Moses called
them to Trial, he did not Sirrah them, or mis-call them; but said to Corah and
the rest, Hear, I pray you, ye Sons of Levi, Numb. 16.8. And when he gave the
Sentence against them, he said; If these Men die the common Death of all Men,
etc. He did not say, If these Rascals, or Knaves, -- as many, that profess
themselves Christians, will now do.

When Elihu spoke to Job, who was a Judge, and to his Friends, and said, Let me
not, I pray you, accept any man's Person, neither let me give flattering Titles
unto Man; for I know not to give flattering Titles: in so doing my Maker would
soon take me away, Job 32. Job did not say, Sirrah, hold thy Tongue; nor gave
him any unsavory Expression. Then for the Words of David and Solomon, and
other Kings and Officers, see in the Books of the Kings and Chronicles the
Savoury Language, that they gave to them, that were brought before them. Nay,
though Shimei cursed David the King, yet neither did David then, or afterward,
nor Solomon, when he caused him to be put to Death, give him any reproachful
Language, or so much as call him Sirrah, 2 Samuel 16. and 1 Kings 2.

Read the Prophecies of Isaiah and Micha, Jeremiah, Ezekiel, and the rest of
the Prophets, who Prophesied to several Peoples, and against Rulers, Kings and
Magistrates; yet where can it be found, that they had any bad Language given
them, as Sirrah, or the like, by any Ruler either of the Jews or Heathens? Nay,
though Jeremiah was cast into the Prison, and into the Dungeon; yet there was
no such Word, as Sirrah, or Knave, given to him, Jer. 37.

Then for the Words and Carriage of the Heathens: When Abraham was brought
before Abimelech, who was a King, he gave Abraham no unsavory Expressions,
Genesis 20. And when Isaac came before Abimelech, he gave him no taunting Language
neither, Genesis 26. When Joseph was cast into Prison, and that in Egypt, we do
not read, that he had any railing Language given him, Genesis 39. Neither did
Pharaoh, when Moses and Aaron went before him, give them bad Language, as
Sirrah, Knave, or the like.

When Nebuchadnezzar Sentenced the Three Children to the Fiery Furnace, there
was no such Language given them, as Sirrah, Knave, Rascal; but called them by
the Names, they were known by, Dan. 3. And when Daniel was brought before King
Darius, and sentenced to be cast into the Lions Den, he had no such Ill Names
given him, as many give now; who call those, Heathen Rulers, but themselves
Christians.

If ye look into the New Testament, there in the Parable of the Wedding-Supper,
the King, that came to view his Guests, did not say unto him, that was found
without a Wedding Garment, Sirrah, how came thou in hither? but, Friend, how
came thou in hither? etc. though he was one, that was to be bound hand and
foot, and cast into utter Darkness, Matthew. 22. Nay, when Judas had betrayed his
Master, Christ Jesus the Lord of Life, and had sold him to the Priests, Christ
did not call him Sirrah, when he came to apprehend him; but Friend: Matthew.
26.50. Stephen in his Examination, Sentence and Death had no such reproachful
Word given him, as Sirrah, or Knave, Acts 6. and 7. Chapt. When the Apostles
Peter and John were brought before the High Priest, and Rulers of the Jews, and
commanded not to preach in the Name of Jesus, Acts 4. they were not called
Sirrah, or Knaves, nor had any such Ill Names given them. And when Paul and
Silas were cast into Prison by the Magistrates, there was no such Word given
them in their Examination, nor in their Sentence, Acts 16. They called them
Men, not Rogues, Sirrahs, nor Knaves. And when the Magistrates had done
contrary to Law, they feared: So ye may see, how short of this Example many
are, that call themselves Christian Rulers; who are not afraid to cast Innocent
People into Prison, and give them Ill Names besides, below both Jews and
Heathens.

When the Vproar was at Ephesus about Diana's Shrine, Demetrius, who bore great
Sway among the Crafts-men, did not call Paul Sirrah; but called him by his
Right Name Paul, Acts 19. And when Paul was brought Prisoner before the
High Priest Ananias, and the Council of the Jews, and told them, He had lived
in all good Conscience toward God, until that day; though they (who professed
the Scriptures, but lived out of the Life of them) could not abide to hear of
Living in a good Conscience (as Professors of the Scriptures now, that live not
in the Life, cannot abide to hear of living in a good Conscience nowadays:)
But Ananias caused Paul to be smitten on the Mouth; yet he did not call him
Knave, nor Sirrah, Acts 23. The Apostate-Jews indeed, (who, though they
professed Scripture, were out of the Life thereof, and had rejected Christ) in
their accusing Paul before the Roman Magistrates, did once call him a Pestilent
Fellow, Acts 24. as the Accusing Professors, who live out of the Life, will
sometimes call us now. But Felix gave Paul no such Language; neither did
Festus, nor King Agrippa in all their Examinations of him, give Paul any such
Words, as Sirrah, Rascal, Knave, or the like: but heard him patiently. So now
Christians may see through all the Scriptures, that when any Persons were
brought before Rulers, Kings, or Magistrates, whether Jews or Heathen, they did
not use to call them Evil Names, as Sirrah, Rascal, Knave, and the like; they
had no such foul-mouthed Language in their Courts: Nor did they use to say to
them, Sirrah, put off your Hat. Now ye, that profess Christianity, and say, the
Scripture is your Rule, may see, that more Corrupt Words proceed out of your
Mouths, than either out of the Jews or Heathens; if ye will Try your Practice
by the Scriptures: And does not the Apostle tell you, that no Corrupt
Communication should proceed out of your Mouths? and that your Words should be
gracious? Now I query, Where and whence ye, that call your selves Christians,
have got all these bad Words and Names, seeing, neither God, nor Christ, nor
the Prophets, nor the Judges, nor Kings, nor Rulers ever gave any such Names,
so far as appears by Scripture, either amongst the Heathens, Jews or Christians?

G. F.



Before the next Assizes came, there was a Quarter Sessions holden at Lancaster
by the Justices: To which though we were not brought; yet I put Friends upon
drawing up an Account of their Sufferings, and laying them before the Justices
in their open Sessions. For Friends had suffered deeply by Fines and
Distresses; the Bailiffs and Officers making great Havoc and Spoil of their
Goods: But no Redress was made.

And because some Evil-minded Magistrates would be telling us sometimes of the
late Plot in the North; we gave forth the following Paper to stop their Mouths,
and to clear Truth and Friends therefrom: Which was as follows:

A Testimony from us, the People of God, whom the World call Quakers, To all
the Magistrates and Officers of what sort soever, from the Highest to the
Lowest.
WE are peaceable, and seek the Peace, and Good, and Welfare of all Men and
Women upon the Earth; as in our Lives and peaceable Carriages is manifested:
and we desire the Eternal Good and Welfare of all, and their Souls everlasting
Peace. We are Heirs of the Blessing, before the Curse was; and of the Power of
God, before the Devil was, and before the Fall of Man. We are Heirs of the
Gospel of Peace, which is the Power of God; and we are Heirs of Christ, who
have inherited him and his Everlasting Kingdom, and do possess the Power of an
Endless Life. Knowing this our Portion and Inheritance, this is to take off all
Jealousies out of your Minds, and out of the Minds of all People concerning us,
That all Plots and Conspiracies, Plotters and Conspirators against the King,
and all Aiders or Assisters thereunto we always did, and do utterly deny to be
any of us, or to be of the Fellowship of the Gospel, or to be of Christ's
Kingdom, or to be his Servants. For Christ said; His Kingdom was not of this
World; if it were, his Servants would fight. And therefore he bid Peter, Put up
his Sword: for, said he, he that takes the Sword, shall perish by the Sword.
Here is the Faith and Patience of the Saints, to bear and suffer all things;
knowing (as we know) that Vengeance is the Lord's, and he will repay it to them
that hurt his People, and that do wrong to the Innocent: Therefore cannot we
avenge, but suffer for his Name's sake. And we do know, that the Lord will
judge the World in Righteousness, according to their Deeds: and that, when
every one shall give an Account to him of the Deeds done in the Body, then will
the Lord give every Man according to his Works, whether they be Good, or
whether they be Evil. Christ says, he came not to destroy Men's Lives: And
when his Disciples would have had Fire to come down from Heaven, to have
consumed them that did not receive him, he told them; They knew not, what
Spirit they were of, that would have Men's Lives destroyed: and therefore he
rebuked them, and told them; That he came not to destroy Men's Lives, but to
save them. Now we are of Christ's Mind, who is the great Prophet, whom all
ought to hear in all things, who says to his; If they strike thee on one
Cheek, turn the other; and render to no Man Evil for Evil. This Doctrine of his
have we learned; and do not only confess him in Words, but follow his Doctrine:
and therefore have and do we suffer all manner of Reproaches, Scandals and
Slanders, and spoiling of Goods, Buffetings and Whippings. Stripes and
Imprisonments for these many years; and can say: The Lord forgive them, that
have thus served us; and lay not these things to their Charge! And we know,
that the Jews outward Sword, by which they cut down the Heathen outwardly, was
a Type of the inward Sword of the Spirit, which cuts down the inward Heathen,
the raging Nature in People. And the Blood of Bulls, Lambs, Rams, and other
Offerings, and that Priesthood that offered them, together with other things in
the Law, were Types of Christ, the one Offering, and of his Blood: who is the
Everlasting Priest and Covenant, Christ, our Life and Way to God, and who is
the great Prophet, and Shepherd that looks to his Flock, and the Head of his
Church, and the great Bishop of our Souls, whom we witness come; and he does
oversee and keep his Flock. For in Adam in the Fall we know, the striving,
quarrelling, unpeaceable Spirits are in the Enmity one with another, and not in
Peace: But in Christ Jesus, the Second Adam, that never fell, is Peace, Rest
and Life. And the Doctrine of Christ, who never sinned, is to love one another;
and who be in this Doctrine, hurt no man: in which we are, in Christ, who is
our Life. Therefore it is well for you to distinguish betwixt the Precious and
the Vile, between them that fear God, and serve him, and them that do not; and
to put a difference between the Innocent and the Guilty, and between him that
is Holy and Pure, and the Ungodly and Profane: for they that do not so, bring
Troubles, Burdens and Sorrows upon themselves. And this we write in Love to
your Souls, that ye may consider these things: for they that hate Enemies, and
hate one another, we cannot say, they are of God, nor in Christ's Doctrine; but
are Opposers of it. And such, as wrestle with Flesh and Blood, with Carnal
Weapons, are gone into the Flesh, out of the Spirit: They are not in our
Fellowship in the Spirit, in which is the Bond of Peace; neither are they of
Us, nor have we Unity with them in their fleshly state, and with their Carnal
Weapons. For our Unity and Fellowship stands in the Gospel, which is the Power
of God, before the Devil was, the Liar, and the Murderer, the Manslayer and
the Envious Man: Now Christ's Mind, and his Doctrine being to save Men's Lives,
we, who are of Christ's Mind, are out of, and above these things. And our
desire is, 1664. Lancaster- Castle.
that in the Fear of the Lord ye may all Live; that in that ye may all receive
God's Wisdom, by which all things were created; that by it all may be ordered
to God's Glory.

This is from them that love all your Souls, and seek your Eternal Good.

Being now a Prisoner in Lancaster Castle, a deep sense came upon me of a Day
of sore Trial and Exercise, that was come and coming upon all, that had been
high in Profession of Religion: And I was moved to give forth the following
Paper, as a Warning unto such:

NOw is the Day, that every one's Faith and Love to God and Christ will be
Tried; and who are Redeemed out of the Earth, and who are in the Earth, will be
manifested; and who is their Master they serve: and whether they will run to
the Mountains, to Cover them. Now will it appear, who are the Stony Ground, who
are the Thorny Ground, and who are the High-way-Ground, in whom the Fowls of
the Air take away the Seed, and the Thorns and Cares of the World Choke, and
the Heat of Persecution scorches, and burns up your green Blade: For the Day
tries all things. Therefore let not such, as forsake Truth, for saving the
Earth, say, that your Brother Priest only serves not the Lord Jesus Christ,
but his own Belly, and minds Earthly things; for such themselves also do the
same, and do hug and embrace Self, and not the Lord. Now it will be made
manifest, who is every ones God, and Christ, and Savior; and their Love will
be manifest, whether it be of the World, or the Love of God: for if it be the
Love of the World, it is Enmity; and the Enmity will manifest it self, what it
is: and the Day will Try every Spirit and his Fruits. Therefore, all my dear
Friends, In the Everlasting Seed of God live, that is over all the House of
Adam and his Works in the Fall: and so dwelling in the Seed, Christ, that never
fell, in him you all have Virtue, and Life, and Peace; and through him ye will
overcome all, that is in the Fall.

G. F.

I writ also another Short Epistle to Friends, to Warn them to keep out of that
Spirit, that wrought in John Perrot and his Company against the Truth.

Dear Friends,
DWell in the Love of God, and in his Righteousness, that will preserve you
above all Changeable Spirits, that be foul and unclean, and that dwell not in
the Truth, but in Quarrels. Avoid such, and keep your Habitations in the Truth,
and dwell in the Truth, and in the Word of God, by which ye are reconciled to
God. And keep your Meetings in the Name of Jesus Christ, that never fell; and
then ye will see over all the Gatherings of Adam's Sons and Daughters, you
being Met in the Life over them all; in which is your Unity, and Peace, and
Fellowship with God, and one with another, in the Life, in which ye may enjoy
God's Presence among you. So remember me to all Friends in the everlasting Seed
of God. And all they, that are gotten into Fellowship in outward things, their
Fellowship will corrupt, and rot, and wither away. Therefore live in the
Gospel, the Power of God, which Power of God, the Gospel was, before the Devil
was. And this Fellowship in the Gospel, the Power of God, is a Mystery to all
the Fellowships in the World. So look over all outward Sufferings, and look at
the Lord, and the Lamb, who is the First and Last, the Amen; in whom farewell.

G. F.


Lancaster- Assizes.
In the Sixth Month the Assizes were held again at Lancaster, and the same
Judges, Twisden and Turner, came that Circuit again: but Judge Turner then sat
on the Crown-Bench; and so I was brought before him. But before I was called to
the Bar, I was put among the Murderers and Fellons for about the space of two
hours; the People, the Justices, and the Judge also gazing upon me. After they
had Tried several others, they called me to the Bar; and impanneled a Jury: And
then the Judge asked the Justices, Whether they had tendered me the Oath at the
Sessions? And they said, They had. Then he bid, Give them the Book, that they
might swear, they had tendered me the Oath according to the Indictment, Some of
the Justices refused to be Sworn: but the Judge said, he would have it done to
take away all Occasion of Exception. Now when the Jury were sworn, and the
Justices had sworn, That they had tendered me the Oath, according to the
Indictment; then the Judge asked me, Whether I had not refused the Oath at the
last Assizes? I said, I never took Oath in my Life; and Christ, the Savior and
Judge of the World, said, Swear not at all. The Judge seemed not to take notice
of my Answer; but asked me: Whether or no I had not refused to take the Oath at
the last Assize? I said: The Words, that I then spoke to them, were, That if
they could prove, either Judge, Justices, Priest or Teacher, that after Christ
and the Apostle had forbidden Swearing, they commanded, that Christians should
Swear, I would Swear. The Judge said, He was not at that time to dispute,
whether it was lawful to Swear; but to Inquire, whether I had refused to take
the Oath, or no. I told him, Those things mentioned in the Oath, as Plotting
against the King, and owning the Pope's, or any other Foreign Power, I utterly
deny. Well, said he, You say well in that: but did you deny to take the Oath?
What say you? What would thou have me to say, said I? for I have told thee
before, what I did say. Then he asked me, If I would have these Men to Swear,
that I had taken the Oath? I asked him, 'If he would have those Men to Swear,
that I had refused the Oath? At which the Court burst out into Laughter. I was
grieved, to see so much Lightness in a Court, where such Solemn Matters are
handled; and thereupon asked them: If this Court was a Playhouse? Where is
Gravity and Sobriety, said I? 1664. Lancaster- Assizes.
for this Behavior does not become you. Then the Clerk read the Indictment;
and I told the Judge, I had something to speak to it, (for I had Informed my
self of the Errors, that were in it.) He told me, He would hear me afterward
any Reasons, that I could allege, why he should not give Judgment. Then I
spoke to the Jury, and told them, That they could not bring me in Guilty,
according to that Indictment; for the Indictment was wrong laid, and had many
gross Errors in it. The Judge said, I must not speak to the Jury, but he would
speak to them: and he told them, I had denied to take the Oath at the last
Assizes; and, said he, I can tender the Oath to any Man now, and Praemunire him
for not taking it: And he said, They must bring me in Guilty, seeing I refused
to take the Oath. Then, said I, what do ye do with a Form? Ye may throw away
your Form then. And I told the Jury, it lay upon their Consciences, as they
would answer it to the Lord God before his Judgment Seat. Then the Judge spoke
again to the Jury; and I bid him, do me Justice. So the Jury brought me in
Guilty. Whereupon I told them, That both the Justices, and they too had
forsworn themselves; and therefore they had small cause to laugh, as they did a
little before. Oh the Envy, and Rage, and Malice, that was there against me,
and the Lightness! But the Lord confounded them, and they were wonderfully
stopped. So they set me aside; and called up Margaret Fell, who had a great deal
of good Service amongst them: and then the Court brake up near the Second Hour.

In the Afternoon we were brought up again, to have Sentence passed upon us:
And Margaret Fell desired, that Sentence might be deferred, till the next
Morning. I desired nothing, but Law and Justice at his hands; for the Thieves
had Mercy: Only I desired the Judge, to send some to see my Prison; which was
so bad, they would put no Creature they had, in it: and I told him, that Col.
Kirby, who was then on the Bench, said, I should be locked up, and no Flesh
alive should come to me. The Judge shook his Head, and said; When the Sentence
was given, he would leave me to the favor of the Jailer. Now most of the
Gentry of the Country were gathered together, expecting to hear the Sentence;
and the Noise among the People was, That I should be Transported. But they were
all crossed at that time: for the Sentence being deferred, till next Morning; I
was had back, as I came, to Prison again. Upon my complaining of the badness of
my Prison, some of the Justices, with Col. Kirby went up to see it: But when
they came to it, they durst hardly go into it; the Floor was so bad and
dangerous, and the place so open to Wind and Rain: and some that came up, said;
Sure, it was a Jakes-house. When Col. Kirby saw it, and heard, what others said
of it, he excused the matter as well as he could, and said; I should be removed
from that place, ere it was long, to some more convenient place.

Next day, toward the Eleventh Hour, we were called forth again to hear the
Sentence: And Margaret Fell being called first to the Bar, she had some
Counsels to plead; who found many Errors in her Indictment: Whereupon, after
the Judge had acknowledged them, she was set by. Then the Judge asked, What
they could say to mine? Now I was not willing to let any Man plead for me; but
to speak to it my self: And indeed, though Margaret had some, that pleaded for
her: yet she spoke as much her self, as she would. But before I came to the
Bar, I was moved in my Spirit to pray, That God would confound their Wickedness
and Envy, and set his Truth over all; and exalt his Seed. And the Lord heard
and answered, and did Confound them in their Proceedings against me. And though
they had most Envy against me; yet the most-gross Errors were found in my
Indictment.

Now, I having put by others from pleading for me, the Judge asked me; What I
had to say, why he should not pass Sentence upon me. I told him, I was no
Lawyer; but I had much to say, if he would but have Patience to hear. At that
he laughed, and others laughed also, and said; Come, what have you to say? He
can say nothing. 'Yes, said I, I have much to say: have but the Patience to
hear me.

Then I asked him, Whether the Oath was to be tendered to the King's Subjects,
or to the Subjects of Foreign Princes? He said, To the Subjects of this Realm.
Then said I, Look the Indictment, and ye may see, that ye have left out the
Word Subject: so not having named me in the Indictment, as a Subject, ye cannot
Praemunire me for not taking the Oath. Then they looked the Statute, and the
Indictment, and saw, that it was, as I said: and the Judge confessed, it was an
Error. I told him, I had something else to stop his Judgment. And I desired him
to look, What day the Indictment said the Oath was tendered to me at the
Sessions there? They looked, and said, It was the Eleventh day of January. What
Day of the Week was that Session held on, said I? On a Tuesday, said they. Then
said I, Look your Almanacks, and see, whether there was any Sessions held at
Lancaster on the Eleventh Day of January, so called? So they looked, and found,
that the Eleventh day was the Day called Monday, and that the Sessions was on
the day called Tuesday, which was the Twelfth day of that Month. Look ye now,
said I; ye have Indicted me for refusing the Oath in the Quarter Sessions held
at Lancaster on the Eleventh Day of January last, and the Justices have Sworn,
that they tendered me the Oath in open Sessions here that day; and the Jury
upon their Oaths have found me Guilty thereupon: and yet ye see, there was no
Session held in Lancaster that day. Then the Judge, to have covered the matter,
asked, Whether the Sessions did not begin on the Eleventh day? But some in the
Court Answered, No; The Session held but one day, and that was the Twelfth.
Then the Judge said, This was a great Mistake, and an Error. Some of the
Justices were in a great Rage at this, and were ready to have gone off the
Bench, and stamped, and said; Who has done this? Some body has done it on
purpose: and a great Heat was amongst them. Then said I, Are not the Justices
here, that have Sworn to this Indictment, forsworn Men in the face of the
Country? But this is not all, said I; I have more yet to offer, why Sentence
should not be given against me. Then I asked; 'In what Year of the King the
last Assize here was holden, which was in the Month called March last? And the
Judge said, It was in the Sixteenth Year of the King. But, said I, the
Indictment says, It was in the Fifteenth Year: and they looked, and found it
so. This also was acknowledged to be another Error. But then they were all in a
Fret again, both Judge and Justices, and could not tell, what to say: For the
Judge had sworn the Officers of the Court, that the Oath was tendered to me at
the Assize mentioned in the Indictment. 'Now, said I, Is not the Court here
forsworn also, who have sworn, that the Oath was tendered to me at the Assize
holden here in the Fifteenth Year of the King, when as it was in his Sixteenth
Year; and so they have sworn a whole Year false? The Judge bid them Look,
whether Margaret Fell 's Indictment was so, or no? And they looked; and found,
it was not so. I told the Judge, I had more yet to offer, to stop Sentence: And
I asked him; 'Whether All the Oath ought to be put into the Indictment, or no?
Yes, said he, it ought to be All put in. Then said I, 'Compare the Indictment
with the Oath, and there thou may see these Words, viz. [or by any Authority
derived, or pretended to be derived from him, or his Sea] left out of the
Indictment; which is a principal part of the Oath: And in another place the
Words [Heirs and Successors] are left out. The Judge did acknowledge these also
to be great Errors. But said I, I have not yet done; I have yet something
further to alledg. Nay, said the Judge, I have enough; you need say no more. If
(said I) thou have enough, I desire nothing but Law and Justice at thy hands:
for I don't look for Mercy. You must have Justice, said he, and you shall have
Law. Then I asked, Am I at Liberty, and free from all, that ever has been done
against me in this matter? Yes, said the Judge, You are free from all that has
been done against you. But then, starting up in a Rage, he said; I can put the
Oath to any man here: and I will tender you the Oath again. I told him, He had
Examples enough yesterday of Swearing and False-swearing, both in the Justices
and in the Jury: For I saw before mine Eyes, that both Justices and Jury had
forsworn themselves. The Judge asked me, If I would take the Oath? I bid him,
Do me Justice for my false Imprisonment all this while: For what had I been
Imprisoned so long for? And I told him, I ought to be set at Liberty. You are
at Liberty, said he; but I will put the Oath to you again. Then I turned me
about, and said; All People, take notice, this is a Snare: for I ought to be
set free from the Jailer, and from this Court. But the Judge cried, Give him
the Book: and the Sheriff, and the Justices, cried, Give him the Book. Then the
Power of Darkness rose up in them, like a Mountain: and a Clerk lift up a Book
to me. I stood still, and said, If it be a Bible, give it me into my hand. Yes,
yes, said the Judge and Justices, give it him into his hand. So I took it, and
looked in it, and said, 'I see, it is a Bible; I am glad of it. Now he had
caused the Jury to be called, and they stood by (for after they had brought in
their former Verdict, he would not dismiss them, though they desired it; but
told them, He could not dismiss them yet; for he should have business for them:
and therefore they must attend, and be ready, when they were called. And when
he said so, I felt his Intent, that if I was freed, he would come on again.) So
I looked him in the Face; and the Witness of God started up in him, and made
him blush, when he looked at me again: for he saw, that I saw him. Nevertheless
hardening himself, he caused the Oath to be read to me, the Jury standing by:
And when it was read, he asked me, Whether I would take the Oath, or no? Then
said I, Ye have given me a Book here to kiss, and to swear on; and this Book,
which ye have given me to kiss, says, Kiss the Son; and the Son says in this
Book, Swear not at all: and so says also the Apostle James. Now (said I) I say
as the Book says; and yet ye Imprison me: How chance, ye do not Imprison the
Book for saying so? How comes it, that the Book is at Liberty amongst you,
which bids me not swear; and yet ye Imprison me, for doing as the Book bids me?
Why don't ye Imprison the Book? Now as I was speaking this to them, and held up
the Bible open in my hand, to show them the place in the Book, where Christ
forbid swearing, they plucked the Book out of my hand again; and the Judge said,
Nay, but we will Imprison George Fox. Yet this got abroad over all the Country,
as a By word, That they gave me a Book to swear on, that commanded me, Not to
swear at all; and that the Bible was at Liberty, and I in Prison, for doing as
the Bible said. Now when the Judge still urged me to Swear, I told him, I never
took Oath, Covenant nor Engagement in my Life; but my Yea or Nay was more
binding to me, than an Oath was to many others: For had they not had
Experience, how little Men regarded an Oath? and how they had Sworn one way,
and then another? and how the Justices and Court had forsworn themselves now?
And I told him, I was a Man of a tender Conscience; and if they had any sense
of a tender Conscience, they would consider, that it was in Obedience to
Christ's Command, that I could not Swear, But, said I, if any of you can
Convince me, that after Christ and the Apostle had commanded not to swear, they
did alter that Command, and commanded Christians to swear, then ye shall see, I
will swear. And there being many Priests by, I said; If ye cannot do it, let
your Priests stand up, and do it: But not one of the Priests made any Answer.
O, said the Judge, all the World cannot Convince you. No, said I, how is it
like, the World should Convince me? for the whole World lies in Wickedness: but
bring out your Spiritual Men (as ye call them) to Convince me. Then the Sheriff
said, and the Judge said the same, That the Angel swore in the Revelations. I
replied, When God brings in his First-begotten Son into the World, he says.
Let all the Angels of God Worship him; and he says, Swear not at all. Nay,
said the Judge, I will not dispute. Then I spoke to the Jury, telling them, It
was for Christ's sake, that I could not swear; and therefore I warned them, not
to act contrary to that of God in their Consciences: for before his
Judgment Seat they must all be brought. And I told them, that as for Plots, and
Persecution for Religion, and Popery, I do deny them in my Heart; for I am a
Christian, and shall show forth Christianity amongst you this day: And it is
for Christ's Doctrine I stand. More Words I had both with the Judge and Jury,
before the Jailer took me away.

In the Afternoon I was brought up again, and put among the Thieves a pretty
while; where I stood with my Hat on, till at length the Jailer took it off.
Then the Jury, having found this New Indictment against me for not taking the
Oath, I was called to the Bar? And the Judge asked me, What I would say for my
self? I bid them, Read the Indictment: for I would not Answer to that, which I
did not hear. The Clerk read it, (and as he read, the Judge said, Take heed, it
be not false again:) but he read it but in such a manner, that I could hardly
understand, what he read. But when he had done, the Judge asked me, What I said
to the Indictment? I told him, At once hearing so large a Writing read, and
that at such a distance, that I could not distinctly hear all the parts of it;
I could not well tell, what to say to it: but if he would let me have a Copy of
it, and give me time to consider of it, I should Answer it. This put them to a
little stand: but after a while the Judge asked me, What time I would have? I
said, 'Till the next Assize. But, said he, What Plea will ye now make? Are you
Guilty, or Not Guilty? I said, I am Not Guilty at all of denying Swearing
obstinately and wilfully: and as for those things mentioned in the Oath, as
Jesuitical Plots, and Foreign Powers, I utterly deny them in my Heart: and if
I could take any Oath, I should take that; but I never took any Oath in all my
Life. The Judge said, I said well: But, said he, The King is sworn, the
Parliament is sworn, I am sworn, and the Justices are sworn, and the Law is
preserved by Oaths. I told him, They had had sufficient Experience of Men's
Swearing; and he had seen, how the Justices and Jury had sworn wrong the other
day: And if he had read in the Book of Martyrs, how many of the Martyrs had
refused to Swear, both within the time of the Ten Persecutions, and in Bishop
Bonner's days, he might see, that to deny Swearing in Obedience to Christ's
Command, was no new thing. Then he said; He wished, the Laws were otherwise. I
said, Our Yea is Yea, and our Nay is Nay: and if we transgress our Yea, and our
Nay, let us suffer, as they do, or should do, that Swear falsely: And this, I
told him, we had offered to the King; and the King said, It was reasonable.

So, after some further Discourse had passed, Lancaster- Prison.
they committed me to Prison again; there to lie till the next Assize: and Col.
Kirby gave order to the Jailer, To keep me Close, and suffer no Flesh alive to
come at me; for I was not fit, he said, to be discoursed with by Men. Then was
I put up into a smoky Tower, where the Smoke of the other Prisoners came up so
thick, that it stood as Dew upon the Walls; and sometimes the Smoke would be so
thick, that I could hardly see the Candle, when it burned: and I being locked
under Three Locks, the Vnder-Jailer, when the Smoke was great, would hardly be
persuaded to come up, to unlock one of the upper-most Doors, for fear of the
Smoke: so that I was almost smothered. Besides it Rained in upon my Bed; and
many times, when I went to stop out the Rain in the Cold Winter-Season, my
Shirt would be as wet as Muck with the Rain, that came in upon me, while I was
laboring to stop it out. And (the place being high, and open to the Wind)
sometimes as fast, as I stopped it, the Wind being high and fierce, would blow it
out again. In this manner did I lie all that long, cold Winter, till the next
Assize: In which time I was so starved with Cold and Rain, that my Body was
greatly swelled, and my Limbs much benumbed.

The Assize began on the 16th day of the Month called March, Lancaster- Assize.
1664/5. And the same Judges, Twisden and Turner, coming that Circuit again,
Judge Twisden sat this time on the Crown-Bench; and before him I was brought.
Now I had Informed my self again of the Errors, that were in this Indictment
also: For though at the Assize before, Judge Turner had said to the Officers in
Court, Pray see, that all the Oath be in the Indictment, and that the word,
Subject, be in; and that the Day of the Month, and Year of the King be put in
right: For it is a shame, that so many Errors should be seen, and found in the
face of the Country; yet there were many Errors, and those great ones, in this
Indictment, as well as in the former. And surely, the Hand of the Lord was in
it, to confound their mischievous Work against me, and to blind them therein:
Insomuch, that although, after the Indictment was drawn at the former Assize,
the Judge Examined it himself, and tried it with the Clerks; yet the Word,
Subject, was left out of this Indictment also, and the Day of the Month was put
in wrong, and several Material Words of the Oath were left out: Yet they went
on confidently against me, thinking, all was safe and well. And when I was set
to the Bar, and the Jury called over to be sworn, the Clerk asked me, First;
Whether I had any Objection to make against any of the Jury? I told him, 'I
knew none of them. Then having sworn the Jury, they swore three of the Officers
of the Court, to prove, That the Oath was tendered to me at the last Assizes,
according to the Indictment. Come, come, said the Judge, It was not done in a
Corner. Then he asked me, What I had said to it? or, Whether I had taken the
Oath at the last Assize? I told him, what I had said, viz. That the Book they
gave me to Swear on, says, Swear not at all: And I repeated more, of what I
had formerly said to them, as it now came to my remembrance. Whereupon the
Judge said; I will not dispute with you, but in point of Law. Then, said I, I
have something to speak to the Jury concerning the Indictment. He told me, I
must not speak to the Jury: but if I had any thing to say, I must speak to him.
Then I asked him, Whether the Oath was to be tendered to the King's Subjects
only, or to the Subjects of Foreign Princes? He replied, To the Subjects of
this Realm: for I will speak nothing to you, said he, but in point of Law.
Then, said I, Look the Indictment, and thou may see, that the Word, Subject,
is left out of this Indictment also. And therefore, seeing the Oath is not to
be tendered to any, but the Subjects of this Realm, and ye have not put me in as
a Subject; the Court is to take no notice of this Indictment. I had no sooner
spoke thus, but the Judge cried; Take him away, Jailer, take him away: So I was
presently hurried away. And the Jailer and People looked, when I should be
called for again; but I was never brought forth to the Court any more, though I
had many other great Errors to assign in the Indictment. But after I was gone,
the Judge asked the Jury, If they were agreed? And they said, Yes; and found
for the King against me: as I was told. But I was never called to hear Sentence
given; nor was any Sentence given against me, that I could hear of. For I
heard, that when they had looked more narrowly into the Indictment, they saw,
and were sensible themselves, that the Indictment was not good: and the Judge
having sworn the Officers of the Court, that the Oath was tendered me at the
Assize before, such a day, according as was set in the Indictment, and that
proving to be the wrong day, I should have proved the Officers of the Court
forsworn Men again, if the Judge would have suffered me to go on to plead to
the Indictment: which was thought to be the Reason, why he hurried me away so
soon. The Judge had passed Sentence of Praemunire upon Margaret Fell, before I
was brought before him: and it seems, when I was hurried away so, they recorded
me, as a Premunired Person; though I was never brought to hear the Sentence,
nor knew of it: Which was very Illegal. For they ought to have not only had me
present, to hear the Sentence given; but also to have asked me first, What I
could say, why Sentence should not be given against me? But they knew, I had so
much to say, that they could not give Sentence, if they heard it.

While I was a Prisoner in Lancaster-Castle, there was a great Noise and Talk
of the Turk's overspreading Christendom; Lancaster- Prison.
and great Fears entered many. But one day, as I was walking in my
Prison-Chamber, I saw the Lord's Power turn against him; and that he was
turning back again. And I declared to some, what the Lord had let me see, when
there were such Fears of his overrunning Christendom; and within a Month after
the News-Books came down, wherein it was mentioned, that They had given him a
Defeat.

Another time, as I was walking in my Chamber, with my Eye to the Lord, I saw
the Angel of the Lord with a glittering, drawn Sword stretched Southward, as
though the Court had been all on a Fire. Not long after, the Wars brake out
with Holland, and the Sickness brake forth; and afterward the Fire of London:
So the Lord's Sword was drawn indeed.

Now by reason of my long and close Imprisonment in so bad a place, I was grown
very weak of Body: but the Lord's Power was over all, and supported me through
all, and enabled me to do Service for him, and for his Truth and People, as the
place would admit. For while I was in Lancaster-Prison, I Answered several
Books, as the Mass, and the Common Prayer, and the Directory, and the
Church-Faith; which are the Four Chief Religions, that are got up since the
Apostles days. And there being several Friends in Prison at Lancaster, and
other Prisons, for not paying Tithes, I was moved to give forth the following
Lines to the World concerning Tithes:

IN the time of the Law, they that did not bring their Tithes into the
Storehouse, they robbed God; and then there was not Meat in their House:
Therefore the Lord commanded them To bring them into his House, that there
might be Meat in the Storehouse; which was to fill the Fatherless, Stranger
and Widow. But these Priests, who are Counterfeits, who take Peoples Tithes now
by a Law, are from the Beast; and if any will not pay them, they Prison them,
or make them pay Treble. So these Rob the Poor People, and Rob the Fatherless;
and the Stranger, and the Widow is not filled: So their Cry is gone up to
Heaven against these. And many are made almost Beggars by these Oppressing
Priests; their Cattle and their Corn being taken away from them, and they cast
into Prison. Others are Sued at the Law by these Priests, and have Treble
Damage taken from them; and yet such Priests are cried up to be Ministers of
the Gospel. Though when the Unchangeable Priest was come, the Priesthood, that
was Changeable, 1665. Lancaster-Prison.
was denied, as we now deny these. But if any be moved now to Cry against them,
they are stocked, or beat, or imprisoned; as there are many now in Prison at
Lancaster, and in other places, by a National Law: the like whereof was never
done by the Law of God, which was delivered to Moses. For we do not read, that
under Moses his Law any suffered Imprisonment, or spoiling of their Goods for
not paying Tithes; or was to pay Treble Damage. Surely, surely, the Cry for
Vengeance will be heard, which arises from the Oppressed Souls, that lie under
the Altar. And there are many, which be Prisoners at Kendal, because they
cannot pay Tithes; as Capt. Ward, and Thomas Robertson, and the Widow Garland,
who has many small Children; and these suffer, because they cannot pay Tithes.
Others there be in Kendal-Prison, who were moved of the Lord to speak to the
Priests; whereof one was moved to go in Sackcloth, and of late with Ashes upon
her Head. And others have been moved to go in Sackcloth, as a Lamentation for
the miserable Estate of this Nation; seeing so much Crying up of the Preaching
of the Gospel, and yet so much Strife, Debate, and Oaths, and Dissension among
People: But where the Gospel is received indeed, Strife and Contention is
ended, and Oppression is taken off. But Oh! The Land mourns, because of the
Oppression of them called Ministers! And though the Cry of the Oppressed has
not entered into the Ears of the Magistrates: Yet is the Cry of the poor,
oppressed People of God entered into the Ears of the Lord of Sabbath; who now
will be avenged of all his Adversaries. And all you Unjust Lawgivers, and
Unjust Judges, to that in all your Consciences I speak, to be Cleared, when ye
are Judged by the Just Judge of Heaven and Earth; whose Terror is gone out, and
is gone forth against all the Ungodly, and all the Oppressors of God's People
whatsoever, whether ye will hear or forbear.

G. F.

After the Assize at Lancaster was over, Col. Kirby, and some others of the
Justices were very uneasy with my being at Lancaster, (for I had gauled them
sore at my Trials there) and they labored much to get me removed from thence
to some Remote Place. Col. Kirby threatened, that I should be sent far enough;
and sometimes he said, I should be sent beyond the Seas. So about Six Weeks
after the Assizes they got an Order from the King and Council, to remove me
from Lancaster; and with it they brought a Letter from the Earl of Anglesey,
wherein was written; That if those things were found true against me, which I
was charged withal, I deserved no Clemency nor Mercy: And yet the greatest
Matter they had against me was, because I could not disobey the Command of
Christ, and Swear.

When they had prepared for my Removal, the Undersheriff, and the
Head-Sheriff's Man, with some Bailiffs came, and fetched me out of the Castle;
when I was so weak with lying in that cold, wet, and smoky Prison, that I could
hardly go or stand. They had me down into the Jailer's House, where was William
Kirby, a Justice, and several others; and they called for Wine to give me. I
told them, 'I would have none of their Wine. Then they cried; Bring out the
Horses. I desired them first to show me their Order, or a Copy of it, if they
intended to Remove me: But they would show me none, but their Swords. Then I
told them; 'There was no Sentence passed upon me, nor was I Premunired, that I
knew of; and therefore I was not made the King's Prisoner, but was the
Sheriff's: For they and all the Country knew, that I was not fully heard at the
last Assize, nor suffered to show forth the Errors, that were in the
Indictment; which were sufficient to quash it, though they had kept me from one
Assize to another, to the end they might Try me. But they all knew, there was
no Sentence of Praemunire passed upon me: And therefore I not being the King's
Prisoner, but the Sheriff's, did desire to see their Order. Instead of showing
me their Order, they haled me out, and lifted me up upon one of the Sheriff's
Horses. And when I was on Horseback in the Street, the Town's People being
gathered to gaze upon me, I told the Officers; I had received neither
Christianity, Civility, nor Humanity from them. So they hurried me away about
Fourteen Miles to Bentham; and I was so very weak, that I was hardly able to
sit on Horseback: and my Clothes smelt so of Smoke, that they were loathsome to
my self. And the Wicked Jailer, one Hunter, a young Fellow, would come behind,
and give the Horse a Lash with his Whip, and make him skip and leap; that I,
being weak, had much a-do to sit him: and then he would come and look me in the
Face, and say; How do you, Mr. Fox? I told him, It was not Civil in him to do
so: but the Lord cut him off soon after.

When we were come to Bentham in Yorkshire, Yorkshire. Bentham.
there met us many Troopers, and a Marshal; and many of the Gentry of the
Country were come in, and abundance of People to stare at me. I being very Weak
and Weary, desired them to let me lie down on a Bed; which the Soldiers
permitted me: for they, that brought me thither, gave their Order to the
Marshal; and he set a Guard of his Soldiers upon me. When they had stayed
there a while, they pressed Horses, and raised the Bailiff of the Hundred, and
the Constables, and others, and had me to Giggleswick that Night: but an
exceeding Weak Man I was. There they raised the Constables, with their
Clog-Shoes, Giggle^wick.
who sat drinking all Night in the Room by me; so that I could not get much
Rest. The next day we came to a Market Town, where several Friends came to see
me; and Robert Widders, and diverse Friends, came to me upon the Road. The next
Night I asked the Soldiers, Whither they intended to carry me, and whither I
was to be sent? Some of them said, Beyond Sea; others said, To Tinmouth-Castle.
And a great Fear there was amongst them, lest some should Rescue me out of
their hands: but that Fear was needless. Next Night we came to York, where the
Marshal put me up into a great Chamber, York
where there came most part of Two Troops to see me. One of those Troopers,
being an envious Man, and hearing, that I was Premunired, asked me, What Estate
I had? and whether it was Copyhold, or Freee-Land? I took no notice of his
Question; but was moved to declare the Word of Life to the Soldiers; and many
of them were very loving. At night the Lord Frecheville (so called) who
commanded those Horse, came to me, and was very Civil and Loving; and I gave
him an Account of my Imprisonment, 1665. York.
and declared many things to him relating to Truth. They kept me at York two
days; and then the Marshal and Four or Five Soldiers were sent to convey me to
Scarborough-Castle. Indeed, these were very Civil Men, and carried themselves
civilly and lovingly to me. Malton.
On the way we baited at Malton; and they permitted Friends to come and visit
me. When we were come to Scarborough, Scarborough.
they had me to an Inn, and gave notice to the Governor; and he sent half a
dozen Soldiers to be my Guard that Night. Next day they conducted me up into
the Castle, Scarborough- Castle.
and there put me into a Room, and set a Centry on me: and I being so very
weak, and subject to fainting, they for a while let me go out sometimes into
the Air with the Centry. They soon removed me out of this Room, and put me into
an Open Room, where the Rain came in: and the Room smoked exceedingly; which
was very offensive to me. One day the Governor, who was called Sir Jo.
Crosland, came to see me; and brought with him one called Sir Francis Cobb. I
desired the Governor to go into my Room, and see, what a Room I had. Now I had
got a little Fire made in it, and the Room was so filled with Smoke, that when
they were in, they could hardly find their way out again: And he being a
Papist, I told him, That was his Purgatory, which they had put me into. I was
forced to lay out a matter of Fifty Shillings, to stop out the Rain, and keep
the Room from smoking so much. But when I had been at that Charge, and made the
Room somewhat tolerable; they removed me out of it, and put me into a worse
Room, where I had neither Chimney, nor Fire-Hearth. And the Room being to the
Seaside, and lying much open, the Wind drove in the Rain forcible; so that the
Water came over my Bed, and ran about the Room, that I was fain to skim it up
with a Platter. And when my Clothes were wet, I had no Fire to dry them; so
that my Body was nummed with Cold, and my Fingers swelled, that one was grown
as big as two: and though I was at some Charge on this Room also; yet I could
not keep out the Wind and Rain. Besides, they would suffer few Friends to come
at me, and many times not any; no, not so much as to bring me a little Food;
but I was forced, for the First-Quarter, to hire one of the World to bring me
Necessaries: and sometimes the Soldiers would take it from her, and then she
would scuffle with them for it. Afterward I hired a Soldier to fetch me Water
and Bread, and something to make a Fire of, when I was in a Room, where a Fire
could be made. Commonly a Three-penny-Loaf served me Three Weeks, and sometimes
longer: and most of my Drink was Water, that had Wormwood steeped or bruised in
it. But one time, when the Weather was very sharp, and I had taken great Cold,
I got a little Elicampane-Beer: and I heard one of the Soldiers say to the
other, That they would play me a pretty Trick: for they would send for me up to
the Deputy Governor, and in the mean time they would drink my Strong-Beer out;
and so they did, When I came back, one of the Soldiers came to me in a Jeer,
and asked me for some Strong Beer, I told him, they had played their pretty
Trick: and so I took no further notice of it. But inasmuch as they kept me so
very strait, not giving Liberty for Friends to come to me; I spoke to the
Keepers of the Castle to this effect; I did not know, till I was removed from
Lancaster-Castle, and brought Prisoner to this Castle of Scarborough, 1665.
Scarborough- Castle.
that I was Convicted of a Praemunire; for the Judge did not give Sentence upon
me at the Assizes, in open Court. But seeing, I am now a Prisoner here, if I
may not have my Liberty and Enlargement, let my Friends and Acquaintance have
their Liberty to come and visit me; as Paul's Friends had among the Romans, who
were not Christians, but Heathens. For Paul's Friends had their Liberty, and
all that would, might come to him; and he had his Liberty to preach to them in
his hired House: But I cannot have Liberty to go into the Town, nor for my
Friends to come to me here. So you, that go under the Name of Christians, are
worse in this respect, than those Heathens were.

But though they would not let Friends come to me; they would often bring
others, either to Gaze upon me, or to Contend with me. One time there came a
great Company of Papists to discourse with me: and they affirmed; The Pope was
Infallible, and had stood Infallible ever since Peter 's time. But I showed
them the contrary by History: For one of the Bishops of Rome (Marcellinus by
Name) denied the Faith, and Sacrificed to Idols; and therefore he was not
Infallible. And I told them; If they were in the Infallible Spirit, they need
not have Jails, Swords and Staves, Racks and Tortures, Fires and Faggots, Whips
and Gallows, to hold up their Religion by, and to destroy Men's Lives about
Religion: for if they were in the Infallible Spirit, they would preserve Men's
Lives, and use none but Spiritual Weapons about Religion. I told them also,
what one, that had been of their Society, told me. It was a Woman, who lived in
Kent, and had not only been a Papist her self, but had brought over several to
that Religion: but she coming to be Convinced of God's Truth, and turned by it
to Christ her Savior, exhorted the Papists to the same. And one time having
one of them, a Tailor, at work at her House; while she opened to him the
Falseness of the Popish Religion, and endeavored to draw him from it to the
Truth, he drew his Knife at her, and got between her and the Door: But she
spoke boldly to him, and bid him put up his Knife: for she knew his Principle.
I asked the Woman, What she thought he would have done with his Knife? and she
said, He would have stabbed her. Stab thee! said I; what would he have Stabbed
thee for? thy Religion? Yes, said she, It is the Principle of the Papists, if
any turn from their Religion, to kill them, if they can. This Story I told
those Papists: and told them, I had it from one, that had been one of them; but
had forsook their Principles, and had discovered their Practices. They did not
deny this to be their Principle, but said; What! would I declare this abroad? I
told them, Yes, such things ought to be declared abroad, that it might be
known, how contrary their Religion was to true Christianity: Whereupon they
went away in a great Rage.

Another Papist came to discourse with me, and he said; All the Patriarchs were
in Hell, from the Creation, till Christ came: and that when Christ suffered, he
went into Hell, and the Devil said to him; What come thou hither for, to
break open our Strong Holds? And Christ said, To fetch them all out. And so, he
said, Christ was three days and three Nights in Hell, to bring them out. I told
him, that was false: for Christ said to the Thief, This day thou shall be with
me in Paradise. And Enoch and Elijah were translated into Heaven. And Abraham
was in Heaven: for the Scripture says, Lazarus was in his Bosom: and Moses and
Elias were with Christ upon the Mount, before he suffered. These Instances
stopped the Papist's Mouth, and put him to a stand.

Another time there came one called Doctor Witty, who was esteemed a great
Doctor of Physic: He came with him, that was called the Lord Falconbridge,
with whom came also the Governor of Tinmouth-Castle, and several Knights. And
I being called to them, this Witty undertook to discourse with me, and asked
me; What I was in Prison for? I told him, Because I would not disobey the
Command of Christ, and Swear. He said; I ought to swear my Allegiance to the
King. Now he being a great Presbyterian, I asked him; Whether he had not Sworn
against the King and House of Lords, and taken the Scotch-Covenant? And had he
not since Sworn to the King? And what then was his Swearing good for? But my
Allegiance, I told him, did not consist in Swearing; but in Truth and
Faithfulness. So after some further Discourse, I was had away to my Prison
again: And afterward, this Dr. Witty boasted in the Town amongst his Patients,
That he had Conquered me. When I heard of his Boasting, I told the Governor,
It was a small Boast in him, to say, He had conquered a Bondsman: And I desired
to bid him come to me again, when he came to the Castle. He came again a while
after, with a matter of Sixteen or Seventeen great Persons; and then he ran
himself worse on ground, than before. For in Discourse he affirmed before them
all, That Christ had not enlightened every Man, that comes into the World; and
That the Grace of God, that brought Salvation, had not apppeared unto all Men:
and That Christ had not died for all Men. I asked him, 'What sort of Men those
were, which Christ had not enlightened? and whom his Grace had not appeared to?
and whom he had not died for? He said, Christ did not die for Adulterers, and
Idolaters, and Wicked Men. Then I asked him, Whether Adulterers, and Wicked Men
were not Sinners? And he said, Yes. 'And did not Christ die for Sinners, said
I? Did he not come to call Sinners to Repentance? Yes, said he. Then, said I,
Thou have stopped thy own Mouth. So I proved, That the Grace of God had appeared
unto all Men, though some turned it into Wantonness, and walked despightfully
against it; and that Christ had enlightened all Men, though some hated the
Light. Several of the People, that were present, confessed, it was true; but he
went away in a great Rage, and came no more at me.

Another time the Governor brought a Priest: but his Mouth was soon stopped. Not
long after he brought two or three Parliament Men, and they asked me, Whether I
did own Ministers and Bishops? I told them, Yes, such as Christ sent forth,
such as had freely received, and would freely give; and such as were qualified,
and were in the same Power and Spirit, that they were in in the Apostles days.
But such Bishops and Teachers, as theirs were, that would go no further, than
they had a great Benefice, I did not own; for they were not like the Apostles.
For Christ says to his Ministers, Go ye into all Nations, and preach the
Gospel: But ye Parliament Men, that keep your Priests and Bishops in such
great, fat Benefices, ye have spoiled them all. for do ye think, they will go
into all Nations to preach? or will go any further, than they have a great, fat
Benefice? Judge your selves, whether they will or no.

There came another time the Widow of him, who was called the Old Lord Fairfax,
and with her a great Company; and one of the Company was a Priest. I was moved
to declare the Truth to them; and the Priest asked me. Why we said Thou and
Thee to People? for he counted us but (...) and ^^iots for speaking so. I asked
him, Whether they, that Trans^^^^ (...) Scriptures, and that made the Grammar
and Accidence, were Fools and Idiots, seeing they translated the Scriptures so,
and made the Grammar so, Thou to one, and You to more than one; and left it so
to us? And if they were Fools and Idiots, then why had not He, and such as he,
that looked upon themselves as Wise Men, and that could not bear Thou and Thee
to a Singular, altered the Grammar, Accidence and Bible, and put the Plural
instead of the Singular? But if they were Wise Men, that had so translated the
Bible, and had made the Grammar and Accidence so; then I wished him to consider,
Whether they were not Fools and Idiots themselves, that did not speak, as their
Grammars and Bibles taught them; but were offended with us, and called us Fools
and Idiots, for speaking so? Thus the Priest's Mouth was stopped; and many of the
Company did acknowledge the Truth, and were pretty loving and tender: and some
of them would have given me Money; but I would not receive it.

After this came one called Doctor Cradock, with three Priests more, and the
Governor, and his Lady (so called) and another, that was called a Lady; and a
great Company with them. Dr. Cradock asked me, What I was in Prison for? I told
him; For obeying the Command of Christ, and the Apostle, in not Swearing. But
if he, being both a Doctor and a Justice of Peace, could Convince me, that
after Christ and the Apostle had forbidden Swearing, they commanded Christians
to Swear, then I would Swear. Here was the Bible, I told him, He might, if he
would, show me any such Command. He said, It is written, Ye shall Swear in
Truth and Righteousness. Ay, said I, it was written so in Jeremiah's time; but
that was many Ages before Christ commanded not to swear at all: but where is it
written so, since Christ forbad all Swearing? I could bring as many Instances
out of the Old Testament for Swearing, as thou, and it may be, more too; but of
what Force are they, to prove Swearing lawful in the New Testament, since
Christ and the Apostle forbad it? Besides, said I, in that Text, where it is
written, Ye shall Swear, What [Ye] was this? Was it Ye Gentiles, or Ye Jews? To
this he would not Answer. But one of the Priests, that were with him, Answered,
and said; It was to the Jews, that this was spoken: and then Dr. Cradock
confessed, it was so. Very well, said I; but where did God ever give a Command
to the Gentiles to Swear? For thou know, that we are Gentiles by Nature.
Indeed, said he, in the Gospel Times every thing was to be established out of
the Mouths of two or three Witnesses: but there was to be no Swearing then? Why
then, said I, do thou force Oaths upon Christians, contrary to thy own
Knowledge, in the Gospel Times? And why, said I, do thou Excommunicate my
Friends? (for he had Excommunicated abundance, both in Yorkshire and
Lancashire.) He said, For not coming to Church. 'Why, said I, ye left us above
Twenty Years ago, (when we were but young Lads and Lasses) to the
Presbyterians, Independents (and Baptists,) many whereof made Spoil of our
Goods, and persecuted us, because we would not follow them. Now we being but
Young, knew little then of your Principles: and the Old Men, that did know
them, if ye had intended to have kept them to you, and have kept your
Principles alive, that we might have known them, ye should either not have fled
from us, as ye did; or ye should have sent us your Epistles, and Collects, and
Homilies, and Evening-Songs, (for Paul writ Epistles to the Saints, though he
was in Prison:) But they and we might have turned Turks or Jews, for any
Collects, Homilies or Epistles we had from you all this while. And now thou
have Excommunicated us, both Young and Old, and so have others of you done;
that is, ye have put us out of your Church, before ye have got us into it, and
before ye have brought us to know your Principles. And is not this Madness in
you, to put us out, before we were brought in? Indeed, if ye had brought us
into your Church; and when we had been in, if we had done some bad thing, that
had been something like a ground for Excommunication, or putting out again.
But, said I, What do thou call the Church? Why, said he, That which you call
the Steeple-house. Then I asked him, Whether Christ shed his Blood for the
Steeple-house? and purchased and sanctified the Steeple-house with his Blood?
And seeing, the Church is Christ's Bride and Wife, and that he is the Head of
the Church, Do thou think, the Steeple-house is Christ's Wife and Bride, and
that he is the Head of that Old House, or of his People? No, said he, Christ is
the Head of the People, and they are the Church. Then said I, But you have
given that Title Church to an Old House, which belongs to the People; and you
have taught People to believe so. I asked him also, Why he persecuted Friends
for not paying Tithes? And whether God did ever give a Command to the Gentiles,
that they should pay Tithes? And whether Christ had not ended Tithes, when he
ended the Levitical Priesthood, that took Tithes? And whether Christ, when he
sent forth his Disciples to preach, had not commanded them to preach freely, as
he had given them freely? And whether all the Ministers of Christ are not bound
to observe this Command of Christ? He said, He would not dispute that: Neither
did I find, he was willing to stay on that Subject; for he presently turned to
another matter, and said, You Marry, but I know not how. I replied, 'It maybe
so: but why do thou not come and see? Then he threatened, that he would use
his Power against us, as he had done. I bid him, Take heed: for he was an Old
Man. I asked him also, 'Where he did read from Genesis to the Revelations, that
ever any Priest did Marry any? And I wished him to show me some Instance
thereof, if he would have us come to them to be Married: For, said I, thou have
Excommunicated one of my Friends two Years, after he was dead, about his
Marriage. And why do thou not Excommunicate Isaac, and Jacob, and Boaz, and
Ruth? Why do thou not use thy Power against these? For we do not read, that
they were ever Married by the Priests: but they took one another in the
Assemblies of the Righteous, in the Presence of God and his People: and so do
we. Holy Men and Women, that the Scripture speaks of in this Practice, on our
side. Much Discourse we had; but when he found, he could get no Advantage on
me, he went away with his Company.

With such sorts of People I was much exercised, while I was there: for most,
that came to the Castle, would desire to speak with me; and great Disputes and
Reasonings I had with them. But as to Friends, I was as a Man buried alive: for
though many Friends came from far to see me, yet few were suffered to come at
me; and when any Friend came into the Castle about Business, if he looked but
toward me, they would Rage at him. But at last the Governor came under some
Trouble himself: for he having sent out a Privateer to Sea, they took some
Ships, that were not Enemies-Ships, but their Friends; whereupon he was brought
into some Trouble: after which he grew somewhat more Friendly to me. For
before, I had a Marshal set over me, on purpose, to get Money out of me; but I
was not to give him a Farthing: and when they found, they could get nothing of
me, then he was taken off again. And the Officers would often be threatening me,
that I should be hanged over the Wall. Nay, the Deputy Governor told me one
time, That the King, knowing, that I had a great Interest in the People, had
sent me thither; that if there should be any Stirring in the Nation, they
should hang me over the Wall, to keep the People down. And there being a while
after, a Marriage at a Papist's House, upon which occasion a great many of them
were Met together; they talked much then of hanging me. But I told them, If
that was it they desired, and it was permitted them, I was ready: for I never
feared Death, nor Sufferings in my Life; but I was known to be an Innocent,
peaceable Man, free from all Stirrings and Plottings, and one that sought the
Good of all Men. But afterward, the Governor growing kinder, I spoke to him,
when he was to go to London to the Parliament, and desired him to speak to him,
that was called Esquire Marsh, and to Sir Francis Cob (so called) and to some
others; and let them know, How long I had lain in Prison, and for what: and he
did so. And when he came down again, he told me, that Esquire Marsh said, He would
go an Hundred Miles barefoot for my Liberty, he knew me so well: And several
others, he said, spoke well of me. From which time the Governor was very
Loving to me.

There were amongst the Prisoners, that were there, Two very bad Men, that
would often sit drinking with the Officers and Soldiers; and because I would
not sit and drink with them too, that made them the worse against me. One time,
when these Two Prisoners were drunk, one of them (whose Name was William
Wilkinson, who was a Presbyterian, and had been a Captain) came to me, and
challenged me to fight with him. I seeing, what Condition he was in, got out of
his way; and next Morning, when he was grown more sober, told him, How unmanly
a thing it was in him, to challenge a Man to fight, whose Principle, he knew,
it was not to strike; but if he was stricken on one Ear, to turn the other. And
I told him, If he had a mind to fight, he should have challenged some of the
Soldiers, that could have answered him in his own way. But however, I told
him, seeing he had Challenged me, I was now come to Answer him, with my Hands
in my Pockets: and (reaching my Head toward him) Here, said I, here is my
Hair, here are my Cheeks, here is my Back. With that he skipt away from me, and
went into another Room: At which the Soldiers fell a laughing; and one of the
Officers said, You are a happy Man, that can bear such things. Thus he was
Conquered without a Blow: But after a while he took the Oath, and gave Bond,
and got out of Prison; and not long after the Lord cut him off.

There were great Imprisonments in this and the former Years, while I was
Prisoner at Lancaster and Scarborough. At London many Friends were crowded into
Newgate, and other Prisons, where the Sickness was; and many Friends died in
Prison: Many Friends also were Banished, and several sent on Shipboard by the
King's Order. Some Masters of Ships would not carry them, but set them on Shore
again; yet some were sent to Barbados, and to Jamaica, and to Mevis, and the
Lord blessed them there. There was one Master of a Ship was very wicked and
cruel to Friends, that were put on Board his Ship: for he kept the Friends down
under Decks, though the Sickness was amongst them; so that many died of it. But
the Lord plagued him for his Wickedness: for he lost most of his Seamen by the
Plague, and lay several Months crossed with Contrary Winds; though other Ships
went out, and made their Voyages. At last he came before Plymouth; and there
the Governor and Magistrates would not suffer him, nor any of his Men to come
ashore, though he wanted many Necessaries for his Voyage: but Thomas Lower, and
Arthur Cotton, and John Light and some other Friends went to the Ship's-side,
and carried Necessaries for the Friends, that were Prisoners on Board. The
Master being thus crossed, and plagued and vexed, he cursed them, that put him
upon this Freight; and said, He hoped he should not go far, before be was
taken. And the Vessel was but a little while gone out of sight of Plymouth, but
she was taken by a Dutchman of War, and carried into Holland. When they came
into Holland, the States there sent the Banished Friends back to England, with
a Letter of Pasport and a Certificate, That they had not made an Escape, but
were sent back by them. But in time the Lord's Power wrought over this Storm;
and many of our Persecutors were Confounded, and put to shame.

After I had lain Prisoner above a Year in Scarborough-Castle, I sent a Letter
to the King, in which I gave him an Account of my Imprisonment, and the bad
Usage I had had in Prison; and also that I was Informed, no Man could deliver
me, but he. After this, John Whitehead being at London, and having Acquaintance
also with him, that was called Esquire Marsh, he went to Visit him, and spoke to
him about me: And he undertook, if John Whitehead would get the State of my
Case drawn up, to deliver it to the Master of Requests, whom he called Sir John
Birkenhead, he would endeavor to get a Release for me. So John Whitehead and
Ellis Hooks drew up a Relation of my Imprisonment and Sufferings, and carried
it to Marsh; and he went with it to the Master of Requests, who procured an
Order from the King for my Release. The Substance of the Order was, That the
King being certainly Informed, that I was a Man principled against Plotting and
Fighting, and had been ready at all times to discover Plots, rather than to
make any, etc. that therefore his Royal Pleasure was, that I should be
discharged from my Imprisonment, etc. As soon as this Order was obtained, John
Whitehead came down to Scarborough with it, and delivered it to the Governor:
Who upon Receipt thereof, gathered the Officers together, and without requiring
Bond or Sureties for my peaceable Living, being satisfied, that I was a Man of
a peaceable Life, he discharged me freely, and gave me the following Pasport.

PErmit the Bearer hereof, George Fox, late a Prisoner here, and now discharged
by His Majesty's Order, quietly to pass about his Lawful Occasions, without any
Molestation.

Given under my hand at Scarborough-Castle this First Day of September, 1666.
JORDAN CROSLANDS, Governor of Scarborough-Castle.

After I was Released, I would have given the Governor something, Scarborough.
for the Civility and Kindness he had of late showed me; but he would not
receive any thing: but said, Whatever Good he could do for me and my Friends,
he would do it, and never do them any hurt. And afterward, if at any time the
Mayor of the Town sent to him for Soldiers to break up Friends Meetings, if he
sent any down, he would privately give them a Charge, Not to meddle: and so he
continued Loving to his Dying-Day. The Officers also and the Soldiers were
mightily changed, and grown very Respectful to me; and when they had occasion
to speak of me, they would say, He is as stiff, as a Tree; and as pure as a
Bell; for we could never bow him.

The very next day after I was Released from Scarborough-Prison, the Fire brake
out at London; and the Report of it came quickly down into the Country. Then I
saw, the Lord God was true and just in his Word, which he had showed me before
in Lancaster-Jail, when I saw the Angel of the Lord with a glittering, drawn
Sword Southward, as is before expressed. And the People of London were
forewarned of this Fire: yet few laid it to Heart, or believed it; but rather
grew more Wicked, and higher in Pride. For we had a Friend, that was moved to
come out of Huntington-shire a little before the Fire, and to scatter his Money
up and down the Streets, and to turn his Horse loose in the Streets, and to
untie the Knees of his Britches, and let his Stockings fall down, and to
unbutton his Doublet; and told the People, So should they run up and down,
scattering their Money and their Goods, half undrest, like mad People, as he
was a Sign to them: And so they did, when the Fire brake out, and the City was
burning. Thus has the Lord exercised his Prophets and Servants, by his Power,
and showed them Signs of his Judgments, and sent them to fore-warn the People:
but instead of Repenting, they have beaten and cruelly entreated some; and some
they have Imprisoned, both in the former Power's days, and since. 1666.
Scarborough.
But the Lord is just; and happy are they, that obey his Word. Some have been
moved to go Naked in their Streets, in the other Power's days, and since, as
Signs of their Nakedness; and have declared amongst them, That God would strip
them out of their Hypocritical Professions, and make them as bare and naked, as
they were. But instead of considering it, they have many times whipped, or
otherwise abused them, and sometimes Imprisoned them. Others have been moved to
go in Sack cloth, and to denounce the Woes and Vengeance of God against the
Pride and Haughtiness of the People: But few regarded it. And in the other
Powers days, the Wicked, Envious, Professing Priests put up several Petitions
both to Oliver and Richard called Protectors, and to the Parliaments, Judges
and Justices against us, stuffed full of Lies, and vilifying Words and Slanders:
but we got Copies of them, and through the Lord's Assistance answered them all;
and cleared the Lord's Truth, and our selves of them. But oh! the Body of
Darkness, that rose against the Truth in them, that made Lies their Refuge! But
the Lord swept them away; and in and with his Power, Truth, Light and Life
hedged his Lambs about, and did preserve them, as on Eagle's Wings. Therefore
we all had, and have great Encouragement to Trust the Lord, whom we did see by
his Power and Spirit, how he did overturn and bring to naught all the
Confederacies and Counsels, that were hatched in the Darkness against his Truth
and People; and by the same Truth gave his People Dominion, that in it they
might serve him.

And indeed, I could not but take notice, how the Hand of the Lord turned
against those my Persecutors, who had been the cause of my Imprisonment, or had
been Abusive or Cruel to me in it. For the Officer, that fetched me to
Houlker-Hall, wasted his Estate, and soon after fled into Ireland. And most of
the Justices, that were upon the Bench at the Sessions, when I was sent to
Prison, died in a while after; as Old Tho. Preston, Rawlinson, and Porter, and
Matthew West of Borwick. And though Justice Fleming did not die, (yet his Wife
died, and left him thirteen or fourteen Motherless Children) who had Imprisoned
Two Friends to Death, and thereby made several Children Fatherless. Col. Kirby
never prospered after: And the Chief Constable, Richard Dodgson died soon
after; and Mount, the Petty-Constable, and the other Petty-Constable, John
Ashburnham his Wife, who railed at me in her House, died soon after. And
William Knipe, that was the Witness they brought against me, died soon after
also. And Hunter, the Jailer of Lancaster, who was very wicked to me, while I
was his Prisoner, he was cut off in his Young Days. And the Undersheriff, that
carried me from Lancaster-Prison toward Scarborough, he lived not long after.
And one Joblin, the Jailer of Durham, who was Prisoner with me in
Scarborough-Castle, and had often incensed the Governor and Soldiers against
me; though he got out of Prison, yet the Lord cut him off in his Wickedness
soon after. When I came into that Country again, most of these, that dwelt in
Lancashire, were dead, and others ruined in their Estates: So that, though I
did not seek Revenge upon them, for their actings against me contrary to the
Law; yet the Lord had executed his Judgments upon many of them.

Being now set free from my Imprisonment in Scarborough-Castle, I went about
three Miles to a large, General Meeting at a Friend's House, that had been a
Chief-Constable; and all was quiet and well. On the Fourth Day after I came
into Scarborough again, and had a Meeting in the Town at Peter Hodgson's House.
To this Meeting came one called a Lady, and several other Great Persons; also a
Young Man, that was Son to the Bailiff of the Town, and had been Convinced,
while I was there in Prison. That Lady (so called) came to me, and said; I
spoke against the Ministers, I told her; Such as the Prophets and Christ
declared against formerly, I declared against now.

From hence I went to Whitby; and having visited Friends there, Whitby.
I passed thence to Burlington, where I had another Meeting; Burlington. Oram.
and from thence to Oram, where I had another Meeting: and from thence to Oram,
where I had another Meeting: and from thence to Marmaduke Stor's, and had a
large Meeting at a Constable's House, Mar. Stor.
on whom the Lord had wrought a great Miracle.

Next Day Two Friends being to take each other in Marriage, there was a very
great Meeting, which I was at. And I was moved to open to the People the State
of our Marriages, declaring; How the People of God took one another in the
Assemblies of the Elders: and how that it was God, that did Join Man an^ Woman
together before the Fall. And though Men had taken upon them to Join in the
Fall, yet in the Restoration it was God's Joining, that was the right and
honorable Marriage: But never any Priest did Marry any, that we read of in the
Scriptures, from Genesis to the Revelations. Then I showed them the Duty of Man
and Wife, how they should serve God, being Heirs of Life and Grace together.

After the Meeting, I passed from thence to Grace Barwick, G. Barwick
where I had a General Meeting, which was very large: and when that was over, I
came to Richard Shipton's, where I had another Meeting; Whitby.
and so to a Priest's House, whose Wife was Convinced, and himself grown very
Loving, and glad to see me. This was that Priest, that in the Year 1651.
threatened, If ever he met with me again, he would have my Life, or I should
have his; and said, He would lose his Head, if I were not knocked down in a
Month: But now he was partly Convinced, and become very kind. I went from his
House toward the Sea, where several Friends came to visit me; and amongst
others, one Philip Scarff, who had formerly been a Priest, but having received
the Truth, was now become a Preacher of Christ freely, and continued so.
Passing on, I called to see an Ancient Man, who was Convinced of Truth, and was
above an Hundred Years old. Then came I to a Friend's House, where I had a
great Meeting, and quiet. Near Malton.
And passing on through the Country, I had a great Meeting near Malton; and
another large Meeting near Hull: from which I went to a place called
Holdendike. Near Hull. Holdendike.
As we went into the Town, the Watchmen questioned me, and those that were
with me; but they not having any Warrant to stay us, we went on by them, and
they in a Rage threatened, they would search us out. I went to the House of one,
that was called the Lady Mountague, and there I lodged that Night; and several
Friends came thither to Visit me. Next Morning being up betimes, I walked out
into the Orchard, and saw a Man about Sunrising go into the House, in a great
Cloak. 1666. L. Mountague.
He stayed not long; but came soon out again, and went away, not seeing me. I
felt something strike at my Life; and went into the House; where I found the
Maidservant affrighted and trembling: and she told me, That Man had a Naked
Rapier under his Cloak. By which I perceived, he came with an Intent to have
done Mischief; but the Lord prevented him.

From this place passing through the Country, I visited Friends, till I came to
York, York
where we had a large Meeting. After the Meeting I went to visit Justice
Robinson, an ancient Justice of the Peace: who had been very loving to me and
Friends from the beginning. There was at this time a Priest with him; and he
told me, It was said of us, that we loved none, but our selves. I told him, We
loved all Mankind, as they were God's Creation, and as they were Children of
Adam and Eve by Generation; and we loved the Brotherhood in the Holy Ghost.
This stopped him: so that after some other Discourse, we parted friendly, and we
passed away.

About this time I had written a Book, Entitled; Fear God, and Honor the
King: In which I showed, That none could rightly Fear God, and Honor the King,
but they, that departed from Sin and Evil: This Book did much affect the
Soldiers, and most People.

Now having visited Friends at York, we passed thence to a Market Town, G
Watkinson.
where we had a Meeting at one George Watkinson's, who formerly had been a
Justice. A glorious, blessed Meeting it was, and very large, and the Seed of
Life was set over all. But we had been troubled to have got into this Town, had
not Providence made way for us; for the Watchmen stood ready to stop us: but
there being a Man riding just before us, the Watchmen questioned him first:
and perceiving, that he was a Justice of Peace, they let him pass; and we
riding close after him, by that means we escaped.

T. Tailor.
From this place we passed to Thomas Taylor's, who had formerly been a Captain,
where we had a precious Meeting. Hard by Thomas Taylor's, there lived one
called a Knight, who was much displeased, when he heard, I was like to be
Released out of Prison; and threatened, That if the King set me at Liberty, he
would send me to Prison again the next day. But though I had this Meeting so
near him, yet the Lord's Power stopped him from meddling, and our Meeting was
quiet. Col. Kirby also, who had been the Chief Means of my Imprisonment at
Lancaster- and Scarborough-Castles, when he heard, I was set at Liberty, got
another Order for the Taking me up; and said, He would ride his Horse Forty
Miles to take me, and would give Forty Pounds to have me taken. Yet a while
after I came so near him, as to have a Meeting within Two Miles of him: and
then was he struck with the Gout, and kept his Bed; so that it was thought, he
would have died.

From Thomas Taylor's I passed through the Country, visiting Friends,
Sinderhill-Green.
till I came to Synderhill-Green, where I had a large and General Meeting. The
Priest of the place hearing of it, he sent the Constable to the Justices for a
Warrant; and they rid their Horses so hard, that they almost spoiled them: But
the notice they had, being short, and the way long, the Meeting was ended,
before they came. I heard not of them, till I was going out of the House, after
Meeting was over; and then a Friend came to me, and told me, 1666.
Sinderhill-Green.
They were searching another House for we; which was the House I was then going
to. As I went along the Closes toward it, I met the Constables and Wardens,
and the Justice's Clerk with them; so I passed through them: and they looked at
me, and I went to the House, that they had been searching. I hus the Devil and
the Priest lost their Design: for the Lord's Power bound them, and preserved me
over them; and Friends parted, and all escaped them. And the Officers went
away, as they came; for the Lord God had frustrated their Design: praised be
his Name for ever!

After this I went into Darbyshire, where I had a large Meeting: Darbyshire.
And some Friends were apprehensive of the Constables coming in; for they had
had a great Persecution in those parts: but our Meeting was quiet. There was a
Justice of Peace in that Country, had taken away much of Friend's Goods:
whereupon one Ellen Fretwell had made her Appeal to the Sessions; and the rest
of the Justices granted her her Goods again, and spoke to that persecuting
Justice, That he should not do so any more. And she was moved to speak to that
Justice, and to Warn him; whereupon he bid her, Come and sit down on the Bench.
Ay, said she, If I may persuade you to do Justice to the Country, I will sit
down with you: No, said he, then you shall not; and bid her Get her out of the
Court. But as she was gong out, she was moved of the Lord to turn again, and
say; She should be there, when he should not. After the Sessions were ended, he
got amongst some of his Persecuting Companions, and said; They would get some
more of the Quakers Goods, if the Devil did not raise up that Woman to hinder
them. So he went home, and drove away her Brother's Oxen for going to Meetings:
and then another Woman, a Friend of Chesterfield, whose Name was Susan Frith,
was moved of the Lord to tell him; That, if he continued on in his persecuting
of the Innocent, the Lord would execute his Plagues upon him. Soon after which,
this Justice, whose Name was Clark, fell distracted, and was bound with Ropes;
but he gnawed the Ropes in pieces, and had like to have spoiled his Maid: for
he fell upon her, and bit her; so that they were fain to put an Iron Instrument
into his Mouth, to wrest his Teeth out of her Flesh: And afterward he died
distracted. This Relation I had from Ellen Fretwel her self.

I traveled out of Darbyshire into Nottinghamshire, Nottinghamshire. Skegby.
Man's field.
and had a large Meeting at Skegby: and from thence went to Mansfield; where
also I had a Meeting: and thence went to another Town, where there was a Fair,
at which I met with many Friends. Then passing through the Forest in a mighty
thundering and rainy day, Nottingham.
I came to Nottingham: and so great was the Tempest that day, that many Trees
were torn up by the Roots, and some People killed; but the Lord preserved us.
On the First Day following I had a large Meeting in Nottingham, very quiet; and
Friends were come to sit under their Teacher, the Grace of God, which brought
them Salvation, and were established upon the Rock and Foundation Christ Jesus.
After the Meeting I went to visit the Friend, that had been Sheriff about the
Year 1649, whose Prisoner I had then been.

1666. Leicestershire. Syleby. Leicester.
From Nottingham I passed into Leicestershire, and came to Syleby, where we had
a large, blessed Meeting. After which I went to Leicester, to visit the
Prisoners there; and then came to John Penford's, where we had a General
Meeting, large and precious. From thence I passed through the Country, visiting
Friends and my Relations, till I came into Warwickshire, and to Warwick; where
having visited the Prisoners, Warwickshire. Warwick. Badgley. Northamptonshire.
Bedfordshire. Buckinghamshire. Oxfordshire London.
I passed from thence to Badgley, and had a precious Meeting there. Then I
traveled through Northamptonshire, Bedfordshire, Buckinghamshire, and
Oxfordshire, visiting Friends in each County. In Oxfordshire the Devil had laid
a Snare for me, but the Lord brake it: and his Power came over all, and his
blessed Truth spread, and Friends were Increased therein. Thus after I had
passed through many Counties, visiting Friends, and had had many large and
precious Meetings amongst them, I came at last to London. But I was so weak
with lying almost Three Years in cruel and hard Imprisonments, and my Joints,
and my Body were so stiff and benumbed, that I could hardly get on my Horse, or
bend my Joints, nor well bear to be near the Fire, or to eat Warm Meat; I had
been kept so long from it. Being come to London, I walked a little among the
Ruins, and took good notice of them; and I saw the City lying, according as the
Word of the Lord came to me concerning it, several Years before.

Now after I had been a time in London, and had visited Friends Meetings
through the City, I went into the Country again, and had large Meetings in the
Countries, Kingston. Reading. Wiltshire. Bristol.
as I went; at Kingston, Reading, and in Wiltshire, till I came to Bristol. At
Bristol also I had many large Meetings; and Thomas Lower came thither out of
Cornwall to meet me: and Friends were there from several parts of the Nation, it
being then the Fair-time. After I was clear of Bristol, I left that City, and
went to Nath. Crips's: N. Crips's London.
and so through the Countries, till I came back to London again; having large
Meetings in the way, and all quiet, blessed be the Lord. And thus, though I was
very Weak, yet I traveled up and down in the Service of the Lord; and the Lord
enabled me to go through in it.

About this time, some that had run out from Truth, and clashed against
Friends, were reached unto by the Power of the Lord, which came wonderfully
over; and made them Condemn and Tear their Papers of Controversies to pieces.
Several Meetings we had with them, and the Lord's Everlasting Power was over
all, and set Judgment on the Head of that, that had run out. And in these
Meetings which lasted whole Days, several, that had Run out with John Perrot
and others, came in again, and Condemned that Spirit, that led them to Keep on
their Hats, when Friends prayed, and when they themselves prayed; and some of
them said, That Friends were more righteous than they: and that if Friends had
not stood, they had been gone, and had fallen into Perdition. And thus the
Lord's Power was wonderfully manifested, and came over all.

Then was I moved of the Lord to recommend the setting up of Five Monthly
Meetings of Men and Women in the City of London, (besides the Womens-Meetings
and the Quarterly Meetings) to take care of God's Glory, and to admonish and
exhort such, as walked disorderly, or carelessly, and not according to Truth.
For whereas Friends had had only Quarterly Meetings; now Truth was spread,
1667. London.
and Friends were grown more Numerous, I was moved to Recommend the setting up
of Monthly Meetings throughout the Nation. And the Lord opened to me, and let
me see, What I must do, and how the Men's and Women's Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings should be ordered and established in this Nation, and in other
Nations; and that I should Write to them, where I came not, to do the same. So,
after things were well settled at London, and the Lord's Truth, and Power, and
Seed, and Life reigned and shined over all in the City, then I passed forth
into the Countries again; and went down into Essex: Ess^x. Suffolk. Norfolk.
And after the Monthly Meetings were settled in that County, I went from thence
into Suffolk and Norfolk, Thomas Dry being with me. And when we had Visited
Friends in their Meetings in those parts, and the Monthly Meetings were settled
there, we passed from thence, and went into Huntingtonshire; Huntingto^shire.
where we had very large and blessed Meetings: and though we met with some
Opposition there, yet the Lord's Power came over all; and the Monthly Meetings
were established there also. Bedfordshire.
When we came into Bedfordshire, we had great Opposition; but the Lord's Power
came over it all. Afterward we went into Nottinghamshire, Nottinghamshire.
where we had many precious Meetings; and the Monthly Meetings were settled
there. Then passing into Lincolnshire, Lincolnshire.
we had a Meeting of some Men-Friends of all the Meetings in the County, at his
House, who had been formerly Sheriff of Lincoln; and all was quiet. Trent.
Nottinghamshire.
After this Meeting we passed over Trent into Nottinghamshire again, (he that
had been the Sheriff of Lincoln, being with me) where we had some of all the
Meetings in that County together; and our Meeting was glorious and peaceable:
And many precious Meetings we had in that County.

At that time William Smith was very Weak and Sick: and the Constables and
others had seized upon all his Goods, to the very Bed he lay upon, for Truth's
sake, These Officers threatened, to come and break up our Meeting; but the
Lord's Power chained them, so that they had not power to meddle with us,
blessed be his Name. After the Meeting was over, I went to visit William Smith;
and there were the Constables and others watching his Corn and his Beasts, that
none of them might be Removed.

From thence we passed into Leicestershire, and so into Warwickshire;
Leicestershire. Warwickshire.
where many blessed Meetings we had: and the Order of the Gospel was set up,
and the Men's Monthly Meetings established in all those Counties. Then we went
into Darbyshire, Darbyshire.
where we had several large and blessed Meetings: And in many places we were
threatened by the Officers; but through the Power of the Lord we escaped their
hands. So leaving things well settled in Darbyshire, we traveled over the
Peak-Hills, (which were very cold; Peak-Hills. Staffordshire.
for it was then Frost and Snow) and so came into Staffordshire: and at Thomas
Hammersley's we had a General Mens-Meeting; where things were well settled in
the Gospel Order, and the Monthly Meetings were established there also. But I
was so exceeding weak, I was hardly able to get on or off my Horse's Back: But
my Spirit being earnestly engaged in the Work, the Lord had concerned me in,
and sent me forth about, I traveled on therein, notwithstanding the Weakness
of my Body; having Confidence in the Lord, that he would carry me through: as
he did by his Power. So we came into Cheshire, 1667. Cheshire.
where we had several blessed Meetings, and a General Men's Meeting; wherein all
the Monthly Meetings for that County were settled, according to the
Gospel Order, in and by the Power of God: And after the Meeting was done, I
passed away. But when the Justices heard of it, they were very much troubled,
that they had not come, and broken it up, and taken me: but the Lord prevented
them. So after I had cleared my self there in the Lord's Service, I passed into
Lancashire, Lancashire. Near Warrington.
to William Barnes's, near Warrington, where met some of most of the Meetings
in that County; and there all the Monthly Meetings were established in the
Gospel Order also. From thence I sent Papers into Westmorland by Leonard Fell
and Robert Widders, (Westmorland. Bishopric of Durham. Cleaveland
Northumberland. Cumberland. SCOTLAND.)
and also into Bishopric, Cleaveland and Northumberland, and into Cumberland
and Scotland, to exhort Friends, to settle the Monthly Meetings in the Lord's
Power in those places; which they did. And so the Lord's Power came over all,
and the Heirs of it came to inherit it. For the Authority of our Meetings is
the Power of God, the Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light; that
they may see over the Devil, that has darkened them, and that all the Heirs of
the Gospel might walk according to the Gospel, and glorify God with their
Bodies, Souls and Spirits, which are the Lord's: For the Order of the Glorious
Gospel is not of Man, nor by Man. To this Meeting in Lancashire Margaret Fell,
Warrington. Cheshire.
being a Prisoner, got liberty to come, and went with me from thence to Jane
Milners in Cheshire, where we parted. Shropshire.
And I passed out of Cheshire into Shropshire, and from thence into Wales,
WALES.
and had a large General Mens-Meeting at Charles Floid's, where some Opposers
came in; but the Lord's Power brought them down.

Denbyshire. Montgomeryshire. Meri^^^^^sh^^^.
Having gone through Denbyshire and Montgomeryshire, we passed into
Merionethshire; where we had several blessed Meetings: and then went to the Sea
side, where also we had a precious Meeting. And having passed through several
Countries, and Friends there being established upon Christ their Foundation, we
left Wales, the Monthly Meetings being settled there in the Power of God; and
returned into Shropshire, Shropshire.
where the Friends of the Country gathering together, the Monthly Meetings were
established there also. Then coming into Worcestershire, Worcestershire.
after we had had many Meetings up and down amongst Friends in that Country, we
had a General Mens-Meeting at Henry Gibs's House at Pashur; Pashur.
where also the Monthly Meetings were settled in the Gospel Order.

The Sessions were held that day in that Town; and some Friends were pretty
much concerned, lest they should send some Officers to break up our Meeting:
but the Lord's Power restrained them, so that our Meeting was quiet; through
which Power we had Dominion. After the Meeting I passed away, and had several
Meetings amongst Friends in that Country, Worcester
till I came to Worcester; and it being the Fair-time, we had a precious
Meeting there. There was then in Worcester one Major Wild, a persecuting Man;
and after I was gone out of Town, some of his Soldiers inquired after me: but
I having left the Friends there settled in good Order, Draitwich.
was passed away to Draitwich.

From thence we passed to Shrewsbury, 1667. Shrewsbury.
where also we had a very precious Meeting. But the Mayor hearing, that I was
in Town, got the rest of the Officers together to Consult, what to do against
me: For they said, The Great Quaker of England was come to Town. But when they
were come together, the Lord Confounded their Counsels; so that, when some were
for Imprisoning me, others of them opposed it: and so being divided amongst
themselves, I escaped their hands.

We went also into Radnorshire, Radnorshire.
where we had many precious Meetings; and the Monthly Meetings were settled in
the Lord's Power. As we came forth of that Country, staying a little at a
Market Town, a Justice's Clerk and some other Rude Fellows combined together,
to do us a Mischief upon the Road. Accordingly they followed us out of Town,
and soon overtook us: but there being many Market-People on the way, they were
somewhat hindered from doing, what they intended. Yet observing, that Two of
our Company rid at some distance behind, they set upon them Two; and one of
them drew his Sword, and cut one of those two Friends, whose Name was Richard
Moor, the Surgeon of Shrewsbury. Mean while another of these Rude Fellows
came galloping after me and the other Friend, that was with me; and we being to
pass over a Bridge, that was somewhat of the narrowest for him to pass by us,
he, in his Eagerness to get before us, rid into the Brook, and plunged his
Horse into a deep Hole in the Water. I saw the Design, and stopped; and desired
Friends to be patient, and give them no occasion: and in this time came Richard
Moor up to us, with the other Friend, that was with him; who knew the Men and
their Names. Then we rid on the Road again; and a little further we met another
Man on foot, who was Drunk, and had a naked Sword in his hand. And not far
beyond him, in a Bottom, we met Two Men and Two Women, one of which Men had his
Thumb cut off by this Drunken Man, that had the Naked Sword: for he being in
Drink, would have Ravished one of the Women; and this Man withstanding him, and
rescuing the Young-Woman from him, he whipped out his Sword, and cut off the
Man's Thumb. Now though this Drunken Man was then on foot, having alighted to
do his Wickedness; yet he had a Horse, that, being loose, followed him a pretty
way behind. Wherefore I rid after the Horse: and having caught him, I brought
him to the Man, that had his Thumb cut off; and bid him, Take the Horse to the
next Justice of Peace, and by that means they might find out, and pursue the
Man, that had wounded him.

Upon this occasion I writ a Letter to the Justices, and to the Judge of the
Assize, which was then at hand: And I employed some Friends to carry it to the
Justices first. The Justice, to whom the Clerk belonged, rebuked his Clerk and
the others also, for disturbing and abusing us upon the Highway: So that those
Men were glad to come and make Entreaty to Friends, not to appear against them
at the Assize; which, upon their Submission and Acknowledgment of their Fault,
Friends granted. And this thing was of good Service in the Country: for it
stopped many rude People, that before had been forward to abuse Friends.

1667. Herefordshire.
We passed into Herefordshire, where we had several blessed Meetings: and we had
a General Mens-Meeting also, where all the Monthly Meetings were settled. There
was about this time a Proclamation against Meetings: and as we came through
Herefordshire, we were told of a great Meeting there was of the Presbyterians;
who had engaged themselves to stand, and give up all, rather than forsake their
Meetings. But when they heard of this Proclamation, the People came, but the
Priest was gone: and then they were at a loss. Then they met in Lemster
privately; and provided Bread, and Cheese, and Drink in readiness, that if the
Officers should come, they would put up their Bibles, and fall to Eating. The
Bailiff found them out, and came in among them, and said; Their Bread and
Cheese should not cover them, but he would have their Speakers. They cried,
What then would become of their Wives and Children? But he took their Speakers,
and kept them a while. This the Bailiff told our Friend Peter Young, and said;
They were the veriest Hypocrites, that ever made a Profession of Religion.

The like Contrivance they had in other places. For there was one Pocock at
London, that married Abigail Darcy, who was called a Lady: and she being
Convinced of Truth, I went to his House to see her. This Pocock had been one of
the Triers of the Priests: and being an high Presbyterian, and envious against
us; he used to call our Friends House-Creepers. Now I going to visit his Wife,
and he being present, she said to me; I have something to speak to thee against
my Husband. 'Nay, said I, thou must not speak against thy Husband. Yes, said
she, but I must in this Case. The last First Day, said she, He and his Priests
and People, the Presbyterians, met, and they had Candles and Tobacco-Pipes, and
Bread and Cheese, and Cold Meat on the Table; and they agreed beforehand, that
if the Officers should come in upon them, then they would leave their Preaching
and Praying, and would fall to their Cold Meat. Oh, said I to him, is not this
a Shame to you, who Persecuted and Imprisoned us, and spoiled our Goods,
because we would not follow you, and be of your Religion, and called us
House-Creepers; and now ye do not stand to your own Religion your selves! Did
ye ever find our Meetings stufft with Bread and Cheese, and Tobacco-pipes? Or
did ye ever read in the Scriptures of any such Practice among the Saints? Why,
said the Old Man, We must be as wise, as Serpents. Then said I, This is the
Serpent's Wisdom indeed. But who, said I, would ever have thought, that you
Presbyterians and Independents, who persecuted and imprisoned others, and
spoiled their Goods, and whipped such, as would not follow your Religion,
should now flinch your selves, and not dare to stand to, and own your own
Religion; but cover it with Tobacco-pipes, Flagons of Drink, Cold Meat and
Bread and Cheese! But this, and such like deceitful Practices, I understood
afterward, were too Common amongst them in times of Persecution.

Now after we had traveled through Herefordshire, and Meetings were well
settled there, Monmouthshire.
we passed into Monmouthshire, where I had several blessed Meetings; and at
Walter Jenkins, who had been a Justice of the Peace, we had a large Meeting,
where were some Convinced: This Meeting was quiet. But at another Meeting that
we had before this, there came the Bailiff of the Hundred, 1667. Monmouthshire.
almost drunk; pretending, he was to take up the Speakers. There was a mighty
Power of God in the Meeting; so that, although he raged, the Power of the Lord
limited him, that he could not break up the Meeting. When the Meeting was over,
I staid a while, and he staid also: but after some time I spoke to him; and so
passed quietly away. At Night some rude People came, and shot off a Musket
against the House; but did not hurt any body. Thus the Lord's Power came over
all, and chained down the unruly Spirits, so that we escaped them; and came to
Ross that Night, and had a Meeting there at James Merricks. Ross.


After this we came into Gloucestershire, Glou^estershire.
and had a General Mens-Meeting at Nathaniel Crips's House, where all the
Monthly Meetings were settled in the Lord's Everlasting Power; and the Heirs of
Salvation were exhorted to take their Possessions of the Gospel, the Power of
God, which was and is the Authority of their Meetings. Many blessed Meetings we
had up and down in that Country, before we came to Bristol, whither also we
went: Bri^tol.
And after we had had several powerful Meetings there, the Men's- and
Womens-Meetings were settled there also.

Now as I was lying in Bed at Bristol, the Word of the Lord came to me, that I
must go back to London. Next Morning Alexander Parker, and several others came
to me, and I asked them, What they felt? They in like manner asked me, What was
upon me? I told them, I felt, I must return to London: and they said, the same
was upon them. So we gave up to return to London: for which Way the Lord moved
and led us, thither we went in his Power. Wherefore leaving Bristol, we passed
into Wiltshire, Wiltshire.
and established the Mens-Monthly-Meetings in the Lord's Power there; and then
passed through the Countries, visiting Friends, till we came to London. London.


After we had visited Friends in the City, and had staid there a while, I was
moved to exhort them, to bring all their Marriages to the Men's- and
Womens-Meetings, that they might lay them before the Faithful there; that so
Care might be taken to prevent those Disorders, that had been committed by
some. For many had gone together in Marriage contrary to their Relations minds;
and some young, raw People, that came among us, had mixed with the World: and
Widows had married, and had not made provision for their Children by their
former Husbands, before their Second Marriage. And although I had given forth a
Paper concerning Marriages about the Year 1653, when Truth was but little
spread over the Nation; Advising Friends who might be concerned in that Case,
That they might lay it before the Faithful in time, before any thing were
Concluded; and afterward publish it in the end of a Meeting, or in a Market (as
they were moved thereto.) And when all things were found clear, they being free
from all others, and their Relations satisfied, then they might appoint a
Meeting on purpose, for the taking of each other; in the Presence of at least
Twelve Faithful Witnesses. Yet these Directions not being observed, and Truth
being now more spread over the Nation, it was therefore Ordered by the same
Power and Spirit of God, That Marriages should be laid before the Men's Monthly
and Quarterly Meetings, or as the Meetings were then established; that Friends
might see, that the Relations of those, that proceeded to Marriage, were
satisfied, and that the Parties were clear from all others, 1667. London.
and that Widows had made Provision for their First Husband's Children, before
they Married again: and what else was needful to be inquired into; that so all
things might be kept clean and pure, and done in Righteousness to the Glory of
God. And afterward it was Ordered in the same Wisdom of God, That if either of
the Parties, that intended to Marry, came out of another Nation, County, or
Monthly Meeting, they should bring a Certificate from the Monthly Meeting, to
which they belonged; for satisfaction of the Monthly Meeting, before which they
came to lay their Intentions of Marriage.

Now after these things, with many other Services for God, were set in Order,
and settled in the Churches in the City, I passed out of London, in the
Leadings of the Lord's Power, into the Country again: and going into
Hartfordshire, Hertfordshire.
after I had visited Friends there, and the Mens-Monthly-Meetings were settled
there, I passed on as far as Baldock, Baldock.
where I had a great Meeting of many sorts of People. Then returning toward
London by Waltham, Waltham.
I advised the setting up of a School there for Teaching Boys; and also a
Womens-School to be set up at Shacklewel for instructing Girls and Young
Maidens, Shacklewell.
in whatsoever things were Civil and Useful in the Creation.

Thus, after I had had several precious Meetings in the Country, I came to
London again, London.
where I staid a while in the Work and Service of the Lord; Buckinghamshire.
Weston.
and then went down into Buckinghamshire, where I had many precious Meetings.
And at John Brown's of Weston near Aylsbury, some of the Men-Friends of each
Meeting being gathered together, the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County were
established amongst them also, in the Order of the Gospel, the Power of God;
and the Power of the Lord confirmed it in all that felt it, and they came
thereby to see and feel, that the Power of God was the Authority of their
Meetings. Then after the Monthly-Meetings were settled there in the Order of
the Gospel, Oxfordshire. North-Newton near Banbury.
and upon the Foundation Christ Jesus, I passed on into Oxfordshire, and went
to Nathaniel Ball's at North-Newton near Banbury, who was a Friend in the
Ministry. And there being a General Meeting, where some of all the Meetings
were present, the Monthly-Meetings for that County were then settled in the
Power of God; and Friends were very glad of them: for they came into their
Services in the Church, and to take Care for God's Glory. After this Meeting we
passed through the Country, Gloucestershire.
visiting Friends, till we came into Gloucestershire: and visiting Friends
through that County also, we traveled on, Monmouthshire.
till we came into Monmouthshire, to one Richard Hambery's; where meeting with
some of all the Meetings of that County, the Monthly Meetings were settled
there also in the Lord's Power, that all in it might take Care of God's Glory,
and Admonish and Exhort such, as did not walk, as became the Gospel. And
indeed, these Meetings did make a great Reformation amongst People, insomuch as
the very Justices took notice of the Usefulness and Service thereof.

When we went from Rich. Humbery's, he and his Wife accompanied us a Day's
Journey through the Country, visiting Friends; till we came to a Widow-Woman's,
where we lay that Night: and from thence passed over the Hills next day, Over
the Hills.
visiting Friends, and declaring the Truth to People, till we came to another
Widow Woman's House; where we had a Meeting. Woman of the House could not speak
English; yet she praised the Lord for sending us over those Hills, to come and
visit them.

We traveled on through the Country, till we came to Swanzey; Swanzey.
where on the First Day we had a large and precious Meeting, the Lord's
Presence being eminently amongst us. -- Beyond Swanzey.
On a Weekday afterward we had a General Meeting beyond Swanzey, of
Men-Friends, that came from Swanzey, Tenby, Haverford-West and other Places;
and there the Monthly-Meetings were settled in the Gospel Order, and received
by Friends in the Power of the Lord: and the Lord's Truth was over all.

From hence we endeavored to have got over the Water into Cornwall; and in
order thereunto went back to Swanzey, Swanzey.
Mumbles.
and so to Mumbles, thinking to have got Passage there; but the Master deceived
us: For though he had promised to carry us; yet when we came, he would not.
Thereupon we turned from thence, and went to another place, where there was a
Passage-Boat, into which we got our Horses: but there being some Rude Men in
the Boat (though called Gentlemen) that threatened to Pistol the Master, if he
took us in; he being afraid of them, turned our Horses out again: which put us
out of hopes of getting over that way. Wherefore turning back again into the
Country, we stayed up all Night; and about the Second Hour in the Morning took
Horse, and traveled through the Country, -- Near Cardiff.
till we came near Cardiff; where we staid one Night. And the next Day came to
a place called Newport: and it being Market Day there, Newport.
several Friends came to us; with whom we sat together a while: and after we
had had a fine refreshing Season together, we parted from them, and went on our
way.

When we were gone beyond this Market Town, we overtook a Man, who lingered on
the Way, as if he stayed for some body: but when we came up to him, he rid
along with us, and asked us many Questions. At length meeting with Two others,
who seemed to be Pages to some great Persons, he took Acquaintance with them;
and I heard him tell them, he would stop us, and take us up. We rid on, being
in our way; and when he came to us, and would have stopped us, I told him: None
ought to stop us on the King 's Highway; for it was as free for us, as for
them: and I was moved to exhort him to Fear the Lord. Then galloped he away
before us: and I perceived, his Intent was to stop us at Shipton in Wales;
which was a Garrison-Town, through which we were to pass in our way. When we
were come to Shipton, John-ap-John being with me, Shipton.
we walked down the Hill into the Town, leading our Horses: And it being the
Market Day there, several Friends met us, and would have had us to have gone
into an Inn. But we were not to go into any Inn: but walked directly through
the Town over the Bridge; and then we were out of the Limits of that Town. Thus
the Lord's Everlasting Arm and Power preserved us, and carried us over in his
Work, Labor and Service.

The next First Day we had a large Meeting in the Forest of Dean; Forest of
Dean.
and all was quiet. Next day we passed over the Water: and having staid a
little at a Friend's House by the way, we came to Oldstone. Oldstone.
Where, after we had visited Friends, we passed over the Water again to William
Yeoman's his House at Irb's Court in Somersetshire. 1668. Oldstone.
Somersetshire. Irb's Court. Posset.
From thence we went down to a Meeting at Posset; whither several Friends of
Bristol came to us. After this Meeting we went further up into the Country, and
had several large Meetings; and the Lord's living Presence was with us,
supporting and refreshing us in our Labor and Travel in his Service.

-- Near Mynhead,
We came to a place near Mynhead, where we had a General Meeting of the
Men-Friends in Somersetshire: and there came also a Cheat, whom some Friendly
People would have had me to have taken along with me. I saw, he was a Cheat;
and therefore bid them bring him to me, and see, whether he could Look me in
the Face. Some were ready to think, I was too hard toward him, because I would
not let him go along with me: but when they brought him to me, he was not able
to Look me in the Face; but looked hither and thither: for he was indeed a
Cheat, and had Cheated a Priest, by pretending himself to be a Minister, and
had got the Priest's Suit, and went away with it.

Mynhead.
After the Meeting we passed to Mynhead, where we tarried that Night. And in the
Night I had an Exercise upon me, from a Sense I had of a Dark Spirit, that was
working, and striving to get up, and to disturb the Church of Christ. Whereupon
next Morning I was moved to write a few Lines to Friends, as a Warning thereof;
as follows: Dear Friends,
LIve in the Power of the Lord God, in his Seed, that is set over all; and is
over all Trials, that you may have from the dark Spirit again, which would be
owned in its Actings, and thrust it self amongst you; which is not come as yet:
But in the Power of the Lord God, and his Seed keep over it, and bring it to
Condemnation. For I felt a kind of dark Spirit thrusting it self up toward
you, and heaving up last Night: But you may keep it down with the Power of God;
that the Witness may arise to Condemn its Actings, so far as it has spread its
dark Works, before it have any Admittance. So no more, but my Love in the Seed
of God, which changes not.

Mynhead in Somersetshire, the 22th of the 4th Month, 1668. G. F.




Devonshire. Barnstable Appledon.
The next day several Friends of Mynhead accompanied us as far as Barnstable and
Appledon in Devonshire, where we had a Meeting. Barnstable had been a bloody,
persecuting Town. For there were Two Men-Friends of that Town, that had been a
great while at Sea: And coming home to visit their Relations, (one of them
having a Wife and Children) the Mayor of the Town sent for them, under pretense
to discourse with them; and put the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy to them.
And because they could not Swear, he sent them to Exeter-Jail, where Judge
Archer premunired them; and kept them, till one of them died in Prison. When I
heard of this, I was moved to write a Letter to Judge Archer, 1668. Appledon.
and another to that Mayor of Barnstable, laying their Wicked and Unchristian
Actions upon their Heads; and letting them know, that the Blood of that Man
would be required at their hands.

Now after we had had a precious Meeting at Appledon among some Faithful
Friends there, we passed to Stratton; Cornwall.
Stratton.
and staid there at an Inn all Night. Next Day we rid through the Country to
Humphrey Lower's; where we had a very precious Meeting: and the next Day we
passed through to Truro; and so went on visiting Friends, Truro.
till we came to the Lands-End. Lands-end
Then coming up by the South-part of tha^ County, we visited Friends, till we
came to Tregangeeves, Tregangeeves.
where at Loveday Hambley's we had a General Meeting for all the County; in
which the Monthly Meetings were settled in the Lord's Power, and in the blessed
Order of the Gospel: That all, who were faithful, might Admonish and Exhort
such, as walked not according to the Gospel; that so the House of God might be
kept Clean, and Righteousness might run down, and all Unrighteousness be swept
away. And several, that had run out, were brought to Condemn, what they had
done amiss; and through Repentance came in again.

So after we had visited the Meetings in Cornwall, and were Clear of that
County, we came into Devonshire, Devonshire,
and had a Meeting amongst Friends at Plymouth. Whence passing to Richard
Brown's, Plymouth.
we came to the Widow Philips; where we had some of Men-Friends from all the
Meetings together: And there the Mens-Monthly-Meetings were settled in the
Heavenly Order of the Gospel, the Power of God; which answered the Witness of
God in all. There was a great Noise of a Troop of Horse coming to disturb our
Meeting (for the Manservant of the House was a wicked, envious Man:) But the
Lord's Power prevented it, and preserved us in Peace and Safety.

After things were well settled, and the Meeting done, we came to
King's-bridge, and visited Friends there-aways. Kings-bridge.
Then (leaving Friends in those parts well settled in the Power of God) we past
from thence through the Country to Topsham, and so to Membury, visiting
Friends, Topsham. Membury. Somersetshire. Ilchester.
and having many Meetings in the way; till we came to Ilchester in
Somersetshire. Here we had a General Mens-Meeting, and therein settled the
Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County in the Lord's everlasting Power, the
Order of the Gospel, the Power of God, which was, before the Devil was. Then
after the Meetings were settled, and Friends refreshed and comforted in the
Lord's Power, and established upon Christ their Rock and Foundation, we passed
to Puddimore; Puddimore.
where at William Beaton's we had a blessed Meeting, and all was quiet: though
the Constables had threatened before.

When we had visited most of the Meetings in Somersetshire, we passed into
Dorsetshire to one George Harris his House; Dorsetshire
where we had a large Mens-Meeting: and there all the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for
that County were settled in the Glorious Order of the Gospel; that all in the
Power of God might seek that, which was lost, and bring again, that which was
driven away: and might cherish the Good, and reprove the Evil.

1668. Southhampton.
Then, having visited the Meetings of Friends through the Countries, we came to
South-hampton; where we had a large Meeting on the First Day of the Week. And
from thence we went to one Capt. Reeves, where the General Men's-Meeting for
Hampshire was appointed; to which some of all the County came, and a blessed
Meeting we had. There the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County were settled in
the Order of the Gospel, which had brought Life and Immortality to Light in
them.

But there came a Rude Company, who were run into Ranterism; and had opposed
and disturbed our Meetings much. One of them had lain with a Man; and the man,
that had lain with her, declared it at the Market-Cross, and gloried in his
Wickedness: These lewd People lived, a Company of them together, at a House
hard by the place, where our Meeting was. Wherefore I went to the House, and
told them of their Wickedness: but the Man of the House said, Why! Did I make
so strange of that? Another of them said, It was to stumble me. I told them,
Their Wickedness should not stumble me; for I was above it. And I was moved of
the Lord God to tell them, That the Plagues and Judgments of God would overtake
them, and come upon them. Afterward they went up and down the Country, till at
last they were cast into Winchester-Jail; where the Man, that had lain with the
Woman aforesaid, stabbed the Jailer, but not mortally. And after they were let
out of Jail, this Fellow, that had stabbed the Jailer, hanged himself: The
Woman also had like to have Cut a Child's Throat, (as we were Informed.) These
People had formerly lived about London: and when the City was fired, they
Prophesied, That all the rest of London should be burnt within Fourteen Days;
and hastened away out of Town. Now though they were Ranters, and were great
Opposers of Friends, and Disturbers of our Meetings; yet in the Country, where
they came, some of the People of the World, that did not know them, would be
apt to say, They were Quakers. Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to write a
Paper, to be dispersed amongst the Magistrates and People of Hampshire, to
Clear Friends and Truth of these Lewd People, and their Wicked Actions.

Now, after the Mens-Monthly Meetings in those parts were settled, and we had
visited Friends, and the Lord's blessed Power was over all; we went to a Town,
where we had a Meeting with Friends. And from thence we came to Farnham,
Farnham.
where we met many Friends, it being the Market Day: and we had many precious
Meetings up and down that Country. Friends in those Countries had formerly been
plundered, and their Goods much spoiled, both for Tithes, and for going to
Meetings: but the Lord's Power at this time preserved both them and us, from
falling into the Persecutors Hands.

We passed from thence, and had a General Mens-Meeting at a Friends House in
Surrey; Surry.
who had been plundered so extremely, that he had scarce a Cow, Horse or Swine
left. The Constables threatened to come then, and break up our Meeting; but the
Lord restrained them. At this Meeting the Mens-Monthly-Meetings were settled in
the Authority of the Heavenly Power. And after we had visited Friends in that
Country, and had many large and precious Meetings among them, we passed to a
Friend's House in Sussex, Sussex.
where the General Meeting for the Men Friends of that County was appointed to
be held; 1668. Sussex.
and thither came several Friends from London to visit us. There we had a
blessed Meeting: and the Mens-Monthly-Meetings for that County were then
settled in the Lord's Eternal Power, the Gospel of Salvation; that all in it
might keep to the Order of the Gospel. There were at that time great
Threatenings of Disturbance; but the Meeting was quiet. And afterward we passed
from thence, and had several large Meetings in that County; though Friends were
then in great Sufferings there, and many in Prison. I was sent for to visit a
Friend, that was sick, and went to see Friends, that were Prisoners; and there
was danger of my being apprehended: but I went in the Faith of God's Power, and
thereby the Lord preserved me in Safety.

Having visited Friends through the Country, we passed on into Kent; where
after we had been at several Meetings, Kent.
we had a General Meeting for the Men-Friends of that County: There also the
Mens-Monthly Meetings for that County were settled in the Power of God, and
established in the Order of the Gospel, for all the Heirs of it to enter into
their Services, and Care in the Church for the Glory of God. And Friends
Rejoiced in the Order of the Gospel, and were glad of the Settlement thereof;
which is not of man, nor by man.

After this Meeting was over, I visited Friends in their Meetings up and down
in Kent: And when I had cleared my self of the Lord's Service in that County, I
came up to London. Thus were the Mens-Monthly-Meetings settled through the
Nation: For I had been in Berkshire before, where most of the Ancient Friends
of that County were in Prison; and when I had informed them of the Service of
these Monthly-Meetings, they were settled amongst them also. And the Quarterly
Meetings were generally settled before. I writ also into Ireland by faithful
Friends, and into Scotland, Holland, Barbados, and other parts of America,
advising Friends, to settle their Mens-Monthly-Meetings in those Countries
also. For they had their General Quarterly Meetings before: But now that Truth
was Increased amongst them, they should settle those Mens-Monthly-Meetings in
the Power and Spirit of God, that did at first Convince them. And since the
time these Meetings have been settled, that all the Faithful in the Power of
God, who be Heirs of the Gospel, have met together in the Power of God, which
is the Authority of them, to perform Service to the Lord therein, many Mouths
have been opened in Thanksgivings and Praise, and many have blessed the Lord God,
that ever he did send me forth in this Service: Yea, with Tears have many
praised the Lord. For now all coming to have a Concern and Care for God's
Honor and Glory, that his Name be not blasphemed, which they do profess; and
to see, that all who profess the Truth, do walk in the Truth, in Righteousness
and in Holiness, which becomes the House of God, and that all order their
Conversations aright, that they may see the Salvation of God: All having this
Care upon them for God's Glory, and being exercised in his holy Power and
Spirit, in the Order of the Heavenly Life and Gospel of Jesus; here they may
all see and know, possess and partake of the Government of Christ, of the
Increase of which there is to be no end. Thus the Lord's everlasting Renown and
Praise is set up in every one's Heart, 1668. Kent.
that is faithful; so that we can now say, that the Gospel Order established
amongst us, is not of Man, nor by Man, but of and by Jesus Christ, in and
through the Holy Ghost. And this Order of the Gospel, which is not of Man, nor
by Man, but from Christ, the Heavenly Man, is above all the Orders of Men in
the Fall, whether Jews, Gentiles, or Apostatized Christians; and will be, when
they are gone. For the Power of God, which is the Everlasting Gospel, was
before the Devil was; and will be and remain for ever. And as the Everlasting
Gospel was Preached, in the Apostles days to all Nations, that all Nations
might come into the Order of it, through the Divine Power, which brings Life
and Immortality to Light; that they, who were Heirs of it, might inherit the
Power and Authority of it: So now, since all Nations have drunk the Whore's
Cup, and all the World has Worshipped the Beast, (but they, whose Names are
written in the Book of Life from the Foundation of the World, who have
worshipped God in Spirit and Truth, as Christ commanded) the Everlasting Gospel
is to be, and is preached again (as John the Divine foresaw it should) to all
Nations, Kindreds, Tongues, and People. And this Everlasting Gospel torments
the Whore, and makes her and the Beast to rage, even the Beast, that has Power
over the Tongues, which are called the Original, to order them; by which they
make Divines, as they call them. But all that receive the Gospel, the Power of
God, which brings Life and Immortality to Light, they come to see over the
Beast, Devil, Whore, and False Prophet, that has darkened them, and all their
Worships and Orders; and come to be Heirs of the Gospel, the Power of God,
which was, before the Beast, Whore, False Prophet and Devil were, and will be,
when they are all gone, and cast into the Lake of Fire. And they that be Heirs
of this Power, and of this Gospel, they inherit the Power, which is the
Authority of this Order, and of our Meetings. Every Man and Woman, that be
Heirs of the Gospel, are Heirs of this Authority, and of the Power of God,
which was before the Devil was; and which is not of Man, nor by Man. These come
to inherit and possess the joyful Order of the joyful Gospel, the comfortable
Order of the comfortable Gospel, the glorious Order of the glorious Gospel, and
the everlasting Order of the everlasting Gospel, the Power of God, which will
last for ever; and will out-last all the Orders of the Devil, and that which is
of Men, or by Men. And these shall see the Government of Christ, who has all
Power in Heaven and Earth given to him; and of the Increase of his glorious,
righteous, holy, just Government there is no end; but his Government and his
Order will remain: for he who is the Author of it, is the First and the Last,
the Beginning and Ending, the Foundation of God, which over all stands sure,
Christ Jesus, the Amen.

After I had traveled amongst Friends through most parts of the Nation, and
the Monthly-Meetings were settled; being returned to London, London.
I stayed some time there, visiting Friends Meetings in and about the City.
While I was in London, I went one day to Visit him, that was called Esquire Marsh,
who had showed much Kindness both to me, and to Friends; and I happened to go,
when he was at Dinner. He no sooner heard my Name, but he sent for me up, and
would have had me sit down with him to Dinner; 1668. London.
but I had not freedom to do so. There were several Great Persons at Dinner
with him; and he said to one of them, who was a great Papist: Here is a Quaker,
which you have not seen before. The Papist asked me; Whether I did own the
Christening of Children? I told him, There was no Scripture for any such
Practice. What! said he, Not for Christening Children? I said, Nay. I told him,
the one Baptism by the one Spirit into one Body we owned; but to throw a little
Water on a Child's Face, and say, that was Baptizing and Christening it, there
was no Scripture for that. Then he asked me, Whether I did own the Catholic
Faith? I said, Yes: but added; That neither the Pope, nor the Papists were in
that Catholic Faith: for the true Faith works by Love, and purifies the Heart;
and if they were in that Faith that gives Victory, by which they might have
Access to God, they would not tell the People of a Purgatory, after they were
dead. So I undertook to prove, That neither Pope, nor Papists, that held a
Purgatory hereafter, were in the true Faith: For the true, precious, Divine
Faith, which Christ is the Author of, gives Victory over the Devil and Sin,
that had separated Man and Woman from God. And if they (the Papists) were in
the true Faith, they would never use Racks, Prisons, and Fines to persecute and
force others to their Religion, that were not of their Faith: For this was not
the Practice of the Apostles and Primitive Christians, who witnessed and
enjoyed the true Faith of Christ; but it was the Practice of the Faithless Jews
and Heathens so to do. But, said I to him, seeing thou art a great and leading
Man among the Papists, and have been taught and bred up under the Pope; and
seeing thou say, There is no Salvation, but in your Church, I desire to know
of thee, What it is, that does bring Salvation in your Church? He answered, A
Good Life. And nothing else, said I? Yes, said he, Good Works. And is this it,
that brings Salvation in your Church, a good Life and good Works? Is this your
Doctrine and Principle, said I? Yes, said he. Then, said I, neither Thou, nor
the Pope, nor any of the Papists know, what it is, that brings Salvation. Then
he asked me, What brought Salvation in our Church? I told him, That which
brought Salvation to the Church in the Apostles Days, the same brought
Salvation to us, and not another; Namely, The Grace of God, which, the
Scripture says, brings Salvation, and has appeared to all men, which taught
the Saints then, and teaches us now: and this Grace, which brings Salvation,
teaches To deny Ungodliness and worldly Lusts, and to live godly, righteously
and soberly. So it is not the good Works, nor the good Life, that brings the
Salvation, but the Grace. What! said the Papist, Does this Grace, that brings
Salvation, appear unto all men? Yes, said I. Then, said he, I deny that. But I
said, All that deny that, are Sect-makers, and are not in the Universal Faith,
Grace and Truth, which the Apostles were in. Then he spoke to me about the
Mother Church; and I told him: The several sorts of Sects in Christendom had
accused us, and said, We forsook our Mother Church. The Papists charged us with
forsaking their Church, and they said; Rome was the only Mother Church. The
Episcopalians taxed us with forsaking the old Protestant Religion, and they
said; Theirs was the Reformed Mother Church. The Presbyterians and Independents
blamed us for leaving them, and each of them said; Theirs was the
right-Reformed-Church. But I said, if we could own any outward City or Place to
be the Mother Church, we should own outward Jerusalem, where the Gospel was
first preached by Christ himself, and the Apostles; where Christ suffered;
where the great Conversion to Christianity by Peter was; where were the Types,
Figures and Shadows, which Christ ended; and where Christ commanded his
Disciples To wait, until they were endued with Power from high. So, if any
outward place deserved to be called the Mother, that was the place, where the
first great Conversion to Christianity was. But the Apostle says, Gal. 4.25,
26. Jerusalem -- which now is in Bondage with her Children: But Jerusalem which
is above, is free, which is the Mother of us all. For it is written, Rejoice,
thou barren, that bear not; break forth, and cry, thou that travailest not:
for the Desolate has many more Children, than she that has an Husband, ver.
27. Now this we do see, that Jerusalem below (which was the highest Place of
Worship) and all that be like her in Profession without Possession, have more
Children, than the Free Woman, that has an Husband, which is Jerusalem that is
above, the Mother of us all, that be true Christians: So, the Apostle does not
say, Outward Jerusalem was the Mother, though the first and great Conversion to
Christianity was there. And therefore there is less Reason for the Title
[Mother] to be given to Rome, or to any other outward Place or City, by the
Children of Jerusalem, that is above and free: and they are not Jerusalem's
Children, that is above and free, who give ^he Title of Mother either to
outward Jerusalem, or to Ro^^ or to any other Place, or Sect of People. And
though this Title [Mother] has been given to Places and Sects amongst and by
the degenerate Christians; yet we say still, as the Apostle said of Old,
Jerusalem that is above, is the Mother of us all: and we can own no other,
neither outward Jerusalem, nor Rome, nor any Sect of People for our Mother, but
Jerusalem, which is above; which is free, the Mother of us all, that are born
again, and become true Believers in the Light, and who are grafted into Christ,
the Heavenly Vine. For all, who are born again of the Immortal Seed, by the
Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, feed upon the Milk of the Word,
the Breasts of Life, and grow by it in Life; and cannot acknowledge any other
to be their Mother, but Jerusalem, which is above. Oh! said Esquire Marsh to the
Papist, You do not know this man: If he would but come to Church now and then,
he would be a Brave Man.

After some other Discourse together, I went aside with this Justice Marsh into
another Room, to speak with him concerning Friends; for he was a Justice of
Peace for Middlesex: and being a Courtier, the other Justices put much of the
Management of matters upon him. Now when we Two were alone together, he told
me, He was in a straight, how to Act between us, and some other Dissenters.
For, said he, You cannot Swear; and the Independents, Baptists and
Fifth-Monarchy-People say also, They cannot Swear: and therefore, said he, how
shall I know, how to distinguish betwixt you and them, seeing they and you all
say, It is for Conscience sake, that you cannot Swear? Then said I, I will show
thee, how to distinguish: For they (or most of them) thou speak of, can and
do Swear in some Cases: Swear in any Case. If a Man should steal their Cows or
Horses, and thou should ask them, whether they would Swear, they were
theirs? Many of them would readily do it: But if thou try our Friends, they
cannot Swear for their own Goods. Therefore, when thou put the Oath of
Allegiance to any of them, ask them, Whether they can Swear in any other case,
as for their Cow or Horse? Which, if they be really of us, they cannot do;
though they can bear Witness to the Truth. Hereupon I gave him a Relation of a
Trial in Barkshire, which was thus: A Thief stole Two Beasts from a Friend of
ours: the Thief was taken and cast into Prison; and the Friend appeared against
him at the Assizes. But some body having Informed the Judge, that the Man, that
Prosecuted, was a Quaker, and could not Swear; the Judge, before he heard, what
the Friend could say, said, Is he a Quaker? And will he not Swear? Then tender
him the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. So he cast the Friend into Prison,
and Premunired him, and let the Thief go at Liberty, that had stolen his Goods.
When I had related this Case, Justice Marsh said, That Judge was a wicked Man.
But, said I, If we could Swear in any Case, we would take the Oath of
Allegiance to the King, who is to preserve the Laws, that preserve every man in
his Estate. Whereas others, that can Swear in some cases, to preserve a part of
their Estates, if they be robbed, will not take this Oath to the King, who is
to preserve them in their whole Estates and Bodies also. So that thou may
easily distinguish, and put a difference betwixt us, and other People. This
Justice Marsh was afterward very serviceable to Friends in this and other
Cases; for he kept several, both Friends and others, from being premunired, in
those parts where he was a Justice. And when Friends have been brought before
him in the times of Persecution, he set many of them at Liberty: And when he
could not avoid sending to Prison, he sent some for a few Hours, or for a
Night. At length he went to the King, and told him: He had sent some of us to
Prison contrary to his Conscience; and he could not do so any more. Wherefore
he removed his Family from Lime-house, where he lived; and took Lodgings near
James's Park. He told the King, That if he would be pleased to give Liberty of
Conscience, that would quiet and settle all; for then none could have any
pretense to be uneasy. And indeed, he was a very serviceable man to Truth and
Friends in his day.

We had great Service at London this year, and the Lord's Truth came over all:
and many that had been out from Truth, came in again this Year, Confessing and
Condemning their former Outgoings.

Now after I had stayed some time in London, I went forth into the Countries
again, visiting Friends in Surry and Sussex, Surry. Sussex.
and in other places that way; and afterward traveled Northward, having
Leonard Fell with me. We visited Friends, till we came to Warwick, Warwick.
where many Friends were in Prison; and we had a Meeting in the Town. After
that I passed from thence to Birmingham and to Badgely: Birmingham. Badgely.
At Badgely I had a large Meeting. After which I passed through the Country,
visiting Friends, till I came to Nottingham, Nottingham.
where on the first day we had a precious Meeting, but not without danger of
being Apprehended; 1669. Balby. York.
the Constables having threatened to take up Friends about that time.

I passed on from thence, visiting Friends through the Country, till I came to
Balby, and so to York to the Quarterly Meeting there; and a blessed Meeting we
had. Friends had in Yorkshire Seven Monthly Meetings before; and they were so
sensible of the Service of them, that they desired to have Seven more added to
them: For Truth was much spread in that Country. Accordingly in that Quarterly
Meeting they were settled and established: So that, whereas before they had but
Seven, now they have Fourteen Monthly Meetings in that County.

It being the Assize-time at York, there I met with Justice Hotham, a
Well-wisher to Friends, and one that had been Tender, and very Kind to me at
the first.

After I had finished my Service for the Lord in York, I passed further up into
the Country: And as I went, a great Burden fell upon me; but I did not
presently know the Reason of it. So I came to a Meeting on the First Day at one
Shipton's, R. Shipton.
which was very large: But there being a Meeting the same day at another place
also, the Priest of that place, being misinformed, that I was to be there, got
a Warrant, and made great Disturbance at that Meeting: of which Isaac Lindley,
who was there, gave me an Account by the following Letter, thus: G. F.
WHen thou went from York, the First Day after thou wast at Richard
Shipton's: That Day I had appointed a Meeting Ten Miles from York, where there
had not been a Meeting before. But the Priest and the Constable got a Warrant
on the Seventh Day, and put thy Name only in the Warrant (for they had heard,
that thou wast to be there) and they came with Weapons and Staves, and cried,
Where is Mr. Fox? over and over; many Friends being there, they concluded, thou
wast among them. But those Raveners being disappointed, plucked me down, and
abused me, and beat some Friends; and then had me before a Magistrate: but he
set me at Liberty.

Isaac Lindley.




After the aforesaid Meeting was done, I passed through the Countries, Whitby.
Scarborough.
visiting Friends at Whitby and Scarborough. When I was at Scarborough, the
Governor hearing, I was come to the Town, sent to invite me to his House,
saying; Surely, I would not be so unkind, as not to come and see him and his
Wife. Wherefore after the Meeting was over, I went up to Visit him; and he
received me very Courteously and Lovingly.

The Wouls
Now after I had visited most of the Meetings in Yorkshire, and up to the Wouls
and Holderness; Holderness. H. Jackson. T. Tailor. Eldreth.
I passed through the Country, till I came to Henry Jacksons, where I had a
great Meeting: And from thence to Thomas Tayler's; and so to John Moor's at
Eldreth, where we had a very large Meeting: 1669. Eldreth.
And the Lord's Power and Presence was eminently amongst us. Not far off from
this place lay Col. Kirby lame of the Gout, who had threatened, that, If ever I
came near, he would send me to Prison again; and had bidden 40 l. to any man,
that could take me: as I was credibly informed.

After this Meeting I passed through the Countries, till I came into
Staffordshire, and so into Cheshire; Staffordshire. Cheshire. Warrington.
where we had many large and precious Meetings. I had a very large Meeting at
William Barns his House about two Miles from Warrington: and although Col.
Kirby was now got abroad again, as violent in breaking up Meetings, as before,
and was then at Warrington; yet the Lord did not suffer him to come to this
Meeting: and so we were preserved out of his hands.

Now was I moved of the Lord to pass over into IRELAND, IRELAND
to visit the Seed of God in that Nation: and there went with me Robert Lodge,
James Lancaster, Thomas Briggs and John Stubbs. We went near to Liverpool, and
waited there for Shipping and Wind: Liverpool.
and after we had waited some days, we sent James Lancaster to take Passage,
which he did; and brought Word, the Ship was ready, and would take us in at
Black-Rock. Whereupon we went thither on foot: and it being pretty far, and the
Weather very hot, I was very much spent with Walking. Yet when we came there,
the Ship was not there: so we were fain to go to the Town, and take Shipping
there. When we were come on Board, I said to the rest of my Company; Come, ye
will Triumph in the Lord; for we shall have fair Wind and Weather. There were
many Passengers in the Ship, and many of them were Sick; but not one of our
Company was Sick. The Master, and many of the Passengers were very loving; and
we being at Sea on the First Day of the Week, I was moved to declare Truth
among them: Whereupon the Master said to the Passengers; Come, here are things,
that you never heard in your Lives. When we came before Dublin, we took Boat,
Dublin.
and went ashore; and the Earth and Air smelt, methought, with the Corruption
of the Nation, so that it yielded another Smell to me, than England did: which
I imputed to the Corruption, and Popish Massacrees that had been Committed, and
the Blood, that had been spilt in it; from which a Foulness ascended. We passed
through, among the Officers of the Custom four times, yet they did not search
us; for they perceived, what we were: and some of them were so Envious, they
did not care to look at us. We did not presently find Friends; but went to an
Inn, and sent out to inquire for some Friends: who when they came to us, were
exceeding glad of our Coming, and received us with Great Joy. We stayed there
the Weekly Meeting, which was a great one; and the Power and Life of God
appeared greatly in it. Afterward we passed to a Province-Meeting, which
lasted Two Days, there being both a Mens-Meeting about the Poor, and another
Meeting more General; in which a mighty Power of the Lord appeared, and Truth
was livingly declared, and Friends were much refreshed therein.

Passing from thence about four and twenty miles, we came to another place,
where we had a very good, refreshing Meeting: But after the Meeting was over,
some Papists, that were there, were Angry, and raged very much. When I heard of
it, I sent for one of them, who was a Schoolmaster; 1669. Ireland.
but he would not come at me. Whereupon I sent a Challenge to him, with all the
Friars and Monks, Priests and Jesuits, to come forth, and Try their God and
their Christ, which they had made of Bread and Wine: but no Answer could I get
from them. Wherefore I told them, They were Worse, than the Priests of Baal:
for Baal's Priests tried their Wooden God; but these durst not try their God
of Bread and Wine: and Baal's Priests and People did not Eat their God, as
these did, and then make another.

New-Garden.
We went on to a place called New Garden, where was a great Meeting. And from
thence we traveled on among Friends, till we came to Bandon-Bridge and the
Lands-End, Bandon-Bridge. Lands-end
having many Meetings, as we went; in which the mighty Power of the Lord was
manifested, through which Friends were well refreshed: and many People were
affected with the Truth. Bandon.
At Bandon the Mayor's Wife, being her self Convinced, desired her Husband to
come to the Meeting; but he bid her for her Life, she should not make known,
that I was at a Meeting there.

He that was then Mayor of Cork, was very envious against Truth and Friends,
and had many Friends in Prison: And knowing, that I was in the Country, he had
sent forth Four Warrants to take me; wherefore Friends were desirous, that I
might not ride through Cork. But being at Bandon, there appeared unto me, in a
Vision, A very ugly-visag'd Man, of a black and dark Look. My Spirit struck at
him in the Power of God: and it seemed to me, that I rid over him with my
Horse, and my Horse set his Foot on the side of his Face. When I came down in
the Morning, I told a Friend, that was with me, that the Command of the Lord
was to me to ride through Cork; but bad him, Tell no Man. So we took Horse,
many Friends being with me: Cork.
And when we came near the Town, the Friends would have showed me a way on the
backside of the Town; but I told them, My way was through the Streets.
Wherefore taking one of them along with me (whose Name was Paul Morris) to
guide me through the Town, I rode on: and as we rode through the Marketplace,
and by the Mayor's Door, the Mayor seeing me ride by, said, There goes George
Fox: but he had not power to stop me. When we had passed through the Sentinels,
and were come over the Bridge, we went to a Friend's House, and alighted: And
there the Friends told me, what a Rage was in the Town, and how many Warrants
were granted forth to take me. While I was sitting there with Friends, I felt
the Evil Spirit at Work in the Town, stirring up Mischief against me; and I
felt the Power of the Lord strike at that Evil Spirit. By and by some other
Friends coming in, told me, That it was over the Town, and amongst the
Magistrates, that I was in the Town: I said, Let the Devil do his worst. So
after a while, that Friends were refreshed one in another, and we who were
Travelers, had refreshed our selves, I called for my Horse: and having a
Friend to Guide me, we went on our way. But great was the Rage, that the Mayor,
and others of Cork were in, that they had missed me, and great pains they
afterward took to have taken me; having their Scouts abroad upon the Roads (as
I understood) to observe, which way I went. And afterward there was scarce a
Public Meeting I came to, but there came Spies to watch, if I were there. And
the Envious Magistrates and Priests sent Informations one to another concerning
me, describing me by my Hair, Hat, Clothes and Horse; so that when I was come
near an Hundred Miles from Cork, they had an Account concerning me, and
Description of me, before I came amongst them. There was one very Envious
Magistrate, who was both a Priest and a Justice; and he got a Warrant from the
Judge of Assize to apprehend me: which Warrant was to go over all his Circuit,
which reached near an Hundred Miles. Yet the Lord disappointed all their
Counsels, and defeated all their Designs against me, and by his good hand of
Providence preserved me out of all their Snares; and gave us many sweet and
blessed Opportunities to visit Friends, and spread Truth through that Nation.
For Meetings were very large, Friends coming to them far and near; and the
World's People flocking in. And the powerful Presence of the Lord was
preciously felt with and amongst us; whereby many of the World were reached,
and Convinced, and gathered to the Truth, and the Lord's Flock was increased:
And Friends were greatly refreshed and comforted in feeling the Love of God.
Oh, the Brokenness, that was amongst them in the flowings of Life! So that, in
the Power and Spirit of the Lord, many together have broken out into Singing,
even with Audible Voices, making Melody in their Hearts.

At which time I was moved to declare to Friends there in the Ministry, as
follows: SOund, Sound abroad, you faithful Servants of the Lord, and
Witnesses in his Name, and faithful Servants and Prophets of the Highest, and
Angels of the Lord! Sound ye all abroad in the World, to the awakening and
raising of the Dead, that they may be awakened, and raised up out of the Grave,
to hear the Voice, that is living. For the Dead have long heard the Dead, and
the Blind have long wandered among the Blind, and the Deaf amongst the Deaf:
Therefore Sound, Sound, ye Servants and Prophets, and Angels of the Lord, ye
Trumpets of the Lord, that you may awaken the Dead, and awaken them that be
asleep in their Graves of Sin, Death and Hell, and Sepulchers, and Sea, and
Earth, and who lie in the Tombs. Sound, Sound abroad, ye Trumpets, and raise up
the Dead, that the Dead may hear the Voice of the Son of God, the Voice of the
Second Adam, that never fell; the Voice of the Light, and the Voice of the
Life; the Voice of the Power, and the Voice of the Truth; the Voice of the
Righteous, and the Voice of the Just. Sound, Sound the pleasant and melodious
Sound! Sound, Sound, ye the Trumpets, the melodious Sound abroad, that all the
deaf Ears may be opened to hear the pleasant Sound of the Trumpet to Judgment
and Life, to Condemnation and Light. Sound, Sound your Trumpets all abroad, you
Angels of the Lord, Sons and Daughters, Prophets of the Highest, that all, that
are dead and asleep in the Graves, and been long dreaming and slumbering, may
be awakened, and hear the Voice of the Lamb, who have long heard the Voice of
the Beast; that now they may hear the Voice of the Bridegroom, now they may
hear the Voice of the Bride, now they may hear the Voice of the Great Prophet,
now they may hear the Voice of the great King, now they may hear the Voice of
the great Shepherd, and the great Bishop of their Souls. Sound, Sound it all
abroad, ye Trumpets, among the Dead in Adam; for Christ is come, the Second
Adam, that they might have Life, yea, have it abundantly. Awaken the Dead,
Awaken the Slumberers, Awaken the Dreamers, Awaken them that be asleep, Awaken
them out of their Graves, out of their Tombs, out of their Sepulchers, out of
the Seas! Sound, Sound abroad, you Trumpets! you Trumpets, that awaken the
Dead, that they may all hear the Sound of it in the Graves; and they that hear,
may live, and come to the Life, that is the Son of God: He is risen from the
Dead, the Grave could not hold nor contain him; neither could all the Watchers
of the Earth with all their Guards keep him therein. Sound, Sound, ye Trumpets
of the Lord to all the Seekers of the Living among the Dead, that he is risen
from the Dead; to all the Seekers of the Living among the Dead, and in the
Graves, that the Watchers keeps; he is not in the Grave, but he is Risen: and
there is that under the Grave of the Watchers of the outward Grave, which must
be awakened, and come to hear his Voice, which is risen from the Dead, that
they might come to live. Therefore Sound abroad, you Trumpets of the Lord, that
the Grave might give up her Dead, and Hell, and the Sea might give up their
Dead: and all might come forth to Judgment, to the Judgment of the Lord before
his Throne; and to have their Sentence and Reward according to their Works.

G. F.

And Sound, Sound, all ye Angels and Faithful Servants of the Most-High, you
Trumpets of the Lord, amongst all the Night watchers and Watchers of the
Graves, Sepulchers and Tombs, and Overseers of those Watchers of the Seas,
Graves and Sepulchers; Sound the Trumpet amongst them, and over them all: Make
the Sound to be heard, that the Dead may arise at the Sound of the Trumpet;
that they may come out of their Graves, and live and praise the Lord; That all
the Dead in the Seas, and all the Dead in the Tombs and Sepulchers may hear the
Sound of the Trumpet, and come to Judgment, and come to hear the Voice of the
Son of God, and live; in whom there is Life.

Away with all the Chaff and the Husks, and Contentions and Strife, that the
Swine feed upon in the Mire, and in the Fall; and the Keepers of them of Adam
and Eve's House in the Fall, that lies in the Mire, out of Light and Life.

G. F.



At James Hutchinson's in Ireland there came many Great Persons, desiring to
discourse with me about Election and Reprobation. I told them, Though they
judged our Principle foolish; it was too High for them, and they could not with
their Wisdom comprehend it: Therefore I would discourse with them according to
their Capacities. You say (said I) that God has Ordained the greatest part of
Men for Hell, and that they were Ordained so before the World began: For which
your Proof is in Jude. And you say, Esau was Reprobated, and the Egyptians, and
the Stock of Ham: But Christ says to his Disciples, Go, teach all Nations;
and, Go into all Nations, and preach the Gospel of Life and Salvation. Now, if
they were to go to all Nations, were they not to go to Ham's Stock, and Esau's
Stock? Did not Christ die for all? then for the Stock of Ham, and of Esau, and
the Egyptians. Does not the Scripture say, God would have all men to be saved?
Mark, All Men; then the Stock of Esau, and of Ham also. And does not God say,
Egypt my People? and that he would have an Altar in Egypt? Isa. 19. Were there
not many Christians formerly in Egypt? And does not History say, that the
Bishop of Alexandria would formerly have been Pope? And had not God a Church in
Babylon? I confess, The Word came to Jacob,
and the Statutes to Israel; the like was not to other Nations. For the Law of
God was given to Israel; but the Gospel was to be preached to all Nations, and
is to be preached. The Gospel of Peace and glad Tidings to all Nations; He that
believes, is Saved; but he that does not believe, is Condemned already: So the
Condemnation comes through Unbelief. And whereas Jude speaks of some, that were
of Old Ordained (or written of before) to Condemnation, he does not say, before
the World began: but, Written of Old, may be referred to Moses his Writings,
who writ of those, whom Jude mentions, namely, Cain, Corah, Balaam, and the
Angels, that kept not their first Estate. And such Christians, as followed them
in their way, and Apostatized from the first state of Christianity, such were
and are Ordained for Condemnation by the Light and Truth, which they are gone
from. And though the Apostle speaks of God's loving Jacob, and hating Esau; yet
he tells the Believers: We all were by nature Children of Wrath, as well as
others. This includes the Stock of Jacob (of which the Apostle himself was, and
all believing Jews were:) And thus both Jews and Gentiles were all concluded
under Sin, and so under Condemnation, that God might have Mercy upon all,
through Jesus Christ. So the Election and Choice stands in Christ: and he that
believes, is saved; and he that believes not, is condemned already. And Jacob
is the Second Birth, which God loved; and both Jews and Gentiles must be born
again, before they can enter the Kingdom of God. And when you are born again,
ye will know Election and Reprobation: for the Election stands in Christ, the
Seed, before the World began; but the Reprobation lies in the Evil Seed since
the World began. After this manner, but somewhat more largely, I discoursed
with those Great Persons about this matter; and they confessed, they had never
heard so much before.

Now after I had traveled over that Nation of Ireland, and had visited Friends
in their Meetings, as well for Business as for Worship, and had Answered
several Papers and Writings from Monks, Friars, and Protestant Priests (for
they all were in a Rage against us, and endeavored to stop the Work of the
Lord: and some Jesuits swear in some of our hearing, that we came to spread our
Principles in that Nation; but we should not do it:) I returned to Dublin,
Dublin.
in order to take Passage there for England. And when I had staid the
First-Day's Meeting there, (which was very large and precious) there being a
Ship ready, and the Wind serving, we took our Leave of Friends; parting in much
Tenderness and Brokenness, in the Sense of the Heavenly Life and Power, that
was manifested amongst us. 1669. Dublin.
So having put our Horses and Necessaries on Board in the Morning, we went our
selves in the Afternoon; many Friends accompanying us to the Ship: and diverse,
both Friends and friendly People coming after us in Boats, when we were near a
League at Sea, At Sea.
their Love drawing them; though not without Danger. A good, weighty and true
People there is in that Nation, sensible of the Power of the Lord God, and
tender of his Truth; and very good Order they have in their Meetings: for they
stand up for Righteousness and Holiness, which dams up the way of Wickedness: A
precious Visitation they had: and there is an Excellent Spirit in them, worthy
to be visited. Many things more I could write of that Nation, and of my Travels
in it, which would be large to mention particularly: but thus much I thought
good to signify, that the Righteous may Rejoice in the Prosperity of Truth.

James Lancaster, Robert Lodge and Thomas Briggs came back with me; John Stubbs
having further Service there, stayed behind. We were Two Nights at Sea: In one
of which a mighty Storm arose, that put the Vessel in great Danger; it rained
and blew so hard. But I saw, the Power of God went over the Winds and Storms;
he had them in his hand, and his Power bound them. And the same Power of the
Lord God, which carried us over, brought us back again; and in his Life gave us
Dominion over all the Evil Spirits, that opposed us there.

Liverpool.
We landed at Liverpool; and went to the Mayor's House, it being an Inn. And
after we had staid about a Quarter of an Hour in the House, we went to a
Friend's House about a Mile out of the Town, where we staid a while; and then
went to Richard Johnson's. Whence departing the next day, Lancashire. Cheshire.
we passed to William Barnes his House, and so to William Gandy's, visiting
Friends, and having many precious Meetings in Lancashire and Cheshire. We bore
toward Bristol: and when we came into Gloucestershire, Gloucestershire.
Nailsworth
we met with a Report at Nailsworth, which was spread about that Country, That
George Fox was turned Presbyterian: and that they had prepared a Pulpit for
him, and set it in a Yard; and that there would be a Thousand People there the
next day, to hear him. I thought it strange, that such a Report should be
raised of me; yet as we went further on, from one Friend's House to another, we
met with the same. We went by the Yard, where the Pulpit was set up, and saw
it; and went on to the Place, where Friends Meeting was to be next day, and
there we stayed that Night. Next day, being the First Day of the Week, we had a
very large Meeting, and the Lord's Power and Presence was amongst us.

Now the occasion of this strange Report, (according as I was informed) was
this: There was one John Fox, a Presbyterian Priest, who used to go about
Preaching; and some changing his Name (as was reported) from John to George,
gave out, that George Fox had changed his Religion, and was turned from a
Quaker to be a Presbyterian, and would Preach at such a Place such a day. This
begat so great a Curiosity in the People, that many went thither to hear this
Quaker turned Presbyterian; who would not have gone to have heard John Fox
himself. By this means it was Reported, they had got together above a Thousand
People. But when they came there, and perceived, they had a Trick put upon
them, 1669. Gloucestershire.
and that that was but a Counterfeit George Fox; and understood withal, that
the real George Fox was hard by at Friends Meeting, there came several Hundreds
of them to our Meeting, and were Sober and Attentive. I directed them to the
Grace of God in themselves, which would Teach them, and bring them Salvation.
And when the Meeting was done, some of the People said, They liked George Fox
the Quaker's Preaching better, than George Fox the Presbyterian's. Thus, by my
providential Coming into those parts at that time, was this False Report
discovered; and Shame come over them, that were the Contrivers of it.

It was not long after this, that this same John Fox was complained of in the
House of Commons, for having a Tumultuous Meeting, in which Treasonable words
were spoken: Which (according to the best Information I could get of it) was
thus. This John Fox had formerly been Priest of Mansfield in Wiltshire: and
being put out of that place, was afterward permitted by a Common-Prayer-Priest
to preach sometimes in his Steeple-House. At length this Presbyterian-Priest,
presuming too far upon the Parish Priest's former Grant, began to be more bold,
than welcome; and would have preached there, whether the Parish Priest would or
no. This caused a great Bustle and Contest in the Steeple-house between the Two
Priests, and their Hearers on either side: in which Contest the
Common Prayer Book was Cut to pieces, and (as it was said) some Treasonable
Words were then spoken by some of the Followers of this John Fox, the
Presbyterian-Priest. This was quickly put in the News-Book: and some malicious
Presbyterians caused it to be so worded, as if it had proceeded from George Fox
the Quaker, whenas I was above Two hundred Miles from the place, when this
Bustle happened. But when I heard it, I soon procured Certificates from some of
the Members of the House of Commons; who knew this John Fox, and gave it under
their Hands, that it was John Fox, who had formerly been Parson of Mansfield in
Wiltshire, that was complained of to the House of Commons, to be the Chief
Ringleader in that Unlawful Assembly.

And indeed, this John Fox was an Ill Man: for when some, that had been
Followers and Hearers of him, came to be Convinced of Truth, and received the
Truth in their Inward Parts, and thereupon left following him; he coming to
some of their Houses to talk with them about it, and they telling him, He was
in the Steps of the False Prophets, preaching for Hire and Filthy Lucre, and
was like them, whom Christ cried Woe against, and the Apostles declared against;
such as served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies; and telling
him, Christ said, Freely ye have received, freely give; and therefore he should
not take Money of People for Preaching, especially, now times were so hard. He
Replied, God bless Preaching: for that brings in Money, let times go how they
will. And fill my Belly with good Victuals; and then call me false Prophet, or
what you will, and kick me about the House, when ye have done, if ye will. This
Relation I had from a Man and his Wife (who had been formerly his Hearers) whom
this John Fox (with others) caused deeply to suffer. For he, and some other
Presbyterian Priests, using to resort to a Widow-Woman's House, who had the
Impropriation, and took the Tithes of the Parish, she told them, There was a
Quaker in that Parish, that would not pay her Tithes; and asked Counsel of
them, what she should do with him. They advised her To send Workmen, and cut
down, and carry away his Corn: which (according to their Counsel) she did, and
thereby Impoverished the Man. But to proceed. --

After this Meeting in Gloucestershire was over, we traveled through that
County, Bristol.
till we came to Bristol; where I met with Margaret Fell, who was come to visit
her Daughter Yeomans there. I had seen from the Lord a considerable time
before, that I should take Margaret Fell to be my Wife. And when I first
mentioned it to her, she felt the Answer of Life from God thereunto. But though
the Lord had opened this thing unto me, yet I had not received a Command from
the Lord, for the accomplishing of it then. Wherefore I let the thing rest, and
went on in the Work and Service of the Lord, as before, according as the Lord
led me; traveling up and down in this Nation, and through the Nation of
Ireland. But now, after I was come back from Ireland, and was come to Bristol,
and found Margaret Fell there, it opened in me from the Lord, that the thing
should be now Accomplished. And after we had discoursed the thing together, I
told her; 'If she also was satisfied with the Accomplishing of it now, she
should first send for her Children: 'which she did. And when the rest of her
Daughters were come, I asked both them and her Sons in Law, If they had any
thing against it, or for it? desiring them to speak: and they all severally
expressed their Satisfaction therein. Then I asked Margaret, 'If she had
fulfilled and performed her Husband's Will to her Children? She replied, The
Children knew that. Whereupon I asked them, Whether, if their Mother Married,
they should not lose by it? And I asked Margaret, Whether she had done any
thing in lieu of it, which might Answer it to the Children? The Children said,
She had answered it to them; and desired me to speak no more of that. I told
them, I was plain, and would have all things done plainly: for I sought not any
outward Advantage to my self. So after I had Acquainted the Children with it,
our Intention of Marriage was laid before Friends, both privately and
publicly, to the full Satisfaction of Friends; many of whom gave Testimony
thereunto, that it was of God. Afterward, a Meeting being appointed on purpose
for the Accomplishing thereof, in the Public Meeting House at Broad-Mead in
Bristol, we took each other in Marriage; the Lord Joining us together in the
Honorable Marriage, in the Everlasting Covenant and Immortal Seed of Life. In
the Sense whereof living and weighty Testimonies were born thereunto by
Friends, in the Movings of the Heavenly Power, which united us together. Then
was a Certificate, relating both the Proceedings and the Marriage, openly read,
and Signed by the Relations, and by most of the Ancient Friends of that City;
besides many other Friends from diverse parts of the Nation.

After we were Married, we stayed about a Week in Bristol; and then went into
the Country together to Oldstone: Oldstone.
where taking our Leaves of each other in the Lord, we parted, betaking our
selves each to our several Service; Margaret returning homewards to the North,
and I passing on into the Countries, in the Work of the Lord, as before. I
traveled through Wiltshire, Berkshire, 1669. Wiltshire. Berkshire. Oxfordshire
Buckinghamshire. London.
Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, and so to London, visiting Friends: In all
which Counties I had many large and precious Meetings.

Being in London, it came upon me to write to Friends throughout the Nation,
about Putting out poor Children to Trades. Wherefore I sent the following
Epistle to the Quarterly Meetings of Friends in all Counties.

My Dear Friends,
LET every Quarterly Meeting make Inquiry through all the Monthly Meetings, and
other Meetings, to know all Friends, that be poor, Widows, or others, that have
Children fit to set forth to Apprenticeships; so that once a Quarter you may
set forth an Apprentice from your Quarterly Meeting: and so you may set forth
four in a Year in each County, as need may be; or more, if there be occasion.
And this Apprentice, when he comes out of his Time, may help his Mother or
Father, and rear up the Family, that is decayed; and in so doing, all may come
to live comfortably, as Men. For being done in your Quarterly Meetings, ye will
have knowledge through all the County, in all the Monthly and particular
Meetings, of Masters that be fit for them; and of such Trades, as their Parents
desire, or you desire, or the Children are most Inclinable too: and so, being
placed forth, as you shall order from your Quarterly Meetings, to Friends, they
may be trained up in Truth: and by this means in the Wisdom of God, you may
preserve Friends Children in the Truth, and enable them to rear up their
decayed Families, and be a Strength and Help to them, and Nursers and
Preservers of their Relations in their ancient days. And thus also, things
being ordered in the Wisdom of God, you will take off a continual Maintenance,
and free your selves from much Cumber. For in the Country, ye know, ye may set
forth an Apprentice for a little, to several Trades, as Bricklayers or Masons,
Carpenters, Wheel-rights, Plough-rights, Tailors, Tanners, Curriers,
Black-smiths, Shoomakers, Naylers, Butchers, and several other Trades, that
might be named, as Weavers of Linen and Woollen, Stuffs and Serges. And you
may do well, to have a Stock in your Quarterly-Meetings for that purpose: and
all that is given by any Friends at their Decease (except it be given to some
particular Use, Person or Meeting,) may be brought to the Public Stock for
that same purpose: This will be a way for the preserving of many, that are poor
among you; and it will be a way of making up poor Families. In several Counties
the same is practiced already: and some Quarterly Meetings do set forth Two
Apprentices; and sometimes they set forth Children of the World, that are laid
on the Parish: You may bind them for fewer or more Years, according to their
Capacities. In all which things the Wisdom of God will teach you; by which ye
may come to help the Children of poor Friends, that they may come to rear up
their Families, and preserve them in the Fear of God. So no more, but my Love
in the everlasting Seed, by which ye will have Wisdom to order all things to
the Glory of God.

London, the first of the 11th Month, 1669. G. F.


1669. Essex. Hertfordshire.
I stayed not long in London: but having visited Friends, and finding things
there quiet and well, the Lord's Power being over all, I passed down into
Essex, and so into Hertfordshire; where I had many precious Meetings. But
before I went out of London, intending to go down, as far as Leicestershire, I
writ a Letter to my Wife, to acquaint her therewith; that, if she found it
Convenient to her, she might meet me there. Cambridgeshire. Huntingtonshire.
Leicestershire.
From Hertfordshire I turned into Cambridgeshire; thence into Huntingtonshire,
and so into Leicestershire: where, instead of Meeting with my Wife, I heard,
that she was Haled out of her House, and carried to Lancaster-Prison again, by
an Order gotten from the King and Council, to fetch her back to Prison upon the
Old Praemunire; 1670.
though she had been discharged from that Imprisonment, by an Order from the
King and Council the Year before. Wherefore, having visited Friends,
Derbyshire. Warwickshire. London.
as far as Leicestershire, I returned by Derbyshire into Warwickshire, and so
through the Countries that way to London again; having had many large and
blessed Meetings in the several Counties I passed through, and had been sweetly
refreshed with and amongst Friends in my Travels.

As soon as I was got to London, I hast'ned Mary Lower and Sarah Fell (two of
my Wife's Daughters) to the King, to acquaint him, how their Mother was dealt
with, and see, if they could get a full Discharge for her, that she might enjoy
her Estate and Liberty without Molestation. This was somewhat difficult at
first to get; but by diligent Attendance on it, they at length obtained it: the
King giving Command to one called Sir John Otway, to signify his Pleasure
therein by Letter to the Sheriff, and others concerned therein in the Country.
Which Letter Sarah Fell, going down with her Brother and Sister Rous, carried
with her to Lancaster; and by them I writ to my Wife, as follows.

My Dear Heart in the Truth and Life, that changes not.
IT was upon me, that Mary Lower and Sarah should go to the King concerning thy
Imprisonment; and to Kirby, that the Power of the Lord might appear over them
all in thy Deliverance. They went; and then they thought to have come down: but
it was upon me to stay them a little longer; that they might follow the
Business, till it was Effected: which it now is, and is here sent down. The
late Declaration of mine has been very serviceable, People being generally
satisfied with it. So no more, but my Love in the Holy Seed.

G. F.


The Declaration here mentioned, was a Printed Sheet, writ upon occasion of a
New Persecution stirred up, For by that time I was got back out of
Leicestershire to London, a fresh Storm was Risen; occasioned (as it was
thought) by that Tumultuous Meeting in a Steeple-house in Wiltshire, or
Gloucestershire, mentioned a little before: where a Contest happening between a
Presbyterian-Priest, and the Priest of the Parish, with their Hearers on either
side, the Common Prayer Book was Cut to pieces, and other great Disorders
committed. 1670. London.
From which (it was said) some Members of Parliament took Advantage, to get
that Act passed against Seditious Conventicles: which soon after came forth,
and was turned against us; who of all People were free from Sedition and
Tumult. Whereupon I writ the Declaration before mentioned; showing from the
Preamble and Terms of the said Act, That we were not such a People, nor our
Meetings such Meetings, as were described in that Act. Beside that Declaration,
I writ also another short Paper, on the occasion of that Act against Meetings;
opening our Case to the Magistrates, as follows:

O Friends, Consider this Act, which limits us to Five, that but Five may Meet:
Is this To do, as ye would be done by? Would ye be so served your selves? We
own Christ Jesus, as well as you, both his Coming, Death and Resurrection; and
if we be Contrary-minded to you in some things, is not this the Apostle's
Exhortation, to Wait, till God has Revealed it? Does not he say, What is not
of Faith, is Sin? And seeing, we have not Faith in things, which ye would have
us to do; would it not be Sin in us, if we should do contrary to our Faith? And
why should any Man have Power ^ver any other Man's Faith, seeing Christ is the
Author of it? When the Apostles did preach in the Name of Jesus, and great
Multitudes heard them, and the Rulers forbad them to speak any more in that
Name; did not they bid them Judge, Whether it were better to obey God or Man?
Would not this Act have taken hold of the Twelve Apostles, and Seventy
Disciples; for they Met often together? And if there had been an Act or Law
made then, That not above Five should have met with Christ; would not that have
been an hindering him from Meeting with his Disciples? And do ye think, that he
(who is the Wisdom of God) or his Disciples would have obeyed it? If such a Law
had been made in the Apostles days, That not above Five might have met
together, who had been different-minded from either the Jews, or the Gentiles;
Do ye think, the Churches of Christ at Corinth, Philippi, Ephesus,
Thessalonica, or the rest of the Gathered Churches would have Obeyed it? O
therefore consider! For we are Christians, and partake of the Nature and Life
of Christ. And strive not to Limit the Holy One; for God's Power cannot be
limited, and is not to be quenched: And do unto all men, as ye would have them
do unto you: for that is the Law and the Prophets.

This is from those, who wish you all well, and desire your Everlasting Good
and Prosperity, who are called Quakers; who seek the Peace and Good of all
People, though they do Afflict us, and cause us to suffer.

G. F.

Now as I had endeavored to soften the Magistrates, and to take off the
Sharpness of their Edge in the Execution of the Act; so it was upon me to write
a few Lines to Friends, To strengthen and encourage them to stand fast in their
Testimony, and bear, with Christian Patience and Content, the Suffering, that
was coming upon them. This I did in the following Epistle: ALL my Dear Friends:
Keep in the Faith of God above all outward things, and in his Power, that has
given you Dominion over all. The same Power of God is still with you to deliver
you, as formerly: for God and his Power is the same, and his Seed is over all,
and before all; and will be, when that which makes to suffer, is gone. And so
be of good Faith, in that which Changes not: for whatsoever any does against
the Truth, it will come upon themselves, and fall as a Millstone on their Heads.
And if so be, that the Lord do suffer you to be Tried, let all be given up: and
look at the Lord, and his Power, which is over the whole World; and will be,
when the World is gone. And in the Lord's Power and Truth Rejoice, Friends,
over that, which makes to suffer, in the Seed, which was, before it was: for
the Life, and Truth, and the Power of God is over all. And all keep in that;
and if ye do suffer in that, it is to the Lord. Friends, the Lord has blessed
you in Outward Things; and now the Lord may Try you, Whether your Minds be in
the Outward Things; or with the Lord, that gave you them? Therefore keep in the
Seed, by which all Outward Things were made; and which is over them all. What!
shall not I pray, and speak to God, with my Face toward Heavenly Jerusalem,
according to my wonted Time? And let not any one's Dalilah shave his Head, lest
such lose their Strength; neither Rest in its Lap, lest the Philistines be upon
you. For your Rest is in Christ Jesus; therefore Rest not in any thing else.

London, the 12th of the 2d Month, 1670. G. F.




On the First Day of the Week, next after the Act came in force, I went to the
Meeting at Grace Church Street, Gracious-Street-Meeting.
where I expected, the Storm was most likely to begin. When I came there, I
found the Street full of People, and a Guard set to keep Friends out of their
Meeting House. I went thereupon to the other Passage, that goes out of
Lombard Street, and there also I found a Guard; but the Court was full of
People, and a Friend was speaking amongst them: But spoke not long. And when he
had done, I stood up, and was moved to say; Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou
me? It is hard for thee to kick against that, that pricks thee. Then I showed,
that it is Readiness Nature, that persecutes still; and that they, who persecute
Christ in his Members now, where he is made manifest, kick against that which
pricks them. That it was the Birth of the Flesh, that persecuted the Birth born
of the Spirit: and that it was the Nature of Dogs to tear and devour the Sheep;
but that we suffered as Sheep, that did not bite again: for we were a peaceable
People, and did love them, that persecuted us. After I had spoken a while to
this Effect, the Constable came, with an Informer and Soldiers; 1670. London.
Grac. Meet.
and as they plucked me down, I said; Blessed are the Peacemakers. The
Commander of the Soldiers put me among the Soldiers, and bid them secure me;
saying to me, You are the Man I looked for. They took also John Burneyate and
another Friend; and had us away first to the Exchange, and afterward toward
More fields. As we went along the Streets, the People were very moderate; and
some of them laughed at the Constable, and told him, We would not run away. The
Informer went with us Unknown; till falling into Discourse with one of the
Company, he said; It would never be a good World, till all People came to the
good Old Religion, that was Two hundred Years ago. Whereupon I asked him, Art
thou a Papist? What! a Papist- Informer? for Two hundred years ago there was no
other Religion, but that of the Papists. He saw, he had ensnared himself; and
was Vexed at it: for as he went along the Streets, I spoke often to him; and
manifested, what he was. When we were come to the Mayor's House, and were in
the Court yard, several of the People, that stood about, asked me; How, and for
what I was taken? I desired them to Ask the Informer; and also know, what his
Name was: but he refused to tell his Name. Whereupon one of the Mayor's
Officers, looking out at a Window, told him; He should tell his Name, before he
went away: for the Lord Mayor (he said) would know, by what Authority he
intruded himself with Soldiers into the Execution of those Laws, which
belonged to the Civil Magistrate to Execute, and not to the Military. After
this he was restless, and eager to be gone; and went to the Porter to be let
out. One of the Officers called to him, saying, Have you brought People here to
Inform against, and now will you go away, before my Lord Mayor comes? Some
called to the Porter, not to let him out: Whereupon he forcibly pulled open the
Door, and slipped out. No sooner was he come out into the Street, but the People
gave a Shout, that made the Street ring again; Crying out, A Papist-Informer! A
Papist-Informer! We desired the Constable and Soldiers to go forth, and Rescue
him out of the Peoples Hands; fearing, lest they should have done him a
Mischief. They went, and brought him into the Mayor's Entry; where we staid a
while: But when he went out again, the People received him with such another
Shout. Whereupon the Soldiers were fain to go, and Rescue him once more: and
then they had him into a House in an Alley; where they persuaded him to Change
his Perriwig, and so he got away unknown.

When the Mayor came home, we were brought into the Room, where he was: and
some of his Officers would have taken off our Hats; which he perceiving, called
to them, and bid them Let us alone, and not meddle with our Hats: for (said he)
they are not yet brought before me in Judicature. So we stood by, while he
Examined some Presbyterian- and Baptist-Teachers; with whom he was somewhat
sharp, and Convicted them. After he had done with them, I was brought up to the
Table, where he sat; and then the Officers took off my Hat. And the Mayor said
mildly to me: Mr. Fox, You are an Eminent Man amongst those of your Profession;
pray, will you be Instrumental, to dissuade them from meeting in such great
Numbers: for (said he) seeing Christ has promised, that Where two or three are
met in his Name, he will be in the midst of them; and the King and Parliament
are graciously pleased to allow of Four to meet together to Worship God: 1670.
London. At Mayor's
Why will not you be content to partake both of Christ's Promise to Two or
Three, and the King's Indulgence to Four? I answered to this purpose: That
Christ's Promise was not to discourage many from Meeting together in his Name;
but to encourage the Few, that the fewest might not forbear to Meet, because of
their Fewness. But if Christ has promised to manifest his Presence in the
midst of so small an Assembly, where but Two or Three were gathered in his
Name; how much more would his Presence abound, where Two or Three hundred are
gathered in his Name. I wished him to consider, Whether this Act would not have
taken hold of Christ, with his Twelve Apostles and 70 Disciples (if it had been
in their time) who used to Meet often together; and that with great Numbers?
However I told him, this Act did not concern Us; for it was made against
Seditious Meetings, of such as Met, under Color and Pretense of Religion, to
contrive Insurrections, as (the Act says) late Experience had shown; but we
had been sufficiently Tried and Proved, and always found peaceable: And
therefore he should do well, to put a difference between the Innocent, and the
Guilty. He said, The Act was made against Meetings, and a Worship not according
to the Liturgy. I told him, [According to] was not the very same thing: and I
asked him, 'Whether the Liturgy was according to the Scriptures? And whether we
might not read Scriptures, and speak Scriptures? He said, Yes. I told him,
'This Act took hold only of such, as did Meet to plot and contrive
Insurrections, as late Experience had shown: but they had never Experienced
that by us. Because Thieves are sometimes on the Road, must not Honest Men
travel therefore? And because Plotters and Contrivers have Met to do Mischief,
must not an honest, peaceable People Meet to do Good? If we had been a People,
that did Meet to Plot and Contrive Insurrections, etc. we might have drawn our
selves into Fours; for Four might do more Mischief in Plotting, than if there
were Four Hundred; because Four might speak out their Minds more freely one to
another, than Four Hundred could. Therefore we being Innocent, and not the
People this Act concerns; we keep our Meetings, as we used to do: and, I said,
I believed, that he knew in his Conscience, we were Innocent. After this, and
some more Discourse, he took our Names, and the places, where we lodged; and at
length, inasmuch as the Informer was gone, set us at Liberty.

Being set at Liberty, the Friends, that were with me, asked me, Grac. Meet.
Whether I would go? I told them, To Gracious-Street-Meeting again, if it were
not over. When we came there, the People were generally gone; only some few
stood at the Gate. We went into Gerrard Roberts his House; and from thence I
sent out to know, how the other Meetings in the City were? And I understood,
that at some of the Meeting-places Friends were kept out; and at others they
were taken, but set at Liberty again a few days after. A glorious time it was;
for the Lord's Power came over all, and his Everlasting Truth got Renown. For
as fast as some, that were speaking, were taken down, others were moved of the
Lord to stand up and speak; to the admiration of the People: and the more,
because many Baptists and other Sectaries left their Public Meetings, and came
to see, how the Quakers would stand? As for the Informer aforesaid, he was so
frighted, 1670. London.
that there durst hardly any Informer appear publicly again in London for some
time after. But the Mayor, whose Name was Samuel Starling, though he carried
himself smoothly toward us, proved afterward a very great Persecutor of our
Friends; many of whom he cast into Prison, as may be seen in the Books of the
Trials of W. Penn, W. Mead, and others at the Old Baily this Year.

After some time, the Heat of Persecution in the City began to abate, and
Meetings were quieter there: and I being then clear of the City, went to visit
Friends in the Country; having several Meetings, as I went, in Middlesex,
Buckinghamshire and Oxfordshire, Middlesez. Buckinghamshire. Oxfordshire
Reading.
which were quiet: though in some places there was much Threatening. At Reading
most of the Friends were in Prison; and I went thither to Visit them: And when
I had been a while with them, the Friends that were Prisoners, gathered
together, and several other Persons came in; so that I had a fine Opportunity
amongst them, and declared the Word of Life, encouraging them in the Truth: and
they were Refreshed in feeling the Presence and Power of the Lord amongst them.
When the Meeting was ended, the Jailer understanding, that I was there, the
Friends were troubled, and concerned how to get me out safe again: for they
feared, lest he should stop me. But after I had staid a while, and Eaten with
them, I went down the Stairs: and the Jailer being at the Door, I put my hand
in my Pocket, which he had such an Eye to, hoping to get something of me; that
he asked me no Question. So I gave him something, and bad him, Be kind and
civil to my Friends in Prison, whom I came to Visit: And he let me pass out
without Interruption. But soon after Isaac Pennington coming to Visit them, he
stopped him; and caused him to be made a Prisoner.

Next Morning I rid about Fourteen Miles to a Meeting, Hampshire. Baghurst.
at a place called Baghurst in Hampshire; Thomas Brigges being with me. When we
came into the Parish, some sober People came to us, and told us, That the
Priest of the Town was an Envious Man, and did Threaten us. We went on to the
Meeting, which was large: and after some time Thomas Brigges stood up and
spoke. Now it seems, the Priest had got a Warrant, and sent the Constables and
other Officers with it: And they came to the House, and stayed a while, and
then went away again; but did not come into the Meeting: So we in the Meeting
did not know of their being there. But after Thomas Brigges had done speaking.
I was moved of the Lord to stand up, and declared the Word of Life to the
People; and a precious Meeting we had. When I had done speaking, and the
Meeting was ended and risen, I heard a great Clutter in the Yard: and when we
came forth, the Man of the House told us, That the Officers had been in the
House before, but did not come into the Meeting; but went away without doing
any thing. And that now the Priest in a great Rage had sent them again, and his
own Servant with them. But the Meeting being ended before they came, they could
do nothing now: And thus the good Providence of the Lord preserved us from the
Wicked Design of the Envious Priest, and out of his Snare; but the Priest was
in a great Rage.

1670. Barkshire. Surrey. Guilford.
From thence We went to a Friend's House on the Edge of Barkshire, where several
Friends came to visit us. And afterward we passed into Surrey, visiting
Friends, and had many precious Meetings: till we came to Stephen Smiths near
Guilford, where great Persecution had been; and very much Goods had been taken
away from Friends thereabouts for their Meetings, and under great Threatenings
they were at that time: yet we had several blessed Meetings there, and
thereabouts; and the Lord's Power was over all, in and by which we were
preserved.

Sussex.
We went out of Surrey into Sussex, by Richard Baxe's, where we had a large,
precious Meeting, and quiet; though the Constables had given out Threatenings
before. Afterward I had many more Meetings up and down in that County: and
though there were some Threatenings, yet Meetings were peaceable; and Friends
were refreshed, and established upon the Foundation of God, that stands sure.
When I had thoroughly visited Sussex, Kent.
I went into Kent; and had many glorious and precious Meetings in several parts
of that County. I went up into East-Kent to a Meeting near Deal, Deal.
which was very large: and returning from thence to Canterbury, Canterbury.
Isle of Sheppy.
visited Friends there: and then passed into the Isle of Sheppy, where I staid
Two or Three Days; and thither came Alexander Parker, George Whitehead and John
Rouse to me.

The next day after they came, finding my Service for the Lord finished there,
we passed away toward Rochester. And on the way, as I was walking down an
Hill, a great Weight and Oppression fell upon my Spirit: I got on my Horse
again; but the Weight remained so heavy on me, that I was hardly able to Ride.
At length we came to Rochester, Rochester.
but I was much spent; being so extremely laden and burdened with the World's
Spirits, that my Life was oppressed under them. I got with difficulty to
Graves-End, Gravesend
and lay at an Inn there; but could hardly either Eat or Sleep. The next day
John Rouse and Alexander Parker went for London; and John Stubbs being come to
me, he and I went over the Ferry into Essex. Essex.
We came to a place called Horne-Church, Horne-Church. Stratford.
where was a Meeting on the First Day: And after the Meeting I rode with great
Uneasiness to Stratford, Three Miles from London, to a Friend's House there,
whose Name was Williams; and who had formerly been a Captain. Here I lay
exceeding Weak, and at last lost both my Hearing and my Sight; so that I could
neither hear nor see. Several Friends came thither to me from London: and I
told them; That I should be as a Sign, to such as would not see, and such as
would not hear the Truth. In this Condition I continued a pretty while, and
several People came about me; and though I could not see their Persons, yet I
felt and discerned their Spirits, who of them was honest-hearted, and who was
not. Diverse Friends that practiced Physic, came to see me, and would have
given me Physic; but I was not to meddle with any of their Medicines: For I
was sensible, I had a Travel to go through; and therefore spoke to Friends, to
let none but solid, weighty Friends be about me. And under great Sufferings and
Groanings, and Travels, and Sorrows, and Oppressions I lay for several Weeks;
whereby I was brought so Low and Weak in Body, that few thought, I could have
lived: and some, that were with me, went away, saying, They would not see me
die; and it was reported both in London, and in the Country, that I was
deceased: 1670. Stratford.
But I felt the Lord's Power inwardly supporting me. And when they, that were
about me, had given me up to die, I spoke to them, to get a Coach to carry me
to Gerrard Roberts's, about Twelve Miles off: For I found, it was my place, to
go thither. I had now Recovered a little Glimmering Sight, so that I could
discern the People and Fields, as I went; and that was all. When I came to
Gerrard's, he was very Weak; and I was moved to speak to him, and encourage
him. And after I had staid about Three Weeks there, it was with me to go to
Enfield: Friends were afraid of my Removing: but I told them, I might safely
go. And when I had taken my leave of Gerrard, and was come to Enfield, Enfield.
I went first to visit Amor Stoddart; who lay there very Weak, and almost
Speechless. I was moved to tell him, He had been faithful as a Man, and
faithful to God; and that the Immortal Seed of Life was his Crown. And with
many more Words I was moved to speak to him; though I my self was then so Weak,
I was hardly able to stand: and within a few days after Amor died. I went to
the Widow Dry's at Enfield, and there I lay all that Winter; warring in Spirit
with the Evil Spirits of the World, that Warred against Truth and Friends. For
there were great Persecutions at this time: some Meeting Houses were plucked
down, and many were broken up by Soldiers; who would come, sometimes a Troop
of Horse, or a Company of Foot, and they would break their Swords, Carbines,
Muskets and Pikes with beating Friends: and many Friends they wounded, so that
their Blood lay in the Streets. Amongst others, that were Active in this Cruel
Persecution at London, my Old Adversary Col. Kirby was one; who with a Company
of Foot went to break up several Meetings: and he would often Inquire for me at
the Meetings, he brake up. But one time, as he went over the Water to
Horsly-Down, there happening some Scuffle between some of his Soldiers, and
some of the Watermen, he bid his Men, Fire at them; and they did so, and Killed
some.

But I was under great Sufferings at this time, beyond what I have words to
declare. For I was brought into the Deep, and saw all the Religions of the
World, and People that lived in them, and the Priests that held them up; who
were as a Company of Men-Eaters, eating up the People like Bread, and gnawing
the Flesh from off their Bones. But as for True Religion and Worship, and
Ministers of God, Alack! I saw, there was none amongst those of the World, that
pretended to it. For they, that pretended to be the Church, were but a Company
of Men-Eaters, Men of Cruel Visages, and of long Teeth; who, though they had
cried against the Men-Eaters in America, yet I saw, they were in the same
Nature. And as the great professing Jews did eat up God's People, like Bread,
and the False Prophets and Priests then preached Peace to People, so long as
they put into their Mouths and fed them; but if they fed them not, they
prepared War against them: they ate their Flesh off their Bones, and chopped
them for the Caldron; so these, that profess themselves Christians now, (both
Priests and Professors) and were not in the same Power and Spirit, that Christ
and the Holy Prophets and Apostles were in, were in the same Nature, that the
old, professing Jews were in, and were Men-Eaters, as well as they. These
stirred up Persecution, and set the wicked Informers on work; so that a Friend
could hardly speak a few Words in a private Family, 1670. Enfield.
before they sat down to eat Meat, but some were ready to Inform against them.
A particular Instance of which I have heard, as follows.

At Droitwich Jo. Cartwright came to a Friend's House: and being moved of the
Lord to speak a few Words, before he sat down to Supper; there came an
Informer, and stood heark'ning under the Window. And when he had heard the
Friend speak, hoping to get some Gain to himself, he went and Informed; and got
a Warrant to Distrain the Friend's Goods, under pretense, that there was a
Meeting at his House: Whereas there was none in the House at that time, when
the Friend spoke before Supper, but himself, the Man of the House, and his
Wife, and their Maidservant. But this Evil-minded man, as he came back with
his Warrant in the Night, Example.
fell off of his Horse, and brake his Neck. So there was a Wretched End of a
Wicked Informer; who hoped to have enriched himself by spoiling Friends: but
the Lord prevented him, and Cut him off in his Wickedness, and spoiled him.

Now, though it was a Cruel, Bloody, Persecuting Time, yet the Lord's Power
went over all, and his Everlasting Seed prevailed; and Friends were made to
stand firm and faithful in the Lord's Power: And some of the Sober People of
the World would say, If Friends did not stand, the Nation would run into
Debauchery.

And though by reason of my Weakness, I could not travel about amongst Friends,
as I used to do; yet in the Motion of Life I sent the following Lines, as an
Encouraging Testimony, amongst them.

My Dear Friends,
THE Seed is above all, in it Walk; in which ye all have Life. Be not amazed at
the Weather: for always the Just suffered by the Unjust; but the Just had the
Dominion. And all along ye may see, by Faith the Mountains were subdued; and
the Rage of the Wicked, and his Fiery Darts were quenched. And though the Waves
and Storms be high, yet your Faith will keep you to Swim above them: for they
are but for a Time; and the Truth is without Time. Therefore keep on the
Mountain of Holiness, ye who are led to it by the Light; where nothing shall
hurt. And do not think, that any thing will outlast the Truth, which stands
sure; and is over that, which is out of the Truth: for the Good will Overcome
the Evil, and the Light Darkness, and the Life Death, and Virtue Vice, and
Righteousness Unrighteousness. The False Prophet cannot overcome the True: but
the True Prophet, Christ, will overcome all the False. So be Faithful, and live
in that, which does not think the time long.

G. F.


But after some time it pleased the Lord to allay the Heat of this Violent
Persecution: and I felt in Spirit an overcoming of the Spirits of those
Men-Eaters, that had stirred it up, and carried it on to that Height of
Cruelty; though I was outwardly very Weak. And I plainly felt, and those
Friends that were with me, and that came to Visit me, saw and took notice, that
as the Persecution Ceased, I came from under the Travels and Sufferings, that
had lain with such Weight upon me: So that toward the Spring I began to
Recover, and to walk up and down, beyond the Expectation of many; who did not
think, I could ever have gone abroad again, I had been so exceeding Weak
through the Travel and Exercise, that was upon my Spirit.

Whilst I was under this Spiritual Travel and Suffering, the State of the City
New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven, was opened to me; which some
Carnal-minded People had looked upon to be like an outward City or Town, that
had dropped out of the Elements: But I saw the Beauty and Glory of it, the
Length, the Breadth, and the Height thereof, all in Complete Proportion. And I
saw, that all, who are within the Light of Christ, and in his Faith, which he
is the Author of, and in the Spirit, the Holy Ghost, which Christ, and the Holy
Prophets and Apostles were in, and within the Grace and Truth, and within the
Power of God (that was before the Devil was) which was the Walls of the City;
such are within the City, such are Members of this City, and have right to Eat
of the Tree of Life, which yields her Fruit every Month, and whose Leaves are
for the healing of the Nations. But they that are out of the Grace, out of the
Truth, out of the Light, Spirit and Power of God; such as Resist the Holy
Ghost, quench, vex and grieve the Spirit of God, and hate the Light, and turn
the Grace of God into Wantonness, and do Despite to the Spirit of Grace; such
as have erred from the Faith, and made Shipwreck of it, and of a Good
Conscience, and abuse the Power of God, and despise Prophesying, Revelation and
Inspiration; these are the Dogs and Unbelievers, that are without the City: And
these make up the great City Babylon, Confusion, and her Cage, the Power of
Darkness; and the Evil Spirit of Error surround and cover them over. And in
this great City Babylon are the False Prophets, in the false Power and false
Spirit, and the Beast in the Dragon's Power, and the Whore, that is gone a
Whoring from the Spirit of God, and from Christ, her Husband: But the Lord's
Power is over all this Power of Darkness, Cage, Whore, Beast, Dragon, False
Prophets and their Worshippers, who are for the Lake, which burns with Fire.
Many things more did I see concerning the Heavenly City, the New Jerusalem,
which are hard to be uttered; and would be hard to be received. But in short,
This Holy City is within the Light: and all that are within the Light, are
within the City; the Gates whereof stand open all the Day, (for there is no
Night there) that all may come in: and Christ's Blood being shed for every Man,
and he tasted Death for every Man, and enlightneth every Man that comes into
the World, and his Grace, that brings Salvation, having appeared to all Men,
there is no Place or Language, but there his Voice may be heard. The Christians
in the Primitive Times were called by Christ A City set upon an Hill; and they
were also called The Light of the World, and The Salt of the Earth: But when
the Christians lost the Light, and Salt, and Power of God, then they came to be
trodden under foot, like unsavory Salt. Even as the Jews, who while they kept
the Law of God, were kept above all Nations; but when they turned their Backs
on God and his Law, then were they trodden under foot of other Nations. So Adam
and Eve, while they obeyed God, were kept in his Image, and in the Paradise of
God, in Dominion over all the Works of God's Hands: but when they disobeyed
God, they lost the Image of God, the Righteousness and the Holiness, in which
they were made; they lost their Dominion, and were driven out of Paradise: and
so fell under the dark Power of Satan, and came under the Chains of Darkness.
But the Promise of God was, That the Seed of the Woman, Christ Jesus, should
bruise the Serpents Head, should break his Power and Authority, which had led
into Captivity, and had held Man in it. So Christ, who is the First and Last,
sets Man free, and is the Resurrection of the Just and Unjust, the Judge of the
Quick and Dead; and they that are in him, are invested with everlasting Rest
and Peace, out of all the Labors, and Travels, and Miseries of Adam in the
Fall. So he is sufficient, and of Ability to Restore Man up into the State,
that Man was in before he fell; and not into that State only, but up into that
State also, that never fell, even to himself.

I had also in this time a great Exercise and Travel of Spirit upon me,
concerning the Powers and Rulers of these Nations, from the sense I had of the
many tender Visitations and faithful Warnings, that had been given them; and of
their great Abuse thereof: who had refused to hear, and had rejected the
Counsel of the Lord. And though I knew, Friends would be Clear of their Blood;
yet I could not but Mourn over them, and gave forth these few Lines following
concerning them:

WE have given them a Visitation, and have faithfully Warned them; and have
declared to them our Innocence and Vprightness, and that we never did any Hurt
to the King, nor to any of his People. We have nothing in our Hearts, but Love
and Goodwill to him and his People; and desire their Eternal Welfare. But if
they will not hear, then the Day of Judgment and of Sorrow, of Torment and
Misery, and sudden Destruction will come from the Lord upon them. that have
been the Cause of the Sufferings of many Thousands simple, innocent, harmless
People, that have done them no hurt, nor have had any Ill Will toward him or
them; but have desired their Eternal Good, for the Eternal Truth's sake:
Destruction will come upon them, that turn the Sword backward. Therefore do not
blind your Eyes; the Lord will bring swift Destruction and Misery upon you:
Surely, he will do it, and will relieve his Innocent People; who have groaned
for Deliverance from under your Oppression, and have also groaned for your
Deliverance out of Wickedness, Blessed be the Lord God, that he has a People
in this Nation, that seeks the Good of all Men upon the Face of the Earth: For
we have the Mind of the Lord Jesus Christ, that desires not the Death of a
Sinner; but the Salvation and Good of all: Blessed be the Name of the Lord our
God for ever.

G. F.

While I continued at Enfield, a sense came upon me of an Hurt, that sometimes
happened, by Persons coming under the Profession of Truth out of one Country
into another, to take an Husband or Wife amongst Friends, where they were
Strangers; and it was not known, whether they were Clear and Orderly, or no.
And it Opened in me to recommend the following Method unto Friends, for
preventing such Inconveniences: Whereupon I writ the following Lines.

ALL Friends, that do Marry, whether they be Men or Women, if they come out of
another Nation, Island, Plantation or County, let them bring a Certificate from
the Men's-Meeting of that County, Nation, Island or Plantation, from which they
come, to the Men's Meeting, where they do propound their Intention of Marriage:
for the Men's-Meeting being made up of the Faithful, this will stop all bad and
raw Spirits from Roving up and down. And then when any come with a Certificate,
or Letter of Recommendation from one Men's-Meeting to another, one is refreshed
by another; and can set their Hands and Hearts to the thing: and this will take
away a great deal of Trouble. And then, what ye have to say to them in the
Power of God, in Admonishing and Instructing them, ye are left to the Power and
Spirit of God to do it; and to let them know the Duty of Marriage, and what it
is: that there may be an Unity and a Concord in the Spirit, and Power, and
Light and Wisdom of God, throughout all the Men's-Meetings in the whole World,
in One, in the Life. Let Copies of this be sent to every County, and Nation,
and Island, where Friends are; that so all things may be kept holy and pure,
and righteous in Unity and Peace; and God over all may be glorified among you,
his Lot, his People and Inheritance, who are his Adopted Sons and Daughters,
and Heirs of his Life. So no more, but my Love in that which changes not.

The 14th of the First Month, 1670/1. G. F.

When I had recovered so much Strength, that I could Walk a little up and down,
I went from Enfield to Gerrard Roberts's again; and from thence to the Women's
School at Shacklewell, and so to London, Shacklewell. London. Grac. Meet.
to the Meeting at Gracious-Street: where though I was yet but Weak, yet the
Lord's Power upheld and enabled me, to Declare his Eternal Word of Life.

And about this time I was moved to pray to the Lord, as follows:

O Lord God Almighty! 1670. London.
Prosper Truth, and Preserve Justice and Equity in the Land, and bring down all
Injustice and Iniquity, Oppression and Falsehood, and Cruelty, and
Unmercifulness in the Land; and that Mercy and Righteousness may flourish!

And, O Lord God! Establish and set up Verity, and Preserve it in the Land: And
bring down in the Land all Debauchery, and Vice, and Whoredoms, and
Fornication, and this Raping Spirit, which causes and leads People to have
no Esteem of Thee, O God! nor their own Souls or Bodies, nor of Christianity,
Modesty, or Humanity.

And, O Lord! Put it in the Magistrates Hearts, to bring down all this
Ungodliness, and Violence, and Cruelty, Profaneness, Cursing and Swearing; and
to put down all these Whore-houses and Play Houses, which do Corrupt Youth and
People, and lead them from the Kingdom of God, where no Unclean Thing can
Enter, neither shall come: but such Works lead People to Hell. And the Lord in
Mercy bring down all these things in the Nation, to stop thy Wrath, O God! from
coming on the Land.

This Prayer was writ the 17th Day at Night, of the 2d Month, 1671. G. F.

I mentioned before, that upon the Notice I received of my Wife's being had to
Prison again, I sent two of her Daughters to the King; and they procured his
Order to the Sheriff of Lancashire for her Discharge. But though I expected,
she would have been set at Liberty thereby; 1671. London.
yet this Violent Storm of Persecution coming suddenly on upon it, the
Persecutors there did not Release her, but found means to hold her still in
Prison. But now the Persecution a little ceasing, I was moved to speak to
Martha Fisher, and another Woman-Friend, to go to the King about her Liberty.
They went in the Faith, and in the Lord's Power; and the Lord gave them Favor
with the King, so that he granted a Discharge under the Broad-Seal, to Clear
both her and her Estate, after she had been Ten Years a Prisoner, and
Premunired: The like whereof was scarce to be heard in England. I sent down the
Discharge forthwith by a Friend: by whom also I writ to her, both to Inform
her, how to get it delivered to the Justices; and also to Acquaint her, that it
was upon me from the Lord, to go beyond the Seas, to visit the Plantations in
America: and therefore desired her to hasten up to London, as soon as she could
conveniently, after she had obtained her Liberty; because the Ship was then
fitting for the Voyage. In the mean time I got down to Kingston, Kingston.
and staid at John Rous his House, till my Wife came up: and then I began to
prepare for the Voyage. But the Yearly Meeting being near at hand, London-Yea.
Meet.
I tarried till that was over. A very large Meeting it was; for many Friends
came up to it from all parts of the Nation, and a very precious Meeting it was;
for the Lord's Power was over all, and his glorious, everlastingly-renowned
Seed of Life was exalted above all.

Now after this Meeting was over, and I had finished my Services for the Lord
here in England, the Ship also, and the Friends that intended to go with me,
being ready, I went down to Graves-end on the 12th day of the Sixth Month; my
Wife, and several Friends, accompanying me to the Downs. We went from Wapping
in a Barge to the Ship, Wapping.
which lay a little below Graves-end; and there we found the Friends, Gravesend.
that were bound for the Voyage with me, who went down to the Ship the Night
before. Their Names were, Thomas Brigges, William Edmundson, John Rouse, John
Stubbs, Solomon Eccles, James Lancaster, John Cartwright, Robert Widders,
George Pattison, John Hull, Elizabeth Hooton, and Eliz. Miers. The Vessel we
were to go in, was a Yatch; and it was called The Industry: the Master's Name
was Thomas Forster; and the number of Passengers about Fifty. I lay that Night
on Board; but most of the Friends lay at Graves end. Early next morning the
Passengers, and those Friends, that intended to accompany us to the Downs,
being come on Board, we took our Leave in great Tenderness of those Friends,
that came with us to Graves-End only, and were to return from thence; and set
Sail about the Sixth Hour in the Morning, for the Downs: and having a Fair
Wind, we Out-sailed all the Ships, that were outward bound; The Downs
and got thither by the Evening. Some of us went ashore that Night, and lodged
at Deal; where we understood, Deal.
that an Officer had Order from the Governor, to take our Names in Writing:
which he did the next Morning; though we told him, they had been taken at
Graves-End. In the Afternoon, the Wind serving, I took my leave of my Wife, and
the other Friends, (both that came down from London with us, and that came from
Dover, and other parts of the Country to visit us;) and went on Board. But
before we could set Sail, The Downs
there being two of the King's Frigates riding in the Downs, the Captain of one
of them sent his Press-master on Board us, who took off Three of our Seamen.
This had certainly delayed, 1671. The Downs
if not wholly lost our Voyage, had not the Captain of the other Frigate, being
Informed of the Leakiness of our Vessel, and Length of our Voyage, in
Compassion and much Civility spared us Two of his own Men. And before this was
over, an Officer of the Custom-house came on Board us, to peruse Pacquets, and
get Fees: So that what with the one and the other, we were kept from Sailing,
till about Sunset; during which Stop a very considerable number of
Merchantmen outward bound, were got several Leagues before us. But being now
Clear, At Sea.
we set Sail in the Evening; and by next Morning overtook part of that Fleet
about the height of Dover. We soon reached the rest; and in a little time left
them all behind us; for our Yatch was counted a very swift Sailer. But she was
very Leaky; so that the Seamen, and some of the Passengers did for the most
part Pump Day and Night. One day they observed, that in Two Hours time she
sucked in Sixteen Inches of Water in the Well.

When we had been about Three Weeks at Sea, one Afternoon we espied a Vessel
about four Leagues a-stern of us. Our Master said, It was a Sally-man of War;
and he seemed to give us Chase. Our Master said, Come, let us go to Supper; and
when it grows dark, we shall lose him: But this he spoke to please and pacify
the Passengers, some of whom began to be very apprehensive of the Danger. But
Friends were well satisfied in themselves, having Faith in God, and no Fear
upon their Spirits. When the Sun was gone down, I saw the Ship out of my
Cabin; and I saw, she made toward us. When it grew dark, we altered our
Course to miss her: but she altered also, and gained upon us. At Night the
Master and others came into my Cabin, and asked me, What they should do? I
told them, 'I was no Mariner: and I asked them, 'What they thought was best to
do? They said, There were but two Ways, either to Outrun him; or Tack about,
and hold the same Course we were going before. I told them, If he were a Thief,
they might be sure, he would Tack about too: And as for Outrunning him, it was
to no purpose to talk of that; for they saw, he Sailed faster than we. Then
they asked me again, What they should do? for (they said) if the Mariners had
taken Paul 's Counsel, they had not come to the Damage they did. I told them,
It was a Trial of Faith; and therefore the Lord was to be Waited on for
Counsel. So retiring in Spirit, the Lord showed me, That his Life and Power was
placed between us, and the Ship, that pursued us. I told this to the Master and
the rest; and that the best way was to Tack about, and steer our Right Course.
I wished them also to put out all their Candles, but that they steered by; and
to speak to all the Passengers to be still and quiet. About the 11th hour in
the Night the Watch called, and said; They were just upon us. That disquieted
some of the Passengers: whereupon I sat up in my Cabin; and looking through
the Porthole, the Moon being not quite down, I saw them very near us. I was
getting up to go out of the Cabin: but remembering the Word of the Lord, That
his Life and Power was placed between us, and them; I lay down again. The
Master, and some of the Seamen came again, and asked me; If they might not
steer such a Point? I told them, They might do as they would. By this time the
Moon was gone quite down; and a fresh Gale arose, and the Lord hid us from
them: and we sailed briskly on, and saw them no more. The next day, being the
First Day of the Week, 1671. At Sea.
we had a public Meeting in the Ship (as we usually had on that Day throughout
the Voyage;) and the Lord's Presence was greatly among us. And I desired the
People To mind the Mercies of the Lord, who had delivered them: for they might
have been all in the Turks Hands by that time, had not the Lord's Hand saved
them. About a Week after, the Master and some of the Seamen endeavored to
persuade the Passengers, That it was not a Turkish Pirate, that chased us; but
a Merchant-man going to the Canaries. But when I heard of it, I asked them, Why
then did they speak so to me? and why did they trouble the Passengers? And why
did they Tack about from him, and alter their Course? And I told them, They
should take heed of slighting the Mercies of God.

Afterward, while we were at Barbados, there came in a Merchant from Sally,
and told the People;
That one of the Sally-men of War saw a Monstrous Yatch at Sea, the greatest
that ever he saw, and had her in Chase, and was just upon her; but that there
was a Spirit in her, that he could not take. This did Confirm us in the Belief,
that it was a Sally-Man we saw make after us; and that it was the Lord, that
delivered us out of his Hands.

I was not Sea-sick during the Voyage, as many of the Friends and other
Passengers were: But the many Hurts and Bruises I had formerly received, and
the Griefs and Infirmities I had contracted in England by extreme Cold and
Hardships, that I had undergone in many long and sore Imprisonments, returned
upon me, now that I came to Sea; so that I was very Ill in my Stomach, and full
of Violent Pains in my Bones and Limbs. This was, after I had been at Sea about
a Month: for during the space of about Three Weeks, after I came first to Sea,
I sweat abundantly, chiefly my Head; and my Body brake out into Pimples, and my
Legs and Feet swelled extremely, so that my Stockings and Slippers could not be
drawn on without Difficulty and great Pain. Then on a sudden the Sweating
ceased. So that when I came into the hot Climate, where others Sweat most
freely, I could not Sweat at all; but my Flesh was hot, dry and burning: And
that which before brake out on my Body into Pimples, struck in again, and
struck to my Stomach and Heart; so that I was very Ill and Weak beyond
Expression. Thus I continued during the rest of the Voyage, which was about a
Month: for we were Seven Weeks and some odd Days at Sea.

On the Third of the Eighth Month, early in the Morning, BARBADOS.
we discovered the Island of Barbados; but it was between Nine and Ten at
Night, e're we came to Anchor in Carlisle-Bay. We got on Shore, Carlisle-Bay.
as soon as we could; and I with some others walked to a Friend's House, a
Merchant, whose Name was Richard Forstall, R. Forstall.
above a Quarter of a Mile from the Bridge. But being very Ill and Weak, I was
so tired with that little Walk, that I was in a manner quite spent, by that
time I got thither. There I abode very Ill for several days; and was so far
from Sweating, though in that hot Climate, that although they several times
gave me things to make me Sweat, yet they could not bring me to Sweat: but what
they gave me, did rather parch and dry up my Body; and made me probably worse,
than otherwise I might have been. Thus I continued for about Three Weeks, after
I Landed, having very much Pain in my Bones, 1671. Barbados.
Joints and whole Body; so that I could hardly get any Rest: yet
notwithstanding I was pretty Cheary, and my Spirit kept above it all. Neither
did my Ilness take me off from the Service of Truth; but both while I was at
Sea, and after I came to Barbados, before I was able to Travel about, I gave
forth several Papers, (having a Friend to write for me;) some of which I sent
by the first Conveyance for England, to be Printed.

After I had rested three or four Days at Richard Forstall's, where many
Friends came to visit me, John Rous, having borrowed a Coach of one of his
Acquaintance there (called Colonel Chamberlain) came to fetch me in it to his
Father Thomas Rous's House: Tho. Rous.
But it was late, e're we could get thither; and little or no Rest could I take
that Night. A few days after that, Colonel Chamberlain, who had so kindly lent
his Coach, came thither to give me a Visit; and carried himself very
courteously toward me.

Soon after I came into the Island, I was Informed of a remarkable Passage,
wherein the Justice of God did eminently appear: It was thus. Example.
There was a Young Man of Barbados, whose Name was John Drakes (a Person of
some Note in the World's Account, but a Common Swearer, and a bad Man;) who
having been in England, and at London, had a mind to Marry a Young Maid, that
was a Friend's Daughter, left by her Mother very Young, and with a Considerable
Portion, to the Care and Government of several Friends, whereof I was one. He
made his Application to me, that he might have my Consent to Marry this Young
Maid. I told him, I was one of her Overseers Appointed by her Mother, (who was
a Widow) to take Care of her; that if her Mother had intended her for a Match
to any Man of the World, she would have disposed her accordingly: but she
Committed her to Us, that she might be Trained up in the Fear of the Lord; and
therefore I should betray the Trust reposed in me, if I should consent, that
he, who was out of the Fear of God, should Marry her: which I would not do.
When he saw, that he could not obtain, he returned to Barbados with great
Offense of Mind against me; but without just Cause. Afterward, when he heard,
I was coming to Barbados, he swore desperately, and threatened, That, if he
could possibly procure it, he would have me burned to Death, when I came there.
Which a Friend hearing, asked him; What I had done to him, that he was so
violent against me? He would not Answer, but said again; I Will have him burnt.
Whereupon the Friend replied, Do not march on too furiously, lest thou come too
soon to thy Journey's End. About ten days after this, he was struck with a
Violent Burning Fever, of which he died; and by which his Body was so scorched,
that the People took notice of it, and said: It was as black, as a Coal. And
three days before I landed, his Body was laid in the Dust; and it was taken
notice of, as a sad Example.

While I continued thus Weak, that I could not go abroad to Meetings; the other
Friends, that came over with me, bestirred themselves in the Lord's Work: for
the next day but one, after we came on Shore, they had a great Meeting at the
Bridge, Bridge.
and after that several Meetings in several parts of the Island: which alarmed
the People of all sorts, so that many came to our Meetings; and some of the
Chiefest Rank. For they had got my Name, understanding I was come upon the
Island, and expected to have seen me at those Meetings; not knowing, that I was
Weak, and unable to go abroad. And indeed, my Weakness continued the longer on
me, by reason, that my Spirit was much pressed down at the first, with the
Filth and Dirt, and Unrighteousness of the People, which lay as an heavy Weight
and Load upon me. But after I had been above a Month upon the Island, my Spirit
became somewhat Easier, and I began to recover in some measure my Health and
Strength, and to get abroad among Friends. In the mean time, having opportunity
to send for England, I writ to Friends there, to let them know, how it was with
me; as follows Dear Friends,
I have been very Weak these Seven Weeks past, and so not able to Write my
self. My Desire is to you, and for you all, that ye may live in the Fear of
God, and in Love one unto another; and be Subject one to another in the Fear of
God. I have been Weaker in my Body, than ever I was in my Life, that I
remember; yea, my Pains have been such, as I cannot express: But yet my Heart
and Spirit is strong. I have hardly Sweat these Seven Weeks past, though I am
come into a very hot Climate; where hardly any, but are well nigh continually
Sweating: But as for me, my old Bruises, Colds, Numness and Pains struck
inwardly, even to my very Heart. So that little Rest I have taken; and the
chiefest things, that were comfortable to my Stomach, were a little Water and
powdered Ginger: But now I begin to drink a little Beer, as well as Water; and
sometimes a little Wine and Water mixed. Great Pains and Travels I have felt,
and in measure am under: But it is well; my Life is over all. This Island was
to me as all of a Fire, e're I came to it; but now it is somewhat quenched and
abated. I came in Weakness amongst those, that are Strong, and have so
continued; but now am got a little Cheary, and over it: Many Friends (and some
considerable Persons of the World) have been with me. I tired out my Body much,
when amongst you in England; it is the Lord's Power, that helps me: Therefore I
desire you all to prize the Power of the Lord, and his Truth. I was but a Weak
Man in Body, when I came away from you, after I had been in my great Travel
amongst you; but after that, it struck all back again into my Body, which was
not well settled after so sore Travels in England. And then was I so tired at
Sea, that I could not rest; and have had little or no Stomach a long time.
Since I came into this Island, my Life has been very much burdened: But I
hope, if the Lord give me Strength to manage his Work, I shall work thoroughly;
and bring things, that have been out of Course, into better Order. So Dear
Friends, live all in the peaceable Truth, and in the Love of it; serving the
Lord in Newness of Life: For glorious Things, and precious Truths have been
manifested among you plentifully, and to you the Riches of the Kingdom have
been reached. I have been almost a Month in this Island, but have not been able
to go abroad or ride out: only very lately I rid out twice, a Quarter of a Mile
at a time; which wearied me much, and almost tired me. My Love in the Truth is
to you all.

G. F.




Now, because I was not yet well able to Travel, the Friends of the Island
concluded, to have their Men's-Meeting, and their Womens-Meeting for the
Service of the Church at Thomas Rous's, where I lay; by which means I was
present amongst them at each of their Meetings, and had very good Service for
the Lord in both. For they had need of Information in many things; and diverse
Disorders were crept in for want of Care and Watchfulness. Wherefore I exhorted
them, (more especially at the Mens-Meeting) to be watchful and careful with
respect to Marriages, to prevent Friends Marrying in near Kindreds; and also to
prevent overhasty proceedings toward Second Marriages, after the Death of a
former Husband or Wife: advising, that a decent Regard were had in such Cases,
to the Memory of the Deceased Husband or Wife. And as to Friends Children
marrying too young, as at Thirteen or Fourteen Years of Age, I showed them the
Unfitness thereof, and the Inconveniences and Hurts that attend such Childish
Marriages. And I admonished them all to purge the Floor thoroughly, and to sweep
their Houses very clean; that nothing might remain, that would defile: And that
all should take care, that nothing be spoken out of their Meetings to the
blemishing, or defaming one of another. Likewise concerning Registring of
Marriages, Births and Burials, I advised them to keep Exact Records of each in
distinct Books for that only use: and also to Record in a Book for that
purpose, the Condemnations of such, as went out from Truth into Disorderly
Practices; and the Repentance and Restoration of such of them, as returned
again. Also I recommended to their Care the providing of convenient Burying
Places for Friends; which in some parts were yet wanting. Some Directions also
I gave them concerning Wills, and the Ordering of Legacies left by Friends for
public Uses; and other things relating to the Affairs of the Church. Then as
to their Blacks or Negro's, I desired them to endeavor to train them up in the
Fear of God, as well them that were bought with their Money, as them that were
born in their Families; that all might come to the Knowledge of the Lord: that
so with Joshua they might (every Master of a Family) say, As for me and my
House, we will serve the Lord. I desired them also, that they would cause their
Overseers to deal mildly and gently with their Negro's, and not use Cruelty
toward them; as the manner of some has been, and is: And that after certain
Years of Servitude they would make them free. Many sweet and precious things
were opened in these Meetings, by the Spirit and in the Power of the Lord, to
the edifying, confirming and building up of Friends, both in the Faith, and
holy Order of the Gospel.

After these Meetings were over, the Vessel, that was bound for England, not
being yet gone, I was moved to write another Epistle to Friends there; the Copy
whereof here follows: DEar Friends and Brethren, to whom is my Love in that
which never changes, but remains in Glory; which is over all, the Top- and
Cornerstone: In this all have Peace and Life, as ye dwell in the blessed Seed,
wherein all is blessed, over that which brought the Curse; where all Shortness
and Narrowness of Spirit is, and Brittleness and Peevishness is. Therefore keep
the Holy Order of the Gospel: and keep in this blessed Seed, where all may be
kept in Temperance, in Patience, in Love, in Meekness, in Righteousness and
Holiness, and in Peace; in which the Lord may be seen amongst you, and no ways
dishonored, but glorified by you all. And so in all your Meetings, in Cities,
Towns and Countries, Mens-Meetings, Womens-Meetings and others, let
Righteousness slow among you, and the Holy Truth be uppermost; and the pure
Spirit your Guide and Leader, and the holy Wisdom your Orderer, that is pure
and gentle, and from above, and easy to be entreated. So keep in the Religion,
that keeps from the Spots of the World, which is pure and undefiled in God's
Sight: And keep in the pure and holy Worship, in which the pure and holy God is
worshipped, to wit, in the Spirit, and in the Truth, which the Devil is out of;
who is the Author of all Unholiness, and of dishonouring of God: So be all
tender of God's Glory, and tender of his Honor, and of his blessed and holy
Name, in which ye are gathered. And all who do profess the Truth, see that ye
Walk in it, and in Righteousness, and Godliness and Holiness: For Holiness
becomes the House of God, the Household of Faith. And that which becomes God's
House, God loves: for he loves Righteousness; and that is the Ornament, which
becomes his House and all his Family. Therefore see, that Righteousness do run
down in all your Assemblies, and that it flow, to drive away all the
Unrighteousness: This preserves your Peace with God; for in Righteousness ye
have all Peace with the righteous God of Peace, and one with another. And so
every one, that bears the Name of the Anointed, that high Title of being a
Christian, named after the Heavenly Man; see, that ye be in the Divine Nature,
and made conformable unto his Image, even the Image of the Heavenly, Divine
Man, who was before that Image, which Adam and Eve got in the Fall from the
Devil: So that in none of you that fallen Image may appear or be seen; but his
Image, and you made Conformable unto him. Here Translation is showed forth in
Life and Conversation, not in Words only; yea, and Conversion and Repentance
(which is a Change of the Nature, of the Mind, and of the Heart, and of the
Spirit and Affections, which have been below; which come to be set above:) and
so receive the things that are from Above, and have the Conversation in Heaven
above; not that Conversation, which is according to the Power of the Prince of
the Air, that now rules in the Disobedient. So all be faithful; This is the
Word of the Lord God unto you all: See, that Godliness do flow, and Holiness,
and Righteousness, and Truth, and Virtue, and the Fruits of the Good Spirit
over the Bad and its Fruits; that ye may answer that which is of God in all:
for your Heavenly Father is glorified, in that you bear and bring forth much
Fruit to God. Therefore ye, who are Plants of his planting, and his Trees of
Righteousness, see, that every Tree be full of Fruit. And all keep in the true
Humility, and in the true Love of God, which does edify his Body; that the true
Nourishment from the Head, the Refreshings, and Springs, and Rivers of Water,
and Bread of Life may be plenteously known, and felt amongst you: that so
Praises may ascend to God. So all be faithful to the Lord God, and just and
true in all your Dealings and Doings with end toward Men. And be not negligent
in your Men's Meetings to admonish, and to exhort, and to reprove in the Spirit
of Love and of Meekness; and to seek that which is lost, and to bring back
again, that which has been driven away. So let all Minds, and Spirits, and
Souls, and Hearts be bended down under the Yoke of Christ Jesus, the Power of
God. Much I could write, but am Weak; and have been very Weak mostly, since I
left you: and Burdens and Travels I have been under, and gone through many
ways; but it is well. And the Lord Almighty knows my Work, which he has sent
me forth to do by his everlasting Arm and Power: which is from Everlasting to
Everlasting, blessed be his Holy Name, which I am in, and in which my Love is
to you all.

G. F.




After I had recovered so much Strength. that I was able to go abroad, and had
been a little amongst Friends, I went to visit the Governor at his House;
Lewis Morice, Thomas Rouse, and some other Friends being with me. And indeed he
received us very Civilly, and treated us very kindly; making us Dine with him:
and keeping us most part of the Day, before he let us go away.

Bridge-Town.
The same Week I went down to the Bridge-Town, (where I had not been before,
save as I passed through it, when I first came into the Island.) There was to
be a General Meeting of Friends that Week: and the Visit I had newly made to
the Governor, and kind Reception I had with him, being generally known to the
Officers, both Civil and Military, there came many of them to this Meeting from
most parts of the Island, and those not of the meanest Rank; diverse of them
being Judges or Justices, Colonels or Captains: so that a very great Meeting we
had, both of Friends and others. The Lord's Blessed Power was plentifully with
us in this Meeting: And although I was somewhat straightened for Time, three other
Friends having spoken before me; yet the Lord opened things through me, to the
general and great Satisfaction of them that were present. Col. Lewis Morice
came to this Meeting, and with him a Neighbor of his, a Judge in the Country,
whose Name was Ralph Fretwell; who was very well satisfied with the Meeting,
and received the Truth.

After the Meeting I went home with Lewis Morice to his House that Night, being
about Nine or Ten Miles; going part of the way by Boat, the rest on Horseback:
This place, where Lewis Morice his Plantation was, I thought to be the finest
Air of the Island. The next day Thomas Briggs and William Edmundson came
thither to see me, they intending to leave the Island the day following; and to
go upon the Lord's Service to Antego and Mevis. Lewis Morice went with them:
and at Antego they had several good Meetings, to which there was a great Resort
of People; and many were Convinced there at that time. But when they had
finished their Service there, and went thence to Mevis; the Governor of Mevis,
who was an old Persecutor, sent Soldiers on Board the Vessel, to stop them
from coming on Shore: and would not suffer them to Land. Wherefore, after
Friends of the Place had been on Board the Vessel, and with them, and they had
been sweetly Refreshed together, in feeling the Lord's Power and Presence
amongst them; they returned to Antego again: Where having staid a while longer,
they came back again to Barbados; Thomas Brigges being very Weak and Ill.

Of the other Friends, that came over with me from England, James Lancaster,
John Cartwright and Geo. Pattison were gone some time before to Jamaica, and
others to other places; so that few remained in Barbados with me: Yet we had
many great and precious Meetings, both for Worship, and for the Affairs of the
Church: to the former of which many of the World came. At one of these Meetings
there came (amongst others) one Col. Line, a sober Person; who was so very well
satisfied, with what I declared, that he afterward said: Now I can gainsay
such, as I have heard speak evil of you; who say, you do not own Christ, nor
that he died: whereas I perceive, you exalt Christ in all his Offices, beyond
what I have ever heard before. This Man observing one to take in Writing the
Heads, of what I delivered, desired him to let him have a Copy of it; and
afterward staid another day with us, before he went away: so great a Love was
raised in him to the Truth. And indeed, a very great Convincement there was in
most parts of the Island: which made the Priests and some Professors fret and
rage. Our Meetings were very large and full, and free from disturbance from the
Government; though the envious Priests and Professors endeavored to stir up
the Magistrates against us. And when they found, they could not prevail that
way, some of them, that were Baptists, came to the Meeting at the Town; which
was very large, and full of People of several Ranks and Qualities. A great
Company came also with them: and they brought with them a malicious, slanderous
Paper written by John Pennyman; with which they made a great Noise. But the
Lord gave me Wisdom and Utterance to Answer their Cavils: So that the Auditory
generally received Satisfaction; and those quarrelsome Professors lost ground
by their coming. When they had wearied themselves with Clamor, they went away:
but the People staying, the Meeting was continued; and the things they cavilled
about, were further opened and cleared: and the Life and Power of God came over
all. But the Rage and Envy in our Adversaries did not cease; but they
endavoured to defame Friends with many false and scandalous Reports, which they
spread abroad through the Island. Whereupon I with some other Friends drew up a
Paper, to go forth in the Name of the People called Quakers, for the clearing
Truth and Friends from those false Reports. It was directed thus:

For the Governor of Barbados, with his Council and Assembly, and all others
in Power, both Civil and Military, in this Island; from the People called
Quakers.
WHereas many scandalous Lies and Slanders have been cast upon us, to render us
odious; as that We do deny God and Christ Jesus, and the Scriptures of Truth,
etc. This is to Inform you, that all our Books and Declarations, which, for
these many Years, have been published to the World, do clearly testify the
contrary. Yet notwithstanding, for your Satisfaction, we do now plainly and
sincerely declare, That we do Own and Believe in God, the only-Wise, Omnipotent
and Everlasting God, who is the Creator of all things both in Heaven and in the
Earth, and the Preserver of all that he has made; who is God over all, blessed
for ever: To whom be all Honor and Glory, Dominion, Praise and Thanksgiving
both now and for evermore! And we do Own and Believe in Jesus Christ, his
beloved and only begotten Son, in whom he is well-pleased: Who was conceived by
the Holy Ghost, and born of the Virgin Mary: in whom we have Redemption through
his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins: Who is the Express Image of the
Invisible God, the Firstborn of every Creature, by whom were all things
created, that are in Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible and invisible,
whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers; All things
were created by him. And we do Own and Believe, that he was made a Sacrifice
for Sin; who knew no Sin, neither was Guile found in his Mouth. And that he was
Crucified for us in the Flesh, without the Gates of Jerusalem; and that he was
Buried, and Rose again the Third Day by the Power of his Father, for our
Justification: And we do Believe, that he Ascended up into Heaven, and now
sits at the Right Hand of God. This Jesus, who was the Foundation of the
Holy Prophets and Apostles, is our Foundation: and we do believe, that there is
no other Foundation to be laid, but that which is laid, even Christ Jesus; who,
we believe, tasted Death for every Man, and shed his Blood for all Men, and is
the Propitiation for our Sins; and not for ours only, but also for the Sins of
the whole World: According as John the Baptist testified of him, when he said;
Behold, the Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the World, Joh. 1.29. We
believe, that he alone is our Redeemer and Savior, even the Captain of our
Salvation, (who saves us from Sin, as well as from Hell and the Wrath to come,
and destroys the Devil and his Works;) who is the Seed of the Woman, that
bruises the Serpent's Head, to wit, Christ Jesus, the Alpha and Omega, the
First and the Last. That he is (as the Scriptures of Truth say of him) our
Wisdom and Righteousness, Justification and Redemption; neither is there
Salvation in any other: for there is no other Name under Heaven given among
Men, whereby we may be saved. It is he alone, who is the Shepherd and Bishop of
our Souls: He it is, who is our Prophet, whom Moses long since testified of,
saying; A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren,
like unto me; him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto
you: And it shall come to pass. that every Soul, that will not hear that
Prophet, shall be destroyed from among the People, Acts 2.22, 23. He it is,
that is now Come, and has given us an Understanding, that we may know him that
is true; and he rules in our Hearts by his Law of Love and of Life, and makes
us free from the Law of Sin and Death, and we have no Life, but by him: for he
is the quickening Spirit, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven; by whose Blood
we are cleansed, and our Consciences sprinkled from Dead Works, to serve the
Living God. And he is our Mediator, that makes Peace and Reconciliation between
God offended, and us offending; he being the Oath of God, the New Covenant of
Light, Life, Grace and Peace, the Author and Finisher of our Faith. Now this
Lord Jesus Christ, the Heavenly Man, the Emanuel, God with us, we all own and
believe in; him whom the High Priest raged against, and said, he had spoken
Blasphemy; whom the Priests and the Elders of the Jews took Counsel together
against, and put to Death; the same, whom Judas betrayed for Thirty Pieces of
Silver, which the Priests gave him, as a Reward for his Treason; who also gave
large Money to the Soldiers to broach an Horrible Lie, namely, That his
Disciples came and stole him away by Night, whilst they slept. And after he was
Risen from the Dead, the History of the Acts of the Apostles sets forth, how
the Chief-Priests and Elders persecuted the Disciples of this Jesus, for
Preaching Christ and his Resurrection. This, we say, is that Lord Jesus Christ,
whom we own to be our Life and Salvation.

And as concerning the Holy Scriptures, we do believe, That they were given
forth by the Holy Spirit of God, through the Holy Men of God, who (as the
Scripture it self declares, 2 Pet. 1.21.) spoke, as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost. We believe, they are to be Read, Believed and Fulfilled (He that fulfils
them, is Christ:) and they are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for
Correction and for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be
perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16. and are able to
make wise unto Salvation, through Faith in Christ Jesus. And we do believe,
that the Holy Scriptures are the Words of God; for its said in Exodus 20.1. God
spoke all these Words, saying, etc. meaning the Ten Commandments given forth
upon Mount Sinai: And in Rev. 22.18. says John, I testify to every man that
hears the Words of the Prophecy of this Book; If any man adds unto these,
and if any Man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this Prophecy (not
the Word) etc. So in Luke 1.20. Because thou believe not my Words. And so in
John 5.47. and John 15.7. John 14.23. John 12.47. So that we call the Holy
Scriptures, as Christ and the Apostles called them, and Holy Men of God called
them, viz. the Words of God.

Another Slander and Lie they have cast upon us, namely; That we should teach
the Negroes to Rebel: A thing we utterly abhor, and detest in our Hearts, the
Lord knows it! who is the Searcher of all Hearts, and knows all things; and so
can witness and testify for us, that this is a most Abominable Untruth. For
that which we have spoken and declared to them, is, To exhort and admonish them
to be sober, and to fear God, and to love their Masters and Mistresses, and to
be faithful and diligent in their Master's Service and Business; and then their
Masters and Overseers would love them, and deal kindly and gently with them.
And that they should not beat their Wives, nor the Wives their Husbands;
neither should the Men have many Wives. And that they should not Steal, nor be
Drunk, nor commit Adultery, nor Fornication, nor Curse, nor Swear, nor Lie, nor
give bad Words to one another, nor to any one else: For there is something in
them, that tells them, they should not practice those, nor any other Evils. But
if they notwithstanding should do them, then we let them know, There are but
Two Ways, the one, that leads to Heaven, where the Righteous go; and the other,
that leads to Hell, where the Wicked and Debauched, Whoremongers and
Adulterers, Murderers and Liars go. To the one the Lord will say, Come ye
Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation
of the World; but to the other he will say, Depart ye Cursed, into everlasting
Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels: So the Wicked go into everlasting
Punishment, but the Righteous into Life Eternal, Matthew. 25. Now consider,
Friends, It is no Transgression for a Master of a Family to instruct his Family
himself, or for some others to do it in his behalf; but rather it is a very
great Duty incumbent upon them. Abraham and Joshua did so: of the first we
read, the Lord said, ( Genesis 18.19.) I know, that Abraham will command his
Children and his Household after him; and they shall keep the Way of the Lord,
to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham the things,
that he has spoken of him. And the latter, we read, said ( Josh. 24.15.) --
Choose ye this day, whom ye will serve, -- But as for me, and my House, we will
serve the Lord. We do declare, that we do esteem it a Duty incumbent on us to
Pray with and for, to Teach, Instruct and Admonish those in and belonging to
our Families, this being a Command of the Lord; the Disobedience whereunto will
provoke the Lord's Displeasure: as may be seen in Jer. 10.25. Pour out thy Fury
upon the Heathen, that know thee not, and upon the Families, that call not upon
thy Name. Now Negroes, Tawnies, Indians make up a very great part of the
Families in this Island; for whom an Account will be required by him, who comes
to Judge both Quick and Dead, at the great Day of Judgment, when every one
shall be Rewarded according to the Deeds done in the Body, whether they be
good, or whether they be evil: At that Day, I say, of the Resurrection both of
the Good, and of the Bad, of the Just and the Unjust, when the Lord Jesus shall
be revealed from Heaven with his mighty Angels, in flaming Fire, taking
Vengeance on them that know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, who shall be punished with everlasting Destruction from the Presence of
the Lord, and from the Glory of his Power, when he shall come to be glorified
in his Saints, and admired in all them that believe in that day, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.
etc. See also, 2 Pet. 3.3. etc.

This wicked Slander (of our endeavoring to make the Negroes Rebel) our
Adversaries took occasion to raise, from our having had some Meetings with and
amongst the Negroes: For both I and other Friends had several Meetings with
them in several Plantations, wherein we exhorted them to Justice, Sobriety,
Temperance, Chastity and Piety, and to be subject to their Masters and
Governors: Which was altogether contrary, to what our envious Adversaries
maliciously suggested against us.

As I had been to visit the Governor, as soon as I was well able, after I came
thither; so sometime after, when I was at Thomas Rouse's, the Governor came
thither to see me, carrying himself very courteously.

Having now been Three Months or more in Barbados, and in that time having
visited Friends, thoroughly settled Meetings, and dispatched that Service, for
which the Lord brought me thither; I felt my Spirit clear of that Island, and
Drawings to Jamaica. Which when I had communicated to Friends, I acquainted the
Governor also, and diverse of his Council; That I intended shortly to leave the
Island, and go to Jamaica: which I did, that as my Coming thither was open and
public, so my Departure also might be. But before I left the Island, I writ
the following Letter to my Wife; that she might understand, both how it was
with me, and how I proceeded in my Travels.

My Dear Heart,
TO whom is my Love, and to all the Children, in the Seed of Life, that
changes not, but is over all; blessed be the Lord for ever! I have gone under
great Sufferings in my Body and Spirit, beyond Words: but the God of Heaven be
praised, his Truth is over all. I am now well: and if the Lord permit, within a
few days I pass from Barbados toward Jamaica; and I do think to stay but
little there. I desire, that ye may be all kept free in the Seed of Life, out
of all Cumbrances. Friends are generally well. Remember me to Friends, that
enquire after me. So no more, but my Love in the Seed and Life, that changes
not.

Barbados, the 6th of the 11th Month, 1671. G. F.


I set Sail from Barbados to Jamaica on the Eighth Day of the Eleventh Month,
1671. Robert Widders, William Edmundson, At Sea.
Solomon Eccles and Elizabeth Hooton going with me. James Lancaster, John
Cartwright and George Pattison were gone thither some time before: and Thomas
Briggs and John Stubbs remained yet longer in Barbados; with whom were John
Rouse and William Baily. We had a quick and easy Passage to Jamaica: JAMAICA
where we met with our Friends James Lancaster, John Cartwright and George
Pattison again, who had been laboring there in the Service of Truth; into
which we forthwith entered with them, traveling up and down through the Island,
which is large: And a brave Country it is; though the People are many of them
debauched and wicked. We had much Service there, for there was a great
Convincement, 1671. Jamaica.
and many received the Truth; some of which were People of Account in the
World. We had many Meetings there, which were large, and very quiet: For
indeed, the People were Civil to us; so that not a Mouth was opened against us.
I was twice with the Governor, and some other of the Magistrates; who all
carried themselves lovingly toward me.

About a Week, after we landed in Jamaica, Elizabeth Hooton, who went with us
from England to Barbados, and from Barbados thither, being a Woman of a great
Age, and who had traveled much in Truth's Service, and suffered much for it,
departed this Life. She was well the Day before she died; and departed in
Peace, like a Lamb, bearing Testimony to Truth at her Departure.

When we had been about Seven Weeks in Jamaica, and had brought Friends into
pretty good Order, and settled several Meetings amongst them, we left Solomon
Eccles there; the rest of us embarked for Maryland: leaving Friends, and Truth
prosperous in Jamaica, the Lord's Power being over all, and his blessed Seed
reigning.

But before I left Jamaica, I writ another Letter to my Wife, as follows: My
Dear Heart,
TO whom is my Love, and to the Children, in that which changes not, but is
over all; and to all Friends in those parts. I have been at Jamaica about Five
Weeks, and Friends here are generally well; and here is a Convincement: but
things would be too large to write of. Sufferings in every place attend me; but
the blessed Seed is over all: the great Lord be praised, who is Lord of Sea and
Land, and of all things therein. We intend to pass away from hence about the
beginning of the nexth Month; and we shall pass toward Maryland, if the Lord
please. Dwell all of you in the Seed of God: In his Truth I rest in Love to you
all.

Jamaica, 23d of the 12th Month, 1671. G. F.




At Sea.
We went on Board on the 8th of the First Month, 1671/2: and having Contrary
Winds, were a full Week sailing forwards and backwards, before we could get out
of sight of Jamaica. A difficult Voyage this proved, and pretty dangerous,
especially, in our passing through the Gulf of Florida; where we met with many
Trials by Winds and Storms. But the great God, who is Lord of the Seas and of
the Land, and who rides upon the Wings of the Wind, did by his Power preserve
us through many and great Dangers, when by extreme Stress of Weather our Vessel
was diverse times like to be Over-set; and much of her Tackling broken. And
indeed we were sensible, that the Lord was a God at hand; and that his Ear was
open to the Supplications of his People. For when the Winds were so strong and
boisterous, and the Storms and Tempests so great, that the Sailers knew not
what to do, but were fain to let the Ship go, which way she would; then did we
pray unto the Lord: 1672. Jamaica.
And the Lord did graciously hear and accept us, and did Calm the Winds and the
Seas, and gave us seasonable Weather, and made us to Rejoice in his Salvation;
blessed and praised be the holy Name of the Lord, whose Power has Dominion
over all, and whom the Winds and the Seas obey!

We were at Sea betwixt Six and Seven Weeks in this Passage from Jamaica to
Maryland. But some days, before we came to Land, At Sea.
after we had entered the Bay of Potuxan-River, a great Storm arose, Potuxan-
River.
which cast a Boat upon us for Shelter; in which were diverse Persons, both Men
and Women, People of Account outwardly in the World. We took them in; but the
Boat was lost, with Five Hundred Pounds worth of Goods in it, as they said.
They continued on Board us several days, not having any means to get off; and
we had a very good Meeting with them in the Ship. But Provision grew short, for
they brought none in with them; and ours, by reason of the length of our
Voyage, was well nigh spent, when they came to us: So that with their living
upon it too, we had now little or none left. Whereupon George Pattison took a
Boat, and ventured his Life to get to Shore; the Hazard whereof was so great,
that all, but Friends, concluded, he would be Cast away. Yet it pleased the
Lord to bring him safe to Land: MARYLAND.
and in a short time after the Friends of the Place came to fetch us to Land
also, in a seasonable time, for our Provisions were quite spent.

We partook also of another great Deliverance in this Voyage, through the good
Providence of the Lord; which we came to understand afterward. For when we
were determined to come from Jamaica, we had our Choice of two Vessels, that
were both bound for the same Coast. One of these was a Frigot; the other was
called a Yacht. The Master of the Frigot, we thought, asked unreasonably for
our Passage; which made us Agree with the Master of the Yacht, who offered to
carry us Ten Shillings a-piece cheaper, than the other. We went on Board the
Yacht, and the Frigot came out together with us, intending to be Consorts
during the Voyage; and for several Days we sailed together: But what with Calms
and Contrary Winds we were in a while separated. And after that the Frigot,
losing her way, fell among the Spaniards; by whom she was taken and robbed, and
the Master and Mate made Prisoners: Afterward being retaken by the English,
she was sent home to her Owners in Virginia. Which when we came to understand,
we saw and admired the Providence of God, who preserved us out of our Enemies
Hands; and he that was Covetous, fell among the Covetous. Some Friends at
Jamaica would have had us gone in the Frigot, that was taken; but the Lord in
his Wisdom ordered it otherwise.

Here we found John Burneyate, intending shortly to Sail for Old England: but
upon our Arrival he altered his purpose; and joined with us in the Lord's
Service, which we were upon. He had appointed a General Meeting for all the
Friends in the Province of Maryland, that he might see them together, and take
his Leave of them, before he departed out of the Country: And it was so ordered
by the good Providence of God, that we landed just time enough, to reach that
Meeting; by which means we had a very seasonable Opportunity of taking the
Friends of the Province together. 1672. Maryland.
A very large Meeting this was, and held Four Days; to which (besides Friends)
came many of the World's People, diverse of which were of considerable Quality
in the World's Account: For there were amongst them five or six Justices of the
Peace, a Speaker of their Parliament or Assembly, One of the Council, and
diverse others of Note; who seemed well satisfied with the Meeting. After the
Public Meetings were over, the Men's and Women's Meetings began; wherein I
opened to Friends the Service thereof, to their great Satisfaction. After this
we went to another Place, Cliffs.
called the Cliffs, where another General Meeting was appointed: We went some
part of the way by Land, and the rest by Water; and a Storm arising, our Boat
was run on ground, in danger to be beaten to pieces: and the Water came in upon
us. I was in a great Sweat, having come very hot out of a Meeting before; and
now was Wet with the Water beside: yet having Faith in the Power of the Lord, I
was preserved from taking hurt, blessed be the Lord. To this Meeting also many
of the World's People came, and did receive the Truth with Reverence. We had
also a Mens-Meeting, and a Womens-Meeting, at which most of the Back-sliders
came in again; and several of those Meetings were established for taking Care
of the Affairs of the Church.

After these Two General Meetings were over, we parted Company, dividing our
selves into several Coasts, for the Service of Truth. James Lancaster and John
Cartwright went by Sea for New England; William Edmundson, and three Friends
more with him, sailed for Virginia, where things were much out of Order: John
Burneyate, Robert Widders, George Pattison and I, with several Friends of the
Province, went over by Boat to the Eastern Shore, Eastern-Shore.
and had a Meeting there on the First Day; where many People received the Truth
with Gladness, and Friends were greatly refreshed. A very large and Heavenly
Meeting it was, and several Persons of Quality in that Country were at it; two
of which were Justices of the Peace. And it was upon me from the Lord, to send
to the Indian-Emperor and his Kings, to come to that Meeting: The Emperor came,
and was at the Meeting; but his Kings, lying further off, could not reach
thither time enough: Yet they came after with their Cockarooses. I had in the
Evening (for they staid all Night) two good Opportunities with them; and they
heard the Word of the Lord willingly, and did confess to it. What I spoke to
them, I desired them to speak to their People; and let them know, That God was
setting up his Tabernacle of Witness in their Wilderness-Country, and was
setting up his Standard, and glorious Ensign of Righteousness. They carried
themselves very courteously and lovingly, and inquired, Where the next Meeting
would be, and they would come to it: Yet they said, They had had a great Debate
with their Council about their Coming, before they came now.

Tredaven-Creek. Miles- River. Wye- River. Chester- River.
The next Day we began our Journey by Land to New England, a tedious Journey
through the Woods and Wilderness, over Boggs and great Rivers. We took Horse at
the Head of Tredaven-Creek, and traveled through the Woods, till we came a
little above the Head of Miles-River; by which we passed, and rode on to the
Head of Wye-River: and so got to the Head of Chester-River; where making a
Fire, we took up our Lodging in the Woods. 1672. Saxifrax- River. Bohemia-
River.
Next Morning setting forward again, we traveled through the Woods, till we
came to Saxifrax-River, which we went over in Canoos (which are Indian-Boats;)
causing our Horses to swim by. Then we rode on to Bohemia-River; where in like
manner swimming our Horses, we our selves went over in Canoos. We rested a
little at a Plantation by the Way, but could not stay long, for we had Thirty
Miles to ride that Afternoon, if we would reach a Town; which we were willing
to do, and therefore rid hard for it. And I with some others, whose Horses were
stronger, got to the Town that Night, exceedingly tired; and withal wet to the
Skin: But George Pattison and Robert Widders, being weaker-horsed, were fain to
fall short, and lie in the Woods that Night also; making themselves a Fire. The
Town we went to, was a Dutch Town, called New Castle; New Castle.
whither Robert Widders and George Pattison came to us next Morning. We
departed from thence, and got over the River Delaware, not without great Danger
of some of our Lives: Delaware- River.
and when we were over, we were troubled to get new Guides; which were hard to
get, and very chargeable. Then had we that Wilderness-Country to pass through,
which is since called West-Jersey, WEST-JERSEY.
which was not then inhabited by English; so that we have traveled a whole Day
together, without seeing Man or Woman House or Dewlling Place: and sometimes we
lay in the Woods by a Fire, and sometimes in the Indians Wigwams or Houses. In
this Journey we came one Night to an Indian Town, and lay at their King's
House, who was a very pretty Man; and both he and his Wife received us very
lovingly, and his Attendants (such as they were) were very respectful to us:
they laid us Mars to lie on; but Provision was very short with them, having
caught but little that day. At another Indian Town, where we staid, their King
came to us, and he could speak some English; wherefore I spoke to him much, and
also to his People: and they were very Loving to us. At length we came to a
Town called Middle-Town, East-Jersey Middle-Town.
which is an English Plantation in East-Jersey; and there were some Friends:
but we could not stay to have a Meeting there at that time, being earnestly
pressed in our Spirits, to get to the Half-Years-Meeting of F^^^ (...)
Oister-Bay in Long Island; which was very near at hand. Wherefore we went down
with a Friend (whose Name was Richard Hartshorn, Brother to Hugh Hartshorn, the
Upholster in London) who received us gladly to his House, where we refreshed
our selves (for we were wear) and then he carried us and our Horses in his own
Boat, over a great Water (which held us most part of the day in getting over;)
and set us upon Long Island. LONG ISLAND.
So we got that Evening to Friends at Gravesand, with whom we tarried that
Night: Gravesand Flushing. Oister-bay- half-years-Meeting.
and the next Day we got to Flushing, and the day following we reached to
Oister-Bay; several Friends both of Gravesand and Flushing accompanying us. The
Half-Years-Meeting began next Day, which was the first day of the Week, and
lasted four Days. The first and second Days we had Public Meetings for
Worship, to which the People of the World of all sorts might and did come: On
the third Day of the Week were the Men's and Womens-Meetings, wherein the
Affairs of the Church were taken Care of. Here we met with some of the Bad
Spirits, who were run out from Truth into Prejudice, Contention and Opposition
to the Order of Truth, 1672. Oister-bay-half-years-Meeting.
and to Friends therein. These had been very troublesome to Friends in their
Meetings there and thereabouts formerly; and it is like, would have been so now:
But I would not suffer the Service of our Men's and Womens-Meetings to be
interrupted and hindered by their Cavils. Wherefore I let them know, That if
they had any thing to Object against the Order of Truth, which we were in, we
would give them a Meeting another Day on purpose. And indeed, I labored the
more, and traveled the harder, to get to this Meeting, where it was expected,
many of these contentious People would be; because I understood, they had
reflected much upon me, when I was far from them. So the Men's and Women's
Meetings being over, on the fourth Day we had a Meeting with those discontented
People, to which as many of them as would, did come; and as many Friends, as
had a desire, were present also: And the Lord's Power brake forth gloriously,
to the Confounding of the Gain sayers. And then some of those, that had been
Chief in the mischievous Work of Contention and Opposition against the Truth,
began to fawn upon me, and to cast the matter upon others: but the deceitful
Spirit was judged down, and condemned, and the glorious Truth of God was
exalted, and set over all; and they were all brought down and bowed under:
which was of great Service to Truth, and great Satisfaction and Comfort to
Friends; Glory to the Lord for ever!

After this Meeting were over, and Friends were gone to their several
Habitations, we staid some Days upon the Island, and had several Meetings in
several parts thereof; and had good Service for the Lord. Oister-bay
And when we were clear of the Island, we returned to Oister-Bay, waiting for a
Wind to carry us to Road-Island; which was computed to be about two hundred
Miles. As soon as the Wind served, we set Sail; ROAD-ISLAND.
and arrived in Road-Island on the thirtieth Day of the Third Month: where we
were gladly received by Friends. We went to Nicholas Easton's House, who at
that time was Governor of the Island; and there we lay, being very weary with
traveling by Land and Sea. On the First Day of the Week following we had a
large Meeting; to which the Deputy Governor and several Justices came, and
were mightily affected with the Truth. The Week following, the Yearly Meeting
for all the Friends of New England, Yearly Meeting.
and the other Colonies adjacent, was held in this Island; to which, besides
very many Friends, who lived in those parts, came John Stubbs from Barbados,
and James Lancaster and John Cartwright from another way. This Meeting lasted
Six Days: of which the first four Days were general public Meetings for
Worship; to which abundance of the World's People came. For they having no
Priests in the Island, and so no Restriction to any particular Way of Worship;
and both the Governor and Deputy Governor, with several Justices of the Peace
daily frequenting the Meetings, this did so encourage the People, that they
flocked in from all parts of the Island. Very good Service we had amongst them;
and Truth had a good Reception with them: And indeed, to give them their due, I
have rarely observed a People, in the State wherein they stood, to hear with
more Attention, Diligence and Affection, than generally they did, during the
four Days together; which also was taken notice of by other Friends. After
these public Meetings were over, the Mens-Meeting began, which was large,
1672. Road-Island- Yearly Meeting.
precious and weighty; and the day following was the Womens-Meeting. which also
was large and very solemn: and these two Meetings being for the Ordering the
Affairs of the Church, many weighty things were opened, and communicated to
them, by Way of Advice, Information and Instruction in the Services relating
thereunto; that all might be kept clean, sweet and savoury amongst them. In
these two Meetings several Men's and Women's Meetings for other parts were agreed
and settled, to take Care of the Poor, and other Affairs of the Church; and to
see, that all, who profess Truth, walk according to the glorious Gospel of God.
Now when this great and General Meeting in Road-Island was ended, it was
somewhat hard for Friends to part: For the glorious Power of the Lord, which
was over all, and his blessed Truth and Life flowing amongst them, had so knit
and united them together, that they spent two Days in taking leave one of
another, and of the Friends of the Island: and then being mightily filled with
the Presence and Power of the Lord, they went away with joyful Hearts to their
several Habitations, in the several Colonies where they lived.

When this General Meeting was fully over, and Friends had taken their Leaves
one of another to depart home; we, who traveled amongst them, dispersed our
selves into our several Services, according as the Lord ordered us. John
Burneyate, with John Cartwright and George Pattison went into the Eastern parts
of New England, in Company with the Friends, that came from thence, to visit
the particular Meetings there; whom John Stubbs and James Lancaster intended to
follow a while after, in the same Service of Truth: but they were not yet Clear
of this Island. Robert Widders and I staid some time longer also upon this
Island; finding Service still here for the Lord, through the great Openness of
the People, and the daily Coming in of Fresh People in Sloops from other
Colonies, for some time, after the General Meeting was over: So that we had
many large and serviceable Meetings among them for several Days after.

During the time, that we abode here, there was a Marriage celebrated amongst
Friends in this Island; and we were at it. It was at a Friend's House, who had
formerly been Governor of the Island; and three Justices of the Peace, and
many others of the World's People were there: and both they and Friends said,
They never saw such a Solemn Assembly on such an Occasion, and so weighty a
Marriage, and so comely an Order. Thus Truth was set over all: and this might
serve for an Example to others; for there were some present from many other
places.

After this I had a great Travel in Spirit concerning the Ranters (for there
were many of them in those parts, and they had been rude at a Meeting, which I
was not at.) Wherefore I appointed a Meeting amongst them; and I believed, the
Lord would give me Power over them: and he did so to his Praise and Glory;
blessed be his Name for ever. There were at this Meeting many Friends, and
diverse of the World's People; some of whom were Justices of the Peace, and
other Officers: and they were generally well affected with the Truth. But one
of the Justices, who had been a Justice twenty Years, was Convinced, 1672.
Providence
and spoke highly of the Truth; and more highly of me, than is fit for me to
mention, or take notice of.

Then we had a Meeting at a place called Providence, which was very large; as
consisting of many Sorts and Sects of People: and I had a great Travel upon my
Spirit concerning the Meeting, that it might be preserved quiet; and that Truth
might be brought over the People, and might gain an Entrance, and have a Place
in them: For they were generally above the Priests, in high Notions; and some
of them came on purpose to dispute. But the Lord, whom we waited upon, was with
us, and his Power went over them all; and his blessed Seed was exalted, and set
above all: and the Disputers were silent, and the Meeting was quiet, and ended
well; praised be the Lord! And the People went away mightily satisfied; much
desiring another Meeting. This place (called Providence) was about Thirty Miles
from Road-Island; and we went to it by Water. The Governor of Road-Island, and
many others, went with me thither; and we had the Meeting in a great Barn,
which was thronged with People, so that I was exceeding hot, and in a great
Sweat: but all was well; the glorious Power of the Lord shined over all, Glory
to the great God for ever!

Narraganset.
After this we went to another place called Narraganset, about Twenty Miles from
Road-Island; and the Governor went with us. There we had a Meeting at a
Justice's House, where Friends had never had any Meeting before: And the
Meeting was very large, for the Country generally came in; and People came also
from Connecticut, and other parts round about. There were amongst them four
Justices of the Peace; and most of these People were such, as had never heard
Friends before: but they were mightily affected with the Meeting; and a great
Desire there is after the Truth amongst that People: So that our Meeting was of
very good Service; blessed be the Lord for ever! The Justice, at whose House
the Meeting was, and another Justice of that Country, invited me to come again;
but I was then clear of those parts, and was going off toward Shelter-Island.
But John Burnyeate and John Cartwright, being come back out of New England into
Road-Island, before I was gone, I laid this place before them; and they felt
Drawings thither, and went to visit them. At another place, I heard, some of
the Magistrates should say among themselves; If they had Money enough, they
would hire me to be their Minister. This was, where they did not well
understand Us, and our Principles: But when I heard of it, I said, It was time
for me to be gone: for if their Eye was so much to Me, or any of Us, they would
not come to their own Teacher. For this thing (of hiring Ministers) had spoiled
many, by hindering them from improving their own Talents; whereas our Labor is,
to bring every one to their own Teacher in themselves.

Now, after we had had very good Service for the Lord in Road-Island, and the
Parts adjacent, and that John Burneyate, with the other Friends, that went from
the General Meeting here into New England, were returned hither again, I went
off from hence to Shelter-Island; having with me Robert Widders, James
Lancaster, George Pattison and one John Jay, a Planter in Barbados: and leaving
John Stubbs and John Burneyate in Road-Island, to Water, 1672. Road-Island.
what had been Planted by the Lord there, and there-aways; who expected John
Cartwright (whom they had left at Piscataway) to come and join shortly with
them in the same Service. We that were for Shelter-Island, went off in a Sloop:
and passing by Point-Juda, and Block-Island, Point Juda Block- Island.
Fisher's- Island.
came to Fishers Island. where at Night we went on Shore; but were not able to
stay for the Muschetos (a sort of Gnats, or little Flies) which abound there,
and are very troublesome. Wherefore we went into our Sloop again, and put off
from the Shore, and cast Anchor; and so lay in our Sloop that Night. Next day
we went into the Sound; The Sound.
but finding, our Sloop was not able to live in that Water, we turned in again,
(for we could not pass that way;) and so came to Anchor again before
Fisher's-Island, where we lay in our Sloop that Night also. There fell
abundance of Rain that Night, and our Sloop being open, we were exceeding wet.
The Two Horse-Races. Garner's- Island. Gull's- Island. Shelter- Island.
Next day we passed over the Waters called the two Horse Races, and then by
Garner's- Island: after which we passed by the Gull's-Island, and so got at
length to Shelter-Island; which, though it was but about Twenty seven Leagues
from Road-Island, yet through the Difficulty of Passage, we were three Days in
getting thither. The Day after we came thither, being the First Day of the
Week, we had a Meeting there. Afterward, in the same Week, I had a Meeting
among the Indians there; at which were their King, with his Council, and about
an hundred Indians more: They sat down, like Friends, and heard very
attentively, while I spoke to them by an Interpreter, an Indian, that could
speak English well. After the Meeting they appeared very loving; and confessed,
that what was said to them, was Truth. On the next First Day we had a great
Meeting on the Island; to which came many of the World's People, that had never
heard Friends before. They were very well satisfied with the Meeting; and would
not go away, when the Meeting was done, till they had spoken with me: Wherefore
I went amongst them, and found, they were much taken with the Truth; and good
Desires were raised in them, and a great Love. Blessed be the Lord, his Name
spreads, and will be great among the Nations, and Dreadful among the Heathen.

While we were in Shelter-Island, William Edmundson came to us, who had been
laboring in the Work of the Lord in Virginia. From whence he traveled through
the Desert-Country, through Difficulties and many Trials, till he came to
Roan-Oak; where he met with a tender People: And after Seven Weeks Service in
those parts, sailing over to Maryland, and so to New York, he came from thence
to Long Island; and so to Shelter-Island: where we met with him, and were very
glad to hear from him the good Service, he had had for the Lord, in the several
Countries and Places, wherein he had traveled, since he parted from us.

We staid not long in Shelter-Island, but entering our Sloop again, At Sea.
put forth to Sea for Long Island. We had a very rough Passage: for the Tide
did run so strong for several Hours, that I have not seen the like; and being
against us, we could hardly get forwards, though we had a Gale. We were upon
the Water all that Day and the Night following; but found our selves next Day
driven back near unto Fisher's-Island. For there was a great Fog, and toward
Day it was very dark, 1672. New England.
so that we could not see, what way we made: and besides it rained much in the
Night, which in our open Sloop made us very wet. Next day a great Storm arose;
so that we were fain to go over the Sound: and did get over with much ado. When
we had gotten from Fisher's-Island, Faulcon- Island.
we passed by Faulcon-Island, and came to the Main; where we cast Anchor, till
the Storm was over: Sound.
and then we came over the Sound, being all very wet; and much difficulty we
had to get to Land, the Wind being strong against us. But blessed be the Lord
God of Heaven and Earth, and of the Seas and Waters, Long Island Oister-bay.
all was well; and we got safe to Oister-Bay in Long Island, on the Seventh Day
of the Sixth Month very early in the Morning, which (they say) is about two
hundred Miles from Road-Island. At Oister-Bay we had a very large Meeting: and
the same day James Lancaster and Christopher Holder went over the Bay to Rye on
the Continent, in Governor Winthrop's Government, and had a Meeting there.
Flushing
From Oister-Bay we passed about Thirty Miles to Flushing, where we had a very
large Meeting, many Hundreds of the People of the World being there; some or
whom came about Thirty Miles to it. A glorious and heavenly Meeting it was,
(praised be the Lord God!) and the People were much satisfied. Mean while
Christopher Holder and some other Friends went to a Town in Long Island, called
Jamaica, and had a Meeting there. We passed from Flushing to Gravesands,
Gravesands
about Twenty Miles, and there had three precious Meetings; to which many would
have come from New York, but that the Weather hindered them. Then being clear of
this Place, we hired a Sloop, and the Wind serving, we set forth for the
New-Country, now called Jersey. And passing down the Bay, JERSEY. Conny-Island.
Natton-Island. Stratton-Island. Middletown-Harbour.
by Conny-Island, and Natton-Island, and Stratton-Island, we came to Rich.
Hartshorn's at Middletown-Harbour, about Break of Day in the Morning, on the
27th of the Sixth Month. Next day we rode about Thirty Miles in that Country,
through the Woods, and over very bad Boggs, one worse than all the rest; the
Descent into which was so sleep, that we were fain to slide down with our
Horses, and then let them lie and breath themselves, before they could go on:
This place the People of the Country called PVRGATORY. We got at length to
Shrewsbury in East-Jersey, East-Jersey S^rewsbury.
and on the First Day of the Week had a precious Meeting there; to which
Friends, and other People came far: and the blessed Presence of the Lord was
with us. The same Week we had a Men's and Women's Meeting out of most parts of
New Jersey. They are building a Meeting Place in the Midst of them; and there
is a Monthly and General Meeting set up, which will be of great Service in
those parts, in keeping up the Gospel Order, and Government of Christ Jesus,
(of the Increase of which there is no End) that they who are faithful, may see,
that all who profess the holy Truth, do live in the pure Religion, and walk, as
becomes the Gospel.

While we were here at Shrewsbury, an Accident befell; which for the time was a
great Exercise to us. There was one John Jay, a Friend of Barbados, who came
with us from Road-Island, and intended to accompany us through the Woods to
Maryland. He being to Try an Horse, got upon his Back: and the Horse fell a
running, and cast him down upon his Head, and brake his Neck; as the People
said. They that were near him, took him up Dead, 1672. Jersey-Shrewsbury.
and carried him a good Way, and laid him on a Tree. I got to him, as soon as I
could; and feeling on him, concluded he was Dead. And as I stood by him,
pitying him and his Family, I took hold of his Hair; and his Head turned any
way, his Neck was so limber. Whereupon,
throwing away my Stick and my Gloves, I took his Head in both my Hands: and
setting my Knees against the Tree, I rai^ed his Head; and perceived, there was
nothing out or broken that Way. Then I put one Hand under his Chin, and the
other behind his Head, and raised his Head two or three times with all my
Strength; and brought it in. I soon perceived, his Neck began to grow stiff
again; and then he began to rattle in the Throat, and quickly after to breath.
The People were amazed: but I bid them Have a good Heart, and be of good Faith,
and carry him into the House. They did so; and set him by the Fire: but I bid
them, Get him some warm thing to drink, and put him to Bed. After he had been
in the House a while, he began to speak; but did not know, where he had been.
The next day we passed away (and he with us, pretty well) about Sixteen Miles,
Middle town.
to a Meeting at Middletown, through Woods and Boggs, and over a River; where
we swam our Horses, and got over our selves upon a hollow Tree: and many
hundred of Miles did he travel with us after this.

To this Meeting came most of the People of the Town, and a glorious Meeting we
had; and the Truth was over all, blessed be the great Lord God for ever!
Middletown- Harbor.
After the Meeting we went to Middletown-Harbour, about five Miles, in order to
take our long Journey next Morning, through the Woods toward Maryland; having
hired Indians for our Guides: for I determined to pass through the Woods, on
the other side of Delaware-Bay, that so we might head the Creeks and Rivers, as
much as was possible. So on the Ninth Day of the Seventh Month we set forwards,
Indian Towns.
and passed through many Indian Towns, and over some Rivers and Boggs: And when
we had ridden about Forty Miles, we made us a Fire at Night, and lay by it. As
we came among the Indians, we declared the Day of the Lord to them. Next Day we
traveled fifty Miles, (as we computed:) And at Night finding an Old House,
which the Indians had forced the People to leave, we made a Fire, and lay
there, at the Head of Delaware-Bay. DELAWARE-Bay. Upper-Diuidock.
The next Day we swam our Horses over a River about a Mile, at twice, first to
an Island called Upper Dinidock, and then to the Main Land; having hired
Indians to help us over in their Canoos. This day we could reach but about
Thirty Miles, and came at Night to a Swede's House; where we got a little
Straw, and lay there that Night. Next day, having hired another Guide, we
traveled about Forty Miles through the Woods, and made us a Fire at Night, by
which we lay, and dried our selves; for we were often wet in our Travels in the
daytime. The next day we passed over a desperate River, which had in it many
Rocks and broad Stones, very hazardous to us and our Horses. From thence we
came to Christian-River; Christian- River.
where we swam over our Horses, and went over our selves in Canoos: but the
sides of this River were so bad and miery, that some of the Horses had like to
have been laid up. From thence we came to a Town called Newcastle, 1672. N
wcastle, alias New-Amsterdam.
heretofore called New-Amsterdam: and being very weary, and inquiring in the
Town, where we might buy some Corn for our Horses; the Governor came into the
Street, and invited me to his House: and afterward desired me to lodge there;
telling me, he had a Bed for me, and I should be welcome. So I staid there; the
other Friends being taken care of also. This was on the Seventh Day of the
Week: and he offering his House for a Meeting, we had a Meeting there the next
Day, a pretty large one; for the Chief of the Town, and indeed most of the Town
were at it. Here had never been a Meeting before, nor any within a great Way of
it: but this was a very precious One, and many of the People, both Men and
Women were tender, and confessed to the Truth, and some received it; blessed be
the Lord for ever!

On the Sixteenth of the Seventh Month we set forward again from hence, and
traveled (as near as we could compute) about Fifty Miles that Day, Bohemia-
River. Saxisrax- River.
through the Woods, and over the Boggs, heading Bohemia-River and Saxifrax
River. At Night we made us a Fire (as we used to do) in the Woods, and lay
there all Night: and it being rainy Weather, we got under some thick Trees for
Shelter; and afterward dried our selves again by the Fire. Chester- River.
Next Day we waded through Chester-River, a very broad Water, and afterward
passing through many bad Boggs, lay that Night also in the Woods by a Fire; not
having gone (by reason of Hindrances in the River and Boggs) above Thirty Miles
that day. But on the day following we traveled hard: and though we had some
troublesome Boggs in our way, we rode about Fifty Miles; and got safe that
Night, but very weary, to a Friend's House, MARYLAND. M les-River.
one Robert Harwood, at Miles-River in Maryland. This was the Eighteenth Day
of the Seventh Month: and though we were very weary, and much dirtied with
getting through the Boggs in our Journey; yet hearing of a Meeting next day, we
went to it, and from it to John Edmundson's: from whence we went three or four
Miles by Water to a Meeting on the First Day following. At this Meeting there
was a Judge's Wife, who had never been at any of our Meetings before; and she
was reached, and said after the Meeting: She had rather hear us once, than the
Priests a thousand times. Many others also of the World's People, that were
there, were very well satisfied; For the Power of the Lord was eminently with
and amongst us: blessed for ever be his holy Name! We passed from thence about
twenty two Miles, Kentish- Shore.
and had a Meeting upon the Kentish Shore, to which one of the Judges came; and
a good Meeting it was. Then, after we had had another good Meeting hard by
there, at one Henry Wilcock's House, where also we had good Service for the
Lord; we went by Water about twenty Miles, to a very large Meeting, where were
some Hundreds of the World's People, and diverse of the Chief Rank, both English
and Indians: For there were four Justices of the Peace, and the High Sheriff of
Delaware, and some others from thence: and there was an Indian Emperor, or
Governor, and two others of the Chief Men among the Indians. With these
Indians I had a good Opportunity the Night before the Meeting; and I spoke to
them by an Interpreter: and they heard the Truth attentively, and were very
loving. A blessed Meeting this was, and of great Service, both for Convincing,
1672. Maryland.
and Establishing in the Truth them, that were convinced of it; blessed be the
Lord, who causes his blessed Truth to spread. After the Meeting a Woman came
to me, (whose Husband was one of the Judges of that part of the Country, and a
Member of the Parliament or Assembly there) and told me, Her Husband was sick,
not like to live; and desired me to go home with her to see him. It was three
Miles to her House; and I being just come hot out of the Meeting, it was hard
for me then to go: Yet considering the Service, I got an Horse, and went with
her, and visited her Husband; and spoke, what the Lord gave me to him: And the
Man was much refreshed, and finely raised up by the Power of the Lord; and he
afterward came to our Meetings. I went back again to the Friends that Night;
and next day we departed thence, and went about nineteen or twenty Miles to
Tredhaven-Creek, to John Edmundson's again: from whence, Tredhaven- Creek.
on the Third of the Eighth Month, we went to the General Meeting for all
Maryland-Friends.

This Meeting held five Days together: General Meeting.
the first three Days we had Meetings for Public Worship, to which People of
all sorts came; the other two days were spent in the Men's and Women's Meetings.
To those Public Meetings came many of the World, both Protestants of diverse
sorts, and some Papists; and amongst these were several Magistrates, and their
Wives, and other Persons of chief Account in the Country: and of the common
People there were so many, besides Friends, that they thought, there were
sometimes a Thousand People at one of those Meetings. So that, although they
had not long before enlarged their Meeting Place, and made it as big again, as
it was before; yet it could not contain the People. I went by Boat every Day
four or five Miles to the Meeting, and there were so many Boats at that time
passing upon the River, that it was almost like the Thames; and People said,
There were never so many Boats seen there together before. And as the Concourse
of People was very great (so that one of the Justices, who was there, said, He
never saw so many People together in that Country before;) so it was a very
Heavenly Meeting, wherein the Presence of the Lord was gloriously manifested,
and Friends were thereby sweetly refreshed, and the People generally satisfied,
and many convinced: for the blessed Power of the Lord was over all; everlasting
Praises to his Holy Name for ever. After the Public Meetings were over, the
Men's and Womens-Meetings began, and were held the other two Days: for I had
something to impart to them, which concerned the Glory of God, and the Order of
the Gospel, and the Government of Christ Jesus. So when these Meetings were all
over, we took our Leaves of Friends in those parts; whom we left well
established in the Truth (which is of good Report amongst the People there, and
great Enquirings there are after it, amongst all sorts of People.) And upon the
Tenth Day of the Eighth Month we went from thence about Thirty Miles by Water,
passing by Cranes-Island, and Swan-Island, Cranes- Island. Swan- Island. Kent-
Island.
and Kent-Island in very foul Weather and much Rain; whereby (our Boat being
open) we were not only very much wetted, but in great danger of being overset:
Insomuch that some of the World thought, we could not have escaped casting
away, till they saw us come to Shore next morning. But blessed be God, we were
very well. And having got a little House, and dried our Cloths by the Fire, and
refreshed our selves a little, we betook us to our Boat again; and put off from
Land, sometimes Sailing, and sometimes Rowing: but having very foul Weather
that day too, we could not get above twelve Miles forward that Day. At Night we
got to Land, and made us a Fire, and some lay by that; and some lay by a Fire
at an House a little way off. Then, next Morning pursuing our Journey, Great-
Bay.
we passed over the great Bay, and sailed about Forty Miles that day; and
making to Shore at Night, we lay there, some in the Boat, and some at an
Alehouse by. Next morning (it being the First Day of the Week) we went Six or
Seven Miles to a Friend's House, who was a Justice of the Peace; where we had a
Meeting that Day: and this was a little above the Head of the Great Bay. So we
were almost four Days upon the Water, weary with Rowing; yet all was very well,
blessed and praised be the Lord. We went next Day to another Friend's House,
near the Head of Hatton's-Island, Hatton's-Island.
where we had good Service amongst Friends and others: as we had also the Day
following at Geo. Wilson's, a Friend, that lived about three Miles further;
where we had a very precious Meeting, there being a great Tenderness amongst
the People.

After this Meeting we sailed thence about Ten Miles to James Frizby's (who was
a Justice of the Peace) and there, on the Sixteenth of the Eighth Month, we had
a very large Meeting; at which, besides Friends, were some Hundreds of People,
as it was supposed, and amongst them were several Justices of the Peace, and
Captains, and the Sheriff, with other Persons of Note in the World's Account. A
blessed, heavenly Meeting this was, and a powerful, thundering Testimony for
Truth was born therein; and a great Sense there was upon the People, and a
great Brokenness and Tenderness was amongst them. We stayed after Meeting, till
about the Eleventh Hour in the Night, that the Tide turned, and was with us:
and then taking Boat again, we passed that Night and the next Day about Fifty
Miles, to another Friend's House. The two next days we made short Journies,
visiting Friends: and on the Twentieth we had a great Meeting at a place called
Severn, Severn.
where there was a Meeting Place, but not large enough to hold the People by
many; for the People of those parts came generally to it. Diverse of the Chief
Magistrates were at it, and many other considerable People; and it gave them
generally great Satisfaction, Two days after we had a Meeting with some, that
walked disorderly; and we had good Service in it. Then spending a day or two in
visiting Friends thereabouts, Western-Shore.
we passed to the Western-Shore; and on the Twenty fifth Day had a large and
precious Meeting at William Coale's, where the Speaker of their Assembly, with
his Wife, and a Justice of Peace, and several other People of Quality were
present. Next Day we had a Meeting, six or seven Miles further, at Abraham
Birkhead's, where many of the Magistrates and upper sort of People were; and
the Speaker of the Parliament or Assembly for that Country was Convinced: A
blessed Meeting it was, praised be the Lord. We traveled on next Day; and on
the Day following (which was the Twenty eighth of the Eighth Month) had a large
and very precious Meeting at Peter Sharp's, Clifts.
on the Clifts, between Thirty and Forty Miles distant from the former. Many of
the Magistrates, and upper Rank of People were at this Meeting, and a heavenly
Meeting it was. One of the Governor's Council's Wives was Convinced; and her
Husband very loving to Friends: and one, that came from Virginia (being a
Justice of the Peace there) was Convinced; and has a Meeting since at his
House. There was some Papists at this Meeting; and one of them threatened,
before he came, that he would Dispute with me: but when he came, he was
reached, and could not oppose. Blessed be the Lord, the Truth has reached into
the Hearts of People beyond Words, and it is of a good Savor amongst them.
After the Meeting we went about Eighteen Miles to James Preston's, a Friend
that lives on Pottuxon-River; and thither came to us an Indian King, Pottuxon-
River.
with his Brother, to whom I spoke; and I found, they understood the thing I
spoke of. Now having finished our Service in Maryland, and intending forthwith
to set forward for Virginia, Pottuxon.
we had a Meeting at Pottuxon on the Fourth Day of the Ninth Month, to take our
Leaves of Friends. The Meeting was in the Meeting Place; and many of the
World's People of all sorts were at it; and a powerful Meeting it was.

Upon the Fifth Day of the Ninth Month we set Sail for Virginia, VIRGINIA
and in three days came to a Place called Nancemum; Nancemum.
it being (as they there computed) about Two hundred Miles from Maryland. In
this Voyage we met with nothing, but what had been usual with us, namely, foul
Weather, Storms and Rain; and to lie in the Woods by a Fire in the Night. At
this Nancemum lived a Friend, called the Widow Wright. Next Day we had a great
Meeting at Nancemum, of Friends and People: There came to this Meeting one Col.
Dewes, with several other Officers and Magistrates, and were much taken with
the Truth declared. After this Meeting was over, we hast'ned toward Carolina;
yet had several Meetings by the Way, wherein we had good Service for the Lord:
One about four Miles from Nancemum-Water, which was a very precious Meeting;
and there was a Men's- and a Womens-Meeting settled, for taking Care of the
Affairs of the Church. Another very good Meeting also we had at William
Yarrow's, at a place called Pagan-Creek; where the Meeting was so large, Pagan-
Creek.
that we were fain to be abroad, the House not being big enough to contain the
People. A great Openness there was in the People; and the Sound of Truth did
spread abroad, and had a good Savor in the Hearts of People: the Lord have the
Glory for ever!

After this our way to Carolina grew worse, being much of it plashy and wet,
and pretty full of great Bogs and Swamps; so that we were commonly wet to the
Knees most of us, and lay abroad a-Nights in the Woods by a Fire: saving that
one of the Nights we got to a poor House, at a place called Sommertown,
Sommerton.
and lay by the Fire in the House. The Woman of the House had a Sense of God
upon her: and the Report of our Travel had reached thither, and drawn some
People, that lived beyond Sommertown, to that House, in Expectation to have
seen and heard us (so acceptable was the Sound of Truth in that
Wilderness-Country:) but they missed us. The next Day, which was the Twenty
first of the Ninth Month, having traveled hard through the Woods, and over
many Bogs and Swamps, we reached at Night to Bonner's Creek; 1672. CAROLINA.
and there we lay that Night by the Fireside, the Woman lending us a Mat to
lie on.

This was the first House we came to in Carolina: And here we left our Horses,
which were over-wearied with Travel. From hence we went down the Creek in a
Canooe to Macocomocock-River, Bonner's Cr^^k.
and came to a Man's House, Macocomocock- River.
whose Name was Hugh Smith; where the People of the World came in to see us
(for there were no Friends in that part of the Country:) and many of them did
receive us gladly. Amongst others that came to us, there was one Nathaniel
Batts, who (we heard) had been Governor of Ronoack: He went by the Name of
Captain Batts, and had been a Rude, Desperate Man. He asked me about a Woman in
Cumberland, who, he said he was told, had been healed by our Prayers, and
Laying on of Hands, after she had been long sick, and given over by the
Physicians; and he desired to know the certainty of it. I told him, We did not
glory in such things; but many such things had been done by the Power of Christ.

Not far from hence we had a Meeting among the World's People, and they were
taken with the Truth; blessed be the Lord. Then passing down the River Maratick
in a Canooe, Maratick- River. Cunnyoke- Bay.
we went down the Bay Connie-oak; and came to a Captain's House, who was loving
to us, and lent us his Boat (for we were much wetted in the Canooe; the Water
flashing in upon us.) With this Boat we went on to the Governor's House: but
the Water in some places was so shallow, that the Boat being laden, could not
Swim; so that we were fain to put off our Shoes and Stockings, and wade
through the Water a pretty way. The Governor, with his Wife, received us
lovingly: but there was at his House a Doctor, who would needs Dispute with us.
And truly, his Opposing us was of good Service, giving Occasion for the Opening
of many things to the People, concerning the Light and Spirit of God, which he
denied to be in Every one; and affirmed, that it was not in the Indians.
Whereupon I called an Indian to us, and asked him. Whether or no, when he did
lie, or do wrong to any one, there was not something in him, that did reprove
him for it? And he said, There was such a thing in him, that did so reprove
him; and he was ashamed, when he had done wrong, or spoken wrong. So we shamed
the Doctor before the Governor and the People; insomuch, that the poor Man run
out so far, that at length he would not own the Scriptures. We tarried at the
Governor's that Night: and next Morning he very courteously walked with us
himself about two Miles through the Woods, to a place, whither he had sent our
Boat about to meet us. Where taking our Leave of him, we entered our Boat again,
and went that Day about Thirty Miles to one Joseph Scot's, who was one of the
Representatives of the Country. And there we had a Meeting, and many People
were at it: a sound, precious Meeting it was, and the People were tender; and
much desired after Meetings. Wherefore we went to another House about four
miles further, and there we had another Meeting; to which the Governor's
Secretary came, who was Chief Secretary of the Province, and had (it seems)
been formerly Convinced.

I went from this place among the Indians, 1672. Carolina. Indians.
and spoke unto them by an Interpreter, showing them; That God made all things
in Six Days, and made but one Woman for one Man: and that God did drown the Old
World, because of their Wickedness. Afterward I spoke to them concerning
Christ, showing them, That he did die for all men, for their Sins as well as
for others; and had enlightened them, as well as others: and that if they did
that which was Evil, he would burn them; but if they did well, they should not
be burned. There was among them their young King, and others of their Chief
Men; and they seemed to receive kindly, what I said unto them.

Now having visited the North-Part of Carolina, and made a little Entrance for
Truth upon the People there; we began to return again toward Virginia, having
several Meetings in our way, wherein we had very good Service for the Lord, the
People being generally tender and open, blessed be the Lord. We lay one Night
at the Secretary's House, to which we had much ado to get: for the Water being
shallow, we could not bring our Boat to Shore. But the Secretary's Wife, seeing
our Strait, came her self in a Canooe. (her Husband being from home) and
brought us to Land. By next Morning our Boat was sunk, and full of Water: But
we got her up, and mended her; and went away in her that Day about Twenty four
Miles, the Water being rough and troubled, and the Winds high: but the great
Power of God was seen, in carrying us safe in that rotten Boat. In our Return
we had a very precious Meeting at Hugh Smith's; praised be the Lord for ever:
the People were very tender, and very good Service we had amongst them. There
was at this Meeting an Indian Captain, who was very loving; and did acknowledge
it to be Truth, that was spoken. There was also one of the Indian Priests, whom
they call a Pauwaw; and he sat soberly among the People. On the Ninth of the
Tenth Month we got back to Bonners-Creek, Bonner's-Creek.
where we had left our Horses; having spent a matter of Eighteen Days in the
North of Carolina.

Our Horses having rested, and being now fresh, we set forward forthwith for
Virginia again; traveling through the Woods and Bogs, VIRGINIA
as far as we could well reach that Day; and at Night lay by a Fire in the
Woods, as we often used to do. Next Day we had a tedious Journey through the
Bogs and Swamps, and were exceeding wet and dirty all the Day; but dried our
selves at Night by a Fire. We got that Night to Sommerton. And when we came
near the House, Sommerton.
the Woman of the House seeing us, spoke to her Son to keep up their Dogs (for
both in Virginia and Carolina they generally keep great Dogs to guard their
Houses, living lonely in the Woods:) But the Son said, He need not; for their
Dogs did not use to meddle with these People. Whereupon, when we were come into
the House, the Woman told us; We were like the Children of Israel, whom the
Dogs did not move their Tongues against. Here we lay, but in our Cloths, and by
the Fire; as we had done many a Night before. And the next Day, before we went
away, we had a Meeting here: for the People having heard of us, had a great
Desire to hear us; and a very good Meeting we had among them, where we never
had Meeting before: praised be the Lord for ever! After the Meeting we hasted
away. And when we had ridden about Twenty Miles, 1672. Virginia.
calling at a House to enquire the Way, the People of the House desired us to
tarry all Night with them: which we did. Next Day we came among Friends, after
we had traveled about an Hundred Miles from Carolina into Virginia: In which
time we observed a great Variety of Climates; having passed in a few Days from
a very Cold, to a warm and spring-like Country. But the Power of the Lord is
the same in all, and is over all, and does reach the good in all; praised be
the Lord for ever!

We spent about three Weeks this time in traveling through Virginia, sometimes
amongst the World's People only, but mostly amongst Friends; having many large
and precious Meetings in several parts of the Country: As at the Widow
Wright's, where a great many of the Magistrates, and Officers, and other high
People came. And a most Heavenly Meeting we had; wherein the Power of the Lord
was so great, that it struck a Dread upon the Assembly, and chained all down,
and brought a Reverence upon the Peoples Minds. Among the Officers that were
there, there was a Major, that was Kinsman to the Priest; and he told me, The
Priest threatened to come, and Oppose us. But the Lord's Power was too strong
for him, and stopped him; and we were quiet and peaceable: and the People were
wonderfully affected with the Testimony of Truth; blessed be the Lord for ever!
Another very good Meeting we had at a place called Crickatrough, Crickatrough.
at which many Considerable People were; many of whom had never heard a Friend
before: and they were greatly satisfied with the Meeting, praised be the Lord!
We had also a very good and serviceable Meeting at John Porter's, which
consisted mostly of the World's People; in which the Power of the Lord was
gloriously seen and felt, and it brought the Truth over all the bad Walkers and
Talkers: blessed be the Lord! Diverse other Meetings we had, and many
Opportunities of doing Service for the Lord amongst the People, where we came.
And the last Week, that we stayed, we spent some Time and Pains among Friends,
sweeping away, that which was to be swept out, and working down a bad Spirit,
that was got up in some: And blessed for ever be the Name of the Lord, he it
is, that gives Victory over all.

Now having finished, what Service lay upon us at Virginia; on the Thirtieth
Day of the Tenth Month we set Sail in an open Sloop for Maryland. MARYLAND.
But having a very great Storm that day, and being much wetted, we were glad to
get to Shore before Night: And walking to an House at Willoughby-Point,
Willoughby- Point.
we got Lodging there that Night. The Woman of the House was a Widow, and a
very tender Woman: She had never received Friends before; but she received us
very kindly, and with Tears in her Eyes. We returned to our Boat in the
Morning, and hoised up our Sail; getting forward as fast and as far as we
could: but toward Evening a Storm rising, and the Wind being high, we had much
ado to get to the Shore; and our Boat being open, the Water slashed often in,
and sometimes over us, so that we were sufficiently wetted. Being got to Land,
we made us a Fire in the Woods, to warm and dry us; and there we lay all that
Night, the Wolves howling about us. On the First of the Eleventh Month we
sailed again: but the Wind being against us, and sometimes driving us
backwards, we made but little Way; and were fain to get to Shore at
Point-Comfort; where yet we found but small Comfort: 1672. Maryland
for the Weather was so Cold, that though we made us a good Fire in the Woods
to lie by; yet our Water, that we had got for our Use, was frozen near the
Fireside. We made to Sea again next Day: Point-Comfort.
but the Wind being strong, and against us, we advanced but little; but were
glad to get to Land again, and travel about to find some House, where we might
buy some Provisions: for our Store was spent. That Night also we lay in the
Woods: and so extreme Cold was the Weather, the Wind blowing high, and the
Frost and Snow being great, that it was hard for some to abide it. On the Third
of the Eleventh Month, the Wind sitting pretty fair, we fetched it up by
Sailing and Rowing, and got that Night to Milford-Haven, Milford- Haven.
Raphahannock- River.
where we lay at Richard Long's near Quinces-Island. Next Day we passed by
Raphahannock-River, where dwell much People; and Friends had a Meeting
there-aways at a Justice's House, that had formerly been at a Meeting, where I
was. We passed over Potomack-River also; the Winds being high, Potomack- River.
the Water very rough, our Sloop open, and the Weather extreme Cold: and having
a Meeting there-aways also, some People of the World, that came to it, were
Convinced: and when we parted thence, some of our Company went amongst them.
Potuxon- River.
We steered our Course for Pottuxon-River; and I sat at Helm most part of the
Day, and some of the Night. About the First Hour in the Morning we reached
James Preston's House in Pottuxon-River; which is accounted about Two hundred
Miles from Nancemum in Virginia. We were very weary; yet the next Day (being
the First of the Week, and Fifth of the Month) we went to the Meeting not far
from thence: and the same Week we went to an Indian-King's-Cabbin, where
several of the Indians were; Indian-King's- Cabin.
with whom we had a pretty Opportunity to discourse: and they carried
themselves very lovingly. We went also that Week to a General Meeting: from
which we went about Eighteen Miles further to John Gearies, where we had a very
precious Meeting; praised be the Lord God for ever! But after this the Cold
grew so exceeding sharp, such extreme Frost and snowy Weather, beyond what was
usual in that Country; so that we could hardly endure to be in it. Neither was
it easy or safe to stir abroad: yet we got (with some Difficulty) six Miles
through the Snow to John Mayer's, where we met with some Friends, that were
come from New England; whom we had left there, when we came away: and glad we
were to see each other, after so long and tedious Travels. By these Friends we
understood, that William Edmundson, having been at Road-Island and New England,
was gone from thence for Ireland; that Solomon Eccles coming from Jamaica, and
landing at Boston in New England, was taken at a Meeting there, and banished to
Barbados; that John Stubbs and another Friend were gone into New Jersey, and
several other Friends to Barbados, Jamaica, and the Leeward-Islands. It was
Matter of Joy to us to understand, that the Work of the Lord went on and
prospered, and that Friends were unwearied, and diligent in the Service.

On the Twenty Seventh of the Eleventh Month, we had a very precious Meeting in
a Tobacco-House: and on the next Day we returned to James Preston's, about
Eighteen Miles distant. J. Preston 's.
But when we came there we found, his House was burnt down to the Ground the
Night before, 1672. Maryland J. Preston 's.
through the Carelessness of a Maidservant: So we lay three Nights on the
Ground by the Fire, the Weather being very Cold. We made an Observation, which
was somewhat strange, but certainly true; that one Day in the midst of this
Cold Weather, the Wind turning into the South, it grew so hot, that we could
hardly bear the Heat; and the next Day and Night, the Wind chopping back into
the North, we could hardly endure the Cold.

Pottuxon.
On the Second of the Twelfth Month, we had a glorious Meeting at Pottuxon: and
after it went to John Gearie's again, where we waited for a Boat, Clifts.
to carry us to the Monthly Meeting at the Clifts; to which we went, and a
living Meeting it was, praised be the Lord: This was on the Sixth of the
Twelfth Month. And another Meeting we had on the Ninth, wherein the Glory of
the Lord shined over all; blessed and magnified be his Holy Name for ever.

From hence we intended to go to Anamessy; and on the Twelfth Day of the
Twelfth Month we set forward in our Boat: And traveling by Night, as well as
by Day, in the Night we run our Boat on Ground in a Creek near Manaco-River.
Manaco- River.
There we were fain to stay, till Morning, that the Tide came, and lifted her
off again: And in the mean time, sitting in an open Boat, and the Weather being
bitter-cold, some had like to have lost the Use of their Hands, they were so
frozen and benumbed with Cold. But in the Morning, when the Tide had set our
Boat a-float again, we got to Land, and made us a good Fire; at which we warmed
our selves well: and then went to our Boat again, and passed on about ten miles
further to a Friend's House; where next day we had a very precious Meeting, at
which some of the Chief of the Place were. I went after the Meeting to a
Friend's House, about four miles off, Anamessy- River.
at the Head of Anamessy-River; where on the Day following, the Judge of the
Country, and a Justice with him came to me, and were very loving, and much
satisfied with Friend's Order. The next Day we had a large Meeting at the
Justice's House, but it was in his Barn; for his House could not hold the
Company. There were several of the Great Folks of that Country; and among the
rest there was an Opposer: but all was preserved quiet and well, and a precious
Meeting it was; and the People were much taken and affected with the Truth,
blessed be the Lord. We went next Day to see one Capt. Colburn, who was also a
Justice of the Peace; and there we had some Service: Then returning again, we
had a very glorious Meeting at the same Justice's, where we met before; and
there were many People of Account in the World, Magistrates, Officers, and
others at it. It was a large Meeting, and the Power of the Lord was much felt;
so that the People were generally well satisfied, and taken with the Truth: and
there being several, both Merchants, and Masters of Ships from New England, the
Truth was spread abroad; blessed be the Lord!

A Day or two after, departing from this place, we traveled about sixteen
miles through the Woods and Bogs, heading Anamessy-River, and Amoroca-River;
Amoroca- River. Manaoke.
part of which last we went over in a Canooe, and came to Manaoke, to a
Friendly Woman's House: where on the Twenty fourth of the Twelfth Month, we had
a large Meeting in a Barn; and the Lord's living Presence was with us, and
among the People: blessed be his Holy Name for ever-more! Friends had never had
a Meeting in those Parts before. 1673. Maryland Wicocomaco-River.
After this Meeting we passed over the River Wicocomaco, and through many bad
and watery Swamps and Marish Way; and came to James Jones, a Friend, who was a
Justice of the Peace: where we had a large and very glorious Meeting, praised
be the Lord God. Then passing over the Water in a Boat, we took Horse, and
traveled about Twenty four Miles through Woods and troublesome Swamps, and came
to another Justice's House; where we had a very large Meeting, much People of
the World being at it, and many of Considerable Account amongst them: and the
living Presence of the Lord was amongst us, praised for ever be his holy Name!
This was on the Third Day of the First Month, 1672/3. And on the Fifth Day of
the same we had another living and heavenly Meeting, at which diverse of the
Justices, with their Wives, and many others of the World's People were; amongst
whom we had very good Service for the Lord, blessed be his Holy Name. At this
Meeting was a Woman, that lived at Anamessy, who had been many Years in Trouble
of Mind; and sometimes would sit moping near two Months together, and hardly
speak or mind any thing. When I heard of her, I was moved of the Lord to go to
her, and tell her, ' That Salvation was come to her House. And after I had
spoken the Word of Life to her, and entreated the Lord for her, she mended; and
went up and down with us to Meetings, and is since well: blessed be the Lord!

Being now clear of these parts, we left Anamessy on the Seventh Day of the
First Month: and passing by Water about Fifty Miles, came to a Friendly Woman's
House at Hunger-River. Hunger- River.
We had very rough Weather in our Passage to this Place, and were in great
Danger, for the Boat had like to have been turned over; and I lost both my Hat
and Cap: yet we recovered them again with much ado; and through the good
Providence of God got safe thither, praised be his Name. At this place we had a
Meeting, where we had never any before; and amongst the People that were at it,
there were two Papists, a Man and a Woman: the Man was very tender; and the
Woman confessed to the Truth. This Meeting was not so large, as it would have
been, if many, who intended to have been at it, could have got to it: but the
Weather was so foul, and the Water by reason of high Winds, so rough, that it
was not safe to pass upon it. I had no Friend now with me, but Robert Widders;
the rest having dispersed themselves into several parts of the Country in the
Service of Truth.

So soon as the Wind would permit, we passed from hence about Forty Miles by
Water, rowing most part of the way; and came to the Head of little
Choptanck-River, to Dr. Winsmore's, Choptanck- River.
who was a Justice of Peace, and lately convinced. Here we met with some
Friends, with whom we staid a while: and then went on by Land and Water, and
had a large Meeting abroad; for the House we were at, could not receive the
People. There were diverse of the Magistrates, and their Wives at this Meeting;
and a good Meeting it was, blessed be the Lord, who is making his Name known in
that Wilderness-Country. We went back from thence to a Friend's House, whose
Name is William Stephen's, where we met with those other Friends, that had been
traveling in other parts; and were much refreshed in the Lord together, when
we imparted to each other the good Success, we had had in the Lord's Work,
1673. Maryland
and the Prosperity and spreading of Truth in the places, where we traveled.
John Cartwright and another Friend had been at Virginia, where were great
Desires in People after the Truth: and being now returned, they staid but a
little with us here; and then set forward for Barbados. But before we left this
place, we had a very glorious Meeting here, at which were very many of the
World's People, and some of the Chief of them. For there was the Judge of that
Country, and three Justices of the Peace, and the High Sheriff, with their
Wives, and several others: And of Indians there was he, who was called their
Emperor, and one of the Indian Kings, and their Speaker; who all sat very
attentive, and carried themselves very lovingly: and an establishing, settling
Meeting it was. This was on the Twenty third of the First Month.

And on the Twenty fourth we went by Water ten Miles to the Indian Town, where
this same Emperor dwelt; whom I had acquainted before with my Coming, and
desired him to get their Kings and Councils together. In the Morning the
Emperor came himself, and had me to the Town; and they were generally come
together, and had their Speaker, and other Officers with them, and the Old
Empress sat among them: And to give them their due, they sat very grave and
sober, and were all very Attentive, beyond many that are called Christians. I
had some with me, that could interpret to them; and we had a very good Meeting
with them, and of very good Service it was: for it gave them a good Esteem of
Truth and Friends; blessed be the Lord!

After this, we had many Meetings in several parts of that Country; one at
William Stephens's, which was a general Meeting once a Month: another at
Tredhaven-Creek; another at Wye; another at Reconow-Creek; and another at
Thomas Taylor's in the Island of Kent. Most of these Meetings were large, there
being many of the World's People at them, and diverse of them of the most
Considerable in the World's Account: And the Lord's Power and living Presence
was with us, and plenteously manifested amongst the People, by which their
Hearts were tendered, and opened to receive the Truth, which had a good Savor
amongst them; blessed be the Lord God over all for ever. Then being clear of
that side, we passed over the Bay about Fourteen Miles to a Friend's House,
where we met with several Friends; and I sent for Thomas Thurston thither, and
had a Meeting with him, to bring the Truth over his bad Actions.

Now having traveled through most parts of that Country, and visited most of
the Plantations thereabouts, and had very good Service for the Lord in America,
having alarmed the People of all sorts, where we came, and proclaimed the Day
of God's Salvation amongst them; we found, our Spirits began to be clear of
those parts of the World, and to draw toward Old England again. Yet we were
desirous, and felt Freedom from the Lord to stay, till the General Meeting for
that Province of Maryland was over (which drew nigh;) that we might see
Friends generally together, before we departed. Wherefore spending our time in
the interim, partly in visiting Friends and Friendly People, Clifts. Pottuxon.
and in having Meetings about the Clifts and Pottuxon; and partly in writing
Answers to some Cavilling Objections, which some of Truth's Adversaries had
raised and spread abroad, to hinder People from receiving the Truth: we were
not idle, but labored in the Work of the Lord, until that General Provincial
Meeting came on; which began on the Seventeenth Day of the Third Month, The
General Provincial Meeting.
and lasted four Days. On the First of these days the Men and Women had their
Meetings for Business, wherein the Affairs of the Church of God were taken Care
of; and many things, relating thereunto, were opened unto them to their
Edification and Comfort. The other Three Days were spent in Public Meetings
for the Worship of God, at which diverse of considerable Account in the
Government, and many others of the World's People were present; who were
generally satisfied, and many of them reached: for it was a wonderful, glorious
Meeting, and the mighty Presence of the Lord was seen and felt over all;
blessed and pra^^ed be his Holy Name for ever, who over all gives Dominion!

After this Meeting we took our Leave of Friends, parting in great Tenderness,
in the sense of the Heavenly Life, and virtuous Power of the Lord, that was
livingly felt amongst us: and went by Water to the place, where we were to take
Shipping; many Friends accompanying us thither, and tarrying with us that
Night. Next Day, which was the Twenty first of the Third Month, 1673, and the
Day following we set Sail for England: At Sea.
The same Day Richard Covell came on Board our Ship, having had his own taken
from him by the Dutch. We had foul Weather, and contrary Winds, which caused us
to cast Anchor often; so that we were till the Thirty first of the Third Month,
ever we could get past the Capes of Virginia, and come out into the main Sea.
But after this we made good Speed, ENGLAND. King's-Road.
and on the Twenty eighth of the Fourth Month, cast Anchor at Kings-road, which
is the Harbor for Bristol. We had in our Passage very high Winds and
Tempestuous Weather, which made the Sea exceeding rough, the Waves rising like
Mountains; so that the Masters and Sailers wondered at it, and said, They never
saw the like before. But though the Wind was strong, it sat for the most part
with us; so that we sailed away before it: and the Great God, who commands the
Winds, who is Lord of Heaven, of Earth and the Seas, and whose Wonders are seen
in the Deep, he steered our Course, and preserved us from many imminent
Dangers. The same good Hand of Providence, that went with us, and carried us
safely over, watched over us in our Return, and brought us safely back again;
Thanksgivings and Praises be to his holy Name for ever! Many sweet and precious
Meetings we had on Board the Ship during this Voyage, (commonly two a Week;)
wherein the blessed Presence of the Lord did greatly refresh us, and did often
break in upon, and tender the Company. Bristol- Harbor.
And when we came into Bristol Harbor, there lay a Man of War; and the
Press-master came on Board us to press our men. We had a Meeting at that time
in the Ship with the Seamen, before we went to Shore; and the Press-master
sat down with us, and staid the Meeting, and was very well satisfied with it.
After the Meeting I spoke to him to leave two of the Men he had Pressed, in our
Ship (for he had pressed four,) one of which was a lame Man; and he said, At my
Request he would.

We went on Shore that Afternoon, and got to Shear-hampton, Shear-hampton.
where we got Horses, and rode to Bristol that Night; where Friends received us
with great Joy. 1673. Bristol.
In the Evening I writ a Letter to my Wife, to give her Notice of my Landing,
as follows: Dear Heart,
THis Day we came into Bristol near Night, from the Seas; Glory to the Lord God
over all for ever, who was our Convoy, and steered our Course: who is the God
of the whole Earth, and of the Seas and Winds, and made the Clouds his
Chariots, beyond all Words, blessed be his Name for ever! Who is over all in
his great Power and Wisdom, Amen. Robert Widders and James Lancaster are with
me, and we are well: Glory to the Lord for ever, who has carried us through
many Perils, Perils by Water, and in Storms, Perils by Pirates and Robbers,
Perils in the Wilderness, and amongst false Professors; Praises to him, whose
Glory is over all for ever, Amen. Therefore mind the fresh Life, and live all
to God in it. I do intend (if the Lord will) to stay a while this-away; it may
be till the Fair. So no more, but my Love to all Friends.

Bristol, the 28th Day of the 4th Month, 1673. G. F.




Between this and the Fair, my Wife came out of the North to Bristol to me; and
her Son-in-Law Thomas Lower, with two of her Daughters came with her. And her
other Son-in-Law John Rouse, and W. Penn and his Wife, and Gerrard Roberts came
down from London, and many Friends from several parts of the Nation came to the
Fair; and glorious, powerful Meetings we had there at that time, for the Lord's
Infinite Power and Life was over all. In the fresh Openings whereof I was moved
to declare of Three Estates, and Three Teachers, viz. That God was the first
Teacher of Man and Woman in Paradise: And as long as they kept to, and under
God's Teaching, they kept in the Image of God, and in his Likeness, in
Righteousness and Holiness, and in Dominion over all, that God had made; in the
blessed State, in the Paradise of God. But when they heark'ned to the Serpent's
false Teaching (who was out of Truth) and disobeyed God, and obeyed the
Serpent, in feeding upon that, which God forbad them; then they lost the Image
of God, the Righteousness and Holiness, and came under the Power of Satan, and
were turned out of Paradise, out of the Blessed into the Cursed State. And then
the Promise of God was, That the Seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpent's
Head, and break his Power that Man and Woman were under, and destroy his Works.
So here were Three States, and Three Teachers. God was the first Teacher in
Paradise: and whilst Man kept under his Teaching, he was happy. The Serpent was
the Second Teacher: and when Man followed his Teaching, he came into Misery,
and into the Fall, from the Image of God, and Righteousness and Holiness, and
from the Power, that he had over all, that God had made; and came under the
Serpent, whom he had Power over before. Christ Jesus was the Third Teacher; of
whom God says, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him:
and who himself says, Learn of me. This is the true Gospel-Teacher, who
bruises the Head of the Serpent, that is the False Teacher, and the Head of all
False Teachers, and of all False Religions, False Ways, False Worships and
False Churches. Now Christ, who said, Learn of me; and of whom the Father said,
Hear ye him, he said; I am the Way to God, I am the Truth, I am the Life, and
the true Light. So as Man and Woman come up again to God, and are renewed up
into his Image, Righteousness and Holiness by Christ, thereby they come up into
the Paradise of God, the State, which Man was in, before he fell; and into an
higher State than that, to sit down in Christ, that never fell. Therefore the
Son of God is to be heard in all things, who is the Savior, and the Redeemer;
and has laid down his Life, and bought his Sheep with his precious Blood. And
we can challenge all the World, Who has any thing to say against our Way? our
Savior? our Redeemer? who is our Prophet, whom God has raised up, that we may
hear, and whom we must hear in all things: Who has any thing against our
Shepherd, Christ Jesus, who leads and feeds us, and we know his Heavenly Voice?
And who has any thing against our Bishop, in whose Mouth was never Guile
found, who does Oversee us in his Pasture of Life, that we do not go astray
from God, and out of his Fold? And who has any thing against our Priest,
Christ Jesus, made higher than the Heavens; who gives us freely, and commands
us to give freely? And who has any thing to say against our Leader and
Counselor, Christ Jesus, who never sinned; but is holy and harmless, and
separate from Sinners? God has commanded us to hear him, and he says, Learn
of me; and if we should disobey God's and Christ's Command, we should be like
our Father Adam and Mother Eve, who disobeyed God's Command, and hearkened to
the Serpent's Teaching. Now, Man commands, and would force us to hear the
Hirelings, who plead for Sin and the Body of Death to the Grave; which Doctrine
savours of the Devil's Teaching, not of Christ's: But we resolve to hear the
Son, as both he and the Father command; and in hearing the Son, we hear the
Father also, as the Scripture testifies. For the Author to the Hebrews says,
God, who at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in time past, unto the
Fathers by the Prophets, has in these last days spoken unto us by his Son:
Mark that, God has spoken unto us (his Apostles, Disciples, Church) by his
Son. And whereas some have objected, That although Christ did speak both to his
Disciples and to the Jews, in the days of his Flesh; yet since his Resurrection
and Ascension he does not speak now. The Answer is; That as God did then speak
by his Son, in the Days of his Flesh; so the Son, Christ Jesus, does now speak
by his Spirit. Wherefore John says in the Revelations; He that has an Ear,
let him hear, what the Spirit says to the Churches, Rev. 2. And Christ is said
to speak from Heaven, Heb. 12.25. See, that ye refuse not him, that speaks:
for if they escaped not, who refused him, that spoke on Earth; much more shall
not we escape, if we turn away from him, that speaks from Heaven. They that
resisted Moses his Law (who spoke on Earth) died for it without Mercy; which
was a Natural Death: but they that refuse him, that speaks from Heaven, neglect
and slight their own Salvation; and so die a Spiritual Death, through Unbelief
and Hardness of Heart. Therefore was the Exhortation given of old; To day, if
ye will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as in the Provocation, etc.
Heb. 3.15. etc. So that they, who neglect or refuse to hear the Voice of
Christ, now speaking from Heaven in this his Gospel-Day, harden their Hearts.
Therefore let all mark well th^se three States and Teachers: The God of Truth
was the first Teacher, w^^^e Man was in Paradise, and in Innocence. The Serpent
was the second Teacher, the false Teacher, who by his false Teaching came to be
the God of the World, which lies in Wickedne^s. Christ Jesus, that bruises the
Serpent's Head, is the third Teacher, who says, Learn of me; and of whom God
says, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, Hear ye him: and of
whom the Testimony of the Saints of Old was, That God has in these last days
spoken unto us by his Son. Thus they, that come to be renewed up again into the
Divine, Heavenly Image, in which Man was at first made, will know the same God,
that was the First Teacher of Adam and Eve in Paradise, to speak to them now by
his Son, who changes not; Glory be to his Name for ever!

Many deep and precious Things were opened in those Meetings, by the Eternal
Spirit, which searches and reveals the deep Things of God: And after I had
finished my Service for the Lord in that City, I departed thence into
Glocestershire, Glocestershire.
where we had many large and precious Meetings; and the Lord's Everlasting
Power flowed over all. From Glocestershire I passed into Wiltshire, Wiltshire.
where also we had many blessed Meetings. Slattenford.
At Slattenford in Wiltshire we had a very good Meeting, though we met there
with much Opposition from some, who had set themselves against Womens-Meetings;
which I was moved of the Lord to recommend to Friends, for the Benefit and
Advantage of the Church of Christ. That the faithful Women, who were called to
the Belief of the Truth, The Service of Womens-Meetings.
being made Partakers of the same precious Faith, and Heirs of the same
everlasting Gospel of Life and Salvation, as the Men are; might in like manner
come into the Possession and Practice of the Gospel Order, and therein be
Meet-helps unto the Men in the Restoration, in the Service of Truth, in the
Affairs of the Church, as they are outwardly in outward and civil, or temporal
things. That so all the Family of God, Women as well as Men, might know,
possess, perform and discharge their Offices and Services in the House of God,
whereby the Poor might be the better looked after, and taken care of; the
Younger sort instructed, informed and taught in the Way of God; the loose and
disorderly reproved and admonished in the Fear of the Lord; the Clearness of
Persons propounding Marriage, more closely and strictly enquired into in the
Wisdom of God: and all the Members of the Spiritual Body, the Church, might
watch over, and be helpful to each other in Love. But after these Opposers had
run into much Contention and Wrangling, the Power of the Lord struck down one
of the Chief of them, so that his Spirit sunk; and he came to be sensible of
the Evil he had done, in opposing God's Heavenly Power; and confessed his Error
before Friends: and afterward gave forth a Paper of Condemnation; wherein he
declared, 1673. Slattenford.
That he did wilfully oppose (although I often warned him to take heed;) until
the Fire of the Lord did burn within him: and he saw the Angel of the Lord with
his Sword drawn in his Hand, ready to cut him off, etc.

Notwithstanding the Opposition was made at the Meeting, yet a very good and
serviceable Meeting it was; for occasion was thereby administered to Answer
their Objections and Cavils, and to open the Services of Women in and for the
Church. And at this Meeting the Womens-Meetings for that County were
established in the blessed Power of God.

After this I went to Marlborough, and had a Meeting there; Marlborough.
to which some of the Magistrates came, and were civil and moderate. Then
passing on to Bartholomew Maylin's, I had a very precious Meeting there: and
from thence went a little beyond Ore, Ore.
where we had a blessed Meeting, and very large; as we had also soon after upon
the Border of Hampshire. Then turning into Oxfordshire, Hampshire. Oxfordshire
Reading. Buckinghamshire.
we visited Friends there; and then went to Reading, where we had a large
Meeting: and from thence passing into Buckinghamshire, had many precious
Meetings in that County. After which we went upwards, visiting Friends, till we
came to Kingston upon Thames, Kingston upon Thames.
where my Wife, and her Daughter Rachel met me.

I made no long stay at Kingston, but went to London, where I found, London.
the Baptists and Socinians, with some Old Apostates, were grown very Rude,
having printed many Books against us: So that I had a great Travel, in the
Lord's Power, before I could get clear of that City. But blessed be the Lord,
his Power came over them all; and all their lying, wicked, scandalous Books
were answered. Then after a while, Essex. Middlesex.
I made a short Journey into some parts of Essex and Middlesex, visiting
Friends at their Meetings, and their Children at their Schools; and returned
soon again to London. London.
And after I had had some Service there among Friends, I went down to Kingston,
Kingston.
and from thence to Stephen Smith's in Surrey; Surrey.
where was a very large Meeting, many Hundreds of People being at it. I staid
in those parts, till I had cleared my self of the Service, the Lord had given
me to do there, and then returned by Kingston to London, Kingston. London.
whither I felt my Spirit drawn; having heard, that many Friends were had
before the Magistrates, and diverse Imprisoned, both at London, and in other
Cities and Towns in the Nation, for opening their Shop-windows upon Holy Days,
and Fast-days, (as they were called) and for bearing Testimony against all such
Observations of Days. Which Friends could not but do, knowing, that the true
Christians did not observe the Jews Holy Days in the Apostles times; neither
could we observe the Heathens and Papists Holy days (so called) which have been
set up amongst those that are called Christians, since the Apostles days. For
we were redeemed out of Days by Christ Jesus, and brought into the Day, which
has sprung from on high; and are come into him, who is Lord of the Jewish
Sabbath, and the Substance of the Jews Signs.

Now after I had staid some time in London, laboring for some Relief and Ease
to Friends in this Case, I took Leave of Friends there, and went into the
Country, with my Wife, and her Daughter Rachel, to Hendon in Middlesex, 1673.
Middlesex. Hendon. Hertfordshire. Rickmansworth. Aylesbury. Oxfordshire
Adderbury.
and from thence to William Penn's at Rickmansworth in Hertfordshire, whither
Thomas Lower (who married another of my Wife's Daughters) came to us the next
Day, to accompany us in our Journey Northward. After we had visited Friends
thereabouts, we passed to a Friend's House near Aylesbury; and from thence to
Bray Doily's at Adderbury in Oxfordshire, where on the First Day we had a large
and precious Meeting: and Truth being well spread, and Friends in those parts
much increased in number, two or three new Meetings were then set up
thereabouts.

Now at Night, as I was sitting at Supper, I felt, I was Taken; yet I said
nothing to any body of it then. But getting out next Morning, we traveled
through the Country into Worcestershire, Worcestershire. Tredington- Parish.
Armscot.
and went to John Halford's House at Armscot in Tredington-Parish; where we had
a very large and precious Meeting in his Barn, the Lord's Powerful Presence
being eminently with us, and amongst us. After the Meeting was done, and
Friends (most of them) gone away, as I was sitting in the Parlour, discoursing
with some Friends, that staid, there came to the House one Henry Parker, called
a Justice, and with him one Rowland Hains, a Priest of Hunniton in
Warwickshire. This Justice came to know of the Meeting by means of a
Woman-Friend; who being Nurse to a Child of his, asked Leave of her Mistress,
to go to the Meeting to see me: and she speaking of it to her Husband, he and
the Priest plotted together to come and break up the Meeting, and apprehend me.
But by means of their sitting long at Dinner (it being the Day, on which his
Child was sprinkled) they came not, till the Meeting was over, and Friends
mostly gone. But though there was no Meeting, when they came; yet I being there
in the House, who was the Person they aimed at; the said Henry Parker took me,
and Thomas Lower for Company with me: and though he had nothing to lay to our
Charge, sent us both to Worcester-Jail, by a strange sort of Mittimus, a Copy
of which here follows: Worcester ss.
To the Constables of Tredington in the said County of Worcester, and to all
Constables and Tithing-men of the several Townships and Villages within the
said Parish of Tredington, and to the Keeper of the Goal for the County of
Worcester.
COmplaint being made to me, being one of his Majesty's Justices of the Peace
for the said County of Worcester, that within the said Parish of Tredington in
the said County, there has of late been several Meetings of diverse Persons, to
the number of Four hundred Persons and upwards at a time, upon Pretense of
Exercise of Religion, otherwise than what is established by the Laws of
England. And many of the said Persons, some of them were Teachers, and came
from the North, and others from the remote parts of the Kingdom, which tends to
the Prejudice of the Reformed and Established Religion, and may prove
prejudicial to the Public Peace. And it appearing to me, that there was this
present Day such a Meeting as aforesaid, to the number of Two hundred or
thereabouts, at Armscot in the said Parish of Tredington; 1670. Armscot.
and that George Fox of London, and Thomas Lower of the Parish of Creed in the
County of Cornwall, were present at the said Meeting, and the said George Fox
was Teacher or Speaker of the said Meeting; and no satisfactory Account of
their Settlement, or place of Habitation appearing to me, and forasmuch as the
said George Fox and Thomas Lower refused to give Sureties to Appear at the next
Sessions of the Peace, to be holden for the said County, to answer the Breach
of the Common-Laws of England, and what other Matters should be Objected
against them: These are therefore in his Majesty's Name to will and require
you, or either of you, forthwith to Convey the Bodies of the said George Fox
and Thomas Lower to the County-Goal of Worcester aforesaid, and there safely to
be kept, until they shall be from thence delivered by due Course of Law: For
which this shall be your sufficient Warrant in that behalf.

Dated the 17th Day of December, in the 25th Year of his Majesty's Reign over
England, etc. HENRY PARKER.



Being thus made Prisoners, without any probable Appearance of being Released
before the Quarter Sessions at Soonest, we got some Friends to accompany my
Wife and her Daughter into the North; and we were conveyed to Worcester-Jail:
from whence, Worcester-Jail.
by that time I thought, my Wife could be got home, I writ her the following
Letter.

Dear Heart,
THou seemedst to be a little grieved, when I was speaking of Prisons, and when
I was taken: Be content with the Will of the Lord God. For when I was at John
Rous's at Kingston, I had a sight of my being taken Prisoner; and when I was at
Bray Doily's in Oxfordshire, as I sat at Supper, I saw, I was taken: and I
saw, I had a Suffering to undergo. But the Lord's Power is over all, blessed be
his Holy Name for ever!

G. F.


When we had beeen some time in the Jail, we thought fit to lay our Case before
him, who was called the Lord Windsore, who was the Lord Lieutenant of
Worcestershire; and before the Deputy Lieutenants, and other Magistrates: Which
we did by the following Letter.

THese are to inform you, the Lord Lieutenant (so called) and the
Deputy Lieutenants, and the Justices of the County of Worcestershire, how
Unchristianly and Inhumanly we have been dealt withal by Henry Parker, a
Justice (so called) in our Journey or Travel toward the North. We coming to
our Friend John Halford's House on the Seventeenth Day of the Tenth Month 1673.
and some Friends bringing us on the Way, and others coming to Visit us there;
toward Night there came the aforesaid Justice, and a Priest, called Rowland
Hains of Hunniton in Warwickshire, and demanded our Names and Places of Abode.
And though we were not in any Meeting, 1673. Worcester- Jail.
but were discoursing together, when they came in; yet he made a Mittimus to
send us to Worcester-Jail. Now, whereas he says in his Mittimus, That Complaint
had been made to him of several bypast Meetings of many Hundreds at a time, we
know nothing of that; nor do we think, that concerns us. And whereas he says
further, That no satisfactory Account of our Settlement, or place of Habitation
appeared unto him. This he contradicts in his own Mittimus, mentioning therein
the Places of our Abode and Habitation; the Account of which we satisfactorily
and fully gave him. And one of us (Tho. Lower) told him, That I was going down
with my Mother-in-Law (who is George Fox his Wife) and with my Sister, to fetch
up my own Wife and Child out of the North into my own Country: And the other of
us (George Fox) told him, That I was bringing forward my Wife on her Journey
toward the North (who had been at London to visit one of her Daughters, that
had lately Lain in.) And having received a Message from my Mother, an ancient
Woman in Leicestershire, that she earnestly desired to see me, before she died;
I intended, as soon as I had brought my Wife on her Journey as far as Causal in
Warwickshire, to turn over into Leicestershire, to have seen my Mother and
Relations there, and then to have returned to London again. But by his
interrupting of us in our Journey, and taking the Husband from his Wife, and
the Son from his Mother and Sister, and stopping him from visiting his Wife and
Child so remote off; we were forced to get Strangers, or whom we could, to help
them on their Journey, to our great Damage, and their Hindrance. We asked the
Priest. Whether this was his Gospel, and their Way of Entertaining Strangers?
And we desired the Justice to consider, Whether this was doing, as he would be
done by? But he said, He had said it, and he would do it. And whereas he says,
We refused to give Sureties: He asked only George Fox for Sureties; who
replied, He was an Innocent Man, and knew no Law, he had broken: But he did not
ask Tho. Lower for any; as if it had been Crime and Cause enough for his
Commitment, that he came out of Cornwall. And if we were at a Meeting, as he
says in his Mittimus, he might have proceeded otherwise, than by sending us to
Jail, to answer the Breach of the Common Laws; though yet he showed us no
Breach of any: as may be seen in the Mittimus. So we thought fit to lay before
you the Substance of his Proceedings against us; hoping, there will more
Moderation and Justice appear in you toward us, that so we may prosecute our
intended Journey.

George Fox. Thomas Lower.



But no Enlargement did we receive by our Application to the Lord Windsor (so
called.) And although Thomas Lower received several Letters from his Brother
Dr. Lower (who was one of the King's Physicians) concerning his Liberty, and
one, by his Procurement, from Henry Savil (who was one of the King's
Bedchamber) to his Brother, called the Lord Windsor, to the same Effect; yet
seeing, it related only to his Enlargement, not mine, so great was his Love and
Regard to me, that he would not seek his own Liberty singly, but kept the
Letter by him unsent. So we were continued Prisoners, 1673.
Worcester-General-Quarter-Sessions
till the next General Quarter Sessions of the Peace: At which time diverse
Friends from several places being in Town, did speak to the Justices concerning
us; who spoke fair to Friends, and said, we should be discharged. For many of
the Justices seemed to dislike the Severity of Parker's Proceedings against us;
and did declare an Averseness to ensnare us by the Tender of the Oaths. Some
Friends also had spoken with him, that was called the Lord Windsor, who
likewise spoke them fair: so that it was the general Discourse, that we should
be discharged. We heard also, that Dr. Lower had procured a Letter, from one
Col. Sands at London, to some of the Justices in Favor of us. Some of the
Justices also spoke to some Friends, to acquaint us, that they would have us
speak but little in the Court, lest we should provoke any of the Bench; and
they would warrant, we should be discharged.

We were not called, till the last Day of the Sessions, which was the Twenty
First of the Eleventh Month, 1673. And when we came in, they were stricken with
Paleness in their Faces; and it was some time, before any thing was spoken:
insomuch that a Butcher in the Hall said, What! are they afraid? Dare not the
Justices speak to them? At length, before they spoke to us, Justice Parker made
a long Speech on the Bench, much to the same Effect, as was contained in the
Mittimus; often mentioning the Common Laws, but not Instancing any, that we had
broken: adding, That he thought it a milder Course, to send us Two to Jail,
than to put his Neighbors to the loss of two hundred Pounds, which they must
have suffered, if he had put the Law in Execution against Conventicles. But in
this he was either very Ignorant, or very Deceitful: for there being no
Meeting, when he came, nor any to Inform; he had no Evidence to Convict us, or
his Neighbors by.

When Parker had ended his Speech, the Justices spoke to us, and began with
Thomas Lower, whom they examined of the Cause of his Coming into that Country;
of which he gave them a full and plain Account. Sometimes I put in a Word,
while they were Examining him; and then they told me, They were upon his
Examination: but that when it came to my turn, I should have free Liberty to
speak, for they would not hinder me; but I should have full time, and they
would not ensnare us. When they had done with him, they asked me an Account of
my Travel; which I gave them, according as is mentioned before, but more
largely. And whereas Justice Parker, to aggravate the Case, had made a great
Noise of There being some from London, some from the North, some from Cornwall,
and some from Bristol at the House, when I was taken: I told them, That this
was in a manner all but one Family. For there was none from London but my self;
none from the North, but my Wife and her Daughter; none from Cornwall, but my
Son-in-Law Thomas Lower; nor any from Bristol, but one Friend, a Merchant
there, who met us, as it were, providentially, to assist my Wife and her
Daughter in their Journey homewards, when by our Imprisonment they were
deprived of our Company and Help. When I had spoken, the Chairman (whose Name
was Simpson, an Old Presbyterian) said; Your Relation, or Account is very
Innocent. Then he and Parker whispered a while together; and after that the
Chairman stood up, and said: You, Mr. Fox, are a Famous Man; and all this may
be true, which you have said: but that we may be the better satisfied, will you
take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy? I told them, They had said, They
would not ensnare us; but this was a plain Snare: for they knew, we could not
take any Oath. However, they caused the Oath to be read: and when they had
done, I told them, I never took Oath in my Life; but I had always been true to
the Government. That I was cast into the Dungeon at Darby, and kept a Prisoner
Six Months there, because I would not take up Arms against King Charles at
Worcester-Fight; and for going to Meetings, was carried up out of
Leicestershire, and brought before Oliver Cromwell, as a Plotter to bring in
King Charles. And ye know, said I, in your own Consciences, that we, the People
called Quakers, cannot take an Oath, or Swear in any Case, because Christ has
forbidden it. But as to the Matter, or Substance contained in the Oaths, this I
can and do say, that I do own and acknowledge the King of England to be lawful
Heir and Successor to the Realm of England; and do abhor all Plots and
Plotters, and Contrivances against him: and I have nothing in my Heart, but
Love and Good Will to him and all Men, and desire his and their Prosperity, the
Lord knows it, before whom I stand an Innocent Man. And as to the Oath of
Supremacy, I deny the Pope, and his Power, and his Religion; and abhor it with
my Heart. While I was speaking to them, they cried, Give him the Book: And I
said, The Book says, Swear not at all. Then they cried, Take him away Jailer;
and I still speaking on, they were Urgent upon the Jailer, crying, Take him
away; we shall have a Meeting here: Why do you not take him away? That Fellow
(meaning the Jailer) loves to hear him preach. Then the Jailer drew me away:
and as I was turning from them, I stretched out my Arm, and said, The Lord
forgive you, who cast me into Prison for Obeying the Doctrine of Christ. Thus
they apparently brake their Promise in the face of the Country: for they
promised, I should have free Liberty to speak; but now they would not give it
me: and they promised, they would not ensnare us; yet now they tendered me the
Oaths, on purpose to ensnare me.

Worcester- Jail.
After I was had away, Thomas Lower was stayed behind in the Court; and they
told him, He was at Liberty. Then he would have reasoned with them, asking
them, Why I might not be set at Liberty, as well as he, seeing we were both
taken together, and our Case was alike* But they told him, They would not hear
him; saying, You may be gone about your business, for we have nothing more to
say to you, seeing you are discharged: And this was all he could get from them.
Wherefore after the Court was risen, he went to speak with them at their
Chamber, desiring to know, What Cause they had to detain his Father, seeing
they had discharged him; and wishing them to consider, whether this was not
Partiality, and would be a Blemish to them. Whereupon Simpson threatened him,
saying, If you be not Content, we will tender you the Oaths also, and send you
to your Father. To which he replied, They might do that, if they thought fit:
But whether they sent him or no, he intended to go, and wait upon his Father in
Prison; for that was now his business in that Country. Then said Justice Parker
to him, Do you think, Mr. Lower, 1673. Worcester-Jail.
that I had not Cause to send your Father and you to Prison, when you had such
a great Meeting, insomuch that the Parson of the Parish Complained to me, that
he has lost the greatest part of his Parishioners; so that when he comes
amongst them, he has scarce any Auditors left. I have heard, replied Thomas
Lower, that the Priest of that Parish comes so seldom to visit his Flock, (but
once, it may be, or twice in a Year, to gather up his Tithes) that it was but
Charity in my Father, to visit such a forlorn and forsaken Flock: And therefore
thou had no Cause to send my Father to Prison for visiting them, or for
Teaching, Instructing and Directing them to Christ their true Teacher, who had
so little Comfort or Benefit from their pretended Pastor, who comes amongst
them only to seek for his Gain from his Quarter. Upon this the Justices fell a
laughing; for it seems Dr. Crowder (who was the Priest they spoke of) was then
in the Room sitting among them; though Thomas Lower did not know him: and he
had the Wit to hold his Tongue, and not undertake to Vindicate himself, in a
matter so notoriously known to be true. But when Thomas Lower was come from
them, the Justices did so play upon Dr. Crowder, that he was pitifully ashamed;
and so nettled with it, that he threatened to Sue Thomas Lower in the Bishop's
Court, upon an Action of Defamation. Which when Thomas Lower heard of, he sent
him Word, that he would Answer his Suit, let him begin it when he would; and
would bring his whole Parish in Evidence against him: And this cooled the
Doctor. Yet some time after he came to the Prison, pretending, that he had a
mind to Dispute with me, and to talk with Tho. Lower about that business; and
he brought another with him, he himself being then a Prebend at Worcester.

When he came in, he asked me, What I was in Prison for? 'Dost not thou know
that, said I? Wast not thou upon the Bench, when Justice Simpson and Parker
tendered the Oath to me? And had not thou an hand in it? Then he said, It is
lawful to Swear: and Christ did not forbid Swearing before a Magistrate; but
Swearing by the Sun, and the like. I bid him ' Prove that by the Scriptures:
but he could not. Then he brought that Saying of Paul's; All things are lawful
unto me, 1 Cor. 6.12. And if, said he, all things were lawful unto him, then
Swearing was lawful unto him. By this Argument, said I, thou may also
affirm, that Drunkenness, Adultery, and all manner of Sin and Wickedness is
lawful also, as well as Swearing. Why, said Dr. Crowder, Do you hold, that
Adultery is unlawful? Yes, said I, that I do. Why, Then (said he) this
Contradicts the Saying of St. Paul. Thereupon I called to the Prisoners and the
Jailer, to hear, what Doctrine Dr. Crowder had laid down for Orthodox, viz.
That Drunkenness, Swearing, Adultery, and such like things, were lawful. Then
he said, He would give it under his Hand: and took a Pen, but writ another
thing, than he had spoken. Then turning to Thomas Lower, he asked him, Whether
he would Answer, what he had there written? Who undertook it. Whereupon, when
he had threatened Tho. Lower to Sue him in the Bishop's Court, for speaking so
Abusively (as he called it) of him before the Justices; and Thomas had bid him
Begin, when he pleased, for he would Answer him, and bring his Parishioners in
Evidence against him; he went away in a great Fret, grumbling to himself, as he
went. A few days after Tho. Lower sent him an Answer to the Paper he had writ,
and left with him: which Answer a Friend of Worcester carried to him, and he
read it, and said, He would Reply to it; but never did, though he often sent
him word, He would do it.

Soon after the Sessions were over, the Term coming on, an Habeas Corpus was
sent down to Worcester, for the Sheriff to bring me up to the King's-Bench-Bar.
Whereupon, the Undersheriff, having made Tho. Lower his Deputy, to Convey me
to London, we set forth out of Worcester on the Twenty Ninth of the Eleventh
Month 1673, and came to London, London.
the Second Day of the Twelfth Month; the Ways being very deep, and the Waters
out. Next day Notice being given, that I was brought up, the Sheriff was
Ordered to bring me into Court. I went accordingly, King's-Bench-Bar.
and did Appear in Court before Judge Wild; and both he and the Lawyers were
pretty fair, so that I had time to speak, to clear my Innocence, and show my
wrong Imprisonment. After the Return of the Writ was entered, I was Ordered to
be brought into Court again next Day; the Order of Court being as follows.

Worcester. The King against George Fox.
Thursday, next after the Morrow of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin
Mary, in the 26th Year of King Charles the Second.
THe Defendant being brought here into Court, upon a Writ of Habeas Corpus ad
Subjiciend' etc. under the Custody of the Sheriff of the County aforesaid; it
is Ordered, That the Return unto the Habeas Corpus he Filed, and the Defendant
is Committed unto the Marshal of this Court, to be safely kept, until, etc.

By Motion of Mr. G. Stroude. By the Court.

Accordingly I went in the Morning, and walked in the Hall, till the Sheriff
came to me (for he trusted me to go, whither I would:) and it being Early, we
went into the Court of the King's Bench, and sat there among the Lawyers
almost an Hour, till the Judges came in. When the Judges came in, the Sheriff
took off my Hat; and after a while I was called: and the Lord's Presence was
with me, and his Power I felt was over all. I stood and heard the King's
Attorney, whose Name was J^nes, who indeed spoke notably on my behalf, as did
also another Counselor after him; and the Judges, who were Three, were all
very moderate, not casting any reflecting Words at me. So I stood still in the
Power and Spirit of the Lord, seeing, how the Lord was at Work, and the Earth
was helping the Woman. 1673. London. King's-Bench-Bar.
But when they had done, I applied my self to the Chief Justice, desiring. That
I might speak: and he said, I might. Then I related the Cause of our Journey,
the Manner of our being Taken and Committed, and the Time of our Imprisonment,
until the Sessions; with a brief Account of our Trial at the Sessions, and what
I had offered to the Justices then, as a Declaration, that I could make or
sign, instead of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy. When I had done, the
Chief Justice said, I was to be turned over to the King's Bench, and the
Sheriff of Worcester to be discharged of me. He said also, That they would
consider farther of it; and if they found any Error in the Record, or in the
Justices Proceedings, I should be set at Liberty. So a Tipstaff was called to
take me into Custody, and he delivered me to the Keeper of the King's Bench,
who let me go to a Friend's House, where I lodged; and appo^nted to meet me at
Edward Man's in Bishopsgate-Street next Day. But after this, Justice Parker, or
some other of my Adversaries moved the Court, That I might be sent back to
Worcester. Whereupon another Day was appointed for another Hearing; and they
had Four Counsels, that pleaded against me: and there was one George Stroud, a
Counselor, that pleaded for me; and was pleading, before I was brought into
the Court: but they bore him down, King's-Bench-Bar.
and prevailed with the Judges to give Judgment, That I should be sent down to
Worcester-Sessions. Only they told me, I might put in Bail to Appear at the
Sessions, and to be of the good Behavior in the mean time. But I told them, I
was never in Ill Behavior in my Life; and that they, the Four Judges might as
well put the Oath to me there, as send me to Worcester to be ensnared by the
Justices, in their putting the Oath to me, and then premuniring me, who never
took Oath in my Life. But, I told them, if I brake my Yea or Nay, I was content
to suffer the same Penalty, which they should, that break their Oaths. This
Alteration of the Judges Minds in my Case proceeded (as was thought) from some
false Informations, that my Adversary Justice Parker had given against me: For
between the times of my former Appearance and this, he had spread abroad a very
false and malicious Story, viz. That there were many substantial men with me,
out of several parts of the Nation, when he took me, and that we had a Design
or Plot in hand; and that Thomas Lower stayed with me in Prison, long after he
was set at Liberty, to carry on our Design. This was spoken in the
Parliament House; insomuch, that if I had not been brought up to London, when I
was, I had been stopped at Worcester, and Thomas had been Recommitted with me.
But although these Lies were easily disproved, and laid open to Parker's Shame,
yet would not the Judges alter their last Sentence; but remanded me to
Worcester-Jail: only this Favor was granted, that I might go down my own Way,
and at my own Leisure; provided, I would be without fail there by the Assize,
which was to begin on the Second Day of the Second Month next following.

So I stayed in and about London, till toward the latter End of the First Month
1674, and then went down leisurely (for I was not able to abide hasty and hard
Travel; Worcester
) and came into Worcester on the last Day of the First Month 1674, being the
Day before the Judges came to Town. 1674. Worcester- Jail.
On the Second Day of the Second Month I was brought from the Jail to an Inn
near the Hall, that I might be in Readiness, if I should be called. But not
being called that Day, the Jailer came to me at Night, and told me, I might go
home, (meaning to the Jail:) Whereupon, Gerrard Roberts of London being with
me, he and I walked down together to the Jail without any Keeper. Next Day
being brought up again, they set a little Boy, of about eleven Years old, to be
my Keeper. I came to understand, that Justice Parker, and the Clark of the
Peace had gived Order, that I should not be put into the Calendar, that so I
might not be brought before the Judge; Wherefore I got the Judge's Son to move
in Court, That I might be called: And thereupon I was called, Worcester- Assizes
and brought up to the Bar before Judge Turner, my old Adversary; who had
tendered me the Oaths, and Premunired me once before at Lancaster. After
Silence made, he asked me, What I did desire? I answered, My Liberty, according
to Justice. He said, I lay upon the Oath; and asked, If I would take it? I
desired, he would hear the Manner of my being Taken and Committed; and he being
silent, I gave him an Account thereof at large, as is before set down: letting
him also know, 'That since my Imprisonment I had understood, that my Mother,
who was an Ancient, Tender Woman, and had desired to see me, before she died;
hearing, that I was stopped and imprisoned in my Journey, so that I was not
likely to come to see her, it struck her so, that she died soon after: which
was a very hard thing to me. When I had done speaking, he again asked me, To
take the Oaths. I told him, I could not take any Oath, for Conscience Sake; and
I did believe, he and they all knew in their Consciences, that it was for
Conscience Sake, I could not Swear at all: But I did declare amongst them, what
I could say, and what I could sign, in owning of the King's Right to the
Government, and in denying the Pope, and his pretended Power; and all Plotters,
Plots and Conspiracies against the Government. Some thought, the Judge had a
mind to have set me at Liberty, for he saw, they had nothing Justly against me;
but Parker, who Committed me, endeavored to incense him against me, telling
him, That I was a Ringleader: that many of the Nation followed me, and he knew
not, what it might come to; with many more envious Words, which some that stood
near, took notice of: who also observed, that the Judge gave him never a Word
in Answer to it. However, the Judge willing to ease himself, referred me and my
Case to the Sessions again; bidding the Justices make an End of it there, and
not trouble the Assizes any more with me. So I was continued Prisoner, chiefly
(as it seemed) through the means of Justice Parker, who in this Case, was as
false, as envious: for he had promised Richard Cannon of London (who had, it
seems, Acquaintance with him) That he would endeavor to have me set at
Liberty; and yet he was the worst Enemy I had in Court, as some of the Court
observed and reported. Other of the Justices were very loving, and promised,
That I should have the Liberty of the Town, and to lodge at a Friend's House,
till the Sessions: Which accordingly I had; and the People were very civil and
respectful to me.

Between this time and the Sessions (having the Liberty of the Town for my
Health's sake) I had some Service for the Lord, 1674. Worcester- Prisoner.
with several People, that came to Visit me. For at one time there came Three
Non conformist Priests, and two Lawyers to discourse with me; and one of the
Priests undertook to prove, That the Scriptures are the only Rule of Life.
Whereupon, after I had plunged him about his Proof, I had a fit Opportunity to
open unto them The right and proper Use, Service and Excellency of the
Scriptures; and also to show, that the Spirit of God, which was given to every
one to profit withal, and the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, and
which has appeared to all men, and teaches them that obey it, to deny
Ungodliness and Worldly Lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in
this present World; that this, I say, is the most fit, proper and universal
Rule, which God has given to all Mankind to rule, direct, govern and order
their Lives by.

Another time there came a Common-Prayer-Priest, and some People with him; and
he asked me, If I was grown up to Perfection? I told him; 'What I was, I was by
the Grace of God. He replied, It was a modest and civil Answer. Then he urged
the Words of John; If we say, that we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and
the Truth is not in us: And he asked, What did I say to that? I said with the
same Apostle, If we say, that we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his
Word is not in us; who came to destroy Sin, and to take away Sin. So there is a
Time for People to see, that they have sinned, and there is a Time for them to
see, that they have Sin; and there is a Time for them to Confess their Sin, and
to forsake it, and to know the Blood of Christ to cleanse from all Sin. Then
the Priest was asked, 'Whether Adam was not perfect, before he fell? and
whether all God's Works were not perfect? The Priest said, There might be a
Perfection, as Adam had, and a falling from it. But I told him, There is a
Perfection in Christ above Adam, and beyond falling; and that it was the Work
of the Ministers of Christ, to present every man perfect in Christ, and for the
Perfecting of them, they had their Gifts from Christ: And therefore they, that
denied Perfection, denied the Work of the Ministry, and the Gifts, which Christ
gave for the Perfecting of the Saints. The Priest said, We must always be
striving. But I told him, It was a sad and comfortless sort of striving, to
strive with a Belief, that we should never Overcome. I told him also, that
Paul, who cried out of the Body of Death, did also Thank God, who gave him the
Victory, through our Lord Jesus Christ: So there was a time of Crying out for
Want of Victory; and a time of Praising God for the Victory. And Paul said,
There is no Condemnation to them, that are in Christ Jesus. The Priest said,
Job was not perfect. I told him, God said, Job was a perfect Man, and that he
did shun Evil: and the Devil was forced to confess, that God had set an Hedge
about him; which was not an outward Hedge, but the invisible, heavenly Power.
The Priest said, Job said, He charge his Angels with Folly, and the Heavens
are not clean in his sight. I told him, That was his Mistake: for it was not
Job said so; but Eliphaz, who contended against Job. Well but, said the Priest,
What say you to that Scripture; The justest Man that is, sins seven times a
Day. Why truly (said I) I say, there is no such Scripture: and with that the
Priest's Mouth was stopped. 1674. Worcester-Quarter-Sessions
Many other Services I had with several sorts of People between the Assizes and
the Sessions.

The next Quarter Sessions began on the Twenty Ninth Day of the Second Month;
and there I was called before the Justices. The Chair-man's Name was -- Street,
who was a Judge in the Welsh Circuit, and he misrepresented me and my Case to
the Country, telling them; That we had a Meeting at Tredington from all parts
of the Nation, to the terrifying of the King 's Subjects, for which we had been
committed to Prison: That for the Trial of my Fidelity the Oaths were put to
me; and having had time to consider of it, he a^ked me, If I would now take the
Oaths? I desired Liberty to speak for my self: and having obtained that, began
first to clear my self from those Falsehoods, he had charged on me and Friends;
declaring, That we had not any such Meeting from all parts of the Nation, as he
had represented it; but that (except the Friend, from whose House we came, and
who came with us to guide us thither, and one Friend of Bristol, who came
accidentally, or rather providentially, to assist my Wife homewards, after we
were taken) they that were with me, were in a sense part of my own Family,
being my Wife and her Daughter, and her Son-in-Law. And we did not Meet in any
way or manner, that would occasion Terror to any of the King's Subjects; for we
met peaceably and quietly, without Arms: and I did not believe, there could any
one be produced, that could truly say, he was terrified with our Meeting.
Besides, I told them, we were but in our Journey; the Occasion whereof I now
again related, as before. Then as to the Oaths, I showed, why I could not take
them, (seeing, Christ has forbidden all Swearing;) and what I could say or
sign in lieu of them, as I had done before. Yet they caused the Oaths to be
read to me again, and afterward read an Indictment also, which they had drawn
up in Readiness; having a Jury ready also. Now when the Indictment was read,
the Judge asked me, If I was Guilty? I said, Nay; for it was a great Bundle of
Lies: which I showed and proved to the Judge in several particulars, which I
instanced; asking him, if he did not know in his Conscience, that they were
Lies? He said, It was their Form. I said, 'It was not a true Form. He asked me
again, Whether I was Guilty? I told him, Nay, I was not Guilty of the Matter,
nor of the Form: for I was against the Pope and Popery, and did acknowledge,
and should set my Hand to that. Then the Judge told the Jury, what they should
say, and what they should do, and what they should write on the Backside of
the Indictment; and as he said, they did. But before the Jury gave in their
Verdict, I spoke to them, and told them, That it was for Christ's sake, and in
Obedience to his and his Apostle's Command, that I could not swear: and
therefore (said I) take heed, what ye do; for before his Judgment Seat ye shall
all be brought. The Judge said, This is Canting, (a base Word!) I said, If to
Confess Christ our Lord and Savior, and to obey his Command, be called Canting
by a Judge of a Court, it is to little purpose for me to say more among you:
Yet ye shall see, that I am a Christian, and shall show forth Christianity; and
my Innocence shall be manifest. So the Jailer led me out of the Court; and the
People were generally Tender, like as if they had been in a Meeting. Soon after
I was brought in again, and the Jury found the Bill against me, which I
Traversed; and then I was asked to put in Bail, till the next Sessions, and the
Jailer's Son offered to be bound for me. But I stopped him, and warned Friends
not to meddle, for I told them, 'There was a Snare in that: Yet I told the
Justices, that I could promise to Appear, if the Lord gave Health and Strength,
and I were at Liberty. Some of the Justices were loving, and would have stopped
the rest from Indicting me, or putting the Oath to me: but Judge Street, who
was the Chairman, said; He must go according to Law. So I was sent back to
Prison again; Worcester- Prison
yet within two Hours after, through the Moderation of some of the Justices, I
had Liberty given me to go at large, till next Quarter Sessions. These moderate
Justices (it was said) desired Justice Parker to write to the King for my
Liberty, or for a Noli prosequi (as they called it;) because they were
satisfied, I was not such a dangerous Person, as I had been represented: and
this (it was said) he promised them to do, but did it not.

After I had gotten a Copy of the Indictment against me, I went up to London,
visiting Friends as I went. And when I came there, London.
some that were Earnest to get me out of the Hands of those Envious Justices,
that sought to Praemunire me at Worcester, would needs be tampering again, to
bring me before the Judges of the King's Bench: Whereupon I was brought again
by an Habeas Corpus before them. King's-Bench-Bar.
And I tendered them a Paper, in which was contained, what I could say instead
of the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, as follows:

THis I do in the Truth, and in the Presence of God declare, that King Charles
the Second is lawful King of this Realm, and of all other his Dominions; and
that he was brought in, and set up King over this Realm by the Power of God:
and I have nothing, but Love and Good Will to him and all his Subjects, and
desire his Prosperity and Eternal Good. And I do utterly abhor and deny the
Pope's Power and Supremacy, and all his Superstitions and Idolatrous
Inventions; and do affirm, that he has no Power to Absolve Sin: And I do abhor
and detest his Murdering of Princes, or other People, by Plots or
Contrivances. And likewise I do deny all Plots and Contrivances, and Plotters
and Contrivers against the King and his Subjects; knowing them to be the Works
of Darkness, and the Fruits of an Evil Spirit, and against the Peace of the
Kingdom, and not from the Spirit of God, the Fruit of which is Love. I dare not
take an Oath, because it is forbidden by Christ and the Apostle; but if I break
my Yea or Nay, then let me suffer the same Penalty, as they that break their
Oaths.

George Fox.

But the Business being so far proceeded in at Worcester, they would not meddle
in it; but left me, as I was, to Appear again before the Justices, at the next
General Quarter Sessions at Worcester.

1674. London. Yearly Meeting.
Mean while the Yearly Meeting of Friends came on, at which, (through the
Liberty granted me till the Sessions) I was present; and exceeding glorious the
Meetings were, beyond Expression, blessed be the Lord.

After the Yearly Meeting was over, and Friends out of the Countries were
pretty generally returned home, Worcester
I set forward again for Worcester, the Sessions drawing on; which were held in
the Fifth Month. And when I was called to the Bar, Worcester- Sessions.
and the Indictment read, some Scruple arising among the Jury concerning it,
the Judge of the Court, who was Justice Street, caused the Oaths to be read,
and tendered to me again. I told him, I came now to Try the Traverse of my
Indictment; and that his tendering me the Oaths anew, was a new Snare. Then I
desired him to Answer me a Question or two: and I asked him, Whether the Oaths
were to be tendered to the King's Subjects, or to the Subjects of Foreign
Princes? He said, To the Subjects of this Realm. Then said I, You have not
named me a Subject in the Indictment, and therefore have not brought me within
the Statute. The Judge cried, Read the Oath to him: I said, I require Justice.
Again, I asked him, Whether the Sessions ought not to have been holden for the
King, and the Body of the County? He said, Yes. Then said I, You have there
left the King out of the Indictment; how then can you proceed upon this
Indictment to a Trial between the King and me, seeing the King is left out? He
said, The King was in before. But I told him, 'The King's (Name) being left
out, here was a great Error in the Indictment, and sufficient (as I was
informed) to quash it. Besides, I told him, that I was Committed by the Name of
George Fox of London; but now I was Indicted by the Name of George Fox of
Tredington in the County of Worcester: And I wished the Jury to consider, how
they could find me Guilty upon that Indictment, seeing, I was not of the Place
in the Indictment mentioned? The Judge did not deny, but there were Errors in
the Indictment; but said, I might take my Remedy in their proper place. I
answered, Ye know, we are a People that suffer all things, and bear all things;
and therefore ye thus use us, because we cannot revenge our selves: but we
leave our Cause to the Lord. The Judge said, The Oath has been tendered to you
several times; and we will have some Satisfaction from you concerning the Oath.
I offered them the same Declaration instead of the Oath, which I had offered to
the Judges above; but it would not be accepted. Then I desired to know, Seeing
they put the Oath anew to me, whether the Indictment was quashed, or no?
Instead of answering me, the Judge told the Jury, They might go out. Some of
the Jury were not satisfied; whereupon the Judge told them, They had heard a
Man Swear, that the Oath was tendered to me the last Sessions: and then he told
them, what they should do. I told him, He should leave the Jury to their own
Consciences. However, the Jury, being put on by him, went forth; and soon after
came in again, and found me Guilty. I spoke to the Jury, and asked them, How
they could satisfy themselves to find me Guilty upon that Indictment, which
was laid so false, and had so many Errors in it? They could make but little
Answer; yet one, who seemed to be the Worst of them, would have taken me by the
Hand: But I put him by, saying, How now Judas, have thou betrayed me, and do
thou now come with a Kiss? 1674. Worcester- Sessions.
So I bid him and them Repent. Then the Judge began to tell me, How favorable
the Court had been to me. I asked him, How he could say so? Was ever any man
worse dealt with, than I had been in this Case, who was stopped in my Journey,
being traveling upon my lawful Occasions, and then Imprisoned without Cause;
and now had the Oaths put to me only for a Snare? And I desired him to Answer
me in the Presence of the Lord, in whose Presence we all are,, Whether this
Oath was not tendered me in Envy? He would not answer that, but said; Would you
had never come here, to trouble us and the Country! I told him, I came not
thither of my self, but was brought, being stopped in my Travel on my Journey;
and I did not trouble them, but they had brought Trouble upon themselves. Then
the Judge told me, What a sad Sentence he had to tell me. I asked him, Whether
what he was going to speak, was by way of passing Sentence, or by way of
Information? For, I told him, I had many things to say, and more Errors to
Assign in the Indictment (besides those I had already mentioned) to stop him
from giving Sentence against me upon that Indictment. He said, He was going to
show me the danger of a Praemunire, which was the Loss of my Liberty, and of all
my Goods and Chattels; and to endure Imprisonment during Life. But he said, He
did not deliver this, as the Sentence of the Court upon me; but as an
Admonition to me: and then he bid the Jailer, Take me away. I expected to have
been called again, to hear the Sentence; but when I was gone, the Clerk of the
Peace, (whose Name was Twittey) asked him, (as I was informed) Whether that,
which he had spoken to me, should stand for Sentence? And he, consulting with
some of the Justices, told him, Yes; that was the Sentence, and should stand.
This was done behind my Back, to save himself from Shame in the Face of the
Country. Many of the Justices, and the generality of the People were moderate
and civil; and there was one John Ashley, a Lawyer, was very friendly both the
time before, and now, speaking on my behalf, and pleading the Errors of the
Indictment for me: But Justice Street, who was Judge of the Court, would not
regard, but overruled all. This Justice Street said to some Friends in the
Morning before my Trial, That if he had been upon the Bench the first Sessions,
he would not have tendered me the Oath: but if I had been Convicted of being at
a Conventicle, he would have proceeded against me according to that Law; and
that he was sorry, that ever I came before him: And yet he maliciously tendered
the Oath to me in the Court again, when I was to have Tried my Traverse upon
the Indictment. But the Lord pleaded my Cause, and met with both him and
Justice Simpson, who first ensnared me with the Oath at the first Sessions: For
Simpson's Son was Arraigned not long after, at the same Bar for Murder. And
Street, who, as he came down from London, (after the Judges had returned me
back from the King's Bench to Worcester, said; Now I was returned to them, I
should lie in Prison, and rot: had his Daughter, (whom he so doted on, that she
was called his Idol) brought down dead from London in an Hearse, to the same
Inn, where he spoke those Words; and brought to Worcester to be buried within a
few days after. And People took notice of the Hand of God, 1674. Worcester-
Prison
how sudden it was upon him: but it rather hardened, than tendered him, as his
Carriage afterward showed.

After I was carried back to Prison, several came to see me, and amongst
others, the Earl of Salisbury's Son; who was very loving, and troubled, that
they had dealt so badly by me. He stayed about two Hours with me, and took a
Copy of the Errors in the Indictment himself in Writing.

The Sessions being now over, and I fixed in Prison by a Praemunire, my Wife came
up to me out of the North, to be with me: And the Assizes coming on soon after,
in the Sixth Month, the State of my Case being drawn up in Writing, She and
Thomas Lower delivered it to Judge Wild. In it was set forth the Occasion of my
Journey; the Manner of my being Taken and Imprisoned; the Proceedings of the
several Sessions against me; and the Errors in the Indictment by which I was
Premunired: which having had Occasion to mention often before, I forbear to
repeat here. When the Judge had read it, he shook his Head, and said; We might
Try the Validity or Invalidity of the Errors, if we would: And that was all
they could get from him.

While thus I lay in Prison, it came upon me to state our Principle to the
King; not with particular Relation to my own Sufferings, but for his better
Information concerning our Principle, and us as a People. It was thus, and thus
Directed:

To the KING.
THe Principle of the Quakers is the Spirit of Christ, who Died for us, and is
Risen for our Justification; by which we know, we are his, and he dwells in
us by his Spirit: and by the Spirit of Christ we are led out of Unrighteousness
and Ungodliness. It brings us to deny all Plottings and Contrivings against the
King, or any Man: And the Spirit of Christ brings us to deny all manner of
Ungodliness, as Lying, Theft, Murder, Adultery, Fornication and all Uncleanness
and Debauchery, Malice and Hatred, Deceit, Cousening and Cheating whatsoever,
and the Devil and his Works. And the Spirit of Christ brings us to seek the
Peace and Good of all Men, and to live peaceably; and leads us from such Evil
Works and Actions, as the Magistrate's Sword takes hold upon. And our Desire
and Labor is, that all, who profess themselves Christians, may walk in the
Spirit of Christ; that they, through the Spirit, may mortify the Deeds of the
Flesh, and by the Sword of the Spirit may cut down Sin and Evil in themselves.
Then the Judges and other Magistrates would not have so much Work in punishing
Sin in the Kingdom; neither then need Kings or Princes fear any of their
Subjects, if they all walked in the Spirit of Christ: For the Fruits of the
Spirit are Love, Righteousness, Goodness, Temperance, etc. And if all, that
profess themselves Christians, did walk in the Spirit of Christ, and by it did
mortify Sin and Evil, it would be a great Ease to the Magistrates and Rulers,
and would free them from a great deal of Trouble: For it would lead all Men and
Women To do unto all others, as they would have others do unto them; and so the
Royal Law of Liberty would be fulfilled. For if all, that are called
Christians, did walk in the Spirit of Christ, by it to have the Evil Spirit and
its Fruits mortified, and cut down in them; then, not being led by the Evil
Spirit, but by the good Spirit of Christ, the Fruits of the good Spirit would
appear in all Men and Women: for as People are led by the good Spirit of
Christ, it leads them out of Sin and Evil, which the Magistrate's Sword takes
hold upon; and so would be an Ease to the Magistrates. But as People err from
this good Spirit of Christ, and follow the Evil Spirit, which leads them into
Sin and Evil; that Spirit brings the Magistrate into a great deal of Trouble,
to Execute the Law upon the Sinners and Transgressors of the good Spirit. That
Spirit, that leads People from all manner of Sin and Evil, is one with the
Magistrate's Power, and with the righteous Law: for the Law being added because
of Transgression; that Spirit, that leads out of Transgression, must needs be
One with that Law, that is against Transgressors. So that Spirit, that leads
out of Transgression, is the good Spirit of Christ, and is One with the
Magistrates in the Higher Power, and owns it and them: But that Spirit, that
leads into Transgression, is the bad Spirit, and is against the Law, and
against the Magistrates; and makes them a great deal of Troublesome Work. Now
the Manifestation of the good Spirit is given to every Man to profit withal;
and no Man can profit in the Things of God, but by the Spirit of God, which
brings to deny all Sin and Evil. It is said of Israel, Nehem. 9. The Lord gave
them his good Spirit to instruct them, yet they rebelled against it: But if all
People did mind this Manifestation of the Spirit, which God has given to
instruct them, it would lead them to forsake all manner of Sin and Evil;
Enmity, Hatred, Malice, and all manner of Unrighteousness and Ungodliness, and
to mortify it. And then in the Spirit of Christ they would have Fellowship and
Unity, which is the Bond of Peace; and then would Love and Peace, which are the
Fruits of the good Spirit, flow among all them, that are called Christians.

Now we are a People, who in Tenderness of Conscience to the Command of Christ
and of his Apostle, cannot Swear: for we are commanded in Matthew. 5. and James
5. to keep to Yea and Nay, and not to Swear at all: not by Heaven, nor by
Earth, nor by any other Oath lest we go into Evil, and fall into Condemnation.
The Words of Christ are these; Ye have heard, that it has been said by (or to)
them of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, but shall perform unto the
Lord thine Oaths: These were true and solemn Oaths; which they who made, ought
to perform in Old Time: But these Christ and his Apostle forbids in the
Gospel Times, as well as false and vain Oaths. Now if we could take any Oath at
all, we could take the Oath of Allegiance, as knowing, that King Charles was by
the Power of God brought into England, and set up King of England, etc. over
the Heads of our Old Persecutors: And as for the Pope's Supremacy, we do
utterly deny it. But Christ and the Apostle having commanded us Not to Swear,
but to keep to Yea and Nay, we dare not break their Commands: and therefore
many have put the Oaths to us, as a Snare, that they might make a Prey of us.
So our denying to Swear, is not in Wilfulness, Stubbornness, or Contempt; but
only in Obedience to the Command of Christ and his Apostle And we are content,
if we break our Yea and Nay, to suffer the same Penalty, as they should, that
break their Oaths. We desire therefore, that the King would take this into his
Consideration, and how long we have Suffered in this Case. This is from one,
who desires the Eternal Good and Prosperity of the King, and of all his
Subjects in the Lord Jesus Christ.

G. F.

About this time I had a fit of Sickness, which brought me very low and weak in
my Body; and I continued so a pretty while, insomuch that some Friends began to
doubt of my Recovery: and I seemed to my self to be amongst the Graves and dead
Corpses. Yet the Invisible Power did secretly support me, and conveyed
refreshing Strength into me; even when I was so Weak, that I was almost
Speechless. And one Night, as I was lying awake upon my Bed in the Glory of the
Lord, which was over all, it was said unto me; That the Lord had a great Deal
more Work for me to do for him, before he took me to himself.

Endeavors were used to get me Released, at least for a Time, till I was grown
stronger; but the Way of Effecting it proving difficult and tedious (for the
King was not willing to Release me by any other way, than a Pardon, being told,
he could not Legally do it: and I was not willing (...) be Released by a
Pardon, which he would readily have given me; because I did not look upon that
way, as agreeable with the Innocence of my Cause) a Friend, one Edward Pitway,
having Occasion to speak with Justice Parker upon some other Business, desired
him to give Order to the Jailer, That, in regard of my Weakness, I might have
Liberty to go out of the Jail into the City. Whereupon Justice Parker wrote the
following Letter to the Jailer, and sent it to the Friend to deliver.

Mr. Harris,
I Have beeen much importuned by some Friends to George Fox, to write to you. I
am informed by them, that he is in a very weak Condition, and very much
Indisposed: What lawful Favor you can do, for the Benefit of the Air for his
Health, pray show him. I suppose, the next Term they will make Application to
the King. I am,

Sir, Your loving Friend HENRY PARKER.
Evesham, the 8th of October. 1674.

After this my Wife went to London, and spoke with the King; laying before him
my long and unjust Imprisonment, with the Manner of my being taken, and the
Justices Proceedings against me, in tendering me the Oath, as a Snare, whereby
they had Premunired me: so that I being now his Prisoner, it was in his. Power,
and at his Pleasure to Release; which she desired. The King spoke kindly to
her, and referred her to the Lord Keeper: to whom she went, but could not
obtain, what she desired; for he said, The King could not Release me otherwise,
than by a Pardon: And I was not free to receive a Pardon, knowing, I had not
done Evil. And if I would have been freed by a Pardon, I needed not have lain
so long; for the King was willing to have given me a Pardon long before, and
told Thomas Moore, that I need not scruple being Released by a Pardon; for many
a Man, that was as Innocent as a Child, had had a Pardon granted him: Yet I
could not Consent to have one. For I had rather have lain in Prison all my
Days, than have come out in any way dishonorable to Truth: Wherefore I chose
to have the Validity of my Indictment Tried before the Judges. And thereupon,
having first had the Opinion of a Counselor upon it (one Thomas Corbet of
London, whom Richard Davis of Welchpool was well acquainted with, and
recommended to me) an Habeas Corpus was sent down to Worcester to bring me up
once more to the King's-Bench-Bar, for the Trial of the Errors in my
Indictment. The Undersheriff set forward with me on the Fourth Day of the
Twelfth Month, there being with us in the Coach the Clerk of the Peace, and
some others. The Clerk had been my Enemy all along; and now sought to Ensnare
me in Discourse: but I saw, and shunned him. He asked me, What I would do with
the Errors in the Indictment? I told him, They should be Tried, and every
Action should Crown it self. He quarrelled with me for calling their Ministers
Priests: I asked him, 'If the Law did not call them so? Then he asked me, What
I thought of the Church of England? Was there no Christians among them? I said,
They are all called so; and there are many tender People amongst them. London.
We came to London on the Eighth of the Twelfth Month, and on the Eleventh I
was brought before the Four Judges at the King's Bench, King's-Bench-Bar.
where Counselor Corbet pleaded my Cause. He started a New Plea: for he told
the Judges, That they could not Imprison any Man upon a Praemunire. Whereupon
the Chief Justice Hales said, Mr. Corbet, You should have come sooner, at the
beginning of the Term with this Plea: He Answered, We could not get a Copy of
the Return, and of the Indictment. The Judge replied; You should have told us,
and we would have forced them to have made a Return sooner. Then said Judge
Wild, Mr. Corbet, you go upon General Terms; and if it be so, as you say, we
have Committed many Errors at the Old Baily, and in other Courts. Corbet was
positive, that by Law they could not Imprison upon a Praemunire. The Judge said,
There is Summons in the Statute. Yes, said Corbet, but Summons is not
Imprisonment: for Summons is in Order to a Trial. Well, said the Judge, We must
have time to look in our Books, and consult the Statutes: So the Hearing was
put off till the next Day. The next Day they chose rather to let this Plea
fall, and begin with the Errors of the Indictment; and when they came to be
opened, they were so many and gross, that the Judges were all of Opinion, That
the Indictment was quashed and void, and that I ought to have my Liberty. There
were that Day several Great Men, Lords and others, who had the Oaths of
Allegiance and Supremacy tendered unto them in open Court, just before my Trial
came on: and some of my Adversaries moved the Judges, that the Oaths might be
Tendered again to me, telling them; I was a dangerous Man to be at Liberty. But
Judge Hales, who was then Chief Justice of England, 1674. King's-Bench-Bar.
said: He had indeed heard some such Reports of me; but he had also heard many
more good Reports of me: and so he and the rest of the Judges ordered me to be
freed by Proclamation. Thus after I had suffered Imprisonment a Year, and
almost Two Months for nothing, I was fairly set at Liberty upon a Trial of the
Errors in my Indictment, without receiving any Pardon, or coming under any
Obligation or Engagement at all: and the Lord's Everlasting Power went over
all, to his Glory and Praise, and to the magnifying of his Name for ever! Amen.
Counselor Corbet, who pleaded for me, got great Fame by it; for many of the
Lawyers came to him, and told him, He had brought that to Light, which had not
been known before; as to the not Imprisoning upon a Praemunire: And after the
Trial a Judge said to them, You have attained a great deal of Honor by
Pleading George Fox 's Cause so in Court.

During the time of my Imprisonment in Worcester, (notwithstanding my Ilness
and Want of Health, and my being so often hurried to and fro to London, and
back again) I writ several Books for the Press; one whereof was called, A
Warning to England. Another was, To the Jews, proving by the Prophets, that the
Messiah is come. Another, Concerning Inspiration, Revelation and Prophecy.
Another, Against all vain Disputes. Another, For all Bishops and Ministers, to
try themselves by the Scriptures. Another, To such as say, We love none but
our selves. Another Entitled, Our Testimony concerning Christ. And another
little Book concerning Swearing; being the first of those Two, that were given
to the Parliament. Besides these I writ many Papers and Epistles to Friends, to
Encourage and strengthen them in their Services for God, which some (who had
made Profession of Truth, but had given way to a Seducing Spirit, and were
departed from the Unity and Fellowship of the Gospel, in which Friends stand)
endeavored to Discourage them from; especially in their diligent and watchful
Care for the well-ordering and managing the Affairs of the Church of Christ:
Which may be read amongst the rest of my Epistles.

London.
Now after I was set at Liberty, I visited the Friends in London; and having for
some time been very Weak, and not yet well recovered, I went down to Kingston
for a little Season. Kingston.
But I did not stay long there; London.
but having visited the Friends there, I returned to London again, and writ a
Paper to the Parliament, and sent several Books to them. And a great Book
against Swearing had been delivered to them a little before; the Reasonableness
whereof had so much Influence upon many of them, something toward our Relief
therein, if they had sat longer. I staid in and near London,
London-Yearly-Meeting.
until the Yearly Meeting came on; to which Friends came up from most Parts of
the Nation, and some from beyond the Seas: and a glorious Meeting we had, in
the Everlasting Power of God.

After this Meeting was over, the Parliament being also risen (who had done
nothing for nor against Friends) I was Clear of my Service for the Lord at
London. And having taken my Leave of Friends there, and had a Glorious Meeting
with some of them at John Elson's in the Morning, before I came away, I set
forward from thence, with my Wife and her Daughter Susan by Coach (for I was
not able to travel on Horseback) toward the North; 1675. Highgate. Dunstable.
Newport-Pagnel. Northampton. Cossel.
many Friends accompanying us as far as High-Gate, and some to Dunstable, where
we lodged that Night. Afterward traveling on, we visited Friends, and were
visited by them at Newport-Pagnell, Northampton and Cossel, where (amongst
other Friends, that came to see us) there came a Woman, and brought her
Daughter for me to see, how Well she was; putting me in mind, That when I was
there before, she had brought her to me much troubled with the Disease, called
the King 's Evil, and had then desired me to Pray for her: Which I did, and she
grew Well upon it; praised be the Lord! From Cossel we went on by John
Simcock's and William Gandy's, to Warrington and Preston, and so to Lancaster;
Warrington. Preston.
Friends visiting us, and we them, as we went.

I had not been at Lancaster, Lancaster.
since I was carried Prisoner from thence by the Undersheriff and Jailer,
toward Scarborough-Castle in Yorkshire; and now I found the Town full of
People: for it was both the Fair-time there, and the Trained-Bands were met
there also, upon a General Muster. There were also many Friends in Town, from
several parts of the County; because the Quarterly Meeting for the County was
to be there the next Day. I staid Two Nights and a Day at Lancaster, and
visited Friends both at their Men's- and Womens-Meetings, which were very full,
large and peaceable; for the Lord's Power was over all, and none meddled with
us. Here met us Thomas Lower and his Wife, with Sarah Fell, James Lancaster and
Leonard Fell; and the next Day after the Meeting, being the Twenty Fifth of the
Fourth Month, we went over the Sands, with several other Friend^, Over the
Sands.
and came safe to Swarthmore.

After I had been a while at Swarthmore, Swarthmore.
several Friends from diverse places and parts of the Nation came to visit me;
and some out of Scotland: by whom I understood, that there were Four young
Students of Aberdeen Convinced there this Year, at a Dispute held there by
Robert Barclay and George Keith, with some of the Scholars of that University.

Among others of the Neighborhood, that came to Visit me, Col. Kirby was one,
who had been one of my great Persecutors; but now he said, he came to bid me
Welcome into the Country: and carried himself at this time in Appearance very
lovingly. Yet before I went from Swarthmore, he sent for the Constables of
Vlverstone, and ordered them to come up to me, and to tell me, That we must
have no more Meetings at Swarthmore; for if we had, they were commanded by him
to break them up: and they were to come the next First Day after. That Day we
had a very precious Meeting there, and the Lord's Presence was wonderful
amongst us; and the Constables did not come to disturb us: but the Meetings
have been quiet since, and have increased.

The Ilness I got in my Imprisonment at Worcester, had so much weakened me, that
it was long, before I recovered my Natural Strength again. For which Reason,
and for that I had many things lay upon me to Write, both for public and
private Service, I did not stir much abroad, during the Time, that I now staid
in the North; but when Friends were not with me, spent pretty much time in
writing Books and Papers for Truth's Service. For while I was at Swarthmore, I
gave forth several Books to be Printed, viz.

1675. Swarthmore.
One, Concerning Swearing.

Another, showing; That none are Successors to the Prophets and Apostles, but
who succeed them in the same Power and Holy Ghost, that they were in.

Another, showing; That Possession is above Profession; and how the Professors
now do persecute Christ in Spirit, as the professing Jews did persecute him
outwardly in the Days of his Flesh.

Another little Book, To the Magistrates of Dantzick.

Another, called Cain against Abel, or, An Answer to the New England- men's Laws.

Another, To Friends at Mevis concerning Watching.

Another, A General Epistle to all Friends in Am^rica.

Another, Concerning Caesar 's Due, and God 's Due, etc.

Another, Concerning Ordering of Families.

Another, Entitled; The Spiritual Man judges all things.

Another, Concerning the Higher Power.

Besides these, I writ several Epistles to Friends, both here in England and
beyond the Seas; and Answers to diverse Papers concerning the Running out of
some, who opposed the Order of the Gospel, and had stirred up a great deal of
Strife and Contention in Westmorland. Wherefore I was moved to write a few
Lines particularly to Friends there, directed thus: This is for Friends in
Westmorland.
ALL live in the Power of God, and in his Light and Spirit, which did first
Convince you; that in it ye may keep in the ancient Unity, and in the Humility,
and in the Fear of the Lord, and his gentle and peaceable Wisdom, which is
Easy to be entreated: That in the same Power, Light and Spirit of God ye may
all be serviceable in your Men's and Womens-Meetings, in the Possession of the
Gospel Order, which Gospel, the Power of God, has brought Life and Immortality
to light; that in this ye may see over him, that has darkened you. And in this
Power, the Glorious Gospel, no Apostates can come: for the Power of God was
before the Apostates were, or the Fall of Man and Woman was, or the Devil
either; and will be, when he is gone. Therefore praise God, in his Glorious
Gospel, in which you have an Eternal Fellowship, in the Everlasting Gospel of
Jesus Christ, which is not of Man, nor by Man. And therefore all Friends in
Westmorland, keep in the Power of God, which will and must preserve and cover
you, if ye be preserved. Therefore let your Faith stand in the Power of God,
and not in the Wisdom of Men's Words, lest ye fall: for in God's Power ye have
Peace, Life and Unity; and for want of keeping in God's Power, and in his
Righteousness and Holy Ghost, is all this Strife come among you.

G, F.




I also writ the following General Epistle to Friends at the Yearly Meeting in
London. 1676. Swarthmore.


My Dear Friends and Brethren,
WHom the Lord has preserved by his Eternal Power to this Day, over and
through many Troubles, Storms, and Tempests, and Prisons; and therefore let
every one's Faith stand in the Power of God, which is over the Devil, and
before he was. So your Faith standing in the Invisible Power of God, it stands
in that, which does not change; and the Faith, that Christ Jesus, the Power of
God, is the Author of, it must stand in the Power of God: So then it stands in
that, which is over all; in which they are established. And this the Apostle
brought the Church and the true Christians to: And so ought all the true
Christians Faith now, which Christ is the Author of, it must stand in the Power
of God; in which Power of God the Everlasting Kingdom stands: and so as every
one's Faith stands in the Power of God, this keeps all in the Power of
Godliness.

For as it was in the Days of the Apostles, when some was crying up Paul and
Apollos (and so forth) he judged them as Carnal; and exhorted them, and
admonished them, that their Faith should stand in the Power of God. So it was
not to stand in Men, nor in the Words of Man's Wisdom; but in the Power of God:
And he said, He would not know the Speech of them, but the Power amongst them;
for the Kingdom of God is not in Word, but in Power. And so it is to be now:
Every one's Faith must stand in the Power of God, and not in Men, nor their
Speeches of the good Words. For we have seen by Experience, when they begin to
cry up Men, and their Faith to stand in them; such Men, as would have Peoples
Faith stand in them, loves Popularity, and brings not People's Faith to stand
in the Power of God; and such cannot exalt Christ: And when such fall, they
draw a great Company after them. And therefore the Apostle would not know such
after the Flesh, but would know them, that were in the Power and Spirit; and
struck down every one's Faith, that stood in the Words of Man's Wisdom, that
they might stand in the Power of God: And so it must be now. And all, whose
Faith does not stand in the Power of God, they cannot Exalt his Kingdom, that
stands in Power; and therefore every one's Faith must stand in the Power of God.

And the Apostle denied Popularity, when he Judged the Corinthians, for looking
at Paul and Apollos, to be Carnal; and such are Carnal still: And therefore all
should know one another in the Spirit, Life and Power, and look at Christ; and
this keeps all low and down in the Humility. And they, whose Faith stands in
Men, will make Sects: as in the Days of J. N. and J. P. and since in others:
And such their Faith Christ is not the Author of; and if he be, they have erred
from it, and made Shipwreck of it. And all those, that are in the True Faith,
that stands in the Power of God, they will Judge them as Carnal, and Judge down
that Carnal Part in them, that cries up Paul or Apollos; that their Faith may
stand in the Power of God, and that they may Exalt Christ, the Author of it.
For every one's Eye ought to be to Jesus, the Author and Finisher of their
Faith; and every Just Man and Woman may live by their Faith, which Jesus Christ
is the Author and Finisher of: And by this Faith every Man and Woman may see
God, who is Invisible; which Faith gives the Victory, by which he has Access
to God. And so every one's Faith and Hope standing in the Power of God, in it
they all have Unity and Victory, and Access to God's Throne of Grace; in which
Faith they do please God, which Christ is the Author of. And so by that Faith
they are Saved: and by this Faith they obtain the good Report, and subdue all
the Mountains, that have been betwixt them and God.

So that Power has kept and preserved Friends over their Persecutors, and over
the Wrath of Men, and above the Spoilings of their Goods, and Imprisonments; as
seeing God, that has created all, and gives the Increase of all; and upholds
all by his Word and Power. Therefore let every one's Faith be in his Power: And
here in this no Schism or Sect can come, for it is over them, and before they
were; and will be, when they are gone. But perfect Unity is in the Truth and in
the Spirit, that does Circumcise the Body of Death, and that puts off the Sins
of the Flesh, and plunges it down with the Spirit: And in the Spirit of God
there is a perfect Fellowship; and Christ is the Minister of this Circumcision
and Baptism.

So this is upon me from the Lord, to write unto you all, that every one of
your Faith, that Jesus is the Author of, may stand in the Power of God: and
from the Lord I do warn you, and all every where to the same. For if a Star
should fall, which has been a Light, either the Earth or the Sea does receive
it; that is, the Earthly Mind, or the foaming, raging People: Though neither
the Seed, nor Light, nor Power, nor Truth ever fell, nor the Faith it self, the
Gift of God; but Men going from it, then they become Unsavory.

For Adam, whilst he kept in Truth, and obeyed the Command of God, he was
happy: but when he disobeyed the Lord, he fell under the Power of Satan, and
became unhappy, though he might talk after of his Experiences in Paradise; but
he had lost his Image, and his Power and Dominion, that God Created him in.

And the Jews, after they received the Law of God, as long as they kept the Law
of God, which was just, holy, good and perfect, it kept them good, just, and
holy, and savoury; but when they turned their Backs off the Lord, and forsook
his Law, then they came under the Power of Darkness, and under the Powers of
the Earth, and were trodden under, as unsavory.

And so the Christians, they were called a City set on a Hill, The Light of the
World, and the Salt of the Earth: but when they forsook the Power of God, and
their Faith stood in Words and Men, and not in the Power; then their Walls fell
down, though the Power in it self stood: and they lost their Hill, and their
Saltness, and their Shining. And so as Christendom now does confess, they are
not in the same Power and Spirit, as the Apostles were in; so not in the same
Salt, nor upon the same Hill. So they came to be trodden under, and the Beast,
and the Whore, and the false Prophet are uppermost; the unsavory. So their
Dead Faith is in Men, and in Words; and therefore they are full of Sects, and
one against another.

And now the Everlasting Gospel, the Power of God is preached again, which was
before the Devil was, that had darkened Man; and by this Power of God, the
Gospel, Life and Immortality is come to light again. And therefore every one's
Faith is to stand in this Power, the Gospel, that has brought Life and
Immortality to Light in them; and so to be Heirs of the Power of God, the
Gospel. And here have all Men and Women a Right to the Power of God, before the
Devil was: and the Power of God is the Authority of the Men's- and the
Womens-Meetings, and of all the other Meetings set up thereby.

But now as the Gospel is preached again, if your Faith does not stand in the
Power, but in Men, and in the Wisdom of Words, you will grow Carnal; and such
are for Judgment, who cry up, as they did, Paul and Apollos, and not Christ,
the Author of your Faith. And them that loves to be Popular, would have
People's Faith to stand in them; and such do not preach Christ, but themselves.
But such as preach Christ and his Gospel, would have every Man and Woman to be
in the Possession of it; and so to have every Man and Woman's Faith to stand in
Christ, the Author of it, and in the Power of God, which was before the Devil
was; and it will be, when he is gone. And their Faith standing in the Power of
God, then nothing can get betwixt them and God: For if any should fall amongst
us, as too many have done; then that leads its Followers either into the
Waters, or into the Earth.

And if any should go from the Spirit of Prophecy, that did open to them, and
from the Power; they may speak their Experiences, which the Power has opened
to them formerly. And so might Adam and Eve speak, of what they saw and enjoyed
in Paradise; and so might Cain and Balaam, of what they saw; and also the Jews,
and Corah, and Dathan, who praised God on the Banks, and saw the Victory over
Pharaoh, and they ate of the Manna, and drank of the Rock, and came to Mount
Sinai, and saw the Glory of the Lord. And so also might the false Apostles
speak of their Experiences; and all those false Christians, that turned from
the Apostles and Christ. And so may such do now, that err from the Spirit, that
are come out of Egypt (in Spirit) and Sodom, and have known the Raging of the
Sodomites, as Lot did the outward; and the Pursuit of the Spiritual Egyptians,
as the outward Jew did of the outward Egyptians: yet if they do not Walk in the
Spirit of God, and in the Light, and in the Grace, which keeps their Hearts
stablished, and their Words seasoned, and also their Faith to stand in the
Power of God, in which the Kingdom stands; they may go forth like the false
Christians, and like the Jews, and like Adam and Eve, and Cain, and Corah, and
Balaam, and be wandering Stars, Trees without Fruit, and Wells without Water,
and Clouds without Rain: and so come to be Unsavory, and trodden down. And as
Adam who lost Paradise; and the Jews, who lost the Holy Land, not walking in
the Law, and keeping the Command of God; and as the Christians, who lost the
City, and the Hill, and the Salt, and the Light since the Apostle's Days, and
came to be unsavory, and to be trodden under foot of Men.

And therefore let every one's Faith stand, as I said before, in the Lord's
Power, which is over all, through which they may be built upon the Rock, and
the Foundation of God, the Seed Christ Jesus, that bruises the Head of the
Serpent; who was before he was, and will be, when he is gone: who is the Head
of his Church. So that all in Christ may be always fresh and green; for he is
the green Tree that never withers: and all are fresh and green, that are
grafted into him: and abide in him fresh and green, and bring forth heavenly,
fresh Fruits to the Praise of God. And though Adam and Eve fell from Paradise,
and the Jews fell from the Law of God, and many of the Christians fell from
their Prophecies, and erred from the Faith, and the Spirit, and the Grace; and
the Stars have fallen, as was spoken of in the Revelations: yet the Spirit,
Grace, Faith and Power of God remains.

And many such States have I seen within this Twenty Eight Years; though there
is a State, that shall never fall, nor be deceived in the Elect, before the
World began: who are come to the End of the Prophecies, and are in him, where
they end, and renewed up into the Image of God (by Christ) which Man was in,
before he fell; in that Power, where he had Dominion over all, that God made:
and not only so, but Attain to a perfect Man, unto the measure of the Stature
of the fullness of Christ, who never fell. And in him is the Sitting down in
Life Eternal, where their Feet stand sure and fast in the Gospel, his Power:
and here their Bread is sure; and he that ears this Bread, lives for ever.

And all Friends and Brethren, that do Declare God's Eternal Truth, and Word of
Life, live in it; and be seasoned with Grace, and salted with the Heavenly
Salt, that your Lives and Conversations may preach, wherever you come: That
there be no Rawness, nor no Quenching of the Spirit, nor despising Prophecy
neither in Men nor Women. For all must Meet in the Faith, that Jesus is the
Author of; and in the Light, that comes from Jesus; and so grafted into the
Life, that your Knowledge may be there one of another, in Christ. And that
there may be none Slothful, nor sitting down in Earthly Things, and minding
them, like Demas of old; lest you Cloth your selves with another Clothing,
than you had at first: but all to keep Chaste; for the Chaste do follow the
Lamb.

And Friends, that are settled in Places, that be Ministers, possess, as if ye
did not; married, as if ye were not: and be loose to the World in the Lord's
Power; for God's Oil will be a-top of all Visible things, which makes his Lamps
to burn, and to give Light afar off. And none strive nor covet to be Rich in
this World in these Changeable things, that will pass away: but your Faith, to
stand in the Lord God, who changes not; that Created all, and gives the
Increase of all.

And now Friends, Concerning Faithful Men and Womens-Meetings, which were set
up in God's Counsel, whoever should oppose them, and the Authority and Tenure
of them, I say; They oppose the Power of God, which is the Authority of them;
and they are no Ministers of the Gospel, nor of Christ, that opposes his Power,
which all are to possess. For the true Ministers of Christ, that preach Christ
and his Gospel (which is to be preached to all Nations, as Deceit is gone over
all Nations, and all Nations have drunk the Whore's Cup, and she has them in
her Cage, her unclean Power from the Beast and Dragon, out of the Power of God,
and out of Truth and the Spirit of God, the Apostles were in; the Power of God
must come over all this again, and all the true Ministers, that preach the
Gospel, (the Power of God) must bring all People into the Possession of it
again. I say, whosoever preaches the Gospel of Christ and him to People or
Nations, and those People and Nations receiving the Gospel, they receive the
Power of God, that brings Life and Immortality to Light in them; and they see
over the Devil, that has darkened them, and the Beast, and the Whore and her
Cage. And so by the Power of God Life and Immortality is brought to Light in
them: then all these Men and Women being Heirs of this Power, the Gospel; they
are Heirs of Authority and Power over the Devil, Beast, Whore and Dragon.

So all Men and Women, that be Heirs of this Power of God, it is their
Possession and Portion; and they are to labor in their Possession and Portion,
and to do God Almighty's business and Service in the Possession of the Power of
God, the Gospel, which is a Joyful, Glorious, Everlasting Order. And here is
the Authority of our Men and Women's Meetings, and other Meetings in the Name
of Jesus, the Gospel of Christ, the Power of God; which is not of Man, nor by
Man: and in this they are all to Meet, and to Worship God; and by this they are
all to act, and in this Power they have all Fellowship, a Joyful Fellowship, a
Joyful and Comfortable Assembly. And so this is the Day in the Eternal Light,
that all are to take their Possessions of the Gospel and its Order, that Power
of God, which they are Heirs of. And all the Faithful Men and Women in every
Country, City and Nation, whose Faith stands in the Power of God, the Gospel of
Christ, and have received this Gospel, and are in the Possession of this
Gospel, the Power of God, they have all Right to the Power in these Meetings;
for they be Heirs of the Power, which is the Authority of the Men's- and
Womens-Meetings.

So here is God's Choice (and not Man's) by his Power of his Heirs, and they
have all Freedom in this Gospel, the Power of God, to go to the Meetings, the
Men to the Men's, and the Women to the Women's; for they are Heirs of the Power,
which Power is the Gospel not of Man, nor by Man, but from Heaven, sent by the
Holy Ghost, and received in the Holy Ghost; which has brought Life and
Immortality to Light in them, and they see over Enmity, and before it was, by
the Light, and the Life, and Immortality, which is brought to Light in them.

So the Devil, the Author of Enmity, cannot get into this Authority and Power,
nor Order, nor Fellowship of the Gospel, nor Life, nor Light, nor the
Fellowship in the Holy Spirit, nor into the Unity of the Faith, which gives
Victory over him, that has separated Man from God, by which Faith they have
Access to God; and into the Unity of this Faith the Serpent cannot come, nor
into the Worship of God in Spirit and Truth: into this Worship the Devil cannot
come, nor any Enmity. So I say, that the Serpent, the Devil, is out of the
Fellowship of the Gospel, out of the Unity of the Faith, and out of the Order
of the Gospel, and out of the Worship in Spirit and Truth: And they that be in
this, be in Unity over him. And therefore, as I said before, let every one's
Faith stand in the Power of God, the Glorious Gospel; and all to walk, as
becomes the Gospel and the Order of it: and as every one has received Christ
Jesus, the Lord, so walk in him, and let him be their Lord and Orderer. For
they that do preach the Gospel of Christ Jesus, it is to the Intent, that all
might come to be Heirs of the Gospel, and into the Possession of it; and to be
Heirs of Christ and of his Government, the Increase of which there is no end;
who is over all in his Righteousness, and over all in his Light, Life, Power
and Dominion. And therefore know one another in his Power, his Gospel, which is
the Authority of your Meetings: And know one another in Christ Jesus, who is
able to restore Man out of the State of the Fall, into the Image of God, as he
was in before he fell, and into that Power and Dominion, that Man had, before
he fell, and into himself, that never fell; where they shall go no more forth.
And here is the Rock and Foundation of God, that stands sure.

And Friends, be Tender to the Tender Principle of God in all, and shun the
Occasion of Vain Disputes and Janglings, both amongst your selves and others;
for that many times is like a blustering Wind, that hurts and bruises the
tender Buds and Plants. For the World, though they have the Words, yet they be
out of the Life: and the Apostle's Disputing with them, were to bring them to
the Life. And those Disputes, that were amongst the Christians about
Genealogies, and Circumcision, and the Law, and Meats and Drinks, and Days,
those came to be the worst sort of Disputers, whom the Apostles Judged; for
such destroyed People from the Faith. And therefore did the Apostles exhort the
Churches, That every ones Faith should stand in the Power of God, and to Look
at Jesus, which was the Author of it; and there every Graft stands in Christ,
the Vine, quiet, where no blustering Storms could hurt them: and there is the
Safety. And there all are of one Mind, one Faith, one Soul, one Spirit,
Baptized into one Body with the one Spirit, and made all to drink into one
Spirit, one Church, one Head, that is Heavenly and Spiritual; one Faith in this
Head, Christ, who is the Author of it, and has the Glory of it; one Lord to
order all, who is the Baptizer into this one Body. So Christ has the Glory of
this Faith out of every Man and Woman; and God through him has his Glory, the
Creator of all in his Power, the Gospel, that has brought Life and Immortality
to Light in them: and their Faith standing in it, they know the Immortal God,
and Serve and Worship him, in his Spirit and in his Truth; by which they are
made God's free Men and Women, from him, that is out of the Truth.

And now Friends, all you, that have been Ancient Laborers, and have known the
Dealings of the Lord these Twenty Years (more or less) as I have often said to
you, to draw up what you can, of that which the Lord has carried you through
by his Power, the Passages and Sufferings; and how by the Lord ye have been
supported from the first: So that the Lord may be Exalted by his Power now, and
in the Ages to come, who has been the only Support, Defense and Stay or his
People all along, over all to himself; to whom be all Glory and Praise for ever
and ever, Amen: Who deserves it in his Church throughout all Ages, from his
living Members, who return the Praise to the living God, who lives and reigns
over all, blessed for ever; who is the Life, and Strength, and Health, and
Length of the Days of all his People. And therefore let there be no Boasting,
but in the Lord, and in his Power and Kingdom; and that keeps all in the
Humility.

And Friends, In the Lord's Power and Truth, what Good you can do for Friends,
that be in Prison or Sufferers, as to the Informing of them, or helping of
them, Every one bend your selves to the Lord's Power and Spirit, to do his Will
and his Business; and in that all will have a fellow-Feeling of one another
Conditions, in Bonds, or in what Trials and Tribulations soever: you will have
a fellow-Feeling one of another, having one Head, and one Lord, and being one
Body in him. For God's Heavenly Flail has brought out his Seed, and his
Heavenly Plow has turned up the fallow Ground, and his Heavenly Seed is sown
by the Heavenly Man, which brings forth Fruits to the Heavenly Sower in some
Fifty, Sixty, and an Hundred fold in this Life: And such in the World without
End will have Life Eternal. Oh, therefore all keep within, and let your Lights
shine, and your Lamps burn; and that you all may be the Wells full of the
Living Water, and the Trees full of the Living Fruit of God's Planting, whose
Fruit is unto Holiness, and End is Everlasting Life.

And so the Lord God of Power preserve you all in his Power, and let all your
Faith stand therein, that you may have both Unity in the Faith, and in the
Power; and by this Faith and Belief you may be all grafted into Christ, the
sure Root and Rock of Ages, where the Eternal Sun of Righteousness shines, in
the Heavenly and Eternal Day, upon his Plants and Grafts. And this Sun never
sets nor goes down: And the Heavenly Springs of Life, and Showers are known to
Water and nourish the Grafts, and Plants, and Buds, that they may always be
kept fresh and green, and never wither; bringing forth fresh and green, and
living Fruit, which is offered up to the Living God; and he is glorified, in
that you bear much Fruit. And so, as I said before, The Lord God Almighty keep
you, and preserve you all in his Power, Light and Life, over Death and
Darkness; that in the Light, Life and Power of God you may spread his Truth
abroad, and be valiant for it upon the Earth, answering that of God in all:
That with it, the Minds of People may be turned to God and Christ, so that with
it they may come to know the Lord, Christ Jesus in the New Covenant, in which
the Knowledge of the Lord shall cover the Earth, as the Waters do the Sea; and
his Life must go over Death, and his Light must go over Darkness, and the Power
of God must go over the Power of Sa tan.

And so all ye, that be in the Light, Life and Power, Keep the Heavenly
Fellowship in the Heavenly Power; and the Heavenly Unity in the Heavenly,
Divine Faith, and the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of the Heavenly
Prince of Princes Peace; who bruises the Head of the Enmity and of the
Adversary, and reconciles Man to God, and all things in Heaven, and in the
Earth: a blessed Reconciliation. And let every one's Faith stand in the Power
of God, which Jesus Christ is the Author of; that all may know their Crown of
Life. For all outward things without the Substance, the Life, the Power, is as
the Husk without the Kernel, and does not nourish the Immortal Soul, nor the
newborn Babe; but that which it is nourished by, is the Milk of the Word, by
which it is born again, and grows by it in the Heavenly Life, Strength and
Wisdom. And the Gospel, which is not of Man, nor by Man, but is the Power of
God, and answers the Truth in all, all the Possessors of it are to see, that
all Walk according to it; which Everlasting Order is ordained of God already,
and all the Possessors of him, possess their Joy, their Comfort and Salvation.
So with my Love unto you all, with him that Reigns, and is over all, from
Everlasting to Everlasting.

So dwell in the Love of God, which passes Knowledge, which Love of God does
Edify the Living Members of the Body of Christ; which Love of God you come to
be built up in, and in the Holy Faith, which Christ is the Author of, that
stands in his Power. And this Love of God it brings you to bear all things, and
endure all things, and hope all things. From this Love of God, which you have
in Christ Jesus, nothing will be able to separate you, neither Powers, nor
Principalities, Heights nor Depths, things present, nor things to come,
Prisons, nor Spoiling of Goods, neither Death, nor Life. So the Love of God
keeps above all that, which would separate from God; and makes you more than
Conquerors in Christ Jesus: And therefore in this Love of God dwell, which you
have in Christ Jesus. And that with the same Love you may Love one another, and
all the Workmanship of God; so that you may Glorify God wi^h your Bodies,
Souls and Spirits, which are the Lord's. Amen.

G. F.
All Friends, sit low in the Life and the Lord's Power, and keep your Place in
it, till the Lord and Master of the Heavenly Feast bid you, Sit higher; lest
you take the Highest Place, and be put down with Shame. He that has an Ear,
let him hear.

G. F.




And Friends, take heed of speaking the things of God in the Words, that Men's
Wisdom has taught; for those Words will lift up the foolish, that be erred
from the Spirit of God: which Words and Wisdom is for Condemnation, and that
which is lifted up by them, and they, that thereby speak the things of God in
them. So that Old House with it is Things must be thrown under the Foot of the
New Birth.

And Friends, I desire, that you may all keep the Holy Order, which is in the
Gospel, the Glorious Order in the Power of God, which the Devil is out of;
which was, before all his Orders were, and before they made any in the World.

In this Gospel, the Power of God, is the Glorious Order, this Joyful Order
keeps all Hearts pure to God, an everlasting Peace, Unity and Order; feel it,
and keep the Order of it, both Men and Women, and come to be Heirs of the
Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light, and to see over that Power
of Darkness, by him, who was before the Power of Death was: In this is the Holy
Order in Love and Peace. And so keep in this, that keeps you always pure; and
what Men and Women act in this, they act in that which will stand, when the
World is gone. This is not received of Man, nor by Man: every Man and Woman
must feel this Power, that brings Life and Immortality to Light through the
Gospel; in that feel this, then Heirs of this Gospel. This is their Inheritance
and Portion, which they have Right to, and to Membership: Every Man and Woman
inherit it, possess it; every one take your Possessions of this Gospel of
Salvation, and of it is Holy Orders.

There has been some Scruple about Men- and Womens-Meetings: Men and Women in
the Gospel are Heirs of the Power, which was, before the Devil was; Heirs of
this, then enter into the Possession of it, and do the Lord's Business therein:
And every one take the Care of God's Honor, and to keep all things in
Righteousness and Holiness, which becomes God's House. And in that, which
Honors the Lord God, it eased me, when those Meetings were set up for Men and
Women: That are Heirs of the Gospel, have Right to the Gospel Order, and it
belongs to them. Then take your Possessions, and Practice in it: and be not
Talkers only, but Live and Walk in the Gospel, the Power of God; which is the
Authority of your Meetings.

Swarthmore, the 28th of the Third Month, 1676. G. F.
Read at the Yearly Meeting in London, the 17th of the Third Month, 1676.




During this time also, I Collected together as many as I could, of the
Epistles I had written in former Years to Friends. I made a Collection too of
the several Papers, that I had written to O. Cromwell, and his Son Richard, in
the time of their Protectorships; and to the Parliaments and Magistrates, that
were in their times. And after I had gathered them together, I Collected also
the Papers I had written to King Charles the Second, since his Return, and to
his Council and Parliaments, and the Justices, or other Magistrates under him.
I made also another Collection of Certificates, which I had received from
diverse Governors of Places, Judges, Justices, Parliament Men and others, for
the Clearing of me from many Slanders, which the Envious Priests and
Professors, both here and beyond the Seas, had cast upon me: And this I did for
the Truth's-sake, as knowing, that their Design in Slandering me was, to defame
the Truth published by me, and hinder thereby (if they could) the Spreading
thereof amongst the People. Besides these I made Two Books of Collections; the
one was, A List or Catalogue of the Names of those Friends, who went first
forth out of the North of England, when Truth first brake forth there, to
proclaim the Day of the Lord through this Nation. The other was of the Names of
those Friends, that went first forth to Preach the Gospel in other Nations,
Countries and Places, and in what Years, and to what Parts they went.

I made also another Collection, in Two Books; one of Epistles and Letters,
from Friends and others, on several Occasions to me: The other of Letters of
mine to Friends and others.

I writ also a Book of the Types and Figures of Christ, with their
Significations; and many other things, which will be of Service to Truth and
Friends in times to come.

I took notice also of those, who had run out from Truth, and drawn others out
after them, and turned against Truth and Friends at several times, since the
First Breaking forth of Truth in this latter Age, and what became of them;
noting particularly the Repentance and Return of such of them, as came back to
Truth again. But some ran quite out, and never returned again; but were Cut off
in their Gainsaying and Rebellion: for the Word and Power of God has blasted,
and is blasting them, and the Holy Seed has ground, and is grinding them to
pieces. And this I have observed, that they, who have been Convinced, and have
not lived and walked in the Truth, have been the Worst Enemies to the Truth,
and done most Hurt amongst Friends in the Truth, and to others: And in these I
have seen fulfilled, what the Lord did long since show me, That such should be
greater Deceivers, than all the Priests and Professors. For such as came as far
as Cain, and Balaam, and Corah, and Dathan, and could preach Christ, and say,
They had preached in his Name; and such as came to be Apostles, and had tasted
of the Power of Christ, and then turned from it; such could yet speak their Old
Experiences, and have the good Words, like Corah and Balaam: but not keeping in
the Life and Truth, such Deceived the Hearts of the Simple both then and now,
and such come to be of the Devil, who abode not in the Truth; as Cain, and and
all the Jews, that abode not in the Truth, were. For though Cain did Sacrifice
to God, and did talk with God; and the Jews could talk of Abraham, Moses and
the Prophets: yet Christ told them, They were of their Father, the Devil. In
like manner, though they, who are called Christians, can talk of Christ, and
use his, and his Apostles and Disciples Words: yet not abiding in the Truth,
and Power, and Spirit, that the Apostles were in, they are of the Devil, out of
Truth, and do his Work. And so are all these, that have been Convinced of God's
Eternal Truth, since it sprang up in this Nation, that have not abode in the
Light, and in the Spirit and Power of Christ Jesus; but have turned against the
Power, and have opposed the Work thereof: though they may retain their former
Experiences, and be able to speak many good Words; yet not living in the Life
and Power, that gave them those Experiences, they live in the Power of
Darkness, which is of the Devil: and by the Light and Truth both he and they
are Condemned; and must own their Condemnations, if ever they come to Truth
again. For to Resist the Heavenly Power, and to oppose the Workings and Divine
Manifestations thereof through any, is not a light Matter. And as I had been
moved of the Lord, to travel in his Power round about this Nation, and in other
Parts, to preach the Everlasting Gospel, and to declare the Word of Life, which
was in the Beginning, through many Imprisonments, Hardships, Sufferings and
Trials; so I was afterward moved to Travel in the same Heavenly Power about
the Nation again (and to write to such Places, where I came not) to recommend
unto Friends the setting up of the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings in all
Counties, for the looking after the Poor, and taking Care for Orderly
Proceedings in Marriages. and other matters relating to the Church of Christ:
Though some Meetings for this end were settled in the North of England in the
Year 1653.

And after this also, Truth still spreading further over the Nation, and
Friends increasing in number, I was moved by the same Eternal Power to
recommend the setting up the Womens-Meetings also; that all, both Male and
Female, that had received the Gospel the Word of Eternal Life, might come into
the Order of the Gospel, brought forth by the Power of God, and might act for
God in the Power, and therein do Business and Service for him in his Church.
All the Faithful must labor in God's Vineyard; they being his Hired Servants,
and he having given them the Earnest of his Spirit. For a Master, that hires a
Servant, and gives him the Earnest of his Hire, expects, he should do his Work,
after he knows his Will, in the outward Creation: So all God's Prople, that be
of the new Creation, and have received the Earnest of his Spirit, ought to
labor with, by and in his Spirit, Power and Grace, and Faith in the Light, in
God's Vineyard, that they may have their Wages every one, Male and Female, when
they have done God's Work and Business in his Day, which is Eternal Life. But
none can labor in his Vineyard, and do his Work and Will, but as they walk in
the Heavenly Divine Light, Grace and Spirit of Christ; which is, has been and
is my Travel and Labor in the Lord to turn all to.

But some that professed Truth, and had made a great Show therein, being gone
from the Simplicity of the Gospel into Jangling, Division, and a Spirit of
Separation, endeavored to discourage Friends, (especially the Women) from
their Godly Care and Watchfulness in the Church over one another in the Truth;
opposing their Meetings, which in the Power of the Lord were set up for that
End and Service. Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to write the following
Epistle, and send it forth among Friends, for the discovering of that Spirit,
by which those Opposers were acted, and its Work and Way, in and by which it
wrought; and to warn Friends of it, that they might not be betrayed by it.

ALL my Dear Friends, Live in the Seed of Peace, Christ Jesus, in whom ye have
all Life. And that Spirit, that comes amongst you to raise up Strife, is out of
Christ; for it is the Spirit, that is not easy to be entreated, nor gentle, so
not of the Wisdom of God, which is justified of her Children: And so they, that
follow that Spirit, are none of Wisdom's Children. Now there is a Spirit, that
has made a Separation, and has been against Men and Womens-Meetings; yet has
set up one of their own, whom they have given Power to: and that none shall sit
amongst them, but whom they give Power to, but shall be looked upon as Usurpers
of Authority. Now this Spirit and its Work is not of God, though it has made
some Jumble amongst some; and the Path it may travel in, is through the earthly
Affections, or the Vnestablished, or Apostates. But all that are in the Life,
and Spirit, and Light, and Grace, and Truth, and the Power of God, bar it out;
and such as sit under their own Vine, Christ Jesus, and are grafted into him,
have no need of their Exhortation or Counsel: for the true Believers are entered
into their Rest. And therefore all keep in the Gospel of Peace; and they that
be Heirs of the Kingdom, and of it, keep in your Possession of it.

Now some that are of this Spirit, have said to me, They see no Service in
Womens-Meetings. My Answer is, and has been to them and such, If they be
blind, and without Sight, they should not oppose others; for there is none
Imposes any thing upon them: for God never received the Blind for a Sacrifice,
neither can his People. But Christ has enlightened all; and to as many, as
receive him, he gives Power to become the Sons of God: And such as be Heirs of
his Power, and of his Gospel, which brings Life and Immortality to Light, they
can see over him, that has darkened them: and all such do keep the Order of the
Gospel, the Power of God, and their Meetings in it; which preserves them in
Life and in Immortality. And all these do see the great Service of the Men's-
and of the Womens-Meetings, in the Order of the Gospel, which is the Power of
God: For they are Meet-helps in this Power, which is the Authority of their
Meetings. And now I say to all you, that be against Womens-Meetings, or the
Men's, and say, You see no Service for the Womens-Meetings, and oppose them; you
are therein out of the Power of God, and his Spirit you live not in. For God
saw a Service for the Assemblies of the Women in the Time of the Law, about
those things, that appertained to his Worship and Service, and to the holy
things of his Tabernacle; and so do they in the same Spirit see now their
Service in the Gospel: many things in those Meetings being more proper for the
Women to see into, than the Men; and they in the Power and Wisdom of God may
inform the Men of such things, as are not proper for them: and the Men may
inform the Women of such things, as are not proper for them, as Meet helps each
unto another. For in the Time of the Law, by the Law of God the Women were to
Offer, as well as the Men; and so in the Time of the Gospel much more, are they
to Offer their Spiritual Sacrifices: for they are all called, both Men and
Women, a Royal Priesthood; and they are of the Household of Faith, and they are
the Living Stones, that make up the Spiritual Building, which Christ is the
Head of; and are to be encouraged in their Labor in the Gospel: For all things
that they do, both Men and Women, are to be done in the Power of God. And all
such, as see no Service for these Womens-Meetings, or the Men's, but do oppose
them, and make Strife amongst Friends, are in the same Spirit of the World,
that is against, and forbids our other Meetings; and are in the same Spirit of
the World, that has been and is against Women's Speaking in Meetings, and says,
They must be silent, etc. though the same Apostle commands, That Men should
keep Silence as well as the Women, if there were not an Interpreter. And
therefore all Friends, you may see, that the Spirit of the World has entered
such Opposers, though they come under another Color: for They would not have
us to Meet at all. And These are against the Womens-Meetings, and some of them
against the Men's also; and say, They see no Service for them: Then they may
hold their Tongues, and not oppose them, that do see their Service for God in
these Meetings.

Therefore all you, that feel the Power of God, and your Service for God, as
aforesaid, in them, you Men and Women, keep your Meetings in the Power of God,
the Authority of them, as they were settled in it; and then ye will be
preserved both over this Spirit, that opposes them, and over the Spirit of the
World, that opposes your other Meetings: For it is all one in the Ground, and
would bring you into Bondage. For such are out of the Peaceable Gospel, who
oppose its Order; and out of the Faith, that Works by Love; and out of the
Wisdom, that is gentle, and easy, and peaceable, etc. and out of the Kingdom,
that stands in Peace and Joy. Therefore keep over that Spirit, that sows
Discord or Dissension, and would draw you from your Habitation and Possession
in the Order of the Gospel: For it is the same Spirit, that deceived Adam and
Eve, by which they lost their Habitation in the Righteousness and Holiness, and
their Dominion: and so that Spirit got over them, and so it would get over you.
One while it will tell you, It sees no Service for your Meetings; and another
time Oppose you: But I say, This is the blind Spirit, which is out of the Power
of God, and which the Power of God is over. And therefore keep in the Power,
that ye may stand up for your Liberty in Christ Jesus, Males and Females, Heirs
of him and of his Gospel, and his Order: and so stand up for your Liberty in
the Gospel, and in the Faith, which Christ Jesus has been the Author of; for
if ye lose it, and let another Spirit get over you, ye will not so soon regain
it again. For I knew, the Devil would bestir himself in his Instruments, when
Men's- and Womens-Meetings came to be set up, and all in the Power, Light and
Truth, and Heirs of the Gospel to take their Possession of it in every County
and City, in it to walk, and to watch one over another, and in it to take Care
of God's Glory and Honor, and his precious Truth, and to see, that all did
walk in the Truth, and as becomes the Gospel, and to see, that nothing was
lacking: and so whatsoever was decent, modest, virtuous, lovely, comely,
righteous, and of good Report, to follow after; and to admonish and exhort all,
that was not faithful, and to rebuke all that did Evil: I knew, that this would
give such a Check to all loose Speakers, Talkers and Walkers; I did not expect,
but that there would be an Opposition against such Meetings. But never heed,
Truth will come over them all, and is over them all; and Faith must have the
Victory: for the Gospel, and its Order is Everlasting, and the Seed (Christ) is
the Beginning and the Ending, and will out-last all; the Amen, in whom ye have
Peace. I say, all that do oppose the Men's- and Womens-Meetings, or that
Marriages should be laid before them, or of Recording of Condemnations of Sin
and Evil; or, Admonishing or Exhorting such, as walk not in the Truth; they are
of a loose Spirit, and their Spirits tend to Looseness: and let them take them,
that will; for Truth will not have them, nor will have none of their Sacrifice:
For nothing is accepted of God, but what is done in Truth, and in his Spirit,
which is peaceable. And the Authority of our Men's- and Womens-Meetings is the
Power of God; and all the Heirs of the Gospel are Heirs of that Authority and
Dignity: and this is of God, and shall Answer the Witness of God in all. And
the greatest Opposers of this Practice and Work will be, and are such, as have
been Convinced of God's Truth, but have not lived in it; and such were the
greatest Troublers of the Church in Moses's Day, and in the Days of the
Apostles: But mark their End, and read, what became of them all. And therefore
all keep your Habitation in Truth, and therein ye may see, what became of all
the Opposers of it for Twenty Years past: They are all gone, and the Truth
lives and reigns, and the Seed is over all, and all is One in it, in Rest,
Peace, and Life Everlasting; and therein they sit down together in the Heavenly
Places in Christ Jesus, the Amen.

Swarthmore, the 5th of the 8th Month, 1676. G. F.


In this Year, while I was at Swarthmore, died William Lampit, the old Priest
of Vlverstone (which is the Parish, that Swarthmore is in.) He was an Old
Deceiver, and Perverter of the Right Way of the Lord, and a Persecutor of the
People of God; and much Contest I had with him, when I first came into those
parts. He had been an old false Prophet: for in the Year 1652. he Prophesied
(and said, he would Wage his Life upon it) That the Quakers would all vanish,
and come to naught within half a year: But he came to naught himself. For he
continued in his Lying and false Accusing of God's People, till a little before
he died; and then he cried for a little Rest: And to one of his Hearers, that
came to visit him before he died, he said: I have been a Preacher a long time,
1677. Swarthmore.
and thought, I had lived well; but I did not think, it had been so hard a
Thing to die.

Now after I had finished those Services, which lay upon me then to do, feeling
my Spirit drawn again toward the South, (though I was yet but weakly, and not
able to Travel far in a Day) I left Swarthmore on the Twenty Sixth Day of the
First Month 1677. Westmorland. Powbank. Camsgill.
and went to Thomas Pearson's at Powbank in Westmorland, where I had a Meeting
the next Day: and went from thence to Thomas Cam's at Cam's-Gill, whither
Robert Widders, with his Wife, and several other Friends came to see me, before
I left the Country, and to be at the Meeting there the next Day, which was very
large; and in which I was largely drawn forth in Testimony to the Truth. After
the Meeting I had much Discourse with some of that Meeting, who at that time
were not in Unity with Friends of the Quarterly Meeting they belonged to: but
afterward several of them, that were somewhat Tender, came to see their Error,
and gave forth Condemnations against themselves. Next day John Blaykling came
to Tho. Cam's, Yorkshire. Sedberg. Drawell.
to bring me to his House at Drawell in Sedberg in Yorkshire; whither I went
with him, visiting Friends in the way. I staid at Drawel two or three Nights,
having Meetings there and thereabouts: For while I was there, the Men- and
Womens-Meetings were held there, which were very large and precious. And on the
First Day following I had a Meeting at Brigflats, not far off, Brigflats.
where were most part of the Friends from the several Meetings round about, and
a great Concourse of other People also, so that it was thought, there were Five
or Six Hundred People; and a very good Meeting it was, wherein Truth was
largely declared, and preciously opened, to the comforting and refreshing the
Faithful, and the drawing near them, that were afar off. After this I had
another Meeting at John Blaykling's, Drawell.
where were many Friends, that were going to the Quarterly Meeting at Kendal:
With them my Wife went back (who, with her Daughter Rachel, had accompanied me
thus far;) and I, having Leonard Fell with me, passed on through Sedberg and
Garsdale, and into Wensydale, Sedberg. Garsdale. Wensydale Counterside.
visiting Friends, as we went. And at Night I reached to Richard Robinson's at
Counterside, where several Friends came to me that Evening; and some of them
went with me next Day over the Hills, to the Widow Tenant's at Scarhouse in
Langstroth-dale, Langstrothdale. Scarhouse.
whither we had much ado to get, the Snow lay so deep, though it was a Week in
the Second Month. Here on the next Day (which was the First Day of the Week) we
had a large Meeting, Friends coming to it from several parts round about; and
the Lord gave me a very seasonable Testimony to bear amongst them, which I did
for several Hours, to their great Satisfaction and Comfort. Thence passing on
through Bishopsdale, Bishopsdale. Mildum. Barton. Bedal. Northallerton.
Burrowby.
Mildum, Barton, and so through the Country by Bedal and North-allerton, I came
to George Robinson's at Burrowby; where also Friends coming out of several
parts, we had a very large and good Meeting* and very Peaceable. But not long
after, an envious Justice, who lived not far off, hearing, that I had a great
Meeting there, troubled Friends about it, and made them appear at the Sessions,
where he asked them many ensnaring Questions; for he knew not, how to Convict
them, because he had no Proof against them. When he saw, his Questions did not
Catch them; 1677. ^urrowby.
he told them, He had heard, that George Fox was at a large Meeting with them,
and they all sat Silent, and none spoke in the Meeting. This false Story he
cunningly feigned, thinking thereby to have drawn out some of the Friends to
have contradicted him, and have said, That I had spoken in the Meeting; that so
he might have Convicted them upon their own Confession, and have Fined them.
But Friends standing in the Wisdom of God, did not Answer him according to his
Desire; and so escaped his Snare. But two other Friends, that came out of
Ireland, and were at this Meeting, having a Meeting that Evening about three
Miles off; this Evil-minded Justice got Information thereof, and Fined Friends,
and plundered them very sorely for it.

I went from Burrowby to Isaac Lindley's, calling upon Friends on the Way, as I
went. And having Robert Lodge and some other Friends with me, York.
from thence next Day we passed to York; and the Day following (being the First
Day of the Week) I was at Friends Meeting in York, which was large and
peaceable. The Second day also I staid in York, and had two Meetings with
Friends at John Taylor's; from whence I writ unto my Wife, to let her know, how
it was with me, as follows: Dear Heart,
TO whom is my Love, and to thy Daughters, and to all Friends, that enquire
after me. My Desires are, that ye all may be preserved in the Lord's
Everlasting Seed, in whom ye all will have Life and Peace, and Dominion, and
Settlement in the Everlasting Home or Dwelling, in the House built upon the
Foundation of God. In the Power of the Lord I am brought to York, having had
many Meetings in the Way. The Way was many times deep and bad with Snow, that
our Horses sometimes were down, and we were not able to ride; and sometimes we
had great Storms and Rain: but by the Power of the Lord I went through all. At
Scarhouse there was a very large Meeting, and another at Burrowby, to which
Friends came out of Cleaveland and Bishopric: and many other Meetings we have
had. At York Yesterday we had a very large Meeting, exceeding thronged, Friends
being at it from many parts, and all quiet, and Friends well satisfied: Oh! the
Glory of the Lord shined over all. And this Day we had a large Men's- and
Womens-Meeting, many Friends, both Men and Women, being come out of the
Country, and all was quiet: And this Evening we are to have the Men's- and
Womens-Meeting of the Friends of the City. John Whitehead is here, with Robert
Lodge and others: Friends are mighty glad, above Measure: So I am in my Holy
Element, and holy Work in the Lord, Glory to his Name for ever! To Morrow I
intend to go out of the City toward Todcaster, though I cannot Ride, as in
days past; yet praised be the Lord, that I can Travel so well as I do. So with
my Love in the Fountain of Life, in which as ye all abide, ye will have
Refreshment of Life; that by it ye may grow, and gather Eternal Strength to
serve the Lord, and be satisfied. So to the God of all Power, who is
All-sufficient to preserve you, I commit you all, to his Ordering.

York, the 16th of the Second Month, 1677. G. F.




Leaving York, I traveled on through Yorkshire, 1677. Yorkshire. Todcaster.
Nottingly. Doncaster. Balby. Ballowfield.
visiting Friends at Todcaster, Nottingly, Doncaster, and so on to Balby,
having Meetings, as I went. At Balby I stayed the First-day-Meeting, and went
next day to Thomas Stacy's at Ballowfield, where in the Evening I had a
Meeting, to compose some difference, that had happened between some, that
professed Truth, and they were Reconciled. From thence next day I came to
Stainsby in Derbyshire, Darbyshire. Stainsby.
in which County I had formerly lived some time, about the first breaking forth
of Truth. Here I had a good Meeting with Friends, and afterward passed to
Skegby in Nottinghamshire, and from thence to Nottingham, Nottinghamshire.
Skegby. Nottingham.
to John Reckless his house; who, being one of the Sheriffs of Nottingham,
(when I first declared Truth in that Town, and was Imprisoned for it) took me
out of Prison into his own house, and kept me there, till the Mayor, and the
rest of the Magistrates of the Town, took me away from him, and sent me to the
Prison again: At which time this John Reckless was Convinced, and abode in the
Truth ever after. Now I had a Meeting with Friends at his house that Evening,
after I came thither, and another the next day in Friends public
Meeting House, which was peaceable and well.

I went from thence the day following to John Fox's at Wymeswould in
Leicestershire, where I had a Meeting that Evening; Leicestershire. Wymes.
would. Sileby.
and went next day to William Smith's at Sileby, where (it being the First Day
of the Week) we had a very large Meeting: for besides Friends, that came from
several places, the Town's People, hearing that I was there, came many of them
to the Meeting, Leicester.
and heard the Truth declared gladly. Next day I went to Leicester, where
finding many Friends come out of the Country, to be at the Horse-fair there
next day, I had a very good Meeting with them that Night, and had another
Meeting next Evening (after the Fair was over) at William Wells his house at
Knighton, Knighton. Swanington.
about a Mile from Leicester: from whence next day I passed to Swanington
(where I had formerly been taken Prisoner) and had a Meeting there: from thence
went to Samuel Fretwell's at Hartshorn in Derbyshire, where I had a Meeting
also: Derbyshire. Hartshorn. Warwickshire. Badgely.
And then went through the Country to Henry Sidon's at Badgely in Warwickshire,
and stayed the Meeting there, which (it being the First Day of the Week) was
very large, and peaceable; notwithstanding that a Justice, who lived not far
off, had threatened, that he would come, and break it up. After Meeting (having
stayed a while with Friends) I went in the Evening to Richard Baal's of
Whittington, where several Friends came to visit me. Whittington Hartshill.
Next day I went to Nathaniel Newton's at Hartshill, where several Friends met
me, with whom I had good Service. After this I passed on, visiting Friends in
diverse places, till I came to Dingley, Dingley.
where a Meeting was appointed before, which was very large, and Truth was
largely opened to the People: The Meeting was peaceable and quiet, and the
People generally Sober; saving that while I was declaring, and showing, how
that Christendom (so called) was gone from the pure Religion, that is
undefiled, etc. One Man rushed out in a furious manner, and said, I deny that.
1677. Warwickshire. Adingworth. Northampton. Olney in Buckinghamshire.
Bedfordshire. Turry.
After this Meeting, I went with Thomas Charles to his house at Adingworth, and
from thence next day to Northampton, where I stayed the First-day-Meeting,
which was very large and peaceable, and had much Service among Friends besides.
Next day Edward Cooper of Northampton accompanied me to Olney in
Buckinghamshire, where I stayed at James Brierlie's, several Friends coming
thither to see me in the Evening. Next day I went to a Meeting at Turry in
Bedfordshire, to which Friends came from several Parts; so that it was a very
large Meeting. Here I met with William Dewsberry, who after the Meeting took me
along with him to his Son-in-law John Rush's of Kempston, Kempston.
where I stayed with William that night, and most part of the next day; passing
thence toward Evening through Ampthill, Ampthill. Bullocks-hill.
to Thomas Gambolls of Bullocks-hill. William Dewsberry went along with me
thither, and there also several Friends came to visit us. Next day, Luton.
Market-street Kensworth.
passing through Luton, I went to Market-street (William Dewsberry accompanying
me part of the way) and the day following Leonard Fell and I had a Meeting at
Kensworth, which was pretty large and peaceable. After the Meeting we went to
Albans, Albans. South-Mims. Barnet Middlesex. Guttershedge in Henden.
where we visited Friends, and next day passing through South-Mims and Barnet,
where also we visited Friends, we came that night to the Widow Haylye's at
Guttershedge in Hendon in Middlesex. Next day, being the First Day of the Week,
we had a very large Meeting there, several Friends coming from London. I stayed
there on the Second-day, and on the Third went to William Mead's house at
High-gate, Highgate.
with whom next day I went to London: London.
and it being the Fourth-day of the Week, I went to the Meeting at
Gracious-street; where Friends and I were greatly refreshed in each other in
the Lord, and the Lord's Power and Seed was set over all, blessed be his Name
for ever.

Thus it pleased the Lord to bring me safe to London, though much wearied with
Travel: for though I rode not very far in a day, yet having had much weakness
of Body, continual Travel was hard to me. Besides, I had not much rest a-nights
to refresh Nature: for I often sat late up with Friends, where I lodged, to
Inform and Advise them in things, wherein they were wanting; and when I was in
bed, I was often hindered of sleep by great pains, which I felt in my Head and
Teeth, occasioned (as I thought) by Cold I had taken, by riding often in the
Rain. But the Lord's Power was over all, and carried me through all, to his
praise.

In my Journey I observed a slackness, and shortness in some that professed
Truth, in keeping up the ancient Testimony of Truth against Tithes: for
wherever that Spirit got Entrance, which wrought Division in the Church, and
opposed the Men's and Women's Meetings, it weakened those that received it, in
their Testimony against Tithes. Wherefore I was moved of the Lord to give forth
a short Paper, by way of an Epistle to Friends, to stir up the pure Mind in
them, and to encourage and strengthen them in their Christian Testimony against
that Antichristian Yoke and Oppression.

My dear Friends,
BE faithful to the Lord in your Testimony for Jesus, 1677. London.
who has ended the Levitical Priesthood of Aaron, that took Tithes, and sent
his Ministers forth freely, to give freely, that which they had received of him
freely, without a Bag or a Staff. So Christ's Disciples could not join with
those, that made a Trade of Preaching. And as there was a Testimony to be born
against those Tithes, which were commanded in the Law for Levi and Aaron: So
there is a Testimony to be born against these Tithes, which have been set up by
Man, in the dark time of Popery, and not set up by God nor Christ. Now for any
to cry against the Priests in words, and yet to give them Means, and put into
their Mouths, that they may not prepare War against you, this is a
Contradiction. And therefore take heed: for if the Lord God do bless you with
outward Creatures, and you do bestow them upon Baal's Priests, the Lord may
justly require the Outward things from you again, which he has given you; who
says, That his Christian Ministers should freely give, as they have freely
received of Christ Jesus. So all the Preachers for Tithes and Money, and the
Takers and Payers of Tithe must be testified against in the Lord's Power and
Spirit; so that all Men and Women may stand up in their Testimony for Jesus
Christ, in his Power and Spirit, against the Tithe-mongers. Consider, how many
faithful Servants and Valiants of the Lord have laid down their Lives against
them, in this day of the Lord: and in the days of the Martyrs they did then
witness against them. Consider also, what Judgments have come upon them, that
have spoiled Friends Goods, and have cast them into Prison for Tithes and
Maintenance. And therefore in the Power of the Lord maintain the War against
the Beast, and do not put into his Mouth, lest he cry Peace to you; which Peace
you must not receive; but it must be broken, and thrown out by the Spirit of
God: And then in the same Spirit, ye will receive the Peace from the Son of
Peace, which the Beast, and the Whore, and the World with all their earthly
Teachers for the Earth, which are made by Man, cannot receive, nor bereave you
of. And therefore keep your Authority and Dominion in the Power, and Spirit,
and Name of Jesus; in whom my love is to you.

3d Month, 1677. G. F.


I came to London on the 23th of the Third Month, some Ten or Twelve days
before the Yearly Meeting; in which time I fell in with Friends there in the
Service of Truth, visiting them at the Meetings: And the Parliament then
sitting, we prepared something to lay before them, concerning the seizing of
the Third part of Friends Estates, as Popish Recusants; which was a great
Suffering, and a Grievance we Complained of; but no Redress we got.

To the Yearly Meeting many Friends came from most parts of the Nation, 1677.
London. Yearly Meeting.
and some out of Scotland, Holland, etc. and very glorious Meetings we had,
wherein the Lord's powerful Presence was very largely felt, and the Affairs of
Truth were sweetly carried on in the Unity of the Spirit, to the Satisfaction
and Comfort of the upright-hearted; blessed be the Lord for ever! Then after
the Yearly Meeting was over, and I had stayed a Week or Two with Friends in
London, I went down with William Penn to his house in Sussex: Sussex.
John Burnyeat, and some other Friends went with us: Surrey.
and as we passed through Surrey, hearing, that the Quarterly Meeting for that
County was that day, William Penn, John Burnyeat and I went from the Road to
it; and after the Meeting returning to our other Company on the Road, went on
with them to William Penn's that Night, which is Forty Miles from London.
Worminghurst.
I stayed at Worminghurst about Three Weeks, in which time John Burnyeat and I
(at such times as we were not amongst Friends in Meetings) Answered a very
envious and wicked Book, which one Roger Williams a Priest of New England (or
some Colony thereabouts) had written against Truth and Friends. When we had
finished that Service, we went with Stephen Smith (who was there with us) to
his house at Warpledon in Surrey, Surrey. Warpledon.
where we had a large Meeting. Friends thereaway had been exceedingly plundered
about Two Months before on the Priest's account; for they took from Stephen
Smith Five Kine (being all he had) for about Fifty shillings Tithes. From
thence we went to Kingston, Kingston. London.
and so to London; where I stayed not long: for it was upon me from the Lord to
go into Holland, to Visit Friends there, and to preach the Gospel there, and in
some parts of Germany. Wherefore setting things in Order for my Journey, as
fast as I could, I took leave of Friends at London, Essex. Colchester.
and with several other Friends went down to Colchester in Essex, in order to
my Passage for Holland. Next day, being the First day of the Week, I was at the
public Meeting of Friends there, which was very large and peaceable; and in
the Evening I had another large Meeting, but not so public, at John Furly's
house, where I lodged. The day following was the Womens-Meeting there, which
also was very large; and I was at that too. Harwich.
From thence next day we passed to Harwich, where Robert Duncon, and several
other Friends out of the Country, came to see us; and some from London came to
us there, that intended to go over with me. The Packet-Boat, in which we were
to go, not being ready, we went to the Meeting in the Town, and a precious
Opportunity we had together: for the Lord, according to his wonted goodness, by
his overcoming, refreshing Power, opened many Mouths to declare his
Everlasting Truth, and to praise and glorify him. After the Meeting we
returned to John Vandewall's, where I had lodged, and when the Boat was ready
(taking Leave of those Friends, that had accompanied us thither, and that met
us there) we that were bound for Holland, went on Board about the 9th hour in
the Evening, on the 25th day of the 5th Month 1677.

The Friends that then went over with me, 1677. Harwich.
were William Penn, Robert Barclay, George Keith and his Wife, John Furly and
his Brother, William Tailcoat, George Watts, and Isabel Yeomans, who is one of
my Wife's Daughters. About the First hour in the Morning we weighed Anchor,
having a fair, brisk Wind, which by the next Morning brought us within sight of
Holland. Holland.
But that day proving very clear and calm, we got forward but little, till
about the Fourth hour in the Afternoon, when a fresh Gale arose, which carried
us within a League of Land. Then being becalmed again, we cast Anchor for that
Night, it being between the hours of Nine and Ten in the Evening. But William
Penn and Robert Barclay (understanding, that Benjamin Furly was come from
Rotterdam to the Briel to meet us) got two of the Boat-men to let down a small
Boat, that belonged to the Packet-Boat, and Row them to shore: but before they
could get to shore, the Gates were shut; and there being no house without the
Gate, they were fain to lie in a Fisher's Boat all Night. As soon as the Gates
were opened in the Morning, they went in, and found Benjamin Furly, with other
Friends of Rotterdam, that were come thither to receive us; and they sent a
Boat, with three Young Men in it, that lived with Benjamin Furly, who brought
us to the Briel, Briel.
where the Friends received us with great Gladness.

We stayed about Two hours at the Briel, to refresh our selves; and then took
Boat, with the Holland-Friends, for Rotterdam; Rotterdam
where we arrived about the Eleventh hour that day, which was the 28th of the
Fifth Month 1677. I was very well this Voyage; but some of the Friends were
Sea-sick: Yet a fine Passage we had, and all came safe and well to Land,
blessed and praised be the Name of the Lord for ever.

The next day, being the First day of the Week, we had Two Meetings at Benjamin
Furly's, where many of the Towns People, and some Officers came in; and all
were civil. Benjamin Furly, or John Claus, (a Friend of Amsterdam) interpreted,
when any Friend declared. I spent the next day in Visiting Friends there, and
the day following William Penn and I, and some other of the Friends, went
toward Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
with some Friends of that City, who came to Rotterdam to Conduct us thither.
We took Boat in the Afternoon, Ouerkirk. Delft.
and passing by a Town called Ouerkirk, we came to Delft, through which we
walked on foot; and then took Boat again to Leyden, Leyden.
where we lodged that Night at an Inn. This is counted six Dutch Miles from
Rotterdam, which are eighteen English Miles, and five hours sail, or Travel:
for our Boat was drawn by an Horse that went on the shore. Next day taking Boat
again, we went to Harlem, Harlem.
fourteen Miles from Leyden, where we had appointed a Meeting, which proved
very large: for many of the Town's People came in, and Two of their Preachers;
and the Lord gave us a blessed Opportunity, not only with respect to Friends,
but to other sober People ( Baptists and other Professors) that were there, and
the Meeting ended peaceably and well. After Meeting we passed to Amsterdam,
1677. Amsterdam.
accompanied by several Friends of that City and of Alkmaer, some by Wagon,
some by Boat.

Next day was the Quarterly Meeting at Amsterdam, to which came Friends from
Harlem and Rotterdam, and with them those Friends of our Company, whom we had
left behind at Rotterdam, viz. Robert Barclay, George Keith and his Wife, etc.
The Meeting was at Gertrude Dirick Nieson's house, and a very large and
serviceable Meeting it was: for both William Penn and I were drawn forth to
open many things concerning the Order of the Gospel, and to show the benefit
and service of Yearly, Quarterly, and Monthly Meetings of Men and Women. We had
another Meeting at Gertrude's the next day, more public, and very large, at
which were Professors of several sorts, unto whom the Way of Life and Salvation
was largely and livingly opened; which they hearkened very attentively to, none
making any Objection, to what was declared. In the Afternoon we had another
Meeting in the same place, but less, and more private. The day following we had
a Meeting of Friends only, wherein by Joint Agreement of Friends were settled
several Meetings, to wit, Monthly, Quarterly, and a Yearly Meeting, to be held
at Amsterdam for Friends in all the United Provinces of Holland, and in Embden,
the Palatinat, Hamborough, Frederick-stadt, Dantzick and other places in and
about Germany; which Friends were very glad of, and it has been of great
service to Truth.

Next day an Exercise came upon me concerning that deceitful Spirit, which
wrought in some amongst Friends, to make Divisions in the Church: and the Care
of the Churches being upon me, I was moved to Write a few Lines to warn Friends
of it, as follows: ALL Friends, keep over that Spirit of Separation and
Division, in the peaceable Truth, and in the Seed of Life, which will wear it
all out, and out-last it. For the Lamb will have the Victory over all the
Spirits of Strife, as it has had since the beginning; and they will Wither, as
others have done: but all that do keep in the Seed, which is always green,
shall never Wither; as Friends have been to this day kept. And if any have gone
out, and backslidden, and thrown off the Cross, and are grown loose and full,
and are gone into Strife and Contention with their Earthly Spirits, and therein
plead for a liberty; this Spirit takes with loose, earthly Spirits, and cries
Imposition to such, as do admonish them to come to the Life, Light, and Spirit
and Power of God, that they may be alive, and may live again with the Living.
And then upon this Admonishment, their Spirits do arise into Contention and
Strife, and a Separation, turning against the Living, in their loose earthly
Spirits, which would have the Name of Truth, but is not in the Nature of it,
but is for Eternal Judgment of the living Seed. And this is it, which does
deceive; but it is judged by that, which does undeceive and save.

Amsterdam in Holland, the 5th of the 6th Month, 1677. G. F.




This being the First Day of the Week, we had a very large Meeting again, there
coming to it a great Concourse of People of several Opinions, as Baptists,
Seekers, Socinians, Brownists, and some of the Collegians. Robert Barclay,
George Keith, William Pen and I, did all severally declare the Everlasting
Truth among them; opening the Estate of Man in the Fall, and showing, by what
way Man and Woman may come into the Restoration by Christ Jesus: And indeed,
the Mystery of Iniquity, and the Mystery of Godliness were very plainly laid
open; and the Meeting ended quietly and well.

The day following, George Keith, Robert Barclay, and William Penn, leaving me
and some other Friends at Amsterdam, set forward on their Journey toward
Germany, where they Traveled many hundred Miles, and had good Service for the
Lord, Benjamin Furly going with them, and Interpreting.

That day, and the next, I stayed at Amsterdam, visiting the Friends, and
assisting them in some businesses concerning their Meetings: And there came
Three Baptists to discourse with me, unto whom I opened things to their
satisfaction; and they parted from me in kindness. I writ a Letter also to the
Princess Elizabeth, which Isabel Yeomans delivered to her, when George Keith's
Wife and she went to visit her.

Princess Elizabeth;
I Have heard of thy Tenderness toward the Lord and his holy Truth, by some
Friends, that have visited thee, and also by some of thy Letters, which I have
seen: which indeed is a great thing, for a Person of thy quality to have such a
tender mind after the Lord and his precious Truth; seeing, so many are
swallowed up with Voluptuousness, and the Pleasures of this World, and yet all
make an outward Profession of God and Christ one way or other; but without any
deep Inward sense and feeling of him. For it is not many mighty, nor wise of
the World, that can become fools for Christ's sake, or can become low in the
humility of Christ Jesus from their mighty state, through which they might
Receive a mightier Estate, and a mightier Kingdom through the Inward holy
Spirit, and the Divine Light and Power of God; and a mightier Wisdom, which is
from above, pure and peaceable; which Wisdom is above that, which is below,
that is earthly, sensual and devilish, by which men destroy one another, yea,
about their Religions, Ways and Worships, and Churches: but this they have not
from God nor Christ. But the Wisdom, which is from above, by which all things
was made and created, which the holy fear of God in the heart, is the beginning
of, that keeps the heart clean. And by and with this Wisdom are all God's
Children to be ordered; and with it come to order all things to God's glory. So
this is the Wisdom that is Justified of her Children: And in this fear of God
and Wisdom, my desire is, that thou may be preserved to God's glory. For the
Lord is come to teach his People himself, and to set up his Ensign, that the
Nations may flow unto it. And there has been an Apostasy, since the Apostles
days, from the Divine Light of Christ, which should have given them the Light
of the Knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; and likewise
from the holy Spirit; which would have Lead them into all Truth: and therefore
have People set up so many Leaders without them, to give them Knowledge: and
also from the holy and precious Faith, which Jesus Christ is the Author and
Finisher of: which Faith purifies the heart, and gives victory over that which
separates from God; through which Faith they have access to God, and in which
Faith they please God; the Mystery of which Faith is held in a pure Conscience.
And also from the Gospel, which was preached in the Apostle's days, (which
Gospel is the Power of God) which brings Life and Immortality to Light in Man
and Woman, by which People should have seen over the Devil, that has darkened
them; and before he was: which Gospel will preserve all them that receive it,
in Life and in Immortality. For the Eyes of People have been after Men, and not
after the Lord, who does write his Law in the hearts, and puts it into the
minds of all the Children of the New Covenant of Light, Life and Grace; through
which they all come to know the Lord from the Least to the Greatest: So that
the Knowledge of the Lord may cover the Earth, as the Waters does the Sea. And
this Work of the Lord is a beginning again, as it was in the Apostles days,
that People shall come to receive an Unction in them again from the holy One,
by which they shall know all things, and shall not need any man to teach them;
but as the Anointing does teach them: and also to know, what the Righteousness
of faith speaks; the Word nigh in the heart and mouth to obey it, and to do it:
which was the Word of Faith, the Apostles preached: Which is now received and
preached again; which is the duty of all true Christians to receive. And so now
People are coming out of the Apostasy to the Light of Christ and his Spirit,
and to receive Faith from him, and not from men; and to receive the Gospel from
him, and their Unction from him the Word; and as they receive him, they declare
him freely, as his Command was to his Disciples, and is so still to the
Learners and Receivers of him. For he Lord God and his Son Jesus Christ is come
to teach his People, and to bring them from all the Worlds Ways to Christ the
Way, the Truth, and the Life, who is the Way to the Father; and from all the
Worlds Teachers and Speakers, to him the Speaker and Teacher, as Hebr. 1.1. and
from all the Worlds Worshippers, to worship God in the Spirit, and in the
Truth, (which the Devil, the Destroyer, is out of:) which Worship Christ set up
above Sixteen hundred years ago, when he put down the Jews Worship at the
Temple at Jerusalem, and the Worship at the Mountain, where Jacob's Well was:
and to bring People from all the World's Religions, which they have made since
the Apostles days, to the Religion, that was set up by Christ and his Apostles,
which is Pure and Undefiled before God, and keeps from the Spots of the World:
And to bring them out of all the Worlds Churches and Fellowships, that they
have made and set up since the Apostles days; to the Church, that is in God the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, These. 1.1. and to bring to the Unity and
Fellowship in the holy Spirit, that does mortify, and circumcise, and baptize,
to plunge down Sin and Corruption, that has got up in Man and Woman by
Transgression: and in this holy Spirit there is a holy Fellowship and Unity:
yea, it is the Bond of the Prince of Princes, and King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords Peace: which heavenly Peace all the true Christians are to maintain with
Spiritual Weapons, not with Carnal.

And now my Friend, the holy Men of God did speak forth the Scriptures, as they
were moved by the holy Ghost; and all Christendom are on heaps about those
Scriptures, because they are not led by the same holy Ghost, as they were, that
gave forth the Scriptures; which holy Ghost they must come to in themselves,
and be led by, if they come into All the Truth of them, and to have the Comfort
of God, and Christ, and Them. For none can call Jesus Lord, but by the holy
Ghost; and all they, that do call Christ Lord without the holy Ghost, take his
Name in vain. And likewise all that name his Name, are to depart from Iniquity;
then they name his Name with Reverence in Truth and Righteousness. And O
therefore feel the Grace and Truth in thy heart, that is come by Jesus Christ,
which is a Teacher, that will teach thee, how to live, and what to deny; and it
will establish thy heart, and season thy words, and bring thy Salvation, and
will be a Teacher unto thee at all times; and by it thou may Receive Christ,
from whence it comes: and as many as Receive him, to them he gives power, not
only to stand against sin and evil, but to become the Sons of God: if Sons,
then Heirs of a Life, and a World and Kingdom, that is Everlasting, without
end, and of the Eternal Riches and Treasures thereof. So in haste, with my Love
in the Lord Jesus Christ, that has tasted death for every man, and bruises the
Serpents head, that has been betwixt Man and God, that through Christ, Man may
come to God again, and so can praise God through Jesus Christ, the Amen; who is
the spiritual and heavenly Rock and Foundation for all God's People to build
upon, to the praise and glory of God, who is over all, blessed for Evermore.

Amsterdam, the 7th of 6th Month, 1677. George Fox.
POSTSCRIPT.
THE Bearer hereof is a Daughter-in-law of mine, that comes with Gertrude
Dirick Nieson and George Keith's Wife, to give thee a Visit.

G. F.




The Princess Elizabeth her Answer to the aforesaid LETTER.
Dear Friend;
I Cannot but have a tender Love to those that love the Lord Jesus Christ, and
to whom it is given not only to believe in him, but also to suffer for him:
Therefore your Letter, and your Friends Visit, have been both very welcome to
me. I shall follow their and your Counsel, as far as God will afford me Light
and Unction: Remaining still

Hertfort the 30th of August, 1677. Your loving Friend, ELIZABETH.


Buyckslote. Purmerent.
Next day John Claus and I took Boat, and passed to Buyckslote, and thence to
Purmerent; where having stayed awhile, and refreshed our selves at an Inn, we
went by Wagon through the Country to Alcmaer, Alcmaer.
about Thirty Miles from Amsterdam. We went to a Friend's house there, whose
name was Willem Willems, where I had a Meeting that night. I had also another
Meeting there next day, which was larger: for several Professors came to the
Meeting; and all was quiet and well. When the Meeting was done, I went and
visited some Friends, and then, taking Boat, Hoorn. North-Holland.
passed-by several places to Hoorn, which is counted the chief City in
North-Holland. We lodged at an Inn there that night: and taking Wagon again
early next Morning, we passed through the Country to Enckhuysen, Enckhuysen.
Friezland. Workum
where we took Ship for Friezland; and landing in the Afternoon at Workum, took
Wagon there again, and rode along upon the high Bank of the Friezen Seas, till
we met Two Friends coming with a Wagon to meet us: Mackum.
with whom (discharging our Wagon at Mackum, a Village hard by) we went,
Harlingen.
in their Wagon, to Harlingen, the chief Sea-port-Town in Friezland. We went to
a Friend's house, whose Name was Hessel Jacobs, whither several Friends came to
Visit us that night. Next day we went among the Friends of the place, and
Visited them; and I wrote a Paper, directed, To all them, that persecute
Friends for not observing their Fastday.

The day following was the First Day of the Week, and Friends had a Meeting
there, to which we went; and many Professors came to it. I declared the
Everlasting Gospel amongst them, John Claus interpreting, and they were all
very Civil, and heard attentively: and when the Meeting was done, departed
peaceably, without making any Opposition. After Meeting I went to Hessel Jacobs
his house again, whither after a while came a Calvinist, to ask me some
Questions, which I answered to his satisfaction; and he departed friendly. Soon
after he was gone, a Preacher of the Collegians came to discourse with me,
1677. Harlingen.
and he seemed well satisfied also, and we parted lovingly. That Evening I had
another Meeting with the Friends there, and next Morning, when we had taken our
Leave of them, we passed to Leuwarden, the chief City in Friezland, Leuwarden.
and lodged that night at a Friend's house there, whose Name was Sybrand Dowes.

Next Morning early, taking Boat, we passed to Dockum, Dockum. Strobus.
and walking through the City, took Boat again to Strobus, which is the utmost
part of Friezland. There we baited, at a Commissary's house: and then taking
Boat again, we passed to Groningen, Groningen.
the chief City of the Province of Groningland. One of the Magistrates of that
City came with us from Leuwarden, with whom I had some discourse on the way;
and he was very loving. We walked near Two Miles through the City; and then
took Boat for Delfziel; and passing, in the Evening, Delfziel. Appingdalen.
through a Town called Appingdalem, where had been a great Horse-Fair that day,
there came many Officers rushing into the Boat, and being somewhat in drink,
they were very Rude. I spoke to them, exhorting them to fear the Lord, and
beware of Solomon 's vanities. They were a sort of boisterous Fellows; yet they
were somewhat more Civil afterward. We landed at Delfziel about the Tenth hour
at night, having traveled much about Fifty English Miles that day. We went to
an Inn to Lodge; and as we passed through the Guards, they Examined John Claus,
whether I was not a Militia Soldier? and when he had told them, that I was
not, they let us pass peaceably on.

This City Delfziel stands on the River Eems, over which we passed next day to
the City Embden, a Place, Embden.
where Friends had been cruelly persecuted, and from which they had been often
banished. I went to an Inn, where I stayed and dined with some men, that
understood English, with whom I had a fine time, and they were loving. Mean
while John Claus went with his Wife to her Fathers, who lived in Embden;
whither, after I had dined, I went also; understanding, the old Man was
desirous to see me. In the Afternoon John Claus and I walked through the City,
to the place where the Wagon, which he had hired, was to meet us: and while we
tarried for it, the Friends, that were in the City, came to the house, where we
were, and there we had a little Meeting. When the Meeting was over, and the
Wagon came not, we sent to know the Reason: and the Master of the Wagon sent us
word, that he durst not let his Wagon go; for the Bishop of Munster's Soldiers
were up in the Country, and he was afraid, they would take away his Horses. So
being disappointed of our passage, we returned to John Claus his
Father-in-law's house, where I left him, and went my self to my Inn at night.

We took Shipping next day, and passed about Fifteen Miles upon the River Eems,
to a Market Town in East-Friezland, River Eems. East-Friezland. Leer.
Strikehuysen.
called Leer, where lived a Friend, that had been banished from Embden: and
when we had visited him, we hired a Wagon in that Town, and passed to a
Garrison-Town, called Strikehuysen, where the Guards Examined us: 1677. Deteren.
and then we went on to Deteren, where hiring another Wagon, we passed through
the Country to another Garrisoned Town, where we were very strictly Examined.
Apre.
From thence we passed unto Apre, in the King of Denmark's Country, where we
lodged that night. In our Travel this day, we met the Earl of Oldenburgh, going
to the Treaty of Peace at Lembachie.

Next day, hiring another Wagon, we passed through the Country to the City
Oldenburgh, Oldenburgh.
lately a great and famous Place, but then burnt down; and but few houses left
standing in it. At this place we hired another Wagon, and went through the
Country to Delmenhurst: Delmenhurst.
where, after we had been Examined by the Guards, we went to a Burger-Master's
to lodge, whose house was an Inn. And there being many People, I declared the
Way of Truth to him and them, Warning them all of the Day of the Lord, that was
coming upon all Evildoers.

Germany. Bremen.
From hence we passed next day by Wagon to Bremen, which is a stately City in
Germany; and from thence, after a double Examination, Overdelend. Fisherholder.
we went by Wagon to a Water called Overdelend, and there took Boat to
Fisher-holder: Where finding pretty many People together, I declared the Way of
God to them, and exhorted them to fear the Lord. There we took Wagon again, and
traveled in the Bishop of Munster's Country, Munsterland. Closterseven.
to a place called Closterseven: and having no Inclination to stay there, we
got fresh Horses there, intending to travel all night. Accordingly we went out
a little way; but it quickly grew so dark, and rained so hard, that we thought
it best to turn back again thither: for our Wagon being open, we had no defense
against the Rain; and our Clothes were already wet with the Rain, that had
fallen for several days before. So we went back to an Inn, and got a little
fresh Straw; upon which we lay, till about break of day: and then set out in
our Wagon again, and traveled through the Country to the City of Buxtehude.
Buxtehude


The People in the Bishop of Munster's Country were very dark: and as we passed
amongst them, I preached Truth to them, warning them of the Great and Notable
Day of the Lord; and exhorting them to soberness, and to mind the good Spirit
of God in themselves.

It was on the First Day of the Week, that we went through this City Buxtehude;
and without the Walls was a great Fair of Sheep and Geese that day. We stayed
but a little, to refresh our selves, Hamborough.
and went on as fast as we could to Hamborough, partly by Wagon, and partly by
Water.

We got to Hamborough time enough to get a Meeting there that Evening; and a
good and glorious Meeting it was. There were at it, amongst others, a
Baptist-Teacher and his Wife, and a Great Man of Sweden and his Wife; and all
was quiet, blessed be the Lord, whose Power was Exalted over all: Yet a dark,
hard place this is; and the People are much shut up from Truth.

At Hamborough there was a Woman, 1677. Hamborough.
that had spoken against me, in John Perrot's time (though she had never seen
me, till now) and she had been troubled for it ever since; and now was glad of
an Opportunity to acknowledge her Fault: which she very readily did; and I did
as readily and freely forgive her.

We stayed that night at Hamborough, encouraging and strengthening the Friends
there in the Testimony to the Truth; and betimes next Morning we set forward
toward Frederick stadt, which is Two long days Journey from Hamborough. We
went the First Day to a Town called Elmshoorn, where we baited; Elmshoorn.
and then rode on through a Garrison-Town of the King of Denmark's: and passing
by the Monument of the Earl of Ransenny, Rantzow. Itzeho.
we came to the City of Itzeho, where we lodged that night; and I had some
Service in the Evening, among the People in the Inn, whom I exhorted to
soberness, and to live in the Fear of the Lord. Next Morning setting out again,
we traveled to a Town called Hoghenhorn, Hoghenhorn.
where we dined at an Inn with one of the Council of Frederick-stadt; to whom,
and to the rest of the People present, I declared the Truth, with which they
seemed to be affected. Then traveling on, we came to a River called Eyder,
where we took Boat, and so went to Frederick-stadt. The River Eyder.
Frederick-stadt.
We went to a Friend's house there, whose name is William Paul's, where several
Friends came to us (for there is a pretty many Friends in that City) and we had
a fine, refreshing Meeting together that Evening; which made us forget our
Weariness: for we were indeed very weary, having traveled hard those Two days;
and being Wet through our Clothes, having had much Rain in our Open Wagons. But
the Lord made all easy and good to us: and we were well, and glad to see
Friends; blessed be his holy name for ever!

This City is in the Duke of Holsteyn's Country, Holstein.
who would have banished Friends out of the City and Country, and did send to
the Magistrates of the City to do it: But they said, they would lay down their
Offices rather, than they would do it, inasmuch as Friends came to that City to
enjoy the Liberty of their Consciences. And not long after, the Duke himself
was banished out of that City, by the King of Denmark: but Friends do still
enjoy their Liberty there, and Truth and they are of good Report amongst the
People, both in City and Country.

On the First Day of the Week I had a Meeting here, to which many People came,
and some rough Spirits: but the Power of the Lord bound them down, and the Seed
of Life was set over all. While I was here, I had a Discourse with a Jew, that
was a Levite, concerning the Coming of the Messiah; and he was much confounded,
in what he said: Yet he carried himself lovingly, and Invited me to his house:
I went thither, and there I discoursed with another Jew, who showed me their
Talmud, and many other Jewish Books: but they are very dark, and do not
understand their own Prophets.

There was at this City a Baptist-Teacher, who had reproached and belied
Friends: 1677. Frederickstadt.
wherefore John Claus went, with Two Friends of the Town, to the house, where
he lodged, and cleared Truth and Friends from his Reproaches, and laid his Lies
and Slanders upon his own head, to his shame.

Before we left this Place, I had another Meeting with the Friends only,
wherein I laid before them the Usefulness and Benefit of a Monthly Meeting, for
the looking after the Poor, and taking care, that Marriages, and all other
things relating to the Church, were done and performed in an orderly Manner:
and the thing Answered the Witness of God in their Consciences, so that they
readily Consented, and Agreed to have Monthly Meetings thence-forward amongst
themselves, that both Men and Women might look after, and take care of the
outward Concerns of the Church.

After this Meeting, feeling my spirit clear of that place, we took leave of
Friends there (whom we left in good Order) and not intending to go further that
way, we turned back again for Hamborough. When we had traveled one days
Journey, and came to an Inn at night to Lodge, I inquired there, whether there
were any tender People in the Town, that feared God, or that had a mind to
discourse of the things of God? but the Inn keeper told me, there were few such
in that Town. Next night we got to Hamborough; Hamborough.
and having passed the Guards, we went to a Friend's house, being very Weary:
for we had been up those Two Mornings before the third hour, and had traveled
each day hard and late. Here we met with John Hill, an English Friend, who had
been traveling in Germany; and being in a Ship bound for Amsterdam, that
waited for a Wind, he had lain sick on board her about two weeks; and now
hearing, that I was in the Country, got off from the Ship, and came hither to
meet me, and to go along with me.

The next day after we came to Hamborough, we had a very good Meeting there,
and very peaceable. After the Meeting I had Discourse with a Swede, an Eminent
man in his own Country; who having been banished from thence upon the Account
of his Religion, was come to Hamborough, and was at the Meeting I had there
before. And when I had done with him, I had another Discourse wirh a Baptist,
concerning the Sacraments (so called:) In both which I had good service, having
opportunity thereby to open Truth unto them.

Being clear of Hamborough, we took our Leave of Friends there, whom we left
well: And taking John Hill along with us, we passed by Boat to a City in the
Duke of Lunenbergh's Country; Lunenburghs Country.
where after we were Examined by the Guards, we were had to the Main-Guard, and
there Examined more strictly: but after they found, that we were not Soldiers,
they were Civil to us, and let us pass. In the Afternnoon we traveled by
Wagon, and the Waters being much out, by reason of the great Rains that had
fallen, when it drew toward night, we hired a Boy upon the Way to guide us
through a great Water, that we had to pass. When we came to it, the Water was
so deep, 1677. Lunenburghs Country.
before we could come at the Bridge, that the Wagoner was fain to wade, and I
drove the Wagon. But when we were come upon the Bridge, the Horses brake part
of it down, and one of them fell into the Water; the Wagon standing upon that
part of the Bridge, which remained unbroken: and it was the Lord's mercy to us,
that the Wagon did not run into the Brook. When they had got the Horse out, he
lay a while, as if he had been dead: but at length they got him up, and put him
to the Wagon again, and laid the Planks right; and then (through the goodness
of the Lord to us) we got safe over.

After this we came to another Water, which finding to be very deep, and it
being in the night, we hired Two Men to help us through. These men put Cords to
the Wagon, to hold it by, that the force of the Water might not drive it beside
the way. But when we came into it, the Stream was so strong, that it took up
one of the Horses off his legs, and was carrying him down the Stream; which I
seeing, called to the Wagoner, to pluck him to him by his Reins, which he did,
and the Horse recovered his Legs, and so with much difficulty we got over the
Bridge, and went to Bormer-haven, Bormer-haven.
the Town where the Wagoner lived. It was the last day of the sixth Month, that
we escaped these dangers; and it being about the eleventh hour in the night,
when we came in here, we got some fresh straw, and lay upon it, till about the
fourth hour in the Morning: and then getting up, we set forward again toward
Bremen, going part of the way by Wagon, and part by Boat. In the way I had good
Opportunities to publish Truth among the People, especially at a Market Town,
where we stayed to Change our Passage; where I declared the Truth to the
People, warning them of the Day of the Lord, that was coming upon all Flesh;
and Exhorting them to Righteousness, and telling them, that God was come to
Teach his People himself, and that they should turn to the Lord, and hearken to
the Teachings of his Spirit in their own hearts.

At Bremen we were Examined (as we usually were in Cities and Garrison-Towns)
and after that we went to an Inn, Bremen.
and stayed a while, till another Wagon was provided to carry us further. And
here, though I felt the Lord's Power was over the City, and kept the wicked and
unruly Spirits down, yet my Spirit suffered much in this place, for the Peoples
sake. When our Wagon was ready, we left Bremen, and traveled through the
Country to Keby, where we lodged at an Inn that night, Keby.
and early next Morning set forth for Oldenburgh; Oldenburgh.
which was a lamentable sight, to see so great and brave a City burnt down. We
went to an Inn, and though it was the First Day of the Week, there were the
Soldiers drinking, and playing at Shovel-board; and at those few Houses, that
were left, the Shops were open, and the People Trading one with another. I was
moved to speak to the People, and declare the Truth among them, and warn them
of the Judgments of God: And though they heard me quietly, and were civil
toward me; yet I was burdened with their Wickedness. 1677. Oldenburgh.
And many times in Mornings, Noons and Nights, at the Inns, and on the Ways, as
I traveled, I spoke to the People, preaching the Truth to them, and warning
them of the Day of the Lord, and Exhorting them to turn to the Light and Spirit
of God in themselves, that thereby they might be led out of Evil.

Next day, passing through many great Waters, we came at night to Leer, Leer.
Embden.
and the day following to Embden, where John Claus his Wife's Father lived: at
whose house, when we went up into Germany, we left a Young Man sick, who
traveled with me, and used to write for me; whom now, at our Return, we found
pretty well recovered. John Claus went to his Father-in-law's; John Hill and I
to an Inn, where we dined: and after dinner we went also to John Claus his
Father's, and had a good Meeting there in the Evening.

The day following we took shipping at Embden, and passed to Delfziel, Delfziel.
and went to an Inn, where a Friend came to us, that then lived in Delfziel,
having been often Banished from Embden: He was a Goldsmith by Trade, and had an
House and Shop in Embden; and still, as they banished him, he went again. Then
they Imprisoned him, and fed him with bread and water; and at length took his
Goods from him, and Banished him, his Wife and Children; leaving them neither
place to come to, nor any thing to subsist on. We Comforted and Encouraged him
in the Lord, Exhorting him to be faithful, and stand steadfast in the Testimony
committed to him. And when we had taken our Leave of him, Groningen.
we took Boat, and passed the same day to Groningen, where we met with
Cornelius Andries, a Friend, that had also suffered much by Imprisonment and
Banishment at Embden. We went with him to his house; and the next day we had a
good Meeting in that City, to which several Professors came, and were very
peaceable and attentive. After Meeting we passed by Boat to Strobus, Strobus
Dockum. Friezland. Leuwarden.
and so to Dockum, where we lodged that night at an Inn. And taking Boat again
next morning, we passed to Leuwarden, the chief City of Friezland, where I
found my daughter Yeomans, who was come from Amsterdam thither to meet me. That
day we had a precious Meeting there, at Sybrand Dowe's house; and after the
Meeting I had some Discourse with some, that were at the Meeting, who had been
formerly Convinced of Truth; but were not come into Obedience to it. We stayed
there that night; but John Hill left us, and went that day to Harlingen, and so
to Amsterdam.

Next day we passed away by Boat down the River to the Lake of Hempen-Sarmer,
Hempen-Sarmer. Lugmer Anderigo. Whispool. Gardick.
and thence by the Lake Lugmer, and so to a Town called Anderigo: from whence
sailing through the Lake Whispool, we came to a Town called Gardick. It was
within night, when we came thither, and we went, and lodged at an Inn: and the
next day, being the First Day of the Week, we were at Friends-Meeting there,
which was very large, many of the Towns-People coming in: Amongst whom I
declared the Truth, in the Power of the Lord, that was upon me; which tendered
the People, and they were very sober. 1677. Gardick.
After the Meeting we stayed but a little while to refresh our selves; and then
went to take Boat again: but the People observing us, gathered together at a
Bridge, where we were to pass; and there I spoke unto them again, declaring the
Way of Life and Salvation unto them: and they were very Attentive and Civil.

We took Boat, and went back that Evening to Leuwarden, Leuwarden
being 27 Miles: but before we could get thither, the Gates were shut, and the
Bridges drawn up, so that we could not get into the City; but were fain to lie
in the Boat all night. And the next Morning, there having been a Man killed in
the City that night, it was late, before the Gates were opened. When we could
get in, we went to a Friend's house, where we stayed a while; and then, taking
Boat again, we passed through Franeker to Harlingen, Franeker. Harlingen.
to Hessel Jacobs, where we found several Dutch Friends, who were come to be at
the Meeting there next day. In the Evening William Penn came to us from
Amsterdam, who returning two or three days before out of Germany, had been at a
large Meeting at Amsterdam on the First Day; and after Meeting, understanding I
was at Harlingen, came thither to me.

The next day was the Monthly Meeting for the Men and Women, to which we went;
and it was large and good. And there it was Agreed upon amongst Friends, That
there should be a Meeting held there once a Month, both for the Men and for the
Women, to take care of the outward Concerns of the Church.

In the Afternoon we had a public Meeting, to which came People of several
sorts, as Socinians, Baptists, Lutherans, etc. amongst which was a Doctor of
Physic, and a Priest. And after I had declared the Truth a pretty large time
to the People, opening unto them the happy Estate, that Man and Woman were in,
whilst they kept under God's Teaching, and abode in the Paradise of God; and on
the other hand, the Woe and Misery that came upon them, when they went from
God's Teaching, and harkening to the Serpent's Teaching, transgressed God's
Command, and were driven out of the Paradise of God: And then came to set forth
the Way, whereby Man and Woman might come into that happy Estate again. The
Priest, an ancient, grave Man, stood up, just as I had done speaking, and
putting off his Hat, said, I pray God to prosper and confirm that Doctrine, for
it is Truth, and I have nothing against it. He would willingly have stayed
longer, until the Meeting had been ended; but being a Parish Priest, and to
preach that Evening, he could not stay longer, (the time for his own Worship
being come:) Wherefore, when he had made Confession to the Truth, he hastened
away, that he might come to the Meeting again; and did come, it seems to the
Meeting Place, but the Meeting was ended first. After Meeting we went to Hessel
Jacobs, where I had a Meeting with Friends; and the Doctor of Physic came
thither to discourse with William Penn, who had a good opportunity to open
Truth to him. By this Doctor the Priest sent his Love to me, wishing him to
tell me, that he had left Preaching that Evening half an hour sooner, than he
used to do, that he might have come to our Meeting again, 1677. Harlingen.
to have heard more of that good Doctrine. I heard afterward, that his Hearers
questioned him, for what he had said in our Meeting; and that, he standing by
his words, they had Complained of him for it to the other Priests of the City,
who called him to Account about it: but the Result I could not learn.

Early next Morning William Penn, taking John Claus with him, passed from
Harlingen for Leuwarden, where he had appointed a Meeting; intending, after
that, to Travel into some other parts of Germany, to visit a tender People
there. I, with those Friends that were with me, Amsterdam.
took Ship the same day for Amsterdam, where we arrived a little after
Midnight; but the Gates being shut, we lay on Board till Morning: then went to
Gertrude Dirick Nieson's, where many Friends came to see us, being glad of our
safe Return. Next day, feeling a Concern upon my mind, with relation to those
seducing Spirits, that made Division among Friends; and being sensible, that
they endeavored to insinuate themselves into the affectionate part, I was
moved to write a few Lines to Friends concerning them, as follows:

ALL these, that do set up themselves in the Affections of the People, set up
themselves, and the Affections of the People, and not Christ. But Friends, your
peaceable Habitation in the Truth, which is Everlasting, and changes not, will
out-last all the Habitations of those that be out of the Truth, although they
be never so full of words. And so, they that be so keen for J. S. and J. W. let
them take them, and the Separation. And you, that have given your Testimony
against that Spirit, stand in your Testimony, till they Answer by Condemnation:
And do not strive, nor make Bargains with that which is out of the Truth; nor
save that alive, to be a Sacrifice for God, which should be slain, lest you
lose your Kingdom.

Amsterdam the 14th day of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.


On the First Day of the Week following, I was at Friends Meeting at Amsterdam,
to which many People came, and were very civil and attentive, hearing Truth
declared several hours; and John Roeloffs Interpreted for me.

Before this time, several of the Friends, that came over with me, were
returned to England again, as Robert Barclay, George Keith's Wife, and others;
and now my Daughter Yeomans went back also: so that I was now left alone at
Amsterdam. And while I was here, it came upon me to visit my suffering Friends
at Dantzick with a few Lines, to encourage and strengthen them in their
Sufferings, as follows:

Dear Friends,
TO whom is my Love in the Lord's Truth, that is over all, 1677. Amsterdam.
and by which all God's People are made free Men and Women, being thereby set
free from him that is out of the Truth; that walking in the Truth, they may
Answer the Witness of God in all People: which Truth all must come to, if they
be made free. Therefore be faithful, unto what the Lord manifests, and makes
known unto you. I am glad, that the Lord has Witnesses in that City, to stand
for his Glory and Name, and to stand up for Christ Jesus, the great Prophet,
whom God has raised up, who is to be heard in all things; so that ye need none
of the Prophets, which men have raised up. Therefore stand faithful to Christ
Jesus, your Shepherd, that he may feed you; and hear his voice, and follow him,
who has laid down his Life for you: but follow none of the Shepherds and
Hirelings, that are made by men, though they be angry, because ye will not
follow them to their dry and barren Mountains; who have been, and are the
Thieves, Persecutors and Robbers, that Clime up another way, than by Christ. So
set up Christ to be your Counselor and Leader, and then, ye will have no need
of any of the Counselors and Leaders of the World: for Christ is sufficient,
whom God has given you. And also set up Christ Jesus to be your Bishop, and
Overseer, who is sufficient to Oversee you, that ye go not astray from God; by
which ye may see over all the Hireling-Overseers made by men, which do keep the
People, that they do not go astray from the Rudiments and Formalities, Fashions
and Customs of the World, which has been and is their Work. And I am glad,
that ye are come to own Christ Jesus, your High Priest, who is holy and
harmless, and separate from Sinners, and made higher than the Heavens, as the
Church and the Apostle did own him in their days, Hebr. 7. who is the
High Priest over the household of Faith; which Faith Jesus Christ is the Author
and Finisher of: and this do all the Children of the New Covenant witness, who
walk in the new and living Way. And therefore my desire is, that ye all may be
steadfast, whether in Bonds, or out, in the Faith of Christ Jesus, which is the
Gift of God; by which Faith all the Valiants overcame the Devil, and all their
Enemies; in which Faith they had Victory and Access to God; and in that was
their Unity: which Mystery of Faith is held in a pure Conscience, hidden from
the World. And I do believe, that your Imprisonments and Sufferings in that
Place, will be for Good in the end (as it has been in other Places) ye
standing faithful to the Lord, who is All-sufficient. For your Sufferings and
Trials will Try their Teachers and Religions, Churches and Worships, and make
manifest, what Birth they are of; even that which persecutes him, that is born
of the Spirit: for ye know, that there is no Salvation by any other Name under
the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; and therefore it is time to leave
them, when there is no Salvation by or in any of them. Now Friends, I desire,
that you would take a List of the Names of all those Persons, that belong to
the King of Poland, and where they do live, and how ye may send Books or
Epistles to them, and keep a Correspondence with them; and also the Name of the
Bishop or Cardinal, that I heard was with you: And if ye can get any of them,
that belong to the King, that are his Attendants, to come and visit the
Prisoners, that they may Inform the King of their Cruel Sufferings. Also I
desire you to get as many Books of mine, as you can dispose of, that set forth
your Sufferings, and the Cruelty of the Magistrates of Dantzick; and give them
to the King, and his Council, and Attendants, and his Bishops. And some of the
Women may speak to the Queen, if they can, that she may signify to the King
their Cruel Sufferings; and especially some of the Sufferers Wives, if there be
any of a Capacity to do it: You may likewise give his Attendants any other
Friends Books; and what Books ye lack, send for them to Amsterdam, where ye may
be furnished with them, to Answer every tender Desirer, and Inquiring mind
after the Lord. So let all your Minds be bended with the Lord's Power, to
spread his Truth abroad; and where ye hear of any, or have any Correspondence
in outward Trading with any sober People, far or near, send them Books, that
their Understandings may be opened after the Lord. So the Lord God Almighty
preserve you; and to his Protection, in his Eternal Power, do I Commend you
all, in Bonds or at Liberty, with my Love to you in the Everlasting Seed of
God, Christ Jesus, who bruises the Head of the Serpent, that make you to
suffer. But Christ is over him, and will be, when he is gone; who is First and
Last, over all, from Everlasting to Everlasting, in whom ye have both Life,
Knowledge, Wisdom and Salvation, and through him live to the Praise and Glory
of God, who is blessed for evermore, Amen.

Amsterdam the 18th of the 7th Month 1677. English style. G. F.


The next day (being the Fourth day of the Week, and 19th of the Month) I had a
large Meeting at Amsterdam, many Professors being at it; and Truth was largely
opened to them, in the demonstration of the heavenly Power. The day following I
went by Boat from Amsterdam, Waterland. Landsmeer
many Friends going with me, to Landsmeer in Waterland (a Town, in which, they
say, there are above an hundred Bridges) where I had a very good Meeting, to
which several Professors came. And after the Meeting I returned, with Friends
to Amsterdam again, Amsterdam.
where I stayed with Friends, till the First Day following; and went to their
Meeting, which was large: for many Professors of several sorts were at it, and
heard the Truth declared with great Attention.

I tarried amongst Friends there next day, and in the night following had a
great Exercise upon my Spirit concerning that loose Spirit, that was run out
into Strife and Contention among Friends, and had drawn some after it into
Division and Separation; the way, work and end whereof the Lord opened to me:
wherefore feeling the Motion of Life upon me, I got up in the Morning, and
wrote the following Epistle to Friends.

My Dear Friends,
KEep your First Love in the Truth, and Power and Seed of Life in Christ Jesus:
for this last night, as I was lying in my Bed at Amsterdam, I had a great
Travel in the holy Seed of Life and Peace, and my Spirit was troubled with that
Spirit of Strife and Separation. I saw, it was a Destroying Spirit, and did
seek not only to get over the Seed, but to destroy it, and to Eat out the minds
of People from it by Strife and Contention: and under pretense of standing for
the Ancient Truth, its work is to root it out; and destroy the Appearance of
it, to set up it self. And it is a Creeping Spirit, seeking, whom it can get
into; and what it cannot do it self, it stirs up others to do, and sets
up their Spirits on float, with the dark Wisdom, to destroy the Simple. And
this Spirit is managed by the Prince of the Air, and leads some to do such
things, which they would have been ashamed to have done, as men, which does
Unman them: and they would not have suffered them, if they had kept to the
tender Principle of God, which leads to Peace. And it is a despising,
backbiting, and a secret-whispering Spirit, and a Sower of Dissension, and a
taker of advantage of all prejudiced Spirits, that are disobedient to their
first Principle and Love of Truth, and begets into hatred; so it begets
all into that Spirit, whose work is to destroy both the Good within, and the
good Order without: Nay, it would, if it could, destroy the Government of
Christ, and the Order of the Gospel, to set up its own Will and Spirit, which
is not of God: and under pretense of crying down Man, are setting up Man, and
are gathering into a Separation of disobedient Men, who float above their
Conditions. And this Spirit, which neither lives in the Truth, nor its Order,
but opposes them that do, I cannot express it, as I do see it and its work,
whose end will be accordingly. And therefore, Friends, I am to warn you all,
that have not lost your Simplicity, not to touch it, nor to have any Unity with
it; lest you be defiled, and lose your Conditions of your Eternal Estate, and
your Everlasting Portion: and that your Inward man, which is after God, may be
preserved; and Christ may reign in all your hearts. And they that are joined
with them, it will be very hard for them ever to come down to Truth in
themselves, and to see their own Conditions, and to have that Spirit of Strife
and Contention (which eats as a Canker) to be brought down in them; which is
carnal, and slays the tender Babe, which was once begotten in themselves: and
the Philistine is got up in them, that stops the Wells and Springs, and
makes a great Busle; and are crying up Men, and pleading for them instead of
Christ. And so, Friends, strive not with them; but let them take them, that cry
them up: and keep you to the Lord Jesus Christ with his Light, that comes from
him; that he may be your Lord, and ye in him may be all in Unity, in one Light,
Life, Power and Dominion in Christ, your Head. And so the God of Peace and
Power preserve you all in Christ Jesus, your Savior; and out of and from that
mischievous Spirit, which is idle and slothful, as to the Work of the Power,
and Spirit, and Light of God and Christ; and its very Act is that which works
strife and disturbance against the Peace of the Church of Christ, and thinks in
its wilfulness, and stubbornness, and unruliness to set up it self, and in that
to have peace: but Destruction will be the end of it; and it is sealed for the
Fire and Eternal Judgment. And therefore let Christ the Seed be the Head and
Crown of every one of you, that nothing may be between you, and the Lord God.
And be not deceived with vain Words, or fained Words, or rough: for Satan is
transforming himself, as an Angel of Light, to deceive; but God's Foundation
stands sure, and God knows, who are his, and will preserve his upon the
Rock and Foundation of Life, in his peaceable Truth and Habitation; that in the
same they may grow. And so keep out of Strife and Contention, with it, after
that ye have born your Testimony, in the Lord's Power and Truth, against it;
and then keep in the Truth: for it has a life in scribbling, strife and
jangling, because it would enlarge its Hell, and bring others into its Misery,
with the airy Power, and would get Power over the Good, and disjoin People from
it; and so to make Rapes upon the Simplicity by its Subtilty. But I do believe,
the Lord will defend his People, though he may try them, and exercise them with
this Spirit for a time, as he has done by it in days past, in other Vessels it
has made use of, as it does of these now; who have a more seeming fair
Outside, but foul, and rough, and rugged enough within, against the Seed,
Christ, as ever were the Pharisees to destroy it: And they, under a pretense of
Preaching Christ, are the men, that are the Destroyers and Crucifiers of him,
and Killers of the Just not only in themselves, but endeavoring with all their
might to destroy it in others, where it is born; Pharaoh and Herod, to slay the
young Jews in the Spirit, as the Old did: I do feel it Worrying of them; and it
is got up to be King, which knew not suffering Joseph. But God will plague him;
and the Seed will have more rest, and be better entertained in Egypt, than
under Herod, into whom Old Pharaoh's Spirit is entered. He that has an Ear to
hear, let him hear; and an Eye to see, let him see, how this Spirit has
Transformed in all Ages against the Just and Righteous: but mark, what has
been its end. But the Seed reigns; Glory to the Lord God over all for ever!
and his Truth spreads: and Friends here are in Unity and Peace, and of good
Report, answering the good, or that of God in People. And so my desires are,
that all God's People may do the same in all places, wherever they be, so
that the Lord may be glorified, in their bringing forth much Fruit, that is
heavenly and spiritual, Amen.

Amsterdam the 25 of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.


After I had given forth the foregoing Epistle, whereby my Spirit was in some
measure eased of the Weight, that lay upon it; I went in the Afternoon to the
Monthly Meeting of Friends at Amsterdam, where the Lord was present with us,
and refreshed our Spirits together in himself.

I thought to have gone next day to Harlem; but there being a Fast appointed to
be kept that day, I was stopped in my Spirit, and moved to stay at Friends
Meeting that day at Amsterdam. We had a very large Meeting, a great Concourse
of People coming to it; and amongst them many great Persons. The Lord's Power
was over the Meeting; and in the Openings thereof I was moved to declare to the
People, That no man by all his wit and study, nor by reading History in his own
Will, could declare or know the Generation of Christ; who was not begotten by
the Will of Man, but by the Will of God. After I had largely opened this unto
them, I showed them the Difference between the true Fast, and the false;
manifesting unto them, that the professed Christians, Jews and Turks were out of
the true Fast, and fasted for strife and debate, being under the Band and Fists
of Iniquity and Oppression, wherewith they were smiting one another: but the
pure hands were not lifted up to God. And though they did all appear to men to
Fast, and did hang down their Heads for a day, like a Bulrush, yet that was not
the Fast which God did accept: but in that state all their Bones were dry; and
when they called upon the Lord, he did not Answer them, neither did their
Health grow: for they kept their own Fast, and not the Lord's. And there I
exhorted them to come and keep the Lord's Fast, which was to fast from Sin and
Iniquity, from Strife and Debate, from Violence and Oppression, and to abstain
from every Appearance of Evil. These things were opened to the astonishment of
the Fasters; and the Meeting ended peaceably and well.

I went to Harlem the day following, Harlem.
having before appointed a Meeting to be there that day. Peter Hendricks and
Gertrude Dirick Nieson went with me; and a blessed Meeting we had. There were
at the Meeting Professors of several sorts, and a Priest of the Lutherans, who
sat very Attentive for several hours, while I declared the Truth amongst them;
Gertrude Interpreting. When the Meeting was done, the Priest said; That he had
heard nothing, but what was according to the Word of God; and desired, That the
Blessing of the Lord might rest upon us, and our Assemblies. Others also
confessed to the Truth, saying; They had never heard things so plainly opened
to their understandings before.

We stayed that night at Harlem at a Friend's house, whose name was Dirick
Klassen; and returning next day to Amsterdam, went to Gertrude's house: where
we had not been long come in, before there came a Priest of great note, who had
formerly belonged to the Emperor of Germany; and with him another German
Priest, desiring to have some Conference with me. So I took the Opportunity to
declare the Way of Truth unto them; opening unto them, how they might come to
know God and Christ, and his Law and Gospel: and showing them, that they could
never know it by study, nor by Philosophy; but by Divine Revelation through the
Spirit of God, opening unto them in the stilness of their Minds. The men were
tender, and went away well satisfied.

On the First Day of the Week following, I was at Friends Meeting at Amsterdam,
where, amongst the several sorts of Professors, that were present, there was a
Doctor of Poland, who for his Religion was banished from the place, he lived
in; and he being affected with the Testimony of Truth, that was born in the
Meeting, came after the Meeting, to have some Discourse with me: and after we
had been some time together, and I had opened things further to him; he went
away very Tender and Loving.

Now while I was at Amsterdam, I spent most of my time (except it were, when I
was at Friends Meetings, or when People came to speak with me) in Writing
Books, Papers, or Epistles on Truth's behalf. For I writ several Epistles from
Amsterdam to Friends in England and elsewhere, on several Occasions, as the
Lord moved me by his Spirit thereunto. I writ also from thence A Warning to the
Inhabitants of the City Oldenburgh, which was lately burnt down: Also A Warning
to the Inhabitants of the City of Hamborough. I writ also an Epistle to the
Ambassadors, that were treating a Peace at Nimmeguen. To the Magistrates and
Priests of Embden I writ a Book, showing them their Unchristian Practices in
persecuting Friends. And several other Books I writ there, in Answer to Priests
and others, of Hamborough, Dantzick, and other places, to Clear the Truth and
Friends from their false Charges and Slanders.

After some time George Keith and William Penn came back from Germany to
Amsterdam, and had a Dispute with one Galenus Abraham's (one of the most noted
Baptists in Holland) at which many Professors were present: But not having time
to finish the Dispute then, they met again two days after; and the Baptist was
much Confounded, and Truth gained ground. Between these Two Disputes we had a
very great Meeting at Friends Meeting Place, at which many hundreds of the
World's People were, and some of high Rank in the World's Account: for there
was an Earl, and a Lord, and diverse other Eminent Persons, who all behaved
themselves very Civilly. But when the Meeting was ended, some Priests began to
make some Opposition; which when William Penn understood, he stood up again,
and answered them to the great satisfaction of the People; who were much
affected with the several Testimonies, that they had heard declared. And after
the Meeting several of them came to Gertrude's, where we were, with whom George
Keith had much Discourse in Latin.

Having now finished our Service at Amsterdam, we took Leave of the Friends
there, and passed by Wagon to Leyden, Leyden.
which is about 25 Miles; where we stayed a day or two, seeking out and
visiting some tender People, that we heard of there. We met there with a
German, who was partly Convinced; and he Informed us of an Eminent Man, that
was inquiring after Truth. Some sought him out, and visited him, and found him
a Serious Man; and I spoke to him, and he owned the Truth. William Penn and
Benjamin Furly went to visit another Great Man, that lived a little out of
Leyden, who, they said, had been General to the King of Denmark's Forces; and
he and his wife were very loving to them, and heard the Truth with Joy.

From Leyden we went to the Hague, Hague.
where the Prince of Orange then kept his Court; and we visited one of the
Judges of Holland, with whom we had pretty much Discourse. He was a Wise,
Tender man, and put many Objections and Queries to us; which when we had
answered, he was satisfied, and parted with us in much Love. Then leaving the
Hague, we went to Delft, and from thence that night to Rotterdam, Delft.
Rotterdam
where we stayed several days, and had several Meetings there. While I was
here, I gave forth a Book for the Jews: with whom, when I was at Amsterdam, I
had a desire to have had some Discourse; but they would not. Here also I
reviewed several other Books and Papers, which I had given forth before, and
were now Transcribed.

And now finding our Spirits Clear of the Service, which the Lord had given us
to do in Holland, we took Leave of: Friends of Rotterdam, and passed by Boat to
the Briel, in order to take Passage that day in the Packet-Boat for England;
several Friends of Rotterdam accompanying us, and some of Amsterdam, who were
come to see us again, before we left Holland. But the Packet-Boat not coming in
till night, we were fain to lodge that night at the Briel: and next day, being
the One and twentieth of the Eighth Month, and the First Day of the Week, we
went on Board, and set Sail about the Tenth hour, viz. William Penn, George
Keith and I, and Gertrude Dirick Nieson, with her Children.

We were in all about sixty Passengers, and had a long and hazardous Passage:
for the Winds were contrary to us, and the Weather stormy; the Boat also very
leaky, insomuch, that we were fain to have two Plumps continually going both
day and night; so that it was thought, there was twice as much Water plumped
out, as the Vessel would have held. But the Lord, who is able to make the
stormy Winds to cease, and the Raging Waves of the Sea to be calm, yea to raise
them, and stop them at his pleasure, he alone did preserve us: praised be his
Name for ever! Though our Passage was hard, yet we had a fine time, and good
Service for Truth on Board among the Passengers, some of whom were a sort of
great Folks; and they were very kind and loving. 1677. Harwich.
We arrived at Harwich on the 23th of the 8th Month at night, having been Two
Nights and almost Three Days at Sea. Next Morning William Penn and George Keith
took Horse for Colchester; but I stayed, and had a Meeting at Harwich: and
there being no Colchester-Coach there, and the Post-masters Wife being
Unreasonable in her Demands for a Coach, and deceiving us of it also, after we
had hired it; we went to a Friend's House about a mile and an half off in the
Country, and hired his Wagon, which we bedded well with Straw, and rode in it
to Colchester. Colchester


I stayed in Colchester, till the First Day of the Week, having a desire to be
at Friends Meeting there that day; and a very large and weighty Meeting it was:
for Friends hearing of my Return from Holland, flocked in thither from several
parts of the Country, and many of the Towns People coming in also, it was
thought, there were about a Thousand People at the Meeting; and all was
peaceable. Then having stayed a day or two longer at Colchester, having Service
amongst the Friends there, I traveled through Essex, Essex. Halsted.
Braintree. Felsted. Saling. ^helmsford. London.
visiting Friends at Halsted, Braintree, Felsted and Saling, and having
Meetings with them. At Chelmsford I had a Meeting in the Evening; and there
being many Friends Prisoners, they got liberty, and came to the Meeting: and we
were well refreshed together in the Lord. Next day, being the 9th of the 9th
Month, I got to London, where Friends received me with great Joy; and on the
First Day following went to Gracious-street Meeting, where the Lord visited us
with his refreshing Presence, and the Glory of the Lord surrounded the Meeting;
praised be the Lord!

After I had been a little while in London, I writ the following Letter to my
Wife, whom (though I had written to her several times out of Holland) I had not
written to, since I came into England.

Dear Heart,
TO whom is my Love, and to the Children, and to all the rest of Friends, in
the Lord's Truth, Power and Seed, that is over all; Glory to the Lord, and
blessed be his Name for ever beyond all words, who has carried me through, and
over many Trials and Dangers in his Eternal Power. I have been Twice at
Gracious-street-Meeting; and though the opposite Spirits were there, yet all
was quiet, and the Dew of Heaven fell upon the People, and the Glory of the
Lord shined over all. Every day I am fain to be at Meetings about Business, and
Sufferings, which are great abroad; and now many Friends are concerned with
many Persons about them: So in haste, with my Love to you all --

London the 24th of the 9th Month, 1677. G. F.


About this time I received Letters from New England, 1677. London.
which gave account of the Magistrates and Rulers cruel and unchristian-like
Proceedings against Friends there, whipping and abusing them very shamefully:
for they whipped many Women-Friends; and one Woman they tied to a Cart, and
dragged her along the Street, she being stripped above the wast. Yea, they
whipped some Masters of Ships, that were not Friends, only for bringing Friends
thither. And at that very time, while they were persecuting Friends in this
barbarous manner, the Indians slew threescore of their Men, and took one of
their Captains, and fleyed the skin off of his head, while he was alive, and
carried it away in Triumph: So that the sober People said; The Judgments of God
came upon them for persecuting the Quakers: but the blind, dark Priests said;
It was, because they did not persecute them enough. So a great Exercise I had
in seeking Relief here for our poor suffering Friends there, that they might
not lie under the Rod of the Wicked.

Upon this and other Services for Truth, to get Friends sufferings in several
places taken off, I stayed in London a month or five weeks, visiting Meetings,
and helping and encouraging Friends to labor for the deliverance of their
suffering Brethren in other parts. Afterward I went down to Kingston, Kingston
and visited Friends there, and there-away. And having stayed a little among
Friends there, over looking a Book, which I had then ready to go to the Press;
Bucks.
I went from thence cross the Country into Buckinghamshire, visiting Friends,
and having several Meetings amongst them; as at Amersham, Hunger-hill, Jordans,
Hedgerly, Amersham. Hunger-hill. Jordans. Hedgerly. Wickham-Turvil-heath.
Wickham and Turvil-heath: In some of which, they that were gone out from the
Unity of Friends in Truth, into Strife, Opposition and Division, were very
unruly and troublesome. Particularly at the Mens-Meeting at Thomas Ellwood's at
Hunger-hill, where the Chief of them came from Wickham, endeavoring to make a
disturbance in the Meeting, and to hinder Friends from proceeding in the
business of the Meeting. When I saw their design, I admonished them to be sober
and quiet, and not trouble the Meeting, by interrupting the Service thereof;
but rather, if they were dissatisfied with Friends Proceedings, and had any
thing to Object, let a Meeting be Appointed on purpose some other day. So
Friends offered them to give them a Meeting another day: and at length it was
Agreed to be at Thomas Ellwood's the week following. Hunger-hill.
Accordingly Friends met them there, and the Meeting was in the Barn (for there
came so many, both of Friends, and of them, that the House could not receive
them:) So after we had sat a while, they began their Jangling; and most of
their Arrows were shot at me: but the Lord was with me, and gave me strength in
his Power to cast back their Darts of Envy and Falsehood upon themselves. And so
their Objections were Answered, and things were opened to the People; and a
good Opportunity it was, and serviceable to the Truth: for many that before
were weak, were now strengthened and confirmed; and some that were doubting and
wavering, were satisfied and settled; and the Faithful Friends were refreshed
and comforted in the springings of Life amongst us: 1677. Hunger-hill.
for the Power rose, and Life sprung, and in the arisings thereof many living
Testimonies were born against that wicked, dividing, rending Spirit, which
those Opposers were joined to, and acted by: And the Meeting ended to the
satisfaction of Friends. That night I lodged, with other Friends, at Thomas
Ellwood's; and the same week I had a Meeting again with those Opposers at
Wickham, Wickham.
where they again showed their Envy; and were made manifest to the
Upright-hearted.

Now after I had visited Friends in that upper side of Buckinghamshire,
Oxfordshire. Henly. Causham. Reading.
I called upon Friends at Henly in Oxfordshire, and afterward went by Causham
to Reading, where I was at Friends Meeting on the First Day of the week; and in
the Evening had a large Meeting with Friends. Next day there being another
Meeting amongst Friends, concerning settling a Womens-Meeting, some of them,
that had let in the Spirit of Division, fell into jangling, and were disorderly
for a while; till the weight of Truth brought them down. After this Meeting I
passed on through the Country, visiting Friends, and having Meetings amongst
them in several places, Barkshire. Wiltshire. Bristol.
through Barkshire and Wiltshire, and so on till I came to Bristol; which was
on the 24th day of the 11th Month, just before the Fair.

I stayed at Bristol all the time of the Fair, and some time after; and many
sweet and precious Meetings we had there at that time; Many Friends being there
from several parts of the Nation, some on the account of Trade, and some in the
Service of Truth. And great was the Love and Unity of Friends, that abode
faithful in the Truth; though some, who were gone out of the holy Unity, and
were run into Strife, Division and Enmity, were rude and abusive to me, and
behaved themselves in a very Unchristian manner toward me. But the Lord's
Power was over all; by which being preserved in the heavenly Patience, which
could bear Injuries for his Name's sake, I felt dominion therein over the
rough, rude and unruly Spirits: and would leave them to the Lord; who knew my
Innocence, and would plead my Cause. And the more these labored to Reproach
and Vilify me, the more did the Love of Friends, that were sincere and
upright-hearted, Abound toward me; and some, that had been betrayed by the
Adversaries, seeing their Envy and rude behavior, brake off from them: who
have cause to bless the Lord for their deliverance.

When I left Bristol, I went with Richard Snead to a house of his in the
Country, and from thence to Hezekiah Coale's at Winterburn, Gloucestershire.
Winterburn.
in Gloucestershire, whether came several Friends, that were under great
Sufferings for Truth's sake, whom I had Invited to meet me there. And there
Stephen Smith, Richard Snead and I, drew up a Breviat of their Sufferings,
setting forth the Illegal Proceedings against them; which was delivered to the
Judges at the Assizes at Gloucester: and they promised to put a stop to those
Illegal Proceedings. Sudbury.
Next day we passed to Sudbury, and had a large Meeting in the Meeting House
there; which at that time was of very good Service. We went next day to
Nathaniel Crip's at Tedbury, and from thence passed on to Nailsworth; 1677.
Tedbury. Nailsworth Finchcomb
where on the First Day of the Week we had a brave Meeting, and large. From
thence we went to the Quarterly Meeting at Finchcomb, where were several of the
Opposite Spirit, who (it was thought) Intended to have made some disturbance
amongst Friends; but the Lord's Power was over, and kept them down, and good
Service for the Lord we had at that Meeting. We returned from Finchcomb to
Nailsworth again, Nailsworth
and had another very precious Meeting there, to which Friends came from the
several Meetings thereabouts; which made it very large also.

We went from Nailsworth on the First day of the First Month 1677/8, and
traveled through the Country, visiting Friends, and having many Meetings
amongst them, at Cirencester, Crown-Allins, Cirencester. Crown-Allins.
Cheltonham. Stoke-Orchard. Tewksbury, etc. Worcester. Parshow. Evesham.
Warwickshire. Ragley.
Cheltonham, Stoke-Orchard, Tewksbury, etc. so went to Worcester, where I had
formerly suffered Imprisonment above a Year for the Truth's sake: and Friends
rejoiced greatly to see me there again. Here I stayed several days, and had
many very precious Meetings in the City; and much Service amongst Friends.
After which traveling through the Country, I had Meetings at Parshow and
Evesham, and then struck to Ragley in Warwickshire, to visit her, that was
called the Lady Conway, who I understood was very desirous to see me, and whom
I found tender and loving, and willing to have detained me longer, than I had
freedom to stay. About Two miles from hence I had Two Meetings at a Friend's
house, whose name was John Stangley, Stratford. Lamcoat. Armscott. Oxfordshire.
Sibbard. North-Newton. Banbury. Adderbury, etc. Buckinghamshire. Long-Crendon.
Ilmer. Mendle. Weston. Cholsberry Chesham, etc. Hartfordshire. Charlewood.
Watford Hempsted. Market-street. Bedfordshire. Luton. Albans. South-Mims.
Barnet. Hendon. London.
whither William Dewsbury came to me, and stayed with me about half a day.
Afterward I visited Friends in their Meetings thereabouts, at Stratford,
Lamcoat, and Armscott (from whence it was, that I was sent Prisoner to
Worcester in the Year 1673) and thence passed into Oxfordshire, visiting
Friends, and having Meetings at Sibbard, North-Newton, Banbury, Adderbury, etc.
Then visiting Friends through Buckinghamshire, at Long-Crendon, Ilmer, Mendle,
Weston, Cholsberry, Chesham, etc. having several Meetings amongst them, I came
to Isaac Pennington's, where I stayed a few days: And then turning into
Hartfordshire, visited Friends at Charlewood, Watford, Hempstead and
Market-street, at which places I had Meetings with Friends. From Market-street
I went in the Morning to Luton in Bedfordshire, to see John Crook, with whom I
spent good part of the day; and went toward Evening to Albans, where I lay
that night at an Inn. And visiting Friends at South-Mims, and at Barnet and
Hendon, where I had Meetings, I came to London on the Eighth day of the Third
Month. And it being the Fourth-day of the Week, I went to
Gracious-street-Meeting, which was peaceable and well; and many Friends, not
knowing I was come to Town, were very Joyful to see me there: and the Lord was
present with us, refreshing us with his living Virtue, blessed be his holy Name.

The Parliament was sitting, when I came to Town, and Friends having laid their
Sufferings before them, were Waiting on them for Relief against the Laws made
against Popish Recusants, which they knew, we were not; though some malicious
Magistrates took Advantages against us, 1678. London.
to prosecute us in several parts of the Nation upon those Statutes. So Friends
being Attending on that Service, when I came, I Joined with them therein; and
some probability there was, that something might have been obtained toward
Friends Ease and Relief in that Case, many of the Parliament Men being tender
and loving toward us, as believing, we were much misrepresented by our
Adversaries. But when I went down one Morning with George Whitehead, to the
Parliament House, to Attend upon them on Friends hehalf, on a sudden they were
Prorogued, though but for a short time.

Yearly Meeting.
About two weeks after I came to London, the Yearly Meeting began; to which
Friends came up out of most parts of the Nation; and a glorious heavenly
Meeting we had. Oh the Glory, Majesty, Love, Life, Wisdom and Unity, that was
amongst us! the Power reigned over all, and many Testimonies were born therein
against that ungodly Spirit, which sought to make Rents and Divisions amongst
the Lord's People: but not one Mouth was opened amongst us in its defense, or
on its behalf. Good and Comfortable Accounts also we had, for the most part,
from Friends in other Countries; of which I find a brief Account in a Letter,
which soon after I writ to my Wife, the Copy whereof here follows: Dear Heart,
TO whom is my Love in the Everlasting Seed of Life, that reigns over all.
Great Meetings here have been, and the Lord's Power has been stirring through
all, the like has not been: And the Lord has in his Power knit Friends
wonderfully together, and the glorious Presence of the Lord did appear among
Friends. And now the Meetings are over, (blessed be the Lord) in quietness and
peace. From Holland I hear, that things are well there: Some Friends are gone
that way, to be at their Yearly Meeting at Amsterdam. At Embden, Friends that
were banished, are gotten into the City again. At Dantzick Friends are in
Prison; and the Magistrates threatened them with harder Imprisonment: but the
next day the Lutherans rose, and plucked down (or defaced) the Popish
Monastery: so they have work enough among themselves. The King of Poland did
receive my Letter, and read it himself: and Friends have since printed it in
High Dutch. By Letters from the Half-yearly-Meeting in Ireland I hear, that
they be all in Love there. And at Barbados Friends are in quietness, and their
Meetings settled in peace. At Antego also, and Nevis Truth prospers, and
Friends have their Meetings orderly and well. Likewise in New England, and
other places, things concerning Truth and Friends are well: and in those
places, the Men's and Womens-Meetings are settled; blessed be the Lord. So keep
in God's Power and Seed, that is over all, in whom ye all have Life and
Salvation: for the Lord reigns over all, in his Glory, and in his Kingdom;
Glory to his Name for ever, Amen. So in haste, with my Love to you all, and to
all Friends.

London the 26th of the 3d Month, 1678. G. F.




The Letter to the King of Poland before mentioned, is as follows: To
Johannes III. KING of Poland, etc.
O King!
WE desire thy Prosperity both in this Life, and that which is to come. And we
desire, that we may have our Christian Liberty to Serve and Worship God under
thy Dominion: For our Principle leads us not to do any thing prejudicial to the
King or his People. For we are a People, that do exercise a good Conscience
toward God through his holy Spirit, and in it do serve, and worship and honor
him; and toward Men, in the things that be equal and just, doing to them, as
we would have them do unto us; and looking unto Jesus, who is the Author and
Finisher of our Faith: which Faith purifies our hearts, and brings us to have
Access to God; without which we cannot please him: by which Faith all the Just
lives, as the Scripture declares. And so, that which we desire of Thee, O King,
is, that we may have the Liberty of our Consciences to serve and worship God,
and to pray unto him in our Meetings together in the Name of Jesus, as he
Commands; with a promise, that he will be in the midst of them. The King, we do
hope, cannot but say, that this Duty and Service is due to God and Christ; and
we give Caesar his due, and pay our Tribute and Custom equal with our
Neighbor, according to our proportion. And we never read in all the Scriptures
of the New Testament, That ever Christ or his Disciples did Banish or Imprison
any, that were not of their Faith, or Religion, and would not hear them, or
gave any such Command; but on the Contrary, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow
together, till the harvest: and the harvest is the end of the World. And then
Christ will send his Angels to sever the Wheat from the Tares, etc. And also he
Rebuked such, that would have had fire to come down from Heaven, to consume
such, that would not receive Christ; and told them, That they did not know,
what Spirit they were of; he came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

And therefore we desire the King to consider, how much Persecution has been in
Christendom, since the Apostles days, concerning Religion? And Christ said;
They should go into Everlasting punishment, that did not visit him in Prison;
then what will become of them, that Imprison him in his Members, where he is
Manifest? And now none can say, that the World is ended: And therefore, how
will all Christendom answer the dreadful and terrible God at his Day of
Judgment, that have persecuted one another about Religion before the end of the
World, under a pretense of plucking up Tares; which is not their Work, but the
Angels at the end of the World? And Christ Commands men to Love one another,
and to Love Enemies; and by this they should be known to be his Disciples. And
therefore, Oh! 1677. London.
that all Christendom had lived in Peace and Unity, that they might by their
Moderation, have Judged both Turks and Jews; and let all have their Liberty,
that do own God and Jesus, and Walk, as becomes the glorious Gospel of the Lord
Jesus Christ. And so, our desires are, that the Lord God of Heaven may soften
the King 's heart to all tender Consciences, that do fear the Lord, and are
afraid of disobeying him.

And now, we entreat the King to read over some of the Noble Expressions of
several Kings, and others, concerning Liberty of Conscience; and especially
Stephanus, King of Poland his sayings, viz. It belongs not to me, to Reform
the Consciences: I have always gladly given that over to God, which belongs
to him; and so shall I do now, and also for the future. I will suffer the Weeds
to grow, till the time of harvest; for I know, that the Number of Believers are
but small: Therefore, said he, when some were proceeding in Persecution, I am
King of the People, not of their Consciences. He also affirmed, that Religion
was not to be planted with Fire and Sword. Chron. Liberty of Religion, Part. 2.

Also a Book wrote in French by W. M. Anno 1576. has this Sentence; viz. Those
Princes, that have ruled by Gentleness, and Clemency added to Justice, and have
exercised Moderation and Meekness toward their Subjects, always prospered and
reigned long; but on the Contrary those Princes, that have been Cruel, Unjust,
Prejudiced, and Oppressors of their Subjects, have soon fallen, they and their
Estates, into danger, or total ruin.

Veritus says; Seeing Christ is a Lamb, whom you profess to be your Head and
Captain, then it behooves you to be Sheep, and to use the same Weapons, which
he made use of: for he will not be a Shepherd of Wolves and Wild-beasts, but
only of Sheep. Wherefore, if you lose the Nature of Sheep, (said he) and be
changed into Wolves and Wild-beasts, and use fleshly Weapons, then will you
exclude your selves out of his Calling, and forsake his Banner; and then will
he not be your Captain, etc.

And also we find it asserted by King James in his Speech to the Parliament, in
the Year 1609. That it is a pure Rule in Divinity, that God never planted his
Church with Violence of Blood. And furthermore he said; It was usually the
Condition of Christians, to be persecuted, but not to persecute.

And also King Charles, in his (...), page 61. said in his Prayer to God: Thou
see, how much Cruelty amongst Christians is acted under the Color of
Religion; as if we could not be Christians, unless we crucified one another.

And page 28. Make them at length seriously to Consider, that nothing violent,
nor injurious, can be Religious.

Page 70. Nor is it so proper, to hew out Religious Reformation by the Sword,
as to polish them by fair and equal Disputations, among those that are most
Concerned in the Differences; whom not force, but reason must Convince.

And page 66. Take heed, that outward Circumstances and Formalities in Religion
devour not all.

And page 91, 92. 1678. London.
In point of true Conscientious tenderness I have so often declared, how little
I desire, my Laws and Scepter should entrench on God's Soverainity, who is the
only King of Conscience.

Page 123. Nor do I desire, any man should be further subject unto me, then all
of us may be subject unto God.

Page 200. O thou Sovereign of our Souls, the only Commander of our Consciences.

Page 346. (In his Meditations on Death,) It is indeed a sad state, to have his
Enemies to be his Accusers, Parties and Judges.

The Prince of Orange testified, Anno 1579. That it was impossible, the Land
should be kept in Peace, except there was a free Toleration in the Exercise of
Religion.

And further: Where have thou read in thy day ( said Menno) in the Writing of
the Apostles, that Christ or the Apostles ever cried out to the Magistrate for
their power against them, that would not hear their Doctrine, nor obey their
Words? I know certainly (said he) that where a Magistrate shall banish with the
Sword, there is not the right Knowledge, Spiritual Word, nor Church of Christ;
it is Invocare Brachium Seculare, (to Invoke the Secular Arm.)

It is not Christian-like, but Tyrannical (said D. Philipson) to banish and
persecute People about Faith and Religion; and they that so do, are certainly
of the Pharisaical Generation, who resisted the Holy Ghost.

Erasmus said, That though they take our Moneys and Goods, they cannot
therefore hurt our Salvation: they afflict us much with Prisons, but they do
not thereby separate us from God. In de Krydges wrede, fol. 63.

Lucernus said, He that Commands any thing, wherewith he binds the
Conscience, this is an Antichrist. In de Bemise Disp. fol. 71.

Irenaeus affirmed, That all forcing of Conscience, though it was but a
forbidding of the Exercise, which is esteemed by one or another to be necessary
to Salvation, is in no wise right nor fitting. He also affirmed, That through
the diversity of Religions, the Kingdom should not be brought into any
disturbance.

Constantius the Emperor said; That it was enough, that he preserved the Unity
of the Faith, that he might be excusable before the Judgment Seat of God: and
that he would leave every one to his own Understanding, according to the
Account he will give before the Judgment Seat of Christ. Here-to may we stir up
People (said he) not Compel them; beseech them to come into the Unity of the
Christians, but to do Violence to them, we will not in any wise. Sebast. Frank,
Chron. fol. 127.

Augustinus said; Some disturbed the Peace of the Church, while they went about
to root out the Tares before their time; and through this Error of Blindness
(said he) are they themselves separated so much the more, from being united
unto Christ.

Retnaldus testified, That he, who with Imprisoning and Persecuting seeks to
spread the Gospel, and greaseth his hands with Blood, shall much rather be
looked upon for a wild Hunter, than a Preacher, or a Defender of the Christian
Religion.

I have for a long season determined ( said Henry the IV. K. of France in his
Speech to the Parliament 1599.) to Reform the Church, which without Peace (said
he) I cannot do: and it is impossible, to Reform or Convert People by Violence.
I am King, as a Shepherd, (said he) and will not shed the Blood of my Sheep;
but will gather them through the Mildness and Goodness of a King, and not
through the Power of Tyranny: and I will give them, that are of the Reformed
Religion, right Liberty, to live and dwell free, without being examined,
perplexed, molested, or compelled to any thing, contrary to their Consciences;
for they shall have the free Exercise of their Religion, etc. [Vid. Chron. Van
de Underg. 2. deel, p. 1514.]

Ennius said; Wisdom is driven out, when the Matter is acted by Force. And
therefore the best of Men, and most glorious of Princes, were always ready to
give Toleration.

Eusebius. in his Second Book of the Life of Constantine, reports these words of
the Emperor: Let them, which err, with Joy receive the like fruition of Peace
and Quietness with the Faithful; since the restoring of Communication and
Society may bring them into the right Way of Truth: let none give Molestation
to any; let every one do, as he determines in his Mind. And indeed, there is
great reason for Princes to give Toleration to disagreeing Persons, whose
Opinions cannot by fair means be altered: for if the Persons be Confident, they
will serve God according to their Persuasions; and if they be publicly
prohibited, they will privately Convene: and then all those Inconveniences and
Mischiefs, which are Arguments against the permission of Conventicles, are
Arguments for the public permissions of differing Religions, etc. they being
restrained and made miserable, endears the discontented Persons mutually, and
makes more hearty and dangerous Confederations.

The like Counsel in the Divisions of Germany, at the first Reformation, was
thought reasonable by the Emperor Ferdinand, and his excellent Son Maximilian;
for they had observed, that Violence did exasperate, was unblest, unsuccessful
and unreasonable; and therefore they made Decrees of Toleration.

The Duke of Savoy, repenting of his War undertaken for Religion against the
Piedmontans, promised them Toleration; and was as good, as his Word.

Also it is remarkable, that till the time of Justinian the Emperor, Anno
Domini 525. the Catholics and Novatians had Churches indifferently permitted,
even in Rome it self.

And Paul preached the Kingdom of God, teaching those things, which concerned
the Lord Jesus Christ, with all confidence; and no man forbad him: and this he
did for the space of two years in his own hired house at Rome, and received all
that came to him.

NOW, O KING, seeing these Noble Testimonies concerning Liberty of Conscience
of Kings, Emperors and others, and the Liberty, that Paul had at Rome in the
days of the Heathen-Emperour, our desire is, that we may have the same Liberty
at Dantzick to Meet together in our own hired Houses, which cannot be any
prejudice, either to the King and the City of Dantzick, for us to meet together
to wait upon the Lord, and pray unto him, and to serve and worship him in
Spirit and Truth in our own hired Houses; seeing our Principle leads us to hurt
no Man, but to Love our Enemies, and to pray for them; yea, them that do
persecute us. And therefore, O King, Consider, and the City of Dantzick, would
you not think it hard for others, to force you from your Religion to another,
contrary to your Consciences? And if it be so, that you would think it hard to
you, then do you unto others, as you would have them do unto you; do not you
that unto others, which you would not have men do unto you: for that is the
Royal Law, which ought to be obeyed. And so in Love to thy Immortal Soul, and
for thy Eternal Good this is written.

G. F.
POSTSCRIPT.
BLessed be the Merciful, for they shall obtain Mercy. And remember, O King,
Justin Martyr's two Apologies to the Roman Emperors, in the Defense of the
persecuted Christians, and that notable Apology, which was written by
Tertullian, upon the same Subject; which are not only for the Christian
Religion, but against all Persecution for Religion.




Dear Peter Hendricks, and John Claus, and J. Rawlins, and all the rest of
Friends in Amsterdam, Friezland and Rotterdam, to whom is my Love in the Seed
of Life, that is over all.
I Received thy Letter, with a Letter from Dantzick: I have written something
to you to the King of Poland, which you may translate into High Dutch, and send
it to Friends there, to give it to the King; or you may print it, after it be
delivered in Manuscript; which may be serviceable to other Princes. So in
haste, with my Love. And the Lord God Almighty over all give you dominion in
his Eternal Power, and in it over all preserve you, and keep you to his Glory;
that you may answer that of God in all People. Amen.

London, the 13th of 9th Month, 1677. George Fox.




I continued yet in and about London some Weeks, the Parliament sitting again,
and Friends Attending upon them to get some Redress of our Sufferings, which
about this time were very great, and heavy upon many Friends in diverse parts of
the Nation; they being very unduly prosecuted upon the Statutes made against
Popish Recusants: Though our Persecutors could not but know, that Friends were
utterly against Popery; having born Testimony against it in Word and Writing,
and suffered under it. But though many of the Members of Parliament in either
House were kind to Friends, and willing to have done something for their Ease;
yet having much business upon them, they were hindered from doing the good they
would: so that the Sufferings upon Friends were Continued.

But that which added much to the Grief and Exercise of Friends, was, that
some, who made a Profession of the same Truth with us, being gone from the
Simplicity of the Gospel into a fleshly Liberty, and laboring to draw others
after them, did Oppose the Order and Discipline, which God by his Power had set
up and established in his Church; and made a great noise and clamor against
Prescriptions: Whereby they easily drew after them such, as were loosly
Inclined, and desired a broader Way, than the Path of Truth to walk in. Some
also, that were more simple, but young in Truth, or weak in Judgment, were apt
to be betrayed by them; not knowing the Depths of Satan in these Wiles: For
whose sakes I was moved to write the following Paper, for the undeceiving the
Deceived, and the opening the Understandings of the Weak in this matter:

ALL you, that do deny Prescriptions without distinction, you may as well deny
all the Scriptures, which were given forth by the Power and Spirit of God. For
do not they prescribe, how men should Walk both to God and Man, both in the Old
Testament and in the New? Yea, from the very first Promise of Christ in
Genesis, what People ought to believe and trust in; and all along, till ye come
to the Prophets? Did not the Lord prescribe to his People, both by the Fathers,
and then by his Prophets? did he not prescribe to the People, how they should
Walk, though they turned against the Prophets in the Old Covenant, for
declaring or prescribing to them the Way, how they might Walk to please God,
and keep in favor with him? And then after, in the days of Christ, did not he
prescribe and teach, how People should walk and believe? And after him the
Apostles, did not they prescribe unto People, how they might come to believe,
and receive the Gospel and the Kingdom of God, directing unto that, which would
give them the Knowledge of God, and how they should walk in the New Covenant in
the days of the Gospel, and by what way they should come to the holy City? And
did not the Apostles send forth their Decrees by faithful, Chosen Men (them
that had hazarded their Lives for Christ's sake) to the Churches, by which they
were established? And so you, that deny Prescriptions given forth by the Power
and Spirit of God, do thereby oppose the Spirit, that gave them forth in all
the holy Men of God. And were there not some all along in the days of Moses,
and in the days of the Prophets, and in the days of Christ, and in the days of
his Apostles, who did withstand that, which they gave forth from the Spirit of
God? And has there not been the same since the days of the Apostles? And how
many have risen, since Truth appeared, to oppose the Order, which stands in the
Power and Spirit of God? who are but in the same Spirit, which has opposed the
Spirit of God all along from the beginning. And see, what Names or Titles the
Spirit of God gave that Opposing Spirit in the Old Covenant, and also in the
New; which is the same now, as was: for after the Lord had given forth the Old
Covenant, there were some among themselves, that did Oppose; which were worse,
than public Enemies. And likewise after, in the days of the New Covenant, in
the Gospel Times, you may see, what sort did Oppose both Christ and the
Apostles, after they came to some Sights of the Truth; and how they turned
against Christ and his Apostles? And see, what Liberty they pleaded for, and
ran into in the Apostles days, who could not abide the Cross, the Yoke of
Jesus. And therefore we see, the same rough and high Spirit cries now for
Liberty (which the Power and Spirit of Christ cannot give;) and cries,
Imposition; and yet is Imposing: and cries, Liberty of Conscience; and yet is
opposing Liberty of Conscience: And cries against Prescriptions; and yet is
prescribing both in Words and Writing: So with the Everlasting Power and Spirit
of God this Spirit is fathomed, its Rise, Beginning and End; and it is Judged.
And this Spirit cries, We must not judge Conscience, we must not judge Matters
of Faith, and we must not judge the Spirits, nor Religions, etc. Yes: They that
be in the pure Spirit and Power of God, which the Apostles were in, they Judge
of Conscience, whether it be a seared Conscience, or a tender Conscience: They
Judge of Faith, whether it be a dead one, or a living one: They Judge of
Religion, whether it be vain, or pure, or undefiled: They Judge of Spirits, and
try them, whether they be of God, or no: They Judge of Hope, whether it be of
Hypocrites, or the true Hope, that purifies, even as God is pure: They Judge of
Belief, whether it be that, which is born of God, and overcomes the World; or
that which runs into the Spirit of the World, which lusts to Envy, and does not
overcome the World. And they Judge of Worships, whether they be Will-worships,
and the Worship of the Beast and Dragon; or the Worship of God in Spirit and in
Truth. They Judge of Angels, whether they be fallen, or them that keep their
Habitation. And they Judge the World, that grieves and quenches the Spirit, and
hates the Light, and turns the Grace of God into wantonness, and resists the
Holy Ghost. They Judge of the Hearts, Ears and Lips, which are Circumcised, and
which are Uncircumcised. They Judge of Ministers, and Apostles, and Messengers,
whether they be of Satan, or of Christ. They judge of Differences in outward
things, in the Church or elsewhere; yea, the least Member of the Church has
Power to Judge of such things, having the One true Measure, and true Weight to
weigh things, and measure things withal, without respect to Persons. And this
Judgment is given, and all these things are done by the same Power and Spirit
the Apostles were in. And also such can Judge of Election and Reprobation; and
who keep their Habitation, and who not: And who are Jews; and who are of the
Synagogue of Satan: And who are in the Doctrine of Christ, and who are in the
Doctrines of Devils: And who prescribes and declares things from the Power and
Spirit of God, to preserve all in the Power and Spirit of God; and who
prescribes and declares things from a loose Spirit, to let all loose from under
the Yoke of Christ, the Power of God, into Looseness and Liberty. And likewise
can Judge and Discern, who brings People into the Possession of the Gospel of
Light and Life, over Death and Darkness, and into the Truth, where the Devil
cannot get in; and who brings them into the Possession of Death and Darkness,
out of the glorious Liberty of the Gospel, and of Jesus Christ, and his Faith,
and Truth, and Spirit, and Light, and Grace. For there is no true Liberty, but
in that; and that Liberty answers the Grace, the Truth, the Light, the Spirit,
the Faith, the Gospel of Christ in every Man and Woman, and is the Yoke to the
Contrary in every Man and Woman. And that makes it rage, and swell, and puff
up; for that is restless and unruly, and out of patience, and is ready to curse
his God, and that which reigns over him; because it has not its Will. And it
works with all Subtilty and Evasion with its restless Spirit, to get in and
defile the minds of the Simple, and to make Rapes upon the Virgin Minds. But as
they receive the heavenly Wisdom, by which all things were made (which Wisdom
is above that Spirit) through this Wisdom they will be preserved over that
Spirit. And Christ has given Judgment to his Saints in his Church, though he
be Judge of all; and the Saints, in the Power and Spirit of God, had and have
Power to Judge of Words and Manners, of Lives and Conversations, and Growths
and States from a Child to a Father in the Truth; and to whom they are a Savor
of Death, and to whom they are a Savor of Life: And who serve the Lord Jesus
Christ, and preach him, and who preach themselves, and serve themselves: And
who Talk of the Light, and of Faith, and of the Gospel, and of Hope, and of
Grace, and preach such things; and in their Works and Lives deny them all, and
God and Christ, and preach up Liberty from that in themselves to that in
Others, which should be under the Yoke and Cross of Christ, the Power of God.
And so the Saints in the Power and Spirit of Christ can discern and
distinguish, who serves God and Christ, and who serves him not; and so can put
a distinction between the Profane, and the Holy. But such as have lost their
Eye Salve, and their Sight is grown dim, lose this Judgment, Discerning and
Distinction in the Church of Christ; and such come to be spewed out of Christ's
mouth, except they Repent: and if not, they come to Corrupt the Earth, and
burden it, that it Vomits them out of it. And therefore all are Exhorted, to
keep in the Power and Spirit of Christ Jesus, and in the Word of Life, and the
Wisdom of God (which is above that, that is below) in which they may keep their
heavenly Understandings, and heavenly Discernings; and so set the heavenly
Spiritual Judgment over that, which is for Judgment, which dishonours God,
which leads into loose and false Liberty; out of the Unity, which stands in the
heavenly Spirit, which brings into Conformity, and to be Conformable to the
Image of the Son of God, and his Gospel, the Power of God, (which was before
the Devil was) and his Truth (which the Devil is out of;) in which all are of
one Mind, Heart and Soul, and come to drink into one Spirit, being baptized
into one Spirit, and so into one Body, which Christ is the Head of; and so keep
one Fellowship in the Spirit, and Unity in the Spirit, which is the Bond of
Peace, the Prince of Princes Peace. And they, that Cry so much against Judging,
and are afraid of Judgment, whether they be Apostates, Professors or Profane,
they are the Most-judging with their censorious, false Spirits and Judgment;
and yet cannot bear the true Judgment of the Spirit of God, nor stand in his
Judgment. This has been manifest from the beginning, they having the false
Measures, and the false Weights: for none have the true Measure, and the true
Weight, but who keep in the Light, Power and Spirit of Christ. And now there is
a loose Spirit, that cries for Liberty, and against Prescriptions; and yet is
prescribing ways, both by Words and Writings. And the same Spirit cries against
Judging, and would not be Judged; and yet is Judging with a wrong Spirit. And
this is given forth in Reproof to that Spirit.

London the 9th of the 4th Month, 1678. G. F.

When I had finished, what Service I had for the Lord at this time here, I left
London and went toward Hartford; visiting Friends, and having several Meetings
in the way. At Hartford I stayed several days, having much Service for the Lord
there; both amongst Friends in their Meetings, and in Conferences with such, as
having let in evil surmisings and jealousies concerning Friends, stood in
Opposition to the Order of Truth: And in Answering some Books that had been
written against Truth and Friends. And while I was here, it came upon me to
write a few Lines, and send them abroad amongst Friends, as follows: Dear
Friends,
LET the holy Seed of Life reign over Death and the unholy Seed in you all:
that in the holy Seed of the Kingdom ye may all feel the everlasting, holy
Peace with God, through Christ Jesus, your Savior, and sit down in him, your
Life and glorious Rest, the holy Rock and Foundation, that stands sure over
all from Everlasting to Everlasting; in whom all the fullness of Blessedness is:
so that ye may glory in him, that lives for evermore, Amen! Who is your
Eternal Joy, Life and Happiness, through whom you have Peace with God. 1678.
Hartford.
Which holy Seed bruiseth the Head of the Serpent, and will outlive all his
Wrath and Rage, Malice and Envy; who was before He and It was; and remains,
when He and It is gone into the fire, that burns with brimstone. The Seed,
Christ will reign; and so will ye, as ye do live and walk in him, and sit down
in Christ, and build up one another in the Love of God.

Hartford the 10 of the 5th Month, 1678. G. F.




Next day a fresh Exercise came upon me, with respect to those unruly and
disorderly Spirits, which were gone out from us, and were laboring to draw
others after them into a false Liberty. And in the sense I had of the hurt and
mischief these might do, where they were given way to; I was moved to write a
few Lines to Warn Friends of them, as follows: All Friends,
KEep in the tender Life of the Lamb, over that unruly, puffed up and swelling
Spirit, whose work is for Strife, Contention and Division, drawing into
Looseness and false Liberty, under a pretense of Conscience, and dangerous to
the Spoiling of Youth. They that do encourage them, will be guilty of their
Destruction, and set up a sturdy Will instead of Conscience in their Rage and
Passion; which will quench the universal Spirit in themselves, and in every Man
and Woman: and so, that Spirit shall not have the Liberty in themselves, nor in
Others, and so shut up the Kingdom of Heaven in themselves, and also in Others.
And so a loose Spirit getting up under a pretense of Liberty of Conscience, or
a stubborn Will, making a Profession of the Words of Truth in a Form without
Power, all Looseness and Vileness will be sheltered and covered under this
pretense, which is for Eternal Judgment: for that does dishonor God. Therefore
keep to the tender Spirit of God in all humility, that in it you may know, that
ye are all Members of one another, and all have an Office in the Church of
Christ; and all these living Members know one another in the Spirit, and not in
the Flesh. So here is no Man ruling over the Woman, as Adam did over Eve in the
Fall: but Christ, the Spiritual Man, among and over his Spiritual Members,
which are edified in the heavenly Love, that is shed in their heart from God,
where all strife ceases.

Hartford the 11th of the 5th Month, 1678. G. F.




I went from Hartford to a Meeting at Rabley-Heath about six miles from thence;
1678. Rabley-Heath. Stevenage. B^ldock. Hi chin. Ashwel. Bedfordshire
Huntington Ives.
and after the Meeting to Edward Crouch's of Stevenage: from whence next day I
went to Baldock, where I had a Meeting that Evening; and after that had
Meetings at Hitchin and Ashwell. Then passing through some part of
Bedfordshire, where I had a Meeting or two; I went on to Huntington, in which
County I stayed several days, having many Meetings, and much Service amongst
Friends; laboring to Convince Gainsayers, and to Confirm and Strengthen
Friends in the Way and Work of the Lord. At Ives in Huntingtonshire George
Whitehead came to me, and traveled with me in the Work of the Lord for five or
six days in that County, and in some part of Northamptonshire;
Northamptonshire. Leicestershire. Great Bowden. S^d^ington. Wigston. Knighton,
Leicester. Sileby Swannington, etc. Leicester.
and leaving me in Great Bowden in Leicestershire, he went on toward
Westmorland, whither he was traveling. I stayed longer in Leicestershire,
visiting Friends at Saddington, Wigston, Knighton, Leicester, Sileby,
Swannington, and diverse other places; where I had very precious Meetings, and
very good Service amongst Friends and other People: for there was great
Openness, and many weighty and excellent Truths did the Lord give me to open
amongst them.

At Leicester I went to the Jail to visit the Friends, that were in Prison
there for the Testimony of Jesus, with whom I spent some time; encouraging them
in the Lord to persevere steadfastly and faithfully in their Testimony, and not
to be Weary of Suffering for his sake. And when I had taken my leave of the
Friends, I spoke with the Jailer, desiring him to be kind to them, and let them
have what Liberty he could, to visit their Families sometimes.

After I had been in Leicestershire, I had a Meeting or two in Warwickshire;
and then went into Staffordshire, Warwickshire Staffordshire.
where I had several sweet and opening Meetings, both for gathering into Truth,
and establishing therein. And while I was in Staffordshire, I was moved to give
forth the following Paper: DEar Friends of the Quarterly and Monthly Meetings
every where: My desire is, that ye may all strive to be of one Mind in the
Lord's Power and Truth, which is peaceable (into which Strife and Enmity cannot
come) and also in the Wisdom of God, which is pure, peaceable and easy to be
entreated (which is above that, that is below, that is Earthly, Devilish and
Sensual) and that with and in this heavenly Wisdom, that is peaceable, and
easy to be entreated, you may be all ordered, and do, what ye do, to God's
Glory. And, Dear friends, if there should happen at any time any thing, that
tends to strife, dispute or contention in your Monthly or Quarterly Meetings,
let it be Referred to half a dozen, or such alike number, to debate and end out
of your Meeting (as it was at first:) so that all your Monthly and Quarterly
Meetings may be kept peaceable. And then they may Inform the Meeting, what they
have done; so that the Weak and Youth amongst you may not be hurt, through
hearing of Strife or Contention in your Meetings, 1678. Staffordshire.
where no Strife or Contention ought to be: but all to go on, and determine
things in one Mind, in the Power of God, the Gospel Order; in which Gospel of
Peace ye will preserve the Peace of all your Meetings. And if any Man or Woman
have any thing against any one, let them speak to one another, and end it
betwixt themselves; and if they cannot so end it, let them take two or three to
end it. And in case they determine it not, let it be laid before the Church; and
then let half a dozen, or such a number out of your Monthly or Quarterly
Meeting hear it, and finally end it, without Respect of Persons. And let all
Prejudice be laid aside, and buried, and also all Shortness one toward
another; and let Love (which is not puffed up, and envies not, and seeks not
her own, but bears all things) rule, sway and have the Dominion in all your
Meetings: for that does edify the Body, which Christ is the Head of; and this
will sway all sounding Brass and tinkling Cymbals. Now this Love will suffer
long, and is kind, and will keep down that which will vaunt it self, or be
puffed up, or behave it self unseemly, or is easily provoked: It has a sway
over all such Fruits, which are not of the Spirit, the Fruit of which is Love,
etc. And that with this holy Spirit ye may all be baptized into one Body, and
so be made all to drink into one Spirit; in which Spirit ye will have Unity, in
which is the Bond of the King of Kings and Lord of Lords his Peace. And they
that dwell in Love, they dwell in God; for God is Love: Therefore let every one
keep his Dewlling Place and his Habitation. So with my Love to you in Christ
Jesus, the everlasting Seed, which is over all.

Staffordshire, the 20th of the 6th Month, 1678. G. F.



Darbyshire. Moniash. Yorkshire. Hill.
Out of Staffordshire I went to visit John Gratton at Moniash in Darbyshire,
with whom I tarried one night; and went next day to William Shaws of the Hill
in Yorkshire, where I appointed a Meeting to be on the First Day of the Week
following. Many Friends out of Darbyshire, and from several Meetings in
Yorkshire came to this Meeting, and a precious, comfortable, opening Meeting it
was; wherein was opened the blessed Estate that Man was in before he fell; the
Means, by which he fell; the miserable Condition, into which he fell; and the
right Way of coming out of it, into a happy State again by Christ, the promised
Seed.

After this I spent about two Weeks in Yorkshire, traveling from place to
place amongst Friends in the Lord's Service; and many heavenly Meetings I had
in that County. Then visiting Robert Widders at Kellet in Lancashire,
Lancashire. Kellet. Westmorland. Arnside. Swarthmore.
I passed to Arnside in Westmorland, where I had a precious living Meeting in
the Lord's blessed Power, to the great Satisfaction and Comfort of Friends, who
came from diverse parts to it. The next day I went to Swarthmore: and it being
the Meeting-day there, I had a sweet opportunity with Friends; our hearts being
opened in the Love of God, 1678. Swarthmore.
and his blessed Life flowing amongst us.

I had not been long at Swarthmore, e're a Concern came upon me, to visit the
Churches of Christ in London and elsewhere, by an Epistle, which was as
follows: Dear Friends,
TO whom is my Love in the heavenly Seed, in whom all Nations are blessed. Oh,
keep all in this Seed, in which ye are blessed, and in which Abraham and all
the Faithful were blessed, without the Deeds of the Law: for the Promise was
and is to and with the Seed, and not with the Law of the First Covenant. In
this Seed all Nations, and ye are blessed, which bruiseth the Head of the Seed,
that brought the Curse, and separated between Man and God. This is the Seed,
which reconciles you to God, and this is the Seed, in which ye are blessed both
in Temporals and Spirituals; through which ye have an Inheritance among the
Sanctified, that cannot be defiled, neither can any defiled thing enter into
its Possession: for all defilements are out of this Seed. This is that, which
leavens up into a New Lump, and bruiseth the Head of the Wicked Seed, that
leavens into the Old Lump, upon whom the Sun of Righteousness goes down and
sets; but never goes down and sets to them, that walk in the Seed, in which all
Nations are blessed: by which Seed they are brought up to God, which puts down
that Seed, which separated betwixt them and God; so that there comes to be
nothing betwixt them and God. Now all my Dear Friends, my desires are, that ye
may all be Valiant in this heavenly Seed, for God and his Truth upon the Earth,
and spread it abroad, answering that of God in all; that with it the Minds of
People may be turned toward the Lord; that he may come to be known, and
served, and worshipped: and that ye may all be the Salt of the Earth, to make
the unseasoned savoury. And in the Name of Jesus keep your Meetings, who are
gathered into it, in whose Name ye have Salvation; he being in the midst of
you, whose Name is above every Name under the whole Heaven. And so, ye have a
Prophet and Bishop, Shepherd, Priest and Counselor (above all the Counselors
and Priests, Bishops, Prophets, and Shepherds under the whole Heaven) to
exercise his Offices among you, in your Meetings, that are gathered in his
Name. For Christ's Meeting and Gathering is above all the Meetings and
Gatherings under the whole Heaven: And his Body, his Church, and he the Head of
it, is above all the Bodies, and Churches, and Heads under the whole Heaven.
And the Faith, that Christ is the Author of, and the Worship that he has set
up, and his Fellowship in the Gospel is above all Historical Faiths, and the
Faiths that Man has made, together with their Worships and Fellowships under
the whole Heaven. And now, Dear Friends, keep your Men and Womens-Meetings in
the Power of God, the Gospel, the Authority of them, which brings Life and
Immortality to Light in you; and this Gospel, the Power of God, will preserve
you in Life, and in Immortality (which has brought it to Light in you) that ye
may see over him, that has darkened, and kept from the knowledge of the things
of God: for it is he and his Instruments (which has darkened you from Life and
Immortality) that would throw down your Men and Womens-Meetings (which were set
up in the Power of God, the Gospel) and would darken you again from this Life
and Immortality, which the Gospel has brought to Light, and will preserve you
in, as your Faith stands in this Power of God, the Gospel, in which every one
sees your Work and Service for God. And every Heir, in the Power of God, the
Gospel, has right to this Authority, which is not of Man, nor by Man; which
Gospel, the Power of God, is everlasting, an everlasting Order, an everlasting
Fellowship: and in the Gospel is everlasting Joy, Comfort and Peace, which will
out-last all those Joys, Comforts and Peaces, that will have an end; and that
Spirit also, that opposes its Order, and the glorious Fellowship, Peace and
Comfort in it. And, My Dear Friends, my desire is, that ye may keep in the
Unity of the Spirit, that baptizes you all into one Body, which Christ is the
heavenly and spiritual Head of; so that ye may see and bear witness to your
heavenly and spiritual Head, and so all drink into the One Spirit: Which all
People upon the Earth are not like to do, while they grieve, quench, and rebel
against it; nor to be baptized into one Body, and to keep the Unity of the
Spirit, which is the Bond of Peace, yea, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords
his Peace: which it is the duty of all true Christians to keep, who are
inwardly united to Christ. So with my Love to you all in the everlasting Seed.

Swarthmore, the 26th of the 7th Month, 1678. G. F.




There were about this time several Friends in Prison, for bearing Testimony to
the Truth: To whom I was moved to write a few Lines, to comfort, strengthen and
encourage them in their Sufferings; having a true sense of their Sufferings
upon my spirit, and a sympathizing with them therein. And that which I writ,
was after this manner: My Dear Friends,
WHO are Sufferers for the Lord Jesus sake, and for the Testimony of his Truth,
the Lord God Almighty with his Power uphold you, and support you in all your
Trials and Sufferings, and give you Patience, and Content in his Will, that y^
may stand valiant for Christ and his Truth upon the Earth, over the persecuting
and destroying Spirit, which makes to suffer, in Christ (who bruises his Head)
in whom ye have both Election and Salvation. And for God's Elect sake the Lord
has done much from the Foundation of the World; as may be seen throughout the
Scriptures of Truth: and they that touch them, touch the Apple of God's Eye;
they are so tender to him. And therefore it is good for all God's suffering
Children to trust in the Lord, and to wait upon him: for they shall be as Mount
Sion, that cannot be removed from Christ their Rock and Salvation, who is the
Foundation of all the Elect of God, of the Prophets and the Apostles, and of
God's People now, and to the End; Glory to the Lord and the Lamb over all.
Remember my dear Love to all Friends; and do not think the time long: for all
Time is in the Father's hand, his Power. And therefore keep the Word of
Patience, and exercise that Gift: and the Lord strengthen you in your
Sufferings, in his holy Spirit of Faith, Amen.

Swarthmore, the 5th of the 12th Month, 1678. G. F.




I abode in the North at this time above a year, Friends there, and being much
taken up in writing Books and Papers, some in Defense of Truth, in Answer to
Books published by Adversaries; and some for the opening the Principles and
Doctrines of Truth to the World, that they might come to have a right
understanding thereof, and be gathered thereunto. Several Epistles also to
Friends I writ in this time, on diverse Occasions and Subjects; whereof one was
to the Friends of the Yearly Meeting, which was held in London this year 1679.
a Copy of which here follows: My Dear Friends and Brethren,
WHO are Assembled together in the Name and Power of the Lord Jesus Christ,
Grace, Mercy and Peace from God the Father, and from the Lord Jesus Christ fill
all your hearts, and establish you in his Grace, Mercy and Peace upon Christ,
the holy living Rock and Foundation, who is the First and Last, and over all
the Foundations and Rocks in the whole world; a Rock and Foundation of Life for
all the Living to build upon, which stands sure in his heavenly, divine Light,
which is the Life in him; by whom all things were made: who is the precious
Stone laid in Sion (and not in the World) which all the Wise Master Builders
rejected, who pretended to build People up to Heaven with the Words of the
Prophets, and the Law from Mount Sinai; but out of the Life of both: and
therefore such Builders could not receive the Law of Life from Christ, the
precious Stone laid in Sion, nor the Word from heavenly Jerusalem. But you, My
Dear Friends, that have received this Law from heavenly Sion, and the Word from
heavenly Jerusalem, in the New Covenant, where the Life and Substance is
enjoyed, you do see the end and abolishing of the Jews Law and Ceremonies from
Mount Sinai. And therefore my desire is, that you all may keep in the Law of
Life and Love, 1679. Swarthmore.
which ye have in Christ Jesus, by which Love the Body is edified, and knit and
united together to Christ Jesus, the Head. Which Love does bear all things, and
fulfils the Law; and will preserve all in Humility, and in it to be of one
mind, heart and soul: so that all may come to drink into that One Spirit, that
does Baptize them, and Circumcise them; Plunging down, and Cutting off the Body
of the Sins of the Flesh, that is gotten up in Man and Woman by their
transgressing of God's Commands. So that in this holy, pure Spirit all may
serve and worship the pure God in Spirit and in Truth, which is over all the
Worships, that are out of God's Spirit and his Truth. And in this Spirit ye
will all have a Spiritual Unity and Fellowship, over all the Fellowships of the
Unclean Spirits, which be out of Truth in the World. And so by this holy Spirit
all your hearts, minds and souls may be knit together to Christ, from whence it
comes; and by the Grace and Truth, which is come by Jesus Christ, which all
should be under the Teachings of in the New Covenant, and not under the Law, as
the outward Jews were in the Old Covenant. So that by this Grace and Truth in
the New Covenant, all may be made God's free Men and Women, to serve God in the
new Life, and in the new and living Way; showing forth the Fruits of the new
heart and new spirit, in the New Covenant, over death and darkness, and before
it was; Glory be unto the Lord for ever! And now Friends, in this Grace and
Truth is your heavenly, gracious and true Liberty to every Spiritual Mind, that
makes you free from him, that is out of Truth, where your bondage was. Also
your Liberty in the holy, divine and precious Faith, which gives you Victory
over that, that has separated you from God and Christ, and through which Faith
ye have Access to God again, through Jesus Christ. So in this divine and holy
Faith, ye have divine, holy and precious Liberty, yea, and Victory over him
that separated you from God: and this Faith is held in a pure Conscience. So
the Liberty in the Spirit of God is in that, which baptizes and plunges down
Sin and Iniquity, and puts off the Body of Death, and Sins of the Flesh, that
is gotten up by transgressing of God's Command, as I said before. And also the
Liberty of the Gospel, which is sent from Heaven by the Holy Ghost, which is
the Power of God, which was and is again to be preached to all Nations; In this
Gospel (the Power of God, which is over the Power of Satan) is the true
Liberty, and the Gospel-Fellowship and Order. So that the Evil Spirit or
Conscience, or false, dead Faith, and that which is ungracious and out of
Truth, and not in the Spirit of God, nor in his Gospel, nor in the divine
Faith, its Liberty is in the Darkness: For all the true Liberty is in the
Gospel, and in the Truth that makes free; and in the Faith, and in the Grace,
and in Christ Jesus, who destroys the Devil and his Works, that has brought
all Mankind into Bondage. So in this heavenly peaceable Spirit, and Truth, and
Faith which works by Love, and in the Gospel of Peace, and in Christ Jesus is
all the Saints Peace, and pure, true and holy Liberty; in which they have Salt,
and Sense, and Feeling, Discerning and Savor, yea, and Unity and Fellowship
one with another, yea, and with the Son and the Father, that heavenly, eternal
Fellowship. So all being subject to the Grace, and Truth, and to the Faith, and
Gospel (the Power of God) and to his good Spirit, in this they distinguish all
true, pure and holy Liberty from that which is false. And this will bring all
to sit low: for Patience runs the Race, and the Lamb must have the Victory; and
not the rough, unruly and vain Talkers, unbaptized, uncircumcised and
unsanctified. For such travel not in the way of Regeneration, but in the way of
unregeneration; Neither go they down into the Death with Christ by Baptism: and
therefore such are not like to Reign with him in his Resurrection, who are not
buried with him in Baptism. Therefore all must go downward, into the Death of
Christ, and be crucified with him, if they will Arise, and follow him in the
Regeneration, before they come to Reign with him. And Friends, Many may have
precious Openings; but I desire, all may be comprehended in that thing, which
does open to them. And that they may all keep in the daily Cross; then they
keep in the Power, that does kill and crucify that, which would lead them
amongst the Beasts and Goats, to leaven them into their rough, unruly spirit:
But that through the Cross, the Power of God, That may be crucified, and they
in the Power might follow the Lamb. For the Power of God keeps all in Order,
and in Subjection, and in Humility, in that which is lovely and virtuous,
decent, comely, temperate and moderate; that their Moderation comes to appear
to all men. So my desire is, that all your Lights may shine, as from a City set
upon a Hill, that cannot be hid; And that ye may be the Salt of the Earth, to
salt and season it, and make it savoury to God, and you all seasoned with it.
Then all your Sacrifices will be a sweet savor to the Lord, and ye will be as
the Lilies, and Roses, and Garden of God, which gives a sweet smell unto him:
Whose Garden is preserved by his Power; that is the Hedge, that hedges out all
the unruly and unsavory, and the Destroyers and Hurters of the Vines, Buds and
Plants, and God's tender Blade, which springs up from his Seed of Life, who
waters it with his heavenly Water, and Word of Life every moment, that they may
grow and be fruitful; that so he may have a pleasant and fruitful Garden. And
so here all are kept fresh and green, being watered every moment with the
everlasting, holy Water of Life from the Lord, the Fountain. So my dear
Friends, my desire is, that this heavenly Seed, that bruises down the Head of
the Serpent both within and without, may be all your Crowns and Life's, and ye
in him one another's Crown and Joy to the praise of the Lord God over all,
blessed for evermore. This holy Seed will outlast, and wear out all that, which
the evil Seed since the Fall of Man, has brought forth and set up. And as
every one has received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in him in the Humility,
which he teaches; and shun the occasions of Strife, vain Janglings and
Disputings with Men of Corrupt Minds, who are destitute of the Truth: for the
Truth is peaceable, and the Gospel is a peaceable Habitation in the Power of
God (which was before the Devil was) and his Wisdom is peaceable and gentle,
etc. And his Kingdom stands in Peace. Oh! his Glory shines over all his Works!
And in Christ Jesus ye will have Peace, who is not of the World, yea, a Peace,
that the World cannot take away: for the Peace, which ye have from him, was
before the World was, and will be, when it is gone: So they are not like to
take his Peace away from his People. This keeps all in that, which is weighty
and substantial, over all Chaff; and will be, when it is gone: Glory to the
Lord God over all for ever and ever, Amen!

And now, My dear Friends, the Lord does require more of you, than he does of
other People; because he has committed more to you. He requires Fruits of his
Spirit, and of the Light, and of the Gospel, and of the Grace, and of the
Truth; for herein is he glorified (as Christ said) in your bringing forth much
Fruit: Fruits of Righteousness, ^liness, Godliness, Virtue, Truth and Purity;
so that ye may answer that which is of God in all People. And be ye valiant for
his everlasting, glorious Gospel, in God's holy Spirit, and Truth; keeping in
the Unity, and in the holy Spirit, Light and Life, which is over Death and
Darkness, and was before Death and Darkness was. In this Spirit ye have the
Bond of Peace, which cannot be broken, except ye go from the Spirit: and then
ye loose this Unity and Bond of Peace, which ye have from the Prince of Peace.

The World also does expect more from Friends, than from other People; because
you profess more. Therefore you should be more Just, than Others, in your Words
and Dealings, and more Righteous, Holy and Pure in your Lives and
Conversations; so that your Lives and Conversations may preach. For the Worlds
Tongues and Mouths have preached long enough, but their Lives and Conversations
have denied, what their Tongues have professed and declared.

And Dear Friends, strive to excel one another in Virtue, and that ye may grow
in Love, that excellent Way, which unites all to Christ and God: And that all
may stand up for God's Glory, and mind that which concerns the Lord's Honor
and Glory; that in no wise his Power may be abused, nor his Name evil spoken of
by any evil Talkers or Walkers: but that in all things God may be honored, and
ye may glorify him in your Bodies, Souls and Spirits, the little time ye have
to live. So my Love to you all in the holy Seed of Life, that reigns over all,
and is the First and Last; in whom ye all have Life and Salvation, and your
Election and Peace with God, through Jesus Christ, who destroys him that has
been betwixt you and God: so that nothing may be betwixt you and the Lord, but
Christ Jesus, Amen.

My Life and Love is to you all, and amongst you all: And the Lord God Almighty
by his mighty Power, by which he has preserved all his People unto this day,
preserve and keep you all in his power and peaceable, holy Truth, in Unity and
Fellowship one with another, and with the Son and the Father, Amen.

The 24th of the 3d Month, 1679. G. F.




Diverse other Epistles and Papers I writ unto Friends, during my stay in the
North; One whereof was, in a few Lines, To Encourage Friends to be bold and
valiant for the Truth, which the Lord had called them to bear witness to: and
it was thus worded: Dear Friends,
ALL be Valiant for the Lord's Truth upon the Earth, which the Serpent, Satan
and the Devil is out of; and in the Truth keep him out, in which you all have
Peace and Life, and Unity with God and his Son, and one with another. And let
the Love of God fill all your hearts; that in it ye may build up one another,
and edify one another in the Light, Life and holy Spirit and Power of God, the
glorious, comfortable Gospel of Christ, the heavenly Man, who is your Lord and
Savior; who will fill all your Bottles and Vessels with his heavenly Wine and
Water of Life, and cloth you with his heavenly Clothing, his fine Linen,
that never waxes old: And will arm you with his heavenly Weapons and Armor,
that ye may stand faithful Witnesses for God and his Son, who is come, and has
given you an understanding to know him; and ye are in him. And so walk in him,
in whom ye all have Life and Salvation, and Peace with God. So my Love to you
all in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom I have labored: and God Almighty in his
eternal Power and Wisdom preserve you all to his Glory, Amen.

Swarthmore the 29th of the 10th Month, 1679. G. F.




The next day, having a sense upon me, how some, that had received the Truth,
and had Openings thereof, for want of keeping low, had run out therefrom; I
was moved to give forth the following Epistle, as a Warning and Exhortation to
all to dwell in Humility.

My Dear Friends,
Whom the Lord in his tender Mercies has visited with the Dayspring from on
high, and has opened you to confess and bow to his Name; keep low in your
minds, and learn of Christ, who teaches you Humility, and to keep in it: so
that in no wise ye, that be younger, be exalted; or puffed up, or conceited
through your Openings, and by that means lose your Conditions, by being carried
up into Presumption: and then fall into Despair, and so abuse the Power of God.
For it was the Apostles care, that none should abuse the Power of the Lord God;
but in all things their Faith was to stand in the power of the Lord God: so
that they all might be comprehended into the Truth, which they did speak to
others; that they might not be Preachers to others, and themselves Cast-aways.
Therefore it does concern you to be comprehended into that, which ye do preach
to Others, and to keep low in it: And then the God of Truth will exalt the
humble in his Truth, Light, Grace, Power and Spirit, and in his Wisdom to his
Glory. So here all are kept in their Measures of Grace, Light, Faith and the
Spirit of Christ, the heavenly and spiritual Man. So let none quench the
Spirit, nor its Motions, nor grieve it, nor err from it; but be led by it,
which keeps every one in their Tents: Which holy Spirit of God gives them an
understanding, how to serve, and worship, and please the holy, pure God, their
Maker and Creator in Christ Jesus, and how to wait, and how to speak, and so to
answer the Spirit of God in his People; in which holy Spirit is the holy Unity
and Fellowship. And the holy Spirit teaches the holy, gentle, meek and quiet
lowly mind to answer the Seed, that Christ has sown upon all grounds; and to
answer the Light, and Grace and Spirit, and the Gospel in every Creature,
though they are gone from the Spirit, Grace, Light and Gospel in the heart: so
that by holy Walking all may come to do it, as well as by holy Preaching; that
so God in all things may be glorified by you, and that ye may bring forth
Fruits to his praise, Amen.

Swarthmore, the 30th of the 10th Month, 1679. G. F.


About the latter end of this Year I was moved of the Lord to travel up into
the South again. Wherefore after I had taken my leave of my Wife and the
Family, and of the Neighboring Friends, I set forward on my Journey in the
beginning of the First Month 1679/80, Westmorland. Lancashire. Yorkshire.
and passing through some parts of Westmorland and Lancashire, I visited
Friends at several Meetings; and so came into Yorkshire. Diverse large and
weighty Meetings I had in Yorkshire, before I came to York-City; and when I
came there, it was the Assize-time: and there being many Friends in Prison for
Truth's sake, I put Friends, that were at liberty, upon drawing up the
Sufferings of the Friends, that were in Prison; 1680. York.
that they might be laid before the Judges: and I assisted them therein. There
were then in York many Friends from several parts of the County, for the
Quarterly Meeting of Friends was at that time; so that I had a brave
opportunity among Friends, and many weighty and serviceable things did the Lord
open through me to the Meeting, relating to both the inward state of Man, how
Man by faith in Christ comes to be grafted into him, and made a Member of his
Spiritual Body: and also the outward state of the Church, how each Member ought
to walk and act, according to its place in the Body. I spent several days in
York amongst Friends, having diverse Meetings amongst them; and all was
peaceable and well. I went also to the Castle, to visit the Friends that were
Prisoners there; with whom I spent some time, encouraging them and
strengtnening them in their Testimony.

Then leaving York, I traveled on Southward through Yorkshire, having Meetings
in many places amongst Friends, Yorkshire. Lincolnshire Burton.
till I came to Burton in Lincolnshire; where on the First Day of the Week I
had a large and precious Meeting. Then turning into Nottinghamshire,
Nottinghamshire.
I traveled among Friends through a good part of that County, in which I had
several very good Meetings; and then passed into Darbyshire, and through
Leicestershire, Darbyshire. Leicestershire. Warwickshire. Warwick. Southam.
Radway. Oxfordshire. North-Newton. Banbury. Oxfordshire: Gloucestershire
Northamptonshire. Buckinghamshire. Biddlesden Lillingstone. Lovel. Bugbrook.
Stonystratford. Bedfordshire. Dunstable. Market-street. Albans. Mims. Barnet.
Middlesex. Guttershedge in Hendon. London. Yearly Meeting.
and so into Warwickshire, having Meetings all along as I went, till I came to
Warwick: There William Dewsberry came to me, and several other Friends; and we
had a little Meeting in than Town. Then passing through Southam and Radway (at
each of which places I had a very good Meeting) I came to Nathaniel Ball's of
North-Newton in Oxfordshire, and so went to Banbury to a Monthly Meeting there.
And after I had visited Friends at their Meetings in the bordering parts both
of Oxfordshire, Gloucestershire, and Northamptonshire, I passed to Richard
Baker's of Bidlesden in Buckinghamshire; and the next day (being the First Day
of the Week) I had a very large Meeting in Biddlesden, at an old Abbeyhouse,
which a Friend Rented, and dwelt in: Many Friends and People came to this
Meeting out of Oxfordshire, Northamptonshire, and the parts adjacent; and of
good Service it was. After this Meeting I visited Friends in those parts,
having Meetings at Lillingstone, Lovel and Bugbrook; and then going to
Stony-stratford, I went from thence into some parts of Bedfordshire, till I
came to Edward Chester's of Dunstable. From whence passing on by Market-street,
I had a Meeting at Albans; and so calling on Friends at Mims and Barnet, I came
to the Widow Hayly's, at Guttershedge in Hendon in Middlesex, on a Seventh-day
night, and had a very large and good Meeting there the day following.

I passed from thence to London on the Third-day following, and went directly
to the Peel-Meeting at John Elsons; and next morning to the Meeting at
Gracious-street, which was very large and quiet: and Friends rejoiced in the
Lord to see me. The Yearly Meeting was in the week following, to which many
Friends came up out of most parts of the Nation; and a blessed Opportunity the
Lord gave us together; wherein the ancient Love was sweetly felt, 1680. London.
and the heavenly Life flowed abundantly over all. After the Yearly Meeting was
over, and the Friends, that came out of the Counties to it, for the most part
returned homewards, I continued about a Month or five weeks longer in and about
London, laboring in the Work of the Lord both in Meetings and out: for,
besides the public Testimony, which the Lord gave me to bear both to Friends
and to the World in Meetings, I had much Service lay upon me, with respect to
Friends Sufferings, in seeking to get Ease and Liberty for them in this and
other Nations. And much pains and time I spent, while I was now at London, in
writing Letters to Friends in diverse parts of England, and in Scotland,
Holland, Barbados, and several other parts of America.

After I had spent about six weeks time in the Service of Truth in and about
London, I was moved of the Lord to go visit Friends in some parts of Surrey and
Sussex. Surrey. Sussex. Kingston.
I went down to Kingston by water, and tarried there certain days: for while I
was there, the Lord laid it upon me to write to both the great Turk, and the
King of Algier severally, to Warn them both, and the People under them, to turn
from their wickedness, and fear the Lord, and do justly; lest the Judgments of
God came upon them, and destroyed them without Remedy. But to the Algerines I
writ more particularly, concerning the Cruelty they exercised toward Friends
and others, whom they held Captives in Algiers. Now when I had finished that
Service, and visited Friends in their Meetings at Kingston, I went on further
into the County, and had Meetings amongst Friends in many places; Worplesdon.
Guildford. Eshing Capell. Patchgate. Worminghurst. Bletchington. Horsham.
Ifield. Rygate. Gaton, etc Kingston. Hammersmith. Battersea. Wansworth.
Kensington Hendon. London. Edmunton Hartford.
as at Worplesdon, Guildford, Eshing, Capell, Patchgate, Worminghurst,
Bletchington, Horsham, Ifield, Rygate, Gaton, etc. and so came back to Kingston
again: and from thence to Hammersmith. And having spent some days in the
Service of Truth amongst Friends at Hammersmith, Battersea, Wansworth and
thereabouts, I crossed over by Kensington, to Hendon, where I had a very good
Meeting on the First Day of the Week. And (having spent about two Months time
in this Journey) went from thence to London.

When I had been about Ten days in London, I was drawn forth again to visit
Friends in the Country; and went down to Edmunton, to Christopher Taylor's, who
kept a School in his House for the educating of Friends Children. I had some
Service here amongst the Youths; and then went on toward Hartford, visiting
several Friends in the way. At Hartford I met with John Story and some others
of his Party; but the Testimony of Truth went over them, and kept them down, so
that the Meeting was quiet. It was on a First Day of the week; and the next day
being the Men's and Women's Meeting for business, I visited them also; and the
rather, because some in that place had let in a Dis-esteem of them. Wherefore I
was moved to open the Service of those Meetings, and the Usefulness and Benefit
thereof to the Church of Christ, as the Lord opened the thing in me; and it was
of good Service to Friends. 1680. Hartford.
I had a Meeting also with some of them there, that were gone into Strife and
Contention, to show them, wherein they were wrong: and having cleared my self
of them, I left them to the Lord. Then, after I had had another public Meeting
in the Town, Waltham-Abby.
I returned toward London by Waltham-Abby, where I had a public Meeting on
the First Day following; and another with Friends in the Evening. Next day I
went to Christopher Taylor's at Edmunton, and stayed there a day or two;
Edmunton.
having some things upon me to write, which were for the Service of Truth. When
I had finished that Service, Schacklewell.
I went to London by Shacklewell, where was a School kept by Friends, for the
breeding up Young Maidens, that were Friends Daughters.

I abode at London most part of this Winter, London.
having much Service for the Lord there, both in Meetings, and out: For as it
was a time of great Sufferings upon Friends, I was drawn forth in Spirit to
visit Friends Meetings more frequently; to encourage and strengthen them both
by Exhortation and Example. The Parliament also was sitting, and Friends were
diligent to wait upon them, to lay their Grievances before them; of which we
received fresh Accounts almost every day, of the sad Sufferings Friends
underwent in many parts of the Nation. In this Service of seeking Relief for my
suffering Brethren, I spent much time; together with other Friends, who were
freely given up to that Service, attending at the Parliament House day by day
for many days together, and watching all Opportunities to speak with such
Members of either House, as would hear our just Complaints. And indeed, some of
the Members of each House were very Courteous to us; and appeared willing to
help us, if they could: But the Parliament being then earnest in Examining the
Popish Plot, and contriving ways to discover such, as were Popishly Affected,
our Adversaries took advantages against us (because they knew, we could not
Swear nor Fight) to Expose us to those Penalties, that were made against
Papists: though they knew in their Consciences, that we were no Papists, and
had had Experience of us, that we were no Plotters. Wherefore, to clear our
Innocence in those Cases, and to stop the Mouths of our Adversaries, I drew up
a short Paper, to be delivered to the Parliament, which was as follows:

IT is our Principle and Testimony, to deny and renounce all Plots and Plotters
against the King, or any of his Subjects; for we have the Spirit of Christ, by
which the have the Mind of Christ, who came to save men's lives, and not to
destroy them: and we would have the King and all his Subjects to be safe.
Wherefore we do declare, that we will endeavor, to our power, to save and
defend him and them, by discovering all Plots and Plotters (which shall come to
our knowledge) that would destroy the King or his Subjects: This we do
sincerely offer unto you. But as to Swearing and Fighting, which in tenderness
of Conscience we cannot do, ye know, that we have suffered these many years for
our Conscientious Refusal thereof. 1680. London.
And now that the Lord has brought you together, we desire you to Relieve us,
and free us from those Sufferings; and that ye will not put upon us to do those
things, which we have suffered so much and so long already for not doing: for
if you do, ye will make our Sufferings and Bonds stronger, instead of Relieving
us.

G. F.

About this time I received Two very envious Books, written against Truth and
Friends: one of them by a Doctor (so called) of Bremen in Germany; the other by
a Priest of Dantzick in Poland. They were both full of gross Falsehoods, and ^ad
in them many reproachful Slanders. I found it upon me to Answer them both: and
that I might not be overmuch interrupted therein by other Business and
Company, I got out of London for a little while, Kingston upon Thames.
and went down to Kingston upon Thames, were I writ an Answer to each of them;
And also an Answer to some other Scandalous Papers, which had been printed and
scattered about to mis-represent Friends by.

While I was there, I writ also the following Paper, to persuade the
Magistrates to Moderation toward Dissenters; and take off their Edge to
Persecution. And because it should have its full Service, I directed it --

To all the Rulers, Magistrates, and them that are in Authority, and Lawmakers
in England, Scotland and Ireland, from the Highest to the Lowest; and to all
other Magistrates every where, in that which is called Christendom; Desiring
their Health, and Peace, and Tranquillity, and Life and Salvation in Christ
Jesus the Lord of Glory, and Lamb of God, that takes away the Sins of the
World; Who is the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, and all Power in Heaven and
in Earth is given to him: who will reward every Man according to his Words and
Works.
ALL you bearing the Name of Christian Magistrates, my desire is, that you may
all be found in Christ; and not only have the Name, but be made Partakers of
his Divine Nature: that ye may be not only Sayers of the Word, but Doers of the
Word; not only Professors of Christ, and Talkers of Christ, but let Christ rule
in your hearts by Faith, and be Walkers in Christ. For as Christ's great
Apostle says, As every one has received the Lord Jesus Christ, so let him
walk in him; 1680. Kingston.
for in him there is peace. And if all that do Profess Christ, did Walk in
Christ, they would all Walk in Peace, and be in Unity: For the Apostle exhorted
the Christians in his day to keep the Unity of the Spirit; which is the Bond of
Peace, yea, of Christ the King of Kings Peace. And all Christians, who have the
Scriptures, and are not in this Spirit of Christ, they are not in Unity one
with another; and so have broken this Bond of Peace, which should knit and
unite them together. And likewise all that do profess the Truth of Christ,
should live in it; for it is peaceable; and the Gospel is the Gospel of Peace:
which if all Christians, that do profess it, lived in, they would be at peace
one with another, and in the glorious Fellowship of the Gospel. And also, if
all Christians kept in the Fear of God, which is the beginning of the pure,
heavenly, peaceable and gentle Wisdom, which is easy to be entreated (above
that Wisdom, which is earthly, sensual, devilish and destroying) then there
would be no difference and destroying about Matters of Religion.

I do declare, the mighty Day of the Lord is Come and Coming; and the Lord God
is come to Teach his People himself by his Son (Hebr. 1.) whose Son, Christ
Jesus, bruises the Serpent's Head, that false Teacher, that led Adam and Eve
from God their Teacher. So God will Teach his People by his Son, who was the
Teacher of Adam and Eve in Paradise, before they fell and disobeyed the Lord,
and forsook him, and followed the Serpent; whose Head Christ does bruise, and
renews Man and Woman up again into the Image of God, which Adam and Eve was in
before they fell: Glory and Honor be to God through Jesus Christ, who has
called us by his Son into his glorious Image, to serve and worship him in his
Spirit and Truth; which holy Spirit and Truth the Devil is out of, and cannot
come into it.

And now, I desire all Christian Magistrates to take heed of Persecuting any,
though they differ from you in Matters of Faith, Worship and Religion. For
Christ says, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the Harvest; and
he forbad such, as would be plucking up Tares: The Reason was, Lest they should
pluck up the Wheat also; for that, Christ said, should be his Angels work, to
separate the Tares from the Wheat. Moreover, Christ said, They should go into
everlasting Punishment, that did not Visit him in Prison in his Members: Then
what will become of them, that Cast him into Prison, where he is made manifest
in his Members! Oh, lay these things to heart! A Day of Judgment will come,
Vengeance and Recompense upon every one according to their Works.

And Christ said to his Disciples, who would have had Fire to come down from
Heaven to consume them, that would not receive him; He turned him about and
rebuked them, and told them, They did not know, what spirit they were of; for
he came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them.

And therefore let all the Magistrates, and the Priests in that which is called
Christendom, consider, who have destroyed Men's and Women's Lives since the
Apostles days, because they could not Receive their Religions, Ways and
Worships, (or Conform to them) which they have made and set up; Have they
known, what Spirit they have been of? Are they not all reproved by, and come
under the Judgment of Christ? Therefore let all Persecution be laid away
concerning Religion, and let Love bear the sway, to overcome Evil and Enemies;
and let Patience over-sway Passion in all such doings: that all may retain the
heavenly Reason, and the pure Understanding, that your Moderation in true
Christianity may be known to all Men. For have you not the Turks, Jews,
Tartars, Indians and Atheists Eyes upon you, and upon Christendom? And
therefore be in Unity, and let not the Name of God and Christ be blasphemed
amongst them by means of any, that bear the Name of Christians: So that God may
be glorified by all and in all, through Jesus Christ, who is over all, who
calls all to Peace, who is blessed for ever.

And now, I would have you to be as Noble, as the Bereans, and search the
Scriptures of Christ and the Apostles, wherever he or they did give any
Command to Imprison, Banish, Persecute or put to Death any, that would not
receive or conform to them, or that were contrary-minded to them in Religion,
or differed from them in Matters of Worship?

Again, I desire all Christian Magistrates to search both Scriptures and
Chronicles, and see, what was the End of all Persecutors, and what Judgments
came upon them. What came to Cain, who was the first Persecutor for Matters of
Faith and Sacrifice? Did not he become a Runnagade, a Vagabond and a Fugitive
in the Earth? What became of the Old World, that grieved God and Noah, a
Preacher of Righteousness? What became of Sodom, that vexed Just Lot? What
became of Pharaoh, that persecuted God's People in Egypt? (though the more he
persecuted them, the more they grew.) What became of Ahab and Jezabel, that
persecuted the Lord's Prophets? And what became of Haman, that would have
destroyed the Jews? What became of the Jews and Jerusalem, that persecuted
Christ and the Apostles? What was the End of all these? Are they not become
Vagabonds in the Earth, and driven away from their native Country? Therefore I
beseech you in the Love and Fear of God, be so Noble as to search both
Scripture and History, and let not your divine understanding be clouded. What
will become of the Beast and Whore, spoken of in the Revelations, with their
false Prophets, that have drunk the blood of the Saints, Martyrs and Prophets
of Jesus? must they not all go with the Devil (who is a Murderer, Destroyer, an
Enemy and Adversary of Mankind) into the Lake of Fire, that burns with
Brimstone? And ye may be sure, that Spirit that stirs you up to Persecution,
let it be in whomsoever it will, is not of Christ, and of his Lamb-like Nature;
who takes away the Sins of the World, not the Lives of Men.

Paul was a Persecutor, and a Haler to Prison, before he was converted to
Christianity; but never after. And therefore, are not all in Readiness nature (let
them be of what Name or Profession soever they be) that are Persecutors, and
unconverted into Paul's Life of Christianity? He said, the Life that he did
live, after he was Converted, was by the Faith in the Son of God: And that He
lived, yet not He, but Christ lived in him, who came to save men's Lives, and
not to destroy them; Which Life should be the Life of all Christians now, which
Paul in his converted state lived in. And the Apostle says, The Law is good,
if a man use it lawfully; knowing this, that the Law is not made for a
righteous man, but for the Lawless, and for the Ungodly and Sinners, and for
Unholy and Profane, and for Murderers of Fathers and Mothers, and for
Manslayers, for Whoremongers, and for them that defile themselves with Mankind,
for Menstealers, Liars and Perjured Persons, 1 Timothy 1. So the Law in its place,
is good against such. Again the Apostle says, The Law was added, because of
Transgression, Gal. 3.19. Now here all Magistrates may see, what the Law in its
place is good against; and what it was made for and against; and what Evils,
the Apostle says, it takes hold upon: He does not say, the Law should be laid
upon Men, that differed from them in their Religion and Judgment, nor upon the
Righteous men. And so you may see, in what condition the Law is good, and what
it was made against; not against Righteous men, against whom they have nothing
in their Lives and Conversations, only because they differ from them in Matters
of Religion; and let Manslayers, Whoremongers, Perjured Persons, Ungodly,
Profane Persons, Liars, etc. go unpunished: Such do not use, nor execute the
Law lawfully, as the Apostle says; The Law is good, if a man use it lawfully.
Therefore it ought to be used lawfully; which Law the Apostle says, is for the
punishment of the Evildoers, and a praise for them that do well: as may be
seen, Romans 13. And so, as the Apostle said, We do not break the Law, nor make
it void; but we establish the Law, Romans 3.31.

Kingston upon Thames, the 4th of the first Month 1680/1. This is from him, who
desires the Eternal Good and Salvation of you all in Christ Jesus, Amen. G. F.

After I had finished these Services there, I returned to London; where I
stayed about a Month, London.
laboring amongst Friends in the Work of the Lord both in public Meetings for
Worship, and in the Meetings relating to the outward Affairs of the Church.
Waltham-Abbey. Flamsteadend. Edmunton Enfield. Winchmore-hill.
Then feeling my Spirit drawn to visit Friends about Enfield-side, I went down
to Waltham-Abbey, where I had a very precious Meeting; and another at
Flamstead-Heath (not far from thence.) And having spent some time amongst
Friends there and thereabouts, and had diverse good Meetings at Edmunton,
Enfield, Winchmore Hill, 1681. London Yearly Meeting.
and other places there aways, I came back to London a little before the Yearly
Meeting, which was in the Third Month 1681; it was a very precious Meeting, in
which the Glorious Presence and Power of the Lord was eminently felt and
enjoyed.

Some time after the Yearly Meeting was over, it came upon me to write the
following Epistle, which I directed --

To the Quarterly Men's and Women's Meetings that are gathered in the Name and
Power of Jesus.
CHrist, the second Adam, who is both Head and Husband of his Church, and
Redeemer, and Purchaser, and Savior, and Sanctifier, and Reconciler of his
Sons and Daughters (his Church) to God, I say, his Presence (to wit, Christ's)
feel among you, to exercise his Prophetical Office, in opening of you with his
Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; and to exercise his Office, as he is a
Bishop, to Oversee you with his Light, Grace, Power and Spirit, that ye do not
go astray from God. And as Christ is a Shepherd, feel, see and hear him
exercising that Office, who has laid down his Life for his Sheep, and is
feeding them in his living Pastures of Life, and makes them to drink of his
living, Eternal Springs. And let him rule and govern in your Hearts, as he is
King, that his heavenly and spiritual Government all may live under, as true
Subjects of his righteous, peaceable Kingdom, which stands in Righteousness,
and Power, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, over Satan and his Power, and the
unclean, unholy Ghost, and all unrighteousness. So all ye Subjects to Christ's
Kingdom of Peace, if ye want Wisdom, or Knowledge, or Life, or Salvation,
Christ is the Treasure; feel him the Treasure among you. And every one among
you, as ye have received Christ, walk in him, in whom ye have all Peace; who
bruises the Head of the Serpent, that is the Author of all Strife, Distraction
and Confusion: yea, you have Peace with God, and one with another; though the
Trouble be from the World and the World's Spirit. And therefore, My dear
Friends, Brethren and Sisters, Love one another with the Love, that is of God
shed in your hearts; that ye may bear the Ma^ks of Christ's Disciples, and it
may appear, that Christ is in you, and ye in him; so that God Almighty may be
glorified among you. And whatever ye do, let it be done in the Name of Jesus,
to the praise of God the Father, keeping in Unity in the Holy Spirit of God,
which was, before the unholy Spirit was: Which holy Spirit is your Bond of
Peace, yea, the holy King of Kings and Lord of Lords his peace. And in this
holy, pure Spirit is your eternal Unity and Fellowship; in which Spirit of
Truth ye do serve and worship the God of Truth, who is God over all, blessed
for ever, Amen. So the Lord guide you all with his Word of Patience, Word of
Life, Power and Wisdom in all your Actions, Lives, Conversations and Meetings
to God's glory. 1681. London.
My Love to you all in the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things were made, and
who is over all, the First and the Last.

London the 9th of the 4th Month, 1681. G. F.


About this time I had occasion to go to several of the Judges Chambers, upon a
Suit about Tithes. For both I and my Wife, and several other Friends, were sued
in Cartmel-Wapentake-Court in Lancashire, for small Tithes, and we had demurred
to the Jurisdiction of that Court. Whereupon the Plaintiff prosecuted us into
the Exchequer-Court at Westminster; where they run us up to a Writ of
Rebellion, for not Answering the Bill upon Oath: and got an Order of Court to
the Sergeant, to take me and my Wife into Custody. This was a little before the
Yearly Meeting, at which time it was thought, they would have taken me up; and
according to outward appearance, it was likely indeed, that he would: and very
easy for him to have done it; I lodging at the same places, where I used to
lodge, and being very public in Meetings. But the Lord's Power was over them,
and restrained them; so that they did not take me. Yet understanding, that
there was a Warrant out against me, as soon as the Yearly Meeting was well
over, I took William Mead with me, and went to several of the Judges Chambers
to speak with them about it; and to let them understand both the state of the
Case, and the ground and reason of our Refusing to pay Tithes. The first, that
I went to, was Judge Gregory, to whom I tendered mine and my Wife's Answer to
the Plaintiff's Bill; in which was set forth, That my Wife had lived Three and
forty years at Swarthmore, and in all that time there had been no Tithe paid
nor demanded: and an old Man, who had long been a Tithe-Gatherer, had made
Affidavit, that he never gathered Tithe at Swarthmore-hall in Judge Fell's
time, nor since. There were many Particulars in our Answer; but it would not be
accepted without an Oath. I told the Judge, that both Tithe and Swearing among
Christians came from the Pope; and it was matter of Conscience to us, not to
pay Tithes, nor to swear: for Christ bid his Disciples, who had freely
received, give freely; and he commanded them, Not to swear at all. The Judge
said, There was Tithe paid in England, before Popery was: I asked him, by what
Law or Statute they were paid then? but he was silent. Then I told him, there
were Eight poor men brought up to London out of the North about Two hundred
Miles, for small Tithes, and one of them had no Family, but himself and his
Wife, and kept no living Creature, but a Cat. I asked him also, Whether they
could take a Man and his Wife, and Imprison them both for small Tithes, and so
destroy a Family? and if they could, I desired to know, by what Law? He did not
Answer me; but only said, That was an hard Case. So when I found, there was no
help to be had there, we left him; and went to Judge Mountague's Chamber: and
with him I had a great deal of Discourse concerning Tithes. Whereupon he sent
for our Adversary's Attorney; and when he came, I offered him our Answer: He
said, If we would pay the Charges of the Court, and be bound to stand Trial,
and abide the Judgment of the Court, we should not have the Oath tendered to us.
I told him, that they had brought those Charges upon us, by requiring us to put
in our Answer upon Oath; which they knew before, we could not do for Conscience
sake: And as we could not pay any Tithe, nor swear; so neither should we pay
any of their Charges: Upon this he would not receive our Answer. So we went
from thence to Judge Atkyns his Chamber; and he being busy, we gave our
Answers, and our Reasons against Tithes and Swearing to his Clerk: But neither
could we find any Encouragement from him to expect Redress there. Wherefore
leaving him, we went to one of the most noted Counselors, and showed him the
state of our Case, and our Answers: He was very Civil to us; and said; This way
of proceeding against us was somewhat like an Inquisition. A few days after,
those Eight poor Friends, that were brought up so far out of the North,
appeared before the Judges; and the Lord was with them, and his Power was over
the Court, so that the Friends were not Committed to the Fleet. Our Cause was
put off till the next Term (called Michaelmass Term) and then it was brought
before the Four Judges again. Then William Mead told the Judges, that I had
engaged my self never to meddle with my Wife's Estate: The Judges could hardly
believe, that any Man would do so: Whereupon he showed them the Writing under
my Hand and Seal; at which they wondered. Then Two of the Judges, and some of
the Lawyers stood up, and pleaded for me, that I was not liable to the Tithes:
But the other two Judges, and diverse other Lawyers pressed earnestly, to have
me sequestered; alleging, that I was a public Man. At length they prevailed
with one of the other Two Judges to Join with them; and then they granted a
Sequestration against me and my Wife together. Thereupon, by Advice of Counsel
we moved for a Limitation, which was granted; and that much defeated our
Adversary's design in suing out the Sequestration: for this limited the
Plaintiff from taking no more, than was proved. One of the Judges, who was
called Baron Weston, was very bitter against me; and brake forth in a great
Rage against me in the open Court: but in a little time after he died.

After the Yearly Meeting was over, I tarried about a Month in London; Sussex.
London.
and then went into Sussex, to visit Friends there: amongst whom I had many
large and very precious Meetings in diverse parts of that County. Yet I spent
not much time now in Sussex; but returned pretty soon to London, whether I felt
drawings in Spirit: and had very good Service for the Lord there, both in
public Meetings, and amongst Friends. And when I had tarried some time in
London, Edmunton. Bucks.
I went down to Edmunton; and from thence into Buckinghamshire, where I visited
Friends at several Meetings in the upper-side of that County: and then went by
Henly to Reading, where I tarried several Meetings. 1681. Henly. Reading. O e.
Oxfordshire. Warborow.
I went no farther Westward at this time, than to Ore; where I had a very large
Meeting: After which, striking off through the Edg of Oxfordshire, I had a
large and very precious Meeting at Warborow, in which the Glory of the Lord
shined over all: Many Friends came to this Meeting, some out of Barkshire, some
out of Buckinghamshire, and some out of Hampshire. Ilmore in the Vale of Bucks.
From thence I passed to Ilmore (which is in the Vale of Buckinghamshire) where
we had a glorious Meeting: And the day following I returned to Mary
Pennington's. From whence I visited the Men's and Women's Monthly Meetings at
Hunger-hill, Hunger-hill. Watford.
and some other Meetings thereabouts: and then passed to Watford; where was a
Marriage of Two Friends, at which I was present: A very large Meeting we had on
that Occasion, and the Lord's Power was over all. I went from Watford to
Longford in Middlesex, Middlesex. Uxbridge. Longford.
visiting Friends at Uxbridge in the way. At Longford we had a large Meeting,
it being on the First Day of the Week; and the presence of the Lord was
preciously felt amongst us: blessed be his Name. I passed from Longford to
Kingston, visiting Friends, as I went, at Stains and Sunbury. Stains. Sunbury.
Kingston
At Kingston I abode with Friends two Meetings, wherein we were sweetly
refreshed together in the Lord. And passing on from thence toward London, I
had a very precious Meeting at Wansworth: Wansworth. Hammersmith.
Then crossing over to Hammersmith, I had a good Meeting there; which was the
larger by reason of a Burial, that was there that time: and there being a
pretty Openness in the People on that Occasion, I had a fine Opportunity to
open the Way of Truth amongst them.

After I was come to London, London.
I was moved to write the following Paper, concerning that Spirit, which had
led some, who professed Truth, into Strife and Division, and to oppose the Way
and Work of the Lord.

Friends,
YOU that do keep your habitations in the Truth, that is over all, do see, that
it is the same Spirit, that does lead the Backsliders and Apostates now, from
the Spiritual Fellowship and Unity of God's People and the Church of Christ,
that led out Adam and Eve from God, and the Jews from God and his Law, to Rebel
against his Spirit; and so to turn against God and his Prophets. And this
Spirit was the same, that was in the World, which was got into the Jews, when
they were gone from the Spirit of God; and then they turned against God and his
Prophets, and against Christ and his Apostles: And that Spirit led them to be
as bad, as Pilate, or worse. The Enmity or Adversary was got within them
against the Truth, and them that walked in it, and the Spirit of the Lord; so
that they killed and destroyed the Just. And this was the Spirit of the Devil,
the Destroyer, who would seek not only to destroy the Truth, but the Order of
it, and them that walk in it, when true Christianity was planted among the
Possessors of the Light, 1681. London.
Grace and Truth, and the Gospel-holy Faith and Spirit; and they did enjoy
Christ in their hearts. But when some did begin to Err from the Spirit and
Faith, and hate the Light, and disobey the Gospel, and to turn the Grace of God
into Wantonness, and walk despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, and turn
from the Truth, and Crucify to themselves Christ afresh, and put him to open
shame; These were they, that let in the Spirit of the World: who held the Form
of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof; which troubled the Churches in the
Apostles days. And when the Spirit of Satan had got into such, they were more
troublesome to the Church, than the open Persecutors, that were without: And
these got into the Assemblies to deceive the hearts of the Simple; having the
good Words, and fair Speeches, and Sheep's-Cloathing. Paul, Peter, John, Jude
and James had much to do with such, and to keep them from troubling the Church
of Christ: For they are out of the Light, Power and Spirit; and therefore the
Apostles of Christ did exhort the Saints to keep to the Word of Life within,
and to the Anointing, and to the Grace, and Truth, and holy Spirit in their
hearts. This foul Spirit will profess all the Scriptures in words; but by the
Spirit of God, which is holy, that Spirit is tried, and its fruits. And so the
Apostates went from the Power and Spirit of God, and turned against the
Prophets, and the Martyrs of Jesus; and became the Whore, whose Cup all Nations
drunk of. And the Dragon with his Tail threw down many of the Stars, and would
have devoured the Woman with his Flood: but the Woman, the true Church was
preserved; and the Gates of Hell cannot prevail against her: And then the
Dragon made war with her Seed. So the Dragon, and the Whore, and Beast, and
false Prophets, all made war against the Lamb and the Saints; but the Lamb and
the Saints will overcome them all, and will have the Victory. And now the
Everlasting Gospel is preached again to all Nations, Tongues and Peoples: and
many are gathered into the Gospel, the Power of God; and are turned to the
Light, which is the Life in Christ, and are grafted into him, and are come to
walk in the Order of the New Covenant of Light and Life, in the Gospel of Peace
and Salvation. The same Spirit, that opposed the Apostles and the Churches in
their days, opposes now; yea, it is the same, that opposed Christ, and
disdained him, that disdaineth God's Servants now: And the same, that did
oppose the Prophets, and rebelled against Moses; opposes and rebels against
God's Servants and People now. And it is the same dark, blind and disobedient,
faithless, wilful, jealous Spirit, that does persecute some with the Hands, and
others with the Tongue. And it is the same Spirit of Enmity, the Adversary and
Destroyer, that tempted Adam and Eve to disobey God, and did deceive them;
which deceived the Jews, and tempted them, and deceived all those, that went
from the Church in the Apostles days. And it is the same Spirit, that is now
going about sometimes like a roaring Lion, sometimes like a twisting Serpent to
tempt, and to deceive, 1682. London.
and to devour; having the fair Speeches, and good Words, and Sheeps-Cloathing
in a Form of Godliness, and in pretense of the Light and Liberty, but denies
the Power thereof; and inwardly are ravening Wolves: and if it were possible,
they would deceive the very Elect. But the Elect are in the Covenant of Light
and Life, and in the Power of God over them, and in Christ, who will grind them
to pieces; and will slay all his Enemies with his spiritual Sword, who will not
have him to rule over or in them. In Christ all his People have Rest and Peace,
who is their Sanctuary over all Storms and Tempests. And in Christ, the
Sanctuary, no Deceiver nor Destroyer can come; for he is a place of sweet Rest
and Safety: Hallelujah, Praise the Lord for his Sanctuary, Amen.

G. F.

Sufferings continuing still hard upon Friends at London, I found, my Service
lay mostly here: Wherefore I went but a little out of Town, and not far; being
frequent at the most public Meetings, to encourage Friends both by Word and
Example, to stand fast in the Testimony, to which God had called them. And at
other times I went about from house to house, visiting those Friends, that had
their Goods taken away for their Testimony to Truth. And because the wicked
Informers were grown very audacious, by reason, that they had too much
Countenance and Encouragement from some Justices; who trusting wholly to their
Information, proceeded against Friends without hearing them: whereby many
Friends were made to suffer, not only contrary to Right, but even contrary to
Law also. I advised with some Friends about it: and we drew up a Paper, which
was afterward delivered to most of the Magistrates in and about the City;
which was as follows:

WHereas some Informers have obtained Warrants of some Justices of Peace, and
have Convicted many of us without hearing us, or once Summoning us to Appear
before them; by which proceedings many have had their Goods seized and taken
away, being generally fined Ten Pounds a piece for an unknown Speaker: and some
of those Persons so fined, have not been that, day at the Meetings they were
fined for, and the Speaker notwithstanding has himself been fined for the same
Meeting, the same day the others were fined for the unknown Speaker. By which
the Justices may see the Wickedness of these Informers, by whose false Oaths we
have been Convicted for an unknown Preacher, when the Preacher has been both
known and fined. And also in their swearing such Persons to have been at such a
Meeting such a day, when indeed they, whom they have so sworn against, have not
been at that Meeting that day. By which proceedings several Families of the
King's peaceable Subjects are like to be ruined, if there be not a speedy stop
put thereunto. Therefore we do both hope and desire, that you, who are the
King's Justices, for the time to come, when any Informers shall come to any of
you with an Information against any of us, will Summon such as are Accused, to
Appear before you, and hear us and our Accusers face to face; that so none for
the time to come may suffer, for that they are not guilty of. For Pilate the
Governor heard Christ and his Accusers face to face, before he Condemned him,
John 19. And the Council and Chief Priests heard Stephen and his Accusers, with
the Witnesses, that were brought against him, face to face, before they
Condemned him, Acts 7. The Roman Captain heard Paul and his Accusers face to
face, Acts 23. And Felix the Governor heard Paul, and Ananias the High Priest,
and the Elders that accused Paul, face to face, Acts 24. And when the High
Priests and Chief of the Jews accused Paul to Festus, he heard Paul and his
Accusers, and them that witnessed against him, face to face, Acts 25. Does the
Law of God, or did the Roman Law, or does the Law of the Land judge any man,
before he and his Accusers, and they that Witness against him, be heard face to
face?

This somewhat moderated the Justices: and after this several Friends, that had
been Illegally prosecuted and fined, entered their Appeals; upon Trial whereof
they were Acquitted, and the Informers Cast: which was a great discouragement
to the Informers, and some Relief to Friends.

A little before the time came for the Choosing new Sheriffs for the City, they
who stood to be Chosen, desiring our Friends to give their Voices for them, I
writ a few Lines, tending to discover, what Spirit they were of, and how they
stood affected to true Liberty; and it was by way of Inquiry, thus:

DO any here in London, who stand to be Chosen Sheriffs, own That Christ, that
was Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, to be the Light of the World,
that does Inlighten every Man, that comes into the World, who says, Believe
in the Light, that ye may become Children of the Light? And is any of you
against persecuting People for their Religion and Worship of God in Spirit and
Truth, as Christ commands? For Christ said, I am not of this World, nor my
Kingdom: And therefore he does not uphold his spiritual Worship and pure
Religion with worldly and carnal Weapons. And Christ said, Swear not at all;
And his Apostle James says the same: But will not you force us to swear, and
so to break Christ's and his Apostle's Commands, in putting Oaths to us? And
Christ says to his Apostles, Freely ye have received, freely give: Will not
you force us to give Tithes and Maintenance to such Teachers, as we know, God
has not sent? Shall we be free to serve and worship God, and keep his and his
Son's Commands, if we give our Voices freely for you? for we are unwilling to
give our Voices for such, as will Imprison, and persecute us, and spoil our
Goods.

But whatever they were, that stood to be Chosen, I observed, there was a Heat
and Strife in the Spirits of the People, that were to Choose; wherefore I writ
a few Lines to be spread amongst them, directed thus: To the People, who are
Choosing Sheriffs in London.
People;
ALL keep in the gentle and peaceable Wisdom of God, which is above that, that
is earthly, sensual and devilish: And live in that Love of God, that is not
puffed up, nor is unseemly; which envieth not, but bears and endures all
things: And in this Love ye will seek the good and peace of all men, and the
hurt of no man. Keep out of all heats, and be not hotheaded; but be cool and
gentle, that your Christian Moderation may appear to all men: for the Lord is
at hand, who beholds all men's words, thoughts and actions, and will reward
every one according to their works: And what every man sows, that shall he
reap.




Now had I some Inclination to have gone into the Country to a Meeting: But
hearing, that there would be a Bussle at our Meetings, and feeling a great
disquietness in Peoples spirits in the City about Choosing Sheriffs; it was
upon me to stay in the City, and go to the Meeting in Gracious-street upon the
First Day of the Week. William Penn went with me, and spoke in the Meeting:
Grac-Me^^.
and while he was declaring the Truth to the People, a Constable came in with
his great Staff, and bid him give over, and come down: but William Penn held
on, declaring Truth in the Power of God. After a while the Constable drew back;
and when William Penn had done, I stood up, and declared to the People the
Everlasting Gospel, which was preached in the Apostles days, and to Abraham;
and which the Church in the Apostles days did receive, and came to be Heirs of.
This Gospel, I declared, was sent from Heaven by the holy Ghost in the Apostles
days, and is so now; and was not of man, neither by man; but by the Revelation
of the Holy Ghost. And now this Gospel is preached again, (as John saw, and
said it should be) to all Nations, Tongues and Peoples; and all People now are
to hear Christ the Prophet, in this his Gospel of the New Covenant. For as
Moses said, Like unto me will God raise up a Prophet, and him shall ye hear in
all things: so, said I, this Prophet Christ, is come, and all the Jews in
spirit, the true believing Christians in the Light, who have the Law of God
written in their hearts, and put into their minds, are to hear Christ in his
Gospel, New Testament and New Covenant, which is the Law of the Spirit of Life
in Christ Jesus, who bruises the Serpent's head (which is the head of Enmity)
and makes free from the Law of Sin and Death. And I showed, that all whom
Christ quickens and makes alive, he makes them to sit together in the heavenly
places in himself. So that they do not wander up and down, like the Fool's eye
in the Corners of the Earth; nor are their Eyes abroad in the World, to sit
down in the World's invented Seats of Religion; but they sit together in him,
as the Saints did in the Apostles days: and so Christ was and is their Treasure
of Wisdom, Life, Knowledge and Salvation. Now as I was thus speaking, two
Constables came in with their great Staves, and bid me give over speaking, and
come down: But I, feeling the Power of the Lord with me, spoke on therein, both
to the Constables, and to the People. To the Constables I declared, That we
were a peaceable People, who meet to wait upon God, and worship him in Spirit
and in Truth; and therefore (I told them) they needed not to come with their
Staves amongst us, who were met in a peaceable manner, desiring and seeking the
good and salvation of all People. Then turning my Speech to the People again, I
declared what further was upon me to them: and while I was speaking, the
Constables drew out toward the door; and the Soldiers stood with their
Muskets in the Yard. When I had done speaking, I kneeled down, and prayed,
desiring the Lord to open the Eyes and Hearts of all People, both high and low,
that their minds might be turned to God by his holy Spirit; that he might be
glorified in all and over all. After prayer the Meeting rose, and Friends
passed away; the Constables being come in again, but without the Soldiers: and
indeed, both they and the Soldiers carried themselves Civilly. William Penn
and I went into a Room hard by, as we used to do, and many Friends went with
us; and lest the Constables should think, we would shun them; a Friend went
down and told them, That, if they would have any thing with us, they might come
where we were, if they pleased. One of them came to us soon after, but without
his Staff; which he chose to do, that he might not be observed: for he said,
The People told him, he busied himself more than he needed. We desired to see
his Warrant; and therein we found, that the Informer was one Hilton, a
North-Countryman, who was reputed to be a Papist. The Constable was asked;
Whether he would Arrest us by his Warrant on that day? (it being the First Day
of the Week, which in their Law was called the Lord's Day) and he said, He
thought he could not: He told us also, That he had charged the Informer to come
along with him to the Meeting; but he had run away from him. We showed the
Constable, that both he and we were Clear; yet to free him from all fear of
danger, we were free to go to the Alderman, that granted the Warrant. Then a
Friend, that was present, said; He would go with the Constable to speak with
the Alderman: which they did, and came presently back again; the Alderman being
gone from home: We seeing the Constable in a strait, and finding him to be a
tender Man, bid him, set an hour to come to us again, or send for us, and we
would come to him. So he appointed the fifth hour in the Afternoon; but neither
came, nor sent for us: and a Friend meeting him afterward in the Evening, the
Constable told him, He thought, it would come to nothi g, and therefore did not
look after us. So the Lord's Power was over all, to him be the Glory!

On the Fourth day following, it was upon me to go to Gracious-street-Meeting
again: for I had heard, that they would come, to break up the Meeting that day.
The Neighbors, it seems, were Informed so; and a Justice had granted a Warrant
for that purpose: and the Constable told a Friend, that Hilton the Informer,
had been with him about it. The Constable would have had the Informer to have
gone with him to the Meeting, but the Informer would not; but would have the
Constable go without him: Whether that put the Constable by from coming, I know
not; but he did not come. I was in a Travel of Spirit in the power of God, and
was moved in it to go to the Meeting; and the Lord's Power did chain all down:
And though they threatened to bring the Red-Coats, yet none came, nor was there
any disturbance; but a glorious, powerful Meeting it was, and very peaceable:
Glory and Honor and Praises be to the Lord over all for ever, Amen.

During the time I thus abode at London, as I had leisure between Meetings, and
from other Public Services, I writ diverse Books and Papers; some of which were
printed, and others were spread about in Manuscript. Of these, One was directed
To the Bishops and others, that did stir up Persecution; to show them from the
holy Scriptures, that they did not walk therein according to the Royal Law, To
love their Neighbor as themselves, and to do to others as they would be done
unto. Another was, ' To all the several sorts of professed Christians, as well
Protestants as Papists, whose Religion and Worship stands in outward
Observances and Ceremonies; pressing them, from those words of the Apostle Paul
to the Galatians, chap. 5. verse. 2, 3, 4. ( Behold, I Paul say unto you, that
if ye be Circumcised, Christ shall profit you nothing. For I testify again to
every man, that is Circumcised, that he is a Debtor to the whole Law. Christ is
become of no effect unto you, whosoever of you are justified by the Law: ye are
fallen from Grace,) to Consider, Whether they, being gone back into legal
Observations and shadowy Ceremonies (in upholding Tithes, Offerings,
First Fruits, Priests-Garments, outward Altars, Temples, Lamps, Lights, etc.
and in Observing Days, Months, Times, Years, with many other things commanded
by the Law) were not gone into the same state, that the Galatians were running
into; and so were fallen from Grace, and become Debtors to the whole Law.
Another was, ' To direct and turn all People to the Spirit of God, that they
might thereby receive a right understanding, and be able to distinguish between
Right and Wrong, Truth and Error; that under pretense of punishing Evildoers,
they might not themselves do Evil in persecuting the Righteous. That Paper
being short, is here inserted:

The Spirit of God, which he has poured upon all, gives an Understanding to
all, that are led by it; and who do not quench the Motions of it, it does give
them Knowledge and Understanding to distinguish Good from Evil, and Light from
Darkness, Christ from Antichrist, and the Old Testament or Covenant from the
New, and the Old Way from the New and living Way; and the Sheep and Lambs from
the Goats and from the Wolves; the Worship of God, which Christ set up above
sixteen hundred years ago, from the Dragon's and Beast's Worship; and all them
that worship the Works of Men's hands, and the Will Worshippers, from them that
Worship God in his Spirit and in his Truth, in which God's People do worship
him; which Worship is over all false Worships and Worshippers. And who believe
in the Light, which is the Life in Christ, do become the Children of Light, and
are the Lambs of Jesus. And the Lambs do follow the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sins of the World; and they will not follow the Hirelings, nor the
Strangers, to be led into strange Ways and Doctrines, and Religions, and
Churches: for the Lambs of Christ follow Christ, the Lamb of God, and do know
his heavenly Voice. And they do know also, that they, who are without Christ,
are Dogs and Wolves, Adulterers, Idolaters, Liars and Unbelievers, who would
devour the Lambs: but they are in the hand of the Lord, which is his Power,
that is over all. And such do good in his Power unto all: for they have the
Mind of Christ, who would have all to come to the knowledge of the Truth, and
be saved. And they that do good unto all, do hurt unto none: for that Spirit,
that does hurt unto any, is not of God; but that Spirit, which does good unto
all, and especially to the Household of Faith, is of God. Christ came not to
destroy men's Lives, but to save them: And it is the Devil, that is the
Destroyer of men's Lives about Religion, and that blinds and corrupts Men and
Women, and makes them deaf and blind to the things of God, and to halt out of
God's way. They that obey the Evil one, and forsake the Lord, such the
Destroyer does destroy: But Christ does destroy that Destroyer, and in Christ
all have Life.

G. F.

I writ another Paper also concerning Meditation, Delight, Exercise and Study;
showing from the Scriptures of Truth, what the true Christians ought to
Meditate upon, and to Exercise their minds in, and what they should take
Delight in, and what they should study to do. For in these things, not the
profane and loose People only, but even the great Professors of Religion are
very much mistaken; taking Delight in earthly, fading, perishing things;
whereas they ought to Meditate on heavenly things, and to delight in the Law of
God after the inward man, and exercise themselves to have always a Conscience
void of Offense toward God, and toward Men, as the Apostle Paul did.

And inasmuch as Sufferings continued very sore and heavy up on Friends not
only in the City, but in most parts of the Nation, I drew up a Paper to be
presented to the King; setting forth our Grievances therein, and desiring
Redress from him in those Particular Cases, which I understood were in his
power. But not having Relief from him, it came upon me to write an Epistle to
Friends, to Encourage them in their Sufferings, that they might bear with
patience the many Exercises, that were brought upon them, both from the outward
Magistrates, and by false Brethren and Apostates; whose wicked Books and filthy
Slanders did grieve the upright-hearted. This Epistle I writ at Dolston,
Dolston.
whither I went to visit an ancient Friend, that lay sick.

FRiends and Brethren in Christ Jesus, whom the Lord has called and gathered
into him, In him abide: for without him (to wit, Christ) ye can do nothing, and
through him ye can do all things; who is your strength and support in all your
Trials, Temptations, Imprisonments and Sufferings, who for Christ's sake are
accounted as Sheep for the slaughter: and in all these things we are more than
Conquerours, through Christ, who has loved us. And therefore, Friends, though
ye do suffer by the Outward Powers; ye know, that the Prophets, Christ and the
Apostles suffered by the Unconverted. And though ye do suffer by false
Brethren, and false Apostates for a time, and by their filthy Books and
Tongues; whose Tongues indeed are become no Slander, let them speak, write or
print what they will: for the sober People even of the World hardly regard it.
And it is well, they have manifested themselves to the World, that their folly
may proceed no farther: though to the utmost of their power they have showed
their Wicked Intent, to stir up the Magistrates, Professors and Profane
against us, and to speak evil of the way of Truth. But God's Judgments will
overtake them, and come upon them, as sure as they have come upon those, that
are gone before them. Let their pretense be never so high, mark their End: for
they will fall, like untimely Figs; and wither like the Grass on the top of the
House. Though they may seem to flourish, and make a Boast and a Noise for a
time; yet the Seed is on the head of such, which will grind them to powder:
which Seed bruises the Serpent's head. Therefore in this Seed, Christ, who is
your sanctuary, rest, peace and quiet habitation, who is the First and Last,
and over all, in him walk: for the Lord takes pleasure in his People, that are
faithful, and that serve and worship him. And therefore let the Saints be
Joyful in Glory: and the God of Peace, the God of all Grace, who has called us
into his Eternal Glory by Jesus Christ, after that ye have suffered a while,
make you perfect, stablish, strengthen and settle you; casting all your Care
upon the Lord: for he cares for you. And Dearly Beloved, think it not strange
concerning the fiery Trial, 1682. Dolfon.
which is to Try you, s though some strange thing had happened unto you: for it
is ^etter, if the Will of God be so, that ye suffer for Well-doing, than for
Evil-doing: and Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made Partakers of Christ's
Sufferings. Wherefore let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit
the keeping of their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator:
for unto you is given, in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe in him, but
also to suffer for his sake. So it is given, or is a gift from Christ to suffer
for his Name; and therefore (as I said before) Rejoice, inasmuch as ye are made
Partakers of Christ's sufferings. And if ye be Reproached, or evil spoken of
for the Name of Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God
rests upon you: On their part he is evil spoken of; but on your part he is
glorified. And therefore if any suffer as Christians, let them not be ashamed;
but let them glorify God on this behalf. Though now for a season ye are in
Sufferings, and Trials, and Temptations, that the Trial of your Faith, being
much more precious than that of Gold, which perishes, though it be tried with
Fire, may be found unto praise, honor and glory, who are kept by the power of
God, through Faith unto Salvation. Therefore mind your Keeper, wherever ye
are, or what sufferings soever ye be in; and mind the Example of the Apostle,
how he suffered trouble as an Evil-doer, unto Bonds. But the Word of God is not
bound, which is Everlasting and endures for ever: And they, who are in that,
which is not Everlasting, and does not endure for ever, cannot bind the Word.
And the Apostle said, I endure all things for the Elects sake; that they may
also obtain the salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory (mark,
with Eternal Glory.) And if we suffer with Christ, we shall reign with Christ,
who abide faithful. Therefore strive not about words to no profit; but shun
profane and vain Babblings, for they will increase unto more ungodliness: So
that ye may be Vessels of Honor, sanctified and meet for Christ, your Master's
use, and prepared unto every good work. Follow after Righteousness, Godliness,
Faith, Love, Patience and Meekness, and fight the good Fight of Faith with your
heavenly Weapons; which Faith is Victory (or gives Victory) by which ye lay
hold on Eternal Life, and have access unto God, who will render to every man
according to his Deeds: to them, who by patient continuing in welldoing, seek
for glory, and honor, and immortality; Eternal Life: but unto them that are
contentious, and do not obey the Truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation
and wrath: Tribulation and Anguish upon every soul of man, that does evil; but
glory, honor and peace to every man, that works good. Christ said to his
Disciples, If the world hate you, ye know, that it hated me, before it hated
you. If ye were of the world, the world would love it is own: but because ye are
not of the world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world
hates you. And, If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you. And
John in his general Epistle to the Church says, Marvel not, my Brethren, if
the world hate you. We know that we have passed from death to life, because we
love the Brethren, And Christ in his Prayer to his Father says of his
Followers; As thou have sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them
i^ the world: And the glory which thou gave me, I have given them; that they
may be one, even as we are one. And therefore all ye, that know God and Jesus
Christ (whom to know is Eternal Life) and are Partakers of his Glory, keep the
Testimony of Jesus, and be valiant for his Truth upon Earth; that ye may be all
settled upon Christ, the Rock and Foundation.

Dolston, the 3d of the 8th Month, 1682. G. F.


I made but little stay at Dolston, but returned again to London, London.
where I continued most part of the Winter; laboring in the Service of Truth
amongst Friends: Save that I was a little while at Kingston in the Tenth Month
this Year; where I writ a Book, Kingston.
setting forth The state of the Birth Temporal, and the Birth Spiritual: And
the Duty and State of a Child, Youth, Young Men, Aged Men and Fathers in the
Truth, etc. But I staid not long at Kingston neither: for the heat of
Persecution still continuing, I felt my Service to be most at London; London.
where our Meetings were for the most part disturbed and broken up, or Friends
were forced to Meet without Doors, being kept out of their Meeting Houses by
the Officers. Yet sometimes, beyond expectation, we got a quiet and peaceable
Meeting in the Houses. One time I was minded to have gone a mile or two out of
Town, to visit a Friend, that was not well: But hearing, that the King had sent
to the Mayor to put the Laws in Execution against Dissenters, and that the
Magistrates thereupon intended to Nail up the Meeting-house-doors, I had not
freedom to go out of Town; but was moved to go to the Meeting at
Gracious-street. And notwithstanding all the Threats, a great Meeting it was,
and very quiet; and the Glory of the Lord shone over all.

The same Week I went to the Meeting at the Peel in John's Street; and the
Sessions were holden the same day at Hicks's- hall. Peel-Meet.
I went to the Peel in the Morning; and William Mead being to appear at the
Sessions for not going to the Steeple-house-worship, he came once or twice from
Hicks's hall to me at the Peel; which some Ill-minded-people observing, went
and Informed the Justices at the Bench, that he was gone to a Meeting at the
Peel. Whereupon the Justices sent a Messenger to see, if there were a Meeting:
but this being in the Forenoon, there was no Meeting there then; and so the
Messenger, when he had looked about, went back and told them. Then others
Informed the Justices that there would be a Meeting there about three or four
in the Afternoon: Whereupon they sent for the Chief Constable, and asked him;
Why he suffered a Meeting to be at the Peel, so nigh him? He told them, He did
not know of any Meeting there. They asked him, How he could but know it, and
live so nigh it? He said, He was never there in his life, 1682. London.
and did not know, that there was a Meeting there. They would have persuaded
him, that he must needs know of it; but he standing steadfast in the denial of
it, they said; They should take order, to have it looked after in the
Afternoon. But a multitude of Business coming before them at the Sessions; when
Dinnertime came, they hasted to their Dinner, without giving order: And when
they came to the Bench again after Dinner, the Lord put it out of their Minds,
so that they sent no Officer; and so the Meeting was quiet, beginning and
ending in peace; and a blessed Meeting we had, the Lord's Presence being
preciously amongst us. Many Friends had a concern upon their minds, when they
saw me come into the Meeting, lest I should have been taken: But I was freely
given up to suffer, if it was the Lord's Will, before I went into the Meeting;
and had nothing in my mind concerning it, but the Lord's Glory. And I do
believe, the Lord put it out of their minds, that they should not send to break
up our Meeting that day. Yet the First Day after, three or four Justices (as I
heard) came to the Peel, and put Friends out of their Meeting there, and kept
them out; and inquired for William Mead, but he was not there.

Grac. Meet.
That day I was moved to go to Gracious-street-Meeting; and it was expected,
that the Officers would come to break up the Meeting, or keep Friends out; and
many hundreds of People came to see, what would be done to us. But the Officers
came not; and so we were in peace and quietness: and many of the People, that
came to look on, staid all the time; and a glorious, precious Meeting we had:
for the Lord's Presence was plentifully amongst us, and his Power came over
all; Glory to his Name for ever, who is over all.

I had seen the Mayor's printed Speech for putting the Laws in Execution
against Dissenters: and it was much in my mind, that we should draw up a Paper
to send to the Mayor and Aldermen, to clear our selves from being such, as
those Laws were made against; and to set forth our peaceable Behavior both
toward the King and the Government. Accordingly a Paper was drawn up, and
signed, and delivered to the Mayor; and Copies thereof to the Aldermen, and to
the Bishop of London also: And they generally took it kindly, and were Civil to
the Friends, that delivered it.

About this time I was moved to write the few Lines following to Friends: Dear
Friends,
FEel the Power of God in you all, and over all, and by it let all your hearts
be united to one another, and to the Lord God, who has gathered you to himself
by his Power and Spirit, to be a People to serve and worship him. So that you
may all strive to Excel one another in Virtue, and in that Love, that does bear
all things, and does edify the Body of Christ, the Body of the second Adam.
For the Body of old Adam in the Fall is full of Malice, Envy and Vice. And
therefore you, that are called out of Old Adam in the Fall, and have put on
Christ, the second Adam, that never fell, Walk in him, who is the Treasure of
Life, Wisdom and Knowledge, in whom ye have peace with God, who is the First
and Last, the Beginning and the Ending. So let all be gathered up to God, into
him, who reconcileth all things in one, both things in Heaven, and things in
the Earth; who is the faithful and true Witness both in Male and Female: And in
him sit down, who is above the subtle Foxes in their holes, and the Fowls of
the Air in their nests; I say, sit down in Christ, who has no place among them
to lay his head; he is your rest. So in him is my Love to you all.

London, the 20th of the 11th Month, 1682. G. F.




It was not long after this, that I received an Account by Letter from some
Friends, that were Prisoners in Denby in Wales: by which I understood, that
many Friends there were under great Sufferings for the Testimony of a good
Conscience. In the tender sense whereof I was moved in the Love of God to Visit
them with a few Lines, as a Word of Consolation to them in their Sufferings;
and of Exhortation, to stand fast in the Testimony committed to them. And that
which I writ, was thus: DEar suffering Lambs for the Name and Command of Jesus!
Be valiant for his Truth, and faithful; and ye will feel the Presence of Christ
with you. And look at him, who suffered for you, and has bought you, and will
feed you, who says; Be of good Comfort, I have overcome the World: who
destroys the Devil and his Works, and bruises the Serpent's head. I say, Look
at Christ, who is your Sanctuary; in whom ye have rest and peace. To you it is
given not only to believe, but to suffer for his Name's sake: And they that
will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer Persecution by the ungodly
Professors of Christ Jesus, who live out of him. And therefore be valiant for
God's Truth upon the Earth, and look above that Spirit, that makes you suffer,
up to Christ, who was, before it was; and will be, when it is gone: Consider
all the Prophets, Christ and the Apostles, who suffered, and were persecuted;
but they never persecuted them as true men, but as Deceivers, and yet true. And
Christ is the same to day, as he was yesterday, a Rock and Foundation for your
Age and Generation, for you to build upon. I have written concerning you (after
I heard your Letter) to Friends in Cheshire to Visit you; understanding, that
you belong to their Quarterly Meeting: And therefore I desire, that some
Friends of your County would go, and lay your suffering Condition before the
Monthly or Quarterly Meeting in Cheshire. I have written likewise to Richard
Davis, that some of that side may go and visit you; and see how your Condition
is. So my Love is to you in the Lord, who is your alone Support.

London, the 27th of the 11th Month, 1682. G. F.




Now, because the Magistrates were many of them unwilling, to have Fines laid
upon Meeting Houses, they kept Friends out in many places; setting Officers,
and Guards of Soldiers at the Doors and Passages: And yet sometimes Friends
were fined for Speaking or Praying, though it were abroad. One First Day it was
upon me to go to Devonshire-house-Meeting in the Afternoon; Dev. Meet.
and because I had heard, Friends were kept out there that Morning (as they
were that Day at most Meetings about the City) I went somewhat the sooner, and
got into the Yard, before the Soldiers came to guard the Passages: but the
Constables were got there before me, and stood in the Door-way with their
Staves. I asked them to let me go in: They said, They could not, nor durst not:
for they were commanded the contrary, and were sorry for it. I told them, I
would not press upon them: so I stood by; and they were very Civil. I stood,
till I was weary; and then one gave me a Stool to sit down on: and after a
while the Power of the Lord began to spring up among Friends, and one began to
speak. The Constables soon forbad him, and said, he should not speak; and he
not stopping, they began to be wroth. But I gently laid my hand upon one of the
Constables, and wished him to let him alone: The Constable did so, and was
quiet; and the Man did not speak long. When he had done, after a while I was
moved to stand up and speak: and in my Declaration I said; They need not come
against us with Swords and Staves, for we were a peaceable People; and had
nothing in our Hearts, but Good Will to the King and Magistrates, and to all
People upon the Earth. And we did not Meet under pretense of Religion to plot
and contrive against the Government, or to raise Insurrections; but to worship
God in Spirit and in Truth. And we had Christ to be our Bishop and Priest, and
Shepherd to feed us, and oversee us, and he ruled in our hearts; so we could
all sit in silence, enjoying our Teacher: So to Christ, their Bishop and
Shepherd I did recommend them all. And after I had spoken, what was upon me at
that time, I sat down: and after a while I was moved to pray, and the Power of
the Lord was over all Friends; and the People, and the Constable and Soldiers
put off their Hats. And when the Meeting was done, and Friends began to pass
away, the Constable put off his Hat, and desired the Lord to bless us: for the
Power of the Lord was over him and the People, and kept them under.

After this I went up and down, visiting Friends at their houses, who had had
their Goods taken from them for worshipping God; and we took an account, of
what had been taken from them: and some Friends met together about it, and drew
up the Case of the Sufferings of our Friends in writing, and gave it to the
Justices at their Petty-Sessions. Whereupon they made an Order, That the
Officers should not sell the Goods of Friends, which they had in their hands,
but keep them until the next Sessions: which gave some discouragement to the
Informers, and put a little stop to their proceedings.

The next First Day it was upon me to go to the Meeting at the Savoy: and by
that time the Meeting was gathered, Savoy Meet.
the Beadle came in; and after him came in the wild People, like a Sea: but the
Lord's Power chained them all. The Spirit of the Lord went through and over
all, and they were quiet, and we had a glorious, peaceable Meeting; blessed be
the Lord for his unspeakable goodness. This was in the Twelfth Month 1682.

In the First Month 1683. I went to Kingston upon Thames: Persecution, as I
went to the Meeting, I met the Chief Constable, who had been at the
Meeting Place, Kingston upon Thames
and had set Watchmen there to keep us out; yet he was pretty Civil, and the
Watchmen let Friends have a couple of Forms out, to sit upon in the Highway:
so Friends met together there, and a very precious Meeting we had; for the
refreshing Presence of the Lord was with us, in which we parted in peace.

Having visited and encouraged Friends there, I returned to London, and went to
the Meeting at Bull and Mouth, London. Bull and M. Meeting.
where the Constables with their Watchmen kept a Guard, to keep Friends out of
the House. So we met in the Street: and when any Friend spoke, the Officers and
Watchmen made a great bustle to pull him down, and take him into Custody. After
some other Friends had spoken, it was upon me to speak; and I said: Heaven is
God's Throne, and Earth is his Footstool: and will ye not let us stand upon
God's Footstool to worship, and serve the living God? While I spoke, they were
quiet: and after I had cleared my self, of what was upon me to speak, we brake
up our Meeting in peace. This was on the Sixth-day of the Week.

On the First Day of the Week following I was moved to go to the Meeting at
Gracious-street: and when I came there, Grac. Meet.
I found a Guard set at the Entrance in Lumbard-street, and another at the Gate
in Gracious-street, to keep Friends out of the Meeting Place; so that we were
fain to meet abroad in the Street. After some time I got a Chair, and stood up
in it, and spoke largely to the People, Opening the Principles of Truth to
them, and declaring many weighty Truths concerning Magistracy, and concerning
the Lord's Prayer. There was, besides Friends, a great Multitude of People, and
amongst them many Professors; and all was very quiet: for the Lord's Power was
over all, and in the Lord's time we broke up our Meeting, and departed in peace.

The next day I went down to Guilford in Surrey: Surrey. Guilford. Sussex.
Worminghurst.
and having visited Friends there, I passed from thence to Worminghurst in
Sussex; where I had a very blessed Meeting among Friends, and free from
disturbance. While I was there, James Claypoole of London (who with his Wife
was there also) was suddenly taken very ill with so violent a Fit of the Stone,
1683. Worminghurst.
that he could neither stand nor lie; but through the extremity of pain cried
out like a Woman in Travel. When I heard it, I was much exercised in Spirit for
him; and went to him: and after I had spoken a few words to him, to turn his
mind inward, I was moved to lay my hand upon him, and prayed the Lord, to
rebuke his Infirmity. And as I laid my hand on him, the Lord's Power went
through him; and through Faith in that Power he had speedy Ease, so that he
quickly fell into a sleep. And when he awaked, the Stone came from him like
dirt; and he was so well, that the next day he rode with me five and twenty
miles in a Coach: though he used formerly (as he said) to lie sometimes two
weeks, sometimes a month with one of those Fits of the Stone. But the Lord was
entreated for him, and by his Power soon gave him Ease at this time: blessed
and praised be his holy Name therefore.

Now after I had had some Meetings in Sussex and Surrey, and had visited
Friends there aways, I returned to London by Kingston, Kingston.
where I had a Meeting on the First Day of the second Month, being the
First Day of the Week also. We were kept out of the Meeting House by a
Constable and Watchmen (as before) and so were fain to meet in the Highway.
But it being the Monthly-Meeting-day, and many of the World's People being
there, the Meeting was pretty large, and very quiet; and the Lord's blessed
Presence was amongst us, blessed be his Name for ever.

London. Wheel. Meet.
Being come to London, I went to the Meeting at Wheeler-street near
Spittle-fields; which that day proved very large: For besides that there were
more Friends there that day, than usually, there came also many Professors to
the Meeting that day; and a glorious, blessed Meeting it was: for the Lord's
Power and Truth was over all, and many deep and weighty things were opened to
the People, to their great Satisfaction.

I tarried now in and near about London, visiting Friends Meetings, and
laboring in the Service of the Gospel, until the Yearly Meeting came on; which
began on the 28th of the third Month this Year. It was a time of great
Sufferings, and much concerned I was, lest Friends, that came up out of the
Countries on the Churches-Service, should be taken and imprisoned at London.
But the Lord was with us, and his Power preserved us; and gave us a sweet and
blessed Opportunity to wait upon him, and be refreshed together in him, and to
perform those Services for his Truth and People, for which we met. Now inasmuch
as it was a time of great Persecution, and we understood by our Friends, who
came out of the several parts of the Nation, that in most Counties Friends were
under great Sufferings either by Imprisonments, or spoilings of Goods, or both;
a concern was weightily upon me, lest any Friends, that were Sufferers,
especially such, as were Traders and Dealers in the World, should hazard the
losing of other men's Goods or Estates through their Sufferings. Wherefore, as
the thing opened in me, 1683. London.
I drew an Epistle of Caution to Friends in that Case, which I communicated to
the Brethren at the Yearly Meeting; and from thence it was sent forth among
Friends throughout the Nation: A Copy of which here follows; DEar Friends and
Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, who is your only Sanctuary in this day of
Storm and Persecution, Spoiling of Goods, and Imprisonments! Let every ones Eye
be unto him, who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto him; so that none
can touch an hair of your head, nor you, nor any thing ye have, except it be
permitted or suffered in this day, to Try his People, whether their minds be
with the Lord, or in the Outward things. And now, Dear Friends, take care, that
all your Offerings may be free, and of your own, that has cost you something;
so that ye may not offer of that which is another man's, or that which ye are
entrusted withal, (and not your own) or Fatherless or Widows Estates: but all
such things ye may settle and establish in their places. You may remember many
years ago, in a time of great Persecution, there were diverse Friends, who were
Traders, Shopkeepers and others, who had the Concerns of Widows and
Fatherless, and other Peoples Estates in their hands. And when a great
Suffering, Persecution and Spoiling of Goods came upon Friends, there was
especial Care taken, that all Friends, that did suffer, what they did offer up
to the Lord in their Sufferings, might be really their own, and not any others
Estates or Goods, which they had in their hands, and were not really their own;
so that they might not offer up another body's, but that which was really their
own, which they had bought and paid for, or were able to pay for. And
afterward several Letters came out of the Country to the Meeting at London,
from Friends, that had Goods of the Shopkeepers here at London upon Credit,
which they had not paid for; who writ to their Creditors, whom they had their
Goods of, entreating them, to take their Goods again. And some Friends came to
London themselves, and treated with their Creditors, letting them understand,
how their Conditions were, That they lay liable to have all that they had,
taken from them; and told them, They would not have any man to suffer by them:
neither would they by suffering offer up any thing, but what was really their
own, or what they were able to pay for. Upon which several took their Goods
back again, that they had sent down: And this wrought a very good Savor in the
hearts of many People, when they saw, that there was such a righteous, just and
honest Principle in Friends, that would not make any to suffer for their
Testimony; but what they did suffer for the Testimony of Jesus, it should be
really and truly their own, not other Peoples: And in this they owed nothing to
any, but Love. So in this every Man and Woman stands in the free Offering, a
free People, whether it be Spiritual or Temporal, which is their own; and in
that they wrong no man, neither inwardly nor outwardly. Ornan said unto David,
I give thee the Threshing-floor, etc. and the Oxen for Burnt-offerings, and the
Threshing-Instruments for Wood, and the Wheat for the Meat Offering; I give it
all. But King David said unto Ornan, Nay, but I will verily buy it for the full
price: for I will not take that which is thine, for the Lord, nor offer
Burnt-offerings without cost, 1 Chronicles. 21, 22, etc. So it should be his own;
and so should it be every man's, that offers. So you may see here, that David
would not accept of another man's Gift for an Offering to the Lord; he would
not offer up that which cost him nothing: but it should be really his own,
Psalm. 112.5. A good man -- will guide his affairs with discretion.

Let this be read in your Monthly and Quarterly Men's and Women's Meetings.

London the 2d of the 4th Month, 1683. G. F.




Kingston upon Thames
Some time after the Yearly Meeting I went down to Kingston upon Thames, to
visit Friends there: and while I was there, it came upon me to write the
following Epistle to Friends in general, as a Salutation of Love unto them, and
to stir up the pure Mind in them.

DEar Friends and Brethren, who are turned from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan to God, who are the Believers in the Light, which is the Life in
Christ, and are become the Children of the Light and of the Day, and are
grafted into Christ, the second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, and so are gathered
in the Name of Jesus, in whom ye have Salvation, and not in any other Name
under the whole Heaven. For Christ Jesus says; Where two or three are gathered
together in my Name, there am I in the midst of them, Matthew. 18.20. So here you
being gathered in the Name of Jesus, he is in the midst of you, a Savior, a
Mediator, a Prophet, a Shepherd, a Bishop, a Leader, a Counselor, the Captain
of your Salvation, who bruises the Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and
his Works. Therefore, Brethren in Christ Jesus, exhort one another daily, while
it is called to day; lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of
sin. For you are made Partakers of Christ, if ye hold fast the beginning of
your Confidence steadfast to the end, Hebr. 3.14. Therefore hear Christ's
voice; for he is in the midst of you a Teacher. And take heed, lest there be in
any of you an Evil heart of Unbelief, in departing from the living God, as
there is in too many in this Day of Provocation and Temptation: But while it is
day hear his Voice, and let us consider one another, to provoke unto Love, and
to good Works. Let us hold fast the Profession of our Faith without wavering
(for he is faithful, 1683. Kingston upon Thames
that has promised, and that has called you) not forsaking the Assembling of
our selves together, as the manner of some is; (mark) as the manner of some is,
that did and do forsake the Assembling of themselves together: but exhorting
one another, and so much the more, as you see the Day of Light appearing. For
if we sin wilfully, after we have received the Knowledge of the Truth, there
remains no more Sacrifice for sins; but a certain, fearful looking for of
Judgment and fiery Indignation, which shall devour the Adversaries, Hebr. 10.
And therefore it is good not to forsake the Assembling of our selves together;
but exhort one another daily: for Christ is in the midst of his People a
Teacher and a Prophet, who says, Learn of me; who is the Way, the Truth and
the Life. And we being many, are one Body in Christ (who are gathered in his
Name) and every one Members one of another. Having then Gifts, differing
according to the Grace that is given us, whether they be Prophecy, let us
prophecy according to the proportion of Faith; and let those that do Minister,
wait on their Ministry; and those that be Teachers, on their Teaching; and he
that Exhorts, on Exhortation; he that gives, let him do it with simplicity;
and he that rules, with diligence; and he that shows Mercy, he is to do it
with Cheerfulness. Abhor that which is evil; cleave to that which is good: Be
kindly affectioned one toward another, with brotherly love in honor
preferring one another. Rejoice in hope; be patient in tribulations; be not
overcome with Evil, but overcome Evil with God; and (if it be possible) as much
as lies in you, live peaceably with all men, Romans 12. This is and was the
practice of the Church of Christ. And now the God of Hope fill you with all joy
and peace in believing, that ye may abound in hope, through the Power of the
holy Ghost. And I my self also am persuaded of you, my Brethren, that ye also
are full of Goodness, filled with all Knowledge, and are able also to admonish
one another, Romans 15.13, 14. Here the Church of Christ, in which Christ was in
the midst, a Teacher and the Head of the Church, they were and are able through
him to admonish one another. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts; to
which Peace of God ye are also called into one Body (to wit, of Christ.) And
let the Word of Christ dwell in you richly in all Wisdom, teaching and
admonishing one another, etc. Col. 3. And whatsoever ye do, in Word or Deed, do
all in the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, giving thanks to God and the Father
by him. And above all things put on Charity, which is the Bond of Perfectness.
And the Apostle says to Timothy, Be not thou ashamed of the Testimony of our
Lord, nor of me his Prisoner: but be thou Partaker of the Afflictions of the
Gospel, according to the Power of God, who has saved us, and called us with an
holy Calling; not according to our works, but according to his own purpose and
grace, which was given us in Christ Jesus, before the world began, 2 Timothy 1.8,
9. So here it concerns every one, not to be ashamed of the Testimony of our
Lord, who has called them by his Grace; and not to be ashamed of any of
Christ's Prisoners, and afflicted Ones for Christ's and his Gospels sake, who
abolishes Death, and brings Life and Immortality to Light through his Gospel:
You that believe in the Light, know it. And Peter says in his General Epistle
to the Church of Christ; As every man (mark, every man) has received the Gift,
so minister the same one to another, as good Stewards of the manifold Grace of
God. If any man speak, let him speak, as the Oracles of God (so not of Men:) If
any man minister, let him do it as of the Ability, which God gives (so not of
the Ability of men's Arts and Sciences) that God in all things may be glorified
through Jesus Christ, etc. For these Gifts and Grace come from Jesus into the
hearts of the Members of his Church, whom he is in the midst of. And if any man
suffer, as a Christian, let him not be ashamed; but let him glorify God, etc.
And every true Christian has the presence of Christ (who has all power in
Heaven and in Earth given him) to support them with his power, light and life.
And Christ says to his Believers, Beware of men, for they will deliver you up
to the Councils, and they will scourge you in the Synagogues, and you shall be
brought before Governors and Kings for my Names sake, for a Testimony against
them and the Gentiles. But when they deliver you up, take no thought, how or
what ye shall speak; for it shall be given you in the same hour, what ye shall
speak: for it is not you that speak; but the Spirit of your Father, that
speaks in you. And ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake: but he
that endures to the end, shall be saved. The Disciple is not above his Master,
nor the Servant above his Lord: It is enough for the Disciple, that he be as
his Master, and the Servant as his Lord: for if they have called the Master of
the house Beelzebub, what will they do to his Servant. Fear not them, which
kill the Body, but are not able to kill the Soul, etc. A Sparrow shall not fall
to the ground without your heavenly Father, etc. The hairs of your head are all
numbered; ye are of more value, than many Sparrows. Whosoever therefore shall
confess me before men, him will I confess also before my Father, which is in
heaven: But whosoever shall deny me before Men, him will I also deny before my
Father, which is in heaven. And whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my
words, of him shall the Son of Man be ashamed, etc. Matthew. 10. And again Christ
says, Whosoever shall be ashamed of me and of my words in this adulterous and
sinful Generation, of him also shall the Son of Man be ashamed, when he comes
in the Glory of his Father with his holy Angels, Mark 8.38. And Christ says to
his Disciples, He that receives you, receives me; and he that receives me,
receives him that sent me: He that receives a Prophet in the name of a
Prophet, shall receive a Prophet's reward: And he that receives a righteous
man in the name of a righteous man, shall receive a righteous man's reward. And
whosoever shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a Cup of cold water
only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise
lose his reward. Matthew. 10.40, 41, 42. Here ye may see, how Christ encourages
his Disciples, and them that receive them. And John says, Among the chief
Rulers of the Jews many believed in Christ; but because of the Pharisees, they
did not confess him, lest they should be put out of the Synagogue, John 12.42.
Too many such Believers are now adays, who dare not Confess Christ, lest they
should lose the favor of men. But Christ encourages the faithful Disciples,
and told them, They would put them out of their Synagogues; yea, that the time
should come, that whosoever killed them, would think, they did God service: And
these things, (said he) will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father, nor me. But these things have I told you, that when the time shall
come, ye may remember, that I told you of them, John 16.2, 3, 4. Here ye may
see, what Christ told his Disciples, should come to pass to them. And Saul,
before he was Converted, did Compel the Christians to blaspheme, and made
havoc of the Church of Christ, Acts 8. and chap. 22. and 26. And did not the
Beast (in the Revelations) Compel both small and great to worship him and his
Image? And did not all worship it, but they, who had their Names written in the
Lamb's Book of Life, before the Foundation of the World? And did not
Nebuchadnezzar set up an Image sixty Cubits high, and six Cubits broad? And
then did not he cause an Herald to cry aloud, It is commanded, that all
People, and Nations, and Languages fall down, and worship the golden Image,
that Nebuchadnezzar has set up: And whosoever falls not down, and worshippeth,
shall the same hour be cast into the midst of the fiery Furnace? And were not
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego cast into the Furnace? Dan. 3. But God delivered
them. Therefore it is good, to be faithful to God and his Worship in Spirit and
Truth. And the Jews had agreed, that if any man should Confess Christ, he
should be put out of their Synagogue, John 9.22. So it was for Christ's sake,
they were Excommunicated out of their Synagogues. But as it is written, Behold,
I lay in Sion a Stumbling-stone, and a Rock of Offense; and who so believes on
him, shall not be ashamed. So Christ is a Stumbling-stone, and a Rock of
Offense to all the Unbelievers in the Light, which is the Life in Christ,
whether they be Jews, Christians, or Gentiles. The Jews did believe, a Christ
was To come, from the Scriptures: And the Christians believe, He is come, by
the Scriptures; but do not believe in the Light (which is the Life in Christ)
as Christ commands; and so do not become the Children of the Light. Therefore
ye, that are the Believers in the Light, and are become the Children of the
Light, walk in Christ your Way, Life and Salvation.

Kingston the 5th Month, 1683. G. F.


Before I left Kingston, something further opened in me, which I was moved to
write, and send forth amongst Friends; and it was as follows: Dear Friends,
MY Love is to you all in the holy Seed, that reigns over all. And my desire
is, that every one, both Male and Female, may feel the Seed Christ in you,
which is Heir of the Promise of Life Eternal: so that ye may all grow up in
Christ Jesus, your Head, and be built upon him the Rock and Foundation, that
God has laid, which stands sure over all Rocks and Foundations in the World.
That ye may eat and drink of this Spiritual Rock, the Spiritual Water and Food;
so that ye may truly and inwardly say, that your Rock and Foundation, and Bread
of Life, and Water of Life is from Heaven, and your Bread and Water is sure;
and that ye know his voice, that feeds you, and that leads you into the
Pastures of Life, which are always fresh and green. In this your Affections are
set on things, that are above, and seeking that which comes down from above (
above that, which is from below) where Christ sits at the right Hand of God,
making Intercession for you; and is your Mediator, making Peace betwixt God and
you; and is your heavenly Bishop to oversee you, that ye keep in his Light,
Life and Power, that ye do not go astray from his heavenly Fold and Pasture;
but he your Shepherd may feed you in it: Who is your Prophet, to open to you
the fulfilling of the Promises and Prophecies; himself being the Substance:
That ye may live in him, and he in you, yea, and reign in your hearts; and
there to exercise his Offices, his Prophetical, and Priestly, and Kingly
Office, who is heavenly and spiritual. That ye may know the Three, that bear
Witness in the Earth, viz. The Spirit, the Water and the Blood, which is the
Life of Christ, which cleanses from all sin; and the Water, that washes you
and refreshes you; and the Spirit, that baptizes you, and circumcises you, and
leads you into all Truth: And that ye may come all to drink into one Spirit,
and keep the Unity of the Spirit, which is the Bond of the heavenly Peace. So
being led by the Spirit of God, ye are his Sons and Daughters, and by his
Spirit will come to know the Three, that bear Witness in Heaven, viz. the
Father, the Word and the Holy Ghost. These are the Three Witnesses, that are in
Heaven, that bear record of all things: for he is God in the Heaven, and God in
the Earth. And therefore I desire, that ye may all feel his Love shed in your
hearts; and in it live in Love (above the love of the World, which is Enmity)
and in that you will keep in the excellent Way. For Love edifies the Body of
Christ, and builds his Church up, and keeps out of the Enmity; for it is above
it, and brings and keeps all in true Humanity, and in the true Divinity; and to
be courteous and kind, and tender one toward another. And to show forth the
nature of Christ, and true Christianity in all your Lives and Conversations; so
that the Blessings of the Lord may rest upon you, as ye all live in the Seed of
the Gospel, the Seed of the Kingdom of God, in which all Nations are blessed:
And in that ye will all have a Care of God's glory. And there is the Hill or
Mountain, where the Light shines to the answering the Witness of God in all;
and the Salt, that is a good Savor to the witness of God in the hearts of all:
And that Savor and Salt being kept in, it does not come under the feet of men.
So my Love to you all in Christ Jesus, whom God has given to be a Sanctuary
for all his People, who is from above, and not of this World, in whom you all
have Life, Peace, and Salvation: And in him God Almighty keep and preserve you
all to his Glory, Amen. And as you all live in the peaceable Truth of God, it
keeps you under, and within his protection: But they that make a Profession of
the Scriptures of Truth, and yet live out of the Truth, in the Spirit of
Strife, Unquietness and Discontent, in a contriving, plotting, ravenous,
destroying Spirit, which is of the Devil, and not of God, that Spirit is judged
out of the Truth, and to be of him, in whom there is no Truth; whose Portion is
in the Lake, and in the Fire that burns.

Kingston, the 27th of the 5th Month, 1683. G. F.




Having visited Friends at and about Kingston, London
I returned to London: for it being a Suffering time with Friends there, I had
not freedom to be long from the City. Being come back, I went to the Meeting at
the Peel; Peel-Meet.
which but a little before the Justices and Constable had broken up, and had
carried themselves very roughly: But that day the Meeting was in the House, and
quiet; and a glorious Meeting it was, blessed be the Lord.

On the First Day following I went to the Meeting at Gracious-street. When I
came there, Grac-Meet.
I found three Constables in the Meeting House, who kept Friends out; so that
we met in the Court. After I had been some time in the Meeting, I stood up, and
spoke to the People; and continued speaking a pretty while. Then one of the
Constables came, and took hold of my hand, and said; I must come down. I
desired him to be patient, and went on speaking to the People: but after a
little time he plucked me down, and had me into the Meeting House. I asked them,
if they were not Weary of this Work? and one of them said, Indeed, they were.
They let me go into the Widow Foster's house (which joined to the
Meeting House) where I stayed, being hot. When the Meeting was ended (for one
prayed, after I was taken away) the Constables asked some Friends, Which of
them would pass their words, that I should Appear, if they should be questioned
about me? But the Friends telling them, They need not require that; for I was a
man well known in the City, to be one, that would neither fly, nor shrink; They
came not to me: but went their ways, 1683. London. Sav. Meet.
and left me at Liberty; and I heard no further of it. The same Week I was at
the Meeting at the Savoy, which used to be kept out, and disturbed; but that
day it was within doors, and peaceable, and a precious Meeting it was. The
First Day after, Westminster. Meet.
it was upon me to go to the Meeting at Westminster, where used to be great
disturbances: But there also the Meeting was within doors that day, and it was
very large. The Lord's Power was over all there, and kept all quiet and still:
for though there were many loose Spirits there, yet they were bound down by the
Power and Spirit of the Lord, that they could not get up to make disturbance.

About this time I was moved to write the following Epistle: Friends and
Brethren,
WHO have received the peaceable Truth, let the fruits of its peaceableness,
and of your quiet Spirit appear in all your Meetings, and in all your Words and
Actions: for he that inhabits Eternity, dwells with an humble heart; and he
gives Grace to the humble, and resists the proud. Heaven is his Throne, and
the Earth ye walk upon, is his Footstool: happy are ye, that see and know him,
that is Invisible. And now Friends,
Let all things be done in your Meetings, and otherways, in Love, without
strife, or vainglory. For Love fulfils the Law, and Love overcomes, and
edifies the Body of Christ, and builds it up; and there is neither Self, nor
Envy in Love: neither is it pufft up; but abides and bears all things. So see,
that this Love of God have the sway in you all, and over you all. Christ says,
Blessed are the Poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of Heaven: Blessed
are they that mourn; for they shall be comforted. Blessed are the Meek; for
they shall inherit the Earth. Blessed are they, that do hunger and thirst after
Righteousness: for they shall be filled. Blessed are the merciful; for they
shall obtain Mercy. Blessed are the Pure in heart; for they shall see God.
Blessed are the Peace makers; for they shall be called the Children of God.
Blessed are they, that are Persecuted for Righteousness sake; for theirs is the
Kingdom of Heaven. Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute
you, and shall say all manner of evil against you falsely, for my sake; rejoice
and be exceeding glad: for great is your reward in Heaven. For so persecuted
they the Prophets which were before you. Now Friends, here is a great deal in
these words: And all must be in these States and Conditions, if they have these
Blessings. And the Children of God are Peacemakers, and strive to make Peace
in the Truth; and to live in Peace with all men, if it be possible. So live in
the Peace, and the Good Will to all men; which Good Will is both for their
Sanctification and Salvation. And Friends, consider; The Wisdom of God; which
is from above, is pure, peaceable and gentle, and easy to be entreated, full
of mercy and good fruits, without Partiality and without Hypocrisy. And now,
Dear Friends, let this pure, peaceable, gentle Wisdom, that is from above, that
is easy to be entreated, 1683. London.
and is full of mercy and good fruits, be exercised and practiced in all the
true Churches of Christ; so that Wisdom may be justified of her Children. For
the Works of the Flesh, or fleshly Spirit, are Hatred, Variance, Wrath, Strife,
Envyings, Drunkenness, Revilings, Adultery, Fornication, Lasciviousness,
Uncleanness, etc. and they which do such things, shall not inherit the Kingdom
of God. But the Fruits of the Spirit of God are Love, Joy, Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, etc. And so,
Dear Friends and Brethren, strive to exceed one another, and all People upon
the Earth in Humility, in Meekness, in Gentleness, in Temperance, in Love and
in Patience, in Pureness and in Mercy; and then ye will show forth the Fruits
of the Spirit of God, and of his heavenly Wisdom that is from above: And in
this, Wisdom will be justified of her Children; and ye will be the Salt of the
Earth, and the Light of the World set on an Hill, that cannot be hid: and your
Moderation will appear to all men. And be ye just, and righteous, and faithful,
and true in all your Words, Dealings and Conversations; so that ye may answer
the Truth in all People: For Christ says, his Father is glorified by such, as
bring forth Fruits, when men do see their good Works; for he that does
Righteousness, is accepted with God. And he that dwells in Love, dwells in God:
for Love is his Habitation: And let that be the Habitation of every one that
has received the Truth: for if it be not, such do not dwell in God, let them
profess what they will. And therefore my desire is, that all you, who have
received Christ, the Seed, which bruises the Serpent's head, may walk in him,
your Sanctuary, Life and Salvation, your Rest and Peace, Amen.

London, the 14th of the 6th Month, 1683. G. F.




I continued yet at London, laboring in the Work and Service of the Lord both
in Meetings and out; sometimes visiting the Friends that were in Prison for the
Testimony of Jesus, encouraging them in their Sufferings, and exhorting them to
stand faithful and steadfast in the Testimony, which the Lord had committed to
them to bear: sometimes also visiting those that were sick and weak in Body, or
troubled in Mind, helping to bear their Spirits up from sinking under their
Infirmities. Sometimes our Meetings were quiet and peaceable; sometimes they
were disturbed and broken up by the Officers. One First Day it was upon me to
go to the Meeting at the Savoy, Sav. Meet.
and it was a large Meeting; for many Professors and sober People were there:
And the Lord opened many precious, weighty things in me to the People, which I
declared amongst them, and directed them to the Spirit of God in themselves,
which the Lord had given them a measure of; that all by the Spirit might
understand the Scriptures, which were given forth from the Spirit of God. And
that by the Spirit of God they might know God and Christ, whom God has sent;
whom to know was Eternal Life. And that by the Spirit they might all come into
Christ, and know him to be their Sanctuary, who destroys the Devil, the
Destroyer, and his works; and bruises the Serpent's head. For Christ was a
Sanctuary to them, to whom he was a Savior, whom he saved from the Destroyer.
And Christ did baptize them with the holy Ghost, and with Fire, and did
thoroughly purge his floor, and burn up their Chaff with unquenchable fire, that
is, Sin and Corruption, which is got into Man and Woman by their Transgression:
But Christ gathers his Wheat into his Garner. So all that are baptized with
Christ's Baptism, their Wheat is in God's Garner: and no Spoiler can get into
God's Garner to meddle with the Wheat there; though they may be permitted to
meddle with the outward Goods, etc. Now as I was speaking in the power of the
Lord, and the People were greatly affected therewith; on a sudden the
Constables, with the rude People, came in like a Sea: and one of the Constables
said to me, Come down; and he laid hands on me. I asked him, Art thou a
Christian? We are Christians. He had hold on my hand, and was very fierce to
pluck me down: but I stood still, and spoke a few words to the People; desiring
of the Lord, that the Blessings of God might rest upon them all. The Constable
still called upon me to Come down, and at length plucked me down; and bid
another Man with a Staff, Take me, and carry me to Prison. That Man had me to
another Officer's house, who was more Civil: and after a while they brought in
Four Friends more, whom they had taken. I was very Weary, and in a great Sweat;
and several Friends, hearing where I was, came to me in the Constable's house:
but I bid them all go their ways, lest the Constables and Informers should stop
them. After a while the Constables had us almost a Mile to a Justice, who was a
fierce, passionate Man: who, after he had asked me my Name, and his Clerk had
taken it down in writing, upon the Constable's informing him, That I preached
in the Meeting, said in an angry manner; Do not you know, that it is contrary
to the King 's Laws to preach in such Conventicles, contrary to the Liturgy of
the Church of England? There was present one -- Shad, (a wicked Informer, who
was said to have broken Gaol at Coventry, and to have been burnt in the hand at
London) who hearing the Justice speak so to me, stepped up to him, and told him;
That he had Convicted them on the Act of the 22d of King Charles the Second.
What! You Convict them? said the Justice; Yes, said Shad, I have Convicted
them; and you must Convict them too upon that Act. With that the Justice was
Angry with him, and said; You Teach me! What are you? I Will Convict them of a
Riot. The Informer hearing that, and seeing the Justice Angry, went away in a
Fret; and so he was disappointed of his purpose. I thought he would have sworn
some body against me; whereupon I said, Let no man swear against me; for it is
my Principle Not to swear: and therefore I would not have any man Swear against
me. The Justice thereupon asked me; If I did not preach in the Meeting? I told
him, I did Confess, what God and Christ had done for my Soul; and did praise
God: and I thought, I might have done that in the Streets, and in all Places,
viz. Praise God, and Confess, Christ Jesus; and this I was not ashamed to
Confess. Neither was this contrary to the Liturgy of the Church of England. The
Justice said; The Laws were against such Meetings, as were contrary to the
Liturgy of the Church of England. I said; I knew no such Laws against our
Meetings: but if he did mean that Act, that was made against such, as did Meet
to Plot and Contrive, and raise Insurrections against the King, we were no such
People; but did abhor all such Actions: and did bear true Love and Good Will to
the King, and to all Men upon the Earth. The Justice then asked me; If I had
been in Orders? I told him, No. Then he took his Law Books, and searched for
Laws against us; bidding his Clerk, take the Names of the rest the mean time:
But when he could find no other Law against us, the Clerk swear the Constable
against us. Some of the Friends bid the Constable, Take heed what he swore,
lest he were perjured: for he took them in the Entry, and not in the Meeting.
Yet the Constable, being an Ill Man, swore, That they were in the Meeting.
However the Justice said; Seeing there was but one Witness, he would discharge
the rest; but he would send me to Newgate, and I might preach there, he said. I
asked him, If it stood with his Conscience, to send me to Newgate for praising
God, and for Confessing Christ Jesus? He cried, Conscience! Conscience! but I
felt, my words touched his Conscience. He bid the Constable, Take me away; and
he would make a Mittimus to send me to Prison, when he had dined. I told him, I
desired his peace, and the good of his Family; and that they might be kept in
the fear of the Lord: So I passed away. And as we went, the Constable took some
Friends word, that I should come to his house the next Morning by the ' eighth
hour. Accordingly I did go, with those Friends: and then the Constable told us,
That he went to the Justice for the Mittimus, after he had dined; and the
Justice bid him, Come again after the Evening-Service: which he did; and then
the Justice told him, He might let me go. So, said the Constable, you are
discharged. I blamed the Constable for turning Informer, and swearing against
us; and he said, He would do so no more. Next day the Justice meeting with
Gilbert Laty, asked him, If he would pay Twenty pounds for George Fox 's Fine?
He said, No. Then, said the Justice, I am disappointed: for being but a Lodger,
I cannot come by his Fine; and he having been brought before me, and being of
ability himself, I cannot lay his Fine on any other.

After I was discharged, I went up into the City. And the same Week the
Sessions coming on, where many Friends were concerned, some as Prisoners, and
some on Trials of Appeals upon the Conventicle-Act, I went to a Friend's house
not far off, that I might be in readiness to Assist those Friends with Counsel,
or otherwise, as occasion should offer: and I found Service in it. But as my
Spirit was concerned on behalf of Friends, with respect to their outward
Sufferings by the Persecutors without; so an Exercise also came weightily upon
me at this time, in the sense I had of the Mischievous Working of that
Adulterated Spirit^ which being gone out from the heavenly Unity, and having
drawn out some, that professed Truth, into Enmity and Opposition against Friends,
endeavored to trouble the Church of Christ with their janglings and
contention. And as a further discovery of the working of that seducing Spirit,
and a Warning to all Friends to beware of it, I was moved to write the
following Epistle, directed thus: To all the Elect, Faithful, Called and Chosen
of God, who are the Flock and Heritage of God, who have been acquainted with
the Dealings of the Lord, and have kept your habitations in his Life, Power and
Truth, being built upon the holy and heavenly Rock and Foundation, Christ
Jesus, who was the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles; which Foundation
stands sure.
MAny Foundations have been laid since the Apostles days, by such, as have gone
from Christ, the true and sure Foundation: and their Foundations have proved
rotten, and come to naught; and they themselves have come to Loss. And many,
since the day of Christ, and the Truth has appeared in this Nation, have come
out, and have had some Openings and Sights, and come among us for a time; and
then gone out from us again: who have been the Comers and Goers, like such as
were in the Apostles days. Such have had an outward Profession of the Truth,
and such have gone from the true Foundation, Christ Jesus, and so from the
heavenly Society and Unity of the Saints in Light. And then they set up
Foundations of their own: and having a Form of Godliness, but out of the Power
thereof, out of the Order thereof; such have turned to Janglings and vain
Disputings. This sort of Spirit you have been acquainted with, who have kept
your habitations in Christ Jesus, the First and the Last. And you are not
unsensible of the scurrilous and filthy Books of Lies and Defamations, which
have been spread abroad in this Nation, and beyond the Seas, against the
Faithful: And it is very well, that the Lord has suffered them to publish
their own shame in print, that Truth's Enemies may be discovered, that their
Fruits and Spirits have appeared, and manifested themselves both in print and
otherwise. And I do believe, that the Lord will yet suffer this Spirit, that it
shall so publish forth its Fruits, to its public Shame and Nakedness, to
Professor and Profane, and to all sober, moderate and innocent People; that
its Shame and Nakedness shall more fully appear. And though for a time it has
been hid and covered with the Fig Leaves and an Outward Profession, and
sometimes with fawning and flattering words, (as at other times it has
discovered it self by rough, lying and defaming words;) yet the Lord God will
blast all such vain Talkers, that do not walk in the Order of Life, Truth and
the Gospel. And therefore ye, that are Faithful, stand fast in the Liberty,
wherewith Christ has made you free in his Government: It is upon his
Shoulders; he bears it up: Of the Increase of it, and of its peace there is no
end. For all the Quarrellers against his Order and Government are without him,
and without his heavenly, spiritual Government and Peace. And therefore, ye
Faithful Ones, who have had the Trial through many Persecutions, Imprisonments,
Spoilings of Goods, you know, that there is a Crown of Glory laid up for you:
and you that Suffer with Christ, shall Reign with him in his Kingdom of Glory;
and ye that die with Christ, shall live with Christ in the Eternal Life, in the
World, that has no End. Who have gone through the Sufferings without, and
within by false Brethren, by Comers and Goers, that have caused the Way of
Truth to be evil spoken of, and have been the Persecuters of the Faithful with
their Tongues (though they have not had power to do it with their Hands.) And
by printing and publishing their lying, defaming Books against the Faithful,
they have stirred up the Magistrates and Priests; who were willing to get any
occasion to speak evil of the right Way, and precious Truth of Christ, by which
his People are made free: Such had better, they had never been born. But God
has brought them to light, and their Fruits and ravenous Spirit is seen,
savoured and known; who are become Judases, and Sons of Perdition, to betray
Christ now within (where he is made manifest) to the Priests, Magistrates and
Profane, as Judas did betray Christ without to the Priests and Pilate: Though
some of the Magistrates, and sober People do see their Envy and Folly, and that
they have more Malice, than Matter against the Faithful. But the Lord will
consume this Judas, or Son of Perdition! The Lord will consume him with the
Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy him with the brightness of his Coming!
And so let all the Faithful look unto the Lord. And let that wicked Son of
Perdition know, though he may be got as high as Judas without (who was partaker
of the Ministry with the Apostles) The Lord will consume him with the Spirit of
his Mouth, and destroy him with the brightness of his Coming: That is his
portion. So the brightness of the Lord will destroy him, and the Spirit of his
Mouth will consume him: And when he is destroyed and consumed, there will not
be a Son of Perdition to betray Christ in his People, and his People, that live
and walk in Christ, who has all power in Heaven (mark, in Heaven) and in Earth
given to him; and with his holy and glorious Power he limits and orders: so
that nothing shall be done against his People, but what is suffered for their
Trial and for their Good, neither by Apostates, Persecutors with the Tongue,
Judases, Sons of Perdition to betray; or the outward Powers to Imprison, or
spoil Goods: All these are limited by Christ's Power, who has all Power in
Heaven and Earth given to him. And every ones Faith is to stand in him and his
power, and rejoice in his power, and see the increase of his righteous, holy,
heavenly, spiritual, peaceable Government, in which the glorious, holy order of
life is lived and walked in by all his Sons and Daughters: And in his Spirit is
the holy Unity and Bond of Peace. Though ye be absent in the Body or Flesh one
from another, yet all joying and rejoicing, being present in his Spirit, and
beholding in the same Spirit your spiritual Order, Unity and Fellowship, and
the steadfastness of your Faith in Christ Jesus, who is steadfast for ever, the
First and the Last, whose Presence is among his People, and who is their Head.
Here is heavenly Sion known, and heavenly Jerusalem, and the innumerable
Company of Angels (which are Spirits) and the Spirits of the just men made
perfect. Here is the general Assembly, or general Meeting, and a general,
heavenly, holy and spiritual joy and rejoicing, lauding and praising the Lord,
the Lord God Almighty, and the Lamb, that lives for evermore, Amen.

London, the 14th of the 8th Month, 1683. G. F.




Read this in your Assemblies amongst the Faithful.

I tarried yet a little while in London, visiting Friends and Meetings, and
laboring in the Work of the Lord there. And being on a First Day at the Bull
and Mouth, Bull and M. Meeting.
where the Meeting had long been kept out; but was that day in the House,
peaceable and large: the People were so affected with the Truth, and refreshed
with the powerful Presence of the Lord, that when the Meeting was ended, they
were loath to go away.

After some time, having several things upon me to write, I went to Kingston,
Kingston.
that I might be free from Interruptions. And when I came there, I understood,
the Officers had been very Rude at the Meeting there, nipping and abusing
Friends, and had driven them out of the Meeting Place; and very abusive they
continued to be for some time. Among other things that I writ, whilst I was
there, one was a little Book (printed soon after) the Title whereof was; The
Saints heavenly and spiritual Worship, Unity and Communion, etc. wherein is set
forth, what the true Gospel Worship is, and in what the true Unity and
Communion of the Saints stands; with a discovery of those, that were gone from
this holy Unity and Communion, and were turned against the Saints, that abode
therein.

When I had finished the Services, for which I went thither, and had visited
the Friends there, I returned to London; and visited most of the Meetings in
and about the City. Essex. Dolston.
Afterward I went to visit a Friend in Essex; and returning by Dolston, I made
some stay at the Widow Stots, and there I writ an Epistle to Friends, 1683.
Dolston.
declaring the Word of the Lord unto them: which Epistle being then printed,
may be read amongst my other printed Books.

I came from Dolston to London, London.
and the next day was sent for in haste to my Son Rouse's at Kingston; Kingston.
whose daughter Margaret lay very sick, and had a desire to see me. I tarried
now at Kingston about a week, and then returned to London; London.
where I continued for the most part of the Winter, and the Spring following,
until the General Meeting in the Year 1684. (save that I went once as far as
Enfield, to visit Friends thereabouts.) And in this time I ceased not to labor
in the Work of the Lord, being frequent at Meetings, and visiting Friends, that
were Prisoners, or that were sick; and in writing Books for the spreading of
Truth, and opening the Understandings of People to receive it.

The Yearly Meeting was in the Third Month, and a blessed, Meeting it was;
wherein Friends were sweetly refreshed together: for the Lord was with us,
Yearly Meeting.
and opened his heavenly Treasures amongst us. And though it was a time of
great difficulty and danger, by reason of Informers and persecuting
Magistrates; yet the Lord was a Defense and Place of Safety to his People.

Now had I drawings in Spirit to go into Holland, to visit the Seed of God in
those Provinces. And as soon as the Yearly Meeting was over, and most of the
Country-Friends gone out of Town; I prepared for my Journey. There went with me
from London Alexander Parker, George Watts and Nathaniel Brassey, who also had
drawings into that Country. We took Coach on the 31th of the Third Month 84.
and got to Colchester that night. Colchester.
The next day, being the First Day of the Week, we went to the Meeting there:
and though there was no notice given of my coming thither, yet our being there
was presently spread over the Town, and in several places in the Country, at
seven and ten Miles distance; so that abundance of Friends came in
double-horsed, which made the Meeting very Large. I had a Concern and Travel in
my mind, lest this great Gathering should have stirred up the Town, and been
more than the Magistrates could well bear; but it was very quiet and peaceable,
and a glorious Meeting we had, to the settling and stablishing of Friends both
in Town and Country: for the Lord's Power was over all; blessed be his Name for
ever. Truly, the Lord's Power and Presence was beyond words; for I was but Weak
to go into a Meeting, and my Face (by reason of a Cold I had taken) was sore:
but God was strong, and manifested his strength in us and with us, and all was
well: the Lord have the Glory for evermore for his supporting Power. After the
Meeting there came, I think, above an hundred Friends of the Town and Country
to see me at John Furley's; and very glad we were to see one another, and
greatly refreshed we were together, being filled with the Love and Riches of
the Lord, blessed be his Name for ever!

1684. Colchester.
We tarried at Colchester two days more; which we spent in visiting Friends
there, both at their Meetings for Business, and at their Houses. Then early in
the Morning on the Fourth-day of the Week, Harwich.
we took Coach for Harwich, where we met with William Bingley and Samuel
Waldenfield; who also went over with us. About the eighth hour at night we went
on board the Pacquet-Boat (of which one Richard Gray was Master) but by reason
of Contrary Winds, it was the first hour in the morning before we sailed. We
had a very good Passage; and about the fifth hour in the Afternoon next day we
landed at the Briel in Holland: HOLLAND Briel.
and there we stayed that night. Early next morning we went to Rotterdam;
Rotterdam
where we abode some days. The next day, after we came to Rotterdam, one
Wilbert Frouzen, a Burgomaster, and Kinsman of Aarent Sunneman's, hearing, that
I was there, Invited me to his Country House; having a desire to speak with me
about some business, relating to Aarent Sunneman's Daughters. I took George
Watts with me; and a Brother of Aarent Sunneman's had us thither. The
Burgomaster received us very kindly, and was very glad to see me; and entering
into discourse about his Kinsman's Daughters, I found, he was apprehensive,
that their Father being dead, and having left them considerable Portions, they
might be stolen, and married to their disadvantage. Wherefore I told him, That
it was our Principle and Practice, that none should Marry amongst us, unless
they had a Certificate of the Consent of their Relations or Guardians: for it
was our Christian Care to watch over and look after all young People, that came
among us; especially those, whose natural Relations were dead. And as for his
Kinsman's Daughters, we should take care, that nothing should be offered to
them, but what should be agreeable to Truth and Righteousness, and that they
might be preserved in the Fear of God, according to their Father's Mind. This
seemed to give him great satisfaction. While I was with him, there came many
great People to me; and I exhorted them all to keep in the Fear of God, and to
mind his good Spirit in them, to keep their Minds to the Lord. After I had
stayed two or three hours, and had had discourse with him of several things, I
took my leave of him; and he very friendly set me to Rotterdam in his Chariot.

The next day, being the First Day of the Week, we were at the Meeting at
Rotterdam, which was pretty large; and we dedeclared to the People by an
Interpreter. The day following one Alderman Gaul came to speak with me; and
with him I and the other Friends had much discourse about Religious Matters:
wherewith he seemed to be well satisfied, and was very Tender. Several other
Persons of Account intended to have come to speak with me that day; but being
hindered by extraordinary business (as I understood) they came not.

Amsterdam.
We went next day from Rotterdam to Amsterdam, where we had a large and very
precious Meeting. And in the Afternoon I was at another Meeting with the
Friends there, about Business.

There is a Yearly Meeting at Amsterdam for the Friends of Holland and Germany,
etc. 1684. Amsterdam.
which begun now on the Eighth day of the Fourth Month: and ended on the
Twelfth. Here we had a fine Opportunity of seeing Friends from diverse parts,
and of being refreshed together in the Love of God. And after this Meeting,
before the Friends, that came out of the several Provinces, were gone, we had a
Meeting with some particular Friends, about the Places and Countries, into
which we, who came out of England in the Work of the Ministry, were to travel;
and to understand, who among them were suitable Persons to go along with us for
Interpreters. When this was concluded on, William Bingley and Samuel
Waldenfield took shipping for Friezland; and Jacob Claus their Interpreter.

Alexander Parker and George Watts remained with me; and we tarried a few days
longer at Amsterdam, where I had further Service. And before I left Amsterdam,
I went to visit one Galenus Abraham's, a Teacher of Chief Note among the
Mennonites (or Baptists.) I had been with him, when I was in Holland about
seven Years before; and William Penn and George Keith had disputes with him
then: He was then very high and very shy, so that he would not let me touch
him, nor look upon him (by his good will) but bid me, Keep my Eyes off him;
for, he said, they pierced him. But now he was very loving and tender, and
Confessed in some measure to Truth: his Wife also and Daughter were tender and
kind, and we parted from them very lovingly.

Soon after this, feeling our Spirits drawn toward Friezland, Alexander
Parker, George Watts and I, having John Claus of Amsterdam with us for our
Interpreter, took shipping at Amsterdam for Friezland, and having sailed some
Nine or Ten Leagues, we left the Ship, Friezland.
and traveled through Friezland, sometimes by Boat, sometimes by Wagon,
visiting Friends and tender People in the Towns and Villages, where we came;
and having commonly one, sometimes two Meetings in a day. After we had been at
Leuwarden, Leuwarder Franeker. Harlingen in West-Friezland.
we passed by Franeker to Harlingen in West-Friezland, which was the furthest
Place we went to that way. And having been out six days from Amsterdam, and had
very good Service in that time, in visiting Friends, and publishing Truth
amongst the People, we took Ship at Harlingen for Amsterdam on the 26th of the
fourth Month, and arrived there that night. Amsterdam.
The First Day following we were at the Meeting at Amsterdam, which was very
large and precious: Many of the World's People were there, and some of their
Teachers; some great Persons also, and they seemed very attentive: and a good
opportunity we all had, one after another, to declare the Word of the Lord unto
them, and open the Way of Truth amongst them; John Claus interpreting for us. I
tarried the next day at Amsterdam: but George Watts went to a Burial at Harlem,
where many hundreds of People were; amongst whom he had a good opportunity, and
came back at night to us.

1684. Waterland-Osan-overton. Lansmeer. Amsterdam.
The day following we went by Boat to Osan-overton in Waterland, and from
thence, in another small Boat, about a League over a small River, where we
passed over and by above an hundred Bridges, and so went to Lansmeer, to a
Friend's house, whose name was Timon Peter's; and there we had a very good
Meeting. After which we returned to Amsterdam at Night; and were at the Meeting
there next day. There were many at this Meeting besides Friends, and among the
rest the great Baptist-Teacher Galenus, who was very attentive to the Testimony
of the Truth; and when the Meeting was done, came and got me by the hand very
lovingly.

Sardam. Alkmaer.
We went next day by Boat to Alkmaer, about eight Leagues from Amsterdam,
passing through Sardam (the great Town of Ship-Carpenters) and several other
Towns in the way. At Alkmaer (which is a pretty City) we stayed, and had a
Meeting there next day at one William Williams his house. There were, besides
Friends, many very sober People at this Meeting, who were very attentive to the
Testimonies of Truth, that were born both by Alexander Parker, George Watts and
my self, John Claus being our Interpreter. This was on the Sixth-day of the
Week; and on the seventh we returned to Amsterdam, Amsterdam.
partly by Wagon, partly by Draw-boat, being willing to be at the Meeting at
Amsterdam on the First Day, because it was like to be the last Meeting we
should have there. Accordingly we were at it, and a very large and open Meeting
it was. Many great Persons were at it; some Earls (we were told) with their
Attendants out of Germany, very grave and sober; and the everlasting Gospel was
preached unto them.

After this Meeting we took our leave of the Friends of Amsterdam; Harlem
and the next morning departed thence to Harlem, where we had a Meeting at a
Friend's house, whose name is Abraham Frondenberg. There were great Numbers of
People at this Meeting, and of great Service it was. And after the Meeting, a
Watch-maker of Amsterdam (who with his Wife was come from Amsterdam to the
Meeting) desired to speak with me concerning Religion. I had pretty much
discourse with him, and both he and his Wife were very Low and Tender, and
received with gladness, what I spoke to them; and seemed well satisfied, when
they went away.

Roterdam. Briel.
We went next day to Rotterdam, where we tarried two Meetings; and on the
sixteenth day of the fifth Month, went to the Briel, to take Ship for England.

It was about the fourth hour in the Afternoon, that we went on Board the
Packet Boat, of which one William Sherman was Master; and set Sail from the
Briel. But when we had gone over the Maes about a League, we cast Anchor at the
place called The Pit, The Pit.
(because it is near unto the Sands) and there we tarried, till about the
fourth hour next morning: when, having a pretty fair Wind, and the Tide with
us, we weighed Anchor; and by the fourth hour next day were got within five
Leagues of Harwich, over against Alborough-Castle; but the Wind falling short,
and the Tide growing weak, 1684. Harwich.
it was the first hour in the Afternoon, before we came so near to Harwich,
that Boats could come to receive the Passengers and Goods. There were on Board
about forty Passengers in all; of which some were English, some Scots, some
Dutch, some French, some Spanish, some Flemish, and some Jews.

I spent a day with Friends at Harwich, while Alexander Parker and George Watts
went by water to visit Friends at Ipswich; and returned at night. Next morning
early we all took Coach for Colchester, and were at the Meeting there;
Colchester
which was large and peaceable: And after the Meeting, and that we had
refreshed our selves, we traveled on to Witham, Witham.
about Ten Miles on the Road toward London; and lodged there that night. Next
day we went on toward London: and William Mead meeting us on the way at
Harestreet, I went with him to his House; Harestreet,
the other Friends going on for London.

Here, being Weak with Travel and continual Exercise, I spent some time to rest
my self, and recover my Health; visiting in the mean time the Friends in that
part of the Country, as I was able to get abroad. And when I was a little
recovered, I went from thence to Enfield, Enfield.
visiting Friends there and thereabouts: and so to Dolston to see the Widow
Stot: Dolston.
And from thence to London; London.
there being some Friends come over from New Jersey in America about business,
which I was desired to be present at.

It was the latter end of the Summer, when I came to London; and I stayed there
the Winter following: saving that once or twice (my Wife being in Town with me
this Winter) I went down with her to her Son Rouse's at Kingston. And though my
body was very weak; yet was I in continual Service, either in public Meetings
(when I was able to bear them) or in particular Businesses amongst Friends, and
visiting those that were Sufferers for Truth, either by Imprisonment, or Loss
of Goods. Many things also in this time I Writ, some for the Press, and some
for particular Service: as Letters to the King of Denmark and Duke of Holsteyn,
on behalf of Friends, that were Sufferers in their Dominions; whereof the
following is a Copy: For the Duke of HOLSTEYN THIS: Whom I do Entreat, in the
Love of God to read over, which is sent in Love to him.
I Understand, that formerly by some Evil-minded persons it was reported to
thee, when one Elizabeth Hendricks came to Fredrickstadt to visit the People
called Quakers there in thy Country, That it was a Scandal to the Christian
Religion, that a Woman should be suffered to preach in a public Assembly
religiously gathered together, 1684. London.
etc. Upon which thou did grant forth an Order to the Rulers of Fredrickstadt
aforesaid, To make the said People leave that place forthwith, or to send them
away. But the said Rulers being Arminians, and they, or their Fathers being
come to live there, as a persecuted People in Holland (not much above
threescore years ago) made Answer to the Duke; They were not willing to
persecute others for Conscience sake, who had looked upon Persecution on that
Account in their own Case, as Antichristian, etc. But after that the said
People of God, in scorn called Quakers, did write unto thee, O Duke, from
Fredrickstadt; and since that time they have had their Liberty, and their
Meetings peaceable, to serve and worship God almost these twenty years at
Fredrickstadt aforesaid, and thereabout, freely without any molestation: which
Liberty they have acknowledged as a Great Favor and Kindness from thee.

And now, O Duke, Thou professing Christianity from the great and mighty Name
of Christ Jesus (who is King of Kings, and Lord of Lords) and the holy
Scriptures of Truth of the Old and New Testament, Do not you use many Women's
words in your Service and Worship out of the Old and New Testament? And because
the Apostle says; Let your Women keep Silence in the Churches; and that he did
not permit a Woman to speak, but to be under obedience; and if she will learn
any thing, to ask her husband at home: For it is a shame for a Woman to speak
in the Church. And 1 Timothy 2.11, 12. Women are to learn in silence, and not
suffered to Teach, nor to usurp Authority over the Man, but to be in silence, 1
Cor. 14.34. Now, here the Duke may see, what sort of Women they be, that were
to be in silence, and in subjection, which the Law Commands to be silent, and
not to usurp Authority over the Man; nor to speak in the Church: These were
Unruly Women. And in the same Chapter, he Commands Women not to plate or
broider their hair, nor to wear Gold, Pearls, or costly Array: These things
were forbidden by the Apostle; and such Women, that wear such things, are to
Learn in silence, and to be subject, and not to usurp Authority over the Men;
for it is a shame for such to speak in the Church. But do not such Women as
these, that were Gold, and Silver, and Pearls and Gaudy Apparel, or Costly
Array, and plates and broiders their hair, speak in your Church, when your
Priest sets them to sing Psalms? Don't they speak, when they sing Psalms?
Consider this, O Duke! And yet you say, Your Women must keep silence in the
Church, and must not speak in the Church: but when they sing Psalms in your
Churches, are they then silent? And though the Apostle forbids such Women
beforementioned to speak in the Church; yet in another place the Apostle
encourages the good or holy Women to be Teachers of good things: as in Tit.
2.3, 4. And John (2 John 1.) writes to the Elect Lady and her Children; And
John rejoiced greatly, that he found her Children walk in the Truth: Surely,
this Elect Lady had Taught and Instructed those Children, that walked in the
Truth; and John, who was an Apostle of Christ, commended her. And the Apostle
said; I entreat thee, true Yoke Fellow, help those Women, which labored with
me in the Gospel, and with other my Fellow Laborers, whose names are written
in the Book of Life: Here the Apostle owns these holy Women, and encourages
them, Women that labored in the Gospel.
which labored with him in the Gospel, and did not forbid them, Philip. 4.2,
3. And the Apostle Paul commended Phoebe unto the Church of the Romans, and
calls her a Servant unto the Church of Cenchrea, and sends his Epistle by her
to the Romans from Corinth, and desires the Church at Rome to receive her in
the Lord, as becomes Saints: And that they were to Assist her, in whatsoever
business she had need of; for she had been a succourer of many, and of him
also: And said, Greet Priscilla and Aquila, my Helpers in Christ Jesus, who
have for my life laid down their necks; unto whom not only I give thanks, but
also all the Churches of the Gentiles. Now here the Duke may see, these were
good, holy Women; the Apostle did not forbid such speaking, Romans 16.1, 2, 3, 4.
but commended them. And Priscilla and Aquilae Instructed and Expounded unto
Apollo the way of God more perfectly; Acts 18.26. So here Priscilla was an
Instructor, as well as Aquila; which holy Women the Apostle does not forbid.
Neither did the Apostle forbid Philip's four Daughters, which were Virgins, to
prophecy (as in Acts.) And Women might pray and prophecy in the Church, 1
Cor. 11.5. And the Apostles said to the Jews, and showed them the fulfilling of
Joel's Prophecy: That in the last days God would pour out of his Spirit upon
all flesh, and their Sons and Daughters should prophecy, etc. and Servants and
Handmaids, they should prophecy with the Spirit of God. And so the Apostle
encourages Daughters and Handmaids to prophecy, as well as Sons; and if they
do prophecy, they must speak to the Church or People, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.17,
18. And Miriam the Prophetess, did not she sing unto the Lord, and all the
Women with her, when the Lord had delivered the Children of Israel from
Pharaoh? did not she praise the Lord, and prophecy in the Congregation of the
Children of Israel? and was not this in the Church? Exodus 15.21. Moses and
Aaron did not forbid her prophesying or speaking; but Moses said, Would God,
all the Lord's People were Prophets! And the Lord's People are Women, as well
as Men. And Deborah was a Judge and a Prophetess: and do not You make use of
Deborah's and Miriam's words in your Service and Worship? as you may see (
Judge. 5. v. 1 -- 31.) Deborah's large Speech or Song: And Barak did not forbid
her, nor none of the Jewish Priests. And did not she make this Speech or Song
in the Congregation or Church of Israel? And in the Book of Ruth there are good
Speeches of those good Women, which were not forbidden. And Hannah prayed in
the Temple before Ely; and the Lord Answered her prayer: And see, what a Speech
Hannah makes, and a praising of God before Ely, the High Priest, and he did not
forbid her, 1 Samuel 2. v. 1. to 10. And Josiah the King sent his Priest with
several others, to Ask Counsel of Huldah the Prophetess, who dwelt at Jerusalem
in the College, 2 King 22.14. 2 Chronicles. 34.22. So here the King and his Priests
did not despise the Counsel of this Prophetess: and she did prophecy to the
Congregation of Israel; as may be seen in these Chapters. And in Luke 1.41. to
55. there see, what a godly Speech Elizabeth made to Mary, and what a large,
godly Speech Mary made also. And Mary said; That the Lord did regard the Low
Estate of his Handmaid, etc. And don't you make use in your Worship and
Service of Mary's and Elizabeth's words from Luke 2.41. to 55. who were holy
Women in your Churches, and yet forbid Women's speaking in your Churches, and to
be in silence? yet all sorts of Women speak in your Churches, when they sing,
and say, Amen. And in Luke the second, there was one Anna, a Prophetess, she
was a Widow of about fourscore and four years: which departed not from the
Temple, but served God with Fasting and Prayer night and day: Did not she
Confess Christ Jesus in the Temple, and gave thanks to the Lord, and spoke of
Christ to all, that looked for Redemption in Jerusalem? Luke 2.36, 37, 38. So
such holy Women were not forbidden to speak in the Church, neither in the Law,
nor Gospel. And was it not Mary Magdalen and other Women, that first preached
Christ's Resurrection to the Apostles? The Woman indeed (namely Eve) was first
in Transgression; and so they were Women, that first preached the Resurrection
of Christ Jesus: for Christ said to Mary, etc. Go to my Brethren, and say unto
them, I Ascend unto my Father, and to your Father; and to my God, and to your
God, John 20.17. And Luke 24.10. it was Mary Magdalen and Johanna, and Mary the
Mother of James, and other Women, that were with them, which told the Apostles,
that Christ was risen from the dead; and their words, and these Women's words,
were as Idle Tales to the Apostles, and they believed them not: Ibid. verse. 11.
And verse. 22. Certain Women also of our Company made us astonished, they said:
So here it may be seen, that the Women's preaching the Resurrection of Christ
did Astonish the Apostles; and Christ sent these Women to preach his
Resurrection: so it is no shame for such Women to preach Christ Jesus: neither
were they to be silent, when Christ sends them. And the Apostle says; Every
Tongue shall Confess to God, Romans 14.11. and, Every Tongue shall Confess, that
Jesus Christ is Lord, to the Glory of God the Father, Philip. 2.11. So Here
it is Clear, that Women must Confess Christ, as well as men; if Every Tongue
must Confess. And the Apostle says, There Is neither Male nor Female; for ye
are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28.

And whereas it is said; Women must ask their Husbands at home, etc. Now, the
Duke knows very well, Virgins have no Husbands, nor Widows; for Anna the
Prophetess was a Widow: And if Christ be the Husband, Men must ask Counsel of
him at home, as well as Women, before they Teach. And set the Case, that a
Turk's Wife should be a Christian, or a Papist's Wife should be a Lutheran, or
a Calvinist, must they Ask and Learn of their Husbands at home, before they
confess Christ Jesus in the Congregation of the Lord? Their Counsel will be to
them to turn Turks or Papists.

I Entreat the Duke to Consider these things. And again I Entreat him to mind
God's Grace and Truth in his heart, that is come by Jesus; that by his Spirit
of Grace and Truth he may come to serve and worship God in his Spirit and
Truth: so that he may serve the Living, Eternal God, that made him, in his
Generation, and have his Peace in Christ, that the World cannot take away. And
I do desire his Good, Peace and Prosperity in this World, and his Eternal
Comfort and Happiness in the World, that is Everlasting without End, Amen.

London, the 26th of the 8th Month, 1684. G. F.




Besides the foregoing I writ also Epistles to Friends; one of which the
following is a Copy: FRiends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom you
have all life, peace and salvation: Walk in him, who is your heavenly Rock and
Foundation, that stands sure; who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given unto
him. So his Power is over all. And let your Faith stand in his Power, which is
over all from everlasting to everlasting, and so is over the Devil and his
power; that in the holy, heavenly Wisdom of God, ye may be all preserved and
kept to God's glory, out of all snares and temptations: so that God's Wisdom
may be justified of all his Children in this day of his power, and they all may
be faithful, serving and worshipping God in his Spirit and Truth, and valiant
for it upon the Earth. For, as the Apostle says, They that believe, are entered
into their rest, and have ceased from their own works, as God did from his. Now
this Rest is an Eternal Rest in Christ, the Eternal Son of God, in whom every
true Believer has everlasting Life in Christ Jesus, their Rest and everlasting
Day. For Christ the Rest bruiseth the Serpent's head, and through Death
destroys Death, and the Devil (the power of Death) and his works: And he is
the eternal Rest, that gives eternal Life to his Sheep. And Christ fulfilleth
the Prophets, and all the Figures, Shadows and Ceremonies, as in the Old
Testament; and all the Promises are Yea and Amen in Christ, their and our
Eternal Rest, who was the Eternal Rest to all the true Believers in the
Apostles days, and ever since; and is so now. And Christ is the Beginning and
the Ending, the First and Last; who is ascended above all Principalities,
Powers, Thrones and Dominions, that he might fill all things. For by Jesus
Christ all things were made and created, whether they be things in Heaven, or
things in the Earth; and he is the eternal Rest, and they that believe, are
entered into Christ, their Eternal Rest, in whom they have (as I said before)
Eternal Life, and peace with God. Wherefore I say again, in him, who is your
Rest, live and abide: for in him ye are happy, and his Blessings will rest upon
you. God Almighty keep and preserve you all, his true Believers, in Christ your
Rest and Peace this day, Amen.

London, the 18th of the 12th Month, 1684/5. G. F.




Month after this I got a little out of London, visiting Friends, first, at
South-street; then at Ford-Green and Enfield, where I had Meetings:
South-street. Ford-green Enfield Waltham-Abbey. Enfield. Edmunton- side
and afterward I went to Waltham-Abbey, and was at the Meeting there on a
First Day; which was very large and peaceable. Then returning through Friends
at Enfield, and about Edmunton-side, I came back to London in the Third Month,
to Advise with and Assist Friends, in laying Friends Sufferings before the
Parliament then sitting; and we drew up a short Account of our Sufferings,
which we caused to be printed, and spread amongst the Parliament Men.

London. Yearly Meeting.
The Yearly Meeting now coming on, I was much concerned for the Friends, that
came up to it out of the Countries, lest they should meet with any Trouble or
Disturbance in their Passages up or down; and the rather, for that about this
time there began to be great bustles in the Nation upon the Duke of Monmouth's
landing in the West. But the Lord, according to his wonted goodness, was
graciously pleased to preserve and keep Friends in safety; and gave us a
blessed Opportunity to Meet together in peace and quietness, and accompanied
our Meeting with his living, refreshing Presence: blessed for ever be his holy
Name!

Now considering the Hurries and Bustles, that were in the Nation, it came upon
me at the Close of this Meeting, to write a few Lines to Friends to Caution
all, to keep out of the Spirit of the World, in which the Trouble is; and to
dwell in the peaceable Truth. Wherefore I writ as follows: Dear Friends and
Brethren,
WHom the Lord has called and chosen in Christ Jesus, your Life and Salvation,
in whom ye have all rest and peace with God; The Lord God by his mighty Power,
which is over all, has preserved you, and supported you to this day, to be a
peculiar, holy People to himself; so that by his Eternal Spirit and Power ye
might be all preserved and kept out of the World: for in the World is the
Trouble. And now in this great Day of the Lord God Almighty, he is shaking the
Heavens and the Earth of outward Professions, and their Elements are in a heat,
and their Sun and their Moon are darkened, and the Stars falling, and the
Mountains and Hills shaking and tottering, as it was among the Jews in the Day
of Christ's appearing. And therefore, all Dear Friends and Brethren, dwell in
the Seed, Christ Jesus, who is the Rock and Foundation, 1685. London.
that cannot be shaken; that ye may see with the Light and Spirit of Christ,
that ye are the fixed Stars in the ^irmament of God's Power; and in this his
Power and Light, you will see over all the wandering Stars, and Clouds without
water, and Trees without fruit. And that which may be shaken, will be shaken;
as will all they, that are wandered from the Firmament of God's Power.

Now, Dear Friends and Brethren, you that are redeemed from the Death and Fall
of Adam, by Christ the second Adam, in him ye have Life, Rest and Peace: for
Christ says, In me ye shall have Peace; but in the World, Trouble. And the
Apostle says, They that believe, are entered into their Rest, namely Christ,
who has overcome the World, who bruiseth the Serpent's Head, and destroys the
Devil and his Works, and fulfils the Types, Figures and Shadows of the Old
Testament, and the Prophets: In whom the Promises are Yea and Amen; who is the
First and Last, Beginning and Ending, Yea and Amen, who is the eternal Rest. So
keep and walk in Christ, your Rest, every one that have received him, your
Eternal Rest.

And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, whatever Bustlings and Trouble, or
Tumults, or Outrages, Quarrels and Strife should arise and be in the World,
keep out of them all; and concern not your selves with them: but keep in the
Lord's Power and peaceable Truth, that is over all such things; in which Power
ye seek the peace and good of all men. And live in the Love, which God has
shed abroad in your hearts through Christ Jesus; in which Love nothing is able
to separate you from God and Christ, neither outward Sufferings, Persecutions,
nor any outward thing, that is below and without; nor to hinder or break your
heavenly Fellowship in the Light and Gospel and Spirit of Christ; nor your holy
Communion in the Holy Ghost, that proceeds from the Father and the Son; which
leads you into all Truth. And in this Holy Ghost, in which is your holy
Communion, that proceeds from the Father and the Son, you have fellowship with
the Father and the Son; and communion and fellowship one with another. And this
is it, which links and joins Christ's Church or Body together, to him the
heavenly and spiritual Head, and in Unity in his Spirit, which is the Bond of
Peace of all his Church and living Members, in whom they have Eternal and
Everlasting Rest and Peace in Christ, and with God everlasting, who is to be
blessed and praised for ever, Amen!

Now, Dear Friends, forsake not the Assembling of your selves together, who are
gathered in the Name of Jesus; who is your Prophet, that God has raised up in
the New Testament, to be heard in all things: who opens to you, and no man can
shut; and shuts, and no man can open: Who is your Priest, made higher than the
Heavens by the Power of an endless Life; by him you are made a Royal
Priesthood, to offer up to God spiritual Sacrifice: Who is the Bishop of your
Souls, to oversee you, that ye do not go astray from God: Who is the good
Shepherd, that has laid down his Life for his Sheep; and they hear his voice,
and follow him, and he gives to them eternal Life.

And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, abide in Christ, the Vine, that ye may
bring forth fruit to the glory of God. And as every one has received Christ,
walk in him (who is not of the World, that lies in wickedness:) so that ye may
be preserved out of the Vain Fashions and Customs of the World, which satisfy
the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of the Flesh, and the Pride of Life, which are
not of the Father, but are of the World, that passes away. And who joins to
that, which is not of the Father, or encourages it; draws the mind from God the
Father and the Lord Jesus Christ. And therefore Let Christ rule in your hearts,
that your Minds, Souls and Spirits may be kept, and preserved out of the
Vanities of the World, both in their words, ways and actions; so that ye may be
a peculiar People, zealous of good works; serving the Lord God through Jesus
Christ, in whom is life: and may be a peculiar People to the praise and glory
of God; and by the word of his Grace your words may be gracious, and in your
Lives and Conversations ye may show forth Righteousness, Holiness and
Godliness. That so God Almighty may be glorified in you all; and through you
all; who is above all, blessed and praised for ever, Amen.

London the 11th of the 4th Month, 1685. G. F.




Several other Letters also I writ at this time to Friends in diverse Foreign
Countries; from whom I had received Letters about the Affairs of Truth. Which
when I had dispatched, the Yearly Meeting being over, and the Country-Friends
for the most part gone out of Town, I got a little way out of Town also; being
much spent with the Heat of the Weather, South-street.
Throngs in Meetings, and continual Business. I went at first but to
South-street, where I abode some days. And among other Services, that I had
there, a great sense entered me of the Growth and Increase of Pride, Vanity and
Excess in Apparel; and that not only amongst the People of the World, but too
much also amongst some, that came among us, and seemed to make a Profession of
the Truth. And in the sense I had of the Evil thereof, it came upon me to give
forth the following Paper, as a Reproof and Check thereunto.

THE Apostle Peter says (in 1 Pet. 3.) of the Women's Adorning; Let it not be
(mark, Let it not be: this is a positive Prohibition) that outward adorning of
plaiting the Hair, and of wearing of Gold, or of putting on of Apparel: But let
it be the hidden Man of the heart, in that which is not corruptible, even the
Ornament of a meek and quiet Spirit, which is in the sight of God of a great
price: for after this manner in the old time the holy women also, who trusted
in God, adorned themselves.

Here ye may see, what is the Ornament of the holy Women, 1685. South-street.
which was in the sight of God of a great price, and which the holy Women, who
trusted in God, adorned themselves with. But the unholy Women, that trust not
in God, their Ornament is not a meek and a quiet Spirit: They adorn themselves
with plaiting the Hair, and putting on of Apparel, and wearing of Gold; which
is forbidden by the Apostle in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ, the
true Christians.

And the Apostle Paul says, (1 Timothy 2.9, 10.) In like manner also, that Women
adorn themselves in modest Apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety: not with
broidered Hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly Array; but (which becomes Women
professing Godliness) with good Works.

Now here ye may see, what the Women were not to Adorn themselves with, who
professed Godliness: They were not to adorn themselves with broidered Hair, nor
Gold, nor Pearls, nor costly Array; for this was not looked upon to be modest
Apparel for holy Women, that professed Godliness and good Works. But this
Adorning or Apparel is for the immodest, and unshamefaced and unsober Women,
that profess not Godliness, neither follow those good Works, that God commands.
And therefore it does not become Men and Women, who profess true Christianity
and Godliness, to be adorned with Gold, or Chains, or Pearls, or costly Array,
with broidered Hair; for these things are for the Lust of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and Pride of Life, which is not of the Father. And therefore all the
holy Men and Women are to mind that, which is more precious than Gold: who are
Redeemed not with corruptible things, as Silver and Gold, from your vain
Conversation; but with the precious Blood of Christ, as of a Lamb without
blemish and without spot. Therefore as obedient Children to God, not fashioning
your selves according to your former Lusts in your Ignorance; but as he, which
has called you, is holy, so be ye holy in all manner of Conversation, 1 Pet.
1.14, 15.

Christ says; The Life is more than Meat, and the Body is more than Raiment,
Luke 12.23.

I read of a Moral-wise Philosopher, who, meeting a Woman with her Neck and
Breast bare, laid his hand upon her, and said; Woman, will thou sell this
Flesh? and she replying, No. Then pray, said he, shut up your Shop (meaning her
bare Breasts and Neck.) So they were looked upon as Harlots, that went with
their Necks, Breasts and Backs bare, and not Civil People, even among the Moral
Heathens. Therefore they, that profess the Knowledge of true Christianity,
should be ashamed of such things. You may see a Book written by the very
Papists, and another by Baxter, the Presbyterian, against bare Breasts and bare
Backs, and them that showed their Flesh Uncovered: They that were but in an
outward Profession, did declare against such things; and therefore they, which
are in the Possession of Truth and true Christianity, should be ashamed of such
things. Read, I pray you, the Third of Isaiah, and there you may see, how that
holy Prophet was grieved with the foolish Women's vain Attire; and how he was
sent by the Lord to reprove them. And envious, persecuting Jezabel her Attired
Head and Bravery, like a painted Harlot out of the Truth, did not keep her from
the Judgments of God, when the Lord stirred up Jehu against her. Does not Pride
go before a Fall, and a haughty Mind before Destruction? And God resists the
Proud, and gives Grace to the Humble. And Solomon says, The Lord will destroy
the House of the Proud, Prove. 15.25. For the Day of the Lord shall be upon
every one, that is proud and lofty, etc. and he shall be brought low, Isa.
2.12. and Mal. 4. Therefore take heed of calling the Proud happy: for The Lord
will scatter the Proud in the Imaginations of their own hearts, and exalt them
of low degree. And you may read in the Revelations (Chap. 17.4. and 18.16.) of
the false Church, how she was outwardly decked, but full of Abomination, and
came to a Downfall at last. And therefore it is good for all, that profess the
Truth, to use this World, as not abusing it: for the fashion of this World
passes away; but the Word of the Lord endures for ever. The Lord takes
pleasure in his People, he will beautify the Meek with Salvation, Psalm. 149.4.
Therefore all, that know the Truth, as it is in Jesus, are to be beautified and
clothed with this Salvation, which Salvation is a strong Wall or a Bulwark
against that Spirit, that would lead you down into the Fall from God, or into
those things, which the fallen Man and Woman delight in, and beautify or adorn
themselves with. And therefore all, that profess the Truth, be circumspect,
sincere and fervent, following the Lord Jesus Christ, who is not of this World;
in whom ye have Life and Peace with God.

South-street, the 24th of the 4th Month, 1685. G. F.

After I had been some weeks in the Country at Southstreet, and at and about
Enfield (in which time I had several Meetings with Friends) I returned to
London. Enfield. London.
And amongst other Services, that I found there, one was, to assist Friends in
drawing up Testimony, to Clear our Friends from being concerned in the late
Rebellion in the West, and from all Plots against the Government: Which
accordingly we did; and delivered them to the Chief Justice, who was then to go
down into the West, with Commission to Try Prisoners.

I tarried some time in London, visiting Meetings, and laboring among Friends
in the Service of Truth. But finding my Health much impaired for want of fresh
Air, I went a little way out of Town to Charles Bathurst's Country House at
Epping-Forrest; Epping-Forrest.
where I stayed a few days. And while I was there, it came upon me to write the
following Epistle to Friends: Dear Friends,
WHO are called, chosen and faithful in this Day of Trial, 1685. Epping-Forest.
and Temptations, and Sufferings, whom the Lord by his right Hand has upholden
in all your Sufferings (and some to Death) for the Lord and his Truths sake;
Christ says, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World: In me ye have peace;
but in the World ye have trouble. The Children of the Seed, which be Heirs of
the Kingdom, know, this is true. And though ye have Trials by false Brethren,
Judasses and Sons of Perdition, that are got into the Temple of God, and
exalted above all that is called God; whom the Lord will destroy with the
breath of his Mouth; and the brightness of his Coming: And though ye be Tried
by Powers or Principalities; yet there is nothing able to separate you from the
Love of God, which ye have in Christ Jesus. In that Love dwell, which bears all
things, and fulfils the Law; in which edify one another, and be courteous, and
kind, and humble: for to such God gives his Grace plentifully, and such he
teaches. And pray in the Holy Ghost, which proceeds from the Father and the
Son; and in it keep your holy Communion, and Unity in the Spirit, the Bond of
Peace, which is the King of Kings heavenly Peace. In that you are all bound to
good behavior, and keeping Peace among your selves, and seeking the Peace of
all men; and showing forth the heavenly, gentle and peaceable Wisdom to all
men, in Righteousness and Truth, answering the good in all People in all your
Lives and Conversations (for the Lord is glorified in your bringing forth
spiritual fruit:) that ye may eye and behold the Lord in all your actions; that
the Blessings of the Lord ye may all feel to rest upon you. Whether ye be the
Lord's Prisoners for his Name and Truth's sake, or at Liberty, in all things
labor to be Content (for that is a Continual Feast;) and let no Trouble move
you: then ye will be as Mount Sion, that cannot be removed. And in all things
exercise the Word of Patience, which Word will sanctify all things to you. And
study to be Quiet, and do the Lord's business, that he requires of you; and
your own, in Truth and Righteousness: and whatsoever ye do, let it be done to
the praise and glory of God in the Name of Jesus Christ. All they, that do make
God's People to suffer, they make the Seed to suffer in their own particulars;
and Imprison the Just there: And such will not visit the Seed in themselves;
but cast it into Prison in Others, and not visit it in Prison. You may read,
that Christ says, Such must go into Everlasting Punishment: That is a sad
punishment and prison. And all such, as are become Apostates and Backsliders,
that do crucify to themselves Christ afresh, and put him to open shame, and
trample under feet the blood of the Son of God, by which they were cleansed,
and then come to be Unclean; such grieve, vex, and quench, and rebel against
the Spirit of God in themselves: and then such rebel against them, that walk in
the Spirit of God. Such are Unfaithful to God and Man, and are Enemies to every
good Work and Service of God: But their End will be according to their works;
who are like unto the Earth, that has often received Rain, but brings forth
Briars and Thorns; which are to be rejected, and are for the fire. Therefore,
Dear Friends, in all your Sufferings feel the Lord's Eternal Arm and Power,
which has upheld you, and supported you to this day; and will to the end, as
your Faith stands in it, and as you are settled upon the Rock and Foundation
Christ Jesus, that cannot be removed: in whom ye have life and peace with God.
And so the Lord God Almighty in him give you Dominion, and preserve and keep
you all to his Glory; that in all your Sufferings ye may feel his presence: and
that, when ye have finished your Testimony, ye may receive the Crown of Glory,
which God has laid up for them, that fear and serve him, Amen.

The 15th of the 7th Month, 1685. G. F.




Having spent about a week at this time among Friends in the Country, London.
I returned to London: Where I continued about Two Months, visiting Friends
Meetings, and laboring to get Relief for Friends from their Sufferings; which
yet lay heavy upon them in many parts of the Nation. Several Papers also I
writ, relating to the Service of Truth; one of which was concerning Order in
the Church of God, which some, that were gone out of the Unity of Friends, did
much oppose. And that was, as follows:

AMong all Societies, or Families, or Nations of People in the World, they have
among them some sort of Order. There was the Order of Aaron in the Old
Testament; and there was the Order of Melchizedeck before that: after whose
Order Christ Jesus came; and he did not despise that Order. So God is a God of
Order in his whole Creation, and in his Church: And all the Believers in the
Light, the Life in Christ, that do pass from death to life, they are in the
Order of the holy Spirit, Power, Light, Life and Government of Christ Jesus, of
the Increase whereof there is no End. And this is a Mystery to all those
disorderly People, who have written and printed so much against Orders, which
the Lord's Power and Spirit has brought forth among his People. And you, that
cry so much against Orders, is it not manifest, that you are gone into a Land
of Darkness (thick, as darkness it self) and of the shadow of death, into
disorder, and where the Light is as Darkness? And is not this your Condition
seen by all them, that live and walk in the Truth, and whose Conversations are
according to the Gospel of Life and Salvation?

The Devil, Satan, Dragon, and the first and second Beast, 1685. London.
and the Whore and false Prophets, and their Worshippers and Followers, all
these are out of the Truth, and abode not in it, nor in the Order of it: And
the Truth is over them all. In Salem is God's Tabernacle, a peaceable
Tabernacle; and his Tabernacle is in Shiloh: And these are far beyond the
Tabernacles of Ham, (Psalm. 76. and 78.)

All the Figures and Shadows were and are in Time; but Christ the Substance is
the Beginning and the Ending. And all Trials, Troubles, Persecutions and
Temptations came up in Time: but the Lord's Power, which is Everlasting, is
over all such things; in which is safety.

The black World of Darkness lies in wickedness, and by their Wisdom knows
not God, that made the World and all things therein: for the God of the World
and Prince of the Air rules in the hearts of all them, that disobey the living
God, that made them. And so the God of this wicked World has blinded all the
Eyes of the Infidels or Heathen; so that this Wicked World by their Wisdom does
not know the living God.

In the Old Testament the Lord said; With all thy Offerings thou shall offer
Salt, Levit. 2.13. And Christ says in his New Covenant; Every one shall be
salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall be salted with Salt. Salt is good;
but if the Salt have lost its saltness, wherewith will you season it? Have Salt
in your selves, and have peace one with another, Mark 9.48, 49, 50.

We have received the Earnest of the Spirit, which is the Earnest of the
Inheritance, that fades not away. For God pours out of his Spirit upon all
flesh: So it is God's Spirit; which is above our natural Spirit (by which alone
we do not know God:) for it is with the Spirit of God, that we do know the
things of God. And the Spirit of God does witness to our Souls and Spirits,
that this Spirit of God is the Earnest of an Eternal Inheritance. God opens his
Peoples Ears to Discipline, and commands, that they turn from Iniquity. If they
obey and serve him, they shall spend their days in prosperity, and their years
in pleasure: but if they obey him not, they shall perish by the sword, and they
shall die without knowledge, Job 36.10, 11, 12. So the Disobedient, that do not
turn from their Iniquity, have not this prosperity and pleasure; but die
without the knowledge of God: And such, their Ears are shut to this Discipline,
which God opens to his People.

G. F.

When I had been about Two Months in London, I was sent for to my Son Rouse's
at Kingston, to visit a Daughter of his, Kingston.
which at that time lay very sick; but recovered. Whilst I stayed there, I had
several Meetings with Friends: Hammersmith.
and returning by Hammersmith, stayed the First-day-Meeting there; which was
large and peaceable. And having visited Friends thereabouts, I came back ^o
London again; being very intent upon the business of getting Redress for
suffering Friends. In this, and other Services for Friends and Truth I
continued at London, till the latter end of the Eleventh Month; save that I
went, in this time, to visit an Ancient Friend at Bednal-Green, Bednal-Green.
with whom I tarried three or four days. While I was there, I was much
exercised, in the sense of the Enemy's Working, to draw from the holy way of
Truth into a false Liberty, and so into the World's ways and worships again.
And the Example of the backsliding Jews coming before me, I was moved to write
the following Paper, as a Warning to all such.

HEre you may see, when the Jews Rebelled against the good Spirit of God, which
he gave them to Instruct them, they forsook God and his Law, Way and Worship,
and then they went a whoring after Balaam's Ways, and became like the wild
Ass-Colt, snuffing up the wind, as in Jer. 2.24. And in Jer. 3. see, how Judah
played the Harlot under every green Tree, and upon every high Mountain: And
therefore the Lord divorced Judah, as he had divorced Israel, when she forsook
his Ways, and followed the Heathens Ways. And though the Lord had fed them to
the full, yet they forsook him, and committed Adultery; and Assembled
themselves together in Harlot's-houses, Jer. 5.7. And with their Whoredom they
defiled the Land, and committed Adultery with Stocks and Stones, Jer. 3.9. So
here you may see, when they forsook the living, Eternal God, they followed the
Religions and Worships of other Nations, whose Gods were made of Stocks and
Stones, which the Jews worshipped, and committed Adultery withal. When they
forsook the living God, and his way and worship, they forsook the worship at
Jerusalem at the Temple, and followed the Heathens Worships in the Mountains
and Fields: and so, it was called Adultery and Whoredom, to join with other
Religions, and forsake God: as in Jer. 13.27.

And now, if the Children of New Jerusalem, that is above, should forsake the
Worship, that Christ in his New Testament set up (which is in Spirit and in
Truth) and follow the Worships of Nations, which men have set up; will not
they, that do so, commit Adultery with them, in forsaking God's Worship, and
Christ, the new and living Way?

And in Jer. 44. ye may see, how the Children of Judah provoked the Lord
against them, by worshipping the works of their own hands, and following the
Gods of the Land of Egypt. In this they committed Adultery, forsaking the
living God, their Husband, and his Worship; and there ye may see God's
Judgments pronounced against them, to their destruction. And what will become
of those, that forsake the Worship in Spirit and Truth, which Christ set up;
and worship the works of their own hands in spiritual Egypt, and follow
spiritual Egypt's Willworship, which they invented? may not this be called
Whoredom in them, that forsake Christ, the new and living Way, and his pure
Religion, and his Worship, that he has set up? And they that do forsake the
Lord's way, 1685. Bednal-Green.
and his worship that he set up, and follow the Worlds ways and worships, that
they set up, do not they, whose Way they follow, become at last their Enemies?
as in Lament. 1. See, how the Jews forsook the Lord's way and worship, and
doted on other Lovers (the Assyrians, etc.) and with all their Idols they were
defiled; and how they did not leave the Whoredoms brought from Egypt, and how
they were polluted with the Babylonians Bed: as ye may read in Ezekiel. 23. When
they forsook the Lord, his Way and Worship, and followed the Way and Worship of
the Heathen; then it was said, They went a Whoring after other Lovers, and
committed Adultery with them.

And ye may see in Ezekiel. 16. how the state of the Jews was likened unto that of
their Sister Sodom, and how that they had played the Harlot with the Assyrians,
and committed Fornication with the Egyptians, and had increased their
Whoredoms, in following their abominable Idols. And therefore the Lord carried
away the Two Tribes, that forsook him, into Babylon; as ye may see in Ezekiel.
17.20. And they that forsake Christ, the new and living Way, and the Worship of
God in Spirit and Truth, which Christ set up in his New Testament, they go into
Captivity in spiritual Babylon.

And in Hosea 2. ye may see, how he discovers the Whoredoms and Idolatry of the
Jews, who forsook the Lord; and compares them to an Harlot. And in Chap. 8. ye
may see the Destruction threatened against the Jews, for their Impiety and
Idolatry. In Chap. 9. also, the Distress and Captivity of the Jews is threatened
for their sins and Idolatry. And again they are reproved and threatened for
their Impiety and Idolatry, Hos. 10. And this was for forsaking the Lord and
his Way, and following the ways of their own Inventions, and the Ways of the
Heathen.

And does not Isaiah say, That the Lord would visit Tire, and that she should
commit Fornication with all the Kingdoms of the World upon the face of the
Earth? and therefore the Lord threatened Destruction upon her, Chap. 23. And in
Chap. 57. you may see, how the Lord reproved the Jews for their Whorish
Idolatry, and said; Upon an high and lofty Mountain have thou set thy Bed; even
thither wentest thou up to offer Sacrifices. -- Thou have enlarged thy Bed, and
made a Covenant with them; thou lovedst their Bed, where thou savest it. This
was a Joining to the Heathens Religions, Altars and Sacrifices, and a forsaking
the Lord's Altar and Sacrifices, which he commanded in the Law: And therefore
that was committing Whoredom with the Heathen, and a going into their Beds,
from the Living God that made them. And now in the New Testament God having
poured his Spirit upon all Flesh, that by his Spirit all might come to be a
Royal Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices to God by Jesus Christ; All
that err from the Spirit of God, and rebel against it, they are not like to
offer spiritual Sacrifices to God: and such their Sacrifice God does not
accept, no more than he did the Heathens, and the Jews, who rebelled against
his good Spirit, that he gave them to Instruct them.

And ye may see in the 17th, 18th and 19th Chapters of the Revelation, the
Punishment of the great Whore Babylon, the Mother of Harlots, and the Victory
of the Lamb; and how he calls God's People out of Babylon: For in her was
found the Blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the Earth: But there ye may read her Judgment, and her Downfall. And this
Whore are they, that are whored from the Spirit of God, and so from God, and
from his holy Worship in Spirit and Truth, and from the pure, undefiled
Religion, that keeps from the Spots of the World, and from the new and living
Way Christ Jesus; and so are whored from the Spirit of God into false
Religions, Ways and Worships, and so corrupted the Earth with her Abominations.
But her Judgment and Downfall is seen, over whom Christ has the Victory: And
the Marriage of the Lamb is come, Glory to the Lord for ever! And God's pure
Religion, and pure Worship in Spirit and Truth Christ has set up, as it was in
the Apostles days, Hallelujah!

G. F.

London.
I soon returned to London, but made no long stay there at this time; my Body
not being able to bear the Closeness of the City long together. While I was in
Town, besides the usual Services of visiting Friends, and taking care about
their Sufferings, to get them eased, I Assisted the Friends of the City in
distributing certain Sums of Money, which our Friends of Ireland had
charitably, and very liberally raised; and sent over hither for the Relief of
their Brethren, who suffered for the Testimony of a good Conscience here: which
Moneys were distributed amongst poor, suffering Friends in the several
Counties, in proportion, according as we understood their Need.

Before I left the City also, I heard of a great Doctor, that was lately come
from Poland; whom I invited to my Lodging, and had a great deal of discourse
with him. And after I had informed my self by him of such things, as I had a
desire to know; I writ a Letter to the King of Poland on behalf of Friends at
Dantzick (a Town belonging to him) who had long been under grievous Sufferings.
A Copy whereof here follows: To JOHN the Third, King of Poland, 1685. London.
Great Duke of Lithuania, Russia, and Prussia, Defender of the City of
Dantzick, etc. Concerning the Innocent and Afflicted People, in scorn called
Quakers, who are now fed with Bread and Water in Bridewell of the aforesaid
City under close Confinement; where their Friends, Wives and Children are
hardly suffered to come to see them.
O King!
THE Magistrates of the City of Dantzick say, That it is thy Order and Command,
that these Innocent and Afflicted People should suffer such Oppression. Now
this Punishment is Inflicted upon them, only and alone, because they come
together in the Name of Jesus Christ, their Redeemer and Savior, who died for
their Sins, and is risen from the dead for their Justification: who is their
Prophet, whom God has raised up like unto Moses; whom they ought to hear in
all things in this day of the Gospel and the New Covenant; who went astray like
scattered Sheep; but now are returned to the Chief Shepherd and Bishop of their
Souls, 1 Pet. 2.25. Who has given his Life for his Sheep, and they hear his
Voice, and follow him: who leads them into his Pastures of Life, John 10.

And now, O King! I understand, that thou openly professest Christianity, and
the great and mighty Name of Jesus Christ, who is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, To whom is given all Power in Heaven and in Earth; who rules all Nations
with a Rod of Iron. Therefore, O King, it seems hard to us, that any, that
openly confesses Christ Jesus (yea, the Magistrates of Dantzick do the same)
should Inflict those Punishments upon an Innocent and Harmless People, by
reason of their Tender Consciences, only and alone, because they come together
to serve and worship the Eternal God, who made them, in Spirit and in Truth;
which worship Christ Jesus has set up Sixteen hundred years ago: as we read in
John 4.23, 24.

Therefore, I beseech the King, that he would Consider, Whether Christ in the
New Testament ever gave such a Command to his Apostles, that they should shut
up any in Prison, and feed them with Bread and Water, who was not Conformable
in every particular to their Religion, Faith and Worship? Or, where did the
Apostles exercise such things in the true Church after Christ's Ascension? For
is not this the Doctrine of Christ, and the Apostles, that Christ's Followers
should Love their Enemies, and pray for them that hate them, and persecute and
despitefully use them? Matthew. 5.

And now, Is it not a shame to Christendom among the Turks and others, That one
Christian should persecute another for the Doctrine of Faith, Worship and
Religion? And they cannot prove, that Christ ever gave them such a Command,
whom they profess to be their Lord and Master. For Christ says, that his
Believers and Followers should love one another; and by this they shall be
known to be his Disciples. And did not Christ Reprove those, who would have
fire to come down from Heaven, to destroy them, who would not receive him; and
did not he tell them, They did not know, what spirit they were of? And
therefore all, who have persecuted Men, or taken away their Lives, because they
would not receive their Religion, have they known, what spirit they were or are
of? Therefore is it nor good for all to know by the Spirit of Christ, what
spirit they are of? For the Apostle says, Romans 8.9. If any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And does not the Apostle say, 2 Cor. 10.4.
The Weapons of our Warfare are not Carnal, but Spiritual, etc. And we wrestle
not against flesh and blood, but against spiritual wickedness, etc. Thus we can
see here, that the Fight of the first Christians, and their Weapons in the days
of the Apostles, were spiritual in matters of Faith, Religion and Worship in
the Church of Christ.

Now would not the King and the Magistrates of Dantzick think, that it was
contrary to their Consciences, if they should be forced by the Turk to his
Religion? Would it not in like manner seem hard to the Magistrates of Dantzick,
and contrary to their Consciences, if they should be forced to the Religion of
the King of Poland? or the King of Poland, if he should be compelled to the
Religion of the Magistrates of Dantzick? And if they would not be subject
thereunto, that then they should be banished from their Wives and Families, and
out of their Native Country, or otherwise be fed with Bread and Water under a
strict Confinement?

Therefore we beseech the King with all Christian Humility, and the Magistrates
of Dantzick, that they would order their proceedings in this matter according
to the Royal Law of God, which is, To do unto others, as they would have others
do unto them; and to love their Neighbor, as themselves. For we have this
Charity, that we hope and believe, that the King of Poland, and his People,
with the Magistrates of Dantzick, own the Writings of the New Testament, as
well as of the Old: And therefore we beseech the King and the Magistrates of
Dantzick, to take heed, that their Work of Imprisoning an Innocent People, for
nothing but their meeting together in Tenderness of Conscience to serve and
worship God, their Creator, may not be contrary and opposite to the Royal Law
of God, and to the Glorious and Everlasting Gospel of Truth.

So we desire the King in Christian Love earnestly and weightily to Consider
these things, and to give Order, to set the Innocent Prisoners, our Friends
called Quakers, at Liberty from their strict Confinement in Dantzick; that they
may have freedom to serve and worship the living God in Spirit, and in Truth,
and go home to their outward Habitations, and follow their Trades and Calling,
to maintain their Wives, Children and Families. And we believe, that the King,
in doing such a Noble, Glorious, yea Christian Work, will not go unrewarded
from the Great God, who made him, whom we serve and worship; who has the hearts
of Kings, and their lives and length of days in his hands.

From him, who desires, that the King and all his Ministers may be preserved in
the Fear of God, and receive his Word of Wisdom, by which all things were made
and created; that by it he may come to order all things to the Glory of God,
which God has put under his hand: That the King, both He and They, may enjoy
the Comforts and Blessings of the Lord in this Life, and in that which is to
come, Life Eternal, Amen.

London in England, the 10th of the 3d Month, commonly called May, 1684. G. F.
Postscript. The King may please to Consider, that His and all Men's
Consciences is the Prerogative of God.






After this I went to Enfield, where, Enfield.
and in the Country thereabouts several Friends had Country-houses, not very
far from one another; amongst whom I tarried some time, visiting and being
visited by Friends, and having Meetings with them. Several things I writ in
this time, relating to the Service of Truth; One whereof was concerning
Judging: For some, who were departed from the Truth, were so afraid of Truth's
Judgment, that they made it much of their business to Cry out against Judging.
Wherefore I writ a Paper, proving by the Scriptures of Truth, that the Church
of Christ has power, and ability to Judge those, that professed to be of it, not
only with respect to outward things relating to this World, but with respect to
Religious Matters also. A Copy of which follows:

Concerning Judging.
THE Natural Man receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, for they are
foolishness to him, neither can he know them, because they are spiritually
discerned: but he that is spiritual, judges all things (mark) all things; yet
he himself is judged of no Man, 1685. Enfield.
1 Cor. 2.14, 15. So here the Natural Man cannot judge of those things he
receives not, for they are foolishness to him: but he is comprehended by the
Spiritual Man, and his foolishness, and is Judged, though he cannot judge the
Spiritual Man.

Do not ye judge them that are within? says the Apostle; (this Power the
Church had, and has) therefore put away from amongst your selves that wicked
person. And did not this Wicked person, think you, profess and plead for
Liberty for his Wickedness, and his Freedom, as he was a Christian, who was
looked upon, as a Member of the Church?

And the Apostle says; For I verily, as absent in body, yet present in spirit,
have judged already, as though I were present, concerning him that has done
this wicked deed, 1 Cor. 5.3, 12. Here the Apostle did Judge, though afar off,
and set up Judgment in the Church against false Liberty, under what pretense
soever it was.

And the Apostle says; Dare any of you, having a matter against a Brother, go
to Law before the Unjust, and not before the Saints. Here the Saints, the
Church, are to Judge of things amongst themselves; and not for the Unjust to
Judge of their Matters. Do ye not know, the Saints shall judge the World? So
the Saints are to judge the Unjust, and not the Unjust to judge their Matters.

And farther the Apostle says; If the World shall be judged by you, (to wit
the Saints) are you unworthy to judge the smaller matters amongst you?

So here it is clear, that the Saints have a Judgment given them of Christ, by
his Power and Spirit, Light and Wisdom, to judge the World, and not to carry
their Matters before the Unjust; but to judge of them amongst themselves: and
if they carry them before the Unjust, they show their unworthiness of the
Saints Judgment.

And further the Apostle says; Know ye not, that we shall Judge the Angels?
(and Angels are Spirits) how much more the things which pertain to this life?

If ye then have Judgment of things pertaining to this life, set them up to
judge, who have least esteem in the Church, 1 Cor. 6. So here it is clear, the
Church of Christ has a Judgment in the Power and Spirit of God, not only to
Judge in things that pertain to this life; but are also to Judge of things
betwixt Brethren, without Brother going to Law with Brother before Unbelievers:
which was a fault, and to be Judged, if they did so.

But also the Saints have a Judgment to judge Angels, that kept not their
Habitations; and the World. And as in Jude; He judged the Angels, that kept not
their habitations; their first state: And did not he Judge in Divine Matters
here? and judged the state of Cain, and Balaam, and Core, and such like
Christians, that were gotten into their steps, and were gone as far as they
was, though they professed themselves Christians? And here again he judged in
Divine Matters, and of their States and Beings; who stood in the Divine
Principle, and who were fallen from it.

And the Apostle says; Try the spirits, and believe not every spirit, 1 John
4. And here again was a Judgment in Divine Matters: And he judged such, as went
out from them; which whilst they were with them, they had sight of things and
openings; but when they went from them, they went from the Anointing: and
therefore he exhorts the Saints to keep to the Anointing. And such as went from
them, that had the Anointing, came to be the Seducers and false Prophets, that
went into the World.

And John had a Judgment to try Sacrifices, and distinguished Cains from Abels;
and by the Spirit of God knew, which God accepted, and which he did not accept:
as in 1 John 3.12. And the Apostle Paul judged and tried such Messengers and
Apostles, and Transformers of themselves, like to the Apostles of Christ: and
would have the Church to try such, and have the same Judgment as he had, 2 Cor.
11.

And the Apostle Peter Judged Ananias and Sapphira, and judged the Thoughts of
Simon Magus, who would have been a worker of Miracles for money: and was not
all this Judgment in Divine Matters? And the Apostle Paul Judged the Preachers
of Circumcision both in the Romans, and in the Galatians. For it was the Faith
and Liberty of those Preachers, to preach up Circumcision, though it was a
wrong Faith: And here did not the Apostle again Judge in Divine Matters?

And James Judged in Matters of Faith, and manifested the living Faith from the
dead one. And also he Judged in Matters of Religion, the vain Religion from the
pure Religion; and distinguished them.

And Paul Judged of the false Brethren, that would spy out the liberty of the
true; to whom he would give no place by subjection, no, not for an hour, that
the Truth of the Gospel might continue with the Saints; as in Gal. 2. And did
not the Apostle here Judge in Divine Matters? And he Judged concerning the
Matters of the Gospel, when some came to pervert them with another Gospel, and
said; The Gospel, which I received, is not of Man, neither was I taught it; but
by the Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1.12. So here was a Judgment to
distinguish the Gospel of Christ from all other Gospels, which was Accursed,
which is after Man, and received of Man, and taught of Man, and not by the
Revelation of Jesus Christ, Gal. 1. And he had a Judgment to know, Who made the
Gospel Chargeable, and who kept it without Charge.

And he set up a Judgment in the Church, that the Believers should not be
unequally yoked; and to see, when Men had a Communion in the Light, and when
they had it in the Darkness; and when with Christ, and when with Baal; and with
the Believer, and Unbeliever; and with the Temple of God, and with Idols: as in
2 Cor. 6. And did he not set up a clear Judgment here in Divine Matters in the
Church?

And the Apostle Judged such Libertines through their knowledge, that could sit
at Meat in the Idol-Temple; which caused the weak Brother to perish through his
knowledge and liberty, for whom Christ died. Now these, it is like, did profess,
it was their Faith, and their Liberty; but did not keep in the Unity of the
true Faith, but went about to destroy it, 1 Cor. 8.

And Peter, he gives Judgment upon the Angels, that sinned, and were cast down
into Hell: and the state of the Old World, and of Sodom, and the state of the
false Prophets then amongst them, that could speak great swelling words of
vanity; and whilst they promised themselves liberty, they themselves were the
Servants of Corruptions. And had not Peter here a Judgment in Divine Matters?
These were such, whose work was to bring into bondage, and these was like the
Dog and Sow, that was washed: which shows, that they had been washed; but was
turned into the Mire again. And the Apostle Paul had a Judgment upon such with
their fair words and men's wisdom, that deceived the hearts of the simple; and
upon such, as served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies, and were
Enemies to the Cross of Christ. And therefore he had a Judgment and Discerning,
who lived in the Cross of Christ, and who did not; and exhorted all to live in
the Cross of Christ, the righteous Power of God, that slew all Deceit, and the
Deeds of the Old Man: agreeable to Christ's words, He that will be my Disciple,
must take up my Cross, and follow me. And was not here a Judgment again in
Divine Matters, and of such as walk in the Divine Power, and such as did not?

And Christ sets up a Judgment in his seven Churches, and commends them, that
did keep in his Judgment, and had tried them, which said, They were Apostles;
which might pretend, they were sent of God and Christ, and were not: But the
Church of Christ had found them Liars. And Christ Commended this Judgment of
the Church of Ephesus, because they had Not born with them, that was evil; but
had tried those false Apostles: And Christ commends this Church, for that they
had hated the deeds of the Nicholaitans, which he also hated: And had not these
Nicholaitans sprung from Nicholas, one of the Deacons? and was not these become
a Sect of Christians? though they might talk and preach of Christ, but Christ
hated them.

And likewise Christ says to the Church of Smyrna, I know the blasphemy of
them, which say, they are Jews, but are not; but are of the Synagogue of Satan.
So the Church is to have a Judgment upon these blasphemers, and are to
distinguish from the Jews in the Spirit, and such as are not, but of the
Synagogue of Satan.

And to the Church in Pergamos Christ had a few things against them, because
thou have there them, that hold the Doctrines of Balaam, etc. And also them,
that hold the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, which I hate. Now, these that held
the Doctrine of Balaam, and the Doctrine of the Nicholaitans, were got into the
Church; and might have looked upon themselves to be high Christians, and took a
great Liberty to go into Balaam's Doctrine, and Nicholas's Doctrine, which was
hated by Christ: but the Church was to keep a Spiritual and Divine Judgment
upon the Heads of all these.

And to the Church of Thyatira says Christ; I have a few things against thee,
because thou suffer the woman Jezabel to teach, which seduces my people,
etc. So here was a Suffering, which should have been a Judgment by Christ's
Spirit, upon that Jezabel, which was erred from his Spirit, and so from Christ:
and such as these were high Preachers. And is not the Church to beware of
suffering such now; lest they come under the Reproof of Christ, for not passing
to Judgment against the false Teacher and Seducer?

And the Church of Sardis, that had a name to live, but was dead, and their
works were not found perfect before God. Therefore here is a Judgment to be set
up in the Church, to Judge all Imperfect Works, and such as would have a Name,
but not the Nature, or a name to live, but are dead: And therefore the Living
must be in Christ, of all Christ's Church, living Members, and live to his
Name. Though this Church had a few Names, that had not defiled their Garments,
that did walk in White; But such as had a Name to live, but are dead, whilst
they are in the dead state, they cannot walk in White, nor Judge in Divine
Matters. And behold, says Christ, I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan,
which say, they are Jews, but are not, but do lie; behold, I will make them to
come, and to worship before my feet.

And to the Church of Laodicea, that was neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm; I
would thou were either cold or hot: I will spew thee out of my mouth, because
thou said thou wast rich, and wanted nothing; when they were wretched,
miserable, poor, blind and naked. Now this was for want of living in the Power
and Spirit of Christ: these could talk of high Experiences, and great
Enjoyments, but was naked, miserable and blind; So lived not in the Power, and
Spirit, and Light, and Righteousness of Christ, by which they might be
clothed, and have the Eternal Riches. So the Church of Christ had a spiritual
Judgment given to them, that are faithful, in his Power and Spirit, and Light
to Judge of Temporal things, and the things of this Life; and to Judge of
Eternal and Divine things and States: and of Angels and Wicked men, and such as
goes from Truth; and of the states of Election, and Reprobation; yea, and of
the Devils, who is out of Truth; being in Christ Jesus, who is the First and
Last, from whom they have the Eternal Judgment, to Judge Eternal, Spiritual and
Divine things: And this Word of Power and Wisdom, by which all things were
made, and by which all things are upheld, in this Word of Wisdom to order all
things to God's Glory, and to Judge of all things in Righteousness.

And the Apostle Judged and set up a Judgment in the Church of Gifts, of
Prophecies, of Mysteries of Faith, and of giving the Body to be burnt, and of
giving Goods to the Poor, and of speaking with Tongues of Men and Angels: And
yet if they had not Love, all this was nothing; but as a sounding Brass, and
tinkling Cymbal. Therefore they are to be tried by the Fruits of the good
Spirit, which is Love. So here the Apostle not only Judged himself in Divine
Matters; but set up a Judgment in the Church in those Spiritual and Divine
Matters.

And the Apostle James here Judges of Fountains, and of the Fig Trees; and of
the Wisdom below, and of the Wisdom from above, and the Fruits of both, Jam. 3.
And Paul Judged in Divine Matters, when he said, The Spirit spoke expressly,
that in the latter times some should depart from the Faith, 1 Timothy 4. And he
Judged in Divine Matters, when he judged all those Teachers, that was
high-minded, and had got the Form of Godliness, but denied the Power; and
termed them like unto Jannes and Jambr^s, which withstood Moses, coming out of
outward Egypt; as these with their Form of Godliness opposes Christ and his
Power, that brings them out of spiritual Egypt now. And was not he a Judge here
in Divine Matters, who judged such, as had gotten the Form of Godliness, but
denied the Divine Power? 2 Timothy 3.

And when the Apostle said; The Priesthood of Aaron was changed, and the Law
was changed, and the Commandment disanulled, that gave them their Tithes; did
not he Judge here in Divine and Spiritual Matters? and was not the Law
spiritual, which served, till the Seed came?

And did not the Apostle Judge in Divine and Spiritual Matters in the Sixth of
the Hebrews, where he says; Let us go on to perfection, not laying again the
foundation of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God, and of the
Doctrine of Baptisms, and of laying on of Hands, and of the Resurrection of the
Dead, and of Eternal Judgment: and this will we do, if God permit, etc. And so
does not the Apostle Judge of such here, That it was impossible for those, who
was once enlightened, and tasted of the heavenly gift, and were partakers of
the Holy Ghost, and had tasted, of the good Word of God, and of the power of
the World to come, if they shall fall away, to renew them again unto
Repentance; seeing, they crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to open shame? Hebr. 6. And was not these Spiritual, Eternal and Divine
Matters and States, that the Apostle Judged of? and have not the Saints the
same Judgment given unto them in the same Spirit? Now has not the Apostles and
the Church a Spiritual Judgment to Judge of Prophets, Mysteries, Faith,
Apostles, Angels, World, and the Devil? and is not this Judgment given them of
God, in Divine Matters, besides the Judgment given them in Matters pertaining
unto this Life?

And had not they Judgment to discern the true Gospel, from the false? and all
such as had a Profession of the Form, and did not live in the power? and such
as spoke the things of God, in the words that Man's wisdom did teach? which
things of God were not to be spoken in the wisdom, which Man's words taught;
but in the Word, which the Holy Ghost taught. And therefore did not the Apostle
exhort to know the Power, and their Faith to stand in the Power of God? for the
Kingdom of God stood not in Word, but in Power.

And had not all the Prophets a Divine Judgment to Judge in Divine Matters? as
see Jeremiah, when he Judged the Prophets. And Ezekiel Judged all such, as came
with a pretense of the Word of the Lord, using their Tongues, and saying, Thus
says the Lord; when the Lord never spoke unto them: as in Jeremiah the 23th,
and in Ezekiel the 13th, and in many other places might be Instanced. And did
not he judge Hananiah, who prophesied falsely? and did not this Hananiah pretend
to speak the Word of the Lord to the Priests and People? as in Jeremiah the
28th.

And did not Isaiah judge in Divine Matters, when he judged the Watchmen, and
the Shepherds? Isa. 56. And did not Micah judge in Divine and Spiritual
Matters, when he said, he was full of the Power by the Spirit of the Lord, and
of Judgment? did not he Judge both of Priests, and Prophets, and Judges, though
they would lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord amongst us, and no evil
can come unto us; yet did not he let them see their States and Conditions, and
divided the precious from the vile? Mich. 3. And so the rest of the Prophets,
you may see here, they Judged for God in his Divine Matters, who served him,
and who served him not, and who lived in truth, and who not; and likewise the
Apostles. And this Divine, Spiritual, Heavenly Judgment was given of God to his
holy Men, and Women.

And they that do Judge in God's Divine Matters, must live in his Divine
Spirit, and Power, and Light now, as they did then; which Spiritual and Divine
Judgment Christ has given to his Church, that be the living Stones, and living
Members, that makes up his spiritual Household, to try Jews, and to try
Apostles, and to try Prophets, and to try Faith, and to try Religions, and to
try Trees and Fruits, and to try Shepherds and Teachers, and to try Spirits. So
the living Members have a living and divine Judgment in the Church of Christ,
which he is the Head of, the Judge of all.

Nay, the Church has a Power given them, which is farther then a Judgment: for
what they bind on Earth, is bound in Heaven by the Power of God; and what they
loose on Earth, is loosed in Heaven by the Power of God: and this Power has
Christ given to his living Members, the Church.

The 20th of the 12th Month, 1685/6. G. F. to Friends.

1686. London.
I came back to London in the First Month 1686. and set my self with all
diligence to look after Friends sufferings; which we had now some hopes of
getting Relief for. The Sessions came on in the Second Month at Hicks's- Hall,
where many Friends had Appeals to be Tried; with whom I was from Day to Day to
advise and see, that no Opportunity were slipped, nor Advantage lost: and they
generally succeeded well. Soon after also the King was pleased, upon our often
laying our Sufferings before him, To give order for the Releasing of all
Prisoners, that were imprisoned for Conscience sake; and which were in his
power to discharge. Whereby the Prison doors were opened, and many hundreds of
Friends, some of whom had been long in Prison, were set at Liberty; and some of
them, who had for many years been restrained in Bonds, Yearly Meeting.
came now up to the Yearly Meeting, which was in the Third Month this Year:
Which caused great Joy to Friends, to see our Ancient, Faithful Brethren again
at Liberty in the Lord's Work, after their long Confinements. And indeed, a
precious Meeting we had; the refreshing Presence of the Lord appearing
plentifully with us and amongst us. After the Meeting I was moved to write a
few Lines, to be sent abroad amongst Friends; the tenor whereof was thus: Dear
Friends,
MY Love is to you all in the holy Seed, Christ Jesus, that bruises the
Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his Works; and who has all Power in
Heaven and Earth given to him. Let every ones Faith stand in him, and in his
Power, who is the Author and Finisher of your Faith. And now ye, who have been
Partakers of his Power, and are sensible of it in this Day of his Power, that
is over all, whose day and power is over darkness and its power: And by his
Power the hearts of the King and Rulers have been opened; by which your outward
Prison-doors have been set open for your Liberty. And therefore my desires are,
that all may be preserved in Humility and Thankfulness, in the sense of the
Mercies of the Lord; and live in the peaceable Truth, that is over all: that ye
may answer God's Grace, and his Light and Spirit in all, in a righteous, godly
Life and Conversation. And let none be lifted up by their outward Liberty, nor
let none be cast down by Suffering for Christ's sake: but all live in the Seed
(which is as Wheat) which is not shaken, nor blown away by the Winds and
Storms, as the Chaff is. Which Seed of Life none below can make higher or
lower: for the Children of the Seed are the Children of the everlasting,
unchangeable Kingdom of Christ and God. So in Christ Jesus, whom God has given
you for a Sanctuary, God Almighty keep you, in whom ye have Life Everlasting,
and Wisdom, which is from above, pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be
entreated, full of Mercy and good Fruits; 1686. London. Yearly Meeting.
that ye all now may be exercised in it, and may practice this Wisdom in your
godly, holy Lives and Conversations: so that this Wisdom may be justified of
all her Children, and they (I say) exercised and preserved in it in this day of
the Power of Christ; in which all his People are made a willing People, to
serve and worship God in Righteousness and Holiness, and in the Spirit and
Truth.

So that none may abuse the Power of the Lord, nor grieve his Spirit, by which
you are sealed, and kept to the day of Salvation and Redemption: But always
exercise your selves to have a good Conscience, void of Offense toward God,
and toward all men; being exercised in Holiness, Godliness and Righteousness,
and in the Truth, and in the Love of it: that ye may all study to be approved
unto God in Innocence, Virtue, Simplicity and Faithfulness; and so laboring
and studying to be quiet in the Will of God in all Conditions. And whatsoever
ye do in Word or Deed, do all in the Name of the Lord Jesus; giving Thanks to
God the Father by him: That he, who is over all, may have the Praise for all
his Mercies and Blessings, with which he does and has refreshed his People,
and by his Eternal Arm and Power has kept and preserved his People to this
day; Glory to his Name over all for ever, Amen! For Christ has called you by
his Grace into One Body, to him the holy Head: And therefore live in Charity,
and in the Love of God, which is the Bond of Perfectness in his Body; which
Love edifies the Body of Christ: which Body and all his Members are knit
together, and increased with the Increase of God, from whom they receive
Nourishment. For by one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, and have been
made all to drink into one Spirit; in which Spirit the Body, and all his
Members have Fellowship with Christ, the Head, and one with another. And so the
Unity of this holy Spirit is the Bond of Peace of all the living Members of
Christ Jesus, of which he is the Spiritual Head, Rock and Foundation. And in
the midst of his Church of living Members Christ exercises his Spiritual
Prophetical Office, to open to them the Mysteries of his Kingdom: And is a
Spiritual Bishop to oversee them, that they do not go astray from the living
God, that made them: and a Shepherd, that feeds them with Bread and Water of
Life from Heaven, and none is able to pluck his Sheep out of his hands: and he
is a Priest, that died for them, and sanctifies them, and presents them to
God; who rules in their Hearts by the Divine Faith, which he is the Author and
Finisher of. And his living Members do praise God through Jesus Christ, in whom
they have Life and Salvation; who reconciles them to God, that they can say,
they have Peace with God through Jesus Christ: and so praise God through him
that was dead, and is alive again, and reigns over all, and lives for
evermore, blessed for ever; Hallelujah, Amen!

Greet one another with an holy Kiss of Charity: and this Kiss of Charity is
above all the Kisses of the World; for Love and Charity bears all things,
believes all things, hops all things, and endures all things. It envieth
not, and Charity vaunteth not it self, nor is puffed up, nor does it behave it
self unseemly: It rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in the Truth. And
Charity is not easily provoked, and thinks no Evil; but suffers long, and is
kind: And Charity never fails. I say, Greet one another with this holy Kiss
of Charity; and Peace be with you all, that are in Christ Jesus, your Life and
Salvation.

The 30th of the 3d Month, 1686. G. F.




I remained for the most part of this Year in London; save that sometimes I got
out to Bednal-Green for a Night or two, Bednal-Green. Enfield. Chiswick.
and some times went as far as Enfield and thereabouts, amongst Friends, and
once or twice to Chiswick, where an Ancient Friend had set up a School for the
Educating of Friends Children: in all which places I found Service for the
Lord. London.
And when I was at London, I spent my time amongst Friends, either in Public
Meetings (as the Lord drew me,) or visiting Friends, that were not well, and in
looking after the Sufferings of Friends. For though very many Friends were
released out of Prisons, yet some remained Prisoners still for Tithes, etc. and
Sufferings of several sorts lay heavy yet on Friends in many places. Yet
inasmuch as many Friends, that had been Prisoners, were now set at Liberty, I
felt a Concern upon me, that none might look too much at Man; but might Eye the
Lord therein, from whom deliverance comes. Wherefore I writ an Epistle to
Friends, and sent it abroad to be read amongst them, as follows: Friends,
THE Lord by his Eternal Power has opened the heart of the King to open the
Prison-doors, by which about Fifteen or Sixteen hundred are set at Liberty; and
has given a Check to the Informers: so that in many places our Meetings are
pretty quiet. So my desires are, that both Liberty and Sufferings, all may be
sanctified to his People; and Friends may prize the Mercies of the Lord in all
things, and to him be thankful, who stilleth the Raging Waves of the Seas, and
allayeth the Storms and Tempests, and makes a Calm. And therefore it is good
to trust in the Lord, and cast your Care upon him, who cares for you. For when
ye were in your Gaols and Prisons, Then the Lord did by his Eternal Arm and
Power uphold you, and sanctified them to you (and unto some he made them as a
Sanctuary;) and tried his People, as in a Furnace of Affliction, both in
Prisons, and spoiling of Goods. And in all this the Lord was with his People,
and taught them to know, that The Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof;
1686. London.
and that he was in all places: who crowns the year with his goodness, Psalm.
65. Therefore let all God's People be diligent, and careful to keep the Camp of
God holy, pure and clean, and to serve God and Christ, and one another in the
glorious, peaceable Gospel of Life and Salvation; which Glory shines over God's
Camp, and his great Prophet, and Bishop, and Shepherd is among or in the midst
of them, exercising his heavenly Offices in them: so that you his People may
Rejoice in Christ Jesus, through whom you have Peace with God. For he that
destroys the Devil and his Work, and bruises the Serpent's Head, is all God's
Peoples heavenly Foundation and Rock to build upon; which was the holy Prophets
and Apostles Rock in days past, and is now a Rock of our Ages: which Rock and
Foundation of God stands sure. And upon this the Lord God establish all his
People, Amen.

London the 25th of the 7th Month, 1686. G. F.




Diverse other Epistles and Papers, relating to Friends and Truth I writ this
Year; whereof one was by way of Exhortation to Friends to keep in Unity in the
Truth, in which there is no Division nor Separation: And thus it was; DEar
Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom ye have all Peace and
Life, and in him there is no Division, nor Schism, nor Rent, nor Strife, nor
Separation: for Christ is not divided, and there can be no Separation in the
Truth, nor in the Light, Grace, Faith and Holy Ghost; but Unity and Fellowship,
and Communion. For the Devil was the first, that went out of the Truth, and
separated from it; and tempted Man and Woman to disobey God, and to go from the
Truth into a false Liberty, to do that which God forbad. And so, it is the
Serpent now, that leads Men and Women into a false Liberty, even the God of the
World, from which Man and Woman must be separated by the Truth; that Christ the
Truth may make them free, and then they are free indeed. And then they are to
stand fast in that Liberty, in which Christ has made them free; and in him (as
I said before) there is no Division, nor Schism, nor Rent, nor Separation; but
Peace, and Life, and Reconciliation to God, and to one another. So that in
Christ, Male and Female are all one: for whether they be Male or Female, Jew or
Gentile, Bond or Free, they are all one in Christ. And there can be no Schism,
Rent or Division in him; nor in the Worship of God in his holy Spirit and
Truth; nor in the pure and undefiled Religion, that keeps from the Spots of the
World; nor in the Love of God, that bears and endures all things; nor in the
Word of God's Grace, for it is pure, and endures for ever. Many, you see, have
lost the Word of Patience, and the Word of Wisdom, that is pure, and peaceable,
and gentle, and easy to be entreated: Then they run into the Wisdom that is
below, that is earthly, sensual and devilish, and very uneasy to be entreated.
And they go from the Love of God, that bears all things, and endures all
things, and thinks no Evil, and does not behave it self unseemly; then they
cannot bear, but grow brittle, and are easily provoked, and run into unseemly
things, and are in that, that vaunteth it self, and are puffed up, and are
rash, heady, high-minded and fierce; and become as sounding Brass, or a
tinkling Cymbal: but this is contrary to the nature of the Love of God, which
is kind, and endures all things, and bears all things. And therefore, all
Dear Friends and Brethren, dwell in the Love of God; for they who dwell in
Love, dwell in God, and God in them. And keep in the Word of Wisdom, that is
gentle, pure and peaceable; and in the Word of Patience, that endures and
bears all things: which Word of Patience the Devil, and the World, and all
his Instruments can never wear out; It will wear them all out: for it was,
before they were; and will be, when they are gone, the pure, holy Word of God,
by which all God's Children are born again, and feed on the Milk thereof, and
live and grow by it. And so, my desires are, that ye may all be of one Heart,
Mind, Soul and Spirit in Christ Jesus, Amen.

G. F.



Soon after this, finding those Apostates, whom the Enemy had drawn out into
Division and Separation from Friends, continued their Clamor and Opposition
against Friends Meetings, both Monthly, Quarterly and Yearly; it came upon me
to write another short Epistle to Friends, to put them in mind of the Evidence
and Seal they had received in themselves by the Spirit of the Lord, that those
Meetings were of the Lord, and accepted by him; that so they might not be
shaken by the Adversaries. Wherefore I writ as follows: My Dear Friends in
the Lord Jesus Christ!
ALL you, that be gathered in his holy Name, ye know, that all your Meetings
for Worship of God, and all your Quarterly-Meetings, and all your
Monthly-Meetings, and all your Womens-Meetings, and all your Yearly-Meetings
are set up by the Power and Spirit of the Lord God, and witnessed by his Spirit
and Power in your Hearts; and by the Spirit and Power of the Lord God they are
established to you, and in the Power and Spirit of the Lord God you are
established in them. And the Lord God has with his Spirit sealed to you, that
your Meetings are of God's Ordering and Gathering; and he has owned them, by
honoring you with his blessed Presence in them: and you have had great
Experience of his furnishing you with his Wisdom, Life and Power, and heavenly
Riches from his Treasure and Fountain; by which many Thanks and Praises have
been returned in your Meetings to his holy, glorious Name. And so, he has
sealed your Meetings by his Spirit to you, and that your Gathering together
has been by the Lord, and to Christ his Son, and in his Name, and not by Man.
And so the Lord has the Glory and Praise of them and in them, who has upheld
you and them, by the Arm of his Power, against all the Opposers and
Backsliders, and their slanderous Books and Tongues. For the Lord's Power and
Seed does reign over them all, in which lie does preserve his Sons and
Daughters to his Glory, by his Eternal Arm and Power, in his Work and Service,
as a willing People in the Day of his Power, without being weary or fainting;
but strong in the Lord, and valiant for his glorious Name and precious Truth,
and his pure Religion: that ye may serve the Lord in Christ Jesus, your Rock
and Foundation, in your Age and Generation, Amen.

London, the 3d of the 11th Month, 1686/7. G. F.




A little after the foregoing was given forth, it came upon me to write
something concerning the state of the true Church, and of the true Members
thereof; which I did, as follows:

Concerning the Church of Christ being clothed with the Sun, and having the
Moon under her feet.
THey are living Members and living Stones, which are built up a spiritual
Household, and are the Children of the Promise, and of the Seed and Flesh of
Christ; and as the Apostle says, Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his Bone.
They are the good Seed, and are the Children of the Everlasting Kingdom written
in Heaven; and have put on the Lord Jesus Christ, and they sit together in the
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and so are clothed with the Sun of
Righteousness, Christ Jesus, and have the Moon under their feet, as Revel. 12.
So all changeable things, that are in the World, and all changeable Religions,
and changeable Worships, and changeable Ways, and Fellowships, and Churches,
and Teachers in the World, are as the Moon: For the Moon changes, but the Sun
does not change. And so the Sun of Righteousness never changes, nor sets, or
goes down: But all the Ways, Religions, and Worships, and Fellowships of the
World, and the Teachers thereof change, like the Moon. But the true Church,
which Christ is the Head of, which is in God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which Church is called The Pillar and Ground of Truth, whose
Conversation is in Heaven; this Church is clothed with the Sun, Christ Jesus,
her Head, who does not change, and has all changeable things under her feet.
These are the living Members, born again of the Immortal Seed, by the Word of
God, and feed upon the Immortal Milk, and live and grow by it. And such are the
New Creatures in Christ Jesus, who makes all things new, and sees the old
things pass away. And his Church, and all his Members, which are clothed with
the Sun, their Worship is in the Spirit, and in the Truth, which does not
change: which Truth the Devil, the foul, unclean Spirit, is out of, and cannot
get into this Worship in Spirit and Truth. And likewise the Church of Christ,
their Religion is pure and undefiled before God, that keeps from the Spots of
the World, etc. and their Way is the new and living Way, Christ Jesus. So the
Church of Christ, that is clothed with the Sun, that has the Moon and all
changeable Religions and Ways under her feet, has an unchangeable Worship,
Religion and Way, and has an unchangeable Rock and Foundation, Christ Jesus,
and an unchangeable High Priest: and so are Children of the New Testament, and
in the Everlasting Covenant of Light and Life.

And now all, that profess the Scriptures both of the New and Old Testament,
and are not in Christ Jesus, the Apostle tells them, they are Reprobates, if
Christ be not in them. And therefore these, that be not in Christ, cannot be
clothed with Christ, the Sun of Righteousness, that never changes. And they
that be not of Christ, be under the changeable Moon, in the World, in the
changeable things, in the changeable Religions and Ways, and Worships and
Teachers, and Rocks and Foundations. But Christ, the Son of God, and Sun of
Righteousness, does not change; in whom his People are gathered, and sit
together in the heavenly places in him: And so are clothed with Christ Jesus,
the Sun, who is the Mountain, that fills the whole Earth with his Divine
Power and Light. And so all his People see him, and feel him both by Sea and
Land; so he is in all places of the Earth felt and seen of all his. And Christ
Jesus says to the outward Professors, the Jews, I am from above, ye are from
below, or beneath; ye are of this World, to wit, that is beneath. And so their
Religions, Worships, Ways, Teachers, Faiths, Beliefs and Creeds are made of
Men, and are below, and of this World, that changes like the Moon; and ye may
see their Religions, Ways, Worships and Teachers, they are all changeable, like
the Moon: but Christ, the Sun, with which the Church is clothed, does not
change, nor his Church; for they are spiritually minded, and their Way, Worship
and Religion is spiritual, from Christ, who is from above, and not of this
World. For Christ has redeemed you from the World, and their changeable
Rudiments and Elements, and old things, and their changeable Teachers, and from
their changeable Faiths and Beliefs. For Christ is the Author and Finisher of
his Churches Faith, who is from above, and says; Believe in the Light, that ye
may become Children of the Light: And it is given them not only to believe, but
to suffer for his Name. So this Faith and Belief is above all Faiths and
Beliefs, which change, like the Moon. And God's People are an holy Nation, a
peculiar People, a spiritual Household, and Royal Priesthood, offering up
spiritual Sacrifice to God, by Jesus Christ; and are zealous of righteous,
godly, good works: and their Zeal is for that which is of God, against the
Evil, which is not of God. And Christ took upon him the Seed of Abraham; he
does not say, the corrupt Seed of the Gentiles: So according to the Flesh, he
was of the holy Seed of Abraham and of David; and his holy Body and Blood was
an Offering, and a Sacrifice for the Sins of the whole World, as a Lamb without
blemish, whose Flesh saw no Corruption. And so by the one Offering of himself
in the New Testament and New Covenant, he has put an end to all the Offerings
and Sacrifices amongst the Jews in the Old Testament. And Christ, the holy
Seed, was crucified, dead and buried, according to the Flesh, and raised again
the third day; and his Flesh saw no Corruption. Though he was crucified in the
Flesh, yet quickened again by the Spirit, and is alive, and lives for evermore;
and has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and reigns over all: and
is the One Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus. And Christ
said, He gave his flesh for the life of the World: And the Apostle says; His
Flesh saw no Corruption: So that which saw no Corruption, he gave for the life
of the corrupt World, to bring them out of Corruption. And Christ said again,
He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has eternal life: for my Flesh
is Meat indeed, and my Blood is Drink indeed. And he that eats my Flesh, and
drinks my Blood, dwells in me, and I in him. And he that eats not his
Flesh, and drinks not his Blood, which is the life of the Flesh, has not
Eternal Life. Now, as the Apostle says, All died in Adam: Then all are dead.
Now all coming spiritually to eat the Flesh of Christ, the second Adam, and
drink his Blood; his Blood and Flesh gives all the Dead in Adam life, and
quickens them out of their sins and trespasses, in which they were dead: and so
they come to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and so are
living Members of the Church of Christ, that he is the Head of; and are clothed
with the Sun, the Sun of Righteousness, the Son of God, that never changes, and
have the changeable Moon under their feet, and all changeable, worldly things
and inventions, and works of men's hands; and do see the People, how that they
do change from one Worship to another, and from one Religion to another, and
from one Way to another, and one Church to another, and yet their hearts are
not changed. And the Letter of Scripture is read by the Christians, like the
Jews; but the Mystery is hid: They have the Sheeps-clothing, the outside, but
are inwardly ravened from the Spirit, which should bring them into the Lamb's
and Sheep's Nature. The Scripture says, All the Uncircumcised must go down
into the Pit: And therefore all must be Circumcised with the Spirit of God,
which puts off the Body of Death, and Sins of the Flesh, that came into Man and
Woman by their Disobedience, and transgressing of God's Commands. I say, all
must be Circumcised with the Spirit, which puts off the Body of Death and Sins
of the Flesh; before they come up into Christ, their Rest, that never fell, and
be clothed with him, the Sun of Righteousness.

G. F.

Kingston.
Toward the latter End of this Year I went down to Kingston to visit Friends
there; and stayed some time at my Son Rouse's near Kingston. While I Was there,
I writ a Paper concerning the Falling away foretold by the Apostle Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.3. Which Paper was, as follows:

THE Apostle says, that there must be a Falling away first, before the Wicked
one, and Man of sin, the Son of Perdition be Revealed, which betrayeth Christ
within, as the Son of Perdition betrayed Christ without: And they, that betray
Christ within, crucify to themselves Christ afresh, and put him to open shame.
Before the Apostles deceased, this Man of Sin and Son of Perdition was
revealed: for they saw the Antichrist come, and false Prophets, and false
Apostles, and Deceivers come, having a Form of Godliness, but denied the Power
thereof. They saw the Wolves dressed in the Sheep's Clothing, and such as went
in Cain's, Corah's and Balaam's way, and Jezabel's; and the Whore of Babylon,
the Whore of Confusion, the Mother of Harlots, and such as were Enemies to the
Cross of Christ, that served not the Lord Jesus Christ, but their own Bellies.
These Christ saw, should come, and said, If it were possible, they should
deceive the Elect; and commanded his Followers not to go after them: And the
Apostle said, Turn away from such; and Christ and his Apostles warned the
Church of Christ of such. And now in this day of Christ, and his Gospel, after
the long Night of Apostasy from the Light, and Grace, and Truth, and Life and
Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Son of Perdition, the wicked One, the Man of Sin is
revealed again; and the inwardly ravening Wolves in Sheeps clothing, and the
Spirit of Cain, Corah, Balaam, Jezabel, the Antichrists, false Prophets, and
false Apostles, and such as are Enemies to the Cross of Christ, who serve not
the Lord Jesus, but their own Bellies; and crucify Christ to themselves, and
put him to open shame. This Spirit have we seen in this Gospel-day of Christ:
but Christ will consume them with the Spirit of his Mouth, and destroy them
with the Brightness of his Coming. But God's People, whom he has chosen unto
Salvation in Christ from the beginning, through the Sanctification of the
Spirit, and the belief of the Truth, stand steadfast in Christ Jesus; and are
thankful to God, by and through his Son, their Rock and Salvation, who is their
Happiness, and eternal Inheritance.

The Apostle says, Ye were as Sheep going astray; but are now returned to the
Shepherd and Bishop of your Souls. So, when People are returned to Christ,
their Shepherd, they do know his Voice, and follow him; and are returned to the
Bishop of their Souls: and then they do believe in him, 1686. Kingston.
and receive Wisdom and Understanding from him; who is from above, heavenly and
spiritual. Then they do Act like spiritual and holy Men and Women; and come to
be Members of the Church of Christ: and then a spiritual Care comes upon the
Elders in Christ, that all the Members do walk in Christ, and in his Light,
Grace, Spirit and Truth, that they may adorn their Confession and Profession of
Christ; and see, that all do walk in the Order of the holy Spirit, and the
everlasting Gospel of Peace, Life and Salvation. And this Order keeps out of
Confusion: for the Gospel of Peace, the Power of God was, before Confusion was.
And all the Heirs of the Gospel are Heirs of its Order, and are in this Gospel,
which brings Life and Immortality to Light in them; by which all Men and Women
may see their Work and Services in it, to look after the Poor, Widows and
Fatherless, and to see, that nothing be lacking: and that all do honor the
Lord in their Lives and Conversations.

When the whole House of Israel were in their Graves and Sepulchers, and were
called, The scattered, dry Bones, yet they could speak, and say; Their Bones
were dry, their Hope was lost, (or they were without Hope) and they were cut
off: so that they were Alive outwardly, and could speak outwardly. So, that
which is called Christendom, may very well be called, The scattered dry Bones,
and they be said to be in their Graves and Sepulchers, dead from the heavenly
Breath of Life, and from the Spirit and Word of Life, that gathers to God:
Though they can speak, and are Alive outwardly; yet they remain in the
Congregations or Churches of the Dead, that want the virtue of Life. For the
Jews, whom God poured his Spirit upon, and gave them his Law; when they
rebelled against the Spirit of God, and turned from God and his Law, then they
came to be dry, scattered Bones, and were turned into their Graves and
Sepulchers. And so Christendom, that is turned from the Grace, and Truth, and
Light of Christ, and the Spirit, that God pours upon all flesh, they are
become the scattered, dry Bones, and are in their Graves and Sepulchers; and
are the Congregations or Churches of the Dead, though they can speak, and are
Alive outwardly.

Christ says, I am come, that they might have life, and that they might have
it more abundantly: And he gave his flesh for the life of the World. And he
says, I am the Resurrection and the Life; and, I am the Way, the Truth and the
Life: No man comes unto the Father, but by me. And Christ is the quickening
Spirit: All being dead in Adam, they are to be quickened and made alive by
Christ, the second Adam. And when they are quickened and made alive by him, then
they do Meet together in the Name of Jesus Christ their Savior, who died for
their Sins, and is risen for their Justification; and so was dead, and is alive
again, and lives for evermore. And all, whom he has quickened and made alive
(even all the living) do Meet in the Name of Jesus, who is alive, and he, their
living Prophet, Shepherd and Bishop, is in the midst of them; and is their
living Rock and Foundation, and a living Mediator between them, and the living
God. And so the Living do praise the living God through Jesus Christ, through
whom they have Peace with God. And so all the Living have Rest in Christ, their
Life; and he is their Sanctification, and their Righteousness, and their
Treasure of Wisdom, Knowledge and Understanding, which is spiritual and
heavenly. And he is the spiritual Tree and Root, which all the Believers in the
Light (the Life in Christ) that do pass from the death in Adam to the Life in
Christ, and overcome the World, and are born of God, are grafted into; even
Christ, the heavenly Tree, which bears all the spiritual Branches or Grafts.
So these do Meet in his Name, and are gathered in him; and do sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus, their Life, who has quickened and made them
alive. And so all the Living do worship the living God in his holy Spirit and
Truth, in which they Live and Walk. And into this Worship the foul, unclean
Spirit, the Devil, cannot get; for the holy Spirit and Truth is over him, and
he is out of it: This is the standing Worship, which Christ set up in his New
Covenant. And they that are quickened, and made alive by Christ, are the living
Stones, and living Members, and spiritual Household and Church, or Congregation
of Christ; who is the living Head and Husband. And they that are quickened, and
made alive by Christ, are a living Church, and have a living Head; and are come
from the Congregations or Churches of the Dead in Adam, where Death and
Destruction talks of God, and of his Prophets and Apostles, in their Wisdom,
that is below, and earthly and devilish, and in the knowledge, that is
brutish, and in the understanding, that comes to naught. For what they know,
is natural, by their natural Tongues, and Arts, and Sciences; in which they
corrupt themselves. This is the state of the Dead in Adam: But the Quickened,
and they that are made alive by Christ, do discern between the Living and the
Dead.

Kingston upon Thames, the 12th Month, 1686/7. G. F.

While I was at Kingston, I writ also another Paper, showing; That the Lord in
all Ages called the Righteous out from amongst the Wicked, before he destroyed
them. Which Paper here follows:

NOah and his Family were called into the Ark, before the Old World was
destroyed with the Flood of Water: And all the Faithful Generation, that lived
before, were taken away, and died in the Faith, before that Flood of
Destruction came upon the wicked Old World.

The Lord did call Lot out of Sodom, before he did destroy and consume it, and
the Wicked there.

Christ said; It cannot be, that a Prophet perish out of Jerusalem: and he
said; O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, which killest the Prophets, and stonest them that
are sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy Children together, as a
Hen gathers her Brood under her Wings! but ye would not, Luke 13.33, 34. And
Christ said unto the Jews; Therefore also said the Wisdom of God, I will send
them Prophets and Apostles, and some of them they shall slay and persecute;
that the blood of all the Prophets, which was shed from the Foundation of the
World, may be required of this Generation; from the blood of Abel, unto the
blood of Zacharias, which perished between the Altar and the Temple. Verily, I
say unto you, it shall be required of this Generation, Luke 11.49, 50 51. And
Christ said to the Jews; Behold, your Houses shall be left unto you desolate,
Matthew. 23.34, etc. And Christ told his Disciples, that the Temple at Jerusalem
should be thrown down, and there should not be one stone left upon another,
that should not be thrown down, Matthew. 24.2. And Christ said to his Disciples,
that he must go to Jerusalem, and suffer many things of the Jews, Elders and
Chief Priests, and be killed; and be raised again the third day, Matthew. 16.21.
And Christ said, When ye shall see Jerusalem compassed with Armies, then know,
the desolation thereof is nigh. And he foretold, that the Jews should fall by
the Edge of the Sword, and should be led away Captive into all Nations; and
Jerusalem should be trodden down of the Gentiles, Luke 21.20, 24. Here ye may
see, how Jerusalem was often warned by Christ, and how often he would have
Gathered them, but they would not, before they were scattered over or into all
Nations, and their Houses left desolate, and their Temple and Jerusalem
besieged with Armies, and destroyed, and thrown down. And though the Disciples
and Apostles of Christ did Meet, with the Elders and Church, at Jerusalem,
after Christ was risen; yet Eusebius reports in his Ecclesiastical History,
That the Christians at Jerusalem had a Vision, or a Revelation to depart out of
Jerusalem. And they being forewarned also by Christ, that When they should see
Jerusalem compassed with Armies, its Desolation was nigh; and that the Temple
should be thrown down, and not one stone left upon another; It Is said, that the
Christians did depart out of bloody Jerusalem, before it and the Temple were
destroyed by Titus, the Emperor, who besieged it with his Armies: who was of
the Gentiles, and destroyed the Temple and Jerusalem, as Christ had fore-spoken
to his Disciples, because of the Wickedness of the Jews, and the Innocent
Blood, that they had shed in it. And so the Lord called his People out of
bloody Jerusalem, before he destroyed it. And it is said, that Titus did
destroy the Temple and Jerusalem about Two and forty years, after they had
C^ucified Christ, and he was risen again; and that with so great a destruction,
that the Jews never did build again the City Jerusalem, nor the Temple (as
Sodom was never built again, nor the Cities of the Old World:) But the Jews for
above these Thousand years have been, and are a scattered People in all Nations
to this day; and Christ (whom they Crucified) and his Doctrine is preached, and
set over them: and the Gentiles, whom they hated, have Received, and do Receive
him and his Doctrine, and do praise God for it through Jesus Christ, Amen.

And God called his People out of Egypt, after he had poured out his Ten
Plagues upon the Egyptians; when he had destroyed the First Birth of Egypt,
then the Lord brought his People out of Egypt. And after the Lord had clearly
brought his People out of Egypt, then the Lord destroyed Pharaoh, and all his
Hosts and Chariots.

And John says, that he heard a Voice, saying; Come out of her my People (to
wit, out of Babylon, the false Church) that ye be not Partakers of her sins,
and that ye receive not of her plagues: for her sins have reached to Heaven,
and God has remembered her Iniquities, Rev. 18.4, 5. Here ye may see, that God
did call his People out of spiritual Babylon, before the Lord destroyed her,
and cast her down, to be utterly burnt with fire, ver. 8, 9. and 21.

Was not Nebuchadnezzar's Empire thrown down and ended by Cyrus and Darius, who
were of the Seed of the Medes, before Cyrus and Darius gave forth their
Proclamations for all the Jews to go into their own Land, out of Babylons
Captivity? And was there not a Prophecy of Cyrus, That he should subdue
Nations, and that the Lord would loose the Loins of Kings before him, and break
in pieces the Gates of Brass, and cut in sunder the Bars of Iron, and open the
two-leav'd Gates; and that the Gates should not be shut? And the Lord said;
This is for Jacob, my Servant's sake, and for Israel mine Elect, Isai. 45. And
was not this fulfilled in Cyrus's and Darius's time? For did not then the Jews
go out of Captivity into their own Land, Ezra 1.2, 3, 4. and chapter 6.1. and 12.
and Isa. 44.28. and 45.13. And was not this Prophecy of Isaiah fulfilled, when
the Children of Israel came out of Babylon? And were not the Assyrians, that
carried away the Ten Tribes, subdued? and the Babylonians, that carried away
the Two Tribes, were they not subdued in the days of Cyrus and Darius, in whose
days the Loins of Kings were loosed, and the two-leav'd Gates of Brass and Iron
were opened? and so had not Israel and Jacob their Liberty by them in their
days, to go into their own Land?

And here in England, was it not observed, that most of the honest and sober
People were turned out of the Army, and their Commissions, Offices and Places
taken from them, because they could not join with Others in their Cruelty and
Persecuting? And Others laid down their Commissions themselves, and came out
from amongst those Persecutors, before they were overthrown, and brought to
Confusion. All that are Wise, see these things, and learn by such Examples and
Way-marks, to shun such Bogs. And the Righteous are safe, that do keep in
Christ, their everlasting Sanctuary, that changes not; in whom they have Rest
and Peace with God, Amen.

Kingston the 29th of the 12th Month, 1686/7. G. F

While I was at Kingston, one day, as I was meditating on the Things of God,
some particular Observations arose in my mind, concerning the first, and the
second or last Adam. As that --

THE First Man Adam was made on the Sixth day of the Week; and Christ, the
Second Adam, was Crucified on the Sixth day of the Week.

The first Adam was betrayed by the Serpent in the Garden of Eden: And Christ
our Savior, the second Adam, was betrayed by Judas in a Garden near Jerusalem.

Christ arose from the dead on the First Day of the Week; and they that do
believe on him, are entered into Christ, their Rest: The Christians do Meet
together to worship God on the First Day of the Week; and on the First day of
the Week it was, that God said, Let there be Light, and there was Light. The
Jews Rest was on the Seventh-day of the Week, which was given to the Jews, as a
Sign of the Eternal Rest of the Lord, sanctifying them, after they came out of
the Land of Egypt: for before that time the Lord had not given to Man and Woman
his outward Sabbath Day to keep, neither in the Old World, nor after in
Abraham's time, nor in Isaac's, nor in Jacob's time; until the Jews came out of
Egypt to Mount Sina in the Wilderness. And then, there the Lord gave the Law,
and his Sabbath, as a Sign in the Old Covenant, of Christ the Eternal Rest in
the New Covenant: and they that believe, do enter into Christ, their Rest.

Adam the first Man, is the Root, from whence we all spring naturally: And
Christ is called the last, or second Adam, because he is the Beginning and Root
of all them, that are spiritual.

The first Adam was made a living Soul: And Christ, the last Adam, was made a
quickening Spirit.

Christ by the Grace of God tasted death for every Man, that they might all
come into Favor with God; and that every Tongue should Confess, that Jesus
Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father.

I writ also a Paper there, Concerning the Two Seeds, distinguishing the Seed,
wherein the Blessing is received, from the Seed which the Curse remains upon.
Of that Paper the following is a Copy.

THE Lord said to Abraham, In thy Seed shall all the Nations of the Earth be
blessed, Genesis 22.18. And thy Seed shall be as the Stars of Heaven, and as the
Sand, which is upon the Seashore, and as the Dust of the Earth, that cannot be
numbered, Chap. 13.16. and 15.5. and 22.17. Now, in this Seed all Nations and
Families of the Earth are blessed; but not in the Seed of Evil Doers and of
Falsehood, nor in the Seed of the Adulterer and the Whore, Isa. 1.4. and 57.3,
4. for the Seed of the Wicked shall be cut off, 1687. Kingston.
says the Lord, Psalm. 37.28. The Lord said to David, That his Seed should
endure for ever, Psalm. 89.36. And again it is said, Psalm. 102.28. The Children
of thy Servants shall continue, and their Seed shall be established before
thee. Now ye may see, that here is a Distinction betwixt the Two Seeds: for the
Seed of Evil Doers, and of the Adulterer and Whore, and of the Wicked shall be
Cut off; and so it is not blessed. But Christ bruises the Head of the Serpent
and his Seed, which he sows in them, that do disobey and transgress God's
Command, and rebel against God's good Spirit. This Wicked Seed of the Serpent
is Cursed, and is an Enemy to the Seed, in whom all are blessed: But Christ
bruises the Head of this cursed Seed of Enmity, and destroys the Devil and his
Works; and in his Seed are all blessed, and all are in Unity in this Seed. And
all the Children of the Seed are the Children of the Kingdom of God, and of
Christ, and are blessed with faithful Abraham: and who are of the saving,
divine, precious Faith, are of Abraham, and walk in the Steps of the Seed and
Faith of Abraham, and are blessed with him, yea, all Nations, and all the
Families of the Earth.

And the Lord said to Abraham, Thy Seed shall be a stranger in a Land, that is
not theirs, and shall serve them; and they shall afflict them Four hundred
years: and that Nation, whom they shall serve, will I judge; and afterward
shall they (to wit, God's Seed) come out with great Substance, Genesis 15.13, 14.
Here ye may see, That which Afflicts God's Seed, he will judge, and did judge;
for he did destroy the First-birth of Pharaoh, and overthrew him and his Host.

And an holy Man said; Except the Lord of Sabbath had left us a Seed or
Remnant, we had been as Sodom, etc. that is, destroyed and burnt. But in the
Seed, which destroys the Devil and his Works, and bruises the Head of the
Serpent and his Seed, are all Nations and Families of the Earth blessed.

Christ, according to the flesh, was of Abraham, and of David: for he took not
on him the Nature of Angels, but the Seed of Abraham; in which Seed all Nations
and Families of the Earth are blessed. And so they, that are of his Seed, are
of the Generation of Christ; and so are Flesh of his Flesh, and Bone of his
Bone. -- Now, all Nations and Families of the Earth must be in this holy Seed,
if they have the Blessings, and are blessed. And out of the Mouth of this
Seed's Seed shall not God's Word depart; but shall Remain and abide in the
Mouth of this Seed's Seed, in which they are blessed, Isa. 59.21. So it is not
the First-birth's talking of the Words of Christ, the Seed, in whose Mouth the
Word of God does not abide, that makes an outward Profession, like the Jews,
that did kill and persecute the Prophets, and crucified Christ the Seed and
Substance of the Law and Prophets, which the Jews professed in words, but they
denied Christ, the Seed and Life. And all the Christians (so called) that do
profess the Scriptures in Words, and are not in the Seed Christ, they are in
the Confusion, and are like the Jews: And so, neither Jews nor Christians are
blessed, except they be in Christ, the Seed of Life.

But though Christ is said to be of the Seed of David, and of Abraham, as his
Generation is declared by Matthew and Luke; yet Christ was not born of the Will
of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God. For he was Conceived by the
Holy Ghost; and not by the Will of Man, but by the Will of God, born of the
Virgin, and supposed to be the Son of Joseph, but was the Son of God: and his
Name was called Jesus, because he should save his People from their sins; and
Emanuel, God with us. And Christ took not upon him the Nature of Angels, but
the Seed of Abraham (as I said before) and so was made of the Seed of David
according to the Flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with Power, according
to the Spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead, Romans 1.4. So the
Generation of Christ is a Mystery. And Christ saw his Seed or Word to grow up
in his Disciples; And Christ in you, the hope of Glory, the Apostle calls The
Mystery, which has been hid from Ages and Generations; but now is made
manifest to the Saints, or sanctified Ones, Col. 1.26, 27. Whom we preach;
warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom, that we may present
every Man perfect in Christ Jesus, v. 28. For in Christ, the second Adam, all
are made perfect and complete; and in Adam in the Fall, all are deformed and
made imperfect: So out of Christ all Mankind are Imperfect and Deformed: Let
them paint, and dress themselves with the Sheep's Clothing, and with the Form
of Godliness, of the Prophets, and Christ's and his Apostles Words never so
much; yet if Christ be not in them, they are Uncompleat, Imperfect, Deformed,
Reprobates. But the Apostle tells the Church of Christ, Ye are complete in
Christ, which is the Head of all Principality and Power, Col. 2.10. (for he
has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, Matthew. 28.18.) And so all the
Saints are made Perfect and Complete in Christ Jesus; blessed be the Lord God
over all for ever, through Jesus Christ, Amen, Amen.

Kingston, the 15th of the 1st Month, 1686/7. G. F.

Quickly after this I returned to London, London.
and continued there a Month in the Service of the Lord; being daily exercised
either in public Meetings, or more particular Services relating to the Church
of Christ: as visiting such as were sick or afflicted, and writing Books or
Papers for the spreading of Truth, or refuting of Error. Now as it was a time
of general Liberty, the Papists appeared more open in their Worship, than they
were formerly wont to do; and many unsettled People going to view them at it, a
great Talk there was of their Praying to Saints, and by Beads, etc. Whereupon I
writ a short Paper concerning Prayer; which was as follows:

CHrist Jesus, 1687. London.
when he taught his Disciples to pray, said unto them, When ye do pray, say;
Our Father, which art in Heaven, hallowed be thy Name, etc. Christ does not
say, that they should pray to Mary, the Mother of Christ; nor does he say, that
they should pray to Angels, or to Saints, that were dead. Christ did not teach
them to pray to the Dead, nor for the Dead. Neither did Christ or his Apostles
teach the Believers to pray by Beads, nor to sing by Outward Organs: but the
Apostle said; he would Sing and Pray in the Spirit: for the Spirit it self
makes Intercession; and the Lord, that searches the heart, knows the mind
of the spirit.

To take Counsel of the Dead, was forbidden by the Law of God; but they were to
take Counsel of the Lord: And he has given Christ in the New Covenant, in his
Gospel-Day, to be a Counselor and a Leader to all his Believers in his Light.
And Men are not to run to the Dead for the Living: for the Law and Testimony of
God forbids it. Those Jews, that refused the running Waters of Shiloh, the
Floods and Waters of the Assyrians and Babylonians came over them, and carried
them into Captivity: And they that refuse the Waters of Christ, they are
overflown with the Flood of the World, that lies in Wickedness. They that
asked Counsel of Stocks and Stones, their state was in the Spirit of Error and
Whoredom; and they were gone a whoring from God, Hos. 4.12. And they, that
joined themselves to Baal-Peor, and ate the Sacrifices of the Dead, provoked
the Lord's Anger, and brought the Lord's Displeasure upon them, Psalm. 106.28,
29. So here ye may see, The Sacrifices of the Dead were forbidden. The Living
know that they shall die; but the Dead know not any thing, neither have they
any more a Reward: for the Memory of them is forgotten, Eccles. 9.5. Woe to the
rebellious Children, says the Lord, that take Counsel, but not of me; and that
cover with a Covering, but not of my Spirit, that they may add sin to sin, Isa.
30.1.

G. F.

When I had stayed about a Month in London, I got out of Town again: For by
reason of the many Hardships I had undergone in Imprisonments, and other
Sufferings for Truth's sake, my Body was grown so Infirm and Weak, that I could
not bear the Closeness of the City long together; but was fain to go a little
into the Country, where I might have the benefit of the fresh Air. At this time
I went with my Son-in-Law William Mead, to his Country House called Gooses in
Essex (about thirteen miles from London; Essex. Gooses.
) where I stayed about Two Weeks: and among other Services, that I had there, I
writ the following Paper; being --

A Distinction between the True Offering and Sacrifice, 1687. Gooses.
and the False, in the Old and New Covenant.
THE Lord says, He that sacrifices to any God, save unto the Lord only, he
shall be utterly destroyed, Exodus 22.20. So no God is to minded, nor sacrificed
to, but the Lord God: It is death to Sacrifice to any other God, save the Lord.
The Lord says also, Thou shall not offer the blood of my Sacrifice with
leavened Bread, Exodus 23.18. So that sour, heavy Leaven must not be offered
with the Lord's Sacrifice. And again the Lord says; Thou shall not build an
Altar of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy Tool upon it, thou have polluted
it, Exodus 20.25. Therefore have a care of polluting the Altar with your own
Tools, you that profess to offer the Spiritual Sacrifice.

Jonah said; He would sacrifice unto the Lord with the voice of Thanksgiving,
when he was in the Fish's belly; and there he prayed unto the Lord, Jonah 2.
For Jonah in the Whale's belly had no Lambs, nor Rams, nor outward Sacrifices
to offer.

The Lord forbids his People to Sacrifice with Harlots, Hosea 4.14. And the
Lord forbids his People to offer Sacrifice of the Blind, Lame, Sick, or that
which was deformed, or had any blemish; as in Mal. 1. and many other places. So
they that offer Spiritual Sacrifice, must not offer the blind, lame, blemished
or deformed Sacrifice to God.

The Scribe says unto Christ, To love God with all the heart, and with all the
understanding, and with all the soul, and with all the strength, and to love
his Neighbor as himself, is more than all whole burnt Offerings and
Sacrifices, Mark 12.33. And when Jesus saw, that he answered discreetly, he
said unto him; Thou art not far from the Kingdom of God, v. 34. Now ye may see,
to Love God, and their Neighbor as themselves, was more than their whole
Burnt-Offerings and Sacrifices in the time of the Law: And therefore all
Offerings and Sacrifices in the time of the Gospel, if there be not love to
God, and to their Neighbor as themselves, avails nothing.

David said, Let them sacrifice a Sacrifice of Thanksgiving, and declare his
Works with rejoicing, Psalm. 107.22. These are the Sacrifices that the Lord
requires of his People, more than Outward Sacrifices. And David said, Let my
Prayer be set forth before thee, as Incense; and the lifting up of mine Hands,
as the Evening Sacrifice, Psalm. 141.2. So here David looks upon his Prayer to
the Lord, and the lifting up of his Hands to him, to be accepted with the Lord,
as much as the Outward Incense, and the Outward Evening Sacrifice. Again David
says, The Sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: a broken and a contrite heart,
O God, thou will not despise, Psalm. 51.17. (See also Isa. 57.15. and chap.
66.2.) These be the Sacrifices that David said God would accept, and not
despise; which are beyond the unbroken Spirit, and uncontrite heart, with
Outward Offerings and Sacrifices.

The Adversaries of the Jews would have joined with them toward the building
of the Temple, saying unto them; Let us build with you, for we seek your God,
as ye do; and we do sacrifice unto him. But the Jews refused them, and said;
You have nothing to do with us, to build an House unto our God, Ezra 4.2, 3. So
here ye may see, that God's People refused their building with them, and their
sacrifice. And Solomon says, The Sacrifice of the Wicked is an Abomination to
the Lord, Prove. 15.8. (See also Isa. 1.11. and chap. 66.3.) Solomon also says,
Better is a dry Morsel, and quietness therewith, than an house full of
Sacrifices with strife, Prove. 17.1. Now let all People Consider, what Good your
house full of Sacrifices does with strife, when a dry Morsel, and Quietness
therewith is better? And Consider all People, If ye live in Wickedness, your
Sacrifice is an Abomination to the Lord.

Again, Solomon speaking of the Sacrifice of Fools, says; They consider not,
that they do evil, Eccles. 5.1. Fools are such, as do not walk in the Spirit of
God, or begin in the Spirit, and end in the Flesh, like the foolish Galatians:
for the Spirit of God is the Spirit of Wisdom and Understanding, and cannot
Join with the Sacrifices of the Dead, nor of the Fools, nor of the Wicked,
whose Sacrifice is Abominable; who grieve and quench the Spirit of God: by
which Spirit of God the Spiritual and Righteous offer up Spiritual Sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

The Apostle Paul says, he was the Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles,
ministering the Gospel of God, that the offering up of the Gentiles might be
acceptable, being sanctified by the Holy Ghost, Romans 15.16. So ye may see, that
all the acceptable Offerings and Sacrifices to God must be sanctified by the
Holy Ghost. The same Apostle says to the Corinthians; Ye are bought with a
price: therefore glorify God in your Body, and in your Spirit, which are
God's, 1 Cor. 6.20. And to the Romans he says; I beseech you, Brethren, by the
Mercies of God, that you present your Bodies a living Sacrifice, holy,
acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable Service, Romans 12.1. Now this is
the duty of all true Christians.

Peter also says in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ; Ye also as
lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer up
spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 2.5. So every
Man and Woman must come to the Spirit of God in their own hearts, if they do
offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. For as Christ
says, Every Sacrifice shall be salted with salt, Mark 9.49. And in the Old
Testament ye may see, All their outward Offerings, they were to season them
with salt, Levit. 2.13. a Type and Figure of Christ, who gave himself for us,
an Offering and a Sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling savor, Ephesians. 5.2.
Therefore all his People must be baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire,
that they may be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice salted with salt, with
the Spirit of Grace, that is poured upon all: so that they may offer up this
spiritual Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.

Samuel said to King Saul; Has the Lord as great delight in Burnt-offerings
and Sacrifices, as in obeying the voice of the Lord? behold, to obey is better
than Sacrifice; and to hearken, than the fat of Rams, 1 Samuel 15.22. So ye may
see, All Offerings and Sacrifices are nothing, if there be not an hearkening to
the Lord in his Spirit, and an obeying of his voice. And Christ told the Jews,
that were outward Sacrificers, that he would have Mercy, and not Sacrifice: and
bid them Go and learn, what that means, Matthew. 9.13.

Gooses, the 28th of the 2d Month, 1687. G. F.

The beginning of the Third Month I returned to London, London. Yearly Meeting,
and continued there, till after the Yearly Meeting, which began on the
sixteenth of the same, and was very large; Friends having more freedom to come
up out of the Countries to it, by reason of the general Toleration and Liberty
now granted. The Meeting lasted several days; and at the Close thereof it was
upon me to write the following Lines, to be dispersed amongst Friends every
where, as -- A Word of Counsel and Caution to them to walk circumspectly in
this time of Liberty.

Dear Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ,
THE Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power having supported you in all your
Sufferings, and great spoiling of Goods, and tedious Imprisonments, only for
serving and worshipping the living God, that made you; who gave up Wife and
Children, and Goods, and suffered the spoil of them, and Imprisonment for his
Truth and Name's sake; And now the Lord, by his Infinite Power and Mercy,
having been pleased to open the King's heart toward you, by which you are set
at Liberty from the Gaols, and the Spoilers of your Goods are stopped, whereby ye
may follow your Callings and Husbandry, and confess Christ Jesus, and call him
Lord by the Holy Ghost, in your Assemblies and Meetings, without being cast
into Gaols, or having your Goods spoiled. And now, Dear Brethren, a great
Concern lies upon me from the Lord to Write unto you, That none may abuse this
Liberty, nor the Mercies of the Lord, but prize them: for there is great danger
in time of Liberty, of getting up, and getting into Ease, and Looseness, and
false Liberty. And now seeing, that ye have not the outward Persecutors to War
withal in sufferings; with the spiritual Weapons keep down that, which would
not be subject to Christ: that he, the Holy One, may reign in your hearts. So
that your Lives, Conversations and Words may preach Righteousness and Truth:
1687. London. Yearly Meeting.
That ye may all show forth good Ensamples of true Believers in Christ, in
Virtue and Holiness, Answering that which may be known of God in all People,
that ye are the Sons and Daughters of God; Standing fast in that righteous,
holy Liberty in Christ, that just and holy One, that has made you free, over
the loose or false; shunning the occasions of vain Disputes, and foolish
Questions of Men of corrupt Minds: For the Serpent was the first Questioner of
Eve, who drew her and Adam out of the Truth. Therefore as ye have received
Christ, all Live and Walk in him, who bruises the Serpent's Head, who is your
safe Sanctuary; in whom ye have Election, Reconciliation and Peace with God.
And therefore live in the Peace, which ye have from Christ, which is not of
this World; and be at peace one with another, and seek the peace of all Men in
Christ Jesus: for blessed are the Peacemakers. And labor to exercise a good
Conscience toward God, in obedience to him, in what he requires; and in doing
to all Men the thing, that is just and honest in your Conversations and Words;
giving no Offense to Jew nor Gentile, nor to the Church of God. So that ye may
be as a City set on God's Sion-Hill, which cannot be hid; and may be Lights to
the dark World, that they may see your good Fruits and Works Righteous and
Holy, and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven: for he is glorified in your
bringing forth good Fruits, as ye abide in Christ, the Vine, in this his day of
Life, Power and Light, thas shines over all. And therefore all you, that
believe in the Light, walk in the Light, as Children of the Light and of
Christ's everlasting Day; that in the Light ye may have Fellowship with the
Father and the Son, and one with another: keeping in the Unity of his holy
Spirit, in the Bond of his holy Peace, in his Church, that he is Head of. And
my desire is, that God's Wisdom every where may be justified of her Children,
and that it may be showed forth in Meekness, and in the Fear of the Lord in
this his Day, Amen.

G. F.


By that time the Yearly Meeting was over, I was very much wearied and spent:
wherefore about a Week after the Meeting I got out of Town to a Friend's House
a little beyond Edmunton, Edmunton South-street. Winchmore-hill. Berry-street.
where, and at Southstreet I abode some time, and had Meetings amongst Friends
there; and at Winchmore-hill and Berry-street. And having my mind continually
exercised in the Things of God, the sense of his Infinite Goodness and Mercy to
Mankind, in visiting them, after they had transgressed and rebelled against
him, and providing a Way and Means for their Return to him again, was very much
upon me; And in the Opening of the Spirit of Truth I writ the following Paper
on that Subject:

GOD, who made all Men and Women, 1687. Berry-street.
though they have transgressed his Commands and Laws, and rebelled against him,
and hated his Light, and grieved his Spirit, and walked despitefully against
his Spirit of Grace; yet God, who is merciful, would have all to be saved, and
come to the knowledge of the Truth. And all that come to the Knowledge of the
Truth, must know it in their inward parts; I say, the Grace and Truth, which
comes by Jesus, all that do know and find, do know and find it in their hearts
and inward parts. And such do find the hidden Man of the heart, and the Pearl,
and the Leaven, and the lost piece of Silver, and the Kingdom of Heaven within.
For until all come to the Light and Truth in their hearts, they have been
strangers to these things, in Adam in the Fall, from the Image of God, and his
Light, Power and Spirit, and Kingdom. But Christ, that never fell, brings Man
and Woman again, that follow him, to know these things, and to know the Truth,
him the Savior, and brings them into his Image, and his everlasting Kingdom.

The Devil, who is out of the Truth, tempted Man and Woman to disobey God; and
so drew them into the Fall from the Truth. So it is the Devil, that has
stopped Men's Eyes, and Ears and Hearts from the Truth, who is called The God of
the World; who has blinded the Eyes of Infidels, or Heathen. But Christ, who
bruises the Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his Works, does open
Men's Hearts, and Eyes and Ears, who is their Savior and Redeemer, and gives
Life Eternal to his People, that obey him and his Truth. Blessed be the Lord
for ever through Jesus Christ, who has tasted death for all Men, to bring them
out of the death of Adam; and is a Propitiation for the sins of the whole
World, and gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified of in due time. For
as by Adam's transgression and disobedience, Death and Condemnation came upon
all Men; so by Christ's Obedience unto Death, Justification of Life is come
upon all Men: and He that believes in Christ, has eternal life; but he that
does not, is condemned already. But God would have all Men to be saved, and
come unto the knowledge of the Truth, as it is in Jesus, who is their Savior;
and in him there is no Condemnation.

G. F.

After I had been a while here, I went to a Monthly Meeting at Enfield, and
from thence with some Friends to Hartford; Enfield. Hartford.
where I stayed three or four days, visiting Friends both at their Public
Meetings on the First Day of the Week, and at their Quarterly-Meetings both of
Men and Women: and good Service for the Lord I had amongst them. Then passing
from thence to Waltham-Abby, I had a very good Meeting with Friends there;
Waltham-Abbey.
and the next day went from thence to another place, to compose a Difference,
which, for want of a right Understanding of each other, had happened between
some Friends. I returned to Waltham that night; 1687. Waltham. Essex. Gooses.
Wanstead. Barking. Gooses.
and the next day went with some Friends to Gooses, which is William Mead's
House in Essex.

Here I stayed some Weeks, yet was not Idle, but often visited the Meetings
thereabouts: as at Wanstead, Barking, and at John Hardings. And betwixt Meeting
and Meeting I writ many things for spreading of Truth, and for the opening
Peoples Understandings to receive it. One was a Paper, proving from the
Scriptures, that People must Repent, before they can receive the Gospel, and
the holy Spirit, and the Kingdom of God, or be baptized. And this was it.

JOhn the Baptist came Preaching in the Wilderness of Judea, saying; Repent ye:
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. 3.2. And when John the Baptist was
cast into Prison, Mark says; That Jesus came into Galilee, preaching the Gospel
of the Kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled, and the Kingdom of
God is at hand: Repent ye, and believe the Gospel, Mark 1.14, 15. Matthew also
says; From that time Jesus began to preach, and to say, Repent, for the Kingdom
of Heaven is at hand, Matthew. 4.17. And when Christ sent forth his Twelve
Disciples, two and two, they went out, and preached, that Men should Repent,
Mark 6.12. Christ said to the Jews, Except ye Repent, ye shall all likewise
perish, Luke 13.3, 5. And when the Publicans and Sinners came to hear Christ,
and the Pharisees and Scribes murmured, saying, This Man receives sinners, and
eats with them, Luke 15.1, 2. Christ reproved them by a Parable, and then
told them; Joy shall be in Heaven over one sinner, that Repents, more than
over ninety and nine just persons, which need no Repentance, ver. 7. And adds,
There is Joy in the presence of the Angels of God over one sinner, that
Repents, ver. 10. And Christ, after he was Risen, said unto his Disciples,
That Repentance and Remission of sins should be preached in his Name among all
Nations, beginning at Jerusalem, Luke 24.47. Peter said unto the Jews, Repent,
and be baptized every one of you in the Name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission
of sins; and ye shall receive the Gift of the Holy Ghost, Acts 2.38. And Paul
said, The times of this Ignorance God winked at; but now commands all Men
every where to Repent, Acts 17.30. Simon Magus was called to Repentance, if he
had regarded it, Acts 8.22. And the Apostle Paul did preach at Damascus, and at
Jerusalem, and throughout all the Coasts of Judea, and then to the Gentiles
(turning them from Darkness to the Light of Christ, and from the Power of Satan
to God) that they should Repent and turn to God, and do works meet for
Repentance, Acts 26.20.

Now here ye may see, that People must Repent, before they do believe, and are
baptized, and before they receive the Holy Ghost, and the Kingdom of God; And
they must Repent of their vain Life and Conversation, before they do receive
the Gospel; and must be turned from Darkness to the Light of Christ, and from
the power of Satan unto God, before they do receive his Holy Spirit, and his
Gospel of Life and Salvation. The Lord does command all Men every where to
Repent, and do works meet for Repentance: So they must show forth, 1687. Gooses.
that their Lives and Conversations, and Tongues are changed; and that they do
serve God in the Newness of Life, with new Tongues and new Hearts.

Gooses the 6th Month, 1687. G. F.

Another short Paper I writ about the same time, showing, Wherein God's People
should be like unto him. It was thus:

GOD is Righteous: and he would have his People to be righteous, and to do
righteously. And God is Holy: and he would have his People holy, and to do
holily. And God is Just: and he would have his People to be just, and to do
justly to all. God is Light: and his Children must walk in his Light. And God
is an eternal, infinite Spirit: and his Children must walk in the Spirit. God
is Merciful: and he would have his People to be Merciful. God's Sun shines upon
the Good and the Bad, and he causes the Rain to fall upon the Evil and the
Good: so should his People do good unto all. God is Love: and they that dwell
in love, dwell in God. Love works no Ill to his Neighbor: therefore Love is
the fulfilling of the Law, Romans 13.10. And the Apostle says, All the Law is
fulfilled in one word, even in this, Thou shall love thy Neigbour as thy self,
Gal. 5.14. As the Father has loved me, so I have loved you: continue ye in my
love, John 15.9. This should be the practice of all God's People.

Gooses the 6th Month, 1687. G. F.

And because most People would own and Confess, that God's People should be
thus; but few knew, how to come to this state: Therefore in the Openings of the
Spirit of Truth I writ another short Paper, directing to The right Way and
Means, whereby People might come unto Christ, and so be made like unto God.
That was thus:

CHrist says, I am the Way, the Truth and the Life; no Man comes unto the
Father, but by me, John 14.6. And again, No Man can come to me, except the
Father, which has sent me, draw him, John 6.44. Now, what is the Means, by
which God does draw People to his Son, but by his holy Spirit, who pours out
of his Spirit upon all Flesh (that is, all Men and Women.) And by this holy
Spirit the holy and righteous God does draw People from their Unrighteousness
and Unholiness to Christ, the righteous and holy One, the great Prophet in his
New Covenant and New Testament, whom Moses in the Old Covenant and Testament
said, God would raise up, like unto him, and whom People should hear in all
things: and they that would not hear him, should be Cut off. Now they, that do
not hear the Son of God, the great Prophet, do not mind the drawing of the
Father by his holy Spirit to his Son: But they, that do mind the drawings of
the good Spirit of the Father to his Son, the Spirit does give them
Understanding to know God, and Jesus Christ, which is Eternal Life. And then
they do know, that Jesus Christ is the Way, the Truth and the Life, and that
none can come unto God, but by and through his Son Jesus Christ; who is their
Shepherd to feed them at his Pastures and Springs of Life; and his Sheep do
know his holy Voice, in whom there was no sin, and in whose mouth there was no
guile; and an Hireling they will not hear, for he cares not for the Sheep: for
they are not the Hireling's, but Christ's; who has laid down his Life for his
Sheep. And he that robs and steals his Neighbor's Words, and climeth up
another way, and enters not by the Door, he is a Thief and a Robber: But
Christ is the Door into his Sheepfold, for his Sheep to enter in by. And so
they know, that Christ is the Bishop of their Souls, to see, that they do not
go astray from God, nor out of his Pastures of Life: And they do know, that
Christ is their Mediator, and makes their Peace with God: And they do know,
that Christ is their High Priest, made higher than the Heavens, and has died
for their sins, and does cleanse them with his Blood, and is risen for their
Justification, and is able to the utmost to save all, that come to God by him.

Gooses, the 6th Month, 1687. G. F.

Before I left this place, I writ another Paper, the Scope whereof was to show,
by many Instances taken out of the holy Scriptures, That the Kingdom of God,
which most People talk of at a distance, and refer altogether to another life,
is in some measure to be known and entered into in this life; but that none can
know an Entrance thereinto, but such, as are Regenerated and Born again. Of
that Paper the following is a Copy:

CHrist says, Except a Man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God,
John 3.3. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh; and that which is born of
the Spirit, is spirit, ver. 6. (So, Except a Man be born of Water and of the
Spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, ver. 5. And John, writing to
the seven Churches in Asia, calls himself their Brother, and Companion in
Tribulation, and in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.9. Here
you may see, that John was in the Kingdom; so, he was born again: for he did
not only see the Kingdom, but was in it.

And John says; Behold, what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the Sons of God: therefore the World knows us not,
because it knew him not, 1 John 3.1. And, Beloved, now are we the Sons of God,
ver. 2. And, If ye know, that he is Righteous, ye know, that every one, that
does Righteousness, is born of him, Chap. 2.29. And, Whosoever is born of God,
does not commit sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because
he is born of God, Chapter 3.9. Again John says, Let us love one another: for love
is of God: and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God. He that
loves not, knows not God; for God is love, Chapter 4.7, 8. Again, Whosoever
believes, that Jesus is the Christ, is born of God, Chapter 5.1. And, Whatsoever
is born of God, overcomes the World: and this is the Victory, that overcomes
the World, even our Faith, ver. 4. Were not these, that were Born of God, in
the Kingdom of God? And seeing John says, Every one that does Righteousness, is
born of God; do not such see the Kingdom of God, that stands in Righteousness,
and enter into it?

Peter, in his first general Epistle to the Church of Christ, says; As
newborn Babes desire the sincere Milk of the Word, that ye may grow thereby, 1
Pet. 2.2. And he tells them, they were a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood,
an holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they should show forth the praises of
him, who had called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, ver. 9. And
that, as lively stones, they were built up a spiritual house, an holy
Priesthood to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ,
ver. 5. Did not these Newborn Babes, these lively Stones, spiritual Household,
Royal Priesthood, holy Nation and chosen Generation, who were called out of
darkness into Christ's mavelous light, see, and enter into his holy Kingdom,
being Heirs of the same? who were Born again, not of corruptible Seed, but of
incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever, 1 Pet.
1.23. And had not such an Entrance ministered to them into the everlasting
Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ?

James, in his general Epistle to the Church of Christ, says; Has not God
chosen the poor of this World, rich in Faith, and Heirs of the Kingdom, which
he has promised to them that love him? James 2.5. The Apostle Paul says; God
sent forth his Son, made of a Woman, etc. to redeem them that were under the
Law; that we might receive the Adoption of Sons: And because ye are Sons, God
has sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father.
Wherefore thou art no more a Servant, but a Son; and if a Son, then an Heir of
God through Christ, Gal. 4.4, 5, 6, 7. The same Apostle says; As many as are
led by the Spirit of God, they are the Sons of God: And tells the Saints at
Rome, Ye have received the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father.
The Spirit it self bears witness with our spirit, that we are the Children of
God: And if Children, then Heirs; Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ: if
so be we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together (namely with
Christ) Romans 8.14, 15, 16, 17. Now seeing, they are the ( Sons of God, that are
led by the Spirit of God, and the Spirit bears witness unto their Spirit,
that they are the Children of God, and Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with
Christ: Are not all these Children of God Heirs of the righteous, glorious
Kingdom of God? and do they not see it, and enter into it?

The Lord says in Hosea 1.10. Where it was said unto them, Ye are not my
People; there it shall be said unto them, Ye are the Sons of the living God.
Did not this relate to the Gospel-days of the New Covenant? see Romans 9.26. And
what the Lord said by the Prophet Jeremiah, Chapter 31.1. the Apostle applies to
the Gospel-days, and says; Be ye separate, says the Lord, and touch not the
Unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye
shall be my Sons and Daughters, says the Lord Almighty, 2 Cor. 6.18. Are not
these the Children, that see, and enter into the righteous Kingdom of God, that
separate from that which is Unclean, and touch it not?

The Lord says also by Isaiah: I will say to the North, Give up; and to the
South, Keep not back: Bring my Sons from far, and my Daughters from the ends of
the Earth, Isa. 43 6. Then does not he bring them to his Kingdom of Glory, that
stands in Righteousness and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost?

And the Lord said to Job, When the Morning-stars sang together, and all the
Sons of God shouted for Joy, Job 38.7. Where did these Sons of God shout for
joy? Was it not in his Kingdom of Glory?

Christ says, The least in the Kingdom of God is greater than John, Luke 7.28.
And in Chap. 16.16. he says, The Law and the Prophets were until John: since
that time (viz. since the Law, and the Prophets, and John) the Kingdom of God
is preached, and every Man presses into it.

The good Seed are the Children of the Kingdom, Matthew. 13.38. And the righteous
shall shine forth, as the Sun, in the Kingdom of their Father, ver. 43. And
Christ said unto his Disciples; Unto you it is given to know the Mysteries of
the Kingdom of God, Mark 4.11. And Christ lifted up his Eyes upon his
Disciples, and said; Blessed be ye poor: for yours is the Kingdom of God, Luke
6.20. And the Apostles preached the Kingdom of God. These were Born again: that
saw and knew the Kingdom of God, preached it.

Christ said to his Disciples; Fear not, little Flock, for it is your Fathers
good pleasure, to give you the Kingdom, Luke 12.32. And, I appoint to you a
Kingdom, said Christ, as my Father has appointed to me, Chap. 22.29. The Lord
said; He that overcomes, shall Inherit all things: and I will be his God, and
he shall be my Son, Rev. 21.7. And John says; I have written unto you, Young
men, because ye are strong, and the Word of God abides in you, and ye have
overcome the wicked One, 1 John 2.14. And Christ, by whom are all things, is
said To bring many Sons to Glory, Hebr. 2.10.

Christ said, Woe unto you Scribes and Pharisees, Hypocrites; for ye shut up the
Kingdom of Heaven against Men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer
ye them, that are entering, to goin, Matthew. 23.13. He also said, Woe unto you
Lawyers; for ye have taken away the Key of Knowledge: ye entered not in your
selves; and them that were entering in, ye hindered, Luke 11.52. Christ gives
unto his Children the Keys of the Kingdom, his Spirit: but the Scribes, and the
Pharisees, and the Lawyers, great Professors, who were erred from the Spirit,
like the great Professors in our Age, that scoff at the Spirit, and draw People
from the Spirit of God within, these shut up the Kingdom from Men, and draw
People from the Key of Knowledge, and the Key of the Kingdom. For no Man knows
the things of God, but by the Spirit of God; for the Things of God are
spiritually discerned. So the Spirit is the Key, by which the Kingdom of God,
and the Things of God are revealed, and discerned, and known, according to 1
Cor. 2.10, 11, 13, 14. The Apostle names some in his Epistle to the Colossians,
and says; These are my Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God, Col. 4.11. And
he tells that Church, that God has delivered us from the power of darkness,
and has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son, Chap. 1.13. So ye may
see, these were born again, that were translated into the Kingdom of Christ;
and were Fellow-workers unto the Kingdom of God.

Christ exhorts his Disciples to Love, and to do Good; that they might be the
Children of their Father, which is in Heaven, Matthew. 5.45. And he bids them be
perfect, even as their Father, which is in Heaven, is perfect, ver. 48. And the
Apostle says to the Church at Philippi; That ye may be blameless and harmless,
the Sons of God, without Rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse Nation;
amongst whom ye shine, as Lights in the World, holding forth the Word of Life,
etc. Phil. 2.15, 16. And writing to the Church of the Thessalonians, he puts
them in mind, how he had exhorted them, That they would Walk worthy of God, who
had called them into his Kingdom and Glory, 1 Thessalonians. 2.12.

The Lord had promised by the Prophet Joel, that he would Pour out his Spirit
upon all Flesh, and that Sons and Daughters should Prophecy; Old men should
dream Dreams, and Young Men see Visions, Joel 2.28. Now the Cause, that Sons
and Daughters, Handmaids, Servants, Young Men and Old men have not these
heavenly Visions, Dreams and Prophecies, is, because they are Erred from the
Spirit of God, which he pours upon them: but as many as are led by the Spirit
of God, are the Sons of God.

John says, Christ was the True Light, which lights every Man, that comes
into the World, John 1.9. And that, As many as received him, to them gave he
power, to become the Sons of God, ver. 12. which were born not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, ver. 13. Now, the
Reason, why People do not become the Sons of God, is, because they do not
receive Christ. The Jews, the great Professors, which had the Promises,
Prophecies, Figures and Shadows of him, they would not receive him, when he
came. And now the Priests, and high Professors of Christ, they are so far from
receiving the Light of Christ, and believing in it, that they have hated the
Light, and scoff at it, calling it a Natural Conscience; and some have called
it Jack in the Lanthorn. Such are not like to become the Sons of God, nor to
see the glorious Kingdom of Christ, which stands in Righteousness, Peace and
Joy in the Holy Ghost. For the Light, that shines in the heart, gives the Light
of the Knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus. And they that
do not receive Christ Jesus, but hate his Light (which is the Life in him) and
yet profess him in words; such neither know the Children of the Light, nor true
Fellowship in the Light, nor the Kingdom of God, that stands in Righteousness,
Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost: but by the Light they are condemned. And this
is the Condemnation, that Light is come into the World, and Men love Darkness
rather than Light, because their deeds are evil. For every one that does evil,
hates the Light, neither comes to the Light, lest his deeds should be
reproved, John 3.19, 20. But the Children of the Light, that walk in the Light,
they come to heavenly Jerusalem, and to the City of the living God, and to the
innumerable Company of Angels, and to the general Assembly, and Church of the
First born, that are written in Heaven; and can sing Hallelujah!

Gooses, the 2d of the 7th Month, 1687. G. F

Having now been somewhat more than a quarter of a Year in the Country, London
I returned to London, somewhat better in health, than formerly; having
received much benefit by the Country-Air. And it being now a time of General
Liberty, and great Openness amongst the People, I had much Service for the Lord
in the City; being almost daily at Public Meetings, and frequently taken up in
Visiting Friends, that were sick, and in other Services of the Church. I
continued at London about Three Months: and then finding my strength much
spent, with continual laboring in the Work of the Lord, and my Body much
stopped for want of fresh Air, Kingston.
I went down to my Son Rouse's by Kingston; where I abode some time, and
visited Friends at Kingston. While I was there, it came upon me to write a
Paper concerning the Jews, showing; How by their Disobedience and Rebellion
they lost the holy City and Land. By which Example the prosest Christians may
see, what they are to Expect, if they continue to disobey, and provoke the
Lord. Of that Paper the Copy here follows:

THE Lord gave the Jews in the Old Testament the Land of Canaan, and they built
the Temple at Jerusalem to worship in; and it was called The Holy Temple, and
Jerusalem was called The Holy City, and Canaan, The Holy Land. But when the
Jews rebelled against the good Spirit, which God gave them to instruct them,
and rebelled against his Law, 1687. Kingston.
and set up Idols and Images, and defiled the Land and the City; the Lord sent
his Prophets to Cry against them, and to bring them back again to his Spirit,
and to his Law, and so to God, to serve and worship him, that they might not
worship Images and Idols, the works of their own hands. But instead of
hearkening to God's Prophets, they persecuted them; and at last killed his Son
Christ Jesus, and persecuted his Apostles. But Christ told the Jews, that both
their City and Temple should be laid Waste, and they should be scattered over
all Nations: And it was so, when Titus the Roman Emperor came, and took
Jerusalem, and destroyed the City and Temple; which was a Day of Vengeance upon
the Jews, for all their Idolatries, and their Wickedness, and for the Innocent
blood they had shed, both in City and Country: And they were driven out of
their own City and Land, and scattered over all Nations. And the Jews had never
power to get the ^and since, nor to build Jerusalem, nor the Temple: But the
Turk has both the Land of Canaan, and that which is called, The City
Jerusalem. Now, the Turk neither makes Images, nor Worships Images: And so it
is a just Hand of the Lord, that he should be over the persecuting, Idolatrous
Jews, so that they cannot defile the Land of Canaan now with Images and Idols,
for the Turk has it; who neither makes Images, nor Idols, nor worships them.
And the Jews must never hope, believe nor expect, that ever they shall go again
into the Land of Canaan, to set up an outward Worship at Jerusalem, and there
for their Priests to offer outward Sacrifices of Rams, Sheep and Heifers, etc.
for Burnt-Offerings: for Christ, the one Offering, has offered himself once
for all; and by this one Offering he has perfected for ever, them that are
sanctified. And Christ has changed the Priesthood of Aaron, that offered
Sacrifices, which was made after the power of a Carnal Commandment; but Christ
was made after the power of an endless Life, a Priest for ever, who was holy
and harmless, and separate from Sinners; and is a Priest made higher than the
Heavens. This is the Priest, that gives power to all that receive him, to
become the Sons and Daughters of God: And Jerusalem, that is above, is the
Mother of all the Sons and Daughters of God; which is free: but Jerusalem that
is below, is in bondage with her Children. And they that are the Children of
Jerusalem, that is above, do not look down at Jerusalem, that is below; but
they look at Jerusalem that is above, which is their Mother. Christ said,
Neither at Outward Jerusalem, nor in the Mountain of Samaria should God be
worshipped; but God should be worshipped in Spirit and in Truth: for he is a
Spirit, and such he seeks to worship him, John 4. This is the Worship, that
Christ set up above Sixteen hundred years ago: And therefore the Idolatrous
Jews must never think to Offer their outward Offerings and Sacrifices, nor set
up their outward Worship at Jerusalem, in the holy Land of Canaan more. For
Christ, by the Offering up of himself once for all for the Sins of the whole
World, has ended all the Jews Offerings; and changed the Priesthood, and the
Law, by which it was made: and has blotted out the Handwriting of Ordinances,
which commanded both Priests and Offerings, and triumphed over them. And so he
is the Offering and Sacrifice of all the Children of the New Testament, and New
Covenant, and heavenly new Jerusalem, that is above; and he is their Prophet,
that opens to them; and Shepherd, that feeds them; and Bishop, that oversees
them; and Priest, that died for their Sins, and is risen for their
Justification, and sanctifies them, and presents them to God. So he is the one
Mediator betwixt God and Man, even the Man Christ Jesus.

Kingston, the 9th of the 10th Month, 1687. G. F.

Guilford.
After this I went from Kingston to Guilford, to visit Friends there, and stayed
three days with them; and had a large and very good Meeting there on the
First Day of the Week. After which I came back to Kingston again, Kingston.
and tarried there about Two Weeks longer, visiting the Friends, and having
Meetings amongst them, both at their Public Meeting House, and in their
Families. Many things I writ, while I was now at Kingston; amongst which the
following Paper was one:

GOD so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
believes in him, shall not perish (mark, not perish) but have everlasting
life, John 3.16. And again he says; He that believes on the Son of God, has
(mark, has) everlasting Life, ver. 36. So these Believers have Everlasting
Life, while they are upon the Earth. And, he that believes on Christ, is not
condemned: but he that believes not, is condemned already, and the wrath of
God abides on him. And, He that hears Christ 's word, and believes on God
that sent him, has (mark has) everlasting life, and shall not come into
Condemnation; but is passed from death (the death in the first Adam) to life
(the life in Christ, the second Adam) John 5.24. And that Meat, which Christ
does give, endures unto Everlasting Life, as in John 6.27. And the Water, that
Christ does give, shall be in him that drinks it, a Well of water springing up
into everlasting life, John 4.14. Christ said to the Jews, Search the
Scriptures, for in them ye think ye have eternal life; and they are they, which
testify of me: And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life, John 5.39,
40. Here ye may see, the Eternal Life is to be found in Christ, and not in the
Scriptures, which testify of him, the Life. Christ's Sheep, that hear his
Voice, and know and follow him, he gives unto them Eternal Life; and they shall
not perish, neither shall any pluck them out of his hand. They shall not pluck
Christ's Sheep, to whom he has given Eternal life, out of his Eternal hand.
Christ said to Martha, I am the Resurrection, and the Life: he that believes
in me, though he were dead (mark, though he were dead) yet shall he live;
(mark, live, though he were dead) and whosoever lives, and believes in me,
shall never die. Believe thou this? Martha said, Yea, Lord, John 25.26. This
is the true and substantial Belief, which they that do believe, shall not
perish, but have Everlasting life. John says, This is the Record, That God
has given to us Eternal Life; and this Life is in his Son, 1 John 5.11. The
Life was manifested, and we (says he) have seen it, and bear witness, and show
unto you that Eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto
us, 1 John 1.2. So these were the Believers, that had Eternal Life in the Son
of God, and showed it unto others. He that has the Son, has life (says John)
and he that has not the Son of God, has not life, 1 John 5.12. Christ says,
Every one that has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father, or
Mother, or Wife, or Children, or Lands for my Names sake, shall receive an
hundred fold, and shall inherit everlasting life, Matthew. 19.29. And the Wicked,
that do not receive Christ, shall go into everlasting punishment: but the
Righteous into everlasting life. And the true Servants of God have their fruits
unto holiness, and their End is everlasting life. For the Wages of Sin is
death: but the Gift of God is everlasting life, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
And such have a Building of God, an House not made with hands, eternal in the
Heavens. Therefore I desire, that God's People may endure all things, that they
may obtain this Salvation, which is in Christ Jesus, with Eternal Glory, a
Glory, which is Eternal: For Christ being made perfect, became the Author of
Eternal Salvation to all them, that obey him. And this Eternal Salvation is
above an External Salvation: for they come to receive an Eternal Inheritance,
and live in the possession of the everlasting Gospel of Joy, Comfort, Peace and
Salvation; having eternal and everlasting life in Christ Jesus, which shall
never die.

Kingston, the 6th of the 11th Month, 1687. G. F.

Another Paper I writ there, Concerning the Stone spoken of by Daniel, Chap. 2.
which became a great Mountain, and filled the whole Earth; showing, that
thereby was set forth the Kingdom and Power of Christ.
WHen Christ, the Stone, that became a great Mountain, and filled the whole
Earth, had broke to pieces the Head of Gold, and the Breast of Silver, and the
Belly of Brass, and the Legs of Iron, and the Feet part Iron part Clay (which
were the four Monarchies, to wit, the Babylonian and Mede, the Persian, the
Grecian, and the Roman) and had ended the outward Jews Typical Kingdom; Daniel
says, In the days of these Kings shall the God of Heaven set up a Kingdom,
which shall never be destroyed, Dan. 2.44. Christ says; All Power is given
unto me in Heaven and in Earth, Matthew. 28.18. And he says, My Kingdom is not
of this World, John 18.36. And Christ is the Image of the Invisible God, the
Firstborn of every Creature. For by him were all things created, that are in
Heaven, and that are in Earth, visible, and invisible, whether they be Thrones,
or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers: all things were created by him, and
for him; and he is before all things, and by him all things consist, Col. 1.15,
16, 17. Here ye may see, All things Consist by Jesus Christ, and all things
were Created by Christ, and for him, whether they be things in Heaven, or
things in Earth, visible or invisible, they were Created by him and for him;
yea, Thrones, Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, these were all created
by him and for him. So Christ is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, Rev. 19.16.
And the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Chap. 1.5. And out of his Mouth goes
a sharp Sword, with which he shall smite the Nations; and he shall rule them
with a Rod of Iron: As the Vessel of a Potter shall they be dashed in pieces,
who do not obey him, who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords. This is Christ, by
whom all things were made, who does rule the Nations, who says; I am Alpha and
Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, the First and the Last: So he is over all
Nations, and above them all. Now we must understand, this Rod of Iron, by which
Christ, who is the First and Last, does rule the Nations, is a Figurative
Speech of Christ, who is Ascended into Heaven, and is at the right hand of God;
yet all Power in Heaven and Earth is given unto him, and All things were
created by him and for him: So then, they are Christ's, and he has power over
all things; for all are his. So, as the Scripture says, By me Kings Reign, and
Princes decree Justice, Prove. 8.15. But if they abuse his Power, and do not do
Justice, as is decreed by Christ, the King of Kings and Lord of Lords, the
First and the Last; they must feel and know the weight of his Rod of Iron, by
which he will rule such, as abuse his Power, and do not do Justice (that is
decreed by him) who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and rules
in the Kingdoms of Men.

Kingston, the 11th Month, 1687. G. F.

Several other things I writ, while I was now at Kingston: for my Spirit being
continually exercised toward God, I had many precious Openings of Divine
Matters; and diverse places of Scripture, both in the Old Testament and in the
New, relating to a state of Regeneration, and Sanctification, etc. were brought
to my remembrance by the holy Spirit: some of which I committed to writing, and
were as follows:

THey that Touched the dead, were unclean, and were to be cleansed by the Water
of Purification, Numb. 19. And they which touch the dead Doctrines or Faiths,
and let them in, burden the pure, and defile and make themselves unclean; until
the Spring of the Water of the Word do arise, and wash and cleanse them: for
all the Dead in Adam in the Fall are Unclean, and they must be washed by
Christ, in his Blood and Water of Life, who quickens, and makes alive.

A Dwarf might not come near, to Offer upon God's Altar; but he might eat ot
the holy Bread, that he might grow: Levit. 21.20. etc. So the Newborn Babes
may eat of the Milk of the Word, that they may grow thereby and increase. And
he that had any Blemish, might not come near to Offer upon God's Altar: neither
might any thing be Offered upon God's Altar; that had any Blemish, or was
Unclean, Lev. 21. And it is said, The Ungodly shall not stand in the Judgment,
nor Sinners in the Congregation of the Righteous, Psalm. 1.5. But God stands
in the Congregation of the Mighty, Psalm. 82.1.

The Camp of God was to be kept Clean and Holy: All that, which was unclean, or
defiled, was to be kept out of God's Camp in the Old Testament. And in the New
Testament, all that is defiled and unclean, must be kept out of God's Kingdom;
the new and heavenly Jerusalem, that is from above. All was to pass through the
Fire (even of those things, that would bear the Fire) and to be purified by
Fire and Water, before the People might come into God's Camp, Numb. 31. So all
must be Circumcised, and Baptized with the Holy Ghost and with Fire, and be
cleansed with the Blood of Christ, and washed with the Water of the Word,
before they come into the Kingdom of God, and into heavenly Jerusalem.

The Apostle Paul says, We know, that if our earthly House of this Tabernacle
were dissolved, we have a Building of God, an House not made with Hands,
eternal in the Heavens. For in this we groan, earnestly desiring to be clothed
upon with our House, which is from Heaven, that mortality might be swallowed up
of life, 2 Cor. 5.1, 2, 4. Here is [WE in the Earthly House of this
Tabernacle;] which [We] are they, that have received Christ, and are become the
Sons of God, and New Creatures, and Children of the Light, that do believe in
Christ's Light: who have an Eternal House in the Heavens, where Mortality is
swallowed up of Life; in which House from Heaven they will not groan.

And Peter said; I think it meet, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, to stir
you up, by putting you in remembrance, knowing, that shortly I must put off
this my Tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has showed me, 2 Pet. 1.13,
14. So Peter knew, he must put off this Tabernacle shortly; but as long as he
was in it, he did stir up the Saints to their duty in holiness, that they might
remember it, after he was deceased.

The Apostle Paul says; The first Man is of the Earth, Earthly, (mark,
Earthly, 1 Cor. 15.47. And as we have born the Image of the Earthy, we shall
also bear the Image of the Heavenly, (mark, the Heavenly, ver. 49. And, We have
this Treasure in earthen Vessels, etc. 2 Cor. 4.7. And I live (said he) yet not
I, but Christ lives in me, Gal. 2.20. who is the Life of all God's People.

And Christ said to the Jews; That the Dead are raised, even Moses showed at
the Bush, when he calls the Lord, the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac,
and the God of Jacob: for he is not the God of the Dead, but of the Living; for
all live unto him, Luke 20.37, 38. So, None of us lives to himself, and no man
dies to himself: For whether we live, we live unto the Lord; and whether we
die, we die unto the Lord. Whether we live therefore, or die, we are the
Lord's. For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might
be Lord both of the dead and living, Romans 14.7, 8, 9. For all died in Adam: and
Christ by the Grace of God tasted death for every Man, that they might come out
of the death in Adam, to the Eternal life in Jesus Christ. Who is also a
quickening Spirit: for as in Adam all died; even so in Christ shall all be made
alive. So Christ, that Died and Rose again, is Lord both of the Living, and of
the Dead: for the Living live to the Lord, and die in him, and are blessed.

All Christendom say, that they do believe in God, and in Christ, and that they
do believe Moses and the Prophets, and preach Christ, Moses, and the Prophets:
So their Words and Writings are preached and printed; and ye say, ye do believe
them. But now what Life do ye live? Are ye through the Law dead to the Law,
that ye may live unto God? And are ye Crucified with Christ? and does Christ
live in you? And is the Life, that ye now live in the flesh, by the faith of
the Son of God, and ye do not live, but Christ lives in you, who gave himself
for you? Is this your present Life? for the Just live by the faith which Christ
is the Author and Finisher of: by which holy, divine and precious Faith they
have Victory over that, which is vile and unholy, and is not divine; and in
this Faith they do please God, and have Access to God and his Son, who
fulfilleth the Law and the Prophets. For the Law and the Prophets were until
John; and since that, the Kingdom of God has been preached, and Men do press
into it: And the Least in the Kingdom of God is Greater than John, though he
was the greatest Prophet born of a Woman. So see, whether ye are in the
Kingdom, that stands in Peace and Righteousness and Joy in the Holy Ghost, or
not. Christ, who is the Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every
Creature, was before any Creature; for by him were all things created, that are
in Heaven and that are in the Earth, visible or invisible, whether they be
Thrones, or Dominions, or Principalities, or Powers, all things were created by
him and for him, and he was before all things, and by him all things consist:
And he is the Head of the Body, the Church, and is the beginning, the
Firstborn from the dead. So here ye may see, that all things were made by
Christ Jesus, and all things were created for Christ Jesus, and by him all
things consist and have their being; who is the Firstborn from the dead, and
dies no more. And it pleased the Father, that in him all Fullness should dwell;
and by Christ to reconcile all things unto himself, whether they be things in
Heaven, or things in the Earth. And in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom
and Knowledge; who is the Head of all Principality and Power: for all Power in
Heaven and in Earth is given to him, the Firstborn of every Creature, and the
Firstborn from the dead, who lives for evermore in his power over all; the
Lamb slain from the Foundation of the World: and while the World's Spirit rules
in men's hearts, they do not know Christ, nor the beginning nor ending of the
Work of God. Christ was outwardly crucified and slain, without the Gates of
Jerusalem, by the disobedient Jews: And they that hate the Light of Christ, and
disobey his Gospel, and quench his Spirit, and are erred from his Faith, do
crucify to themselves Christ afresh. So Adam and Eve, and their Children, that
disobeyed God, did slay the Lamb; and the blind Jews, that disobeyed God,
crucified Christ Jesus: and the outward Christians, that live and walk not in
Christ, but in Sin and Evil; though they do make an outward Profession of
Christ, yet they do Crucify to themselves Christ afresh. But as to Christ
himself, he is Ascended far above all Principalities, Thrones, Powers and
Dominions; so that they cannot put him to death, or Crucify him any more, as
to himself: But what the Killers, and Crucifiers, and Persecutors do now upon
the Earth, it is against Christ, as in themselves, and in his Members; as
Christ said to Saul, Why Persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4. For what is done to his
Members, Christ takes as done to himself, Matthew. 25.40, and 45. And they, that
did not visit Christ, but persecuted him in his Members, they persecuted Christ
in themselves first.

The Serpent, that Enemy to Man and Woman, and Satan, that Adversary to Man's
prosperity, and the Devil, the destroyer, the God of the World and Prince of
the Air, that rules in the hearts of the Disobedient, he got in by
disobedience. But Christ bruises his head, breaks his power to pieces, and
destroys the Devil and his Works; and through death destroys death, and the
Devil, the power of death. And so Christ, the Light and Life, has all power in
Heaven and Earth; and opens the Prison-doors, and the Eyes of the blind, and
takes Captive him, that has led into Captivity, and gives Gifts unto Men. And
so Christ binds the strong man of sin, and spoils his goods (for Christ is
stronger than the Devil) and casts him out; Hallelujah! For the strong man of
sin is the God of the World, and his House is the whole World, that lies in
Wickedness: And the God of the World has kept his house, and his goods have
been in peace; until a stronger than he comes, and binds the Devil, and casts
him out; and then destroys him and his goods. And so Christ, the Son of God,
who is stronger than the Devil, having destroyed the Devil and his Works,
sets up his House? and all the Believers in the Light are the Children of
Light, and are of the Son of God's spiritual House, and the Son of God is over
his House for evermore: Glory to God in the Highest, through Jesus Christ, Amen.

God spoke by the mouth of all his holy Prophets concerning Christ Jesus, his
Son, the holy One: so they were holy men, and not unholy, that God spoke by.
And therefore all, that name the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, are to depart
from Iniquity.

Kingston upon Thames, the 11th Month, 1687. G. F.

I returned to London toward the latter end of the Eleventh Month 1687.
Chiswick. Hammersmith.
visiting Friends in the way at Chiswick, and at Hammersmith, where I had Two
Meetings, one upon a First Day, and the other upon the Occasion of a Marriage
there; at which were many of the World's People, amongst whom I had a very
seasonable Opportunity of opening the Way of Truth.

London.
Being come to London, I visited Friends Meetings in and about the City, as the
Lord led me; in whose Service I continued laboring in the City, until the
middle of the First Month 1687/8. Enfield. Barnet. Waltham-Abbey.
At which time I went down toward Enfield, and visited Friends there, and
thereabouts; and at Barnet, and Waltham-Abbey, and other places; where I had
many Meetings, and very good Service amongst Friends: in which I spent several
Weeks. And then returned to London: London. Yearly Meeting.
where I continued laboring in the work of the Gospel of our Lord, until after
the Yearly Meeting was over; which this Year was about the beginning of the
Fourth Month. A precious Meeting it was, and a very refreshing Season Friends
had together; the Lord vouchsafing to honor our Assemblies with his living and
glorious Presence, in a very plentiful manner. At the Conclusion of the Meeting
I felt a Concern upon my Spirit, to give forth the following Paper, to be
dispersed abroad amongst Friends.

ALL you Believers in the Light, that are become Children of the Light, walk as
Children of the Light, and of the Day of Christ, and as a City set on a Hill,
that cannot be hid; and so let your Light shine, that People may see your good
Works, and glorify your Father, which is in Heaven. For a good Tree brings
forth good Fruit: and therefore be ye Trees of Righteousness, the planting of
the Lord, having Fruits unto Holiness; and then your End will be Everlasting
life. And such are the Wells and Cisterns, that hold the living Water of life.
which springs up in them to Eternal life: so ye may all drink Water out of your
own Cisterns, and running Water out of your own Wells; and eat every one of his
own Fig Tree, and of his own Vine: having Salt every one in your selves, to
season every one's Sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ; and like unto
the Wise Virgins, that have Oil in their Lamps, and follow the Lamb, and enter
in with the Bridegroom. 1688. London. Yearly Meeting.
And now is the time to Labor, while it is day (yea, the Day of Christ) and to
stir up every one's pure Mind, and the Gift of God that is in them; and to
improve your Talents, that Christ has given you, that ye may profit: And to
walk every one according to the Measure, that Christ has given you; for the
Manifestation of the Spirit of God is given to every one to profit withal. Now
consider, what you have profited in spiritual and heavenly things, with the
heavenly Spirit of God: and be not like the wicked and slothful, that hid his
Talent; from whom it was taken, and he cast into Utter darkness. And a Dwarf,
or one that had any blemish, was not to come nigh to Offer upon God's Altar:
And therefore mind the Word of Wisdom, to keep you out of that which will
Corrupt you, and Blemish you; and that ye may grow in Grace, and in Faith, and
in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ: and feeding upon the Milk of the
Word, may grow by it, that ye may not be Dwarfs; and so to Offer your spiritual
Sacrifice upon God's holy Altar. For the Field or Vineyard of the slothful
grows over with Thorns and Nettles, and his Walls go down: such are they, that
are not diligent in the Spirit of God, and the Power, which is the Wall, a sure
Fence: and the Spirit of God will Weed out all, both Thorns, and Thistles, and
Nettles out of the Vineyard of the heart. And you, that are Keepers of others
Vineyards, see, that you keep your own Vineyard clean with the Spirit and Power
of Christ: and sanctify your selves, and sanctify the Lord in your hearts,
that ye may be a holy People to the Lord, who says; Be ye holy, for I am holy:
that ye may be the holy Members of the Church of Christ, that is clothed with
the Sun, and has the Moon under her feet; the changeable World with all her
changeable Worships, Religions, Churches and Teachers. And be ye new and
heavenly Jerusalem's Children: for new and heavenly Jerusalem, that is above,
is the Mother of all the Children of the Light, and that are born of the
Spirit; and these be they, that have been persecuted, and have suffered by the
false Church, Mystery Babylon, and Mother of Harlots.

And now, all heavenly Jerusalem's and Sion's Children, that are from above,
labor in the Gospel, the Power of God, and the Seed, in which all Nations, and
all the Families of the Earth are blessed: which Seed, Christ, bruises the
Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his Works; and overcomes the Whore,
the false Church, and the Beast, and the false Prophet: And takes away the
Curse, and the Vail that is spread over all Nations, and over all the Families
of the Earth: and brings the Blessing upon all Nations, and upon all the
Families of the Earth (if they will receive it) saying; In thy Seed shall all
Nations and all the Families of the Earth be blessed. And this is the Gospel of
God preached to Abraham, before Moses writ his Five Books; and was preached in
the Apostles days, and is now preached again: Which Gospel brings Life and
Immortality to light; and is the Gospel of Peace, Life and Salvation to every
one that believes it. And so all Nations, and all the Families of the Earth
must be in Christ, the Seed, if they be blessed, and be partakers of the
Blessing in the Seed; which Gospel God did preach and reveal to Abraham, as in
Gal. 3.8. And this Gospel was revealed and preached by Christ unto his
Apostles, who preached it; which is not of Man, nor from Man. And now, God and
Christ has Revealed the same Gospel unto me, and many others in this Age, (I
say, the Gospel and the Seed, in which all Nations and Families of the Earth
are blessed;) in which Gospel I have labored, and do labor, that all may come
into this blessed Seed, Christ, who bruises the head of the Serpent, that in it
they might have peace with God. And this Everlasting Gospel is preached again
to them, that dwell upon the Earth; and they that believe it, and receive it,
receive the Blessing, and the Peace, and Joy, and Comfort of it, and the
stability in it, and the life and immortality, which it brings to light in them
and to them: And such can praise the Everlasting God in his Everlasting Gospel.

And Friends all, seek the peace and good of all in Christ: for Truth makes no
Cains, Corahs, Balaams, nor Judasses; for they come to be such, that go out of
the peaceable Truth. And therefore walk in the peaceable Truth, and speak the
Truth in the love of it, as it is in Jesus.

G. F.

Sometime after the Yearly Meeting was over, I went to my Son Mead's House,
Essex. Gooses.
called Gooses in Essex, and abode there some Weeks; often visiting Friends
Meeting near there, and sometimes at Barking. And after I had been a while
there, I went to visit Friends at Waltham-Abbey and at Hodsdon, Waltham-Abbey.
Hodsdon. E^field. South-street. Fordgreen. Winchmore-hill.
and about Enfield, South-street, Ford-Green, and Winchmore-Hill; where I had
several very serviceable Meetings amongst Friends, the Lord opening many deep
and weighty things through me, both for the Informing the Understandings of
Inquirers, and building up those, that were gathered into the Truth, and
establishing them therein.

It was in the Seventh Month, that I returned to London, having been near Three
Months in the Country for my health's sake, which now was very much Impaired;
so that I was hardly able to stay in a Meeting the whole Time thereof: and
often after a Meeting was fain to lie down upon a Bed. Yet did not my Weakness
of Body take me off from the Service of the Lord; but I continued to labor in
Meetings, and out of Meetings in the work of the Lord, as the Lord gave me
Opportunity and Ability.

I had not been long in London, before a great Weight came upon me, and a sight
the Lord gave me of the great Bustles and Troubles, Revolution and Change,
which soon after came to pass. In the sense whereof, and in the movings of the
Spirit of the Lord I writ a few Lines, as -- A general Epistle to Friends, to
fore-warn them of the approaching Storm; 1688. London.
that they might all retire to the Lord, in whom safety is. That Epistle was,
as follows: ALL my Dear Friends and Brethren every where, who have received
the Lord Jesus Christ; and he has given you power to become his Sons and
Daughters: In him ye have both life and peace, and in his Everlasting Kingdom,
that is a stablished Kingdom and cannot be shaken; but is over all the World,
and stands in his Power, and in Righteousness, and Joy in the Holy Ghost, into
which no unrighteousness, nor the foul, unclean Spirit of the Devil in his
Instruments can enter. And therefore, Dear Friends and Brethren, every one in
the Faith of Jesus, that he is the Author and Finisher of, stand in his Power,
who has all power in Heaven and Earth given to him, and will Rule the Nations
with his Rod of Iron, and dash them to pieces, like a Potter's vessel, that are
not Subject and Obedient to his Power: Whose Voice will shake the Heavens, and
the Earth, that that which may be shaken, may be Removed, and that which cannot
be shaken, may Appear. And stand in him; and all things shall work together for
good, to them that love him.

And now, Dear Friends and Brethren, though these Waves, and Storms, and
Tempests be in the World, yet you may all appear the harmless and innocent
Lambs of Christ, walking in his peaceable Truth, and keeping in the Word of
Power, and Wisdom, and Patience; and this Word will keep you in the Day of
Trials and Temptations, that will come upon the whole World, to Try them, that
dwell upon the Earth. For the Word of God was before the World, and all things
were made by it: It is a Tried Word, which gave all God's People in all Ages
Wisdom, Power and Patience. And therefore let your dwelling and walking be in
Christ Jesus, who is called The Word of God; and in his Power, which is over
all: And set your Affections on things that are above, where Christ sits at the
right hand of God (mark) on those things which are above, where Christ sits;
and not those things, that are below, which will change, and pass away. And
blessed be the Lord God, who by his Eternal Arm and Power has gathered a
People to himself; and by his Eternal Arm and Power has preserved his,
Faithful to himself through many Troubles, Trials and Temptations: His Power
and Seed, Christ, is over all, and in him ye have life and peace with God.
Therefore in him all stand, and see your Salvation, who is First and Last, and
the Amen. God Almighty preserve and keep you all in him, your Ark and
Sanctuary; for in him you are safe over all Floods, Storms and Tempests: for he
was, before they were; and will be, when they are all gone.

London, the 17th of the 8th Month, 1688. G. F.




About this time great Exercise and Weights came upon me (as has usually done
before great Revolutions and Changes of Government) and my strength departed
from me; so that I reeled, and was ready to fall, as I went along the Streets.
And at length I could not go abroad at all, I was so Weak for a pretty while;
till I felt the Power of the Lord to spring over all, and had received an
Assurance from him, that he would preserve his faithful People to himself
through all.

In the time that I kept in, I writ a Paper, showing; How Moses, as a Servant,
was faithful in all his House, in the Old Testament; and Christ, as a Son, is
over his House in the New Testament.

THE House of Israel was called God's Vineyard, in Isa. 5.7. and all the
Israelites were called the House of Israel. Israel signifies, A Prince with
God, and a Prevailer with Men, Genesis 32.28. And when Peter did preach Christ to
the House of Israel, he said; Let all the House of Israel know assuredly, that
God has made the same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ,
Acts 2.36. So they were all called the House of Israel. And it is said, Moses
was faithful in all his House (to wit, this House of Israel,) as a Servant; for
a Testimony of those things, which were to be spoken after: But Christ, as a
Son, over his own House; which House are we, if we hold fast the Confidence,
and the Rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end, Hebr. 3.5, 6. Here it is
manifest, that Moses was faithful in all his house, as a Servant, viz. in the
house of Israel, in the Old Testament: but Christ Jesus, the Son of God, is
over his house in his New Testament and Covenant; and all his true Believers
are of his House. The Apostle tells the Ephesians (who were the Church of
Christ) They were Fellow-Citizens with the Saints, and of the Household of God,
Ephesians. 2.19. And the Saints are called The Household of Faith, Gal. 6.10. And
Peter in his general Epistle, tells the Church of Christ; They were a Chosen
Generation, a Royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, 1 Pet. 2.9.
And that as lively Stones, they were built up a spiritual House, an holy
Priesthood, to offer up spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, ver. 5. And the Apostle says to the Church of Christ at Corinth; If
our earthly House of this Tabernacle were dissolved, we have a building of God,
an house not made with hands, eternal in the Heavens, 2 Cor. 5.1. And Christ
said to his Disciples; Let not your hearts be troubled: ye believe in God,
believe also in me. In my Father's house are many Mansions; (a Mansion is a
Dwelling, or Abiding-place) If it were not so, I would have told you: I go to
prepare a place for you. And if I go and prepare a place for you, I will come
again, and receive you unto my self, that where I am, there ye may be also,
John 14.1, 2, 3. The Psalmist says; Those that be planted in the House of the
Lord, shall flourish in the Courts of our God: They shall bring forth fruit in
old Age; they shall be fat and flourishing, Psalm. 92.13, 14. And again;
Holiness becomes thine house, O Lord, for ever, Psalm. 93.5. Isaiah also said by
way of Prophecy; It shall come to pass in the last days, that the Mountain of
the Lord's house shall be established in the top of the Mountains, and shall be
exalted above the Hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, Isa. 2.2. Is not
that a great House? Now, is not this Mountain, Christ, who is over his House in
the New Testament and New Covenant? And to this Mountain and House all the
Children of the New Testament and New Covenant slow in these latter days; so
that it is come to pass, which was prophesied of by Isaiah. For he said; Many
People shall go and say, Come ye, and let us go up to the Mountain of the Lord,
to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us of his ways, and we will
walk in his paths: for out of Zion shall go forth the Law, and the Word of the
Lord from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among the Nations, and shall rebuke
many People; and they shall beat their Swords into Plon-shares, and their
Spears into Pruning Hooks: Nation shall not lift up Sword against Nation,
neither shall they learn War any more. O house of Jacob, come ye, and let us
walk in the Light of the Lord, ver. 3, 4, 5. Here ye may see, They that come to
the Mountain of the house of God, and to God's Teaching, they must walk in the
Light of the Lord; yea, the House of Jacob. Jacob signifies a Supplanter: he
supplanted profane Esau, who is hated, and Jacob is loved. Now these Two Births
must be known within: And they that walk in the Light of the Lord, and come to
Christ, the Mountain of the house of the Lord, established above all Mountains
and Hills, they break their Swords into Plow-shares, and their Spears into
Pruning Hooks: and in Christ, this Mountain and House of the Lord, there are no
Spears, nor Swords to hurt one another withal. And Christ, the Son of God, is
over his House and great Family, the Children of the Light, them that believe
in it, and walk in it, who are the Children of the Day of Christ, and are of
his Holy and Royal Priesthood, that offer up spiritual Sacrifice to God by him.
All such are of Christ's (the spiritual Man's) house; who are born of God, and
led by his Spirit: They are of the Lord of Lords, and King of King's House and
Family, which he is over; and are of the Household of the holy, divine, pure and
precious Faith, which Christ is the Author and Finisher of. And they that be of
the Son's house, they are pure, righteous and holy, and can do nothing against
the Truth, but for it, in their Words, Lives and Conversations; and so are a
chosen Generation, a holy Nation, a peculiar People, that they should show
forth the Praise of him, who has called them out of Darkness into his
mavelous Light. And these are Christ's lively Stones, that build up a
spiritual House, which he (Christ, the spiritual Man, the King of Kings, and
Lord of Lords) is over.

London, the 10th Month, 1688. G. F.

1688. Essex. Gooses.
Sometime after this, my Body continuing Weak, I went down with my Son Mead to
his House in Essex; where I staid some Weeks. In which time I Writ many things
relating to the Service of Truth, of which some were printed soon after; others
were spread abroad in Manuscript. And amongst other things, 'there were a few
Lines to this purpose:

THat, while Men are contending for Thrones here below, Christ is on his
Throne, and all his holy Angels are about him; who is the Beginning and the
Ending, the First and Last, over all. And that the Lord will make way and room
for himself, and for them that are born of his Spirit, which are heavenly
Jerusalem's Children, to come home to their free Mother.

A few Words also I writ concerning the World's Teachers, and the Emptiness of
their Teaching. Which were thus:

Does not all that, which is called Christendom, live in Talking of Christ's,
and of the Apostles and Prophets Words, and the Letter of the Scriptures? And
do not their Priests minister the Letter, with their own Conceptions thereupon,
to them for Money, though the holy Scriptures were freely given forth from God
and Christ, and his Prophets and Apostles? Yet the Apostle says, The Letter
kills: but the Spirit gives Life, 2 Cor. 3.6. And the Ministers of the New
Testament are not Ministers of the Letter, but of the Spirit: And they do sow
to the Spirit, and of the Spirit do reap Life Eternal. But Peoples spending
their time about Old Authors, and their Talking of them, and of the outward
Letter; this does not feed their Souls. For Talking of Victuals, and Clothes
does not clothe the Body, nor feed it, except they have Victuals to eat, and
Clothes to put on. No more are their Souls and Spirits fed and clothed, except
they have the Bread and Water of Life from Heaven to feed them, and the
Righteousness of Christ to clothe them. So only Talking of Outward things and
Spiritual things, and not Having them, they may starve both their Bodies and
their Souls. Therefore quench not the Spirit of God, which will lead to be
diligent in all things.

With this I writ another short Paper, showing the hurt that they did, and the
danger they run into, who turned People from the inward Manifestation of Christ
in the heart.

THE Jews were commanded by the Law of God, Not to remove the outward
Landmark, Deuteronomy. 19.14. And they that did so, or that caused the Blind to
wander, were Cursed in the Old Covenant, Deuteronomy. 27.17. In the New Covenant the
Apostle says; Let him be Accursed, that preaches any other Gospel, than that,
which he had preached, Gal. 1.8. Now the Gospel, that he preached, was The
Power of God unto Salvation, 1688. Gooses.
to every one that believes, Romans 1.16. And the Gospel, that was preached to
Abraham was, That in his Seed all Nations, and all the Families of the Earth
should be blessed. And in order to bring Men to this blessed state, God pours
out of his Spirit upon all Flesh; and Christ does enlighten every one, that
comes into the World; and the Grace of God, which brings Salvation, has
appeared unto all Men, and teaches the Christians, the true Believers in
Christ; and God does write his Law in the true Christians hearts, and puts
it in their minds, that they may all know the Lord, from the greatest to the
least; and he gives his Word in their hearts to obey and do, and the Anointing
within them; so that they need not any Man to Teach them, but as the Anointing
does Teach them. Now all such, as turn People from the Light, Spirit, Grace,
Word and Anointing within, remove them from their heavenly Landmark of their
Eternal Inheritance, and make them blind, and cause the Blind to wander from
the living way to their Eternal House in the Heavens, and from New and Heavenly
Jerusalem. So they are Cursed, that cause the Blind to wander out of their way,
and to remove them from their heavenly Landmark.

G. F.

I writ also a Paper to show, by Instances taken out of the Holy Scriptures,
That many of the holy Men and Prophets of God, and of the Apostles of Christ,
were Husbandmen and Tradesmen: by which People might see, how unlike to them
the World's Teachers now are.

RIghteous Abel was a Shepherd, a Keeper of Sheep, Genesis 4.2. Noah was an
Husbandman: and he was a Just man, and perfect in his Generation, and walked
with God, Genesis 9.20. and 6.9. Abraham, the Father of the Faithful, was an
Husbandman, and had great Flocks of Cattle; And just Lot was an Husbandman
also, and had great Flocks and Herds, Genesis 13. Isaac also was an Husbandman,
and had great Flocks and Herds of Cattle, and great store of Corn, Genesis 26.12,
14. And the Promise was with Isaac: for the Lord said to Abraham, In Isaac
shall thy Seed be called, Genesis 21.12. Jacob was an Husbandman, and his Sons
Keepers of Flocks of Cattle, Genesis 46.32, 34. and God loved Jacob. Moses kept
Sheep, Exodus 3 1. and the Lord spoke to him, when he was keeping Sheep, ver. 4.
and sent him to Pharaoh, to bring God's People, or Sheep, out of Egypt. And by
the hand and power of the Lord, he and Aaron his Brother brought them out of
Egypt, a Land of Anguish, Bondage, Darkness and Perplexity. And Moses kept the
Lord's People, or Sheep, forty years in the Wilderness: A Meek Shepherd of God
he was, and kept his great Flock of Sheep; though some of them were scabbed
with the Leprosy of Contention and Murmuring, and were destroyed in the
Wilderness.

David (though he afterward came to be a King) was a Keeper of his Father's
Sheep in the Wilderness, 1 Samuel 17.15, 28. And the Lord God called him from the
Sheep-Cotes to feed his Sheep, the House of Israel, and to defend them from the
spiritual Wolves, Bears and Lions; and he did it to purpose, who was a Man
after God's own heart.

Elisha was a Plowman, 1 Kings 19.19. and he was called from the Plow, that was
outward, to Teach God's People, the Children of Israel, to plow up the Fallow
ground of their hearts, that they might bring forth Seed and Fruits to God,
their Creator.

And the Word of the Lord came to Amos, when he was among the Herdsmen of
Tekoa, Amos 1.1. And Amaziah, the Priest of Bethel, said to Amos; Prophecy not
again any more at Bethel: for it is the King's Chapel, and it is the King's
Court, Chap. 7.13. Then answered Amos, and said to Amaziah, I was no Prophet,
neither was I a Prophet's Son; but I was an Herdsman, and a gatherer of
Sycomore-fruit: and the Lord took me, as I followed the Flock. And the Lord
said unto me, Go, prophecy unto my People Israel, ver. 14, 15. Here ye may
see, how the Lord made use of a poor man, and how he called him from following
the outward Flock, and from gathering of outward Fruits, to gather his Fruits,
and to follow his People or Flock, the Children of Israel.

Christ called Peter, and Andrew his Brother, when they were Fishing, and
casting their Net into the Sea (for they were Fishers:) and he said unto them,
Follow me, and I will make you Fishers of Men, Matthew. 4.18, 19. And likewise
Christ called James and John his Brother, when they were in a Ship, with
Zebedee, their Father, mending their Nets; And they immediately left the Ship,
and their Father, and followed him, ver. 21, 22. And he gave them power (a Net
that will hold, and not want mending) and made them Fishers of Men, to fish
them out of the great Sea, the World of Wickedness. And we read, that when
Peter, and Thomas, and Nathaniel, and the Sons of Zebedee and other Disciples
went a Fishing together, and that Night caught nothing; And in the Morning
Jesus appeared to them, and said, Cast the Net on the right side of the Ship,
and ye shall find: and they did so, and catched so great a Multitude, that they
were not able to draw them to the shore. And when thereupon one of the other
Disciples said unto Peter, It is the Lord; Peter hearing, that it was the Lord,
Girded his Fisher's Coat unto him, John 21.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. And this was,
after Christ was risen. So here ye may see, Peter had not laid away his
Fisher's Coat all this while, that he had been preaching before Christ's Death,
and after he was Risen.

And Jesus saw Matthew sitting at the Receipt of Custom, and he said unto him,
Follow me. And he arose, and followed him, Matthew. 9.9. And Christ employed
Matthew to gather his People, that were scattered from God; another manner of
Treasure, than the outward Custom of the Romans. 1689. Gooses.
Luke was a Physician, whom Christ made a Physician spiritual; which was
better, than Outward.

Paul was a Tent-maker; and being of the same Craft with Aquila and Priscilla,
he abode with them at Corinth, and wrought; (for by their Occupation they were
Tent-makers:) Acts 18.3. And did not Paul, and Priscilla and Aquila bring many
to their heavenly Tents, and to be settled upon Christ, the heavenly Rock and
Foundation?

Joseph, the Husband of Mary, was a Carpenter: And the Jews said of Christ, Is
not this the Carpenter, the Son of Mary? etc. Mark 6.3. The Jews meant only an
outward Carpenter; not knowing, that Christ was also a spiritual Carpenter, who
does build up the fallen Estate of Man and Woman into the Image of God, which
they were first made in; and had shod them with the Gospel of Peace, the Power
of God, which will never wax old; and Clothed them with fine Linen, that never
will wear out; and armed them with Armor and Weapons, that will never rust;
which all the Weapons of the Wicked can never blunt nor pierce: The Saints have
tried it.

Gooses, the 1st Month, 1688/9. G. F.

It was now a time of much Talk: and People too much busied their minds, and
spent their time in hearing and telling News. To show them the Vanity thereof,
and to draw them from it, I writ the few following Lines:

IN the Low Region, in the Airy Life all News is Uncertain; there is nothing
stable: But in the Higher Region, in the Kingdom of Christ, there all things
are stable and sure, and the News always good and certain. For Christ, who has
all Power in Heaven and in Earth given unto him, rules in the Kingdoms of Men:
And he, who does inherit the Heathen, and possess the utmost parts of the Earth
with his Divine Power and Light, he Rules all Nations with his Rod of Iron, and
dashes them to pieces, like a Potter's Vessels; the Vessels of Dishonor, and
the leaky Vessels, that will not hold his living water of Life: And he does
preserve his Elect Vessels of Mercy and Honor. And his Power is certain and
sure, and does not change; by which he does remove the Mountains and Hills, and
shakes the Heavens and the Earth. And leaky, dishonorable Vessels, and the
Hills and Mountains, and the Old Heavens and the Earth, they are all to be
shaken, and removed, and broken to pieces; though they do not see it, nor him
that does it: But his Elect and Faithful do both see it, and know him, and his
Power, that cannot be shaken, and which changes not.

The 5th of the 1st Month, 1688/9. G. F.

1689. London
About the middle of the First Month 1688/9. I went to London, the Parliament
then sitting, and being then about the Bill for Indulgence. And though I was
but Weak in Body, and not well able to stir to and fro; yet so great a Concern
was upon my Spirit on behalf of Truth and Friends, that I Attended continually
for many days, with othet Friends, at the Parliament House, laboring with the
Members thereof, that the thing might be done Comprehensively, and Effectually.

In this, and other Services at Meetings and amongst Friends, I continued, till
toward the end of the Second Month; when being much spent with continual
Labor, I got out of Town for a little while, South-gate
as far as South-gate and thereabouts. And while I was there, I writ a Letter
to Peter Hendricks, a Friend at Amsterdam in Holland; in which I enclosed an
Epistle to the Friends at Dantzick in Poland, who at this time were under great
Persecution. And as I writ unto them, to Encourage and Strengthen them in their
Testimony, and to Comfort them in their Sufferings for the Truth; so also I
writ a Paper to their Persecutors, the Magistrates of Dantzick; laying before
them the Evil of Persecution, and persuading them to Christian Moderation, and
To do unto others, in Matters of Religion, as they would be done unto. Which
Papers were as follows: To Peter Hendricks at Amsterdam; and to Friends at
Dantzick, who are under Persecution.
Dear Friend P. H.
WIth my Love to thee and thy Wife, and J. Clause, and J. Roeloffs, and all the
rest of Friends every where in Christ Jesus, who Reigns over all. And I am glad
to hear, that Friends are well in all those Provinces and Places every where,
except Dantzick; and that you were so diligent in spreading my Papers to the
strengthening of Friends. I have lately printed the Life of William Caton, but
not made a Collection of his Books: and I think to send some of them to you,
which you may Translate and Print, if you will; it may be serviceable among
Friends, especially them that knew him.

Now concerning Dear Friends at Dantzick, whom the Lord has supported by his
Eternal Arm and Power to this Day, I hope, by the same Arm and Power he will
support them, and in it they will feel his Blessed Presence with them in all
their Sufferings; who is over the Cruelty of their Persecutors, who will hardly
let them breathe neither Outwardly nor Inwardly, in the Common Air of their
Natural Soil. Which shows both their Immorality, Inhumanity and Vnchristianity,
and that they want the Counsel of a Gamaliel amongst them; whose Actions are
below the Law of God, To do unto others, as they would have them do unto them:
And God will not Bless the Doings of such. 1689. Southgate.
And however I desire, that Friends may mind the Lord's Power, that is over
all, and be valiant for his Truth, and keep upon their Rock and Foundation
Christ Jesus, that stands sure in this time of the heat of the Sun of
Persecution, which is so hot upon you; who will not let you, nor suffer you to
have so much as your Natural Houses to work and sleep in, nor meet, nor serve
God in: And the Lord does behold all such Actors and their Actions. And
therefore look over all such Actors and Actions to him, who is able to Deal
with them, and Reward them according to their Works. And so God Almighty
preserve you all in Christ Jesus, in whom you have Rest, Life and Peace, Amen.

Southgate, the 28th of the 2d Month, 1689. G. F.


To the Magistrates of Dantzick: Christian Shroder, President of the Council,
and Emanuel Dilger, N. Gadecken, and N. Fraterus, Deputies of the Council, and
the Rest of the Magistrates and Priests.
WE have seen your Order, and of your Breathing out Persecution against that
Little Flock, the Lambs of Christ, that lived under your Jurisdiction in the
City of Dantzick; and how that you have Imprisoned and Banished Two by the
Hangman out of the Government of your City: and others you threaten to do the
same to; with great punishment, if they Return. And likewise you threaten them
with punishment, that they Rent their Houses of, if they let them have their
Houses either to Live in, or Meet in to Serve and Worship the Lord, that made
them: Truly, I am heartily sorry for both your Magistrates and Priests, that go
under the Name of Christians, and show such Immoral and Inhuman, Unchristian
Actions, below the Royal Law of God, which is, To do to others, as you would
have them do unto you. For would you think it was Moral, Human or Christian, or
according to the Law of God, if the King of Poland, who is of another Religion
than you, should Banish you out of your City by the Hangman, and call you
Murderers of Souls: Could you say, but this was according to the Law of God, To
do unto you, as you have done unto others? But if you say, That you have the
Sword and the Horn, and the Power; but blessed be the Lord, that has shortened
your Sword, and your Power, and your Horn, that it reaches no further, than
your Jurisdiction of Dantzick: and you do not know, how long God may suffer you
to have your Horn, and your Power, and your Sword. We are sure, you have not
the Mind nor Spirit of Christ: and the Apostle says, They that have not the
Spirit of Christ, are none of his; as in Romans 8. And Christ bids Peter, Put up
his Sword: They that draw the Sword concerning him, to Defend him and his
Worship and Faith, should perish with the Sword. And Peter, and the Apostles
never drew the outward Sword after; but said, Their Weapons were Spiritual, not
Carnal: and they did not wrestle with flesh and blood. And Christ never gave
forth any such Command, that they should Banish any by the Hangmen, that were
not of their Religion, nor would not receive it. Are not you worse than the
Turks, who let many Religions be in their Country, yea Christians, and to Meet
peaceably? Yea, the Turkish Patroons let our Friends, that were Captives, Meet
together at Algiers, and said, It was good so to do: And at Sally those
barbarous People, who do not profess Christianity, you are worse than they; for
you profess Christ in Words, but in Works deny him. And did you ever know
either in Scripture or History, that any Persecutors prospered long? And you
are worse, than they are in the Mogul's Country, who they say, permits Sixty
Religions in his Dominions: and many others might be mentioned, which you are
worse, than them all in your Cruelty and Persecution of God's People only for
Meeting together in the Name of Jesus, and Serving and Worshipping God, their
Creator. No, they must not Breathe in their Natural Air, neither Natural, nor
Spiritual, in your Dominions: I pray, where had you these Commands from?
neither from Christ, nor his Apostles. And do not you profess the Scriptures of
the New Testament to be your Rule? but I pray you, what Scripture have you for
this your practice? It is good for you to be Humble, and do Justly, and love
Mercy; and Call home your Banished, and Love them, and Cherish them: yea,
though they were your Enemies, you are to obey the Command of Christ, and Love
them. I wonder, how you and your Wives and Families can sleep quietly in your
Beds, that do such Cruel Actions, without thinking, the Lord may do to you the
same! Yout cannot be without Sense and Feeling, except you be given over to
Reprobation without Sense and Feeling, and your Consciences seared with a hot
Iron. But Christian Charity does hope, that you are not all in that state; but
that there may be some Relenting or Consideration of your Actions among some of
you, either according to the Law of God, or his Gospel.

From him, that desires your Temporal and Eternal Good, and Salvation, and not
Destruction, Amen.

Middlesex, the 28th of the 2d Month, 1688. G. F.
Peter,
Thou may Translate this into High Dutch, and send them; and you may print
it, if you will, and spread it abroad: and Translate that part of the Letter,
that is to Friends, into High Dutch, and send to them.






Having stayed in the Country about Three Weeks, 1689. London. Yearly Meeting.
I returned to London a little before the Yearly Meeting, which was in the
Third Month this Year, and was a very Solemn, Weighty Meeting; the Lord (as
formerly) visiting his People, and honoring the Assembly with his glorious
Presence, to the great Satisfaction and Comfort of Friends. After the Business
of the Meeting was over, it was upon me to add a few Lines to the Epistle,
which went from the Meeting to Friends, after this manner: Dear Friends and
Brethren,
WHO have known the Lord's Eternal Arm and Power, that has preserved you upon
the heavenly Rock and Foundation, and has built your House upon it; you have
known many Winds, Tempests and Storms, that have risen out of that Sea, where
the Beast rose; and many raging Storms, that have risen by Apostates of several
sorts: but the Seed, that bruises the Serpent's head, and is the Foundation of
God's People, stands sure. And therefore, Dear Friends and Brethren, though
there be great Shakings in the World; the Lord's Power is over all, and his
Kingdom cannot be shaken. And therefore, all ye Children of God, Children of
the Light, and Heirs of his Kingdom, a Joyful, Peaceable Habitation keep in;
keeping out of all the Heats, Contentions and Disputes about things below. And
Lay hand on no man, nor no thing suddenly; lest they should be puffed up with
that which fades, and so come to loss: but mind the Lord's Power, that keeps
open your heavenly Eye, to see things present, and to come; and in that ye will
see and handle the Word of Life. And Dear Friends every where, Have power over
your own Spirits. As God has blessed you with his Outward things, have a care
of Trusting in them; or falling into Difference one with another about these
Outward Things, that are below: which will pass away. But all live in the Love
of God, and in that live in peace with God, and one with another. And follow
the Works of Charity, and overcome the Evil with the Good to all. For what Good
have all the Tinklers done, with their Cymbals and sounding Brass? They always
bred Confusion, and never did Good in any Age; Tinkling with their Cymbals, and
sounding with their Brass, to draw out the Simple to follow them. And therefore
it is good for all the Children of God, to keep in their Possessions of Life,
and in the Love of God, that is Everlasting. And as for all the Tumults of the
World, and the Apostates from the Truth, the Lord's Power is over them all, and
Christ reigns; and the Lord says, No Weapon, that is formed against thee,
shall prosper, (Isa. 54.17.) And now Friends, you are not unsensible, how many
Weapons have been formed against us, who are the Sons and Daughters of God; and
the Lord has restrained them, according to his Promise: they have not
prospered. And the Lord said; Every Tongue, that shall rise up in Judgment
against thee, thou shall Condemn: so God has given such a Power to his
Children, to Condemn all the Tongues, that shall rise up in Judgment against
them; and this is the Heritage of the Servants of the Lord, Their Righteousness
is of me, says the Lord. And you are not unsensible of the many Tongues, that
have risen up against us in Judgment, yea, of Apostates and Profane: But in
and with the Truth, and the Power of God, according to the Promise of God,
Every Tongue, that rises against thee, thou shall Condemn. So it is not one
Tongue only thou shall Condemn; but Every Tongue, that shall rise up in
Judgment against thee, thou shall Condemn. So the Lord gives this Power to his
Servants and Children, to judge the Evil Tongues, and he does restrain the
Weapons formed against them; so that they shall not prosper against his
Children, that he has begotten: Praises and Honor be to his holy Name for
ever! Amen.

G. F.




Soon after this Meeting was over, the Yearly Meeting began at York; which
because of the Largeness of that County, and for the Convenience of Friends in
the Northern parts, had for some Years been held there. And inasmuch as there
had been some Hurt done in that place, as some Division made there, by some
that were gone out of the Unity of Friends; It was upon me to write a few Lines
to Friends of that Meeting, to Exhort them to keep in the pure, heavenly Love,
which brings into and keeps in the true Unity. And that which I writ was thus:
Dear Friends and Brethren in Christ Jesus,
WHom the Lord by his Eternal Arm and Power has preserved to this day, all
walk in the Power and Spirit of God, that is over all, in Love and Unity: For
Love overcomes, and builds up, and unites all the Members of Christ to him the
Head; for Love keeps out of all strife, and is of God. And Love and Charity
never fails, but keeps the Mind above all outward things, or strife about
outward things; and is that, which overcomes Evil, and casts out all false
Fears: And it is of God, and unites all the hearts of his People together in
the heavenly Joy, Concord and Unity. The God of Love preserve you all, and
settle and establish you in Christ Jesus, your Life and Salvation, in whom ye
have all Peace with God. And so Walk in him, that ye may be ordered in his
peaceable, heavenly Wisdom, to the Glory of God, and the Comfort one of
another, Amen.

London, the 27th of the 3d Month, 1689. G. F.




Being much Wearied and Spent with being at many large Meetings, 1689. Kingston.
and in much Business with Friends, during the time of the Yearly Meeting, and
finding my health much impaired thereby; I went out of Town with my Daughter
Rouse, to their Country House near Kingston, and tarried there most of the
remaining part of the Summer. In which time I sometimes visited Friends
Meetings at Kingston, and writ diverse things for the Service of Truth and
Friends. Amongst those things that I writ there, one was an Epistle to Friends
in Barbados; and it was, as follows: To all Friends in Barbados, that are
Convinced of God's Truth.
MY Desires are, that ye may live and walk in his peaceable Truth, and show
forth, that ye are Children of the Light and of the Truth: for the heavenly,
gentle and peaceable Wisdom is justified of her Children. But Debate, Strife,
Wilfulness, and laying open one another's Nakedness and Weakness, that is not
heavenly Wisdom's Children's doing (but Ham's) nor from the Spirit of Christ;
nor such, as bite and tear one another: That Is from a devouring Spirit, and not
from the Spirit of Jesus, which clothes and covers that which is uncomely, and
can forgive. And now my Friends, you profess that Truth, which is beyond all
the World's ways; therefore see, that you do Excel them in the heavenly, gentle
Wisdom, that is easy to be entreated: for the Wisdom of the World is not easy
to be entreated; and sometimes will not be entreated at all. And now pray see,
how you do excel the World in Wisdom, in Virtue, in Kindness, in Love that is
over hatred, in Meekness, and Lowliness, and Humility, and in Sobriety,
Civility and Modesty, and in Temperance and Patience, and in all that which is
called Morality and Humanity (which will not act any thing below Men, or
unmanly) and to show forth true Christianity, and that ye are the Converted and
Translated Believers in Christ, dwelling in the Love of God, that bears all
things, and endures all things, and is not puffed up, and envies not. For they
that be out of this Love of God, and Christian Charity, are nothing, but as a
tinkling Cymbal and a sounding Brass; and are discontented, Murmurers and
Complainers, full of Doubts, Questions and false Jealousies. Keep that Spirit
out of the Camp of God: for do not you read in the Scriptures, both of the New
and Old Testament, that the End of such was Misery? Therefore in the Love of
God build up one another: for Love edifies the Body of Christ; and he commands
his Believers to love Enemies, and to love one another: By this they are known
to be the Disciples of Christ. But to live in Envy, Strife and Hatred, is a
Mark, they are no Disciples of Christ: For he that loves not his Brother,
abides in Death; and whosoever hates his Brother, is a Murderer: and ye know,
that no Murderer has eternal life abiding in him. But they, that do love the
Brethren, are passed from death to life, 1 John 3.14, 15. And, If a Man say, I
love God, and hates his Brother, he is a liar: for he that loves not his
Brother, whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not seen? And this
Commandment have we from God, that he who loves God, loves his Brother also,
Chap. 4.20, 21. Therefore love one another: for Love is of God, and Hatred is
of the Devil; and every one that loves, is born of God, and knows God. Now all
are Children of God by Creation: and therefore in that state they are to love
their Neigbours, as themselves; and to do unto all Men, as they would have them
do unto them. Secondly, God pouring his Spirit upon all Flesh (or all Men and
Women) all that are led by the Spirit of God, are the Sons of God, and Heirs of
God, and Joint-heirs with Christ; and so are in Fellowship in the Everlasting
Gospel: and so are in Unity in the Spirit, the Bond of Peace. And they that go
out of this Unity, and out of the Bond of Peace, and do not keep it; they break
the King of Kings Peace: but they that keep in the Unity, and Fellowship in the
Spirit, and walk in the Light, have Fellowship one with another, and with the
Father and the Son. So it is not every one, that talks of the Light, and talks
of the Word, and of Righteousness, and talks of Christ, and of God; but he that
Does the will of God. And therefore, My Friends, all strive to excel one
another in Love, and in Virtue, and in good Life and Conversation; and strive
all to be of one Mind, Heart and Judgment in the Spirit of God: for in Christ
all are one, and are in peace in him. The Lord God Almighty preserve you in
him, who is your holy Rock and Foundation, that is heavenly, and stands sure;
that ye may all be Valiant for the Truth upon the Earth, and for the Lord and
his glorious Name; so that ye may all come to serve him in your Generation, and
in his New Creation in Christ Jesus, Amen.

And now, that you are come into so much Favor with the Magistrates and
Powers, that they let you serve the Office of a Constable, etc. without
swearing or taking any Oaths; hereby Christ's Doctrine and Command, and his
Apostle's is set up. And therefore I desire, that you may double your diligence
in your Offices, in doing that which is just, and true, and righteous; so that
ye may excel and exceed all them, that are tied, shack'led or bound by Swearing
or Oaths, to perform their Offices: and you can do it at Yea and Nay, so say
and so do; according to Christ's Doctrine and Command. For Adam and Eve by
disobeying the Command of God, fell under Condemnation: and they that disobey
the Command of Christ in taking Oaths and Swearing, go into Evil, and fall into
Condemnation, Matthew. 5. and Jam. 5. So my Love in the Lord is to you all.

Kingston upon Thames, the 10th of the 5th Month, 1689. G. F.




I stayed at Kingston, till the beginning of the Seventh Month; where not only
many Friends came to visit me, but some Considerable People of the World, with
whom I discoursed about the Things of God. Then leaving Kingston, I went to
London by Water, visiting Friends as I went, Hammersmith.
and taking Hammersmith-Meeting in my way. And having recovered some strength
by being in the Country, when I was come to London, London.
I went from Meeting to Meeting; laboring diligently in the work of the Lord,
and opening the Divine Mysteries of the heavenly things, as God by his Spirit
opened them in me. But I found, my Body would not long bear the City;
wherefore, when I had traveled amongst Friends there about a Month,
Tottenham-High-Cross. Winchmore-hill. Enfield.
I went to Tottenham-High-Cross, and from thence to Edward Man's Country House
near Winchmore-hill, and to Enfield; spending a matter of Three Weeks time
amongst Friends thereabouts, and had Meetings at all those places. Then, being
a little refreshed with being in the Country, I went back to London; where I
tarried, laboring in the Work of the Ministry, till the middle of the Ninth
Month: at which time I went down with my Son Mead to his House in Essex, and
abode there all the Winter. Essex. Gooses.
During which time I stirred not much abroad; unless it were sometimes to the
Meeting, to which that Family belonged, which was about half a Mile from
thence: but I had Meetings often in the House with the Family, and those
Friends, that came thither. Many things also I writ, while I was there; some of
which follow here. One was an Epistle to the Quarterly and Yearly-Meetings of
Friends in Pensylvania, New England, Virginia, Maryland, the Jerseys, Carolina,
and other Plantations in America. And it was thus: MY Dear Friends and Brethren
in the Lord Jesus Christ, who, by believing in his Light, are become Children
of his Light and of his Day; my desires are, that you may all walk in his Light
and in his Day, and keep the Feast of Christ, our Passover, who is sacrificed
for us, not with Old Leaven, neither with the Leaven of Malice and Wickedness;
but let all that be purged out: that ye may be a New Lump, keeping the Feast of
Christ, our Passover, with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth.
Therefore let no leavened Bread be found in your Houses, nor in your Meetings,
nor in the Camp of God, or Household of Faith, which are the Household of Christ:
But all that sour, old Leaven, which makes Peoples hearts sour, and to burn one
against another; all that must be purged out of the Camp of God, and kept out.
For the Feast of Christ, our Passover, must be kept, in the New Covenant, with
his heavenly, unleavened Bread of Life. The Jews in the Old Testament their
Feast was kept with outward unleavened Bread: And now, in the New Testament, in
the Gospel-Day, our Feast is to be kept with the heavenly, unleavened Bread of
Sincerity and Truth. Therefore Friends, I desire you seriously to consider, and
to keep this Feast, which the Apostle directed the Church of Christ to keep. Do
not you see Christendom, 1689. Gooses.
so called, keep their Feasts with the leavened Bread of Malice and Wickedness?
which makes them so sour, and their hearts to burn one against another, that
they have destroyed, and do destroy one another about Religion. Therefore all
live in the love of God, which keeps above the love of the World; so that none
of your Hearts may be choked or surfeited with these outward Things, or with
the Cares of the World, which will pass away: But mind ye the World and the
Life, that is without end, that ye may be heirs of it. And Friends, you should
strive to Excel all, both Professor and Profane, both in Morality, Humanity
and Christianity, Modesty, Sobriety and Moderation, and in a good, godly,
righteous Life and Conversation; showing forth the Fruits of the Spirit of God,
and that you are the Children of the living God, and Children of the Light, and
of the Day, and not of the Night. And serve God in Newness of Life: for it is
the Life, and a living and walking in the Truth, that must Answer the Witness
of God in all People; that they, seeing your good Works, may glorify our
Father, which is in Heaven. Therefore be valiant for God's holy, pure Truth,
and spread it abroad, among both Professors and Profane, and the Indians. And
you should write over once a year, from all your Yearly-Meetings, to the
Yearly Meeting here, concerning your Diligence in the Truth, and of its
spreading, and of Peoples receiving it, both Professors and Profane, and the
Indians; and concerning the Peace of the Church of Christ amongst your selves.
For, blessed be the Lord, Truth does get ground in these Parts, and many are
made very loving to Friends, and the Lord's Power and Seed is over all: In
which God Almighty keep all his People to his Glory, Amen.

Gooses, the 28th of the 11th Month, 1689. G. F.




While I was in the City, I had a Concern upon my Spirit with respect to a
Twofold Danger, that attended some, who professed Truth: one was of Young Peoples
running into the Fashions of the World; and the other was of Old Peoples going
into the Earth. And that Concern coming now again weightily upon me, I was
moved to give forth the following Paper, as a Reproof to such, and an
Exhortation and Warning to all Friends to beware of, and keep out of those
Snares.

To all that do Profess the Truth of God.
MY desires are, that you may walk in Humility in it. For when the Lord first
called me forth, he let me see, That Young People grew up together in Vanity,
and the Fashions of the World; and Old People went downwards into the Earth,
raking it together: and to both these I was to be a stranger. And now Friends,
I do see too many Young People, that do profess the Truth, 1690. Gooses.
do grow up into the Fashions of the World; and too many Parents indulge them:
And amongst the Elder, some are growing downwards, and raking after the Earth.
Therefore take heed, that you are not making your Graves, while you are Alive
outwardly, and loading your selves with thick Clay (Hab. ^.6.) For if you have
not power over the Earthly Spirit, and that which leads into a Vain Mind, and
the Fashions of the World, and into the Earth; though you have often had the
Rain fall upon your Fields, you will but bring forth Thistles, Briars and
Thorns, which is for the Fire. And such will become brittle, peevish, fretful
Spirits, that will not abide the heavenly Doctrine, and the Admonitions,
Exhortations and Reproofs of the Holy Ghost, or heavenly Spirit of God; which
would bring you to be Conformable to the Death of Christ, and to his Image,
that ye might have Fellowship with him in his Resurrection. And therefore it is
good for all to bow to the Name of Jesus, their Savior, and that all may
Confess him to the Glory of God the Father. For I have had a Concern upon me,
in a sense of the Danger of Young Peoples going into the Fashions of the World,
and Old Peoples going into the Earth, and many going into a loose and false
Liberty; till at last they go quite out into the Spirit of the World, as some
have done. Such their House has been built upon the Sand on the Sea shore, not
upon Christ the Rock; that they are so soon in the World again, under a
pretense of Liberty of Conscience. But it is not a pure Conscience, nor in the
Spirit of God, nor in Christ Jesus: for in the Liberty in the Spirit there is
the Unity, which is the Bond of Peace; and all are one in Christ Jesus, in whom
is the true Liberty. And this is not of the World: for He is not of the World.
And therefore all are to stand fast in him, as they have received him; for in
him there is peace, who is the Prince of Peace: but in the World there is
Trouble. For the Spirit of the World is a Troublesome Spirit; but the Spirit of
Christ is a Peaceable Spirit: and in it God Almighty preserve all the Faithful,
Amen.

Gooses, the 1st of the 2d Month, 1690. G. F.

Another Paper, that I writ while I was here, was concerning the Ensign, which
Isaiah prophesied the Lord should set up for the Gentiles, which I showed was
Christ. Of that Paper this which follows, is a Copy:

THE Lord says; They shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy Mountain: for
the Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the Waters cover the
Sea, Isa. 11.9. And in that day there shall be a Root of Jesse, which shall
stand for an Ensign of the People; to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his Rest
shall be glorious, ver. 10. And he shall reign over the Gentiles, and in him
shall the Gentiles trust, Romans 15.12. This Ensign is Christ, which was
prophesied of by the Prophet; which Prophecy the Apostle, who was a Minister to
the Gentiles, shows was fulfilled in the New Testament. And in this Day of
Christ, Isaiah says, The Lord shall set his hand again the second time, to
Recover the Remnant of his People, which shall be left, from Assyria and from
Egypt, etc. And he shall set up an Ensign for the Nations, and shall assemble
the Outcasts of Israel, and gather together the dispersed of Judah from the
four Corners of the Earth, ver. 11, 12. This is in the Day of Christ, and his
Gospel of Life and Salvation, which is preached to every Creature under Heaven,
who Enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World, both Jews and Gentiles;
that by his heavenly, divine Light they may see Christ, their Ensign, and
Captain of their Salvation: So Christ is one Ensign both to the Jews and
Gentiles. And Isaiah says, The Redeemer shall come to Sion, etc. Isa. 59.20.
And, This is my Covenant with them, says the Lord, my Spirit, that is upon
thee (to wit, Christ) and my Words, which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not
depart out of thy Mouth, nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, nor out of the Mouth
of thy Seed's Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth and for ever, ver. 21.
Arise, shine, for thy Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen upon
thee, Chap. 60.1. And the Gentiles shall come to thy Light, ver. 3. And the
abundance of the Sea shall be converted unto thee, ver. 5. ( the Sea is the
World.) The Lord shall be thy everlasting Light, ver. 20. And, Thou shall call
thy Walls, Salvation, and thy Gates, Praise, ver. 18. And the Lord says; I
will make the place of my Feet glorious, ver. 13. Heaven is his Throne, and
Earth is his Footstool, Chap 66.1. And he that puts his trust in me, says the
Lord, shall possess the Land, and shall inherit my holy Mountain, Chap. 57.13.
Which Mountain is Established above all the Mountains and Hills, Isa. 2.2. The
Lord says (speaking of Christ) I have put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring
forth Judgment to the Gentiles, Isa. 42.1. And he says of him, I will give
thee for a Covenant of the People, for a Light of the Gentiles; To open the
blind Eyes, to bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in
Darkness, out of the Prisonhouse. I am the Lord, that is my Name, and my Glory
will I not give to another, neither my Praise to graven Images, ver. 6, 7, 8.
So Christ the Light is come, and the Glory of the Lord is risen; and the
Gentiles are come to the Light of Christ: and this Prophecy of Isaiah
concerning Christ, many of the Gentiles witness fulfilled, that Salvation is
come to the Gentiles, Romans 11.11. And God gave his Glory to his Son: And Christ
says, The Glory, which thou gave me, I have given them (namely, his
Believers and Followers) that they may be one, even as we are one, John 17.22.
Now here you may see, how the Promises and Prophecies are fulfilled in Christ
Jesus, whom God has given for an Ensign both to the Jews and Gentiles, and the
Captain of their Salvation; and he does enlighten every one, that comes into
the World: that with his heavenly, divine Light they might see Christ, the Lord
from Heaven, their Captain and Ensign, and trust in him, who is their
Conqueror; who bruises the Serpent's head, and destroys the Devil and his
Works: And Christ and his Followers overcome the Dragon, Beast and false
Prophet. And therefore all Jews, Gentiles and Christians, that come to believe
in Christ, are to stand to their Ensign, Christ; who is also the Captain of
their Salvation, who is above all Ensigns and Captains below. For he is from
above, and therefore all are to trust in him; for he is certain and able to
save to the utmost, etc. and is the same Ensign and Captain to day, as he was
yesterday, and so for ever, the First and Last, the Beginning and Ending, and
Lord of all Lords, and King of all Kings upon the Earth; and there is nothing
certain to be trusted in, below Christ Jesus, who is from above. You see in the
Scriptures, there were many Ways and Religions among the Heathen, as there were
many Sects among the Jews, when Christ came: And now there are many Sects, or
Religions among the Christians, who believe from the Scriptures, that he is
come; as the Jews believed, he was to come. But they that close their Eyes, and
stop their Ears to the Light of Christ, they are not like to see Christ, who
has enlightened them, to be their Ensign, and the Captain of their Salvation,
that see not with the heavenly Eye, nor hear with the heavenly Ear, to see and
hear their heavenly Ensign, and Captain of their Salvation, to convert them and
heal them; that they might follow him, and be of his holy Camp, and be his
heavenly Soldiers, to whom he gives spiritual Arms and Armor, the Helmet of
Salvation, the Breast Plate of Righteousness, the Armor of Light, and the
Shield of Faith (which will quench all the fiery Darts of Satan, and give
Victory) and the Sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, which shall cut and
hammer down, and burn up all the Strong holds of Satan. Also he cloatheth his
Soldiers with fine Linen, white and clean, his Righteousness, and shooeth them
with the everlasting Gospel of Peace, the Power of God; which Cloths and Shoes
will never wax Old. And all that are shod with the Everlasting Gospel, the
Power of God, they will never wax Old; but will stand all Storms and Tempests
in the World. And they that are shod with the Gospel, the Power of God, can in
it tread upon Serpents, Vipers and Scorpions, and all the venomous Beasts upon
the Earth, and all the Thorns, Briars, Brambles, Thistles, and sharp Rocks and
Mountains, and never be hurt, nor never wear out their Shoes; but their Feet
are always beautiful upon the Mountains. Moses a Captain, the Servant of the
Lord, said unto the People of Israel, I have led you forty years in the
Wilderness: your Cloths are not waxen old upon you, and thy Shoe is not waxen
old upon thy foot, Deuteronomy. 29.5. Here ye may see, the Jews in the Old Testament,
their Cloths and their Shoes did not wax old: But they, who are Christ's
followers, whom he shooeth with his Everlasting Gospel of Peace, and Cloatheth
with his fine Linen, his Righteousness, and Arms with his Arms and Armor,
they are clothed, shod and armed, with that which will never decay, nor wax
old, nor canker, nor rust, nor corrupt, nor grow blunt. Now all, (whether
Christians, or Jews, or Gentiles) that hate the Light of Christ, and close
their Eyes, and stop their Ears to it, are not like to see Christ their Ensign,
and Captain of their Salvation, but are blind. And as there is no outward
Captain, would List a Company of blind and deaf men, and cloth and arm them
with outward Armor; so such, as are blind and deaf, whose Eyes are closed, and
Ears stopped to the heavenly Light of Christ, he is not like to cloth them
with his fine Linen, and arm them with his heavenly and spiritual Armor; nor
are they like to be spiritually and heavenly disciplined, and to see and know
his holy and spiritual, living Camp, nor to follow him, while they are deaf and
blind, and hate his Light, which is the Life in Christ, the heavenly Ensign and
Captain of their Salvation. For it is the Light, that shines in the heart,
which gives the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Christ Jesus; who
is the Ensign and Captain of Men's Salvations, and who has brought, and does
bring many Sons unto glory: Praises, Honor and Glory be unto the Lord over
all, who lives for ever, Amen.

Gooses, the 14th of the 2d Month, 1690. G. F.

London.
A Week after this I returned to London: and after a little stay there, Kingston.
went down to visit Friends at Kingston, where I stayed not long; London.
but came back to London, and remained there in the Lord's work, Yearly Meeting.
till after the Yearly Meeting, which was in the Fourth Month this Year: in
which the wonted Goodness of the Lord was witnessed, and his blessed Presence
enjoyed, and his heavenly Power livingly felt, opening the hearts of his People
unto him, and his Divine Treasures of Life and Wisdom in and unto them; whereby
many useful and necessary things, relating to the safety of Friends, and to the
honor and prosperity of Truth, were weightily treated of, and unanimously
concluded.

After the Meeting was over, I writ the following Paper to Friends, to be added
to the Epistle, which from the Yearly Meeting was sent into the several
Counties.

ALL Friends every where, that are alive to God through Jesus Christ, and are
living Members of Christ the holy Head; Be still, and stand still in the Lord's
Camp of Holiness and Righteousness, and therein see the Salvation of God, and
your Eternal Life, Rest and Peace: and in it you may feel and see, the Lord's
Power is over all; and how the Lord is at work in his Power, and ruling the
Nations with his Rod of Iron, and is breaking (in the Nations) the old, leaky
Vessels and Cisterns to pieces, like the Potter's Vessels, that will not hold
his living Water of Life, who are erred from the Spirit. But blessed be the
Lord God of Heaven and Earth, 1690. London. Yearly Meeting.
who by his Eternal Arm and Power has settled all his People upon the living,
holy Rock and Foundation, that stands sure; whom he has drawn by his Spirit to
his Son, and gathered them into the Name of Jesus Christ, his only begotten
Son, full of Grace and Truth: who has all Power in Heaven and Earth given to
him. Whose Name is above every Name under the whole Heaven: and all his living
Members know, there is no Salvation given by any other Name under the whole
Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus; and he, their Salvation, and their living
Head is felt in the midst of them in his Light, Life, Spirit, Grace and Truth,
and his Word of Patience, Wisdom and Power: who is his People's Prophet, that
God has raised up, in his New Testament and Covenant, to open to them; and
their living Shepherd, that has purchased, redeemed and bought them with his
precious Blood. And Christ, the living One, feeds his living Sheep in his
living Pastures of Life, and his living Sheep know their living Shepherd's
voice, with his living Bread and Water, and follow him; and will not follow any
of the World's Hirelings, nor Thieves, nor Robbers, nor Climbers, that are
without Christ, the Door. And likewise Christ's living Children know Christ,
the Bishop of their Souls, to oversee them with his heavenly and spiritual Eye,
that they may be preserved in his Fold of Life, and go no more forth. And also
they know Christ, their holy Priest, that by the Grace of God tasted Death for
them, and for every Man, and is a Propitiation for their Sins; and not for
their Sins only, but for the Sins of the whole World: and by the one Offering
up of himself he has perfected for ever, them that are sanctified. And such an
High Priest becomes Christ's Sheep in his New Covenant and Testament, who is
holy and harmless, and separate from sinners, and is made higher than the
Heavens; who is not made a Priest after the Order of Aaron, with his Tithes,
Offerings, etc. but he makes an end of all those things, and has abolished
them: and is made an High Priest after the Power of an endless life, who ever
lives to make Intercession for his People; and is able to save to the
uttermost, all that come to God through him. Who is the one holy Mediator
betwixt God and Man: and who sanctifies his People, his Church, that he is Head
of, and presents them to God without spot, or wrinkle, or blemish, or any such
thing; and makes them an holy, royal Priesthood, to offer up spiritual, holy
Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, who is King of all Kings, and
Lord of all Lords in the Earth. So an holy, heavenly King, who has ^all power
in Heaven and Earth given to him; and rules in all the hearts of his Sheep and
Lambs by his holy, divine, precious Faith, that is held in all the pure
Consciences of his People: which holy Faith, Christ, the holy One, is the
Author and Finisher of. By which holy Faith all the Just live, and in which
holy, divine and precious Faith all the Just and holy Ones have Unity; and by
it they do quench all the fiery Darts of Satan: and by this holy, divine and
precious Faith they have access to the pure God, in which they do please him.
And Christ, who is set on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the
Heavens, in his New Testament and New Covenant, is a Minister of the Sanctuary
and true Tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not Man. And therefore all
the Lambs and Sheep of Christ must feel this holy Minister in their Temple and
Sanctuary, who ministers spiritual, holy and heavenly things to them in their
Sanctuary and Tabernacle. For all the Tabernacles and Sanctuaries, that are
built or pitched by Man, Men make Ministers for them; and such Ministers are of
Men and by Men, with their worldly Sanctuaries and Tabernacles of Men's
pitching, by Men's hands.

And now, all Dear Friends and Brethren every where, that are the Flock of
Christ: Christ, our Passover is sacrificed for us. Therefore let us all keep
this heavenly Feast of our Passover in his New Testament and Covenant, not with
Old Leaven neither of Malice nor Wickedness; but let all that be purged out,
with the sour old leavened Bread, that all may become a new Lump: and so keep
this heavenly Feast of Christ, our heavenly Passover, with the unleavened Bread
(mark, with the unleavened Bread) of Sincerity and Truth. My desires are, that
all the Flock of Christ every where may keep this heavenly Feast of Christ, our
heavenly Passover, with his heavenly, unleavened Bread of Sincerity and Truth,
Amen.

G. F.

I stayed in Town between Three Weeks and a Month, after the Yearly Meeting was
over: and then went into the Country, first to Tottenham-High-Cross,
Tottenham-High-Cross. Ford-green. Enfield.
where was a Meeting on the First Day of the Week, which I was at; and then
went to Edward Man's House at Ford-Green near Winchmore-Hill: and on the
First Day following went from thence to the Meeting at Enfield; where the Lord
gave me many precious Openings to declare to the People. Afterward, moving to
and fro amongst Friends thereabouts, I visited the Meetings at Chess-hunt,
Chess-hunt Waltham-Abbey. Enfield Tottenham Winchmore-hill. Hartford.
Waltham-Abbey, Enfield, Tottenham and Winchmore-hill frequently; the Lord
being with me, and opening many deep and weighty Truths, divine and heavenly
Mysteries to his People through me, to their great Refreshment, and my Joy.
After some time I went to Hartford, to visit the Friends there; and was at
their Meeting on a First Day. And having something more particular upon me to
the Ancient Friends of that place, I had a Meeting with some of them the next
day, and imparted to them, what the Lord had given me for them. Ware.
Then passing thence to Ware, I made a little stay amongst Friends there, and
was at their Meeting. After which, returning, Edmunton Tottenham London.
amongst Friends about Edmunton-side and Tottenham, and taking Meetings as I
went, I came back to London in the end of the Seventh Month.

I remained now at London, 1690. London.
till the beginning of the Ninth Month, being continually exercised in the Work
of the Lord, either in Public Meetings, opening the Way of Truth to People,
and building up and establishing Friends therein; or in other Services relating
to the Church of God. For the Parliament now sitting, and having a Bill before
them concerning Oaths, and another concerning Clandestine Marriages; several
Friends did attend the House, to see to get those Bills so worded, that they
might not be hurtful to Friends: In this Service I also assisted, attending on
the Parliament, and discoursing the Matter with several of the Members.

Having stayed more than a Month in London, and much spent my self in these
Services, I went out of Town to Tottenham, Tottenham Ford-Green.
and sometime after to Ford-Green near London; at which Places I continued
several Weeks, visiting Friends Meetings round about there, at Tottenham,
Enfield and Winchmore-Hill. Tottenham Enfield. Winchmore-hill.
In this time several things came upon me to Write: whereof One was an Epistle
to Friends in the Ministry; and was as follows:

ALL Friends in the Ministry every where, Ford-Green.
to whom God has given a Gift of the Ministry, and who use to Travel up and
down in the Gift of the Ministry, Do not hide your Talent, nor put your Light
under a Bushel; Nor Cumber your selves, nor entangle your selves with the
Affairs of this World. For the natural Soldiers are not to Cumber themselves
with the World; much less the Soldiers of Christ, who are not of this World;
but are to mind the Riches and Glory of the World, that is Everlasting. And
therefore stir up the Gift of God in you, and Improve it: and do not sit down,
Demas-like, and embrace this present World, that will have an end; lest ye
become Idolaters. But be valiant for God's Truth upon the Earth, and spread it
abroad in the Daylight of Christ, you who have sought the Kingdom of God, and
the Righteousness thereof, and have received it and preached it; which stands
in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost: As Able Ministers of
the Spirit sow to the Spirit, that of the Spirit ye may reap Life Everlasting.
And go on in the Spirit, plowing with it in the purifying Hope; and threshing,
with the Power and Spirit of God, the Wheat out of the Chaff of Corruption, in
the same Hope. For he that looks back from the spiritual Plow into the World,
is not fit for the Spiritual and Everlasting Kingdom of God; and then he is not
like to press into it, as the Faithful do. Therefore you that are awakened, and
are come to Righteousness, and to the Knowledge of the Truth, keep your selves
awakened in it; then the Enemy cannot sow his Tares in your Field: for Truth
and Righteousness is over him, and before he was. So my desires are, that all
may fulfill their Ministry, that the Lord Jesus Christ has committed to them;
and then by the Blood (or Life) and Testimony of Jesus you will overcome the
Enemy, that opposes it, within and without. And all you that do preach the
Truth, do it as it is in Jesus, in Love: And all that are Believers in Jesus,
1690. Ford-Green.
and receivers of him, he gives them Power to become the Sons of God, and so
Joint-heirs with Christ; whom he calls Brethren: and he gives them the Water
of Life, which shall be a Well in them, springing as a River up to Eternal
Life; that they may water the spiritual Plants of the living God. So that all
may be spiritual Planters, and spiritual Waterers; and may see with the
spiritual Eye the Everlasting, Eternal God over all to give the Increase, who
is the Infinite Fountain. So my desires are, that you may be kept our of all
the beggarly Elements of the World, which is below the spiritual Region, to
Christ the Head; and may hold him, who bruiseth the Head of Enmity, and was,
before it was: So that ye may all be united together in love, in your Head,
Christ, and be ordered by his heavenly, gentle, peaceable Wisdom to the Glory
of God. For all that be in Christ, are in love, peace and Unity; and in him
they are strong, and in a full Persuasion: and in him, who is the First and
Last, they are in a heavenly Resolution and Confidence for God's Everlasting
Honor and Glory, Amen.

From him, who is Translated into the Kingdom of his Dear Son, with all his
Saints, a heavenly Salutation: And salute ye one another with a holy Kiss of
Charity, that never fails. G. F.
Ford Green, the 25th of the 9th Month, 1690.
Another Epistle I writ soon after, more particularly to the Friends in the
Ministry, that were gone into America: which was thus; DEar Friends and
Brethren, that are Ministers, and Exhorters, and Admonishers, that are gone
into America and the Islands there-aways: Stir up the Gift of God in you, and
the pure Mind, and improve your Talents; that ye may be the Light of the World,
a City set upon an Hill, that cannot be hid: and let your Light shine among the
Indians, and the Blacks and the Whites; that ye may answer the Truth in them,
and bring them to their Standard and Ensign, that God has set up, Christ
Jesus. For from the Rising of the Sun to the Going down of the same God's Name
shall be great among the Gentiles; and in every Temple, or sanctified Heart,
Incense shall be offered up to God's Name. And have Salt in your selves, that
ye may be the Salt of the Earth, that ye may salt it; that it may be preserved
from Corruption and Putrefaction: so that all Sacrifices, offered up to the
Lord, may be salted and seasoned, and be a good Savor to God. And all grow in
the Faith and Grace of Christ, that ye may not be like Dwarfs: for a Dwarf
shall not come near to Offer upon God's Altar; though he may eat of God's
Bread, that he may grow by it. And Friends, Be not negligent, but keep up your
Negroes-Meetings and your Family-Meetings; and have Meetings with the Indian
Kings, 1690. Tottenham
and their Councils and Subjects every where, and with others: and bring them
all to the Baptizing and Circumcising Spirit, by which they may know God, and
serve and worship him. And all take heed of sitting down in the Earth, and
having your Minds in the earthly Things, Coveting and Striving for the Earth:
for to be carnally minded brings death, and Covetousness is Idolatry. There is
too much Strife and Contention about that Idol, which makes too many go out of
the Sense and Fear of God; so that some have lost Morality and Humanity, and
the true Christian Charity. O therefore, be awakened to Righteousness, and keep
awakened: for the Enemy sows his Tares, while Men and Women sleep in
Carelessness and Security. Therefore so many slothful Ones go in their filthy
Rags, and have not the fine Linen, the Righteousness of Christ; but are
straggling, and plowing with their Ox and their Ass, in their woollen and linen
Garments, mixed Stuff, feeding upon Torn food, and that dies of it self, and
drinking of the dregs of their old Bottle, and eating the sour, leavened Bread,
which makes their hearts burn one against another. But all are to keep the
Feast of Christ, our Passover, with the unleavened Bread of Sincerity and
Truth. And this unleavened Bread of Life from Heaven makes all Hearts and Souls
glad and joyful, and lightsome and cheerful, to serve and love God, and to love
and serve one another in the peaceable Truth, and to keep in the Unity of God's
Spirit, which is the Bond of (the Lord of Lords, and the King of all Kings his)
Peace. In this Love and Peace God Almighty keep and preserve all his People,
and make them valiant for his Truth upon the Earth, to spread it abroad both in
Doctrine, and good Life and Conversation, Amen.

All the Members of Christ have need one of another. For the Foot has need of
the Hand, and the Hand has need of the Foot: The Ear has need of the Eye, and
the Eye of the Ear. So that all the Members are serviceable in the Body, which
Christ is the Head of; and the Head sees their Service. Therefore let none
despise the least Member.

And have a Care to keep down that greedy, earthly Mind, that raveneth and
coveteth after the Riches and Things of this World; lest ye fall into the low
Region, like the Gentiles or Heathen, and so lose the Kingdom of God, that is
Everlasting: But seek that first, and God knows, what things ye have need of;
who takes care for all both in Heaven and in the Earth: Thanks be unto God for
his unspeakable Gifts, both Temporal and Spiritual.

Tottenham, the 11th of the 10th Month, 1690. G. F.




Not long after this I returned to London, and was almost daily with Friends at
Meetings. 1690. London.
And when I had been near Two Weeks in Town, The sense of the great Hardships
and sore Sufferings, that Friends had been and were under in Ireland, coming
with great weight upon me; I was moved to write the following Epistle, as a
Word of Consolation unto them.

DEar Friends and Brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, whom the Lord by his
Eternal Arm and Power has upheld through your great Sufferings, Exercises,
Trials and Hardships (more, I believe, then can be uttered) up and down that
Nation, which I am very sensible of; and the rest of the faithful Friends, that
have been Partakers with you in your Sufferings: and cannot but suffer with the
Lord's People, that suffer. And my Confidence has been in the Lord, that he
would and will support you in all your Sufferings; and that he would preserve
all the Faithful in his Wisdom, that they would give no just Occasion to one
nor other to make them suffer: And therefore, if that you did suffer
wrongfully, or unjustly, the righteous God would assist you, and uphold you;
and reward them according to their Works, that oppressed or wronged you. And now
my desire is unto the Lord, that in the same holy and heavenly Wisdom of God ye
may all be preserved to the End of your days, to the Glory of God, minding God
Almighty's supporting Hand and Power: who is God All-sufficient, to strengthen,
help and refresh in time of Need. And let none forget the Lord's Mercies and
Kindnesses, which endure for ever: but always live in the sense of them. And
truly Friends, when I consider the thing, It is the great Mercy of the Lord,
that ye have not been all swallowed up; seeing with what Spirits ye have been
compassed about. But the Lord carries his Lambs in his Arms, and they are as
tender to him, as the Apple of his Eye: And his Power is his Hedge about his
Vineyard of heavenly Plants. And therefore it is good for all his Children, to
be given up to the Lord with their Minds and Souls, Hearts and Spirits, who is
a faithful Keeper, that never slumbers nor sleeps; but is able to preserve and
keep you, and to save to the utmost: and none can hurt so much as an hair of
your Heads, except he suffer it, to try you; for he upholds all things, in
Heaven and Earth, by the Word of his Power: All things were made by Christ, and
by him all things do consist (mark, consist) whether they be Visibles, or
Invisibles, etc. So he has power over all; for all Power in Heaven and Earth
is given to him: and to you, that have received him, he has given Power to
become the Sons and Daughters of God; so living Members of Christ, the living
Head, and grafted into him, in whom ye have Eternal Life. And Christ, the Seed,
reigns, and his Power is over all; who bruises the Serpent's Head, and destroys
the Devil and his Works, and was before he was. And so all of you live and walk
in Christ Jesus; so that nothing may be between you and God, but Christ, in
whom ye have Salvation, Life, Rest and Peace with God.

As for the passages of Truth in this Land and abroad, I do hear, that in
Holland and Germany and there-aways, Friends are in Love, Unity and Peace: And
in Jamaica, Barbados, Mevis, Antego, Maryland and New England I hear nothing,
but Friends are in Unity and Peace. The Lord preserve them all out of the
World, (in which there is Trouble) in Christ Jesus, in whom there is Peace,
Life, Love and Unity, Amen. So my Love in the Lord Jesus Christ to all Friends
every where in your Land, as though I named them.

London, the 10th of the 11th Month, 1690. G. F.


THus, Reader, have thou had some Account of the Life and Travels, Labors,
Sufferings and Manifold Trials and Exercises of this holy Man of God, from his
Youth to almost the time of his Death: Of which himself kept a Journal; out of
which the foregoing Sheets were transcribed. It remains, that an Account be
added of the Time, Place and Manner of his Death and Burial; Which were thus:

The next day, after he had written the foregoing Epistle to Friends in
Ireland, be went to the Meeting at Gracious-street, which was large (it being
on the First Day of the Week:) And the Lord enabled him to preach the Truth
fully and effectually, opening many deep and weighty things with great Power
and Clearness. After which having Prayed, and the Meeting being ended, he went
to Henry Gouldney 's (a Friend's House in Whitehart-Court, near the Meeting
house:) and some Friends going with him thither, he told them, He thought, he
felt the Cold strike to his heart, as he came out of the Meeting; yet added, I
am glad I was here: Now I am clear, I am fully clear. As soon as those Friends,
that were with him, were withdrawn, he lay down upon a Bed (as he sometimes
used to do, through Weariness after a Meeting) but soon rose again; and in a
little time lay down again, complaining still of Cold. And his Strength
sensibly decaying, he was fain soon after to go into Bed; where he lay in much
Contentment and Peace, and very sensible to the Last. And as in the whole
Course of his Life, his Spirit in the universal Love of God, was set and bent
for the exalting of Truth and Righteousness, and the making known the Way
thereof to the Nations and Peoples afar off; so now, in the time of his outward
Weakness, his Mind was intent upon, and (as it were) wholly taken up with that:
And some particular Friends he sent for, to whom he expressed his Mind and Desire
for the Spreading Friends Books, and Truth thereby in the World, and through
the Nations thereof. Diverse Friends came to visit him in his Ilness; unto some
of whom he said, All is well: The Seed of God reigns over all, and over Death
it self. And though (said he) I am weak in Body; yet the Power of God is over
all, and the Seed reigns over all disorderly Spirits. Thus lying in an heavenly
frame of Mind, his Spirit wholly exercised toward the Lord, he grew weaker and
weaker in his natural Strength; and on the Third day of that Week, between the
hours of Nine and Ten in the Evening, he quietly departed this Life in Peace,
and sweetly fell asleep in the Lord, whose blessed Truth he had livingly and
powerfully preached in the Meeting but two days before. Thus ended he his Days
in his faithful Testimony, in perfect Love and Unity with his Brethren, and in
Peace and Good Will to all Men, on the 13th day of the 11th Month 1690. being
then in the 67th year of his Age.

Upon the 16th day of the same Month (being the sixth of the Week, and the Day
appointed for his Funeral) a very great Concourse of Friends, and other People
of diverse sorts, Assembled together at the Meeting House in White-Hart-Court
near Gracious-street, about the middle time of the day, in order to attend his
Body to the Grave. The Meeting was held about two hours with great and heavenly
Solemnity, manifestly attended with the Lord's blessed Presence and glorious
Power; in which diverse living Testimonies were given, from a lively Remembrance
and Sense of the blessed Ministry of this Dear and Ancient Servant of the Lord,
his early Entering into the Lord's Work at the breaking forth of this
Gospel-day, his innocent Life, long and great Travels, and unwearied Labors of
Love in the Everlasting Gospel, for the turning and gathering many Thousands
from Darkness to the Light of Christ Jesus, the Foundation of true Faith; his
manifold Sufferings, Afflictions and Oppositions, which he met withal for his
faithful Testimony, both from his open Adversaries, and from false Brethren;
and his Preservations, Deliverances and Dominion in, out of and over them all,
by the Power of God: To whom the Glory and Honor always was by him, and is,
and always ought to be by all Ascribed.

After the Meeting was ended, his Body was born by Friends, and accompanied by
very great Numbers of Friends, and other People, to Friends Burying-Ground near
Bunhill-Fields: where, after a solemn Waiting upon the Lord, and several living
Testimonies borne, recommending the Company to the Guidance and Protection of
that Divine Spirit and Power, by which this holy Man of God had been raised up,
furnished, supported and preserved to the end of his Day, his Body was decently
committed to the Earth; but his Memorial shall Remain, and be Everlastingly
Blessed among the Righteous.

An Epistle of Dear George Fox's, which was writ with his own Hand, and left
Sealed up with this Superscription, (viz. Not to be opened before the Time;)
which after his Decease being opened, was thought meet to be printed, being as
follows: Viz. For the Yearly and Second-Days-Meeting in London, and to all
the Children of God in all Places in the World. By and from G. F.
This for all the Children of God every where, that are led by his Spirit, and
do walk in his Light, in which they have Life, and Unity, and Fellowship with
the Father, and the Son, and one with another.
KEep all your Meetings in the Name of the Lord Jesus, that be gathered in his
Name by his Light, Grace, Truth, Power and Spirit; by which you will feel his
blessed and refreshing Presence among you and in you, to your Comfort and God's
Glory.

And now all Friends, All your Meetings, both Men's and Women's, Monthly and
Quarterly, and Yearly, etc. were set up by the Power, and Spirit, and Wisdom of
God; and in them you do know, that you have felt both his Power, and Spirit,
and Wisdom, and blessed refreshing Presence among you, and in you, to his
Praise and Glory, and your Comfort: So that you have been a City set on a Hill,
that cannot be hid.

And although many loose and unruly Spirits have risen betimes to Oppose you
and them, both in Print and other ways; but you have seen, how they have come
to Naught: and the Lord has blasted them, and brought their Deeds to Light,
and made them Manifest to be the Trees without Fruit, and Wells without Water,
and Wandering Stars from the Firmament of God's Power, and the Raging Waves of
the Sea, casting up their Mire and Dirt: And many of them are like the Dog
turned to his Old Vomit, and the Sow that was washed, turned again to the Mire.
And this has been the Condition of many, God knows, and his People!

And therefore all to stand Steadfast in Christ Jesus, your Head, in whom you
are all one, Male and Female, and know his Government, and of the Increase of
his Government and Peace there shall be no End; but there will be an End of the
Devil's, and of all them, that be out of Christ, and do Oppose it and him,
whose Judgment does not linger, and their Damnation does not slumber: And
therefore in God and Christ's Light, Life, Spirit and Power live and walk, that
is over all (and the Seed of it) in Love and in Innocence, and Simplicity; and
in Righteousness and Holiness dwell, and in his Power and Holy Ghost, in which
God's Kingdom does stand. All Children of New and Heavenly Jerusalem, that is
from above, and is free, with all her Holy, Spiritual Children, To her keep
your Eyes.

And as for this Spirit of Rebellion and Opposition, that has risen formerly
and lately, it is out of the Kingdom of God and Heavenly Jerusalem; and is for
Judgment and Condemnation, with all its Books, Words and Works. And therefore
Friends are to live and walk in the Power and Spirit of God, that is over it,
and in the Seed, that will bruise and break it to pieces: In which Seed you
have Joy and Peace with God, and Power and Authority to Judge it; and your
Unity is in the Power and Spirit of God, that does Judge it: and all God's
Witnesses in his Tabernacle go out against it, and always have and will.

And let no Man live to Self, but to the Lord, as they will die in him; and
seek the Peace of the Church of Christ, and the Peace of all Men in him: for
Blessed are the Peacemakers. And dwell in the pure, peaceable, Heavenly Wisdom
of God, that is Gentle, and Easy to be entreated, that is full of Mercy; all
striving to be of one Mind, Heart, Soul and Judgment in Christ, having his Mind
and Spirit dwelling in you, building up one another in the Love of God, which
does edify the Body of Christ, his Church, who is the holy Head thereof. So
Glory to God through Christ, in this Age and all other Ages, who is the Rock
and Foundation, and the Emanuel, God with us, Amen, over all, the Beginning and
the Ending; in him Live and Walk, in whom you have Life Eternal, in whom you
will feel me, and I you.

All Children of New Jerusalem, that descends from above, the Holy City, which
the Lord and the Lamb is the Light thereof, and is the Temple; in it they are
born again of the Spirit: So Jerusalem that is above, is the Mother of them,
that are born of the Spirit. And so they that come, and are come to Heavenly
Jerusalem, are them that receive Christ; and he gives them Power to become the
Sons of God, and are born again of the Spirit: So Jerusalem, that is their
Mother. And such do come to Heavenly Mount Sion, and the innumerable Company of
Angels, and to the Spirits of just Men made perfect; and are come to the Church
of the Living God written in Heaven, and have the Name of God, and the City of
God written upon them: So here is a New Mother, that brings forth a Heavenly
and a Spiritual Generation.

There is no Schism, nor Division, nor Contention, nor Strife in Heavenly
Jerusalem, nor in the Body of Christ, which is made up of living Stones, a
Spiritual House. And Christ is not divided, for in him there is Peace. Christ
says, In me you have Peace. And he is from above, and not of this World; but
in the World below, in the Spirit of it there is Trouble: therefore keep in
Christ, and walk in him, Amen.

G. F.
And Jerusalem was the Mother of all the true Christians before the Apostasy;
and since the outward Christians are broken into many Sects, and they have
gotten many Mothers: But all they, that are come out of the Apostasy by the
Power and Spirit of Christ, Jerusalem that is above, is their Mother, (and none
below her;) who does nourish all her Spiritual Children.

Read at the Yearly Meeting in London, 1691.

G. F.




Reader, please to note, That these following Papers and Epistles (some of
which being mentioned in the Journal, page 452, etc. and there omitted) are
found meet to be here inserted; and are as follows.
A Warning to the Magistrates and People of the City of Oldenborg.
Friends,
HAve you not seen and felt the Judgments of God upon your City, the Lord
sending Lightning from Heaven, Amsterdam.
that destroyed and burnt it? And as I passed through your City on a First Day
of the Week, which you call your Sabbath, To page 448
I saw some drinking, and Soldiers playing at Shuffle-board, and others with
their Shops open, and Trading, when they should have been Waiting upon God, and
Worshipping him: And your People were light and vain, without any sense of
God's Judgments, or Repentance. O therefore Repent, lest the All-seeing God,
who sees all your Actions, and is over all, do bring swift Judgment upon you in
his Wrath and Fury, and Indignation. And so Repent, and lay away all manner of
Evil, and Wickedness, and Ungodliness, and Unrighteousness: for the Day of the
Lord will come upon all that do Evil, and the Workers of Iniquity; and this
mighty Day of the Lord will find them all out, and will burn, as an Oven; and
burn up all the Proud and Wicked, and neither leave them Root nor Branch. And
therefore all ye Magistrates, Priests and People, search in your selves to find
out the Cause, and what Wickedness and Evil it has been you have Committed,
that has brought the Wrath, and Vengeance, and Judgments of God upon you and
upon your City, in burning of it. And therefore all Return, and come to the
Light of Christ in your hearts, and to God's Spirit, and to the Grace and Truth
in your hearts, that comes by Jesus Christ; that with it ye may search your
hearts. And so, do not grieve, nor vex, nor quench God's good Spirit in your
hearts, and walk not despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, nor turn from it
into Wantonness; and yet make a Profession of God and Christ in Words, 1677.
Amsterdam.
when your hearts are afar off, and living in Pleasures, and wantonly upon the
Earth, sporting your selves, killing the Just, and Crucifying to your selves
Christ afresh, and putting him to open shame: And so dishonouring God and
Christ, and Christianity, and making a Profession and a Trade of the
Scriptures; keeping People always Learning, that they may be always paying.

Therefore Cease from Man, whose Breath is in his Nostrils, and look unto the
Lord, all ye ends of the Earth, and be saved: for the Lord God of Heaven and
Earth is come, to teach his People himself by his Light, Spirit, Grace and
Truth, and to bring them off all the World's Teachers. And God has raised up
Christ Jesus his Prophet, whom People should hear; and says, This is my
beloved Son, hear ye him: and Christ says, Learn of me, I am the Way, the
Truth and the Life; and no Man comes to the Father, but by me. And there is no
Salvation by any other Name under the whole Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus,
who says, I am the good Shepherd, and have laid down my Life for my Sheep, and
my Sheep hear my voice and follow me, and will not follow the Hireling: For
Christ feeds them in the Pastures of Life, that will never wither. And God has
anointed Christ Jesus to preach, if you will hear him; and God has given
Christ for a Counselor, and a Leader, if you will be Led and Counseled by
him; and God has given Christ for a Bishop to Oversee you, and a King to Rule
you, if you will be Overseen and Ruled by him. And you that will not have
Christ to Rule over you, who never sinned, nor Guile was found in his Mouth;
you may read his Sentence in the New Testament upon such. And is not Christ a
sufficient Teacher, whose Blood was shed for you, and tasted Death for every
Man? And does not Christ say to his Ministers, Freely ye have received, freely
give? And the Apostle says, We covet no Man's Gold, Silver or Apparel; but
Labored with their Hands, and kept the Gospel without Charge: Have they that
are called Ministers amongst you, done the same, and kept this Command of
Christ Jesus? Let them be Examined, and Examine themselves. And have you not
trimmed your Outsides? but look within with the Light and Spirit of Christ
Jesus, and see, if your Insides be not black and foul. For Christ Jesus, who
does Enlighten every Man, that comes into the World, with the Life in himself,
who is the Word, he says; Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of
the Light: and with the Light ye may see all the Evil Deeds ye have done, and
all your ungodly Deeds, that ye have acted and committed; and all your ungodly
Words you have spoken; and all your ungodly Thoughts ye think; that ye may turn
from them, and turn to Christ, from whence the Light comes: who is your Savior
and Redeemer, who has given you a Light to see your Sin, and how that you are
dead in Adam; that with the same Light you may see Christ, the quickening
Spirit, who makes you alive to God, and saves you from your sin. But if you
hate the Light, which is the Life in Christ, the Prince of Life; and Love the
Darkness and the Prince of Darkness more, than the Light, or the Life in
Christ, whose Deeds be Evil, and because it will Reprove you; Christ tells you,
This Light will be your Condemnation, John 3. And therefore be Warned now in
your Day, and while you have Time, turn to the Lord, and do not quench the
Spirit of the Father, by which he draws to his Son: nor hate the Light of
Christ; for if you do, you hate the Life in Christ, and so remain under
Condemnation from God and Christ with the Light, who now speaks to his People
by his Son, as he did in the Apostles Days; so the same God, that was the
Speaker by the Prophets to the Fathers, and Speaker to Adam and Eve in
Paradise: And happy had Adam and Eve, and the Jews, and all Christians been, if
they had kept to this Speaker, and not have followed the Serpent, that false
Speaker, and his Instruments. And now God is the true Speaker by his Son, who
bruises the Head of the Serpent, the false Teacher, who is the Head of all
false Ways, and false Prophets, and false Churches, and false Religions and
Worships. And so God and Christ is bringing People to the pure and undefiled
Religion, that will keep them from the Spots of the World; and into the new and
living Way, Christ Jesus; and to the Church in God, which Christ is the Head
of, as he was in the Apostles Days; and to worship God in the Spirit and Truth,
which Worship Christ set up above Sixteen hundred years since. And therefore
must all People come to the Grace and Spirit of Truth in their own hearts, to
know the God of Truth, who is a Spirit, and in the Spirit and Truth to worship,
and serve, and honor, and glorify the Living God, who is over all, and Worthy
of all, Blessed for evermore, Amen.

And ye Magistrates and Officers, read this in all your Assemblies, and cause
all your Priests to read it in their Churches; that they and you, and all
People may hear and fear the God of Heaven, as you will Answer it at the Great
and Terrible Day of Judgment, and Vengeance of the Lord God Almighty. And this
is in Love to your Souls, and for your Temporal and Eternal Good.

Amsterdam, the 19th of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.

1677. Harlingen in Friezland
An Epistle concerning true Fasting, true Prayer, true Honor, and against
Persecution, and for the true Liberty in Christ Jesus; To page 438
and that all may have a care, that the Apostle has not bestowed his Labor in
vain upon you in your observing of Days, Months, Times, Feasts and Years, and
of coming under the beggarly Elements, and the Yoke of Bondage again, and of
bringing and forcing People into them.
WHere did ever Christ or his Apostles Command any Believers or Christians to
observe Holy Days or Feast-Days? and let us see, where it is written in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, in the Four Evangelists, or the Epistles, or
the Revelation, that ever Christ or his Apostles gave the Christians any such
Command, that they should observe the Time called Christmas, or a Day for
Christ's Birth? or that they should observe the Time called Easter, or
Whitsuntide, or Peter, or Paul's, or Mark or Luke's Days, or any other Saints
Day?

Now you, that profess your selves to be the Reformed Churches from the
Papists, Jews and Heathen, and the Scriptures to be your Rule, and are
Professors of the New Covenant, where do you prove out of the Scriptures of the
New Testament, that the Apostles and the Primitive Church practiced or forced
any such thing, or that Christ and his Apostles gave any such Command to the
Churches, that they should practice and observe any such Days? Let us see,
where this Command is written. For did not the Apostle say unto the Galatians
in the fourth Chapter; But now, after that ye have known God, or rather ye are
known of God, how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye
desire again to be in bondage? Ye observe Days, and Months, and Times and
Years; I am afraid of you, lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain. And in
the Third of Galatians it is said; O foolish Galatians, who has bewitched you,
that you should not obey the Truth, etc. And in Galatians the Fifth, the
Apostle exhorts them to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ had made
them free: and moreover said, Be not entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage.

Now does not this manifest, that there were some Teachers, that were drawing
the Church of the Galatians into these beggarly Elements, and bringing them
again into Bondage, in observing of Days, Months, Times and Years? for it was
the Apostle's Work to bring them out of those Bondages and beggarly Elements;
and therefore, when they were going back again into observing Days, Months,
Times and Years, he was afraid, that he had bestowed his Labor upon them in
vain: and he Exhorts them, to stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ Jesus
has made them free, and not to be entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage:
and Again signifies, That they had been once entangled with that Yoke of
Bondage and beggarly Elements. But O! how are People, called Christians, since
the Apostles Days gone again under this Yoke of Bondage, and these beggarly
Elements, in observing Days, Months, Times and Years, let their practice
declare. Nay, do not both Papists and Protestants force People to observe Days,
Months and Times? etc. And therefore is not the Apostle's Labor and Travel
bestowed upon Christendom in vain, which was to bring People from under such
beggarly Elements and that Yoke of Bondage, (which the Law did require;) to
stand fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free, and not to be
entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage? So it was and is Christ, that has
made and does make his People free, from these things and beggarly Elements.
And therefore they that are Redeemed, are to stand fast in that Liberty,
wherewith Christ has made them free. And this Liberty, which all true
Christians are to stand fast in, they are made free by Christ, and not by Man;
for Man with out the Spirit and Mind of Christ, seeks to force and compel
Christ's Followers, and such as he has made free from the Yoke of Bondage, to
outward things, that the Law commanded, and to the observing of Days, Months,
Times, Feasts and Years: such weak, beggarly Elements, them that know God, or
are known of God and Christ; are to stand fast in their Liberty, and not come
under, nor be entangled with the Yoke of Bondage of such things again, seeing,
he has made them free. For they that are in such things, and would force
others to them, are gone from that, which gives them the knowledge of God; and
have not stood fast in the Liberty, wherewith Christ makes free.

And now concerning Prayer, we do not read, that ever Christ or his Apostles
did Compel by force any to Fast or Pray, and make a Law to strain the Goods of
such, as would not observe Days to fast and pray with them. But Christ taught
them, how they should pray, and be distinct from the Hypocrites; and Christ's
words are as follows: When thou prayest, thou shall not be, as the Hypocrites
are; for they love to stand praying in the Synagogues; and in the Corners of
the Streets, that they may be seen of Men, etc. But when thou prayest, enter
into thy Closet, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy Father, which is
in secret, and thy Father, that sees in secret, will Reward thee openly. But
when you pray, use not vain Repetitions, as the Heathen do; for they think,
that they shall be heard for their much speaking. Be not ye therefore like
them; for your Father knows, what things ye have need of, before ye ask him,
etc. So as the Apostles and Saints did, so do we; we pray in secret, and we
pray in public, as the Spirit gives us utterance, which helps our Infirmities,
as it did the Apostles and true Christians: and after this manner we pray for
our selves, and pray for all Men both high and low.

Concerning Fasting, Christ says; Moreover when ye fast, be not as the
Hypocrites of a sad Countenance; for they disfigure their Faces, that they may
appear unto Men to fast. But when thou fastest, anoint thy Head, and wash thy
face, that thou appear not unto Men to fast, 1677. Harlingen in Frietzland.
but unto thy Father which is in secret; and thy Father, which sees in secret,
shall Reward thee openly.

And likewise you may see in Isaiah the 58th, what the true Fast is, the Lord
requires: where it is said to the Prophet; Cry aloud, and spare not, lift up
thy Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People their Transgression, and the House
of Jacob their sins; yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways, as a
Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God: they
ask of me the Ordinances of Justice, they take delight in approaching to God.
Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou see not? wherefore have we
afflicted our Soul, and thou take no knowledge? Behold, in the day of your
Fast ye find pleasure, and exact all your Labors. Behold, ye fast for strife
and debate, and to smite with the Fist of Wickedness; ye shall not fast, as ye
do this day, to make your Voice to be heard on high. Is it such a Fast, that I
have chosen? A day for a Man to afflict his Soul? Is it to bow down his Head as
a Bull-rush, and to spread Sackcloth and Ashes under him? Will thou call this a
Fast, and an acceptable Day to the Lord? Is not this the Fast that I have
chosen, says the Lord; To loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo the heavy
Burdens, and to let the Oppressed go free, and that ye break every Yoke? 'So
this Fast that the Lord requires, is not to lay Yokes, and Oppress and lay
Heavy Burdens, and to make fast the Bands of Wickedness; but to loose and to
break such things.

And further, Concerning the true Fast the Lord requires; Is it not, to deal
thy Bread to the Hungry, and that thou bring the Poor, that are cast out, to
thy House? When thou see the Naked, that thou cover him, and that thou hide
not thy self from thy own Flesh? (Do you keep this true Fast?) Then shall thy
Light break forth as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily:
and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the Lord shall be thy
Re-reward. Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall Answer; thou shall cry, and
he shall say, here I am: If thou take away from the midst of thee the Yokes,
the putting forth of the Finger, and speaking Vanity: And if thou draw out thy
Soul to the Hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul; then shall thy Light arise
out of obscurity, and thy Darkness be as the Noonday. And the Lord shall guide
thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in drought, and make fat thy Bones: and
thou shall be like a watered Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters
fail not, etc.

Now here is the practice of the true Fast the Lord requires of his People; and
they that observe this Fast, the Lord says; When they call, he will Answer.
And you may see what glorious and happy Comforts they do receive from the Lord,
that keep this true Fast; but such as fast for Strife and Debate, and smite
with the fists of Wickedness, to make their Voices to be heard on high, and
afflict their Souls for a day, and bow down their Head as a Bull-rush, and
looses not the Bands of Wickedness, and does not undo every heavy Burden, and
break off every Yoke, and let the Oppressed go free, and does not deal his
Bread to the Hungry, and clothe the Naked, and bring the Poor to his House, but
hides himself from his own Flesh, and clothes not the Naked: Such Fasts and
Fasters the Lord does not accept, neither has he chosen them. But these appear
to Men with their disfigured Faces, and hanging down their Heads as a Bull-rush
for a Day, like the Hypocrites to fast, as Christ speaks of in Matthew. 6.

And is it not the Command of Christ, that in their Fast they should not appear
unto Men to Fast? And now you, that would force us to shut up our Shops on
Fasting-days, or for a Day, does not this Fast appear to Men? and is not this
the Fast, that the Lord says in Isaiah, he does not accept? for he says; Is
this the Fast that I have chosen, a Day for a Man to afflict his Soul, and bow
down his Head, as a Bull-rush, etc. Will thou call this a Fast, and an
acceptable Day to the Lord? Isai. 58.

And therefore all God's People are to keep the true Fast of the Lord from
Debate and Strife, and the Fists of Wickedness; and that Fast, that breaks the
Bands of Wickedness, and undoes every heavy Burden, and breaks every Yoke, and
lets the Oppressed go free, and deals Bread to the Hungry, and clothes the
Naked, and brings the Poor that are cast out, to his own House. So every one
that keeps this true Fast, their Health shall grow, and when they Call, the
Lord will hear them; and the Lord will be their Guide continually, and satisfy
their Souls in drought, and make their Bones fat, and shall be like a watered
Garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters fail not. Now you, that keep
not this true Fast, when you call upon the Lord on your own Fasting-days, does
the Lord Answer you, and say, Here I am? does the Lord guide you continually?
and is your Bones made fat by him, and your Souls satisfied in drought? and are
you like a watered Garden, and like a Spring, whose Waters fail not? But you
that keep not this true Fast, do you not want these Waters, which fail not? so
your Souls are not satisfied in drought, but your Bones are lean, and you hear
not the Voice of the Lord, who says, Here I am: and so you lose the Heritage
of Jacob, and ride not upon the High Places there; but come under. And
therefore every Man and Woman, shut your hearts against all manner of Evil
whatsoever, and trade not with Babylon's Merchants of Confusion; but keep the
Supernatural Day of Christ, that is sprung from on high, that is, by believing
and walking in the Light of Christ, and being grafted into him: and this will
bring you to the true Fast, from feeding upon any Evil, and to the true praying
in the Spirit, as Christ and the Apostles have taught: which Fruits of the
Spirit is Love, etc. which Birth of the Spirit is not a persecuting Birth: But
he that is born of the Flesh, will persecute him that is born of the Spirit,
because he will not follow the Birth of the Flesh, with its weak, beggarly
Elements, that entangles with its Yoke of Bondage, and its observing of Days,
Months, Times, Fasts, Feasts and Years; which the Birth of the Spirit is to
stand fast against in the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made it free.

And do you not know, that the very Turks keep their Sabbath on the Sixth Day,
and the Jews upon the Seventh Day, and the Christians meet together on the
First Day of the Week? And that Day, which the Turks keep, the Jews and
Christians Shops are open; and that Day the Jews keep, Christians and Turks
Shops are open; and the First-Days, that the Christians keep, both Jews, and
Turks Shops are open? and so the Turk does not force the Jews nor the
Christians, to shut up their Shops on their Meeting-Days, but lets them have
their Liberty in the Turks Country. And where do you read, that ever the Turks
forced any Christians to observe any of their Holy Days, or Fasts, or Feasts?
And if not, should not Christians be beyond the Turks in giving Liberty to all
tender Consciences to serve God, seeing Christ and the Apostles command not,
nor force People to observe Holy Days, or Times, or Months, or Years, but
should Pray always in the Spirit, and Fast always from Strife and Debate, from
all manner of Sin and Evil; and that will keep down the Fist of Wickedness, and
the Bond of Iniquity? etc. And why should not People, that be of a tender
Conscience, have their Liberty to exercise their Consciences toward God, that
they may have a good Conscience always, toward God and Man, to that which God
requires, and to do unto all Men, as they would have them to do unto them, and
to love their Neighbors as themselves; seeing that there are so many
debauched, evil and seared Consciences, as with an hot Iron, have the Liberty
in their loose Lives and Conversations, and in their loose Words, whose Tongues
are at Liberty to Swear and Curse, and their Spirits are at Liberty in
Drunkenness and Uncleanness? So let the Magistrates look and see, how this
evil, seared Conscience has its Liberty to be Exercised in all manner of evil
things, yea all Christendom over; which is a great shame and dishonor to God
and Christ, and Christianity, yea and Humanity. And therefore why should not
God's People have their Liberty to Exercise their good and tender Consciences
toward God and Man? For the Mystery of Faith, which Jesus Christ is the Author
and Finisher of, is held in a pure Conscience. And should not the Work of the
true Christian Magistrate be to encourage the Exercise of this pure Conscience
toward God and Man, and to discourage the Exercise of this evil, seared
Conscience, that dishonours both God and Christ, and true Christianity? If not,
how are they a Praise to them that do well, and a Terror to Evildoers?

And now Concerning the not putting off Hats, for which many, that goes under
the Name of Christians, have taken Offense at us, because we could not put off
our Hats, and bow down to them: For which we find no such Command from Christ
or his Apostles; Joh. 5.41, 44.
but rather to the contrary. For Christ says, I rereceive not honor of Men
(mark, he did not Receive Honor of Men:) And further Christ says; How can ye
believe, which receive Honor one of another, and seek not the Honor, that
comes from God only? Now Christ declares it to be a Mark of Unbelievers, that
seek Honor one of another, and seek not that Honor, that comes from God only;
and is not the putting off the Hat, and Bowing with it, an Honor of Men, which
they seek one of another, and are offended, if they have it not? Nay, have they
not Fined, Persecuted and Imprisoned some, because they did not put off their
Hats to them? Nay, do not the very Turks mock at the Christians in their
Proverb, saying; That the Christians spend much of their time in putting off
their Hats, and showing their bare Head to one another? But should not the
Christians be beyond the Turks, that bear that Noble Name of Christian, of
seeking Honor one of another, and Persecuting them that will not give it them,
when all true believing Christians should seek the Honor, that comes from God
only? which is the Duty of all true Believers in Christ Jesus, for he would not
receive Honor of Men. And he that believes on the Son of God, has
Everlasting Life: and he that believes not the Son, shall not see Life; but
the Wrath of God abides upon him, John 3.36 And now, is not the Turks Proverb
a Reproach to the Christians, who say; That the Christians spend much of their
time in putting off their Hats, and showing their bare Head one to another?
Nay, have you not Fined and Imprisoned many, because they would not put off
their Hats to you, and show you their bare Heads? Nay, in many of your Courts
they shall not have Right and Justice, nor Liberty and Freedom in Cities or
States, though they have truly served their Time, and are honest and civil Men,
unless they will put off their Hats, and show you their bare Head? And have you
not made a Law against such, as will not put off their Hats, and show you their
bare Heads; and that they must forfeit two Gilders, if they did it not? Yea,
and to compel and force them to do it, and fine such, as do not, as at Lansmeer
in Waterland? And is not this the Honor, that you seek one of another? Did not
the Pharisees and Jews do the same?

Now as for your saying, The Apostle commands to honor all Men; and such as
Rule well, are worthy of double honor: Now, if this honoring all Men were to
put off their Hats to all Men, and show all men their bare heads, then this
Command you break your selves; for you do not do this to all Men generally: and
if they that Rule well, must have double Hat-honour, then they must put off
their Hats twice, and show them their bare heads. Now, if this Hat-honour, and
showing the bare head, be an Invention of Men, and not from God, and ye cannot
prove it by Scripture, and yet say, It is your Rule; then you Act beside the
Rule, and compel People to act contrary to your Rule. For where did ever the
Prophets, Christ or the Apostles Command any such thing? Let us see a Command,
a Practice and an Example for it. Nebuchadnezzar, who was a Persecutor, and
cast the three Children of Israel into the Fire with their Hose, Cloaks and
Hats, we do not read, that he was offended at them, because they did not put
off their Hats, and show him their Bare heads; but because that they would not
bow to his Image. And is it not said in the Margent of the Bible, where it is
said, Honor all Men (it is said,) Have all Men in Esteem? then they that Rule
well, are worthy of double Esteem; and this Esteem must be truly in the Heart,
without any envy, malice or hatred. As all Men are the Workmanship of God, they
are to be esteemed in the heart with the Spirit of God; and they that Rule
well, are worthy of double Esteem: and here is true honor from the heart both
to God and Man, his Workmanship. For People may put off their hats, and show
their bare heads one to another once, or twice to the Officers and Magistrates,
and yet be full of envy, and malice, and hatred, and murder in their hearts one
against another; and give them that honor, as you call it, and yet speak or
wish bad things of them, when they have turned their backs on them: which the
true Honor or Esteem in the heart to all Men, as they are God's Creation, is
without any Evil Wish or Thought in the heart to all Men, and to them that Rule
well; which have the double esteem, whom God has placed over People. There is
no evil in the heart, that gives this respect, esteem or honor, and brings
them to love their Neighbors, as themselves, and to do unto all Men, as they
would have them do unto them, in that they esteem all Men, and they have a
double esteem to them that Rule well: and this is beyond all the honor of
putting off the Hats once to all Men, and twice to them that are worthy of the
double honor, as you may call it. But we would ask the Christians, that
practice this Hat-honour, and showing one another their bare heads, Who did
invent this single honor, and double honor, that they should put off their
Hats one to another, and show their bare heads, seeing, that they cannot prove,
that ever Christ or the Apostles did Command or Practice any such thing; or
Moses in the time of the Law? Now, do not say or think, that we had this
Practice of not putting off the hats from the Turk; for we were moved by the
Spirit of the Lord to it, before ever we heard of the Turks Proverb and
Practice, to leave the honor that is below, and seek the honor that comes
from above, when we came to be true Believers in Christ Jesus.

Now Concerning Persecuting, Imprisoning and Banishing God's People, in whom
Christ is manifest, and dwells in their hearts; Does not Christ tell you, that
you Imprison him? and then do you not Banish him, and Persecute him out of your
Cities and Corporations? And how can you enter into his Kingdom, and have a
share of his Kingdom, though you may profess him in Words? And do not they go
into Everlasting Punishment, that did not visit Christ in Prison? Then what
will become of you, that do Banish and Imprison him, where he is manifest in
his Members, nor suffer them to Meet together to enjoy him amongst them,
according to his Promise? And therefore you, that will not let Christ Reign in
his People, and have his Liberty in them in your Cities and Countries, to
Exercise his Offices, you will not have your Liberty in Heaven: and you that
will not let Christ Reign in your Hearts, nor suffer him to Reign in his People
here upon the Earth in this World, in your Kingdoms; you will not Reign with
Christ in Heaven in his Kingdom, nor in the World without end.

And so you, that banish the Truth out of your Cities or Countries, or his
People for its sake, you do banish the Truth and Christ out of your hearts from
Ruling there: and so you your selves are not the Temples of God. And then, when
you have banished Christ and his Truth out of your own hearts, then you do
banish such, in whom he Rules, out of your Estates and Country: and then see,
what Judgments the Lord does bring upon you, when you are left to your selves;
yea, Fears and Troubles, and one Judgment after another, that come upon you,
you are even filled with them. But the Banished and Sufferers for Truth and
Christ's sake have a peaceable habitation in the Truth, which the Devil is out
of, and cannot get in: which habitation will outlast all the habitations of the
Wicked and Persecutors, though they be never so full of Words without Life and
Truth. So the Life and the Truth will out-last all Airy Notions; and Christ the
Lamb and patient Seed, will overcome the Devourer, and the unpatient Seed: and
they that have the Garments, the Righteousness of Christ, which is the fine
Linen, it will out-last all the Rags and Inventions of Men. For Christ says
to his Learners, Be of good cheer, I have overcome the World, the persecuting
World: and so he said unto his Disciples; Marvel not, if that the World hate
you, for it hated me before you. And therefore let all that profess themselves
Christians, lay away Persecution about Religion, Churches or Worship, Fasting
or Praying-Days; for you have no Command from Christ and his Apostles to
Persecute any. For Christ, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, when
they called him a Deceiver, and blasphemed him, and said, He had a Devil; he
did not Persecute any of them for it, nor force or compel any to hear and
believe him, nor the Apostles after him; but he bad them, that would have been
plucking up the Tares, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together until the
Harvest. So you have no Command from Christ or his Apostles to Persecute,
Imprison or Banish, or Spoil the Goods of any, for matter of pure Conscience
and Religion, Worship, Faith and Church in the Gospel Times.

Harlingen in Friezland, the 11th of the 6th Month, 1677. G. F.

A Warning to the Magistrates, Priests and People of the City of Hamborough, to
Humble themselves before the Lord, and not to be High-minded.
Friends,
YOU have painted and garnished the Inside of your outward Houses and
High Places; Light of Christ, Amsterdam.
which he has enlightened you and every Man, that comes into the World,
withal, and with it you may see, To page 448
how foul your Hearts and Insides are with Sin and Evil, which Christ tells
you, ye should make clean; who told the Pharisees, how they painted the
Sepulchers of the Righteous, and they themselves were full of Rottenness, and
Corruption. Therefore look into your selves, 1677. Amsterdam.
and your own hearts, what you are full of: to paint out the Sepulchers of the
Righteous Apostles, and making a Trade and a Profession of their words, without
the same Holy Ghost, and Power, and Light, and Truth which they were in, will
not stand at the Day of God's Vengeance. And therefore Repent, while you have
Time, and turn to the Lord with your whole hearts; and do not think your selves
to be secure, without his Immediate, Almighty Protection. For it is not all
your Works, nor all your own Strength, and Power and Defense, that can protect
you, and you to look at them, and think your selves secure, and to sit down in
your Security; and in it let your hearts be merry, and at rest and ease. But
then when the Lord brings a Scourge upon you, that you are filled with Terrors
and Fears, remember you were Warned, that you were set down, but not in the
true Rest: and then all your own Strength and Force will stand you in no stead;
and you will acknowledge, that it must be God, that must protect you. And
therefore take Warning; for your Priests and People are too high, and are
swallowed up too much in this World; and the Vanities of it carry your Minds
away from God, and your Care is more for the World, than for God, and more
after the Riches of the World, than after the Riches of the World that has no
end. For know you not, that all your Heaps of outward Treasure must have an
end, and that you must Leave them all behind you? Therefore I am to Warn and
Advice you, both High and Low, Priests and People, to come to the Grace, Light
and Truth, that comes by Jesus Christ; and also to come to the Manifestation of
the good Spirit of God, which is given to you to profit withal; that with This
Grace, and Truth, and Light, and Spirit of Christ, you may turn to Christ
Jesus, from whence it comes, who says, Learn of me; and God says, This is my
beloved Son, hear ye him. And so all the Children of the New Covenant, that
walk in the New and Living Way, do hear Christ their Prophet, that God has
raised up, who is their Teacher and Priest, whom God has anointed to Preach.
And so now, God does speak to his People by his Son, as he did in the Apostles
Days. And so the Lord is come to Teach his People himself by his Grace, Light,
Truth and Spirit, and to bring them off all the Worlds Teachers, that are made
by Men since the Apostles days; who have kept People always Learning, that they
may always be paying of them: And is come to bring them off all the Worlds
Religions, to the Religion that he set up in the Apostles Days in the New
Covenant, which is pure and undefiled before God in his sight, and keeps from
the Spots of the World, etc. And the Lord is come to bring them off all the
World's Churches, to the Church in God, which Christ the heavenly Man, is Head
of: and to bring them off all the World's Worships, to worship God in Spirit
and in Truth, which Christ set up above Sixteen hundred years since. So all Men
and Women must come to the Spirit and Truth in their hearts, by which they must
know the God of Truth, who is a Spirit; and then in the Spirit and Truth they
will Worship him, and know, what and who they Worship. And also the Lord is
come to bring his People off all the World's Temples, that with the Spirit they
may know, ^^at their Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost. And the Lord is
come to bring his People off all the World's Crosses, and Pictures, and Images
and Likenesses, to know, that the Power of God is the Cross of Christ, which
Crucifies them to the World, and brings them up into the Likeness and Image of
God, as Man and Woman was in, before they fell, and so to Christ that never
fell. And this Work of Christ must all know in their hearts, by the Light of
Christ Jesus, who is the true Light, that lights every Man, that comes into
the World. It is called the Light in Man and Woman, and the Life in Christ the
Word: and Christ says, Believe in the Light, that ye may become Children of
the Light. And the Light lets you see all your Evil Actions, that you have done
and committed; and your ungodly Ways you have walked in; and your ungodly Words
and Thoughts: and now, if you do hate this Light, and love the Darkness, and
the Prince of it, more than this Light, which is the Life in Christ, the Prince
of Life, and will not come to it, because your Deeds be Evil, and it will
reprove you; Christ tells you, This Light is your Condemnation. And then what
is all your Profession good for, when you remain under the Condemnation of the
true Light, in which you should believe; and so become Children of Light, and
out of Condemnation? And therefore every one must believe in the Light, if they
do receive Christ Jesus; and as many as receives him, he gives them Power to
become the Sons of God. So he that has the Son of God, has Life; and they
that have not the Son of God, have not Life: and then if you have not Life,
what good does all your Profession of the Scriptures from Genesis to
Revelations do you, any more than the Jews, Scribes and Pharisees, that would
not receive Christ the Life; upon whom God brought his overflowing Scourge. And
therefore do you take heed of that, for your Strength will be no better than
theirs, if you have not God and Christ's supporting Power, when God's Scourge
comes upon you, and you are filled with Horrors and Fears. But my desires are,
that you may all Repent, even from the Highest to the Lowest, and not grieve,
nor quench, nor vex, nor rebel against God's good Spirit in you, nor walk
despitefully against the Spirit of Grace, nor turn from it unto Wantonness,
which would teach you, and bring your Salvation. Which if you do, how can you
escape the overflowing Scourge of the Almighty, and the Wrath of the Lamb? But
my desires are, that you may all obey God's good Spirit of Truth, which will
lead you out of all Evil, into all Truth, and reprove you for your
Righteousness, and for your own Judgment and Sin, etc. and it will bring you to
cleave to that which is good, and forsake that which is evil; and to turn to
the Lord, who will receive you in his Mercy and Kindness: By which Means you
may escape the overflowing Scourge in the Day of Vengeance, which dreadful Day
is coming upon all Evildoers. And this as a Warning to you, both for your
Temporal and Eternal Good: and for you to Read it in your Assemblies, and your
Priests to Read it in their Churches; so that all People may hear and fear, as
you will Answer it at the Terrible and Dreadful Day of Judgment.

Amsterdam, the 19th of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.

For the Ambassadors, that are Met to Treat for Peace at the City of Nimmeguen
in the States Dominions.
To page 448
CHrist Jesus says, Blessed are the Peacemakers, for they shall be called the
Children of God, Matthew. 5.9. so all Christian men are to forsake Evil, and do
Good, and seek Peace and follow it, if they will love Life, and see good Days,
1 Pet. 3.11. for God has called all true Christians unto Peace, 1 Cor. 7. and
therefore all Christians ought to follow this Peace, which God calls them to:
and they should let the Peace of God rule in all their Hearts; which is above
the Peace of this World, that is so soon broken. For the Apostle Commands the
Christians to let the Peace of God rule in their Hearts; to which all
Christians should be subject: Now the Practice of this should be among
Christians, that profess Christianity; and this Peace is above that, which
Christ takes from the Earth, Rev. 6. which is the Peace of the Wicked. And the
Apostle says to the Christians, Be at Peace among your selves, 1 Thessalonians. 5.
Now, all Christians should obey this Command, and be at Peace among themselves,
and not in Wars and Strife. And further the Apostle exhorts the Christians to
keep the Unity of the Spirit in the Bond of Peace: so this Unity, and this Bond
of Peace should be kept (and not be broken) by all that bears that Noble Name
Christian; and they should keep the Unity of the Spirit of Christ in the Bond
of the Prince of Princes, and King of Kings, and Lord of Lords Peace, which is
the Duty of all true Christians to keep: In which they may honor Christ, in
bringing forth the Fruits of Peace, which is Love and Charity. For the Apostle
tells you, The fruits of the good Spirit is Love, Joy and Peace,
Long-suffering, Gentleness, Goodness, etc. Gal. 5.

And the Apostle exhorts the Christians, and says; If it be possible, as much
as lies in you, live peaceable with all Men: and this should be the Endeavor
of all Christians. For it is no honor to Christ, that Christians should war
and destroy one another, that do profess the Name of Christ, who says, He came
to save Men's lives, and not to destroy them: For Christians have Enemies enough
abroad without them, and therefore they should Love one another, as Christ
commands, who says; By this ye shall be known to be my Disciples, if ye Love
one another. For Christians are commanded to love Enemies; therefore much more
one another. And Christ says; As the Father has loved me, so I have loved
you: Continue ye in my Love, John 15.8. and By this shall all Men know, that ye
are my Disciples, if ye Love one another, John 13.35. But if Christians do war
and destroy one another, this will make both Jews, Turks, Tartars and Heathens
to say, That you are not Disciples of Christ. And therefore, as you love God,
and Christ, and Christianity, and its Peace, All make Peace, as far as you have
power, among Christians, that you may have the Blessing. For you read, that
Christians were called the Household of Faith, the household of God, a holy
Nation, a peculiar People: and they are commanded to be Zealous for good Works,
not for bad: and Christians are also commanded not to bite and devour one
another, lest they be consumed one of another.

And is it not a sad thing for Christians to be biting and consuming one
another in the sight of the Turks, Tartars, Jews and Heathens, when they should
Love one another, and do unto all Men, as they would have them do unto them?
And such Work and Devouring as this, will open the Mouths of Jews and Turks,
Tartars and Heathens to Blaspheme the Name of Christ, who is the King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, and cause them to speak evil of Christianity, for them to
see, how the Unity of the Spirit is broken among such, as profess Christ and
Christ's Peace. And therefore all Christians are to mind God and Christ's
Teaching, who teaches Christians to Love one another, yea, Enemies; and
persuade all Kings and Princes, to give Liberty to all tender Consciences in
Matters of Religion and Worship, they living peaceable under every Government:
so that for the time to come there may be no more Imprisonment and Persecution
among the Christians, for Matters of tender Consciences about Matters of Faith,
Worship and Religion, that the Jews, Turks, Tartars and Heathens may not see,
how Christians are Persecuting one another for Religion. And seeing, from
Christ and the Apostles Christians have no such Command, but on the contrary,
to Love one another; and knowing, that Christ said to such, as would have been
plucking up Tares, Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the Harvest
(which is the End of the World) lest they plucked up the Wheat; and at the End
of the World Christ would send forth his Angels, and they should sever the
Wheat from the Tares: So Christ tells you, that it is the Angels work at the
End of the World, and not Men's work, before the Harvest at the End of the
World. Has not all this Persecution, Banishing, and Imprisoning and putting to
Death concerning Religion, been the pretense of plucking up Tares? and has not
all this been before the Harvest, and before the End of the World? And
therefore, have not all these been the Actors against the Express Command of
Christ, the King of Heaven? which all Kings and Rulers, especially they, that
call themselves Christians, should obey their Lord and Savior's Command, which
he expressly Commands: Let the Tares and the Wheat grow together, till the
Harvest; and the Harvest is the End of the World: and then Christ will send his
Angels, and they shall sever the Wheat from the Tares, etc. And also Christ
told some of his Disciples, that would have had Fire to come down from Heaven,
to destroy such as would not receive him (in their Zeal;) That they did not
know, what Spirit they were of: and rebuked them, and said; He came not to
destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. And therefore all such, that have
destroyed Men's Lives concerning Religion, and Worship of God, have they known,
what Spirit they have been of? Have they not done, that they should not do? and
done that, which Christ forbad, who says, Lest ye should pluck up the Wheat
with the Tares, and says, It is the Angels work at the End of the World? And
has not God showed unto Man, what is Good, and his Duty, To Love Mercy, and to
do Justly, and to walk Humbly with his God? which Man is to mind.

And the Apostle exhorts the Christians, to Follow Peace with all Men, and
Holiness, without which no Man shall see the Lord, Hebr. 12.14. And why should
Christians War and Strive one with another, seeing they all do own in words one
King, and Lord and Savior Christ Jesus, whose Command is, That they should
Love one another; which is a Mark, that they shall be known by, to be Christ's
Disciples, as I said before. And Christ, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, says; As I have Loved you, so love one another, John 15.12. and John
13. And the Apostle says, Christians ought to be patient toward all Men, 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.

From him, who is a Lover of Truth and Righteousness, and Peace, and desires
your Temporal and Eternal Good; and desires, that in the Wisdom of God, that is
pure, and gentle, and peaceable from above, with that you may be Ordered, and
Order all things, that God has Committed to you, to his Glory, and stop those
things among Christians, so far as you have power, which dishonor God, Christ
and Christianity!

Amsterdam, the 21th of the 7th Month, 1677. G. F.

THE FIRST TABLE, CONTAINING The Names of the Countries, Cities, Towns and
Places mentioned in the Author's Journal of his Travels, and Labors on Truth's
Account in England, etc. and beyond the Seas.
[ Note, The Pages with a Star refer to the like Pages with a Star; to begin p.
189* 190* -- 200* 201*, etc. these Pages being double.]
A.
ABbyholm 268* Aberdeen, Scotl. (407) Acton 141 Adderbury 388. 457 Addingworth
430 Albans 171. 430. 457. 479 Alborough- Castle 522 Aldenham 78 Alexandria in
Egypt (248. 253) Alkmaer, Holl. 438. 522 America 408 Amersham 455 Amoroca-
River (Amer.) 380 Ampthill 430 Amsterdam 433-438. 446-451, 452. 520-522. 594.
617-619. 627-632 Anamessy- River, Amer. 380 Anderigo, Friezl. 444 Antego 356,
357. 458 Apledon 318, 319 Appingdalen, F. 439 Applebye 91 Apre, Denmark 440
Arnside 103. 215, 216. 269. 470 Armscot 388, 389. 457 Arundel 171 Ashford 259
Ashwell 469 Atherston 30. 132 Aylesbury 388
B.
BAdcow, Scotl. 269* 271* 276* Badgesley 167. 170. 225* 213. 310. 325. 429
Baghurst 341 Bagworth 29 Balby 54. 67. 69. 129. 213, 214. 326. 429 Baldock 170,
171. 316. 469 Ballowfield 429 Banbury 316 Bandon, Irel. 328 Bandon-Bridge,
Irel. ibid. Barbados 351-361. 379. 382. (599) Barking 570 Barnet 3. 430. 457.
479. 584 Barnet-hills 254, 255 Barnstaple 318 Barrow 28. 254 Barton 423
Barton-Abbey 215 Basingstoke 244* Battersea 480 Beavor Vale 16. 18-26 Becliff
79 Bedall 423 Bedfordshire 149. 166. 170. 282* 259. 310, 311. 430. 457. 469.
479 Bednalgreen 536-538. 550 Bentham 297 Berkshire 254. 335. 342. 456
Berry-street 568, 569 Berwick 281* Beverley 54 Beumaris, Wales 258* 259*
Biddlesden 479 Birmingham 167. 325 Bishopsdale 423 Bishop-starford 156
Black-Rock, Chesh. 327 Bletchington 480 Block-Island, Amer. 369 Bodmin 178, 179
Bohemia-River, Amer. 365. 372 Bonners-Creek, Amer. 376, 377 Boston, Lincolnsh.
225* Boston, New Eng. 242. 379 Boulton 280 Bowden mag. 469 Bowtell 104, 105
Bradforth 71 Braintrie 457 Brecknock 246* 247* Bremen, Germ. 440, 443
Bremer-Haven, Germ. 443 Bridge-Town, Barb. 356 Bridport 244 Briell, Holl. 433.
453. 520. 522 Brigflats 423 Bristol 221* 222* 245* 210. 212. 253, 254. 266.
310. 315. 332. 334. 456 Bristol-Harbour 383-386 Buckinghamshire 3. 224* 196.
310. 316. 341. 387. 430. 455. 457. 479 488, 489 Bugbrook 479 Bullocks-Hill 430
Burlington 307 Burnt-Island 276* Burroby 57. 423 Burrow-bridge 269 Burton,
Linc. 479 Burton upon Trent 53 Bushel-house 53 Buxtehude, Germ. 440 Buykslote,
Holl. 438
C.
CAmbridge, 155, 156 Cambridgeshire 224* 204 259. 336. Camsgill 423 Canterbury
151. 342 Capell 480 Cardiff 245* 317 Carlisle 108-117. 268* Carlisle-Bay,
Barbad. 351 Carolina 376, 377 Carterford 217 Cartmeil 270 Causham 456
Charingcross 137-139 Charlewood 457 Chattan 168 Chelmnsford 454 Cheltonham 457
Chesham 457 Cheshire 247* 281* 226. 312. 327-332 Cheshunt 608 Chesterfield 30,
31 Chester- River, Maryl. 364. 372 Chichester 171 China 248 Chiswick 550, 584
Cholsberry 457 Chopthank- River 381 Christian- River, Amer. 371 Cirencester
225* 457 Clauson, Leicest. 18 Cleaveland 57, 58. 281* (312) Clifts, Maryl. 364.
374, 375. 380. 382 Closter-Seven, Germ. 4. 10 Cockan 87, 88 Coc^ermouth 105,
106 Coggeshall 152. 248 Colchester 152, 153. 248. 432. 154. 519, 520. 523
Coldbeck 108. 118 Collumpton 221* 265 Point Comfort, Amer. 379 Connecticut,
Amer. (363) Cony-Island, Amer. 370 C^rk 328 Co^nwall 174. 187. 219* 220* 207
262-265. 318, 319 Cossel 407 C^^entry 4, 5. 29, 30. 169, 170 Cou^^e^^de 423
Cranes-Island 373 Crantzick 55, 64 Cranbrook 150, 151, 259 Crickatrough, Amer.
378 Crook 76 Crosland 83 Crowland 224* 225* Crownallins 457 Cumberland 104.
118. 120. 268* 370. (312)
D.
DAlgelthly, Wales 256* 257* Dalton 79 Dantzick (408. 458. 463. 539. 540. 594,
595, 596) Darby 31-46. 49-53. 213 Darbyshire 6. 15. 17. (30) 54. 129, 130, 131.
167. 281* 213. 267. 309. 311. 336. 429. 470. 479 Darwen-water 119. 269. 270
Deal 342. 349 Delaware- Bay 371. (372) - River 365 Delft, Holl. 433. 453
Delfziel, Friezl. 44. 439 Delmenhorst, Germ. 440 Denbyshire 312. 501, 502 Dent
73 Deteren, East-Friezl. 440 Devonshire 207. 209. 262. 265. 318, 319 Dingley,
Northamptonsh. 429 Dockum, Friezl. 439. 444 Dolston 497-499. 518. 523 Doncaster
54, 69, 429 Dorchester 172. 244* 206 Dorsetshire 206. 262. 319 Dover 151 Do^ns
349, 350 Douglas, Scotl. 269* Drawell 423 Drayton 1. 4. 131-136. 167. 213
Draitwich, Worcest. 312 Dublin 327. 331 Duckenfield 12 Dumfreez, Scotl. 269*
Dunbar, Scotl. 280* 281* Duncow, Scotl. 16^, 170 Dunstable 407. 479 Durham 118.
281.* 269. (312)
E.
EAst-Friezland 439 East-Jersey, Amer. 365. 370 Edenborough 272*-275* 278**
280* Edghill 225* Edmonton 480. 481. 485. 488. 528. 568. 608 Eems- River,
Friezl. 439 Eldreth 326, 327 Elmshoren, N. Holl. 441 E^y 155. 259 Embden, E.
Friezl. 439. 444 Enfield, 343-347. 485. 523. 528. 532. 541. 547. 550. 569. 584.
586. 601. 608. 609 Enkhuysen, North-Holl. 438 Epping-Forest 532-534 Eshing,
Surrey 480 Essex 151. 196. 203. 248. 259. 311. 336. 342. 387. 432. 454. 518.
564 570. 586. 590. 601 Eton 17 Evesholme 168. 225* 404. 457 Exeter 220* 245*
Eyder- River, Holst. 441
F.
FAlcon-Island, Amer. 370 Falmouth 177, 178. 263 Farnham 243* 320 Felsted 454
Fen-Country 224* 259 Firbank-Chappel 74, 75. 79 Fisher-holder, Germ. 440
Fishers-Island, Amer. 369 Flampstead-Heath 485 Flintshire 259* Flushing, Amer.
365. 370 Fordgreen 528. 586. 608-610 Forest of Dean 317 Franeker, Friezl. 445,
521 Frederickstadt, Holst. 441, 442 Friezland 438. 444. 521
G.
GAinsborough 67, 68 Gardick 444 Garners-Island, Amer. 369 Garsdale 423
Garshore, Scotl. 269* Garstrang (276) Gatton 480 Germany 440 Gickleswick, 297
Gi^^island 119, 120. 268* Glascow, Scotl. 276 Glasson 79 Gloucester 212, 213
Glocestershire 225* 266. 315, 316. 332-334. 386. 456. 479 Gooses, 564-567.
570-576. 586. 590-593. 601-606 Grarigg 102, 103, 269 Gravesands, Amer. 365, 370
Gravesend 342. 349 Great-Bay, Amer. 374 Griscdall 73 Groningen, 7. Prove. 439.
444 Guilford 342. 480. 503. 578 Gulf of Florida, Amer. 362 Guls-Island, Amer.
369 Gutters-hedge 479
H.
HAgue, Holl. 453 Hallifax 124. 128, 129 Halsted 454 Hamborough, 440-442.
627-630 Hammersmith 480. 489. 535. 584 601 Hampshire 206. 261. 341. 387
Hampton Court, 195 -Park ibid. Harborough 137 Harestreet 523 Harlem 433. 451.
522 Harlingen 438. 445. 521. 620-627 Hartshill 429 Hartshorn ibid. Harwich 432.
454. 420. 423 Hatters- Island, Amer. 374 Haverford-west 254* Heads, Scotl. 269*
276* Hedgeley 455 Heistone 175. 263 Hempensarmer, Friezl. 444 Hempsted 457
Hendon 388. 430. 457. 479. 480 Henly 456. 489 Hereford 266 Herefordshire 266.
314. 388 Hertford 156. 467, 468. 480, 481. 569. 608 Hertfordshire 170. 259.
316. 336 457 Hexham 119 Hide-Park 223* Higham 170 Highgate 407. 430 Highlands,
Scotl. 269* 276* Hightown 71 Hill, Yorksh. 470 Over the Hills 316, 317 Hitchin
469 Hodsdon 586 Hoghen-horn, Holst. 441 Holdendike 307 Holderness 64. 128. 225*
281* 267. 326 Holland 304. 433. 458. 520 Holstein 441 Honiton 173. Honington
388 Hoorn 438 Horn-Church 342 Horse-bridge 209. 265 The two Horse-Races, Amer.
369 Horsham 151. 480 Horsham- Park 171 Howlker 218 Howlker-Hall 271-273 Hull
67. 281* 307 Humber 225* Hunger-hill 455, 456. 489 Hunger- River 381 Huntington
224* 469 Huntingtonshire 224* 204. 259. 311. 336. (305)
J.
JAmaica 361, 362. (357) -- a Town in Long Island 370. 379 Jersey 370 Ifield
480 Ilchester 319 Ilmore 457. 489 Indian Towns 370 Johnstons, Scotl. 276* 278*
279* Jordans 455 Ipswich 153 Irby's Court 318 Ireland 170. 327-332. 379
Itzchoa, Holst. 440 Ives 176, 177. 469
K.
KEby, Westph. 443 Kellet 81. 470 Kempston 430 Kendal 76. 81. 267* 296
Kensington 480 Kensworth 430 Kent 150. 243* 259. 321, 322. 342 Kent-Island,
Amer. 373, 374 382 Kentish-shore, Maryl. 372, 373 Keswick 270 Kidsley-Park 31.
130 Kings-Bridge 174. 262. 319 Kings-Road 383 Kingston Tham. 223* 195. 310.
349. 387. 406. 432. 455. 480. 482-485 489. 499. 503, 504. 506-511. 518 519-535.
556-563. 5^6-578-584 599-601. 606. 612-617 Kirby-hall 270, 271 Knighton 429.
469
L.
LAmcoat 457 Lancashire 12. 77. 84. 103. 269, 270. 312. 470. 478 Lancaster 81.
88. 92. 124. 261* 215. 217, 218. 226. 273. 297. 407 Lanceston 178-219* 220*
Lands-end 207. 263, 319 Landsmeer, H^ll. 448. 522 Langlands 120. 268
La^gstrehdale, Yorksh. 423-428 Leer, E. Friezl. 439. 444 Leeward-Islands, Amer.
379 Leicester 15, 16. 136, 137. 256-258. 310. 429. 469 Leicestershire 3, 4. 7.
(13) 15. (18) 28. (30) 53. 131. 166. 170. 225* 282* 213. 254, 255. 310, 311.
336. 479 Leith, Scotl. 272* 278* Lemster 252, 253* 314 Leuwarden, Friezl. 439.
444, 445. 521 Leyden, Holl. 433. 453 Lillingstone 479 Lime 245* Lincolnshire
67. 129. 224* 259. 311. 479 Litchfield 53, 54 Lithgow, Scotl. 272* Littleport
259 Liverpool 259* 260* 327. 332 London 3. 137. 140-149, 150. 152. 156-166.
171. 223*-243* 248*-251* 286-288* 189-195-197. 200-206. 226-254. 259. 310, 311
315, 316. 322-325. 235-341. 347-349. 387. 394. 406. 430-432. 454, 455. 457.
479-497. 499-506. 511-519. 523-530. 532. 534-536. 538-541. 548-556. 563, 564.
567, 568. 576. 584-589 594. 597, 598. 601. 606-609. 612 613 Long Crendon 457
Longford 489 Long Island, Amer. 365. 370 (369) Loo 262 Lovel 479 Lugmer,
Friezl. 444 Luneburg's Country 442, 443 Luton 149. 430. 457 Lutterworth 3 Lyn
154, 155. 259
M.
MAckum, Friezl. 438 Macocomocock-River, Amer. 376 Maidston 150 Malpas, Chesh.
260* Malra 252 Malton 60, 61. 267. 298. 307 Manac^-River, Amer. 380 Manchester
12. 260* Mansetter 4 Mansfield 13. 15. 17, 18. 54. 309 Mansfield-Wood-house 27,
28 M^^arick-River, Amer. 376 M^rket-bossoth 30 Market-Jew 175, 176
Market-street 171. 430. 457. 479 Marleborough 223* 387 Maryland 362-364. (372)
373-375. 378-383. Eastern-shore, 364. Western-shore 374 Membury 319 Mendle 457
Mendlesham 153 Menhenniot, Cornw. 174 Merione^^hshire 312 Mevis, Amer. 356,
357. 408. 453 Middlesex 341. 387, 388. 430. 479. 489. 596 Middletown, E. Jers.
365. 371 Middletown-Harbour 370, 371 Mildum 423 Mile-end 241 Miles-River,
Maryl. 363. 369. 372 Milford- Haven 379 Mims 479 Minehead 318 Moni^sh 470
Monmouthshire 314 Montgomeryshire 251* 312 Moors 63 Morpeth 281* Mumbles 317
N.
NAilsworth 212. 457 Nancemum, Amer. 375 Narraganset, Amer. 368 Natton-Island,
Amer. 370 Nevis, see Mevis. Newbury 223* New Castle 281* New Castle, Amer.
(alias New-Amsterdam) 365. 371, 372 New England (364. 367-379) 241 242. 244.
(408) New-Garden, Irel. 328 New Jersey 379 Newick 261 Newport-Pagnel 3. 317.
407 Newton in Cartmel 77 New York (36^, 370) Nimm^guen (630. 632) Non-Eaton
(167) 226 Norfolk 153, 154. 203, 204. 259. 311 Northallerton 423 Northampton 3.
137. 407. 430 Northamptonshire 166. 170. 224* 282* 259. 310. 469. 479
North-Country 121. 128 North-Holland 438 North-Newton 316. 457 Northumberland
118, 119. 281* 269. (312) Norwich. 153. 203, 204. 259 Nottingham 18. 26, 27.
281* 282* 309. 325, 326. (249.) 429 Nottinghamshire 7. 13, 14. 16, 17, 54. 67.
130. 167. 224 281* 213. 215. 254. 309. 311. 479 Nottingley 429
O.
Olsterbay (Long- Island) 365. 370 Okington 220* Oldenborg, Westph. (617) 440.
443, 444 Oldeston 212. 318. 334 Ol^ey 430 Oram 64. 307 Orchard 457 Ore 387. 489
Ormskirk (275) Osan-Overton, Holl. 522 Overdelent (ob. Nielant) 440 Ouerkirk,
Holl. 433 Oxford 225* Oxfordshire 310. 316. 335. 341. 387, 388. 456, 457. 479.
489
P.
PAgan-Creek in Amer. 375 Pardsey-Crag 268* 270 Pardihaw 457 Pashur 312
Patch-gate 480 Patrington 64-67 Peak-Country 7. 130. 267 Peak-Hills 311
Pell-mell 2^0 Pembroke 254* Pembrokeshire 254* Pendle-hill 72 Penryn 175, 263
Pickering 62 Piscattaway, Amer. 369 The Pit ( at Sea near the Briel) 522
Plymouth 174. 207-209. 262. 304. 319 Point Judah, Amer. 369 Poland (595)
Pomfret 281* Pontamile 247* Pool 172. 244* 206 Posset 318 Portsmoutk 172. 244*
Potomack- River, Amer. 379 Pottuxon, Maryl. 375. 380. 382 Pottuxon- River in
Maryl. 375. 379 Powbank 423 Prester John's Country (248) Preston 261*. 226.
276. 407 Preston-Patrick-Chappel 75 Providence, Amer. 368 Puddimore 221* 266.
319 Pulner 261 Purgatory, Amer. 370 Purmerent, Holl. 438
R.
RAbley-heath 469 Radnorshire 251* 252* 267. 313 Radway 479 Ragley 457 Ramside
78 Ranzenny's Monument, Denm. 441 Raphahannock- River, Amer. 379 Reading 151,
152. 223* 198, 199, 200. 310. 341. 387. 456. 489 Reconow- Creek Amer. 382
Redruth 177. 263. 266 Rexham 259 Rickmansworth 388 Ringwood 172. 244* 206. 261
Road-Island 366-369. (379) Roan-Oke, Amer. 369. 376 Rochester 150. 342 Rome
(241) Ross 315 Rotterdam, Holl. 433. 453. 520 Rumney 150, 151 Rye in N. E. 150.
370 Rygate 171. 480
S.
SAddington 469 Saling 454 The Sands, Lanc. 407 Sandside 261* Sardam, Holl. 522
Saxifrax-River, Maryl. 365. 372 Scale-house 281* Scarborough 60. 267. 298-307.
326 Scar-house 423. (428) Scotland (140, 141) 268*-281* (312. 407) At Sea, from
Ireland, 332. to Barbados 350. 351. for Jamaica 361. for Maryland, 362, 363.
for Long Island, 369, 370. for Virginia, 375. for England, 383. Sedber
(Sedberg, Sedbur) 73, 74. 269. 423 Selby, Yorksh. 54 Severn, Amer. 374
Shacklewell 347. 481 Shearhampton 383 Shelter-Island, Amer. 368, 369 Isle of
Sheppey, Kent. 342 Shrowsbury, 247* 312, 313. -in Amer. 370, 371
Shropshire 267. 312 Sibbard 457 Silebie, Leicest. 167. 310. 429. 469 Skegby
130. 215. 254. 309. 429 Skypton 215. 317 Slattenford 222. 266. 386. 387 Slone
245* Smirna (248) Somersetshire 209. 266. 318, 319 Sommerton, Amer. 375. 377
The Sound in Amer. 369, 370 Southgate 594-596 Southam 479 Southampton 172. 261.
320 Southmims 430. 457 Southstreet 528. 530-532-568. 586 Staffordshire 225*
226. 267. 311. 327. 469. 470 Stains 489 Stainsby 429 Stainmoor 269 Starling,
Scotl. 276* Stath 58-60 Stenning 151 Stevenage 469 Stickhusen, East-Friezl. 439
Stoke 264. 457 Stony-stratford 479 Stratford 342, 343. 457 Stratton 319 Street
266 Strickland-head 267* 268* 118. 269 Strobus, Friezl. 439. 444 Sudbury 456
Suffolk 153. 203. 259. 311 Sunbury 489 Sunderhill-green 124. 128. 213. 267. 308
Surrey 171. 243* 206. 320. 325. 342. 387. 432. 480. 503 Sussex 150, 151. 243*
206. 261. 320 321. 325. 342. 432. 480. 488. 503 Sutton 155. 259 Swanington,
Leicest. 131. 170. 213. 255. 256. 258. 429. 469 Swan-Island, Maryl. 373
Swanzey, Wales 254* 317 Swarthmore 77-80. 82, 83. 86. 88. 94-101. 103, 104.
118. 124. 261*-264* 281* 216. 226. 269-271. 273. 407-423. 470-478 Syleby, see
Silebie.
T.
TAmworth 4 Taunton 221* 266 Tedbury 457 Tenby 253* 254* Tenterden 259-261
Tewksbury 168, 169. 213. 457 Theobald's 139 Tickhill 69 Tiverton 265 Todcaster
429 Topsham 173, 174. 262. 319 Totness 174. 262 Tottenham 608. 611
Tottenham-High-Cross 601 Tredington (398. 400) Tredington- Parish 388
Tredhaven- Creek, Maryl. 364. 373 382 Tregangeeves 319 Trent 67, 311 Truro 263,
264. 319 Turry 430 Turvil-heath 455 Twitnam (Twytham) 197, 198 Twycross 30.
131. 213. 258
V.
VAle of Beavor 16. 18-26 Virginia 375. 377, 378. (364. 369. 375. 382) Capes of
Virginia 383 Ulverston 77, 78. 84-86. 216, 217. (407. 422) Underbarrow 76. 81,
82. 269 Upper-Dinidock, Amer. 371 Uxbridge 489
W.
WAkefield 54. 70 Wales 245* 255* 256. 267. 312 Walney-Island 79. 87
Walthan.-Abbey 139. 316. 481. 485. 528. 569. 584. 586. 601. 608 Wansted 570
Wansworth 480. 489 Wapping 349 Warborough 489 Ware 608 Warrington 312. 327. 407
Warwick 169. 225* 310. 325. 479 Warwickshire 4. 15. 131. 167. 170. 282* 225*
226. 258. 267. 310, 311. 336. (388, 389) 429, 430. 457. 469. 479 Waterland,
Holl. 448. 522 Watford 457 Wellingborough 166 Wellington 265 Wensdale 423
Wentzerdale 72, 73 Westchester 259* 240 West-Friezland 521 West-Jersey, Amer.
365 Westmorland 74. 80, 81. 83, 84. 101. 118. 267* 269, 270. (312. 408.) 423.
470. 478 Weston 316. 457 West Riding 69, 70 Weymouth 173. 244* Whetston 136,
137. 166, 167 Whispool, Friezl. 444 Whitby 60. 267. 307. 326 Wh^tehall 137,
138. 140-149. 223* 225* 230 Whitehaugh 267 Whittington, Warw. 429 Wickham 455,
456 Wicocomako-River, Amer. 381 Wighton 118. 270 Wigston 469 Willoughby-Point,
Amer. 378 Wiltshire 222* 223* 254. 262. 266. 1^. 315. 335. 386. 456
Winchmore-hill 485. 568. 586. 608 Winterburn 456 Witham 523 Worcester 168. 213.
312. (388) 389. 395. 457 Worcestershire 167. 225* 312. 388 Workum, Friezl. 438
Worminghurst 432. 480. 503, 504 Worplesdon 432. 480 The Woulds 60. 326 Wye,
Amer. 382 Wye-River, Amer. 364 Wymes-would 429
Y.
YArmouth 153 Yelland 88. 216 York 57. 267-269. 297. 298. 308. 32^. 428. 479
Yorkshire 54. 56. 61. 63. 66. 68, 69. 72. 128. 225* 281* 213. 269. 297. 423.
429. 470. 478, 479
THE SECOND TABLE, CONTAINING The Names of Friends and others, mentioned in
this Volume, with their respective Pages.
A.
Abraham's Galenus 452. 521, 522 Aldam Thomas 68-70. 130 140. 199 Andries
Cornelis, Friezl. 444 Anglesey, Earl 296 Archer, Judge 249, 250. 318, 319
Ashfield, Col. 276* Ashley John 401 Askburnham, Constable, 216. his Wife 306
Atherton Oliver 275, 276 -Godfrey ibid.
Atkins Christopher 153 Atkins, Judge 488 Atkinson Thomas 271 d'Aubenny, Lord
252 Audland John 74, 75. 80. 84. 124. 131. 222* 267* -Anne 269
B.
BAiley Charles 241 Bailey William 172, 361 Baker Daniel 248 Baker Nathaniel
479 Ball Nathaniel 316. 479 -Richard 429
Barclay Robert 407. 433-435. 446 Barnes William 327. 332 Barwick Grace 307
Bateman Miles 76. 82 Bathurst Charles 532 Bates Nathaniel 376 Baxe Richard 342
Beard Nicholas 151 Beaton William 221* 266 Bennet, Col. Just. 37. 41. 187 217*
219* Benson, Just. 73. 80. 90, 91. 101. 103. 111. 116, 117. his Wife 112.
-Francis 270
Beaumont, Lord 255. 258 Bewley Thomas 108. 118 -George 262. 263. 270
Bicliff Anthony 226 Billing Grace 212* 272* -Edward 272* 277*
Bindlas Robert, Esquire 93 Bingley William 520, 521 Birdet -- 64 Birkenhead, Sir
John 304 Birkhead, Serj. 197 Birkhead Abraham 374 Bishop George 152. 210. 244
Blackmore, Major 245* Blaykling John 74. 80. 267. 269. 423 Bolton John, and
Wife 171 Bond Thomas 153 -Nicholas 286*
Bonner, Bishop 293 Booth George 202 Bottomley Jacob 131 Bousfield, Major 73
Bradden, Capt. 179, 180. 184. 185 Bradford, Capt. 128 Bradshaw, Judge 80
Brassey Nathaniel 519 Brathwait John 77 Brickley Anthony 131 Brigges Thomas 90.
259, 260. 265. 327. 332. 341. 349. 356, 357. 361 Britland, see Priest.
Broadstreet Simon 243, 244 Bromley Thomas 148 Brown, Capt. 254. John 316
Bryerley James 430 Bushel Thomas, Ranter 59 Burnyeate John 363, 364. 367, 368.
432 Borough Edward 76. 84. 124. 131. 286* 241, 242. 259 Burton, Just. 213
C.
Came John 84. 124. 170. 225* -Thomas 423
Cannon Richard 396 Canterbury, Bishop 245 Cartwright John 349. 357. 361. 364.
366-369. 382 Carry Robert 174 Caton William 150. 594 Ceely Peter, Just. Major
176. 182-184. 187. 219 Chamberlain, Col. 352 CHARLES II. King 225. 228, 229.
238. 241-243. 245-248. 250 272. 277. 279, 280. 325. 336. 349. 402. 404, 405
CHARLES I. 226. 460, 461 Charles Thomas 430 Chetham George, Sheriff 228 Chevers
Sarah 252 Claessen Dirick 452 Clark, Just. 309 Clause John, Holl. 433. 438,
439. 444. 446. 463. 521. 594 Claypoole, Lady 189 -James 503, 504
Coal William, Amer. 374 -Hezekiah 456
Cob Francis, Esquire 298. 303. 326 Cob, Ranter 139 Cock -- 76 Colburn, Capt. of
Amer. 380 Cole -- 167, 168 Colonel of Bristol 210 Conway, Lady. 457 Cooper
Edward 430 Corbet Thomas 405, 406 Costrop Richard 248 Cotton Arthur 304 Covel
Richard 383 Countess of Derby 275 Cradock, Dr. of Coventry 4. 301 Craven
Robert. 224* 225* (129. 140) Crips Nathaniel 222* 225* 310. 315. 456, 457
Craston Thomas, Just. 114 Cromwell Oliver 136-138. 169. 187. 214* 223* 224* 269*
288* 190. 194-196. 392. 448 - Richard 196. 229. 418. 199, 200. 204. 229. 238
Crook John 149, 150. 169. 282* 286* 457 Crosland Jordan 298. 300. 305 Crouch
Edward 469 Crowder Dr. 393 Cubban Richard 259* 276 Cubham Richard 282 Cummings
Thomas 218 Curtis Thomas, and Anne 220* 244* Thomas 216. Anne 222
D
DAndy John 222* 266 Darcy Abigail 314 Davenport, Capt. 279 Davis Richard 405
Dennis, Col. 204 Desborow, Maj. Genesis 178. 214*-217* Dewes, Col. Amer. 375
Dickinson James 77. 80 Dilger Emanuel of Dantzick 595 Dirick Niesson Gertrade
434. 446. 451-453 Dixon Alexander 102 Dodgson, Constable 306 Doily Bray 388.
389 Dove, Lieut. 281 * Downer Anne 186, 187 Dowes Sybrand, of Friezl. 439. 444
Drakes John 352 Draper Henry 269 Drury, Capt. 136-138 Dry Thomas 311. Widow 343
Duisbury William, and Wife 54. 118. 137. 430. 457. 479 Duncon Robert 153. 432
E.
EAston Nicholas, Governor 366 Eccles Solomon 349. 361, 362 379 Edmundson
William 170. 349. 356. 361. 364. 369. 379 -John of Maryl. 372, 373
Edwards Edward 255* Elizabeth, Princess of Herwerden 435. 438 Ellis John 245 *
263 Ellwood Thomas 455, 456 Elson John 406. 479 Endicot John, of New Engl. 242,
243 Evans Catharine 252
F.
FAirfax, Widow 301 Farnsworth Richard 54. 70, 71. 80. 131 Fauks Thomas 255
Faulconbridge, Lord 300 Fell, Judge 77. 80. 83. 88. 90, 91. 103. 261* his Son
85 -- Margaret 78. 88. 216. 221, 222. 231. 238. 262. 266. 271. 273. 278. 289.
295. 312. 334. 336. 346 384. 387. 389. 402. 404. 407. 423 428 - Daughters 152 -
Henry 230. 248 - Leonard 79. 258. 262. 269-271. 312. 325. 407. 423. 430 - Mary
262 - Rachel 387. 389. 423 - Sarah 262. 336. 407 - Susan 407
Fisher Samuel, and Wife 150, 151 - Martha 349
Fleetwood Charles 269* Fleming Daniel, Just. 270. 273. 278-181. 306 Fletcher
270 Floyd Charles 312 Forstall Richard 351, 352 Forster Thomas 349 Foster,
Judge 226, 227 - Lieut. 279* - Widow 511
Fox Christoph. and Mary 1. 390. 396 - George 46. 48, 49, 192
Fox John 332, 333. 336, 337. 429 Capt. 178. 211 *
Fraterus of Dantzick 295 Frecheville, Lord 297, 298 Fretwell Ellen 309 -Ralph
356. -Samuel 429
Frith Susan 309 Frizbey James 374 Frondenberg Abraham of Harlem 522 Frouzen
Wilbert of Rotterd. 520 Frye -- 262 Fuce Joseph 154, 155 Furly Benjamin 245.
433. 435. 453, 519 - John 432, 433

G.
GAdecken of Dantzig 595 Gamboll Thomas 430 Gandy Will. 247* 226. 332. 407
Garland, Wid. 296 Gaul, Alderm. of Rotterd. 520 Geary John, Amer. 379, 380
General of Denmark 453 Gerard, Lord 230 Gibbs Henry 312 Gilpin -- 123 Glyn,
Judge 179-185. 189* 200* Goldsmith Ralph 242 Goodyear Thomas ^^ 54 Governor of
Barbados 356. 361 - of Carlisle 117 - of Carolina 376 - of Jamaica 362 - of
Mevis 357
Gouldney Tho. 210. -Henry 613 Gray Richard 520 Green, Wid. 71. -Thomas 218
Grimes, Coll. 225* 213 Gratton John 470 Gritton -- 149 Gwin Paul 221* 222*
H.
HAcker, Coll. 136, 137. 166. 195. 238. 260. 272 Haistings, Lord 258 Hales,
Chief Just. 405, 406 Haley, Wid. 430. 479 Halford John 388, 389 Halhead Miles
84 Hambleton Margaret 269* Hambley Loveday 212* 219* 262, 263. 319 Hamberry
Richard 247* 316 Hammersley Thomas 130. 311 Hancock Edward 174 Harding John 570
Hardy -- 218 Harris George 319 - Jailer 404
Hartiss George 64 Hartshorn Richard 365. 370 Harvey -- 137. 195 Harwood Robert
372 Hawkings George 264 Hellen Joseph 262, 263 Hendricks Peter 451. 463. 594 -
Elizabeth 523. 594. 596
Hill John 442. 444 Hodges Francis 263 Hodgson, Doctor 272 -Peter 307 Holder
Christopher 370 Holmes Thomas 124. 246* Holstein, Duke 441. 523-527 Hooks
Ellis 304 Hotham, Just. 55. 64. 66. 80. 326 Howard Luke 151 Howgil Francis 74.
83, 84. 120. 124. 131. 216 Howsigoe Thomas 150 Hubberthorn Richard 84. 93. 124.
153. 156. 204. 226, 227. 229. 231 250 Hubbersty Miles, 76. 84 -Steph. 76 Hull
John 349 Hunter -- 297. 306 Huntington Robert 239 Hutchinson Hugh 269 -Jam. 33^
Hutton Eliz. 7. 349. 361, 362 - Thomas 87

J.
JAckson Henry 326 Jacobs Hessel, Friezl. 438. 445 Jay John 368. 370 Jenkins
Walt. 167. 246* 247* 314 Jews 441. 453. 559, 560 Indian Emperor 364. 372. 382 -
Empress 382 - King 365. 375. 377. 379. 382 - Priest (called Pawaw, or Bawaw)
377 - Captain ibid.
John ap John 123. 240. 251 * 253 -- 259 Johnson Richard 332 Jones Rice 127,
128. 281** 282* - James, Just. Amer. 381 - the King's Attorney 394
Jose Nicholas 207. 263 Justices in Wales 245* 253* 254* 281*
K.
KEat, Capt. 177-179. 187 Keith Geo. and Wife 433-435. 452-454. 521. Geo. 407
Kellet, Priest 15 Killam John 213 King of Poland 458-463. 538 -- 541. 594, 595
Kirby William, Col. 270, 271 273, 274. 278. 289. 293. 296. 306. 308. 327. 343.
407 Knipe John 77. 271. 306
L.
LAgo Mary 1 Lambert -- 214, 215 Lambol George 152 Lancaster James 87. 105.
277* 327 332. 349. 357. 361. 364. 366-368 370. 384. 407. Wife 87, 88 Lawrence,
Capt. 153, 154. 259 Lawson Thomas 78. 87 -John 81. 90 - Justice 110
Laythes Thomas 270 Ledger, Alderman of Newcast. 281 * Leek John 54 Lenthal
John, Marshal 227-229 Leper Thomas 93 Lidcot, Col. his Wife 272* Light John 304
Lindley Isaac 326. 428 Line John, Constable 262 Lingard, Capt. 267 Lodge Robert
327, 332. 428 Long Richard 379 Love John 241 Lower Humphry 185. 219* 245* 262.
264, 265. 319 -Thomas 211* 212* 245* 209. 304. 384. 388, 389. 396. 392-395.
402. 407 - Doctor 390, 391 -Mary 336. 407
Line, Col. 357
M.
MAcham, Priest 5 Mallet, Judge 226-229 Man Edward 395 Marcellinus, Pope 299
Marsh, Esquire 226-228. 230. 303, 304 322-325 Marshal of the K. Bench, see Lenthal
Maylin Bartholomew 387 Mayor of Huntington (and Wife) 224* 259 -of Bristol 210
-of Cambridge 239. 259
Mayor John, Amer. 379 Mead William 341. 430. 488. 499, 500. 523. 564. 570. 590
Merrick James 315 Middleton, Just. 216. 271-273 his man Thomas 216
Milner James 103 Monk, General 204. 211 Moore Thomas 171. 238. - John 326 -
Richard 313
Morris William 243. - Paul 328 - Lewis, Col. 356
Mounce Thomas 174, 175. 214* 219* 220* 262. 264 Mount, Constable 216, 217. 306
Mountague, Lady 128 Musgrave, Dep. Gov. 270 Myer Richard 103, 104 Myers
Elizabeth 349
N.
NAylor James 70. 80. 83. 87, 88 90. 156. 167. 171. 220* 245* Needham, Hacker's
Son 136 Newport, Earl 286* Newton Nathaniel 429 Nicholas Edward 228 Nicholson
Joseph 104, 105
O.
Oats, a Baptist 28 Oldenburgh, Earl 440 Osburn Will. Col. 268* 272* 276*
Otway, 267* Sir John 336 Overton, Col. 66 Owen Dr. 223*
P.
PAcker, Col. 139 Parker Alexander 136. 140. 149. 224* 277*-279. 253. 315. 342.
519. 521-523 -Henry, Just. 388, 389. 391-393. 395, 396. 399. 404
Parnel James 112, 113. 132. 152 -Thomas 259
Patchyn Thomas 171. 231 Pattison George 349. 357. 361 363-365. 367, 368 Paul's
William (Fredrickstadt) 441 Pawaw an Indian Priest, Amer. 377 Pearson Anthony,
Just. 64. 104. 110. 111. 118. 281** 199 -William 270 Thomas 423
Penford John 310 Penn William 341. 384. 432-435 445, 446. 452-454. 493, 494.
521 -Gulielma Maria 384. 388
Pennington Isaac 196. 341. 457 -Mary 489
Pennyman John 357 Perrot John 241. 248, 249. 310 Peter's Hugh, Chaplain of O.
C. 187 Peter's Timon, Holl. 522 Pickering -- 3 Pittaway Edward 168. 404 Pocock
-- 314 Pollexfen Henry 201* 254* 262 Pool, Capt. 277* Pope Blanch 262 Porter
John, Amer. 378 Porter, Just. 216, 217. 219. 221, 222. 229. 306. 262 Preston
Thomas, Just. 271. 278. 306 -his Wife 218 - James, Amer. 375. 379, 380
Priest Bennet of Cartmeil 82. 102 Priest Bowls of York 57 Priest B^yes 63
Priest Britland 30 Priest Burton 101 Priest Camelford 77 Priest of Coventry,
Dr. Cradock 4 Priest of O. Cromwell 140 Priest Crowder 393 Priest of Gilsland
119 Priest of Grarigg 102 Priest Rowland Haines of Honington 388-390 Priest
Hewes 240 Priest of Hexham 119 Priest Hull 208 Priest Jaccus 89-91 Priest
Keilet 15 Priest Lampit 77, 78. 80. 82. 84. 86. 95, 96. -Died 422, 423 Priest
Larkham of Cockermouth 106 Priest of Leicester 15, 16 Priest Marshal 70. 88, 89
Priest Mounce 174. (See Mounce.) Priests of Newcastle 281* Priest of Reading
206 Priest Roger Williams 432 Priest of Scotland 59, 60. 307 Priest Stephens
4-6. 30. 131. 134-136 Priest of Sutton 155 Priest Tamworth 4 Priest Tatham 100
Priest of Tewksbury 168, 169 Priest Tombs 252 * Priest Townsend 203, 204 Priest
Whitehead 81 Priest Wilkinson 105, 106. 120. 268 * Priest at Harlingen 445, 446
-at Harlem 451
Purfoy, Col. 30 Pursloe, Capt. 54, 55. 64 Pyot Edward 131. 172-177. 189*-200*
214. 221*-224* 210-213. 253
R.
RAwlinson Tho. 201* 278* -- Just. 271. 273, 274. 306
Reckless John, Sheriff, and Wife 27. 309. 429 Reeves, Capt. 320 Richardson
Richard 216 Ripan, Mayor 90 Roberts Gerard 169. 246. 340. 343. 347. 384. 396
Robertson Thomas 296 Robinson Richard, Just. Yorksh. 64. 73. 80. 308. 423 --
Andrew, Scotl. 271* 272* 333 -- William 244 -- Col. in Cornw. 264. -- Geo. 423
Roeloffs John (Amsterd.) 446 463. 594 Roper, Lieut. 70 Rouse, Col. Just. 185.
264 -- John 342. 349. 352. 361. 384. 389. 535. 556. 576 -- Margaret 336. 599 --
Thomas 352. 354. 356. 361
Rush John 430
S.
SAle Richard 240 Salisbury (Earl's) Son 402 Salmon, Ranter 30 Sanders Mary
223* Sands Adam, Capt. 77. 80. 99, 100 Sands, Col. 391 Savil Henry 390 Sawrey
Just. 78. 80. 85. 88-91. 94, 95 Scaif (Scafe, Scarf) Philip 58, 59 Scott
Joseph, Amer. 376 Sharman Thomas 213. 251, 252 Sharp Peter, Maryl. 374 Shattock
Samuel 242 Shaw William 470 Sheriff of Lincoln 129. 311 Sherman William 522
Shipton Richard 307. 326 Shroeder Christian, Dantz. 595 Sidon Henry 429 Simcock
John 407 Smith William 167. 255-257. 311. 429. 432 -- Humphrey 168 -- Stephen
342. 387. 456 -- Hugh, Amer. 376, 377
Snead Richard 456 Speed Thomas 210 Spencer, Just. 273 Stacy Thomas 128. 429
Stangley John 457 Starling Samuel 341 Stephens Nathaniel, see Priest. -William,
Amer. 381, 382
Stoddard Amor. Capt. 15. 152, 153. 155. 169. 124* 343 Stookes, Just. 223* Stor
Marmaduke 137. 307 Story John 480 Stot, Widow 519. 523 Street, Justice 398-401,
402 Stroud George 394, 395 Stubbs Thomas 120 -John 123. 150. 245. 248. 253,
254. 279. 327. 332. 342. 349 361. 366-369
Studholm Cuthbert, Just. 114 Sunman Aarent 520 a Swede 442 Sympson William
239. Just. 391-393. 401
T.
TAylcoat William 433 Tailor James 77. 270 -Thomas 83. 128. 132. 252* 253* 215.
308. 326 -Thomas of Amer. 382 -Christopher 84. 480, 481 -John 428
Tennant, 73. Widow 423 Thomas Margaret 253 Thompson, Just. 88, 89 Thurston
Thomas, Amer. 382 Tickel Hugh 270 Toldervey John 171 Trelawney Elizabeth 174.
211* 245 Tripe Nicholas, and Wife 174 a Trooper 45 Turner, Judge 276-278.
288-293. 396 Judge's Son ibid.
Twisden, Judge 227. 276-278. 288. 293-295 Twitty, Clerk of the Peace 401. 405
V.
VAn de Wall John 432 Vane Henry, Esquire 197 Undersheriff of Lancaster 296. 306
W.
WAldenfield Samuel 520, 521 Walters Thomas 280 Ward, Capt. 296 Watkins Morgan
251 Watkinson George, Just. 281** 308 Watts George 433. 519. 221-523 Welsh
William, his Wife 272* Wells William 429 Wennington Miles 104 West, Col. 89,
90. 92-94. 261* 273 -Matthew 306
Weston, Baron 488 Whitehead George 124. 204. 342. 458. 469 -John 267. 304,
305. 428
A Wicked man 17 Widders Robert 93. 118. 261 * 268* 276*-279* 215, 216. 226,
227. 265. 269. 297. 312. 349. 361. 364, 365. 367, 368. 381. 384. 423. 470 -his
Wife 423
Widow-woman, Maryl, 378 Wiggan, Major 196, 197. 281, 282 Wild, Major 312 Wild,
Judge 394. 402. 405 Willems Willem of Alkmaer 438. 522 Williams, Capt. 342
Wilkinson William, Capt. 303 Wilson William 279 -George, Amer. 374
Windham, Judge 92 Windsore, Lord Lieutenant 389-391 Winsmore Dr. Just. 381
Winthrop, Governor 244 Wittey, Dr. 300 Women several 12. 27, 28. 48. 55. 381.
Wright, Widow. Amer. 375. 378 Wrey Richard, Esquire 129 -John and their Wives 224*

Y.
YArrow William, Maryland 375 Yeomans William 318 -Isabella 334. 433. 444. 446
York, Duke 230 Young Peter 314
THE THIRD TABLE, CONTAINING Some of the Subject Matters and Things occurring
in this Volume.
A.
ABuses done to G.F. 70. 85, 86 by Professors, etc. 103, 104. 118. 132, 133.
169. 244* Friends abused 118. 197. 216. 257. 313. at Meetings 197, etc.
Action in the Fields, near London, where Friends had been much abused, G. F.
had a Meeting 197 Adam, the First and Second compared 561 Affections, Lusts and
Desires mortified 261* 262* 285* Aged Friend of 100 years old 58. one of 122
years old 269 Allegiance to the King 277. 279. 300. 325. and Supremacy 399.
(see Oath.) America, G. F's, etc. Travels there from Maryland to New England,
etc. through the Woods and Wilderness, over Bogs and great Rivers (not without
great Danger of some of their Lives) and lying a-nights in the Woods, by a Fire
in a very cold Season, the Wolves howling about them, 364-380. Truth's
prosperity there, 458. G. F's Epistle to those places, 601, 602 Anointing
within teaches the Believers 5, 6. 436 Antichrists, see False Prophets.
Apostasy entered since the days of the Apostles 227* 282** Apostates,
back-sliders and false Brethren are got into the Temple of God 533, 534. 556.
597, 598 Apostles were Tradesmen 591-593 Apparel for Pride, judged 530-532
Apparition of the Death of O. C. seen by G. F. 195 Appeals of London-Friends
Tried, 548 Apprentices put forth by Monthly, Meetings 335 Arminians, strangers
to the Spirit of the Apostles 147 Assizes of G.F's. Trials at Carlisle 110 111.
Lancaster, 92. 276-278. 288-295. Lanceston, 179, 180. Nottingham 249, 250.
Worcester 396. (See Sessions.) Astrologers, see Stargazers.
B.
BAcksliders warned, 535-538 (see Apostates.) Banishment of G.F's. in Scotl.
274* 275* 277* Banishing and Imprisoning for Religion is not Christ's Doctrine,
459, 460. 594-396. Friends Banished in England, 304. at Dantzick 595 Baptism.
172. 229* 237* Baptist-Meetings 13. 109, 139. Baptists discoursed by G. F. 28,
29. 108, 109. 149. a Teacher convinced 118. 150. 167. Baptists in Warwick, 169.
in Nottinghamshire, 16, 17. Baptists and Fifth-Monarchy-men Prophesied of
Christ to come that Year to reign, 211. A Baptist-Woman restored, 170, 171.
Baptists deny G. F. their Meeting House 172. Particular Baptists, 173.
Battledore, the Author's Account thereof 245. 272 Believers are born of God 5
Bible given to G. F. to swear upon, which forbids Swearing, 291, 292. and
teaches the plain Language 301 Blacks or Negro's to be trained up in the fear
of God 352. 359 -- 361. 377 Bond for Appearance refused, 260. -- for good
behavior 395
Book, see Bible. Books writ and answered by G.F. 295. 308. 406. 408 Bowling
and foolish Exercises denied 218* 219* Bread and Wine, see Papists. Brown's
Prophecy of G. F. 13 Brownists 247. 435 Butchers and rude People bind
themselves with an Oath to kill G. F. 128, 129
C.
CAlvinists 247. 483 Cambridge-Scholars rudeness, 155 Captain much given to
laughter, Convinced, 173. A Captain's in Scotland impious saying 214 Carlisle
in an uproar 109. G. F. in Carlisle-Dungeon 111-117 Cartmeil Wapentake-Court
487 Certificates to be brought by Friends proceeding to Marriage 315, 316. 347
A Cheat discovered by G. F. 318 Christ the Teacher of his People, 107. 628,
629. the Rest 527-530. Sun of Righteousness, 554, 555. a quickening Spirit, 557,
558. who can speak to Men's Conditions, 8. 10. 13. 175. and is known by
Revelation 8. etc. Church the true and the false, 283* the Church of Christ
clothed with the Sun 553-556 Church of Rome degenerated, 246, 247. 286.
persecuting, 288* Church of England's Faith, 196
Climates sudden change and variety in America 378-380 Cloisters, Monasteries,
etc. there is no Scripture for them 286* 287* Coldbeck-Steeple-house, Robert
Widders going thither, etc. was almost killed by the People 118 Colleges
cannot make Ministers of Christ 281* Collegians 435. 439 Committee of Safety,
etc. their Proclaiming Fasts, is like Jezabel's 194 Conjurer (so reputed)
reproved by G. F. in Jail 48 Conscience a Witness to Truth, 192-194. is not to
be forced, 539-541. must be void of Offense 549 Contentions not to be in
Meetings 469, 470 Conventicle-Act is not, To do, as they would be done by
337-340 Convincements in the Nation in the beginning, 12. 15, 16, etc. 118.
120. 123. 129. 135. London, 140. In O. C's. House and Family, 141. 147, etc.
Cromwell Oliver his Discourse with G. F. 137, 138. 169. A Friend offers himself
to O. C. to lie in Doomsdale for G.F. 214 The Cross, the Power of God, 10. 12.
282* 285* Covetousness of Wracks reproved, 207, 208. 611 A Cutpurse at Sessions
searching Friends Pockets, is set at liberty 258
D.
DAngers and Perils of G. F. 24. 30. 258. 71. 73. 81. 86-88. 92-94. 101. 105.
110-113. 128. 130. 139. 177-179. 184. 188, 189. 224* 225* 246* 256* 267* 286*
210. 213-215. 259. 266, 267. 269 307, 308. 313. 318. 329. At Sea, 350, etc. by
Knives, Rapiers, rude Multitudes, Beatings, Bruisings and binding themselves
with an Oath to kill him, etc. Day of Judgment coming upon Persecutors, 346.
the Day of the Lord's Wrath is kindling upon them 146 Deceivers beyond the
Priests that stand in Deceit, described 19 Declaration of G. F's. offered by
him to the Court, instead of the Oath 399, 400 Devil, he was not made of God
152. 263 Differences about outward things to be shunned 597 Disputes at
Leicester, 15, 16. with the Priest of Grarigg, etc. 102. at Drayton, 131, 132.
G.F. with Priest Wilkinson 120 A Dispute of James Naylor with 8 Priests, 167. A
vain Disputer answered, 272* Vain Janglings to be shunned 414 Dogs did not move
their Tongues against them 377 Do unto others, as you would, etc. 25. 275* 208,
209. 539-541. 595, 596. 600 Dreams relied upon by a People 6 Drought was great
in England 247* Drunkenness testified against by G.F. at Inns in his Travels
174. 225* 313. Great Drunkenness at the Choosing of Parliamentmen 213 Dwarfs
not to come nigh the Altar of God, 581. 585. 610. Out of Christ all Mankind are
Imperfect and Deformed 563
E.
EGyptians afflict Israel till the Lord overthrows them 207* Election and
Reprobation 62. 108. 173. 254* 269* 270* 330, 331 Ambassador with Irish-men
came to disturb the Meeting 240, 241 Ambassadors at Nimmeguen, G. F. his
Epistle to them 630-632 Enemies, who are the worst to Truth? 418 Episcopal-mea
cannot affirm, they have the same Spirit the Apostles had 247 Errors pleaded in
Margaret Fell's Indictment 289, 290 Errors in G. F's. Indictment pleaded by
himself, 290, 291. and the second Indictment quasht by Errors 294
Examples, see Judgments. Excise-man warned 30 Excommunicated Friends in
Scotland, none was to buy or sell with them, 276* in England, 301, 302
Experiences formerly had, or other men's, spoken and preached from 83. 411. 418,
419
F.
FAith gives Victory over Sin, 271*. Christ is the Author of -- 196. Faith
stands in the Power of God, 409-412. Dead Faiths and Doctrines 587 Fanatics,
who and what they are? 205. 220 Fashions and Vanities of the world testified
against, 25. 602, 603. (see Apparel.) Fast of G. F's. 92. 103. of a Woman in
Lancashire, 12. Fast proclaimed by O. C. for Rain, 147*. a Day of Humiliation,
190. The true and false Fast, 194. 248* 251* Fast and Holy Days (so called)
387. Fasting and Prayer 621-624 Feastings and Sporting whilst others were, G.
F. visited the Poor, relieving them 5 Fees Marshal's, 230, 231. 303. G.F. could
not pay, being Innocent; and the Jailer's 217* 258 Fell, Judge, sends a Warrant
against the Abusers of G. F. 88. and grants a Supersedeas of a Warrant against
him 90 -- Margaret shows to the King Friends Sufferings and Innocence 231
Fellowships in outward things will corrupt and wither 288 Fifth-Monarchy-mens
Uproar, 229, 230. 238. They cleared Friends openly at their Execution, 240.
247. They look for Christ's Personal Coming, 247. are Fighters 248 Fighters are
not of Christ's Kingdom, 200. Sion needs no such, 201. 204. 246. 268. (See
Wars.) Fox George, his place of Birth, Parents and Relations, 1-3. 30. 41. 135.
213. 310. 390. 396. his Cloths and Wear, 60. 173, 174. his Marriage, 334. A
great Weight fell upon his Spirit, 342. his Travel and Sufferings at Reading,
198, 199, 200. 213. 229. Offers his Hair and Cheek to the Threatner, 240, 241,
etc. and Labors diligently in the Work of the Lord, 601. his Persecutors would
have hanged him, 110. His care for Truth and Friends, 613, 614. He prays to the
Lord, 7. 348. and for the Afflicted, 30. 503, 504. etc. (See Miracles.) His
weakness of Body, 594. 613. His Death and Burial, 614. whose Name is written in
the Lamb's Book of Life, which was before the Foundation of the World, 22 His
Epistle left sealed up, etc. 615-617 -- Mary, Mother of G.F. 1. died, 369
Frederickstadt-Friends Cause pleaded by G. F. 423, 424 Friends much abused by
Priest and People, 69, 86. Their Charity to the Poor, 215. going for a Sign,
see Sign.
G.
Jailer, see Jailer. God's People to be like unto him, 571, 572. The Power of
God thundered amongst the Magistrates of Darby, etc. 31. Good Behavior G. F.
Could not consent to be bound to, who had committed no Ill Behavior, 41. (See
Bond.) Good morrow, good evening, etc. Vain Customs and Traditions forbidden 24
Goods ill gotten, are a Curse to Men 208 Gospel is not the four Evangelists
264. 436. Governments Change, God has a mighty Hand therein 224 Governor of
Dover Convinced 151 -of Tinmouth Castle with others, visits G. F. in Prison. 300
Grace of God teaches those that turn to it, 22, 23. 239* 240* 264* which has
appeared to all men. 300 Grammar and Accidence distinguish the Singular from
the Plural 30^ Groans which brake forth through G. F. did reach to People, and
strike them 57. 10
H.
HAbeas Corpus, etc. for G. F.'s Removal, 222, 223. 394. 399. 405. Hacker
(Coll.) his Son Needham's wicked Saying of G. F. 136. Hacker (Coll.) cut off
being hanged at Tyburn, 137. His Wife and Marshal convinced of Truth, 166.
Hagget Judge, his Wife visits G.F. etc. in Lanceston-Gaol, and was convinced
200* Hair worn long of G.F. 176. 221* 259* Hales Judge, his Answer to G.F.'s
Adversaries in Court 406 Hands not to be laid on any suddenly 283** 597
Hat-honour proud Flesh looks for, 24, 25. 121. 179, 180. 182. 184. 273* 219*. A
Professor's absurd Proof for it from Scripture (pretendedly) 188. 192*-196*
202* Professors offended at it, 244* 198. Friends fined for it, 211. and
Imprisoned, 254* 197, 198. 205. 227. 239. 273, 274. 276. 339. The Hat kept on
in Prayer by J. Perrot and his Party, 310. 394. 624-626. Hebrew, Greek and
Latin makes no Minister of Christ 281* Hirelings and Diviners for Money get
vast Sums of it by selling the Scriptures 26. 133 Honor, the true from the
false distinguished, 24. 202* 284* 274. 308. Hornby-Castle robbed of the
Wainscot and Bucks-horns in Major Po^ter's House 222 House-Creepers, leading
silly Women Captive, etc. are such as having crept into Temples with Tithes and
Offerings, keep People always learning under them, etc. 196 House of Israel,
the House of God 588, 589. Humility goes before Honor, 202* 416. 478. 548,
549.
I.
JAiler of Darby watches G. F. for evil, being in a rage against him, 32. His
Vision concerning G. F. 37. Was convinced of Truth, G. F. finding him among
Friends, 213. and afterward he writ a sensible Letter to G. F. 251, 252
Jailers of Carlisle, their Cruelty against G.F. 110. 112. so that the
Under-Jailer was put into the Dungeon to G. F. for using him so badly 117
Jailer at Lanceston, 179. his Wickedness and Rage against G. F. etc. 186. who
had been a Thief and burnt in the Hand, 187. 214* and afterward was put into
Doomsdale himself, and died in Prison ibid. Under- Jailer at Lancaster a very
wicked Man, 218. 222. And the Upper-Jailer Hunter was cut off in his Young
days, for his Wickedness to G. F. 297. 306. Jailer at Leicester was very Cruel
to Friends in his Prison before G. F. came there, 256, 257. Jailer of Durham
incensing the Governor and Soldiers of Scarb. Castle against G. F. was cut off
in his Wickedness 306 Jeroboam's Calves-houses likened to the Houses called
Churches, set up in the darkness of Popery 84 Jerusalem, which comes down from
Heaven, its State described, 345, 346. The Children thereof 616, 617 Jesuits,
two of them (fawning upon Friends) discoursed by G. F. concerning the
degeneracy of the Churcn of Rome, 246, 247. 286* 287* who are filthy Dreamers,
dreaming they are the Apostles Successors, 247. and are in a Rage against the
Work of the Lord, 331. and persecute to Death for Religion 288* A Jew
discoursed by G. F. concerning the Coming of the Messiah, 441. others would not
discourse 453. 559, 560 Imprisonments for not Swearing, 164. 168. for Tithes
and going to Steeple Houses, etc. 231 * 253*-255* 258* 263* 153. G. F.
Imprisoned in a nasty, stinking Prison at Nottingham, 26, 27. in Darby-Prison,
32-46. 49-53. in Darby-Dungeon. 46-48. in Lanceston Prison, 178, 179. 185, 186.
Doomsdale, 186-188. Lanceston Goal, 189* 210*-219* at Leicester, 256-258 in
Lancaster Prison, 274-297. in Scarborough-Castle, 298-305. Taken at
London-Meetings, and had before Magistrates, 339, 340, etc. G. F. in Worcester
Goal, 389, being premunired, 405. and pleading the Errors of the Indictment at
the K.'s-Bench-Bar, was set at Liberty 406 Friends Imprisoned to Death, 252.
304. Independent-Woman's prejudice against G.F. 154. Independents, 247 Indian
King discoursed by G. F. and several Indians at the King's Cabin, 379. their
Gravity and Attention 382 Indictment's Errors pleaded by G. F. 289-294. 297.
400-402. calls it a bundle of Lies, 398. is quashed 405, 406 Informers hired in
Cumberland, 270. set at work by Priests, 343. a Papist-Informer against G. F.
339. they make spoil, 491, 492. Hilton, 494, 495. S^ad, 514. Innkeepers in
Wales, their Treachery to G.F.'s Horse, etc. 255* 256* another (of Topsham)
burns G. F.'s Leathern Girdle, 173, 174. Inquisition) Friends Traveling in the
Service of the Lord, were many times in danger thereof, but preserved, 123. and
at Dunkirk, 151. Two Women Friends were in the Inquisition at Malta 252
Ireland-Friends Charity for the Relief of Friends Sufferers in England 538
Judge and Juries wrong Proceedings in G. F.'s Case, 400, 401. a Judge's base
Expression, 398. a Judge in Holland discoursed by G.F. 453 Judging) The Church
of Christ has power and ability to Judge, etc. 464-467. 541-547. 597, 598.
Judgments of God on Darby, 53. upon a false Accuser of G. F.'s, 67, 68. on a
Persecutor, 95. upon Adam Sands, 100. on two persecuting Justices of Carlisle,
123. on Conspirators against G. F. 129. on Captain Drury, 138. on a Mocker of
Friends Meetings, 206, 207. on Preston's Wife, 218. upon New England, 244. an
Independent Scottish Pastor, 271* 272* a Soldier speaking evil of the Light,
278* upon persecuting, envious Officers, 262. upon a Persecutor in Cornwall,
264, 265. in Lancashire, 276. on Justice Flemming, 281. on Major Wiggan, ibid.
on Persecutors and bad Men, 303, 304. on Justices, G. F.'s Persecutors, 306.
upon a persecuting Justice, 309. upon a common Swearer in Barbados, 352. on
Justice Simpson, 401. and on Justice Street, 401, 402. on persecuting Powers,
204, 205. Day of Judgment, See Day. Justices fair Promises at Worcester-Assize
broken, 391, 392. ensnaring Questions 423. 428 Justices sitting about hiring of
Servants, were admonished and exhorted by G. F. to Justice, and the Servants to
do their Duty, 17. Courts of Justice warned by G. F. to do justly 25
K.
KEat Capt. his base Carriage to G. F. 177, 178 King Charles II. his Coming in,
198, 199. 212, 213. 219. 221, 222. Old Kings Judges Executed 238 To the King
and Council, a Declaration 233. 237
King's of France and Spain, and the Pope to prove all things, etc. in an
Epistle of G. F.'s to the Pope, and all Kings and Rulers in Europe 146 King's
Bench-Bar) G. F. being removed by Habeas Corpus, had his Trial there, 227, 228.
394, 395. 399. 405, 406. King's Evil, a Friend's Daughter being healed of 407
Kingdom of Christ has been set up above Sixteen hundred Years ago, 274. is in
Peace and Righteousness, 234. the Heirs of the Kingdom of Christ are such as
are Regenerated and Born again, 572-576
L.
LAndmark) those that removed it to cause the Blind to wander, were cursed 590
Languages, see Tongues. Law of God is perfect, 11, 12. 14, 15. is written in
the Heart, 238* 243 Lawyers must be reformed, and brought into the Law of God,
18, 19 Liberty and Freedom Man is brought into by the Ministry of Christ and
his Teaching, 12. An Intention was in the Government, of granting Friends
Liberty, 229. 325. true Liberty is in that which puts down Sin and Iniquity,
474. outward Liberty from Prisons, is the Lord's Mercy, 548, 549. 567, 568, the
false Liberty is from the way of Truth 536-538 Life Eternal is in Christ, not
in the Scriptures 578, 579 Light is not Natural, 252* 253* 257*. 22, 23. 125,
126, etc. 136. 176. 181. 223* 224* 238* 261, 262. Light and Grace, 270* 271*
Light Cursed by the Scotch Priests, 270* 190. 192. All are enlightened, 281, 282.
The Light to be in the Indians, was denied by Dr. Witty, 300. and a Dr. in
Carolina denied it also, 376. Which Light gives the Light of the Knowledge,
etc. 436. 569. 575, 576. 604, 605. Little Ease, a Prison or Hole, whereinto
Rich. Sale was squeezed, that not long after he died 240 Love of God, its
Infiniteness, 9. 14. 416. Love and Charity's Effects, 550. 552. 598. Love and
Unity is from the Spirit of God 598
M.
MAgistrates must yield to Truth, 254*-256*-260* 114-117. 256* 260* 259*. are
to do Justice, 209. and stop Profaneness, 225. 244. their Sword against
Evildoers, 272, 273. Magistrates of Dantzick their Work of Persecution,
458-463. 538-541. 594-596 Marriages, 5. stated, 302. 307. The Proceedings
thereof settled, 315, 316. 352. 354. 422. To be laid before the Monthly and
Quarterly Meetings, 312. and to have Certificate, 316. A Case of Marriage tried
at Nottingham-Assizes, 249, 250. A Marriage in Road-Island, 367. Friends Care
therein, 520. Marrying, Meats and Drinks, 12. 229 Major General of
Northamptonshire, an old Persecutor, sharply reproved by G. F. 224* Meetings)
G. F. meeting with some friendly People in Darbyshire, etc. 6, 7. at Broughton,
13, etc. Meetings of Friends set up, 84. at F Lepers, 93. Arnside 103 Great
Meetings at London, 140. Near Acton in the Fields 141 A Meeting near London,
where Friends were much abused 197 Monthly and Quart. Men and Women's Meetings
set up in London, and in the Nation 310-315-320. in the Power of God, which is
the Authority thereof, 413. 417. and are of God's Ordering, 552, 553. being set
up in the Wisdom of God, 615 Womens-Meetings set up, and the Service thereof
386. 419-421 Yearly-Meetings 1657, 1658. in Bedfordshire, 282* 286*. at Balby
(Boulthie, Yorkshire) 213, 214. York 598. and at London, a Yearly Meeting
(1670.) 349 Meeting for Sufferings at Skipton set up 215 Powerful Meetings in
Ireland 327-332 Ministers went forth, 104. 120. from the North-Country over
England, 124. into Scotland, 140, 141. and beyond the Seas, 150. Truth
spreading in England, 200* True Ministers Trial, 147. Exercising their Gift,
283* 286* and sounding abroad their Trumpets 329, 330
Ministry of Christ, 5. 8. 12. 300. 412. takes no Hire 368 Miracles wrought by
the Power of God, 167. She that was ready to die, raised up again, 170, 171.
The Lame made whole, 103. The Diseased restored, 407. A distracted Woman
healed, 27, 28. (See Trouble of Mind.) A great Man given over by Physicians,
restored, 30. 258. G. F. prays for a Woman ready to die, 70. and for a
distracted Woman at Chichester, 171. Restores John Jay's Neck broke (as the
People said) by a fall from an Horse in East-Jersey, 370, 371. Speaks to a
Sickman in Maryland, who was raised up by the Power of the Lord, 373. and
prays the Lord to rebuke J. C's. Infirmity, and the Lord by his Power soon gave
him Ease, etc. 503, 504 Monk General his Order, requiring all Officers and
Soldiers to forbear to disturb the Quakers Meetings, etc. 212. 229. which are
not Seditious, 237. yet disturbed 240. 314, 315. 326 Mountebanks Vanity, 25.
Their Ignorance 245* Mountague Judge, G. F. discoursing him at his Chamber (in
London) about Tithes 487, 488 Muggletonians 247 Musheto's in Amer. (little
Flies or Gnats.) 369 Music and Singing 23. 25
N.
NAmes are given to Things according to their Nature 18 Natures of Creatures
outward to be read within Man, 13. 20. 82. That all Things come by Nature,
refuted 16 Naylor James, running into Imaginations, is warned by G. F. 220* his
Recovery, ibid. 232* his Followers 245* Nebuchadnezzar's Dream of Christ's
Kingdom, which is not of this World 247, 248. 45. Negroes and Family-Meetings
recommended, 610, 611. (See Blacks) New England Professors proclaiming a Fast,
194. soon after put four of our Friends to Death, and became bloody
Persecuters, 241, 242. G. F. charged their Magistrates with Murdering them,
according to their own Confession, 243, 244. who felt God's Judgments for their
Wickedness 455. 458. 601 News hearing and telling, 65. 539. Nicknames, see
Sirrah.
O.
OAth or Engagement to O. C. 123, 124. Swear not at all, 130. 180, 181. Oath of
Abjuration, 163, 164. tendered to G. F. 176. his Paper against Swearing, read in
Court, 180-182. 185. Oaths and Swearing, 229. 239. 600. refused by G. F. 301.
being unlawful. ibid. - Allegiance and Supremacy, 250. 255-257. 403, 404. Oaths
taken falsely against Friends, 262. 273-280. Oath tendered to G. F. 288. 292,
293. 295. 392. Allegiance wherein it consists, 300. 318. what G. F. could say
instead of it, 392. and of Supremacy, 395, 396. 400
Offering, the true and the false, 560-567. 577. 581. 607 Old Cause) The
setting up thereof was for themselves 205 Oldenburgh Magistrates and People a
Warning to them 617-619. Openings of G. F's. 3. 5. 8-10. 13, 14. 16. of the
things of the Creation, 18. of Physic, Divinity and Law, 18-22, etc. 586. 588.
602 Opposers of the Faithful come to naught 615, 616. Order of Bodmin-Sessions
for the Prisoners Ease, 187. Order and Discipline in the Church of Christ
maintained, 534, 535, is of the Spirit 557 Oxford and Cambridge-Teachers, 263.
cannot make Ministers of Christ, 5. 8. Oxford-Scholars Rudeness 155, 225*
P.
PApists, their Superstition of Consecrated Bread and Wine, 287* 288* Images,
Crosses and Relics 286* 252. pray by Beads, 247. 328. 564. and sprinkle
Children, 323. their Purgatory, ibid. and Mother Church pretended, 324. A
Warning to them, 146, 147. and their murdering false Doctrine confuted 299,
300 Pardon being offered by the King to G. F. he could not take it, 404, 405.
and was fairly freed without it, 406 Parliament Men discoursing G. F. in Prison
300 Parnel James Convinced (1653) 112. was at a Dispute of G. F's. against
eight Priests, etc. at Drayton on an Hill (1654) 132. Imprisoned in
Colchester-Castle (1655) 112. is visited by G.F. in Prison, 152. The Gaoler's
Wife threatened to have his Blood, 153. who died by a fall from a Ladder, going
up to his Prison, 112, 113. Of whom Professors (to cover their Cruelty) said,
He fasted himself to Death ibid. Patience and Faith's Exercise, 265* People
flew like Chaff before the dreadful Power of God, 81. 31. People trembled and
shook in Carlisle-Steeple-house, 109. (See Shaking.) Perfection, a Priest
Discourses G.F. about it, 397. Perfection in Christ is above Adam's, 357.546.
Imperfection pleaded for by Professors 36, 37. 119 Persecution Judged, 94-96.
98-100. testified against and Persecutors warned, 191-199. they being blinded,
210* 263* 264* 225. and not knowing what Spirit they are of, 224. Persecutors
to Blood, 318, 319. Persecutors restrained, 308. 312, 313. 328. Persecution
violent at London-Meetings, 343. Testimonies against it, 460-462. 482-485.
496-499. 626, 627. 631, 632. Four Friends in New England hanged 240-244 Physic
and Letting Blood a Priests Remedy against a troubled Mind 5 Physicians must be
in in the Wisdom of God 18. 30. 245 Pleasures and vain Delights denied 217*
219* 220* 204 Plots and Fightings, Friends Declaration against, 231. 233-237.
267. 395. 481. and denied, 272. 274. 303 Poland's Exiled Protestants, 190, 191.
King of Poland, 458. Two Letters to him from G. F. 459-463. and 539-541. Powers
of the Earth 286* Prayer in Sighs and Groans, 266* how to pray 564 Preachers
(Congregational) at a Meeting with G. F. 252* Praemunire of G. F. 295. 297. of
two Friends in Devonshire, 318. Counselor Corbet's Plea for G.F. in Court 405
Presbyterians Meeting stuff't with Bread and Cheese, etc. 314, 315. 391
Press-masters on Board G. F's. Vessel 349. 383 Pride in Apparel 144, 145
Priests sell the Scripture, 26. pray by Form, 134, 135. their Spirit, 25. they
are Hirelings, 106. 133, 134. Tithe-takers, 228* Robbers of the People, and not
Ministers of the Gospel, 295. 333, 334. plead for Sin and Imperfection, 32. 36,
37. 52. are confounded, 60. 119. dreaded the Man in Leather-Britches, 60. A
Priest trembles, 69. hides himself from G. F. 79. are miserable Comforters, 45.
reproved by Judge Fell, etc. at Sessions for their gross Assertions, 89.
reproved in the Streets, 90. Eight Priests dispute against G. F. 132. are false
Prophets and Antichrists, 106. 556. One pleads for Adultery, 393. one beats
Friends, 59, 60, 326. are choked by a Parsonage, 30, 31. and love a fat
Benefice, 167. 300, 301. so much a Year, 211. The Devils Lawyers and
Counselors, 265*. Oppressors, 296. Persecutors: 207. 308, 309. 343. 415
Prophecy of R. Jones vain, 127, 128. of Brown's, see Brown. A Woman's Prophecy
of the Kings Coming in, 199. Prophecy of Priests and Professors against the
Quakers vain, 120, 121. false Prophecies and Prophets 128 Prison of G. F. its
badness, 288. 292, 293. 295. 297. and that of Scarborough-Castle 298
Prison-Keeper struck with terror 37 Prisoners many, 194. Friends offer their
Bodies one for another, ibid, died Prisoners, 197. 250. 275, 276. 278. 280.
304. 318.
Prisoners set at Liberty by the King 229. 548 Pirates 363. 350, 351
Q.
Quakers first so called 37, 38 Quakers Love to all Men, 308. A Quaker's
upright Verdict, being upon a Jury, commended by the Judge in Court 130 Quakers
Principle stated to the King by G. F. 402-404

R.
A great Rain fell after a Meeting in Cheshire in a great Drought 247* Ranters
confounded, 29. 57. 59. 130, 131. 139. 151, 152. 225* 247. A Ranting Woman at
Low, 262, 263. Their Wickedness, and the Judgment fallen on them 320 G. F. had
a meeting with the Raniers in Road-Island 367
Rebellion and Plots denied 532 Regeneration must be known, to enter into the
Kingdom of God 572-576 Religion, the Reformed by Tradition, 191. The true one
is the Life and Power of God, 223, 436, 437. The Pope's, 191. (See Papist.)
Repentance of some that had run out, 310. Repentance goes before the Gospel
570, 571 Reports raised of G. F. falsely, 244* at Nailsworth, 332. Of G.F. and
Friends at Barbados, 357. 361 Restitution made of wrong done 27 Restoration
out of the Fall, into the state that never fell 346 Revelation of John is a
sealed-up Book, said the Priests to G. F. 6. By Revelation God is known 8
Righteous Men are preserved from Destruction 558-560 Rude People at Meetings
and Inns, 243* 244* in Wales, 255* at Manchester, 260* in Scotland, 272* Rude
Fellows by the way-side, 276* Rude Serving-men abusive to Friends in and out of
Meetings, 93. and to Women going home, 216. Fellows encompassing G.F. by the
way, 224* Rude Priests 218 Rude People 240, 241. 269. 317 Rule of Life 397
S.
Sacrament of Bread and Wine, the denial of it objected and answered, 230* 231*
237* 287* 288* Sally-man of War, that gave chase to the Vessel G. F. went in to
America, his report thereof 355 (55) Salutation of G. F.'s to the Council of
Edinburgh, being had before them, 273* Schools set up for Friend's Children,
one at Waltham-Abbey for Boys, 316. and at Shacklewell another for Girls, ibid.
347. 387 Scots challenging a Dispute with Friends were overthrown, 271* A
Scotch Officer's impious Saying 272* Scotch Priests Principles, 269* Curses
270* 271* Blindness 274* 275* Scriptures are the Words, not the Word of God
102. 211* and understood by the Spirit, 22, 23. 511, 512. being given forth by
it, 359. Scripture-Knowledge without the Life, vain 7, 8. 13. 437 Seekers 247,
435 Separation and its Spirit, a warning against it, 420-422. pleads a Liberty,
434. has the Name of Truth, but not the Nature, 434. 446. 448-451. 455. 464.
467, 468. 481. 489-491. 516-518. 551-553. Unruly Spirits at Reading, 456. In
America G. F. had a Meeting with them 366 Sessions at Lancaster 88-92. 273,
274. Leicester, 257, 258. Worcester, 391, 392. 398. 401. Bodmin 187 Serpent 9.
Speaking in People 14 Serving-men: See Rude. Shaking of the House, G. F.
praying, 15. A Meeting of Friends were greatly shaken, 17. People shook 109.
(See Steeple-house.) Sheriff of Lincoln convinced, 129. (See Craven.) Sheriffs
to be Chosen by Friends, such as they can give their Voices for 492, 493 The
Sick and afflicted restored. (See Trouble in Mind, and Miracles.) Shipwracks
called God's Grace 207. 209 Sign) Tho. Aldam a Sign to O. C. 199. Rob.
Huntington, 239. Some in Sackcloth and Ashes, 296. 306. Another before the Fire
of London, 305. Another going naked, 306. A Woman going before the Parliament,
etc. 199. (See Prophecies.) Richard Sale carrying, etc. 240 Silent-Meeting 63
Singing in the Spirit with a melodious Sound 277* Sin Priests preach up for
Term of Life, 32. 239. Sin's Entail and Original cut off, 265*. Professors
distinguish the Guilt and the Power of it, 196. and plead for Sin, 397, 398.
Sin's Deceitfulness to be watched against 506, 507 Sirrah, and other
reproachful Nicknames given by Magistrates to Prisoners, reproved 277 Slander
raised by a Priest on a Meeting of Friends he was at 102 Socinians 247. 387.
435 Soldiers, one proffered G. F. to assist him, 86. others were Convinced, and
their Wives at Meetings, 106. 108, 109. and at Cranbrook, 150. Another, begins
to draw his Sword at a Friend 188. Some could not take the Oath to O. C. 123,
124. others took it, and fell into Danger, ibid. A Soldiers wicked Saying of
Christ, 214*. Several Officers Convinced in Scotland, 279*. Some Soldiers
striking Friends at Meeting, 210, 212. Troopers came to see G.F. in Prison 297
Soldiers Testimony of him, 305 Lewd Soldiers in Germany, 443. Blind Men are not
Listed for Soldiers (neither outward nor inward) 606 Somerset House 199 Soul) A
People holding, That Women have no Souls 5, 6 Spirit of Discerning in G. F. 14.
108. The Spirit tries Doctrines, 26. and leads into all Truth, 238* A measure
of it is given to every one, 281. Its Fruits, if obeyed, 402, 403. (A Spirit in
the Ship, and in the Steeple-House 55. 350, 351 Sports and Feastings denied 5
Steeple Houses and Markets, Truth preached in them, 262* the Sound of its Bell
seemed like the Sound of a Market-Bell, 25, 26. 31. G. F. in the Steeple-house
at Beverly and Crantzick, 54-57. Mansfield-Woodhouse the People fell upon him,
etc. Steeple-house shook, 82. 102. 109 Friends declaring Truth in
Steeple Houses, 149. 151. 177. 188 276*. others admonished the Bowlers 217*
Streets, Truth preached in them, 246. 254*-258* Stone laid in Sion, rejected,
473. That became a great Mountain 579, 580 Stilness, the Mind feels the
Principle of God in it 189 Students at Aberdeen, some Convinced 407 Sufferings
of G. F.'s and Friends for being contrary to the World's Ways and Customs, 24.
G. F. cruelly beaten by a Clerk in the Steeple-house, 69. by a rude Multitude,
87. banished, (see Banishment.) su^fered in bad Prisons, 289, etc. Sufferings
of Friends for Traveling about their Occasions, 201* for going to
Steeple Houses, etc. 262* 263* etc. laid before O.C. 195 Sufferings of Friends
at Meetings, 197. by Imprisonments, ibid. 198. 295, 296. 321. 250. And after
the Monarchy-mens Rising, 231. some Banished, etc. Dantzick Friends Sufferings
458-463. 538-541. 594-596
Swear not at all, 292. Friends not swearing, how discerned from others not
swearing, 324, 325. See 481. 514. Offices served by Friends without Swearing,
600. Justices and Jury Forsworn at Lancaster-Assizes in G. F's. Case, 289, 290.
Three Officers of the Court Forsworn in the same Case 294 Syllogisms and
Sophistick Arguments overthrown 273*
T.
TAlents, 240* 241* and the slothful Servant. 611 Talkers airy, 8. 14. 185,
186. Tawnies, see Blacks. Teacher) God was the first Teacher in Paradise, etc.
384 Tempest great with Thunder and Rain 309 Temples made with Hands God dwells
not in 6.31 Temptations to Despair upon G. F. 3, 4. 6. 8. for the Trial of his
Faith, 10. was under great Temptations sometimes 13, 14 Thee and Thou to a
single Person, 279* 198. 205. 239. 245. 301. (See Hat.) Thieves lying hid by
the highway in Scotland, reproved by G. F. 276* Tithes Quakers cannot pay 229.
118. Great Havoc and Spoil made for them by Priests, 162. 239. some Imprisoned
to Death for them, 275, 276. 302. Friends to keep up the Testimony against
them, 430. 432. 487. 550. Tithes pleaded for by the Priests 228 Tongues and
Languages the Beast has power over 281* Toleration prayed against by a Priest,
240. how to use it, 567, 568 Two Thirsts in Man 8, 9 Thrones on Earth contended
for, 590 Trading of Friends increased, People seeing their honest Dealing, 12^
Transgression of the Life of God, what it leads to 189, 190 Travels of G. F's.
into 1657 Wales 245* and 261* Scotland 268*-281* 1669 Ireland 327-3^2 1671
Barbados 34^-361 Jaimaca 361-363 1672 Maryland 363-365 E. and W. Jersey 365
Long Island in N.E. ibid Road Island 366-369 Jerseys -370 Maryland 372-375
Virginia 375 Carolina 375-377 Virginia 377, 378 1673 -- Maryland 378-383
Returning thence to England he went over to 1677. Holland, Friezland, Germany,
Holstein, etc. 432-454 1684 Holland and Friezland 520-523
Trembling and Quaking owned, 157-160 Trials of G. F's. etc. see Assize. Two
Triers sent from Wales, both were convinced, 123. A pretended Trier of Spirits
confounded, 149. A Day of Trial is coming upon all, etc. 287. 533. 587 Troubles
of Mind spoken to, 189. Of a Woman in Maryland, for whom G.F. entreated the
Lord, 381. Troubles upon a Trooper concerning G. F. 45 Truth is honorable,
284* is peaceable, 486. in Unity, 551, 552. the Pearl, 569 Tumult of the People
at Brecknock 246* Turks and Turkish Patrons give Liberty of Religion 596
V.
VEngeance is the Lord's 244 Victory and overcoming of Temptations known 8. 166
Vision of G. F's. of a Bear, etc. 69. Of a desperate Creature, etc. 267* Of New
Engl. Sufferings to Death, 241. Concerning the Turk, 295. Of himself to be
taken Prisoner, 389. A Vision in Ireland, 328. and in his Voyage for America,
350. the Christians at Jerusalem, had a Vision before its Destruction 559 Voice
coming to G. F. 8, 9. (see Openings) the Voice of the Lord to a Trooper 45
Voyages of G. F.'s to Ireland, 327. for England, 332. to Barbados, 349-351,
etc.
W
WAiting upon God 203, 204 Wales) The Governor of Tenby must yield to Truth,
253* 254* and Magistrates in other Places, 255* 256* the Moderation of a Town
in Wales, 257* 258* A Lady and her Preacher send for G. F. 259* Wars and
Fightings denied by G.F. 3, 4. 46. 48, 49. They arise from the Lusts in the
Fall, 200, 201. None to go down to Egypt for help, 202, 203. It is not our
Principle, 235. but do testify against it, 285-287. and is not becoming
Christianity, 630-632. being a Work of Darkness 137 Warrants against G. F. 118.
188. 267* 278* 203. 213. 216, 217, etc. 271. 308. 326. 341. for Tithes, 487.
Warrant against all Quakers 203* 223* Watches set up in the Streets and
Highways in Cornwall, etc. to stop Friends from Traveling, 200*-203* 206* 208*
209* Weakness of G. F.'s Body, 310. by long and close Imprisonment, 295, 296.
407. 564. by continual Travel, 430. and spent at Meetings, etc. 568. his Health
being much impaired, 586. A great Exercise came upon him 588 Wicked Man cut
off, 303. another plagued 304 Worship, the World's, 23, 24. Will Worship, 213*
The Dragon's and the Beast's 227* The Worship in the Spirit, 245, 246
Wrong, see Restitution.
Y
YEA and Nay, 2. 121. is more binding than an Oath to many, 292, 293. 403, 404.
Z.
ZEal against Unrighteousness many will God provoke unto, 224
The FOURTH TABLE; Being a Catalogue of the Epistles, Letters and Papers of G.
F.'s and others contained in this Volume.
THE Appearance of the Lord's Everlasting Truth, etc. Testim. p. xviij.
1650.
G. F. his Mittimus by Bennet and Barton, Just. 32 To the Priests of Darby 33
To the Magistrates of Darby ibid. To Barton and Bennet, Just. 34 To Justice
Bennet ibid. To Justice Barton 35 To the Mayor of Darby ibid. To the Court at
Darby 36 To the Ringers ibid. To Friends and others 38 To the convinced People
40 To the Faithful an Encourage. 41 To the Justices of Darby ibid. To the same
42 To the same ibid. To the Priests of Darby 43 To the Justices of Darby ibid.
To Col. Barton, Justice 44
1651.
To the Judges 47 To the same ibid. To Justice Barton and Bennet 49 To the
convinced and tender People 50 To the Magistrates of Darby 51 A Lamentation
over Darby 52
1652.
J. Naylor's Account of Lancaster Sessions 90 To Justice Sawrey 94 To William
Lampit 96 To the People of Vlverstone ibid. To the Followers of P. Lampit 98 To
Adam Sands 100
1653.
A. P. To the Judges of Assize 111 G. F.'s Challenge to Professors 113 To T.
Craston and C. Studholm 114 G.B. To the Mag. at Carlisle 116
1654.
To Friends in the Ministry 124 To all Professors of Christ. 141 To such as
follow the World's Fashions 144 To the Just. Trying Ministers 147
1655.
To those that Scorn at Trembling and Quaking 156 To the Churches in outward
Forms 161 To Friends to offer themselves for their Brother, etc. 165 An
Encouragement to Friends 166 To Fr. in the N. of Ireland 170 To the 7 Parishes
at Landsend 175
1656
Concerning Swearing 180 Peter Ceely's Mittimus 183 E. Pyot to J. Glyn, C.
Just. 189* To Magistrates of Watches 201* Answer to Exon-Warrant 203* To
Priests and Professors 207* To Friends in the Ministry 212* E.P. To M. Genesis
Desborow 215* G. F. To the same 216* Concerning Pleasures 218* To the Bowlers
ibid. To all the Elect 232* To Fr. to keep up Meetings ibid. Judging any in
Meetings 233* An Answer to a Professor 235* Profes. Priests etc. Darkness 238*
1657
The true Fast and false 248* Of Lusts, Affections, Desires 261* To try all
things, etc. 263* Be valiant for the Truth 265* Order of Council in Scotl. 273*
To the Council of Edenburg 274*
1658
Bedfordshire yearly Meeting 283* To the Lady Claypool 189 Concerning Fasting
191 To the Parliament, of Profes. 195 To Friends to go on faithfully 197 About
the Image of O. C. 200
1659
To keep from Plots, etc. ibid. To keep out of Powers, etc. 202 Of the day of
Recompense 204 Concerning Shipwracks 207
1660
G. Monk's Order 212 G. F's. Ans. to his Mittimus 219 M. Fell to all
Magistrates 221 Concerning true Religion 223 Against Persecution 224 Concerning
Change of Gov. ibid. To K. Charles the Second 225 The Sheriff of Lancast.
Return 228 The K.'s Order for G.F.'s Rel. ibid Judge Mallet's Warrant 239 To
Friends to send up Suffr. 232 A Declar. against Plotters 233 The K.'s Mandamus
to N. E. 243
1661.
Of the true Worship 245 Keeping on Hat in Prayer 249 The World says Kiss the
Book 250
1662.
To the K. Friends Sufferings ibid. T. Sharman's Letter to G.F. 251 The Grounds
of Persecution 252 Conc. E. Burrough's Decease 259
1663.
Of Ol. Atherton's Death 276 Lanc. Prisoners to J. Flem. 278
1664.
G. F. To Dan. Flemming 281 To Judges giving Nicknames 282 A Testimony against
Plotting 285 A day of Trial and Exercise 287 To keep out of J. P.'s Spint ibid.
1665.
Concerning Tithes 295
1666.
G.F.'s Discharge and Pasport 305
1668.
Against the Dark Spirits 318
1669.
Is. Lindley's Letter to G. F. 326 Sound, sound abroad, you faithful Servants
of the Lord 329 Of putting Children to Trades 335
1670.
To Margaret Fox 336 Conc. the Act against Meet. 337 Friends to stand to their
Test. 338 Encouragement under Suffr. 344 Visitations abused, etc. 346 All
Friends that do Marry 347
1671.
G. F.'s Prayer to the Lord 348 From Barb. to Fr. in Engl. 353 Another Epist.
to Fr. in Engl. 355 For the Governor of Barbados 359 To Margaret Fox 361. 362
1673.
To the same 384 G.F.'s Mittimus to Worc. Pris. 389 To Margaret Fox ibid. To
the L. Windsor G.F.'s Case ibid. G. F.'s Habeas Corpus 394 G.F.'s Allegiance
and Suprem. 399
1674.
To the K. the Qu.'s Principle 402 H. Parker to the Jailer 404
1675.
To Friends in Westmorland 408
1676.
To Friends at Yearly Meet. 409 Spirit of Opposers and Work 402
1677.
To Margaret Fox 428 A Testimony against Tithes 431 The Spirit of Separation
434 To Princess Eliz. Herwerden 435 The Princess her Ans. to G.F. 438 Fasting,
Prayer, etc. 620 Getting the Affections of Peo. 446 To Friends at Dantzick 447
To Mag. and Peo. of Oldenb. 617 To Magist. Priests, etc. Hamb. 627 To the
Embas. at Nimeguen 630 The Spirit of Separation 449 To Margaret Fox 454
1678.
To the same 458 To John III. King of Poland 459 To Friends in Amsterdam 463
Concerning Prescriptions 464 Let Life reign over Death 467 The hurt of
Disorderly Spirits 468 To Qu. and Monthly Meetings 469 To the Churches of
Christ 471 To Friends in Prison 472
1679.
To Fr. of the yearly Meeting 473 Be Valiant for the Truth 477 To dwell in
Humility 478
1680.
To the Parliam. against Plots 481 To Magist. to be moderate 482
1681.
To the Quarterly Meetings 486 Spirit of Strife and Division 489
1682.
Informers convicting Friends 491 To the Sheriffs to be chosen 492 To the Pople
that choose them 493 To distinguish Truth and Err. 496 Exercises from Mag. and
Apo. 497 Feel the power of God in you all 500 Be Valiant for Truth 501
1683.
To the Yearly Meet. in Land. 505 To Friends, a Salutation 506 My Love is to
you all 510 Fruits of Peace and Quietness 512 To all the Elect, etc. 516
1684.
To the Duke of Holstein 523 To Friends, an Epistle 527
1685.
Keep out of the World's Spirit 528 Excess in Apparel 530 To Friends who are
called 533 Among all Societies, etc. 534 Here you may see, when -- 536 To John
III. King of Poland 539 Concerning Judging 541
1686.
Ancient Pris. at the Y. Meet. 548 The King opening Prisons 550 In Christ is no
Separation 551 Men and Women Q. Meet. 552 Church clothed with the Sun- 553 The
Falling away, etc. 556 Noah and his family were called 558 The First and Second
Adam 561
1687.
Concerning the two Seeds ibid. Concerning Prayer 564 True and false Offering
565 Caution in time of Liberty 567 God's Goodness to Mankind 569 Repentance
before Baptism 570 God's People to be like him 571 The right Way to Christ
ibid. Except a man be born again 572 The Jews Rebel. their Loss 576 God so
loved the World, that he- 578 The stone became a mountain 579 Regeneration and
Sanctifica. 58^
1688.
All you Believers in the Light 584 An approaching Storm 587 Moses and Christ's
House 588 Thrones on Earth contended 590 The World's Empty Teachers ibid. Not
to remove the Landmark ibid. Apostles Husbandmen, etc. 59^
1689.
Hearing and telling News 593 To P. H. and Fr. at Dantzick 594 To the Magist.
of Dantzick 595 Great Shakings in the World 597 To keep in Love and Unity 598
To Friends in Barbados 599 To Q. and Y. Meet. in America 60^
1690.
Against Fashions, etc. 602 Christ the Ensign, etc. 603 Stand still and see
Salvation 606 To Friends in the Ministry 609 To Fr. in the Minist. in Amer. 610
To suffering Friends in Irel. 612 G. F.'s Death and Burial 613 His Epistle left
sealed up, etc. 615
OMitted p. 356. line 41. viz. Paul Gwin came into the Meeting, and began to
Babble, and asked me, How I spelt Cain? And whether I had the same Spirit as
the Apostles had? And I told him, Yes: And he had the Judge take Notice of it.
And I told him; He that had not a measure of the same Holy Ghost, as the
Apostles had, was possessed with an unclean Ghost: And then he went his ways.
(See p. 221* 222*)

The Letter against Plotting is printed p. 200. and the same over again p. 267.
by a mistake.


