TO THE Ministers, Teachers, AND PRIESTS, (So called, and so Stileing your
Selves) IN BARBADOS.

BY GEORGE FOX.

Printed in the Year, 1672.

To the Ministers, Teachers and Priests (so called, and so stiling your selves)
in BARBADOS.
COnsider seriously what a Charge you take in hand; do you not pretend to watch
for and over Peoples Souls, and to present them to God? Have you presented any
to God? Nay, Can you present any to God? unless you be in the same Power and
Spirit the Apostles were in, which is an Immortal Power and Spirit, to present
the immortal Soul to the immortal God: Do you pretend to watch for the
spiritual and everlasting Good of the People? but do not you watch more
(whatever your pretenses are) for their Goods (which you call your Revenues)
then for that? O! how is it that there is so much raging (which wars against
the Soul) amongst you; yea, such abundance of Fleshly Lusts and Fleshly Talk in
the Hearts and Mouths of People? Do you not pretend to cure their Souls, and
to be the Curates of them? And if so, can you make the Soul Perfect? If you
present them to God, must they not be perfect here? For, will you present an
unperfect Offering to a perfect God? Do you not pretend that you Plough in
Hope? And have you the Spiritual Plough, that turns up the Fallow Ground? And
if so, how comes it to pass, that there are so much Weeds upon your Ground? and
that your Land lies fallow, in that there is so little Fruit brought forth to
God? Look upon your Field every one of you; or whether are you idle, and do not
plough, but beat the Air? and so do not you pretend that you thresh in Hope?
Now have you the Spiritual Flayl? and if so, How chances it that there is so
much Chaff? And do you not plead for Imperfection, and a Body of Sin and Death
that people must necessarily have, while they live upon Earth? Then do you not
plead for Chaff, and not for the Wheat? And look upon your Fields, and look
upon your Vineyards, and see what abundance of Chaff there is: Have you not
been the Seeds-men of the Flesh, who sow to the Flesh; and not the Seeds-men of
the Spirit, who sow to the Spirit ( For he that sows to the Flesh, must of the
Flesh reap Corruption (and so look what a goodly Crop you have) and he that
sows to the Spirit, he reaps Life Eternal. But do you believe, that every one
has a measure of the Spirit for you to sow to? And do you believe, that every
one is enlightened by Christ Jesus, the Light, and their Savior, that you may
turn them from Darkness to the Light, and from the Power of the Devil to God;
or rather, that you turn them from the Power of God to the Devil, and from the
Light to Darkness? Examine your selves, and consider; for you must give an
Account to God.

Have you heard Christ's Voice and God's Voice immediately from Heaven? Has he
sent you to Preach, or have you ran before you were sent? And have you not
spoken, and yet God never spoke to you? and say, Thus says the Lord, as those
did who were reproved in Jer. 23.21. or, Have you been called of God as Aaron
was; or, Have you taken that Honor upon your selves, having a Call of Men, and
not as Aaron had? And Christ says to his Apostles, Go and teach all Nations;
and elsewhere he says, The Gospel must be preached amongst all Nations, Mark
13.10. Now, did Christ set his Apostles down in Parishes, for so much a Year,
that the People should be like a Freehold, and that the People should be
Tenants for Life, or until they could hear of a bigger Benefice? Is this your
Practice, or theirs, to wit, the Apostles of Christ? Now consider, Christ (I
say) says, Go teach all Nations: Have you obeyed his Commands, or have you
heard his Voice (as was said before) or are you of those that have climed up
another way? and what does Christ call such?

And if you be Ministers of Christ, are you not Teachers of Blacks and Taunies
(to wit, Indians) as well as of the Whites? For, is not the Gospel to be
preached to all Creatures? And are not they Creatures? And did not Christ taste
Death for every man? And are not they Men? And was not he a Propitiation for
the Sins of the whole World, as well as for the Saints? And so consider, if the
Gospel was to be preached unto all (according as Christ commanded) why do you
not teach the Blacks and Taunies here? You may (it may be) say, There is
nothing to be gotten of them: What, have they not Souls for you to watch over
and to cure? Are they not part of your Parishioners if not the greatest part?
And why do you find fault with the Quakers (so called) for teaching of their
Families, and instructing them (to wit) the Blacks, and Taunies, and Whites?
Does not the Lord say, That Abraham (he knew) would instruct his Family? And
were not all his Men-Children to be Circumcised? And are not all Men and Women
now to be Circumcised with the Spirit of God? But it seems your Blacks, etc.
are taught to Swear, and to Curse, and to say, God Dam them; and many of them
do Swear almost at every word, which they have been taught and learned here
among you called Christians (for they learn no such kind of Speech in their own
Country) And is not this sad, that Christians, who profess Christianity, should
have such things amongst them? For, Christ says, You must not Swear at all, in
Mat. 5. and in Jam. 5. who taught them true Christianity: And is it not the
Duty of every Master of a Family, that so these may come to know their Duty to
God, and to Man.

Now first, Consider your own Lives, and the End of your Preaching; whether you
do not preach your selves, and for your selves, and seek theirs you preach to,
and not them: Examine your Hearts truly before God; for to him you must give an
Account: Have you not laid aside this Command of Christ? namely, Freely you
have received, freely give: and to invite the People, To come for Wine and Milk
without Money and without Price, Isa. 55.1. Now can you do so without
Hypocrisy? How can you say so and not blush, when you will do nothing without
Price, nor give any thing without Money, but will have so much a Year of every
one in your Parish; or else, No Penny, No Pater Noster. The Apostle says, He
coveted no man's Silver, nor Gold, nor Apparel; but labored with his Hands to
supply his own Necessities, and the Necessities of others; and that he might be
an Example to all that followed him (remember the words of our Lord Jesus, how
that it is a more Blessed Thing to Give, then to Receive) Acts 20.33, 34, 35.
Now do you follow the Apostle Paul herein? and is he your Example? What, do you
think the People have no Eyes in their Heads to see you? And did not the
Apostle speak of a company, that were Heady, High-minded, and Lovers of
Pleasures more then Lovers of God, Self-willed and Covetous, that had got a
Form of Godliness, but denied the Power thereof, from whom he commands to
turn away, read your selves in 2 Timothy 3.3, 4, 5.

And truly Friends, I must needs say to you, I never heard so much debauched
Language and Hellish Lies, as has been cast unjustly and wickedly upon me since
I came into this Island; which grieves my Soul, that ever such should be in
Peoples Mouths, and that you Ministers should gladly be Entertainers (if not
the Fomenters and Preachers) of them, wherewith you have filled and poisoned
Peoples minds, with wicked Lies (I say) and false and filthy Slanders, and so
corrupted them. O! how can ye be otherwise called, then Teachers of Lies, and
Liars? even such as love and make a Lie, Rev. 22.15. and such as are given up
to believe Lies; see their sad End in Rev. 21.27. And when you cannot with all
your Lies provoke and stir up the Magistrate to Persecution, then you persecute
us with your Tongues: But I hope, that many of the Magistrates will come to see
you, so as that you shall not get to ride on them, and spur them on; for if you
should, you would make them your Drudges, just as the Priests of old spurred up
Pilate, when they got over him to Persecute and Crucify our Lord and Savior:
But consider it well, the same spirit and nature is in you that would Crucify
Christ, who is revealed now in his People: For have there not been Saul's among
you, with their Packet of Letters, to Persecute the People of God in this
Island of late? read but Priest Lessley's, and some other Priests Petition,
which they sent or delivered to the Governor and Council here, a Copy whereof
is hereunto annexed; And what has he and others done this last Assembly
convened, it is well known: Were not the Chief Priests the Authors of Readiness
Packet? for had he not a Packet from them? But now it seems you Chief Priests
are grown more bold; for you can go your selves with your Packets to this last
Assembly, I say. O! is it not a Shame, that you (who call your selves,
Ministers of the Gospel) should go to the Magistrate, to persuade them to
persecute Christians? And do you think, that the Magistrates have no other Work
to do in this Island, even to do Justly, and to love Mercy, and walk Humbly
with God; and to take Care of the Preservation and Right Governing of the
people in Righteousness and in Holiness; and that every man may be preserved in
their respective Estates; and to see that all do to others as they would have
others do unto them; and to see that the Island may be preserved in Peace; and
to take Care of that which is for the Good of this Island, and Property of its
Inhabitants: As for Religion, that belongs to God; for it came from God and
Christ Jesus (who is the Author of every man's Faith) and sets up his Worship,
which is in the Spirit and in the Truth, and is to rule in the Hearts of his
People, who receive that Religion from above that is pure and undefiled in
God's Sight; and so God and Christ must have a place in man to dwell in (to
wit) the Heart, that so he may have his Due, his Worship and Honor from and by
them.

But to return to your Sland^^^, namely, that I should hang ribbons upon
peoples arms; and that I brought a young Women from England to be naught with
her, And that I should lie with my Sister, and suchlike stinking and filthy
Lies, have you and your Auditors reported of me, which no sober man (I am sure)
will give Credit to; being full well known, that I was never tainted or
blamisht with any such Uncleanness. So that with David I may say, False
Witnesses did rise up, they laid to my Charge things that I knew not, Psalm.
35.11. Certainly, many of you are, and have been naught your selves this way,
else you would have virtue in your mouths, rather then have such things, as a
modest Ear abhors; yea, such filthy stuff, and wicked Lies as these (which came
from the Devil, who is the Father of them) are your Parishes filled with. For I
would have you know, that I abhor, detest, and scorn such things; it being well
known in England, I say, that I was never tainted with the least Unclean
action, nor thus taxed, till I came here amongst you; but, what is in your own
Hearts, that you cast upon me, so that ye fulfill Christ's Words who foretold,
They should speak all manner of Evil against you falsely for my Name's sake. And
indeed it is for Christ's sake that you do it; So that we can be exceeding
glad, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, in that it is for his sake, that we are thus
evil spoken of. But know this, and be assured of it, the time will come that he
will appear for our glory, and to your shame and confusion. For We would have
you to understand, that we have an esteem of our Bodies, for our Bodies the
Lord has honored with his mercies, and they are Vessels of his honor, and
Temples of Christ, and of God, and of the Holy Ghost, and not for Adultery and
Fornication. Truly I could not but wonder, and stand amazed, to hear of such
soul, beastly and unmannerly, and uncivil Language, as I have heard since I
came here; What, is this Gospel Teaching? O, but consider, what the Scriptures
speak concerning slanderous Tongues, and of lying Lips, and of such as have
Venom under their Tongues, and the Poison of Asps: What do you not believe that
God will judge for these things, and sweep away the Refuge of Lies, and take
the Reproach from off his People? Would you have the same Measure measured to
you as you have done to me, and the rest of us? Surely you have not had so much
as Common Civility or Humanity, much less Christianity; for if you had had
either, you would have come, and spoken to me, when I was in the Island, and
not have railed against me behind my back, and incensed others against me: Was
this Humane, or Christianly, or Neighbourly done? Judge ye.

But alas! what shall I say? I do very much fear, that the Hand of the Lord God
will suddenly come upon many of you, with his swift Destruction: The Lord did
visit (and that not very long since) this Island with two sore Judgments, the
one, of Fire; the other, of the Plague: but alas! what Repentance? what Change
have they wrought in you and upon you? What says the Prophet of the Lord in
Isa. 26.9? When thy Judgments are on the Earth the Inhabitants of the World
will learn Righteousness. But alas! are you not rather worse then you were
before, and hardened more then you were before (Pharoah-like) as it is in the
10th verse, Let Favor be shown to the Wicked, yet will he not learn
Righteousness, etc. O! it is not the work of Christ's Ministers, to fall upon
the Righteous, and persecute the Innocent, and let Swearers, Drunkards,
Whore-Masters and Adulterers go free: And do you not pronounce the Blessing of
God to be upon them, and Peace be unto them all, in the State and Condition
wherein they remain unconverted? For, are not the words general in the close of
your Service? And is this the best Entertainment you can afford Strangers, viz.
To Slander and Belie them? Is this the best Provision you have for them in your
Houses? Surely these are very course Complements, from such Persons as are
looked upon by others, and by themselves too, as Men of no small Breeding? But
this is no good Breeding, nor manifests good Education; but bespeaks the
Educator not to be of Christ, nor of God; and this is the Production and Fruit
of your Studdyings: Is this to follow the Apostle's Advice? who exhorts, To
Studdy to be Quiet, 1 These. 4.11. And 2 Timothy 2.15, 16. Studdy to show thy self
approved of God, a Workman that needs not be ashamed, rightly dividing the
Word of Truth: but shun Profane and Vain Babblings; for they will increase to
more Ungodliness, etc. And says Solomon, Prove. 12.22. Lying Lips are an
Abomination to the Lord; but they that deal truly are his Delight. And in chap.
10.18. He that hides Hatred with Lying Lips, and he that utters a Slander,
is a Fool. And Psalm. 101.5. Who so privily Slandereth his Neighbor, him will I
cut off. Read Romans 1.28, 29, 30, etc.

And consider you, that call your selves Ministers; Are the Scriptures of Truth
of no value, of no use with you, nor with your People? which says, That
whosoever is angry with his Brother without a Cause, shall be in danger of the
Judgment: And whosoever shall say unto his Brother, Racha, shall be in danger
of the Council: But whosoever says unto his Brother, Thou Fool, shall be in
danger of Hell Fire, Mat. 5.22. Now do you not know what this means? Ought not
this to be more seriously heeded by you Priests, and your Hearers, as you would
not undergo the Penalty? or how can you? How dare you bring your Gift to the
Altar, before you be reconciled to your Brother? And you that persecute, or go
about to persecute; are you not of the number of those, that mingle their
Sacrifices with Blood? O! what will become of you that persecute and speak all
manner of Evil against God's People for Christ's sake? Hesaith, Blessed are the
Merciful; for they shall obtain Mercy. But what then will likely be your
Portions, who ate Cruel and Unmerciful? Further, he says, Blessed are the
Meek; for they shall inherit the Earth. What then will become of you, who are
Furious and Envious? Again, says he, Blessed are the Peacemakers; for they
shall be called he Children of God. Then what will become of you, who stir up
to Contention, Dissension and Persecution? this is no Gospel, no Glad-tidings.

How can you say the Lord's Prayer, Forgive us our Trespasses as we forgive
them that trespass against us? So mark, you are no more forgiven then you do
forgive, Mat. 25. Depart you Cursed into Everlasting Fire, etc. Why, what is,
the Matter? For, says he, I was an Hungered, and ye gave me no Meat; I was
Thirsty, and ye gave me no Drink, etc. But you may answer and say, Lord, When
saw we thee a Hungry, or a Thurst, or a Stranger, etc? Then will he say,
Insomuch as you did it not unto the least of these, you did it not unto me: And
these shall go into Everlasting Punishment. There you see the Sentence is given
already, you have heard it, and you may read it there, about the latter end.
And Mark, If he dealt so with those then, that did no good, how much more sorer
Punishment shall be inflicted on those that persecute such, etc.

And so you that do profess and make a Trade of Christ's words for Money, and
persecute him, where, and in whom he is made manifest; are not you made
manifest in the sight of the Son to be the very Antichrist's, professing
Christ, and yet are found Enemies to him, and acting perversely against him; and
to be in the number of those inwardly ravening Wolves in Sheep's Clothing,
Christ speaks of in Mat. 7. and those evil Trees and evil Ground, that brings
forth nothing but Thistles, Briars and Thorns, wherewith to rend, and tear,
and prick the Lambs of God? And are you not of the number of those, who build
up, and adorn, and garnish the Tombs of the Righteous, even Christ's Sepulcher,
and observe his days, and their days, and yet persecute him and the Saints?

Where do you read, that Christ, or any of the Apostles, gave any Command unto
you for to observe days unto them? And where was it ever the practice of any
of the People of God all along the Bible, either to keep Christmas Day, or
Candlemas-day, or Childermas-day, or All Saints-day, or Michaelmas, or Lent,
etc? Had you not all these from the Popes? And how can you cry out against
Popery, and yet live in the practice of those things which you have from them,
and that they have set up? If you will have a Mass for your Candles, why not as
well a Mass for your Cows and your Horses, your Sugarcanes and your Potatos?
We do not read that Isaac observed his Father's day, or Jacob observed Isaac's
day; or did the Jews observe Joshua's, or Moses's, or Aaron's day; or that any
of the Saints did observe the Apostles days, and called them, Holy Days: Yea,
did the Apostles observe Christ's day, or Stephen's day, or James's day, or any
of the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, and called them, Holy Days? Let us
see the Scripture for it? For you pretend the Scriptures to be the Rule for
your Practices; and yet, how dare you say so, and act quite contrary to the
Scriptures of Truth? For did not the Apostle leave the People of God to their
Liberty in Romans 14.4, 5, 6, 7. concerning observing of days, He that observed a
day, he was to observe it to the Lord; and he that did not regard the day to
the Lord, they were not to judge one another about such things: but you have
thrown away this day also, that do act contrary, in judging and persecuting one
another upon this account,

And does not the Apostle judge and reprove the Galatians for observing days;
and tells them, That they were Bewicht; and calls them, Fools? Gal. 3.1. O
foolish Galatians! who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth?
And chap 4.10, 11. Ye observe Days, and Times, and Months, and Years; I am
afraid of you lest I have bestowed upon you Labor in vain,

How came you to be so wise, as to observe them, and compel others to observe
them? do you not make your selves wiser then Christ, or any of the Apostles?
What Wisdom is this think you, that you should by it force People to observe
days? came not this Power and Wisdom first from the Pope, and not from the
Apostles, nor from Christ Jesus? if you have it from Christ Jesus and the
Apostles, let us see where it is, convince us with Scripture? And where, I say,
do you find in Scriptures, that Christ or his Apostles did ordain the day you
call Christ-Mass, and the rest of the days attending it, which you call,
Holy Days? But, to say the Truth, you may rather term them Unholy, by reason
of the Ungodly, and Debaucht Heathenish Practice: So that, whereas you pretend
to Honor the Lord Jesus in and by them, you do no other indeed but dishonor
him, and do Persecute others that will not do as you do, and so break the
Command of God, who says, Six days shall thou labor, etc. and here your
Command is, that they must play more then Six Days. Now tell me, if you can,
how many hundred of years after Christ and the Apostles were these days first
observed as Holy Days, and set apart to be kept as you do now keep them.

O! the Whoredoms, and Debauchery, and Drunkenness, the Excess, Sensual
Pleasures, Carnal Delights, Carding, Diceing, Dancing, that these days are
filled up with; so that the Devil has more Work done him in these days then
in many other days before or after. So, let the Witness of God in your
Consciences answer, Yea or Nay, and let all Sober People judge, whether or no I
speak not Truth, when I say, God is more dishonored and his Name prophanened,
and taken in vain, and blasphemed more in the twelve Holy Days (so called)
then in three times the number of them; let, I say, your Consciences and all
sober people judge: So here you may see how the Apostle judged them that did
observe days. But, consider, whether or no does the Kingdom of God stand in
Meats, and Drinks, and Washings, and in Days; Nay, nay, it stands only in
Righteousness, and in Peace, and Joy in the Holy Ghost; which Kingdom all
people are in the first place to seek after.

And then concerning your Fasts in Lent, etc. the Lord will say, Who required
these things at your Hands? as it is in Isa. 58.3, 4. Wherefore have we fasted,
and thou see (or regardest) not, etc. Behold, says the Lord, in the day of
your Fasts you find Pleasures, and exact all your Labors; ye fast for Strife
and Debate, and to smite with the Fist of Wickedness: Ye shall not fast as ye
do this day, to make your Voices to be heard on high. Is it such a Fast as I
have chosen? a Day for a man to Afflict his Soul: Is it to bow down his Head
like a Bull-Rush? And will thou call this a Fast (see the Contents of the
Chapter above, where it is reproved for Hypocrisy) But is not this the Fast
that I have chosen, says the Lord, To loose the Bands of Wickedness, to undo
the heavy Burdens, to let the Oppressed go free, and that they break every
Yoke? Is it not to deal thy Bread to the Hungry, etc. Now, whether your Fast be
such, yea, or nay, let your own Consciences judge.

And the Apostle commands us to pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands,
without Wrath, or Doubting, 1. Tim. 2.8. Now consider this, are not your hands
like those fists of Wickedness? and are you not full of Wrath and Doubting? or
are your Hands Clean and Holy? Let the Witness in your Consciences judge, and
see if those Actions and Practices be not found among you as was amongst them,
whom the Prophet speaks of here, which is called Hypocrisy, as was said before.

And, did not Judas carry the bag who was a Thief, who betrayed his Master?
And, are not they for his Bag and Money, to hold it by intayle, even all, who
are the Betrayers of Christ now in this day, where he is made manifest in his
People? I say, do they not betray him now, and seek to crucify him in his
members? or his members for his sake? And is it not the Son of Perdition spoken
of 2 Thessalonians. 23. who exalts himself above all that is called God? whom Christ
will destroy with the breath of his mouth, and the brightness of his coming;
Look into your selves, and read this if you can. But are not such now worse
then Judas who carried the Bag? for we never read that Judas persecuted any for
not putting into his bag (as too too many now a days do) and have done, who
will not go without the bag. And are not all such Transgressors of Christ's
Command, who bids them go without a bag or Scrip; and, Freely you have
received, Freely give. How will such answer Christ (think you) at the day of
Judgment, when they are brought before his Throne, and before him at his
Judgment Seat, who then will say unto them, Depart you Cursed, etc. but to his
Sheep on his right hand, Come ye Blessed of my Father, etc. and so enter thou
into the Joy of the Lord, and the other into everlasting Punishment, who have
been persecuting others for Worshipping the living God in Spirit and in Truth,
which Worship Christ Jesus set up above 1600. years since, as you may read in
John 4.23, 24.

Now Friends, to look into your Families and into your own Practices, are not
we to see, that first you are to be approved before you do minister, both you
and your Families? For, are we not to try all things, and to follow you no
farther, then you follow Christ? And, were not th^^ereans accounted Noble, in
that they searched the Scriptures, to see whether or no that which the Apostle
had delivered them, were according to the Law and the Prophets; And must we be
more ignoble then they, think you? and now to try, whether you are in the steps
of the true Prophets, and of Christ and of the Apostles, or in the steps of
those False Prophets they cried out against; must we not try here by the
Scripture? viz. by the Prophets words, and by Christ's and his Apostles Words.

Then for the Trying you, the Apostle says in 1 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3, etc. A Bishop
must be Blameless, the Husband of One Wife, Vigilant, Sober, of Good behavior,
given to Hospitality, apt to teach, not given to Wine, no Striker, not Greedy
of filthy Lucre, but Patient, not a Brawler, nor Covetous, one that rules well
his own House, having his Children in subjection with all Cravity. Now, are you
Blameless? are you Sober? of Good behavior? and are you given to Hospitality?
are you apt to teach? It Is Storied of one Parson Gray of this Island [being at
a Feast] the custom was, for the Cups to be often handed about; one of Brandy,
the other of Sack; but as for the Sack, the Parson cared not much for it,
having had enough of that Liquor: whereupon said the pretended Reverend Parson,
when he saw the Cup of Sack come about again, which he cared not for, Lord;
says he, If thou will, let this Cup pass from me; But shortly after, when a
Cup of Brandy was coming toward him, said he, Lord, if thou will, let as many
as thou please of those little ones come unto me. And after a while the Cup
came about again, and first the Sack coming toward him (it being his turn to
drink) said he, Be not drunk with Wine wherein is Exceses and so put it by; in
regard he cared not for it; but the Brandy coming next, says he, but be filled
with the Spirit, and drunk up the Brandy. O! abominable, that ever Men should
be given up to such vile Affections, and to such Atheistical Practices. But to
return,

Are you no Strikers, no Persecutors? What, did not Briest Lessley beat and
strike George Foster very sorely? the Truth of which is made evident to me
under the hand of the said G. Foster before his Death, the Copy whereof is
inferted in the End of this Book. Also one John Hopwood Priest in this Island
of Barbados, struck one Charles Bream on the Head, as they rod together on the
Highway, by which stroke the said Charles received much harm and prejudice,
and not long after dyed. And that you are Persecutors of God's Heritage, is
evidently manifest, by the Humble Petition of William Lessley, John Barnard,
William Johnson, John Hopwood, Matthew Cray and John Page to the Governor and
Council of this Island of Barbados; the Copy whereof is likewise afflixed to
the latter End of this Book.

But once more to return; Are you not Greedy of filthy Lucre? are you not
Brawlers? are you not Covetous? Let the People of this Island, and your own
Consciences judge.

The Apostle says in 1 Timothy 6.10. The Love of Money is the Root of all Evil.
Now see, if all this Evil has not proceeded from your Root, which is the Love
of Money. And therefore says Paul Ephesians. 5.3. but -- Covetousness let it not
once be named amongst you as becomes Saints. And yet, what is more named and
practiced among you, then Covetousness, and covetous Practices; and this, I
say, springs from your Root, which is the Root of all of you, as was said
before. And this is the Cause, that you Priests and others in Christendom (so
called) do endeavor to incense the Civil Magistrate against the Saints and
People of God, to hold up the Root of all the Evil in you, which is the Love of
Money. Let the People and the Witness in your own Consciences judge.

Now next, as concerning your Families and Children; Are they ruled well? Do
you rule your own House well? are your Children in Subjection (mark) with all
Gravity in that 1 Timothy 3.4. Is this so? Let the People and your own Consciences
judge. If that you cannot rule your own Houses well, how are you like to take
care of the Church of God? And are you not lifted up into Pride in your
Families? Let but the People and your own Consciences judge. How can you but
fall into the Condemnation of the Devil? And moreover, have you a good Report
of them that are without, who are not of your Church? What good Report can
those that are without give of you? Are you Grave? are you not double-Tongued?
etc. Let your Consciences and the People judge; For you must be approved, and
then you may minister, being found Blameless of those Evils.

Now, concerning your Wives, are they Grave, not Slanderous? are they Sober?
and do you rule your Own House well? Let your own Consciences and the People
judge. Have you refused Profane and Old Wives Fables? And do your Women adorn
themselves in modest Apparel, with Shamefacedness and Sobriety, and not with
broidred Hair or Cold, or Pearls, or Costly Array; but (which becomes Women
professing Godliness) with Good Works, 1 Timothy 9.10. Are you not them, that
suppose Gain to be Godliness? from such the Apostle bids to turn away. 1 Timothy
6.5. Are you not of them that preach for the Love of Money? and would you
preach without it? and is it not the Root of all Evil, which while some coveted
after, they have erred from the Faith, which gives Victory.

And are you not of those which preach no Victory here over Sin? But was not
the man of God to flee such, and follow after Godliness and Righteousness,
Faith, Love, Patience, Meekness; Read Timothy for further Trial and approving
you and your Families, and also Titus 1.6, 7, 8, etc.

Are you Blameless, having Faithful Children, not accused of Rioting and
Unruliness? Let your own Consciences and the People judge, whether these things
be so or no. You profess your selves Stewards of God, but are you Blameless?
Are you not Self-willed and soon angry? Let your Consciences, and the People
judge. Are you Lovers of Good Men? If so, why do you raise or broach Slanders
of them, and Lies of Good Men? Are you Just, Holy, Sober, Temperate? Let the
People and your own Consciences judge.

Are you not those that preach for Filthy Lucre sake? And, where are your
Epistles written in one another Hearts, that you are all void of those
foregoing Evils, mentioned before? But rather, are you not like them, that were
always Liars, Evil Beasts, and Slow-Bellies, which were to be rebuked sharply?
Read the first Chapter of Titus throughout, and Romans 16.18. Does not the
Apostle command us to mark such? and avoid such as serve not the Lord Jesus
Christ, but their own Bellies; and by good Words and fair Speeches deceive the
Hearts of the Simple. And were they not such, as made Divisions among the
People, and Offenses? Would you preach but for your Bellies? For if you serve
the Lord Jesus Christ, you would keep his Commands, who says; Freely you have
received, freely give, Tit. 3.19. and Phil. 3.19. Read that, and consider
whether you are not such as the Apostle and People of God have often wept
about. For do not you mind Earthly things? and do not you preach for Filthy
Lucre? So, is not your Godd your Bellies? and what is like to be your End? you
may read there. For would you preach without these things? And if you be
otherwise minded, why do not you follow the Apostle's Example? For the
Apostle, when he had spoken in the 1 Cor. 9. concerning his Powers, he told
them, that he used none of those things; nor did he write that it should be so
done unto him; For he would rather dye, then any man should make his glorying
void, for he had kept the Gospel of Christ without Charge, and would not abuse
his Power in the Gospel. Now have you kept the Gospel without Charge? Look over
whole Christendom, both among Papists and Protestants, Independants,
Presbyterians, and Baptists. And did not the Apostle say, He wrought with his
hands, to supply his own Necessities and the Necessities of others? And in
Jerem. 5.29, etc. You dare not say, but that he was a True Prophet, nor dare
you say, he preached and prophesied to People for Maintenance; or can you make
good, he had any thing given him for Publishing his Book? Shall not I visit for
these things, says the Lord; Shall not my Soul be avenged on such a Nation as
this? A Wonderful and Horrible Thing is committed in the Land, the Prophets
prophecy Falsely, and the Priests bear Rule by their means, and my People love
to have it so: What will you do in the End thereof? Now consider? Do you not
bear Rule by your means? and do not the People love to have it so? and was not
this a horrible thing committed in the Land, and reproved by the true Prophet?
And yet will you hold up that which he reproved. And read Jer. 23. Such as
prophecy Lies in the Lord's Name, and the Lord never sent them, and he never
commanded them. And Verse. 11. He says both the Prophet and the Priests were
Profane, and the Lord had found their Wickedness in his House; and therefore,
thus says the Lord, I will feed them with Wormwood, and make them to drink the
Water of Gall: For, from the Prophets of Jerusalem is Profaneness gone forth
in all the Land: I never sent them (says the Lord) yet they ran; I never spoke
to them, yet they prophesied: How long shall this be in the Hearts of the
Prophets, that prophecy Lies? Yea, they are Prophets of the Deceit of their
own Hearts, which think to cause my People to forget my Name by their Dreams.
And these were they that did steal the Word from their Neighbors? Behold,
says the Lord, I am against them; for these are them that cause my People to
Err. Read the Chapter throughout, and read your selves by it; wherein, as in a
Glass, you may see your Physiognomy, whether you be like Jeremiah, or them.

And in Isa. 56. He was a true Prophet, and spoke forth freely; And do not you
make a Trade of his words? read from the 10th verse to the end; his Watchmen
are blind, they are all ignorant, they are all Dumb Dogs, they cannot bark,
sleeping, lying down, loving to slumber; yea, they are greedy Dogs that never
have enough, and they are Shepherds that cannot understand; they all look to
their own Way, every one for his Gain from his Quarter [Mark that] who looks
for his Gain from his Quarter. Are ye not found among them, walking in their
Steps? Come, say they, we will fetch Wine, and we will fill our selves with
strong Drink, and to morrow shall be as to day, and much more abundant.

And in Ezekiel. 13. you may see what Morter-Makers they were, and what Builders,
and how that God would break down their Wall that they had built; even such as
had prophesied a Vision of their own brain, a lying Divination, and yet the
Lord had not spoken to them, nor sent them: and these went to polute God's
People for Handfuls of Barley, and for Pieces of Bread, as you may read in the
Chapter throughout. And see if you be not found in the steps of such as the
Prophet reproves, and who with your Lies have made the Hearts of the Righteous
Sad, and strengthened the Hands of the Wicked, that he should not return from
his Wicked Way. But God will deliver his People out of your hands, and ye shall
know, that he is the Lord.

And in Ezekiel. 34. when the Lord sent Ezekiel his Prophet, to cry Woe against the
False Prophets and Shepherds, who fed themselves, and clothed themselves with
the Wool, etc. when they should have fed the Flock; But the Diseased they did
not strengthen, the Sick they did not heal, the Broken they did not bind up,
neither brought again that which was driven away; but with Force and Cruelty
have they Ruled: but the Lord will gather his Sheep from their Mouths, and is
gathering of them, and has gathered many, that they may not be a Prey unto you
any more; and he has set one Shepherd over them, Christ Jesus: So read this
Chapter throughout.

And read Mich. 3. where you may see, whether or no you be not in the steps of
them whom he was sent to cry out against; Thus says the Lord concerning the
Prophets that make my People to Err, that bite with their Teeth, and cry Peace,
and they that put not into their Mouths, they prepare War against them. And
have we not found it so? Did you not say a Blessing to us, and preach Peace to
us, while we put into your Mouths? but when we could not put into your
Mouths, did you not prepare War against us? and did not the Lord say, That the
Son should go down upon you, and it shall be dark unto you; the Priests teach
for Hire, and the Prophets divine for Money; yet you lean upon the Lord, and
say, Is not the Lord among us? none Evil can come upon us: And therefore shall
Sion for your sakes be ploughed up as a Field, and Jerusalem shall become a
Heap, and the Mountains of the House as the high places of the Forest. So now,
mark what Barrenness and Heaps of people comes to; let your own Consciences and
the People judge.

And Mal. Chap. 2. And now, O ye Priests, this Commandment is for you; If ye
will not hear, if ye will not lay it to heart, to give Glory to my Name (says
the Lord of Hosts) I will send a Curse upon you, and will curse your Blessings;
yea, I have cursed them already, because you do not lay it to heart. Behold, I
will corrupt your seed, and spread Dung upon your Faces, the Dung of your
Solemn Feasts, and one shall take you away with it. So consider your selves,
whether you be not under this Curse, or no, by your practice.

And in Mat 23. There you may see how Christ taught the Multitude, and his
Disciples both; but take notice how we shall know them that walk out of his
Commands; read the Chapter throughout: They (to wit, the Scribes and Pharisees)
loved to have the uppermost Rooms at Feasts, and the chief Seats in the
Synagogues, and greetings in the Markets, and to be called of Men Masters, and
to go in Long Robes, and that which they do is to be seen of Men: But be not ye
called of Men Masters; for, one is your Master, even Christ, and all ye are
Brethren; and he that is greatest among you, shall be your Servant, etc. Mark,
this Command do not you scoff at? And he that will not give you the Cap and the
Knee (the World's Manners lying in such things) you call them, Ill-bred Clowns:
but see how many Woes Christ pronounces against such as walk in their steps:
And if you had been in the Prophets and Christ's days, you would possibly have
called them Railers. And you may see in the latter end of Matthew, what a Rage
the chief Priests and Elders were in against Christ; though they could tell by
Scripture, when Herod had gathered them together, where Christ should be born:
For you may see in the 27th Chapter, When the Morning was come, all the Chief
Priests and the Elders of the People took Counsel against Christ Jesus, to put
him to Death.

And in Matthew. 26. there assembled together the Chief Priest and Elders of the
People unto the Palace of the High Priest named Caiphas, and consulted how
they might take Jesus by Subtilty, and so kill him. And Judas Iscariot, one of
the twelve, went unto the Chief Priests, and covenanted to betray him unto them
for thirty Pieces of Silver, and so he delivered Christ unto them; For he came
with a great multitude, with Swords and Staves from the Chief Priests and
Elders of the People, and so apprehended him, and brought him before the High
Priest, and Scribes, and the Elders of the People; And the Chief Priest, and
the Elders and the Council sought False Witnesses against Jesus, to put him to
Death, and yet found none; At last there came two False Witnesses, and said,
This Fellow said, He would destroy the Temple of God, and in three days build
it up. And the High Priest rose up, and said to Jesus, answerest thou nothing?
What is it these witness against thee? And Jesus held his peace. What would you
have said? would you not have answered, He was guilty? And the High Priest
adjur'd him by the Living God to tell him, whether he was the Son of God; And
when Jesus confessed the truth, then the High Priest rent his Clothes, and said,
He has spoken Blasphemy, what think you? And they answered, He was guilty of
Death; And they spit in his Face, and buffetted him, (Here is the Work of the
Priests) and smote him with their hands, and mocked him, and said, Prophecy to
us, thou Christ, who it is that smote thee? And the chief Priests and Elders
persuaded the Multitude to ask Barabbas, and to destroy Jesus the Just. And so,
is it not the practice of you now, to let the Thieves, Murderers, and
Adulterers, and Drunkards at Liberty, and persecute the Just? And after they
had Crucified him, the chief Priests and Pharisees came to Pilate flattering,
and saying, Sir, We remember that this Dreamer said, while he was yet alive,
After Thee Days I will Arise again; therefore let the Sepulcher be made sure,
until the third day, lest his Disciples come by Night and steal him away, and
so say unto the People, He is arisen from the Dead: so the last Error will be
worse then the first.

See what a pitiful Fright these Priests were in, whose Cause was not good.
But when Christ was risen indeed, and the Watch had acquainted the Chief
Priests of all things that were done concerning Jesus, then they assembled
together with the Elders, and took counsel, and gave the Soldiers a large sum
of Money to say, His Disciples came and stole Him away by Night, while they
slept: So, if in case this should come to the Covernours Ears, we will secure
you, said the chief Priests, and the rest. See how they were Teachers of Lies
here.

And after Christ was risen, see what work the Priests made against his
Disciples in the Acts of the Apostles, chap. 4. What an Assembly there was of
them in examining the Apostles, and how they threatened them, That they should
speak no more in the Name of Jesus, nor teach: but their Answer was, Whether it
was right to obey God or Man judge ye: So they threatened them, and let them go.

And in Acts 5. See how the High Priest was full of Indignation, and all that
were with him, against the Apostles, and laid hands on them, and put them in
Prison. So this was the Work still of the Priests all along you see, and how
the Lord still Delivered his People.

And in Acts 7. You may there see, the High Priest and his Council examined
Stephen, and at last, put him to Death. So that you may see their Work was
against Christ, and his, though they had a Profession.

And in Acts 9. See there how Saul breathed out Threatenings and Slaughter
against the Disciples of Christ; and how he went to the High Priest, and
desired Letters to go to Damascus, and he had his Packet with him; but the Lord
met him by the way, and sent him upon a contrury Arrand, as he has met with
many in these latter days; Praises be to the Lord forever. But afterward,
when Saul was turned Paul (which signifies, Marvelous) in Acts 14. you may see
how the Professing Jews stirred up the Gentiles, and made their minds
evil-affected against the Apostles; As its now the manner of Professors this
day (who are without the Possession) to stir up the Rude Multitude against the
Professors and Possessors of Christ.

And in Acts 20. There you may see how the Jews laid wait for Paul, on purpose
to destroy him: And in Acts 21. how the Jews cried out, Help Men of Israel
against the Apostle; and the people ran together, and took Paul, and went about
to kill him, had he not been secured by the Captain, who was a Heathen.

And in Chap. 22. Paul there acknowledges what he was when he followed the
High Priest; and how there were more then Forty Men that had bound themselves
with a Curse, That they would neither Eat nor Drink till they had killed Paul;
and this they declared to the Chief Priests and Elders, who did not reprove
them; but the Captain delivered him again: For those that had bound themselves
with a Curse were of the Jews, and of the Gang of the Chief Priests.

And in Chap 24. See there how Ananias the High Priest and Elders came against
Paul, with many Accusations; but still he was delivered out of their hands.

And how the High Priest, and chief of the Jews, came to inform against Paul to
Pestus, Acts 25.

And so you may see how they (to wit, the Priests) still continued and
persisted in their sad Work of Persecution and Blood all along, both against
the Prophets of old, and against Christ and the Apostles then, and against
Christ now, who is manifested in his Children and People.

And here you may see that the Birth born of the Flesh persecutes him (all
along, I say) that is born of the Spirit, from Generation to Generation.

And what soul clamarous Words and corrupt Language they had against Christ,
and his Prophets and Apostles? which were the Fruit of the Evil Spirit, and so
is now, wherever it is; and with such unfruitful Works of Darkness there is
no Fellowship to be had, but rather to reprove them: And therefore, let all
Bitterness, and Anger, and Wrath, and Clamor and Evil-speaking be put away
from you, with all malice, Ephesians. 4.31, 32. and Fornication, and Uncleanness, and
Covetousness, let it not be once named amongst such as becomes Saints, Ephesians.
5.3. and also, all Filthiness, Foolish-talking and Jesting, which are not
convenient; but rather giving of Thanks to God through Jesus Christ the
Redeemer. For this we know, That no Whoremonger, nor Unclean Person, nor
Covetous Man (which is an Idolater) has any Inheritance in the Kingdom of God
and of Christ: and they that think, or speak otherwise, are such as deceive the
People with vain words; and for such things comes the Wrath of God upon the
Children of Disobedience.

Now, consider all you that call your selves Ministers, and others in
Christendom, so called; Christ Jesus is the Seed's-Man, and he sows the good
Seed which is in Man's Heart: now some Hearts be a Highway, and those Fowls in
them, that are bred by the foul spirit, take it away; and some is sown upon
Stony Ground, where is not much Earth, but is scorch't by the heat of
Persecution; and some again is sown upon the Thorny Ground, Thorny Hearts,
where it grows a while, and then the Thorns, the Cares of the World, choaks
it; but that which is sown upon Good Ground brings forth good Fruit abundantly,
to the Glory of God and Christ, the Seed's-Man.

Now Christ, in a Parable, (...) speaks of a Householder, that sowed good Seed
in his Field, and his Servants said, Did thou not sow good Seed? whence then
has it Tares? He answered, An Enemy has done this? They replied, Will thou
that we go and gather them up? Nay (says he) lest ye gather the Wheat also,
let both grow together till the Harvest. The Field is the World; the Good Seed
are the Children of the Kingdom of Christ; the Tares are the Children of the
Wicked One; the Enemy, that sowed them, is the Devil; the Harvest is the end of
the World; and the Reapers are the Angels: So Christ, he would not suffer his
Disciples to gather the Tares, lest, etc. Now what is the matter with you and
others, who will be Gatherers when Christ has forbidden you, lest you pluck up
Wheat instead of Tares; seeing it is the Angels Work to sever the Wheat from
the Tares, and the Wicked from the Just? And therefore whose Servants have you
been in all Christendom, who will venture the gathering of the Tares, and
instead of them have been plucking up the Wheat; as witness all the Martyrs and
Bloody Persecutions since Christ's time: but these Tares, at the End of the
World, the Angels shall cast into the Fire, where shall be Weeping, and
Wailing, and Gnashing of Teeth, etc.

And Luke 9.55. When Christ sent to a Village of the Sameritans, to make ready
for him, and they did not receive him, his Disciples said, Lord, Will thou that
we command Fire to come down from Heaven, to consume them, even as Elias did?
but Christ rebuk^t them, saying, Ye know not what spirit ye are of; the Son of
Man is not come to destroy men's lives, but to save them.

Now mark, If the Disciples of Jesus Christ did not know themselves what spirit
they were of, who would have had Fire to come down from Heaven upon such as
would not receive Christ; how do you know what spirit you are of, and all those
since the Apostles days, that do persecute people about Religion, by
Imprisoning them, etc? Now had they and you known what spirit you are of, you
would not Persecute; but seeing you do not, therefore it is you will have the
People of God persecuted; and so are under the Rebukes of Christ, who came to
Save, and nor destroy: And therefore, since you do not know what spirit you are
of your selves, we cannot trust our Bodies, nor our Souls, nor Spirits in your
hands: And you see you have no Command from Christ, or the Apostles, to
persecute; for Christ says, All Power is given to me, both in Heaven, and
Earth, etc. What to do? To destroy the Devil and his Works, the Enemy, the
Adversary, and Destroyer of Mankind.

Christ, he is so far from that, that he commands us, To love one another, and
to love Enemies; but this Command has been little regarded in Christendom.

Christ spoke to such as built the Sepulchers of the Prophets, and garnisht
them whom their Forefathers had killed; and yet these Builders killed the Son.

Have not we the same Builders now, that would kill him, and persecute him
where he is revealed in his People? Truly, ye bear witness, that you allow the
Deeds of your Forefathers, who did kill them and their Children, built and
garnisht their Sepulchers, that so all the Righteous Blood from Abel to
Zacharias, yea, to this very day, will come upon this Generation of
Persecutors; whereof in our days we have seen sad Examples, how the Lord has
cut several of them suddenly off, who have been found persecuting his People
and Beloved Ones, his dear Lambs.

And says Christ, The Servant that says in his Heart, My Lord delays his
coming, and begins to smite his Fellow Servants, and Eat, and be Drunken; the
Lord will come in a day when he looks not for him, when he is not aware of it,
and will cut him assunder, and will appoint him his Portion with Unbelievers,
Mat. 12. And therefore take ye heed who smite the Servants of God, and
Handmaids of God, lest the Lord come in a Day, or in an Hour, when you are not
aware, and cut you assunder with his sharp two-edged Sword, and appoint you
your Portion with Hypocrites and Unbelievers; and therefore the People of God
are always to be in a readiness waiting for the Appearance of the Lord: Mat.
24. And Blessed is that Servant that the Lord finds so doing; he will make him
Ruler over his House, that gives them their Meat in due season.

Now consider, you Strikers, this; and all you Smiters and Persecuters, you do
not watch for Christ's coming; no, no: but you put the Day and Hour afar off,
and you do not know how soon either of them may come; of cutting assunder, and
of your Weeping, Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth, and your Portion, which you are
like to have with Hypocrites.

And Christ further says, Luke 19.27. Those mine Enemies, which would not that
I should Reign over them, bring hither, and slay them before me.

Now consider this, you that will not have Christ to Rule and Reign in his
People, no, nor in your selves; Do you think that you shall escape the Sword of
his Judgments, and of his Mouth, and the Wrath of the Lamb? And did ever
Christ, though he was called a Blasphemer, and as Beelzebub, and that he had a
Devil, and a Deceiver; yet, though he had all Power in his Hands given to him,
in Heaven and in Earth, yet he did not persecute any of them, but rebuk't his
Disciples: Neither did he give any such Command or Advice to his Apostles, but
rather the contrary, viz. That they should love one another, and love Enemies.
Now then, who has given you this Power, to persecute and beat another man's
Children and Servants? Let us know your Original and your Antiquity.

Now, whereas you may say, That Laymen, and Mechanic Men are not to meddle
with the Scriptures; but you only that have got the Original of Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin.

I Answer, Was not the beginning of the Originals in Babel? For, was not all
the Earth of one Language before? And had not Pilate these Originals when he
crucified Christ? And did he not write a Title upon his Cross in Hebrew, Greek
and Latin? And had not he your Originals? and was not he an Orthodox man, and
yet could not see Christ? And did not the Priests and the Jews speak Hebrew
naturally? And the Grecians, was not Greek their Natural Language? and yet they
could not see Christ, nor could any of the Priests open Scriptures to the
People; but incensed them against Christ, as you may see, John 19.

And is it not said in the Revelations, That the Beast and the Whore had Power
over the Tongues? Rev. 13.7. And does not the Apostle there call the Tongues
Waters? Chap. 17.15. And in 1 Cor. 13.8. Does he not say, That Tongues shall
cease? And where are your Originals then?

Now the Original, viz. the Word, is not that it that makes Divines? for was
not John the Divine a Fisherman? and who made him a Divine? was it not Christ
the Word that made him so? For they had no Colleges, nor Universities, nor
Schools, to serve Seven Years in, as Mechanic Men do; and when they are out of
their Time, then they set up where they can have the best Trading.

And was not Paul a Tent-Maker, and Aquila and Priscilla Tent-Makers? and was
not Luke a Physician? and was not Matthew called from the Custom? and Peter, and
others of the Apostles, were they not Fishermen? and yet were they not
Preachers? And were not Abraham and Noah Husbandmen? and Isaac a Husbandman and
a Grazier? and was not Lot a Grazier and an Husbandman? and were not Moses and
David Shepherds, and did not Moses keep his Father's Sheep in the Wilderness?
and David his Father's? and was not Jacob a Shepherd twenty years with Laban
his Uncle, whom he faithfully served? and was not Elisha a Plowman, and Amos a
Herdsman, a Keeper of Cattle, and a Gatherer of Fruits? and what were the rest
of them?

And so, were not these Laymen, as you term them, and these Mechanick-men that
gave forth the Scriptures? And can you make a Trade of Lay-men's and
Mechanick-men's words, whom you allow and approve of; and yet will not suffer
Laymen and Mechanick-men to Preach, and Teach, and Speak now adays? I pray
you consider, and read the Scriptures, and read your selves: Did any of these
serve Seven years at the School before they went to preach? and learn the Seven
Liberal Arts or Sciences (whereof Music is one) are not they accounted by you
University men, as the Seven Seals of that Book spoken of in the Revelations?
and so is the Arms of your University at Oxford; which is as much as to say,
That you are the only Persons that are fit to open those Seals: and is not this
to give John the Lie? who said, None was found worthy to open the Seals of the
Book, but the Lamb, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Rev. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.

But what Parsonages, or Vicaridges and Benefices had these Laymen, these
Mechanics, these Husbandmen, these Graziers, Shepherds, Customers, Plowmen,
Herdsmen, and other Tradsmen, for Preaching and giving forth these Scriptures?
or, what had Paul, and his Fellow-Teat-Makers? or Peter, and his
Fellow-Fisher-Men? I pray you let us see some Scripture for your Revenues and
Parsonages: Christ says, They shall take no Scrip nor Purse, no Money with
them; and they should be contented to eat such things as are set before them.
And is there any thing more in the whole World got by any Trade now adays, by
all them that serve Seven years, or by the Husbandmen before mentioned, now in
the World, that get more by their Callings, than you do, who call your selves
(and are called) Priests and Ministers all Christendom over, both amongst
Papists and Protestants, than you do (I say) by these Shepherds words, and
Plowmen, Fishermen and Tent-makers words; (who never served seven years at your
Colleges) which were given freely forth at first, by which you now get such
great Revenues, that you will not suffer any others, neither Shepherds,
Plowmen, nor Husbandmen, nor Fishermen, nor Tole-Gatherers, hardly to meddle
with their Fellow-Fishermen, Fellow Plowmen, Fellow-Husbandmen,
Fellow-Shepherds words. I pray take the right Measure, and the right Weights,
and measure your selves, and see whether you would be so served your selves.

And do you think that you can open such men's words before mentioned with your
Tongues and Languages now? Whereas Pilate, and the Jews, and the Grecians could
not open them then: and are there better Tools think you to open them now, then
there were then? not a whit. It was said by one of your acknowledged and owned
Fathers, St. Augustine, so called, upon that verse, The Kingdom of Heaven
suffers Violence, etc. says he to this purpose, A company of poor Mechanic
and Tradesmen, Tinkers, Weavers and Cobblers, etc. do take the Kingdom of
Heaven by Violence, when such great Doctors and Learned as we are thrown down
to Hell.

But further, Is it not written in Isa. 54.13, etc. All thy Children shall be
taught of the Lord, and great shall be the Peace of thy Children; In
Righteousness shall thou be Established, etc. And many shall gather together
amongst them, but not by me, says the Lord. Whosoever shall so gather together
against thee, shall fall for thy sake; and no Weapon that is formed against
thee shall prosper; and every Tongue that shall rise up against thee in
Judgment, thou shall condemn, etc.

Now mark; Is not this fulfilled now adays upon them that are Taught of God?
yea, by you Ministers, so called.

And in John 6.45. where Christ speaking to the Jews, says he, It is written
in the Prophets, They shall be all taught of God; every man therefore that has
heard and learnt of the Father comes unto me. Now this we witness this day,
and therefore it is that there is so much murmuring against us.

And in Romans 10. The Word of God is nigh thee, even in thy Mouth and in thy
Heart. That is the Word which we Preach, says the Apostle, which every one is
to Hear, and to Obey.

And the Apostle relates in Acts 2. when the professing Jews mocked the Apostle,
saying, They were drunk with New Wine; Peter answering, told them, it was the
third Hour of the Day, and so not likely to be in Drink. But this is that which
was spoken of by the Prophet Joel, And it shall come to pass in the last days
(says the Lord) I will pour out of my Spirit upon all Flesh, and your Sons and
your Daughters shall Prophecy, and your young Men shall see Visions, and your
old Men shall dream Dreams; and on my Servants, and on my Handmaids I will
pour out in those days of my Spirit, and they shall Prophecy.

Now this same we witness in our days, as the Apostles did in their days. And
we see your Sun is turned into Darkness, and your Moon into Blood, verse 20.
and your Sun is gone down, and your Stars are fallen from Heaven, as was
prophesied in the Revelations.

And in Heb. 1.1, 2. God at sundry times, and in diverse manners spoke in times
past unto the Fathers, by his Prophets, but has in these last days spoken to
us by his Son, who is Heir of all things, by whom the World was made, etc. For
as the Apostle says, Acts 3.22. that Moses said, A Prophet shall the Lord God
raise up unto you of your Brethren, like unto me, him shall ye hear in all
things whatsoever he shall say unto you.

And so now, we do witness that God has raised him up, and him we do hear; and
so (I say) we do witness the Teachings of God by his Son Jesus Christ the
Anointed of the Lord: So that we are not now without a Prophet and a Priest,
nor without a Shepherd and a Bishop, nor a Minister. And we do certainly know,
That the Son of God is come, and he has given us an Understanding, that we
know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus
Christ; and this is the True God, and Eternal Life, 1 John 5.20. and he has
given us an Understanding: so that we now find that Wisdom and Satisfaction in
him, which we could never purchase, neither for Gold, nor Silver, nor for
Pearls; the beginning whereof is the Fear of God, and departing from Evil, as
you may see in John 28. at large. And therefore the Apostle says, Heb. 12.25.
See that you refuse not him that speaks; for if they escaped not who refused
him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from
him that speaks from Heaven.

And in Heb. 3.7. To day if you will hear his Voice, harden not your Hearts, as
in the Provocation in the Day of Temptation in the Wilderness, etc. So we are
to hear his Voice that speaks from Heaven, yea, and that while it is to day,
and not to put it off till to morrow. Now you that do so, and say, that there
is no hearing of God's Voice, nor of Christ's Voice now adays, and that
there is no speaking from Heaven now adays; are not your Hearts hardened? and
have you not hardened them to the purpose? do not the Fruits of your Hearts
bespeak it with a loud Voice? And if God's and Christ's Voice be not to be
heard now adays, I would willingly know of you, how he does exercise his
Offices in his Church, namely, his Kingly Office, as he is sole Head of his
Church; and his Prophetical and Priestly Offices; and his Office of a Bishop
and Shepherd, who feeds them with Life, and over-sees and rules them by his
Power and Spirit. Now do not say, He does not exercise his Offices in his true
Church, because you do not feel the exercise of them in yours, who lies
knocking at the Door of your hearts, as a Priest, and a Prophet, etc. and you
will not let him in; if so, how then can he exercise his Offices? and how can
you hear his Voice when you harden your Hearts, and like the deaf Adder stop
your Ears, and will not hearken to the Voice of the Charmer, charm he never so
wisely? And how can you see him, when you close your Eyes, Pharisee-like, so
that you are not like to see him exercise his Offices? but the Blind lead the
Blind into the Ditch, which is a corrupting place; and there they corrupt, and
plead for their Corruptions for term of Life. Whereas we can, and do now hear
his Voice, and obey it; and so can love our Enemies in Obedience to Christ's
Command, and love one another. And we know the Liars, who say, they Love God,
and yet Hate their Brother, He is a Liar, says the Apostle; For, he that
loves not his Brother whom he has seen, how can he love God whom he has not
seen? 1 John 4.20. And he that hates his Brother is a Manslayer: And we know
that no Manslayer has Eternal Life abiding in him. For as the same Apostle
says, We know the Message which we have heard from the Beginning, That We love
one another; not as Cain, who was of that Wicked One, and slew his Brother: And
wherefore slew he him? Because his own Works were Evil, and his Brother's
Righteous. Marvel not, my Brethren, if the World hate you, 1 John 3.11, 12, 13.

And so, it is no Wonderment to us, that the World hate us; for says Christ
(the Heavenly Man) It hated Me first. And this Cain was the first Persecutor
about Religion; and wherever this Persecuting is, we know, that is of Cain,
of his Spirit, of his Nature, Seed and Offspring, from whence is the
Reprobation, since the World began in the Devil and old Adam, out of Christ,
since, I say, the World began; whereas the Election is in Christ, the Seed of
the Woman, by whom the World was made, who was glorified with the Father before
the World began. But the Reprobation (I say) is in the Devil, and old Adam,
that seed where all the Vessels of Dishonor are: Whereas they are the Vessels
of Mercy and of Honor, that have received Christ, in whom is the Election only.

And therefore, as we said before, Marvel not if the World hate us; as the
Reprobate Seed hated the Elect Seed, Cain hated Abel, and Esau Jacob; and this
you may see in 1 John 3.10. In this the Children of God are manifest from the
Children of the Devil; whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither
he that loves not his Brother. And in Heb. ^.10. where the Apostle sets forth
the Children of the New Covenant, says the Lord, I will put my Laws into their
Mind, and write them in their Hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they
shall be to me a People. Now these are God's People, of his Elect Seed, and he
is their God, who has written his Law in their Hearts, etc. and this we
witness, praised be the Lord for evermore, for his New Covenant, and Work in us.

And in the next Verse, says he, You shall not teach every man his Neighbor,
and every man his Brother, saying, Know the Lord; for all shall know him from
the Least unto the Greatest, etc. And so we know, that the Knowledge of the
Lord shall cover the Earth as the Waters cover the Sea: For the Lord says,
Look unto me, and be saved, all the Ends of the Earth: Here all are invited to
Salvation. And in another place, says he, I will give him for a Covenant of
Light, the Glory of Israel; and he shall be my Salvation to the Ends of the
Earth.

And so now the Church is coming out of the Wilderness, the Bride, the Lamb's
Wife; and the Bride says, Come; and the Spirit says, Come: Here is the Call
to Christ the Savior, who is the Way to God, and there is no other Way to the
Father, but by him; neither is there any Salvation by any other Name under
Heaven, but by the Name of Jesus, in whose Name we are gathered; and there is
no other Foundation to be laid, but what is laid, even Christ Jesus, who is the
Top and Cornerstone, the Foundation of the Prophets, Apostles, and us, as is
said in John; and we are those who have obeythe Commands of Christ, who
enlightens every Man that comes into the World, that all through it might
believe; who said, Believe in the Light, this is his Command, that they may
become Children of the Light, John 12.36. So we know, That as many as receives
him (to wit, Christ, the Light that enlighteneth every one that comes into the
World) to them gives he Power to become the Sons of God, John 1.12.

And this we Witness, and can say, Behold what manner of Love is this, that we
should be called the Sons of God, and Heirs of Christ, who makes us sit
together in the Heavenly Places in Christ Jesus, who formerly were dead in Sins
and Trespasses, Ephesians. 2. And we have received the Unction from the Holy One,
through which we come to know all things: The Anointing which we have received
of him, abides in us; and we need not any ones Teaching us, but as the same
Anointing does teach us all thengs; and is true, and is no Lie; and even as it
has taught you, ye shall abide in him, 1 John 2.27. It taught the Saints in
the Apostles days, and us in ours; therefore we must abide in him, as they
did, to wit, in Jesus. And the Light of Christ which shines in our Hearts,
which God has commanded to shine out of Darkness, does give us the Light of
the Knowledge of the Glory of God in the Face of Christ Jesus; And this is the
Heavenly Treasure we have in our Earthen Vessels, that the Excellency of the
Power may be of God, and not of us, 2 Cor. 4.6, 7. So as we walk in the Light,
as he is in the Light, we have Fellowship one with another, and the Blood of
Christ the Son of God (which sprinkles our Hearts and Consciences) cleanses us
from all Sin, 1 John 1.7.

And whereas many Lies and Scandals you have cast upon us (to wit) our Denying
of God, Christ, and the Scriptures, etc. They are all False; For Christ we
know, own, and believe his Incarnation, Passion, Death, Resurrection,
Ascension, and Glorification. And the Scriptures we own to be the Scriptures of
Truth; And Scriptures signify Writings, and we own the Scriptures to contain
the Words of God which we learn of God, and given forth by the Holy Men of God,
and are profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction and Instruction in
Righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.16, 17.

And whereas we have been accused for Denying Original Sin, and Owning
Perfection here in this Life.

To which we answer, That there is an Original of Sin we deny not, but your
Doctrine of Original Sin we do deny, as you state it; For does not Original
signify the Beginning, and the beginning of Sin, was it not the Devil? For we
do affirm, it was neither God, nor Christ. And did not Christ come to destroy
the Devil, and his Works, and so destroy the Original. So we must tell you, we
hold Christ, and not the Devil, who was, and is the Original of Sin and
Imperfection; I say again, Christ, who was before the Devil was, who was
glorified with the Father before the World began, who bruises the Serpents
Head, and the Heads of all Deceivers, Liars, and Slanderers, and False
Prophets, and Antichrists: And in him we are (to wit) Christ Jesus, who is our
Salvation, Mediator, and Redeemer.

And as for your Accusing us for holding Perfection.

Answ. What must we not hold God, who is Perfect? and must we not hold Christ,
who is Perfect; and his Work and Worship, which is Perfect; and his Religion
which is Perfect, that comes from himself; and the Gifts of his Spirit, and
Grace, and Faith which are Perfect? Are not all his Gifts Perfect? and must we
not receive them in this Life? yea, must not our Bodies be the Temple of God,
and of Christ, and of his Holy Ghost? And then must we not hold them who are
Perfect, and own Perfection? And is not the Command of Christ to us to be
Perfect as our Heavenly Father is Perfect? And was it ever the work of the
Prophets and Apostles to preach up Imperfection for Term of Life; but always
both the Prophets, Christ, and the Apostles pressed, and presses us to
Perfection? and what, do they press us to that which is Impossible to be
attained unto? What, will you say, that their Words were of no Value? What will
you liken Christ and his Apostles words unto? For were there any that ever
denied the Doctrine of Perfection, saving only Presbyterians, Independants, and
Baptists; and you, who have got the Form of Godliness, but deny the Power
thereof which brings out of Imperfection to the perfect Head Christ Jesus, who
is the way to God? And therefore you do not only deny the perfect Power, but
also are short of having the Form of Godliness. And will not Christ present his
Church Perfect? that is, without Spot, or Wrinkle unto God the Father, who is
the pure Head of it? And how will you present your Church to God? What, will
you present it to God with a Body of Death, and a Body of Sin.

Do not you deny Circumcision in this, namely, the Circumcision of the Spirit,
that is made without Hands, by putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh,
by the Circumcision of Christ.

And do not you deny Christ's Baptism, who came with his Fan in his Hand, to
purge his Floor thoroughly, whom We see is come, and does increase, and do see
the decrease of John? I say, He is come with his Fan in his Hand, who will
thoroughly purge his Floor, and burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire, and
gather his Wheat into his Garner, a safe place; And this We witness, and so
must all People before they go to their Graves. For this is the Baptism that
the Devil would fain have People to deny, and his Ministers and Messengers, and
then he fills them with Chaff; For as the Apostle says to the Church: By one
Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, Bond
or Free. He does not say, that by Water we were all baptized into one Body; For
we see many Bodies baptized with Elementary Water, and yet do destroy one
another.

Now mark the Words, We are all baptized into one Body, that is, the Church of
the Firstborn, and Christ is the Head of this Body, 1 Cor. 12.13. So this is
the One Baptism spoken of Ephesians. 4.4, 5. There is one Body and one Spirit, even
as you are called into one Hope of your Calling, one Lord, one Faith, one
Baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in
you all; Mark that, Through all, and in you all; Unto every one of us is given
Grace according to the measure of the Gift of Christ, praised be his Name
forever: Grace and Truth is come by Jesus Christ, yea, that Grace which brings
Salvation, which has appeared unto all men (without Exception) Teaching us, to
deny all Ungodliness, and Worldly Lusts, and to live Soberly, and Righteously,
and Godlily in this present Evil World, Tit. 2.11, 12. And this Grace seasons
our Words, and establishes our Hearts; So we have a Teacher which brings us
Salvation, Glory be to God forever and forever. And this Teacher is with us
wherever we are, to wit, the Grace of God by which we are saved, and not of
our selves.

And we can say, this Grace is Sufficient which brings Salvation, though you
look not upon it to be Sufficient, who keep People always under your
Teachings, that they may be always Learning of you, and always paying of you,
and yet never come to the Knowledge of the Truth in themselves, nor their
Talent in themselves to improve. For have you not been like the Pharisees, who
stopped their Ears, and closed their Eyes; and like Saul, who kicked against that
that pricks him, and then kicked against others, and persecuted others? And were
they not them who shut up the Kingdom of Heaven against men, who would not
enter themselves, nor suffer others to enter? See that Blessed Doctrine of
Christ in Luke 17. who said to them, The Kingdom of Heaven (when they demanded
when it should come, Christ's Answer to them was) comes not with Observation,
Lo Here, Lo there; But says Christ, The Kingdom of Heaven is within you. And
we have found his blessed Words to be true; Blessed be his Name forever, who
has stood at our Door, and knocks, as He does at yours; Yea, I say, at the
Door of our Minds, and at the Door of our Hearts and Souls, and we have let Him
in, who now Sups with us, and we with Him, the Heavenly Supper with the
Heavenly Man, the Second Adam, the Lord from Heaven, our Blessed Lord, Jesus
Christ, and our Alone Savior; O! Glory be to Him forever and for evermore,
Rev. 3.

And you say, There is no Overcoming of Sin and Death on this side the Grave,
but must have always a Warfare.

Ans. But did not Paul say that He had fought, etc. then surely he was not then
fighting, he was not then warring, though it is true, Time was that He had been
in the War, and led Captive to do those things he would not have done; But if
there be no Overcoming on this side the Grave, then there is no Eating of the
hidden Manna on this side the Grave, nor no Getting of the White Stone on this
side the Grave, nor of that New Name written in the Stone, which no man knows
saving He that receives it, Rev. 2.17. The Reason there rendered, because it is
a Gift only to Him that Overcomes, that is, on this side the Grave. And Rev.
3.12, 13. Him that Overcomes will I make a Pillar in the Temple of my God, and
He shall go no more out; and I will write upon Him the Name of my God, and the
Name of the City of my God, New Jerusalem, which comes down out of Heaven from
my God. So that, mark, this Promise will not be made good, unless we Overcome
on this side the Grave; But it may be, you have not the Ears to Hear what the
Spirit says to the Churches. And in the 21. Verse. To Him that Overcomes will
I grant to Sit with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame and am Set down
with my Father in his Throne; He that has an Ear let Him hear what the Spirit
says to the Churches. But I fear, you have none of these Ears open that the
Spirit speaks to here, namely, The Church of the Living God, whereof Christ is
the Head.

Again, Rev. 3, 5. He that Overcomes, the same shall be Clothed in White
Raiment; and I will not blot out his Name out of the Book of Life; But I will
confess his Name before my Father, and before his Angels: He that has an Ear,
let him hear, etc. But (as I said before) I question your Ears of hearing what
the Spirit says, that there must first be an Overcoming: Now this was the
Spirit's speaking to the Church that did Overcome.

But it may be you will say, That the Spirit does not speak to you in your
Church; and therefore you may question your Church, and your selves too.

And Rev. 2.26. He that Overcomes and keeps my Works unto the End, to him
will I give Power; and I will give him the Morning Star: He that has an Ear,
let him hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. Now we can, and do witness
that Spiritual Ear, to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches, Glory to
God forever; and we do heartily desire, that you had the same.

And as for the LIGHT, which you call Natural and Created, and a Made Light,
that really and truly is the Light of Christ Jesus, the Heavenly and Spiritual
Man; and it is a Heavenly Light and a Spiritual Light, wherewithal He
Enlightens every one that comes into the World, which he commands us to believe
in, through which we become Children of Light, as was said before: For, in Him
was Life (to wit, Christ) by whom the World was made, and this Life, that is,
in Christ, is the Light of Men. And so, as men are turned to the Light, and
believe in the Light, they are ingrafted into Christ, who is the Root or Stock,
and they the Branches: So that this Light is neither Natural, nor Created, nor
Made; for it is the Heavenly Light, which is the Life in Christ; by which, we
coming into Christ the Light, we receive Life. And as Peter speaks of the
Light, which was a more Sure Word of Prophecy, whereunto you do well that you
take heed, as unto a Light that shines in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and
the Day Star arise in your Hearts; signifying that this Light was sufficient to
bring them unto the Day-dawning, and unto the Day Star arising in their Hearts;
yea, this Light, that shines in a dark Place: And what dark Place was this? and
where was it? was it not in their Hearts, which they did well to take heed
unto? signifying thereby, that they do not well that do not take heed unto it:
and so, they do well that do take heed unto it; in the Light they see more
Light, and it shines more and more to the perfect Day.

So this Light that comes from Christ, Christians waiting in it, they receive
Christ the Bright Morning Star, which Thousands do witness, and have received
Him, Glory to God for evermore; and with their Hearts they do believe, and with
their Mouths Confession is made unto Salvation; and that their Salvation is
their Wall and Bulwork against all Persecutors: And so, we follow Him, (to wit)
Christ Jesus, the Captain of our Salvation, and the Lamb of God that takes
away the Sins of the World; against whom the Dragon, Beast and Whore, and their
Followers are Fighting; but the Lamb will have the Victory; For He is King of
Kings and Lord of Lords, who is the First and Last, the Alpha and the Omega,
the Bening and the Ending. Hallelujah.

A Copy of the Priests Petition.
To the Honorable President and Council of his Majesty's Island of Barbados;
the Humble Petition and Address of the Clergy of the said Island,
Shows,
THat whereas many of us, in the Public Discharge of our Ministerial Function,
upon the Lord's Day, in the Time of Divine Prayer and Sermon, have been
Frequently and Irreverently Interrupted; and Holy Mother, the Church of
England, Scandalously Vilified, as if she were both in Doctrine and in
Discipline False, and Erroneous, and Antichristian; the Honest and Learned
Clergy thereof (even in the Face of their own Congregations) not only taxed as
Seducers, Hirelings, Teachers of Lies, and such like, but Uncharitably Pursued
and Anathematized with Words, and Execrations, and Bitter Invectives, by a Base
Sort of Phanatick People, commonly termed Quakers; Men, whose Practices and
Opinions seem not less repugnant to Civil and Ecclesiastical Government, which
tends to the Disparagement of us, and Prostration of our Order to Contempt; but
also, and chiefly (which is the saddest Evil of all) to the Poisoning, if not
the utter Ruin of many Well-meaning Souls in our Flock, who being infatuated
and inveighed with their Pernicious Tenants, do desert the Public and
Consecrated Places of God's Worship, to withdraw into Private and Unlawful
Conventicles, which we are credibly informed they do repair to Duty Four Times
in the Week, contrary both to Common and Ecclesiastical Laws, and to Acts of
Parliament in the Reign of Edward the sixth, Queen Elizabeth, and King James,
and King Charles the first, and of our now Gracious Sovereign Charles the
second, in such Cases Wholsomely Provided.

May it therefore please your Honor, either to Revive and Enforce the Statute
against them; or that some other Speedy Expedient, against those Growing
Distempers, may be considered of, whereby our People may be less exposed to the
Danger of the Wicked Insinuations; and our selves, by your Pious Care,
succored from such Rude Affronts and Scurrillities; for the future may be
Enconraged with more Alacrity to proceed in the Faithful Discharge of that High
Calling, wherein God has placed us, and we shall continue your Daily Chaplins
and Orators, William Lessley, John Bernad, William Johnson, John Hopwood,
Matthew Gray, John Page.


The Priests of this Island, about the beginning of the 10th Month, 71. did
Petition the Assembly to make Laws against the People called Quakers, and to
suppress them; amongst which Will. Lessley, and Will. Johnson and Priest
Walker were very active: But after their Paper was read in the House, its
credibly affirmed, they were advised to put it into their Pockets, lest the
Quakers by some means or other might procure the Copy of it; and so they did,
their Deeds of Darkness being ashamed of the Light, lest it should Reprove them.

Here follows George Foster's Testimony concerning Priest Lessey's Striking and
Kicking of him.
INasmuch as William Lessley, Priest of the Parish called St. John's, does
revive his Rage and Malice against the People of God called Quakers, and
against the Precious Truth of God, which they hold forth to all, even That
Christ Jesus is the True Light of the World, and that he has Enlightened all
Mankind with a measure of his True Light. I say, Inasmuch as he revives his
Rage, I think it not amiss to revive my Testimony, which once I bore against
him in his public House of Speaking, so far as I was permitted to speak, which
is, That he is no True Minister of Christ Jesus, the Lord of Life and Glory;
for his Fruits make him so manifest. Once I went to his House Civilly, to ask
for some Goods that were due to me, and he did fall upon me with several hard
Blows, and with Violence Thrust me out of his Porch, and gave me one bad Kick
in the Small of my Back, as I went, or was down the steps of the Porch. Now let
all Sober People judge, and to God's Pure Witness in all Consciences I leave it
to be judged, Whether Priest Lessley's Dealings with me do not manifest him to
be one of those whom Christ Jesus speaks of, saying, Many shall come in Sheep's
Clothing, but inwardly they are Ravening Wolves; by their Fruits ye shall know
them.

George Foster.
This Paper was sent us about the 26th of the 8th Month, 1671 somewhat before
his Death.
To William Lessley, -- Walker, William Johnson, William Frith, -- Dyke,
and the rest of the Priests and Ministers in Barbados.
Friends,
IN much Terderness of Love, and Yearning Bowels of Compassion, some of us
called Quakers (but indeed True Christians) came here to this Island (through
the Tender Mercy and Good Providence of our Heavenly Father) to visit our
Brethren in Spirit (being thereunto moved by him) as was the Practice of the
Servants of the Most High, in the Primitive Times, before the Grand Apostasy,
so to do, as you may read in Acts 15.36, 37, etc. and verse 40. Paul took
Silas, being recommended by the Brethren unto the Grace of God.

Now since I have been fully informed, that you (as your Forefathers ever did
in Ages past) are the Main and Principal (if not the only) Instruments in the
Hands of Antichrist, to provoke and incite the Civil and Military Powers here
in this Island, to draw out their Swords against us; to exercise, I mean, their
Power to disturb our Peace and Quiet, and to Persecute us; as we read how Saul
persecuted the Christians in Acts 9.1, 2, etc. which great Wickedness he
acknowledges with much Ingenuity (after he became Paul, a Convert) Gal. 1.13.
and 1 Cor. 15.9. yea, persecuted unto Death, and into Prisons, Acts 22.4. and 1 Timothy 1.13. I was (says he) a Persecutor, and a Blasphemer, and Injurious; but
I obtained Mercy, because I did it Ignorantly in Unbelief: And even Paul
himself, after he (I say) became a Convert, and a Preacher of Righteousness,
was sorely Persecuted; but by whom? [Mark] by the Chief Priests and Elders of
the Jews; who by one Tertullus, their Orator, informed the Governor against
him, saying, We have found this man a Pestilent Fellow [Mark] and a Mover of
Sedition among all the Jews throughout the World, and a Ringleader of the Sect
of the Nazarens, who also has gone about to Profane the Temple, etc. Acts
24.1, 2, 3, etc. and in the 14th verse they call that Way of Worship Heresy
[mark that] For do not you so, if not worse, of us Christians, in terming our
Ministry Heresy, and Blasphemy, and what not, as they did his then?

And you may read how Christ himself (the Beloved Son of the Father, the
Savior and Redeemer of the World) who did no Sin, who knew no Sin, then whom
no man spoke like) did not escape their Persecution, viz. of the Priests.

So then, this is plain, that this has ever bin the usual and constant Practice
of the Priests in all Ages, and of the false Prophets, false Apostles, and
Clergy, and Ministers of Antichrist (who falsely, term themselves, the True
Ministers of Christ ( Nam est haec Tunica Filij tui, you understand me) though
certainly Christ never sent them, and so consequently will never own them; to
whom he does and will say, namely, to these Priests, that say, they Prophesied
in his Name, and in his Name cast out Devils) Depart ye Workers of Iniquity, I
know ye not. What says Paul, Gal. 4.28, etc? But as then, he that was born
after the Flesh persecuted him that was born after the Spirit (what follows?)
even so it is now.

Christ (I say) never sent such, but Antichrist (that is, one contrary to, and
against Christ) though they care not to mind or heed it, neither will they
believe it: But such are of those that (as Scripture says) Ran before they
were sent; as in Jer. 23.21, 32, etc. I have not sent these Prophets, says the
Lord; yet they Ran [mark that] I have not spoken to them, yet they Prophesied:
Behold, I am against them that Prophecy False Dreams, and do tell them; and
cause my People to Err by their Lies, and by their Lightness, yet I sent them
not, and commanded them; therefore they shall not profit this People at all,
says the Lord. [Mind that well] For, whom the Lord of Hosts (who is KING of
Kings and LORD of Lords) sends, commissionates, or imployes as Ambassadors upon
his Errand, he sends them Dove-like, with an Olive Branch of Peace and Love in
their Hearts, and with Words of Reconciliation in their Mouths, out of his
Ark; which the Apostle terms, The Ministry of Reconciliation, 2 Cor. 5.18. to
wit, to Reconcile God and Man, Offended God, and Rebellious Offending Man; to
publish the Gospel of Peace, and proclaim Glad-tidings of Good Things, whose
Feet are Beautiful, Romans 10.15. and Good Will toward poor and undone Man.

Now consider, if so, how far short do you come (who falsely pretend and profess
your selves to be the Ministers of Christ in these our days) of the true
Apostles and Ambassadors of the Lord Jesus (the only Ruler of Princes, and
Prince of Peace) in that their day? Who notwithstanding pretend your selves to
be Ministers of Reconciliation, and yet are found and experimented to be
Ministers of Separation, Divisions and Persecutions, even to Nasty Prisons,
Bonds and Blood; who, instead of putting on the Spiritual Armor, to fight the
Lord's Battles, do Harness your selves, and prepare War to fight the Old
Dragon's, and the Devil's and Antichrist's Quarrels: Who, instead of handling
the Sword of the Spirit (which is the Word of God, and Power of God to
Salvation) use a Sword of Steel; so that I may say to you, as the Apostle said
to him (whom he calls an Instructor of Fools, and a Teacher of Babes, Romans
2.20, etc.) Thou that say (or preachest) a man should not Steal, do thou
Steal? Thou that say, a man should not commit Adultery, etc. [Mark well that]
So say I. Thou that say, a man should not be Drunk, art thou Drunk? Read Isa.
28.7, 8. But they also have Erred through Wine, and through Strong Drink are
out of the Way: The Priest and Prophet have Erred through Strong Drink; they
are swallowed up of Wine; they are out of the Way through Strong Drink; they
Err in Vision; they Stumble in Judgment; for all Tables are full of Vomit and
Filthiness, so that there is no place clean.

Again, Thou that say, a man should not commit Adultery, do thou commit
Adultery? Read Jer. 29.21, 23. Which Prophecy a Lie unto you in my Name --
because they have committed Villainy in Israel, and have committed Adultery with
their Neighbors Wives, and have spoken Lying words in my Name, etc. And mind
you not, that Whoremongers and Adulterers God will Judge, Heb. 13.4. And such
shall not enter the Holy City, New Jerusalem, Rev. 21.8.

The Lord I say, sent his Ambassadors to proclaim Peace; whereas you sound
forth a Trumpet to Alarm Battles, and to Provoke, Instigate and Stir up to
Wars, to Fightings and Imprisonings, to Destroy, Kill and Murder Nations, and
Families, and Persons in the particular, even such whose Desires and utmost
Endeavors are, to live Peaceably, Harmlesly, and In-offensively toward God,
and toward Men, as they persecuted Paul. And yet, I say, such is the Cain-like
spirit of too too many amongst you, who seek the utter Ruin and Destruction,
and thirst after the Blood (which is the Life) of the Poor Despised People of
God: Whereas Christ acertains us, (whose Steps you should follow, to do Well)
That he came not to Destroy Men's Lives, but to save them. But you on the
contrary (walking in Antichrist's Bloody Steps, and so contrary to his Noble
Precept and Practice) are come it seems here to this Island not to save men's
Lives, but to destroy them; not to seek after their Good, but their Goods;
insomuch that the Inhabitants Eyes begin to be open (which you had shut) so as
that they in measure see your Deceits and Juggles; whereby now you do clearly
manifest whose you are, so that he that runs may read; who (as Scripture of
Truth says) Fight with the Fist of Wickedness: Whereas an Evangelical Bishop
(that is, a True Minister of Christ) should be Blameless, Sober, and of Good
Behavior; not given to Wine, no Striker, nor Greedy of Filthy Lucre, nor
Covetous. Now Mark, Are not you on the contrary guilty of all these Things, if
not of much more?

But Friends, let me tell you in Seriousness, That unless you Repent (if it be
not too late already, if Time be not past, and your Day over; if, I say, you be
not sealed up to Destruction, as many of God's People witness their sealing up
unto Salvation) Repent, I say, betimes, ere the Dismal and Dreadful Decree be
gone forth from the Presence of the Lord against you; who are found beating
your Fellow Servants (or rather the Lord's Servants, who are not your Fellows)
it had been better you never had been born, as he said of his Betrayer; mind
that well; and that a Millstone were hanged about your Neck, etc. you know
what follows. For alas! what will become of you, when the Righteous Judge shall
come to Judgment, who will then (after a strict Inspection) Reward every man
according to his Works?

O! Whither then will you, or can you betake your selves, to hide you from the
Wrath of the Lamb? when he shall say, Bring hither those mine Enemies, that
would not have me to Rule over them, and Slay them before me (this is the
Portion of such) You may indeed cry to the Mountains, and to the Hills, to the
Greater, and to the Lesser, to hide you from Him; but alack! all in Vain: for
that will not avail, that will not prove a Sufficient Cover; no, it will be (to
your great Grief, Horror and Amazement) found too Short a Covering. If you be
(as you pretend your selves to be) the true Orthodox, and not Hetrodox (that
is, the True Evangelical Ministers of Christ) Where are your Evangelical
Fruits? Where is your Love, your Righteousness, your Meekness, your Patience,
your Good Will toward all men, your Good Exhortations in the Way of Peace,
with all Long-Suffering and Forbearance? But instead thereof, do you not bring
forth the Fruits of the Flesh? viz. Envying, Strife, Malice, Contention,
Drunkenness, Covetousness, Whoredoms, Uncleanness, Persecution; rendering Evil
for Good, instead of rendering Good for Evil; and Cursings for Blessings,
instead of Blessings for Cursings. Of such Christ bids us beware of, in Matthew.
7.15, 20, etc. Who come in Sheep's Clothing, but inwardly are Ravening Wolves;
for by their Fruits ye shall know them.

O! that you would in time think upon the Great Account (I speak to you as one
who wishes well, if not better then your selves to your Immortal Souls) that
you shall, without all controversy, render to the Lord at the Great and
Terrible Day of the Lord. For if the Death of the Body be, (...), The King of
Terrors, as it is in Job, to the Reprobate; O! what will, in that day, that
Death be, when Christ shall say unto the Left Hand Goats, Depart, ye Cursed,
into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil, etc. Why? What Is the Matter?
Because they visited not his Imprisoned Ones; how much more then in regard they
were the Means and Occasion of their Imprisonments (weigh well his words in
Mat. 25.) In that, I say, he came and found you beating (that is Persecuting)
your Fellow Servants. O! how then will you be able to appear, and show your
Faces before the Lord? who have made it your great Concern, as much as in you
lies, to provoke and stir up those in Power in this Island (as witness your
several Petitions to them) to War, Imprison and Trouble the Innocent: Whereas
you should endeavor to persuade people, To beat their Swords into
Plough-Shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks; so that Nation might not
lift up Sword against Nation, neither learn War any more, Isa. 2.4. A Mercy
which the Lord long since promised should come to pass, and is now beginning to
be fulfilled; but endeavored to be obstructed by the Contradictions of such as
you, but all in Vain: But take heed of limitting the Holy One of Israel, of
with-standing his Accomplishments, lest you be found Fighters against God; and
if so, expect that justly, with that Apostate Julian, that may make you cry out
with him, in the Anguish of your spirits, Vicisti me Galilee: For know this,
That no man ever stood it out against the Lord, and Prospered; man has stood it
out against another, and Nation against a Nation, and Kingdom against a
Kingdom, and have Prospered; but none ever stood it out against God, and
Prosper'd.

O! Where is your Love (your Charity, so rendered) that suffers long, and is
Kind, that Envyeth not, that vaunteth not it self, that is not Puffed up, that
behaveth it self not Unseemingly, seeks not her own, is not easily Provoked,
thinks no Evil, Rejoices not in Iniquity; but Rejoices in the Truth,
Bears all things, Believes all things, Hops all things, Endures all
things: Of which I may say, with your allowed Poet Terras Astrae reliquit, as
Justice, so Mercy and Compassion are departed from you: For where are your
Bowels of Compassion? Have you not rather stirred up others to Fight, and set at
Variance, etc. that instead of a Concord, have set at Discord? O! what Rents
and Divisions, what Animosities and Enmities, you, and your Fellows have made
over all Christendom, so called? Have you not been only Partners, but the chief
Fomenters, Complotters, and Broachers of all the Mischief done? Therefore your
Coat, above all other Coats, are like to give an Heavy Account; namely, You of
the Black Robe here in this Island, like the Chimrims (i. e.) Eorum qui nigras
induunt vestes, as it is rendered in the Margent by Arius Montanus, in Zeph.
1.4. and as Junius has it (Nomen atratorum) who have set all the World at odds,
and on Fire; whereas you should have persuaded them to love one another, and to
bear one with another: you have been, I say, the Sad Instrumens, to learn them
Strife and Contention, to teach their Hands to War, and their Fingers to Fight
against the Lamb and his Followers, who are clothed in White Linen, which is
the Righteousness of the Saints, and of Christ; so that one Neighbor by your
means has hated another, and sought the Destruction one of another, and
Persecuted and Imprisoned one another, for your Lusts sake, your Covetousness
sake, your Prides sake, your Envy your Malice sake, your Fables sake, your
Corrupt Doctrines and Divinations sake, which are the Fancies and Product of
your airy Imaginations, and Accursed Birth of your own fiery Brain, that have
been hatched there, and conceived in the Chamber of your Imagenary, Ezekiel. 8.12.
these being part of the Inventions that men have sought out, as the Wise Man
says, Eccl. 7.29. and as he who was greater then Solomon says, Teaching for
Doctrines the Traditions of Men, and so make void the Law of God; to whom you
are like in all things, the very Picture of your own Father in John 8.44. O!
where will you abide when the Books shall be opened, and all these things shall
in order be set before you?

O! that you would be Wise, to consider your Latter-Ends, ere the Evil Day come
(if, I say, you Repent not of the Evil of your Doings) when the Lord shall hurl
you down, and tumble you headlong into the Bottomless-Pit of Perdition; and
there forever seal you up from the Presence of the Lord, into the Abiss, Isay,
of Destruction and Eternal Misery, such as will never have an End, (because
Time then shall be no more) but after Thousands of Millions and Miriads of
Years are as far from the End of their Misery, as at the first Moment of it;
from whence, I say, there shall be no Redemption: No, no; as you have been the
Cause of all the Righteous's Sufferings, Imprisonments, and Persecutions, and
Deaths; you shall be Imprisoned there, and bound Hand and Foot, and cast in
there forever, Luke 11.48, 49, 50. as says the Lord in the Parable of the
Unmerciful Servant (just such Servants many of you are) Who Treated his
Fellow Servants Cruclly, and dealt Hardly with him; whereas his Lord had great
Compassion on him, in forgiving him all that he owed him: whereupon his Lord
was Wrath, and delivered him to the Tormentors, till he should pay all that was
due unto him. And look as certainly as you have (or shall) filled any of us
with Sorrows and Grief, so shall you drink the Dregs of our Cup, as the Apostle
says to this purpose, it is a Righteous Thing with God, to Recompense
Tribulation to them that Trouble you, 2 These. 1.4, 5, 6. You shall, I say,
drink even of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out without Mixture
(of the least Pity or Mercy) into the Cup of his Indignation, and shall be
Tormented with Fire and Brimstone in the Presence of his holy Angels, and in
the Presence of the Lamb; and the Smoke of their Torment ascends up forever,
and forever; and they have no Rest Day nor Night. Can you, Friends, English
that, Rev. 14, 10. and 16.5, 6, 7. MEAN TEKEL, You are weighed in the Balance,
and are found light; so writes the Finger of God: and therefore your Kingdom
shall be taken from you (look for it) and all your Ill-gotten Goods and
Estates, that by your Lies, and False Prophesyings, and by speaking Smooth
Things, Isa. 30.10. and Daubing with Untempored Mortar, Ezekiel. 22.28. and 13.9,
10. and by all your sowing Pillows under people's Elbows, to Keep and Lull them
Asleep, shall all be Vomited up.

Thus much I thought meet in Love to write unto you, that so you may learn to
Fear God, Repent, Believe and Live forever with the Lord.

Barbados, the 29th of the 1st Month, called March, 1672. From Him that was
once of you; but now through Mercy is come out from amongst you^; and bears
this Tostimony against you, John Hull.
Read Jer. cap 6. from verse, 13. to 19. and Ezekiel. cap. 34. and cap. 13.
throughout.



Postscript.
Since the writing of this Letter, I had Information of some Sad Passages of
Priest Walker's Sermon, that he Preached before the Rulers of the last General
Sessions, which occasioned this Postscript.
OFRIENDS! But Seriously weigh the Thing in the Cool of the Day, between God
and your own Hearts; and Consider Seriously, Whether it be not Sad to See Him,
and such who profess your selves Ministers, viz. Christ's Ambassadors, given
to the Churches for Education, Consolation, Information, and Instruction, to
Stand and Appear so directly Diametrically Opposite and Cross to the very End
of your Pretended Work and Ministry; Concerning many of whom I fear it may be
said, That knowingly, wilfully and deliberately Oppose Piety and Godliness, and
Crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh; and have Condemned and Killed the
Just, that Resisted not: O! read that Within. That you should, I say,
Persecute, and stir up others to Persecution, whose Work should be, To Feed and
Preserve out of it; and Wound, instead of Healing; and Grieve the Spirit of the
Righteous, who should further their Joy and Comfort: So that such declare
themselves, with open Mouth, to be Phys^^ians of No Value.

And so it is made clearly manifest, That none are a Greater Plague to the
Church (so called) both in Corrupting and Deluding it, by your Sorceries and
Enchantments, and also, in causing the Sacrifice of the Lord to be by Men
abhorred, then some of you, who would be accounted, The SALT of the EARTH: But,
alas! it has lost its Savor, so that, as Christ says, It is good for
Nothing, but to be cast out, and trodden under Foot by men, Mat. 5.13. Luke
14.34. Just like those Priests, Eli's Sons, Sons of Belial by their
Debaucheries, Wickedness and Whoredoms, spoken of in 1 Samuel 2.12, 17. compared.
And instead of being Barnabas's Sons of Consolation, are found and experimented
to be Boanerges's Sons of Thunder, Alaruming to War, and to Battles, with
Confused Noise, and Garments rold in Blood.

O Friends! Be Friendly Advised, Not to Sadden the Hearts of those whom God
would not have made Sad, Hazael-like, 2 King. 8.11, 12, 13. Is thy Servant a
Dog, says he to the Prophet, that I should do this Great Thing. So Priest
Walker and you may happily say, Far be it from any of us, that we should do
this Great Thing; that we should Seek, Labor and Endeavor, by Preaching,
Teaching or Petitioning the Destruction of the Righteous: But take heed, take
heed, that you be not found amongst the number of those that think in so doing
(i. e.) in Killing, Imprisoning, Plundering and Persecuting them, they do God
Service: you cannot be Ignorant that such there were, mentioned John 16.2.
where says the Lord, They have put you out of their Synagogues (that is,
Excommunicated or Unchurched them, and then Imprisoned them, and Spoiling them
of their Goods) as many Hundreds have been by such as you: Yea, the Time
comes, and is it not now? that whosoever shall Kill them, thinks he dorh God
Service therein. O! Read and Consider, lest you be found, I say, to be such;
such Fools were those by their own Consession in the Book of Wisdom, which is
good Scripture, though placed in that part which is called Appochripha; read
Wisdom chap. 5. verse. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, etc.

Then shall the Righteous Man stand in great Boldness before the Face of such
as have Afflicted him, and made no Account of his Labors; when they see it,
they shall be Troubled with Terrible Fear, and shall be Amazed at the
Strangeness of his Salvation, so far beyond all that they looked for. [Mark] Is
not this made good now in the Disappointment of the late strenous Endeavors
and Actings against the Quakers only, of all Dissenters in this Island, through
the Instigation and Promotion with the greatest Violence and Fury of you
Priests (especially of Priest Walker, W. Lessley, and his Son in Law Johnson)
For, as the Psalmist says, Psalm. 25.20. They speak not Peace, but Divise
Deceitful Matters against them that are Quiet in the Land: whereas the Lord
says plainly, Divise not Evil against thy Neighbor, seeing he dwells
securely by thee, Prove. 3.29, 30, 31. Weigh this well, and consider Proud
Hamon's Devilish Stratagem against God's People, and how the Lord Frustrated
and Disannulled his designed Acts (as he has, and will do yours) and wicked
Divises in and to their own Ruin, in the Book of Esther, chap. 8. and 9.
according to that Psalm. 7.15. He made a Pit, and Dug it, and is fallen into
the Ditch which he made; his Mischief shall return upon his own Head; and his
Violent Dealing shall come down upon his own Pate (Insidit in foveam quam
struxit) then sollows, I will Praise the Lord according to his Righteousness,
etc. It being a Righteous Thing in God, so to Reward them, whose Ways are
Equal, though Man's Ways are Unequal: And Prove. 26.27.

But to return to that in Wisdom again:
And they Repenting, and Groaning in Spirit, shall say within themselves, This
was he we had sometimes in Dirision, and a Proverb (or Parable) of Reproach; We
Fools Accounted his Life Madness, and his End to be without Honor; How is he
numbered among the Children of God? and his Lot is amongst the Saints: Therefore
we Erred from the Way of Truth, and the Light of Righteousness has not shined
unto us, and the Son of Righteousness arose not upon us: We Wearied our selves
in the Way of Wickedness, and Destruction, etc. O! was not this, Friends, your
Work? and will not these, or the like, be your Words and Wages answerable one
Day?

John Hull.

FOR THE GOVERNOR, And His Council and Assembly, And all Others in Power, both
Civil and Military in this Island; from the People called QVAKERS. (With an
ADDITION)
WHereas many Scandalous Lies and Slanders have been cast upon us, to the
rendering us the more Odious (viz.) That we do deny God, and Christ Jesus, and
the Scriptures of Truth, etc. This is to inform you, That all our Books and
Declarations (that for these many years have been published to the World) do
clearly testify to the contrary; but yet, for your sakes this is now given
forth.

That God (who is the Only Wise, Omnipotent, and Everlasting God) we do Own and
Believe in, who is the Creator of all things both in Heaven and in Earth, and
the Preserver of all that he has made; who is God over all, blessed forever;
to whom be all Honor, and Glory, and Dominion, and Praise, and Thanksgiving,
both now and for evermore.

And that Jesus Christ is his Beloved and Only Begotten Son, in whom he is
Well-pleased; who was Conceived by the Holy Ghost, and Born of the Virgin Mary;
in whom we have Redemption, through his Blood, even the Forgiveness of Sins;
who is the express Image of the Invisible God, the Firstborn of every
Creature; by whom were all things created that are in Heaven, and that are in
the Earth; Visible, and Invisible; whether they be Thrones, or Dominions, or
Principalities, or Powers.

And we do own and believe, that he was made to be as Sin, or an Offense and
Curse for us, who knew no Sin; and was Crucified for us in the Flesh, without
the Gates of Jerusalem; and that he was Buried, and Rose again the Third Day,
by his own Power, for our Justification; and we do believe, that he Ascended up
into Heaven, and now sits at the Right Hand of God.

And that this Jesus is the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles, and our
Foundation; so that there is no other Foundation to be laid, but what is laid,
even Christ Jesus: and that he tasted Death for every man, and shed his Blood
for all men: that he is the Propitiation for our Sins, and not for our Sins
only, but for the Sins of the whole World: For says John the Baptist of him,
Behold, the Lamb of God that takes away the Sins of the World, John 1.29.

And we do believe, That he is our Alone Redeemer and Savior, even the Captain
of our Salvation; who saves us from Sin, as well as from Hell, and from the
Wrath to come, and destroys the Devil and his Works; who is the Seed of the
Woman, that bruises the Serpent's Head, to wit, Christ Jesus; who is Alpha and
Omega, the First and Last.

That he is (as Scriptures of Truth say) our Wisdom, Righteousness,
Justification and Redemption; neither is there Salvation in any other; For
there is none other Name under Heaven, given among men, whereby we must be
saved: it is he alone who is the Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls; he it is
that is our Prophet, whom Moses long since testified of in Acts 3.22, 23. A
Prophet shall the Lord our God raise up unto you, of your Brethren, like unto
me, him shall you hear in all things, whatsoever he shall say unto you: and it
shall come to pass, that every one that will not hear that Prophet, shall be
Destroyed from among the People.

He it is that is now come, and has given us an Understanding, that we may
know him that is true; and a Rule in our Hearts, even his Law of Love and of
Life in our Inward Parts, which makes us free from the Law of Sin and Death,

And we have no Life, but by him; For he is the Quickening Spirit, the Second
Adam, the Lord from Heaven; by whose Blood we are cleansed, and our Consciences
sprinkled from Dead Works, that we might serve the Living God; by whose Blood
we are purchased. And so he is our Mediator, that makes Peace and
Reconciliation between God offended, and Us offending; being our Surety of the
New Testament, and the Oath of God, the New Covenant of Light, Life, Grace and
Peace; the Author and Finisher of our Faith.

Now this Lord Jesus Christ, the Heavenly Man, Emanuel, God with us, we all own
and believe in; whom the High Priests raged against, and said, He had spoken
Blasphemy; and the Chief Priests, and Elders of the Jews, took Counsel
together, and put him to Death; the same whom Judas* betrayed for Thirsy Pieces
of Silver, which he had from the Priests; who gave a Large Sum of Money to the
Soldiers, to broach a Horrible Lie, namely, that they should say, That his
Disciples stole him away by Night, whilst they Slept. And after he was risen
from the Dead, you may see in the Acts of the Apostles, how that the chief
Priests and Elders Persecuted the Disciples of this Jesus, for preaching
Christ, and his Resurrection: this (we say) is that Lord Jesus Christ, whom we
own to be our Life and Salvation.

Now concerning the Holy Scriptures.
We do believe, That they were given forth by the Holy Spirit of God, through
Holy Men of God, who spoke (as Scriptures of Truth say) As they were Moved by
the Holy Ghost, in 2 Pet. 1.1. and that they are to be Read, and Believed and
Fulfilled; and he that fulfils them is Christ. And are profitable for Doctrine,
for Reproof, for Correction, and for Instruction in Righteousness; that the Man
of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all Good Works, 2 Timothy 3.16.
and are able (as Divinely Inspired) to make us Wise to Salvation, through Faith
in Christ Jesus. And we do believe, That the Scriptures are the Word^ of God;
for its said in Exodus 20.1. God spoke all these Words, saying, etc. meaning the
Ten Commandments, given forth upon Mount Sinai: and in Rev. 18. says John, I
testify unto every man, that hears the WORDS of the Prophecy of this Book;
if any man adds unto These -- and if any man shall take away from the WORDS
(not Word) of the Book: So in Luke 1.20. Because thou believe not my WORDS:
and John 5.47. and 15.7. and 14.23. and 12.47. So that we call the Scriptures
as Christ and the Apostles called them, and as the Holy Men of God called them,
namely, The WORDS of God.

Another Slander and Lie they have cast upon us, is; namely, That we should
teach the Negars to Rebel.

A Thing we do utterly abhor and detest in and from our Hearts, the Lord knows
it, who is the Searcher of all hearts, and knows all things; and so can witness
and testify for us, that this is a most Egregious and Abominable Untruth.

For, that which we have spoken and declared to them is, to exhort and admonish
them, To be Sober, and to Fear God, and to love their Masters and Mistresses,
and to be Faithful and Diligent in their Masters Service and Business; and that
then their Masters and Overseers will Love them, and deal Kindly and Gently
with them: And that they should not beat their Wives, nor the Wives their
Husbands; nor multiply Wives, nor put away their Wives, nor the Wives their
Husbands, as they use frequently to do: and that they do not Steal, nor be
Drunk, nor commit Adultery, nor Fornication, nor Curse, nor Swear, nor Lie, nor
give Bad Words to one another, or unto any one else. For there is something in
them, that tells them, That they should not Practice those Evils (or any other)
before mentioned: Which if notwithstanding they should do them, that there are
but two Ways; the one, that leads to Heaven, where the Righteous go; and the
other, that leads to Hell, where the Wicked and Debancht, Whoremongers and
Adulteres, Murderers, Liars and Thieves go: To the one the Lord of Heaven and
Earth will say, Come ye Blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for
you, from the Foundation of the World; but to the other he will say, Depart ye
Cursed into Everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. The
Wicked, into Everlasting Punishment; but the Righteous, into Life Eternal, Mat.
25.

Now consider, Friends, that its no Transgression, for a Master of a Family to
instruct his Family himself, or else, some others in his behalf; but rather,
that it is a very great Duty lying incumbent upon them: As Abraham did, and
Joshua did; as to the first, the Lord said, I know that Abraham will command
his Children, and his Household after him; and they shall keep the Way of the
Lord, to do Justice and Judgment, that the Lord may bring upon Abraham that
which he has spoken of him: And as for Joshua, said he, Josh. 24.15. And if it
seems Evil unto you to serve the Lord, choose you this Day whom you will serve,
whether the Godds which your Fathers served, that were on the other side of the
Flood; or the Godds of the Amorites, in whose Land ye dwell: But as for me, and
my House, we will serve the Lord. And further consider this, That it is a Duty
lying upon us, to Pray and to Teach, Instruct and Admonish those in and
belonging to our Families; it being the Command of the Lord, the Disobedience
to which will incur the Lord's Displeasure; as you may see in Jer. 10.25. where
its written, Pour out thy Fury upon the Heathen, that know thee not; and upon
the Families, that call not upon thy Name. Now Negars and Tauny Indians make up
a very great part of Families here in this Island, for whom an Account will be
required at the Great Day of Judgment, when every one shall be Rewarded
according to his Deeds done in the Body, whether they be Good, or whether they
be Evil: In that Day, I say, of the Resurrection, both of the Good and of the
Bad, of the Just and of the Unjust; when the Lord shall be revealed from Heaven
with his Mighty Angels, in Flaming Fire, taking Vengeance on them that know not
God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, who shall be punished
with Everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory
of his Power, when he shall come to be Glorified in his Saints, 2 Thessalonians. 1.8.

Here follows the Addition.
Whereas diverse Reproachful Speeches, by some of the Priests and People of the
Island of Barbados, were cast upon George Fox, since his arrival here; its
manifest that the Devil was the Author of them, to prevent and pervert the
Minds of People from the Living Truth of God, and the Right Way to God, to wit,
Jesus Christ; of whom the said G.F. informed the People, that so they might all
come to inherit Christ Jesus, and so inherit the Substance, viz. Christ, their
Teacher, their Way, their Prophet (of whom Moses prophesied long since, That
him they should Hear) their Bishop, to Over-see them; and their Shepherd, to
Feed them; and their Minister, that Ministereth Grace, and Life and Truth unto
them; who is their Rock, and Foundation of the Prophets, and Apostles, and of
us, who in Scorn they call Quakers; yea, of that Christ, who bruised the
Serpent's Head, and destroys the Devil and his Works.

So he is the Way to God, to the pure God, who is the Pure Foundation of many
Generations, and is the Life of all Mankind, that have Life; for as they all
dyed in the first Adam, so the Life they have is in the second Adam, to wit,
Christ Jesus, by whom the World was made; who was Glorified with the Father
before the World began.

Now, I say, every one must receive him, in whom they have Life Eternal, who is
the Son of God; and so receiving him, they receive the Faith of the Son of God,
and receive his Blood, that sprinkles their Hearts and Consciences from dead
Works, that so they might serve God in the new Life in Christ Jesus. I say,
that Christ Jesus, that was Crucified without the Gates of Jerusalem, who was
born of the Virgin Mary, and was Dead and Buried, whom Judas betrayed to the
Chief Priests for thirty pieces of Silver, who afterward arose out of the
Grave, even the third day; though the Magistrates and Priests set a Watch, a
Guard of Soldiers upon his Sepulcher; and the chief Priests gave the Soldiers
large Money to say, That his Disciples stole Him away by Night.

This Christ, I say, is our Life, who Died for our Sins, and is Risen for our
Justification; who remains in the Heavens at the Right hand of God, until the
restitution of all things: And we say, He is Manifested and Revealed in us, and
we are in him by his Light, Power and Spirit: and he has taught us what to
believe in, to wit, the Light, as you may see in John, who says, He is the
Light; and commands us, to believe in the Light, that we may be the Children of
Light: And so, we are Believers in the Light (to wit, Christ Jesus) and have
the Witness within our selves: And after we believed, we were sealed by the
Spirit of Promise; and we can set to our Seal, That God is True in all his
Prophets and Promises, concerning his Son; and the Doctrine of the Apostles,
that preached Christ's Birth and Life, Miracles, Sufferings, his Death and
Resurrection. So we do confess him before men, to be our Shepherd, our Way, and
our Foundation, and the Head of his Church; and he is our Bill op, our
Minister, and our Priest; who is made higher then the Heavens, Holy and
Harmless: and this we are not ashamed to confess before men.

Now as for the Filthy and Unsavory words, that have been cast upon me, they
are all False. O! that People should bend their Tongues to invent filthy Lies,
and that others should be given up to believe a Lie: So that Say^ of Christ is
fulfilled, They shall speak all manner of Evil^ you for my sake. But yet this
we can truly say, The Lord forgive them, if it be his will, if that they have
not sinned out their day; and we do earnestly desire their Repentance, if there
be any place found for Repentance. But truly, it is much if God's Wrath and his
Sore Judgments do not fall heavy upon them in this Island; a great measure
whereof they have seen and felt already, and that not long since, both by the
Plague, that swept Multitudes away, as with a Besom; and by a very great Fire,
that burnt down most part of the Houses at the Bridge: but we desire in our
Hearts, if it be his Will, That his Wrath may pass from them: And yet I cannot,
nor do not see how well they should escape, and go Unpunished, since people
give themselves up to such Debaucht Talk, and Wicked and Slanderous Speeches,
which manifests the Wickedness of their Hearts: For, an Evil Man, out of the
Evil Treasure of his Heart, brings forth that which is Evil; out of the
abundance of his Heart his Mouth speaks, Luke 6.45.

Now therefore, O Barbadians, I Warn you to take heed and Repent, lest the
Judgments and Wrath of the Lord break out like Fire suddenly upon you, and as
a Thief in the Night, in an Hour when you little Dream of it. For alas! I do
see that that makes my Heart even ready to Tremble almost, to speak of the
Judgments and Plagues that this Corrupt Nature brings upon a Land.

Where, alas! is Virtue to be found among you? where is Sobriety? where is
Moderation? as the Apostle says, let your Moderation be known to all men; the
Lord is at hand, Phil. 4. where is Modesty? where is Love Unfeigned? where is
Holiness and Righteousness (the Blessed Fruit of the Spirit of Life and
Holiness) to be found; but rather the Fruits of the Flesh: O! what a Great Crop
may be gathered of these? And so that Birth of the Flesh judges of others to
be like it self.

Know this, If you Priests were the Ministers of Christ, then such things would
be Reproved by you, and you and your People would receive us gladly when we
come among you in the Name and Fear of the Lord, and Visit you in Love; and not
have raised such false Report and Wicked Slanders of us, and cast so much Dirt
and Filth upon our Faces to mar us: so that it is much to be feared, that you
have lost the Day of your Visitation; you having Rejected those whom the Lord
has sent in Love to Visit you here: And it is no Wonder, considering that this
has been the Practice of the False Prophets, and Shepherds and Priests of Old,
to raise Lying Slanders upon the Truth; and so do you, as you may see all along
in the Scriptures of Truth. O! what Rage and Malice, what Envy and Cruelty did
the Priests and Jews (who professed themselves, to be the Children and People of
God, and Children of Abraham the Faithful) act against the Prophets of the
Lord, and against Christ and his Apostles? see Joh. 8.39, 40, etc. But withal,
mark their End; what became of them all? its said, The Name of the Wicked shall
Rot? but the Name of the Righteous shall never be blotted out: and Psalm. 37.35,
etc.

And thus you Priests, and others of your Gang (who they are you may guess)
have broacht and published these Lies and Slanders, whose Minds and Tongues seem
wholly bent to do Mischief, and to speak Evil of the Righteous: But a Lying
Tongue God abhors, Psalm. 119.163. And Tophet is prepared of Old for such, as
you may read in Rev. 21.8.

Now we may say, What Christianity is amongst the People here? and what
Religion have they been taught? And truly, this is not Civil, nor Neighbourly
done, of such as have raised up these Slanders and Lies, whereof G.F. was not
guilty, nor ever heard of them before: so that it seems, the Father and Mother
of these Lies are here in this Island; and therefore query, whether you Priests
and Baptists have not been the Men-Mid-Wives, to forward the birth of them. O!
where is Modesty, and where is Virtue, that should be in your Minds and
Mouths? where is Truth in your Inward Parts? Yea some of these filthy things
have been in the Minds and Mouths of some who have been of some Repute amongst
you, yea, and of the Teachers too, which is a very strange thing; had it been
only the rude rabble of people, it had not been worth the taking notice of; but
for such as look upon themselves, as Men of Repute amongst you, to have such
things in your minds and mouths; it is very strange, had they any regard to
their own Credit and Reputation; though I shall name none, but you all know
your selves who you be: and therefore it is good for you all to Repent of these
things, and seek after Virtue, and after Peace, Truth and Holiness, without
which no man shall see God; and after the Lord Jesus, who teaches no such Lies
nor Slanders; but destroys the Liar, and Author of Lies.

Another Slander they have got up here, That G.F. should Hang Ribbons upon
peoples Arms, by which means they were Bewitched; Which was first forged by an
Independent Priest, one of Oliver Cromwell's News-Mongers, who put it into his
Weekly-News-Book: and when he was questioned, where he had the Information;
first, he said, it was a Woman, and then afterward, said, it was a Man that
told him of it; but never could we get from him the Name of that Man or Woman,
or of the Town and Country where he or she lived to this day. And this Lie and
Slander went for credit, it being printed in the Dyurnal; and the Priests
likewise published it in their Pulpits; and others would Swear, that their
Brother Independent Priest caused it to be put into the News-Books, when they
perceived many of their Hearers to forsake them, who would not put into their
Mouths any longer; therefore they raised this Slander, thinking thereby, to
cast a Stumbling Block before the people, to stop them from coming to embrace
the Truth: but they were deceived in that; for that manifested their Folly the
more, and their Lies and Slanders; and confirmed the people the more in the
Truth. And these Independants were the first that gave the Nickname of
Quakers; as, one Bennet at Darby, 1650.

And then likewise they raised Slanders, That we denied God and Christ, and the
Scriptures; which were all Lies: and then the Presbyterians, Independants and
Baptists set their people to Scoff and Mock us; calling us Tremblers, and
Shakers and Quakers in that day, and what not, when they had the day of it, the
Tithes, and Pulpits and the Power in their Hands. But the Lord God, when he had
brought the King into his Power, then he shook't them out of their Pulpits,
their Tithes, and Esther-Reckonnings, and Midsummer-Dues, etc. and made such
Shaking, and Quaking, and Quivering amongst them, as Rock't and Shook't them
out of their Great Benefices, and laid their Maintenance levil with the Earth,
insomuch as that they durst hardly Creep into a House to Meet: and so the Lord
has given them Shaking, and Quaking, and Trembling and Quivering enough, who
were the first Raisers of that Nickname, in calling the People of God Quakers:
So that they have had a Dreadful Day of Trembling since that. And therefore let
others take heed, and mind the Example of all these Liars and Slanderers that
are gone before them

And because that G. F. and some Masters of Families, had some Meetings with
the Negars belonging to friends, and did admonish them and Christianly persuade
them, that they should be content with having but one wife, each man of them;
and that the Wives should love their Husbands, and the Husbands their Wives;
and fear God, and not abuse them, either with blows, or in Bitter Words, and
that they should not Steal nor commit fornication, or Adultry, nor do any
wicked thing; but that they should Serve and Worship the Lord God in Spirit and
in Truth, and yield subjection to their Masters, and those over them, and do
what they did in Singleness of Heart etc. Whereupon some of you Priests have
raised, as we understand, a Slander upon Friends, viz. that we have a Design to
teach the Blacks to rebel: which is a most false Lie; whereas indeed, it should
have been their work (who take upon them to be Ministers of Christ) to admonish
the Blacks and Taunies themselves, and preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ to
them themselves. But was not there a great Professor, that said to a Black's
Child, Lord bless thee; and after did she not, as re-calling her words, say,
Lord forgive me; as though the Blacks had no souls to save as well as Whites?
Its credibly reported that once when a Black came to a Steeple-House in time of
worship, That the Sexton came to him with his Whip, and said unto him, Get thee
out thou Dog; what do you here? are these the words of Christ? for sure the
Lord Would have all to be saved: And have you no Gospel for Blacks? is not the
Gospel to be preached to all Nations and peoples? and are not the Blacks of
some Nations and people? did not Christ dye for the Blacks and the Taunies, as
well as for the Whites? and was not his Blood shed for all men, and are they
not men? And must Christ be preached to some people and not to some others? And
as for designs we deny, disown and abhor all such things: We desire that all
may live Peaceable under the Governors of their respective Families, and under
the Government of the Island and nations wherein and amongst whom they are; for
we are so taught of Christ, namely, to seek the good of all men, and peace with
all men. And we would have all men to be saved, as well as our selves. And we
Covet none of the People's Money, neither Gold nor Silver, as you Priests do;
but as freely we have received, so freely we give: For we do not come into a
Parish, to make the People and their goods our Freehold for term of life, as
yours do; and pretend and make the people believe, that we do watch for their
souls as yo^ Priests do, and yet never intend it; but watch when the harvest
comes that you may share in their goods and estates that God has blessed them
with increase: And as you know they do in other places, watch when the Sows
pig, that they may have the Tithe Pig, and the Tithe Eggs, etc. and watch when
the Turkies and Hens hatch, that they may have some of the increase of the
Chickins, and Goglings, etc. this is that they watch for; And watch when the
Corn is ripe, and the cocks of hay are made, this is that they Gape for, gain
from their quarter as of old, for their goods, and not for the good of their
souls; which if a man give them not, nor put into their Mouths, then they
prepare war against them. This, I suppose, is well known here, and these are
the Souls they watch for; and where they find a bigger Benefice, thither do
they go; for such things it is they watch for; and so, as the old Proverb is,
No Penny, no Pater Noster: For what Pater Noster have any had of you Priests,
without a Penny in this Island? Have you not thrown away that Command of
Christ, who said, Freely you have received, freely give? And have you not come
short of the Example of Paul, who says, Acts 20.33. I have Coveted no man's
Silver, or Gold, or Apparel (Yea, your selves know, That these Hands have
ministered to my Necessities, and to them that were with me) that so he might be
an Example to all that followed him. So that I say, Such have not followed the
Apostle in this particular: But is not Demas your Example, who forsook the
Truth, and embraced the things of this present World? And the False Prophets
and Shepherds, are they not your Example, who seek for their Gain from their
Quarter, and Horsleech like, think they can never have enough; read Isa. 56.
throughout: And seek for the Wool and the Fleece, and to make a Prey of the
Sheep; read Ezekiel. 34. cap. And preach for filthy Lucre, for Hire, for the Love
of Money, that mind Earthly things, who are Enemies to the Cross of Christ
(...) these are the things that such watch for, and (...) ^ple's Souls; and to
get and present these outward things into their Barns and Houses, and not to
present their Souls to God, as the True Ministers did and do: and if any one
would not give them their Hire, though they never set them a work, they would
Persecute them, and Cry Out for the Magistrate's Power to assist them: So that
are not such as these next a kin to the Order of Begging Friars; for do they
not Beg of the Magistrate, for their Tithes or Maintenance to be paid them? And
was not the first rise of Tithes from the Pope? who raised up and instituted
that Order of Friar Mendicants, since Christ's and the Apostles days, who
said, Freely you have received, freely give. So read Jer. 5. and Tim. and
Titus, and Mich. 3. and see whose Steps such Ministers walk in; and Mat. 23.
throughout; and see if you do not walk in the Steps of them, against whom
Christ pronounces such Heavy, Dizmal and Dreadful Woes.

THE END.

