THE SUM OF SUCH PARTICULARS AS ARE Charged against George Fox in the Mittimus
by which he stands Committed; Together with George Fox his answer to the said
Particulars.
We Thomas Cummings and Thomas Green being sent by George Fox ( now Prisoner in
the Common Goal at Lancaster) to the Jailer to desire a Copy of his Mittimus,
that he might know wherefore he was committed; the Jailer answered that be
could not give a Copy of it, for another had been Fined for the like, but he
gave us liberty to read it over, wherein was charged against him (to the best
of our remembrance) to this effect, That he was a Person suspected to be a
Disturber of the Peace of this Nation, a Common Enemy to his Majesty our Lord
the King, a chief upholder of the Quakers Sect, and that he, together with
others of his Phanatique Opion, have of late endeavored to raise Insurrections
in this part of the Country, to the imbruing the Nation in Blood, with command
to the Jailer to keep him in safe custody, till he should be released by Order
from the King and Parliament.

I Am a Prisoner at Lancaster by Justice Porter; a Copy of the Mittimus I
cannot get, but such like expressions are found in it, which are untruths.
First, That I am suspected to be a disturber of the Nations Peace, unto the
King an Enemy, and that I and others of my company should raise Insurrections
to imbrew the Nation in Blood. All which is false, and I do deny every word in
it to be Truth, for through the Nation have I been tried of these things
formerly. In the days of Oliver I was taken up as raising Arms against him,
which was false, and I was taken up to London, and kept Prisoner till I was
brought before him, and when things were cleared, and I denied drawing a Carnal
Weapon against him, or any man upon the Earth, for my Weapons are Spiritual,
that takes away the occasion of War, and which leads into Peace. And after that
Major Seily in Cornwall who sent me to Prison, when I was brought before the
Judge, said, that I took him aside, and told him I could raise four thousand
men in one hour, which was false and a lie (and was then proved so to him) for
such words I never spoke to him; I never was found in any Plots, nor ever took
any Engagement; nor never took any Oath, nor never learned War Postures, and so
these things which come from Major Porter, who is lately appointed to be a
Justice, who has wanted Power formerly to Exercise his Cruelty against us,
which is but the Wickedness of the Old Enemy; for the peace of this Nation I
am not a disturber of, but seeks the peace of it, and of all men, and stands
for all Nations and men's peace upon the earth; And wish that all Nations and
Men knew my Innocence in these things. And whereas Major Porter says, I am a
Common Enemy to the King, that is false, for my love is to him and all men
(though Enemies to God, and to themselves and to me) and I can say it is of the
Lord that he is come in to bring down many unrighteously set up, of which I had
a sight before he came. Its much that he should say I am an Enemy to the King,
for which I have no Reason, he having done nothing against me; yet I have been
Imprisoned and Persecuted this eleven or twelve years, by them that have been
against the Kings Father, which was the Party that Porter was made a Major by,
and bore Arms for, and not them that were for the King; I was never a Common
Enemy to the King, nor to any man's Person upon the Earth, but I am in the Love
that fulfills the Law, and thinks no evil, but Loves Enemies, and would have
the King saved, and come to the knowledge of the Truth, and brought into the
Fear of the Lord, and to receive his Wisdom from above, by which all things
were Made and Created, that with that Wisdom he may Order all things to the
Glory of God by whom it was Created. I ow nothing to the King but Love, nor to
any man, and Love does not kill but fufill the Law.

And Major Porter further says, That he together with others of his Phanatique
Opinion, has of late endeavored to raise Insurrections in this part of the
Country, to the imbrewing this Nation in Blood. This is false, to these things
I am as a Child, and knows nothing of them, and never learned the postures of
War, and my Weapons are Spiritual, and not Carnal, and with Carnal Weapons I
do not fight; and my Kingdom is not of this World says Christ, and those that
follows Christ in the Spirit, the Captain of their Salvation denies the Carnal
Weapons, who denies drawing any Carnal VVeapon against the King or the
Parliament, or any man upon the Earth, yet we have these Lies and Slanders laid
upon us who are come to the end of the Law, who loves Enemies and wrestles not
with Flesh and Blood, and am in that which saves men's lives, and I witness
against all Murtherous plots, and all such as would imbrew the Nation in Blood,
which be not in Peace, and I am innocent of all these things and knows them
not, and it is not in my Heart to have any man's Life destroyed upon the Earth.

And Major Porter told me, he imprisoned me to prevent a danger, because times
were troublesome, and we had meetings by hundreds. I told him we had kept our
Meetings in most parts of the Nation to wait upon the Lord, but neither he nor
any man in the Nation had any occasion to suspect me of any Tumultuous
Meetings, or to raise any Tumult in the Nation, who am a peaceable man, and
desires the peace and good of all, and had not gone from the place where I was
apprehended, passing two Miles in a Month since I came into the Country.

And Major Porter proffered the Oath of Allegiance to me to take, and I told
him I never took Oath in my life of one side or the other, against or for my
self, but did abide in Christ's Doctrine, who says, Swear not at all, and did
suffer in that; And all people that have but the least soberness in them may
see this to be but Malice and Envy of Major Porter in imprisoning and
persecuting of me, and laying such things to my charge (up and down the
Country) which I am innocent of as a child, and so I am ordered to be kept
prisoner till I be delivered by order from the King or Parliament.

These things are to be delivered to you to be laid before you to consider of
before you act any thing, that you may in the wisdom of the Lord consider the
intent and end of men's spirits, least you act the thing that will bring the
hand of the Lord against you, and upon you as many have done before you that
have been in Authority, whom God has overthrown, whom we trust unto, and fear,
and cry unto day and night, who has heard us, and does hear us, and will hear
us, and avenge our cause, for much innocent blood has been shed, and many has
been persecuted to death, by such as have been in Authority before you, who
turned against the just, whom the Lord has vomitted out; Therefore consider
with your selves, for now you have the day.

From the Innocent, a Sufferer in Bonds, and close prisoner in Lancaster
Castle, called George Fox.

THE END.

