The State of the Birth Temporal and Spiritual AND THE Duty and State OF A
Child, Youth, Young Men, Aged-Men and Fathers in the Truth.

Also, showing That Children are the Heritage of the Lord, and that he has a
Glory in them.

By George Fox.

Children are the Heritage of the Lord, and he has a Glory in them, and they
are to be trained up in the fear of the Lord. That your Children may be blessed
after you, Prove. 20.7. And may be blessed with thee, Psalm. 147.13. for blessed
is every one that fears the Lord, Psalm. 128.1. LONDON: Printed and Sold by
Andrew Soul at the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane, near Shoreditch, 1683.

The State of the Birth Temporal and Spiritual, etc.
THe State and duty of a Child, Youth and Young Men, and the State of Aged-men
and Fathers, it is the Lord that does bring to the birth. David Says, My
Substance was not hid from thee when I was made in secret, etc. Thine Eyes did
see my Substance, yes being unperfect, and in thy book all my members were
written, which in continuance were fashioned, when as yet there were none of
them; for thou possessedst my reins when thou coveredst me in my Mothers Womb.
Here you may see Gods infinite and All-seeing Eye, Work and Providence; the
Darkness nor secrets hide not from God, but the Night shines to him as the
day, and the Darkness and the Light are alike to his All-seeing Eye, who made
both; and therefore all are to Consider how God has made them, and fashioned
them, Psalm. 139.

And the Lord says in Isa. 66. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to
bring forth, says the Lord? Shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the Womb,
says my God? So here you may see, it is the Lord that fashions in the Womb,
and brings it forth, both the Natural birth and the Spiritual birth, and opens
the womb and shuts the womb, both the womb of the Morning, and of Eternity, and
of the Natural.

And the Lord said to Jeremiah in the 1st. chapter, Before I formed thee in the
belly, I knew thee, and before thou came out of the womb, I sanctified thee,
etc. And so, here all may see, and consider, and know themselves to be the
great Work of God, that when God that forms and fashions you in the Womb, and
brings to a birth, and has brought you forth, that you may choose the Good and
forsake the Evil, that you may remember and consider, that you are the Work of
the Lord, and remember your Creator, and who has fashioned you and formed you
in the womb, and has brought you to a birth, and has brought you forth to
Fear, and Serve, and Worship, and Honor him that has made thee, and brought
thee forth; For as Solomon says in Eccless. 12. Remember now thy Creator in
the days of thy youth, whilst the Evil days come not, or before the Evil days
do come. Now this is the duty of all Youth, let them be Males or Females, to
remember their Creator, and let him not go out of their memory, so that they
may be fitted to stand in the Evil days when they come; for when they grow up
to be young men, then the evil days will appear, in which they may be tempted
to Adultery, Fornication, Drunkenness, Theft, Murder, Lying, Consening,
Cheating, Unrighteousness, Vngodlyness, Lightness, Wantonness, Pleasures, and
other Evils, by which they may forget their Creator by going into such Evils,
when they are tempted to such things; the Evil days are come to try Youth, for
they that yield unto such Evils beforementioned, forget their Creator, and
forsake him; for Solomon says, Train up a Child in the Way he should go, and
when he is Old he will not depart from it, Prove. 22.6. Here is the duty of
Parents, and the duty of Children, which is to be practiced and followed. Now
here is the duty of Youth, To remember his Creator in the days of his Youth,
before the Evil days come; But what must we do when we come to be young men?
What is their means and duty? David declares in Psalm. 119.9. Wherewith shall a
young man cleanse his ways? By taking heed to thy word, etc. Thy Word I have
hid in my Heart, and do meditate on thy Word, that I might not sin against
thee. So now, for all Young men to take heed to the Word of God in their
hearts, and hide it in their hearts, and to meditate upon it; for the Word is
called a Hammer, and a Sword, and a Fire, to hammer down, and cut down, and
burn up that which would defile them in their Ways, Words and Hearts.

And the Apostle says, That the Word of Faith which he preached, was in their
hearts and mouths, to obey it, and to do it, Romans 10. And the engrafted Word,
was able to save their souls, James says. And Peter says, That they were to
feed upon the sincere Milk of the Word; but they which are hearers of the Word,
and not doers of the Word, deceive their own souls. And Christ said to his
Disciples, Now ye are clean through the Word, etc. So this Word will keep the
Ways and the Hearts of Young men clean, the Word of God, which is a Sanctifying
Word, a Reconciling Word; and Christ told the Jews, His Word had no place in
them.

And again, he told the unclean Jews, Ye have not his Word (to wit, the Word of
God) abiding in you. So these Jews made a great Profession of the Scriptures,
but had not the Word of God abiding in them, John 5. then they were not like to
be made clean by it.

And Christ said, Sanctify them through thy Word; thy Word is Truth (to wit,
his Disciples and Believers.) And again, Christ says, I have given them thy
Word, and they have k^pt thy Word, (namely, his Disciples) to wit, the Word of
God, John 17.

Now here you may see the Disciples kept the Word of God, which was the means
to keep their Hearts, Ways and Words clean; but the Jews, Priests, Scribes and
Pharis^es, that made a great outward Profession of the Scriptures, whose ways
were unclean, and mouths full of foul unclean words against Christ; Christ
told them, That the word of God did not abide in them: And therefore, though
they had the Scriptures, and made an outward Profession of them, like the
Professors of our Age, and others, who go from the means, the Word of God in
their hearts, to keep their Ways and Lips clean, and to Sanctify them.
Therefore they plead for a Body of Death to the ^rave, and a Purgatory when
they are dead, who live in a profession of the Letter without the Word.

And John says, I have written unto you young men, because you are Strong, and
the Word of God abides in you; and you have overcome the wicked one, viz. the
Devil, by the Word of God, which was before the Devil was. So here you may see,
what is the means by which the Young men's ways are cleansed and sanctified, and
what makes them strong, and to overcome the wicked One, the Word of God abiding
in them; and therefore every Young man, and all Young people are to love and
obey, and do the Word of God, by which their Ways, Words and Hearts, and all
may be kept clean; for the Word of God is a Hammer and a Sword, to hammer down
and cut down the Devil and his works, and a Fire to burn them up: So it is the
Word of Power, the Word of Wisdom, the Word of Reconciliation, and the Word of
Patience, by which they overcome.

Now concerning Aged men or Fathers in the Truth, John says, I have written
unto you Fathers, because you have known him that is from the beginning, to
wit, Christ Jesus: And John writes as a Father himself, who says, That which
was from the beginning, which we have heard, which we have seen with our Eyes,
which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled of the Word of Life; for
the L^fe was manifested, and we have seen it, and bear witness, and show unto
you, that Eternal Life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us 1
John 1^1, 2.

So, here you may see, not only John in his Epistle, but also John in his
Evangelist, declares Christ in the beginning, and says, In the beginning was
the Word, and the Word was with God, and God was the Word; the same was in the
beginning with God, and all things were made by him, and without him was not
any thing made that was made; and the Word, was made flesh, and dwelt among us,
and we beheld his Glory, the Glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full
of Grace and Truth, John 1.

Now, here you may see how John writes as a Father, that knew Christ in the
beginning; and he writes to the Fathers that knew Christ in the beginning. So
the Fathers knew him in the Glory that he had with the Father before the World
began, and that all things were made by Jesus Christ: So they knew him as he
was God, the Word; they knew Chrst, as he was Man. The Word was made Flesh,
etc. they knew Christ in the Promises and in the Prophecyes, they knew him in
the Figures, Types and Shadows made under the Law, they knew him, and of whom
he was to be conceived, to wit, the Virgin; they knew him in his Birth, Life,
Doctrine, Preaching, Miracles, Sufferings, Death, Grave, Resurrection and
Ascension into the Glory with the Father and at his right hand; yea, the Glory
which he had with the Father before the World began. So the Fathers have known
[Mark] have known Christ from the beginning, 1 John 2.14.

So, here you may see the State of the Birth Temporal and Spiritual, and the
duty and State of Youth, the duty and State of Young men and Young people, and
the State of Fathers in the Truth.

Kingston, the 10th Month, 1682. G. F.

DAvid says, Lo Children are an Heritage of the Lord, and the fruit of the
Womb is his reward; as Arrows are in the hands of a mighty man, so are Children
of Youth: Happy is the man that has his Quiver full of them, they shall not be
ashamed, but they shall speak with the Enemy in the Gate, Psalm. 127.

Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, that walks in his Ways, for thou
shall eat the Labor of thine hands: Happy shall thou be, and it shall be well
with thee, and thy Wife shall be as a fruitful Vine by the side of thine House;
thy Children like Olive Plants round about thy Table: Behold, that thus shall
the man be blessed that fears the Lord, yea, thou shall see thy Childrens
Children, and the Lord shall bless thee out of Sion, Psalm. 128.

Now, all you that do Murmur against people that have many Children, and do
complain and say, That they do fill your Towns, Cities and Countries with
Children; and many times you that do so complain have few or no Children; and
you are afraid that they should come to want, and that then you must be fain to
relieve their necessities. And what then? What you do give to the poor, you
lend to the Lord, and he will repay it to you again, if they cannot; and this
wanting mind is for want of Faith, and of God, who gives the increase of all,
and is Rich unto all that call upon him; and the Lord would have you to take
notice, that Children are the Heritage of the Lord. And so, what you do give to
the breeding, and nursing, and relieving of Children, you do it to the Heritage
of the Lord, and the Lord has many adopted Sons, that he has taken to be his,
that have received the adoption of Sons, Gal. 4. And what if you that have no
Children should do so? It was but a Cross to the grumbling or murmuring self,
which many times have no Children, and are discontent with the poor that have
many; and do think much either to adopt them to your selves, and are afraid
that they will be chargeable to you, namely, the Children that are the Heritage
of the Lord; but the Lord that does increase the Children which are his
Heritage, he will take care for his Heritage, whether that murmuring
complaining mind against Poor People of having so many Children, you relieving
them or no, he will take care for his Heritage, blessed be his Name forever,
Amen.

Sing unto God, sing Praises to his Name, exalt him that rides upon the
Heavens by his Name ^AH; and rejoice before him, a Father of the Fatherless,
and a Judge of the Widow; God is in his holy habitation, Psalm. 68. The Sayings
of old, which we have heard, and known, and our Fathers have told us, we will
not hide them from their Children, showing to the Generations to come the
Praise of the Lord, Psalm. 78. And David says, Let thy Work appear unto thy
Servants, and thy Glory unto their Children, and let the beauty of the Lord be
upon us, etc. Psalm. 90.16.

See what heavenly Love he had to Children, Gods Heritage; so they are not of
David's mind, who think that they shall be undone by maintaining of poor
Peoples Children, which Children are Gods Heritage; and David says, Ye are
blessed of the Lord, which made Heaven and Earth; the Heavens, even the
Heavens, are the Lords, but the Earth he has given to the Children of Men,
Psalm. 115.16. And the Lord says to David, If thy Children will keep my
Covenant and my Testimony, that I shall teach them, their Children also shall
sit upon thy Throne for evermore, Psalm. 132.12. Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,
praise thy God, O Sion; for he has Strengthened the Bars of thy Gates, he has
blessed thy Children with thee. These are they that keep in the Covenant, and
the Testimony that God does give them that have his blessings.

And you may see the tenderness of Joseph to his Father, and to his Children,
and to his Childrens Children in the days of the Famine, when they were in
Egypt, Genesis 45. Here he was tender of Children, which are the Heritage of the
Lord; and the Lord said, Thrice in the Year shall all your men Children appear
before the Lord God of Israel, Exodus 34.23. Here you may see the care the Lord
takes, that Children, which are his Heritage, should be acquainted with him,
which ought to be the duty of all Parents. And the Lord said, Take heed to thy
self, and keep thy Soul diligently, lest thou forget the things which thine
Eyes have seen, lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy Life; but
teach thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons, especially in the day that thou stoodst
before the Lord thy God in Horeb, when the Lord said unto me, ( viz. Moses)
Gather me the people, and I will make them hear my words, that they may learn
to fear me all the days that they shall live upon the Earth, and that they may
teach their Children. Here you may see the Care of the Lord, both to his
People, and how they are commanded to teach their Children; yea, their Sons
Sons; the Children that are Gods Heritage might be Instructed by their Parents
the things of God; Deuteronomy. 4.10.

And in the Old Testament the Lord God said, Thou shall do no manner of work on
the Sabbath day, thou nor thy Son, nor thy Daughter, nor thy Man Servant, nor
the Stranger which is within thy Gate; they were all to rest on the Sabbath
day, in the old Covenant; so were all the Believers, whether they be Masters or
Mistrisses, Sons, Daughters, or Strangers, to rest in Christ in the New
Covenant; for he that believes is entered into Christ the rest, and ceased
from his own works, as God did from his. Know therefore this day, and consider
in thine heart (Mark) in thine heart, that the Lord he is God in Heaven above,
and upon the Earth beneath, there is none else; so with the Spirit of God ye
may know him in Heaven, and know him in Earth, and thou shall keep therefore
his Statutes and his Commandments, which I command you this day, that it may go
well with thee, and thy Children after thee, that thou may prolong thy days
upon the Earth. Here again you may see what care the Lord takes for his People
and his Children, Deuteronomy. 39, 40.

And you may see in Nehemiah 5.5. how they complained of them and their
Children, their Sons and Daughters were brought into Bondage because of going
astray from the Lords Commandments: And in Nehamiah 9. how they had rebelled
against the good Spirit of the Lord, that he gave them to instruct them. And is
not this the cause now that Christians are in Confusion? for rebelling against
Gods good Spirit, though they may make an outward Profession of the New
Testament, as the Jews did of the Old.

Thus says the Lord in Isa. 49. Behold! I lift up my hand to the Gentiles, and
set up my Standard to the People; And is not this Standard Christ? And they
shall bring their Sons in their Arms, and thy Daughters shall be carried upon
their shoulders: And where do they carry their Children and their Sons and
Daughters? is it not to Christ, who teaches them and blesses them? The Lord
says, I will make all my Mountains a high way, and my high way shall be
exalted. And is not God and Christ's Highway his Light? that is, the path of
the Just, and Highway to the Perfect day; And Kings shall be Nursing-Fathers,
and Queens Nursing-Mothers, and And that will be a happy day when they come to
nurse Christ's Chickens, Doves, Lambs, Babes and little Children; Then
Persecution will cease for not taking Oaths, and Swearing, and for not Paying
of Tithes, and for not going to the Worship at Temples made with hands; and
then Christ's Doctrine will be obeyed; who says, Swear not at all, but let your
Yea be Yea, and your Nay, Nay, etc. And then every one that has received
freely from Christ, will give it freely, as he commands; then every one will
know their Bodies are the Temples of the Living God; and then every one will
walk in the Light, Gods Highway, which shall be exalted; and in it they have
fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Christ, the Son of God cleanses
you from all sin.

And Isaiah 54. All thy Children shall be taught of the Lord; and great shall
be the peace of thy Children that are taught of the Lord: in Righteousness
shall they be established, that are taught of the Lord: Thou shall be far from
oppression, thou shall not fear; and from Terror, for it shall not come nigh
thee that art taught of the Lord: Behold, they shall gather, but not by me; so
then it is by the Wicked Spirit; whosoever shall gather together against thee,
shall fall for thy sake, that are taught of the Lord; no weapon that is formed
against thee shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against thee in
Judgment; thou shall condemn, etc. This is the Heritage of the Servants of the
Lord, and the Righteousness is of me, says the Lord. And in 1 Kings 2.4. David
says, That the Lord may confirm his Word, which he spoke concerning me,
saying, If thy Children take heed to their way to walk before me in Truth with
all their hearts, and with all their Souls, there shall not fail thee, said he,
a man to sit on the Throne of Israel: See that thy Children take heed to their
way, and walk before me, as thou have walked before me (to wit, David.)

Now here, you may see, that not walking in the Truth before the Lord with all
their Souls, and their hearts, made such Confusion among the Jews, and likewise
makes, or has made such confusion among the Christians, for not walking before
God in the Truth, kept them off the Throne of Israel; and therefore Children
are to succeed their Fathers Path in the Truth, if they will be accepted and
exalted by the Lord, and if they do enjoy the Comfort of the Lord as their
Fathers did with the Promise, as in 1 Kings 2.4. and 8.25.

In Micah 2. he d^clareth against their Oppression, and reproves the Jews for
their Injustice and Idolatry, and says, The Women of my people have you cast
out from their houses, from the Children have ye taken away my Glory (to wit)
the Lords; for Children are the Lords heritage, and he has a glory in them.

And Jo^^ declares sundry Judgments of God, and exhorts the Jews to observe
them, and bids the Old men tell their Children of it, and let your Children
tell their Children, and let their Children tell another Generation: See what
care was here, and watches set up, that Childrens Children might escape the
Judgments of God by their walking in the Truth, and keeping to the Lord with
all their hearts; and Children which were the Lords Heritage, were to warn and
tell one another to walk in the fear and way of the Lord with their whole
hearts, that he may have his Glory in them, and their Children, which are his
Heritage.

And you may see in Luke 19.43, 44. the Judgments that Christ pronounces upon
the Jews and their Children, that disobeyed God, and did not believe in him,
and Christ says, While ye have the Light, believe in the Light, that ye may
become Ch^ldren of the Light: Here Christ encourages his believers with a new
Name, that believe in the Light (to wit) Children of the Light, John 12.36. And
Paul says to the believers in the Light, Ye were sometimes in Darkness (that
was, when they did not believe in the Light) but now are ye Light in the Lord,
walk as Children of the Light, Ephess. 5.8. Ye are all the Children of the
Light, and the Children of the day; we are not of the Night, nor of Darkness. 1
These. 5.5. These are the Believers in the Light, as Christ Commands.

And John says, My little Children (1 John 2.2.) these thing I write unto you
that you sin not, etc. and if any man sins, we have an advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ, the righteous, etc. [but they must take heed of sinning
willfully] I write to you little Children, because your Sins are forgiven you,
for his Name sake [here is a comfort to Christ's little Children.] Again, John
says to little Children, It is the Last Time, and as ye have heard that
Antichrist should come, even now are many Antichrists, whereby we know that it
is the Last time; they went out from us (to wit, the Antichrists) but they were
not of us (to wit, the elect members of the Church of Christ) for if they had
been of us, they would no doubt have continued with us; but they went out from
us that they might be made manifest that they were not all of us. And these
things I have written unto you concerning them that seduce you, but the
Anointing, which ye have received of him, abides in you, and you need not that
any man teach you, but as the same Anointing teaches you of all things, and is
Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in him:
And now, little Children, abide in him (to wit, Christ, etc.) Whosoever abides
in him, sins not; whosoever sins, has not seen him, neither known him:
Little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is
Righteous, even as he is Righteous; He that commits sin is of the Devil; for
the Devil sinned from the beginning; for this purpose the Son of God was made
manifest, that he might destroy the works of the Devil. Whosoever is born of
God; does not commit sin, for his seed remains in him, and he cannot sin
because he is born of God; In this the Children of God are manifest from the
Children of the Devil, which is a clear manifestation and distinction.

Again, John says, My little Children, Let not us love in Word, neither in
Tongue, but in Deed and in Truth, hereby we know that we are of the Truth, and
shall assure our hearts before him: This is a good trial, little Children, 1
John 3. Ye are of God, little Children, and ye have overcome them (to wit,
Antichrist, and the World and its God) because greater is he that is in you,
than he that is in the World; (a good reason to little Children, the greater to
overcome the lesser) and every one that Loves him, (to wit, God that begot
him) loves him also that is begotten of him; by this we know that we love the
Children of God, when we love God and keep his Commandments; this is a good
trial, and a manifestation, 1 John. 5.

And Paul says to the Galations in chap. 4. My little Children, of whom I
travel in birth again, until Christ be formed in you* This is a good Travel,
which should be every true Christians, and not to travel to persecute Christ,
where he is formed within his people; for that is a bad travel. And John writes
to the elect Lady and her Children, whom he loved in the Truth; etc. and said,
I rejoiced greatly that I found thy Children walking in the Truth, etc. this is
cause of great Joy to see Gods Children walk in the Truth. Again, he writes;
Gaius, whom I love in the Truth (said he) I have no greater Joy then to hear
that thy Children walk in the Truth; 3 Epist. of John. Now this is a concern
for all true Christians, that they and their Children walk in the Truth, that
they may have the Joy and comfort of them in the Lord and his Truth, in this
World and in the World to come. And every one that names the name of Jesus, let
them depart from Iniquity, and not live in Iniquity, and to see that their
Children do depart from Iniquity; for David says, The Lord hates all Workers
of Iniquity, and says, Depart from me, all ye workers of Iniquity; and
therefore train up all your Children in the nurture and fear of the Lord, that
both you and they may all serve God in his Spirit, in your Creation and
Generation; for Children are the Heritage of the Lord, and ought to be trained
up in his fear, and serve and worship him in his Spirit and Truth; for it is
the Lord that gives the increase of them all, it is he that brings to the
Birth, and gives power to bring forth, whether it be Natural or Spiritual, and
the Life, and Breath, and the Souls of all is in his hand and Power.

I was by him, as one brought up with him, I was daily his delight, rejoicing
always before him, rejoicing in the habitable parts of the Earth; and my
delights are with the Sons of men: Now therefore hearken unto me, O ye
Children; for blessed are they which keep my Ways; hear instruction, be wise,
and refuse it not, Prove. 8. Here you may see the Eternity of Wisdom, which is
to be desired for the blessing it brings.

The Apostle Paul tells the Corinthians, That I have espoused you one Husband,
that I may present you as a Chaste Virgin to Christ, 2 Cor. 11.2.

THE END.

