THE HYPOCRITES FAST and FEAST not GOD's HOLY DAY. HAT-HONOUR to MEN MAN's
INSTITUTION, not GOD's. Presented to the View and Consideration of Papistical
and Protestant Time servers and Day-observers, VVill-worshippers and
Persecutors; and Satisfaction of the moderate Inquirer.

By George Fox.

Printed in the year, 1677.

THE HYPOCRITES FAST and FEAST not GOD's HOLY DAY.
HAT-HONOUR to MEN MAN's INSTITUTION, not GOD's.
WHere did ever Christ or his Apostles command any Believers, or Christians to
observe Holy Days, or Feast days; and let us see where it is written in the
Scriptures of the New Testament, in the four Evangelists, or the Epistles, or
the Revelations? That ever Christ or his Apostles gave the Christians any such
Command, that they should observe the time called Christmas, or a day for
Christ's Birth? Or that they should observe the time called Easter, or
Whitesuntide, or Peter's, or Paul's, or Mark's, or Luke's days, or any other
Saints days?

Now: you that profess your selves the Reformed Churches from the Papists, Jews
and Heathen, and the Scriptures to be your Rule, and are Professors of the New
Covenant, where do you prove out of the Scriptures of the new Testament that
the Apostles and any of the primitive Church practiced any such thing or that
Christ or his Apostles gave any such Command to the Churches, that they should
practice and observe any such days let us see where this Command is written.

For did not the Apostle say, in his Epistle to the Galatians' in chapter 4.
But now after ye have known God, or rather are known of God, how turn ye again
to the weak and Beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again to be in Bondage?
Ye observe Days, and Months and Times, and Years; I am afraid of you, lest I
have bestowed upon you Labor in vain. And in Gal. 3. it is said, O foolish
Galatians, who has bewitched you, that you should not obey the Truth? etc. And
in Gal. 5. the Apostle exhorts them, To stand fast in the Liberty* wherewith
Christ has made them free; and moreover said, Be not entangled again with the
Yoke of Bondage.

Now does not this manifest that here were some Teachers, that were drawing the
Church of the Galatians into these Beggarly Elements, and bringing them again
into Bondage in observing of Days, Months, Times and Years; for it was the
Apostles work to bring them out of those Bondages and Beggarly Elements, and
therefore when they were going back again into observing Days, and Months,
and Times and Years, he was afraid that he had bestowed his Labor upon them in
vain: and be exhorts them to stand fast in the Liberty; wherewith Christ Jesus
has made them free and not to be entangled again with the Yoke of Bondage;
AGAIN signifies that they had been once entangled with that Yoke of Bondage,
and Beggarly Elements.

But O, how are all that are called Christians (since the Apostles days) gone
again under this Yoke of Bondage, and these beggarly Elements, in observing
Days, Times, Months and Years, let their Practice declare! Nay do not both
Papists and Protestants force People by Laws to observe Days, and Months, and
Times? etc. And therefore is not the Apostles Labor and Travel bestowed upon
Christendom in vain, which was to bring People from under such beggarly
Elements, and that Yoke of Bondage, which the Law did require, to stand fast in
the Liberty, wherewith Christ has made them free, and not to be entangled
again with the Yoke of Bondage. So it was and is Christ that has made, and does
make his People free from these things, in the Apostles days, and now: And had
all Christendom kept in this Freedom, they had kept from under this Yoke of
Bondage: And therefore they who are redeemed, are to stand fast in the Liberty,
wherewith Christ has made them free: And this Liberty which all true
Christians are to stand fast in, they are made free by Christ, and not by man;
for man without the Spirit and Mind of Christ seeks to force and compel Christ's
Followers, and such as he has made free from the Yoke of Bondage to the
outward things that the law commanded, and to the observing of Days, and
Months, and Times, Fasts and Feasts, and Years, such weak and beggarly
Elements, them that know God, or are known of God and Christ, He has made them
free, and they are to stand fast in their liberty, and not come under, not be
entangled with the Yoke of Bondage in such things again; for they that are in
such things, and would force others to them, are gone from that which gives
them the Knowledge of God, and have not stood fast in the liberty, wherewith
Christ makes free.

Concerning Prayer.
First, We do not read that ever Christ or his Apostles did compel any to pray
or fast, and make a law to strain the Goods of such as would not observe days
to fast and pray with them; but Christ taug^t them how they should pray, and be
distinct from the Hypocrites, and Christ's words are as follows; When thou
prayest thou shall not be as the Hypocrites are, for they love to stand praying
in the Synagegues, and in the Corners of the Streets, that they may be seen of
men, etc. But when thou prayest enter into thy Closet, and when thou have shut
thy Poor, pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father that sees in
secret, will reward thee openly; but when you pray use not vain Repetitions as
the Heathen do; for they think that they shall be heard for their much
speaking: Be not ye therefore l^ke unto them; for your Father knows what
things ye have need of before ye ask him, etc. So as the Apostles and Saints
did, so do we pray in secret, and we pray in public, etc as the Spirit gives
utterance, which helps our Infirmities, as it did the Apostles and true
Christians; and after this manner we pray for our selves. and we pray for all
men, both high and low.

Concerning Fasting.
Christ says, Moreover, when ye fast be not as the Hypocrites, of a sad
Countenance; for they disfigure their Faces that they may appear unto men to
fast; but when thou fasts anoint thy Head, and wash thy Face, that thou appear
not unto men to fast, but unto thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father
which sees in secret shall reward thee openly.

And likewise you may see in Isaiah 58. what the true Fast is the Lord
requires, where it is said to the Prophet, Cry aloud and spare not, lift up thy
Voice like a Trumpet, and show my People their Transgression, and the House of
Israel their Sins, yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my Ways, as a
Nation that did Righteousness, and forsook not the Ordinance of their God; they
ask of me the Ordinance of Justice they take Delight in approaching to God.

Wherefore have we fasted say they, and thou see not? Wherefore have we
afflicted our souls, and thou take no Knowledge?

Behold, in the Day of your Fast ye find Pleasure, and exact all your labors.

Behold, ye fast for Sirife and Debate, and to smite with the fist of
Wickedniss, ye shall not fas^ as ye do this day, to make your voices be heard
on high: Is it such a Fast that I have chosen? a Day for a man t^ ^ffi^^ his
Soul? Is it to how down his Head as a Bulrush, and to spread S^^ck^loth and
Ashes under him? Will thou call this a Fast* and an acceptable Day to the Lord?

Is not this the Fast that I have chosen (says the Lord) To loose the Bands of
Wickedness, to undo the heavy Burdens and to let the oppressed go free, and
that you break every Yoke?

So this Fast that the Lord requires, is not to lay yokes and oppress, and lay
heavy Burdens, and to make fast the Bands of Wickedness; but to loose and break
such things.

And further concerning the true Fast the Lord requires: Is it not to deal thy
Bread to the hungry, and that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy
House? When thou see the naked that thou cover him, and that thou hide not
thy self from thine own flesh? (Do you keep this true Fast?) Then shall the
Light break forth as the Morning, and thine Health shall spring forth speedily,
and thy Righteousness shall go before thee, the Glory of the Lord shall be thy
Rere-ward. -- Then shall thou call and the Lord shall answer, thou shall cry,
and he shall say, Here I am: If thou take away from the midst of thee the Yoke,
the putting forth of the finger, and speaking Vanity. And if thou draw out thy
^oul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul, then shall thy Light rise
in Obscurity, and thy Darkness be as the Noonday, and the Lord shall guide
thee continually, and satisfy thy Soul in Drought, and make fat thy bones, and
thou shall be like a watered garden, and like a Spring of Water, whose Waters
fail not, etc.

Now here is the true Fast the Lord requires of his People, and they that
observe this Fast, the Lord says, When they call he will answer; and you may
see what Glorious and Happy Comforts they do receive from the Lord, that keep
this true Fast; but such as fast for Strife and Debate, and smite with the
fists of Wickedness, to make their Voice: to be heard on high, and afflict
their Souls for a Day, and bow down their head like a Bulrush and looses not
the Bands of Wickedness, and does not undo every heavy Burden, and break off
every yoke, and let the oppressed go free, and does not deal his Bread to the
hungry, and cloth the naked, and bring the poor to his house, but hides himself
from his own Flesh and clothes not the naked, such Fasts and Fasters the Lord
dot^ not accept, neither has he chosen them; but these appear to men with
their disfigured faces in bowing down their heads like a Bulrush for a Day like
the Hypocrites to fast, as Christ speaks of in Mat. 6. And is it not the
Command of Christ, that in their Fast they should not appear unto men to fast?
And now you that would force us to shut up our Shops on fasting days, or for a
Day, does not this Fast appear unto men? and is not this the Fast that the Lord
says in Isaiah, he does not accept; for he says, Is this the Fast that I have
chosen, a Day for a man to afflict his Soul, and bow down his Head as a
Bulrush? etc. Will thou call this a Fast, and an acceptable Day to the Lord?
Isa. 58.

And therefore all God's People are to keep the true Fast of the Lord, from
Debate and Strife, and the Fist of Wickedness, and that Fast that breaks the
Bands of Wickedness, and undoes every heavy Purden, and breaks every yo^e, and
lers the oppressed go free, and deals Bread to the hungry, and clothes the
naked, and brings the poor that are cast out, to his own House: So every one
that keeps this true Fast, their Health shall grow, and when they call, the
Lord will hear them, and the Lord will be their Guide continually, and satisfy
their Souls in Drought, and make their Bones fat, and shall be like a watered
garden, and like a Spring of Water whose Waters fail not.

Now you that keep not this true Fast, when you ca^l upon the Lord on your own
Fasting-Dayes, does the Lord answer you, and say, Here I am? (Does the Lord
guide you continually? And are your Bones made fat by him, and your Souls
satisfied in Drought? And are you like a watered Garden, and like a Spring,
whose waters fail not? But you who keep not this true Fast, do you not want
these Waters which fail not? So your Souls are not satisfied in Drought, but
your Bones are lean, and you hear not the Voice of the Lord, who says, Here I
am; and so you loose the Heritage of Jacob, and ride not upon the High Places
there, but come under.

And therefore every mau and woman, shut your hearts against all manner of Evil
whatsoever, and trade not with Babylon's Merchants of Confusion, but keep the
supernatural Day of Christ, that is sprung from on high, that is by believing
and walking in the Light of Christ, and being grafted into him; and this will
bring you to the true Fast, and from feeding upon any Evil, and to the true
praying in the Spirit, as Christ and the Apostles have taught, which Fruits of
the Spirit is Love, etc. which Birth of the Spirit is not a persecuting Firth;
but he that is born of the Flesh, will persecute him that is born of the
Spirit; because he will not follow the Birth of the Flesh, with its weak,
beggarly Elements, that entangle with its yoke of Bondage, and its observing
days, months, times and years, which the Birth of the Spirit is to stand fast
against, in the Liberty wherewith Christ has made it free.

And do you not know the very Turks they keep their Sabbath on the sixth day,
and the Jews on the seventh day, and the Christians meet together on the first
day of the Week, and that day which the Turks keep, the Jews and Christians
shops are open, and that day the Jews keep, the Turks and Christians shops are
open; and the first days the Christians keep, both Jews and Turks, shops are
open: And so the Turk does not force the Jews nor Christians to shut up their
shops on their meeting-dayes, but lets them have their Liberty in the Turks
Counrry.

And where do you read, that ever the Turks forced any Christians to observe
any of their Holy Days Fasts or Feasts? and if not, should not Christians be
beyond the Turks, in giving Liberty to all tender Conscience to serve God,
seeing Christ and the Ap stles command not, nor for^e People to observe
Holy Days, or Times, or Monet's, or years, but should pray always in the
Spirit, and fast always from Strife and Debate, and from all manner of Sin and
Evil; and that will keep down the Fist of Wickedness, and the Bond of Iniquity
etc.

And why should not People that be of tender Consciences have their Liberty to
exercise their Consciences toward God? that they may have a good Conscience
always toward God and man, and to that which God requires, and to do unto all
men as they would have them do unto them, and to love their Neighbors as
themselves: And seeing there is so many debauched and seared Consciences* as
with a hot Iron have their Liberty in their loose Lives and Conversations, and
in their loose words, whose Tongues are at liberty to swear and curse, and
their Spirits are at liberty in Drunkenness and Uncleanness; so let the
Magistrates look and see how this evil Conscience has its liberty, to be
exercised in all manner of Evil Things, yea all Christendom over, which is a
great Shame and Dishonor to God, Christ, Christianity and Humanity: And
therefore, why should not God's People have their liberty to exercise their
good and tender Consciences toward God and man; for the Mystery of Faith,
which Christ Jesus is the author and finisher of, is held in a pure Conscience;
and should not the Work of the Christian Magistrates be to encourage the
Exercise of this pure Conscience toward God and man, and to discourage the
exercise of this evil Conscience, which dishonours God, Christ and true
Christianity? If not, how are they a Praise to them that do well, and a Terror
to evildoers.

And now concerning The not Putting off Hats, for which many that go under the
Name of Christians have taken Offense at us, because we could not put off our
Ha^s and bow down to them, for which we find no such command from Christ or his
Apostles, but rather to the contrary; for Christ says,

I receive not Honor of man: M^rk, Job. 5.41, 42.
he did not receive Honor of men. And further Christ says, How can ye
believe, which recive Hon^ur one of another, and seek not the Honor that comes
from God only.

Now Christ declares it to be a Mark of an Unbeliever, that seeks Honor one of
another, and seeks not that Honor that comes from God only: And is not the
putt^ng off the Hat, and bowing with it, an Honor of men, which they seek one
of another, and are offended if they have it not? Nay, have they not fined,
persecuted and imprisoned some, because they did not put off their Ha^s to
them? Nay, do not the very Turks mock at the Christians in their Proverb,
saying: That the Christians spend most of their time in showing their bare
Heaths one to another? ^ut should not the Christians be beyond the Turks, that
bear that noble Name of Chistian, in seeking Honor one of another, and
perse^uting them that will not give it them? when all true believing Christians
should seek the Honor that comes from God only, which is the Du^y of all true
Believers in Christ Jesus; for he would not receive Hon^ur of men: And he that
believes on the Son of God has Ever lasting Life, and he that believe^h not
the Son of God, shall not see Life, but the Wrath of God abi^eth upon him.

And now, is not the Turks Proverb a Reproach to the Christians? who say, that
The Christians spend most of their time in showing their bare Heads one to
another; Nay have you not fined and imprisoned many, because that they could
not put of their Hats to you, and show you their bare Heads? Nay in many of
your courts they shall not have Right and Justice; and its hard for
Apprentices, in some Places, to get their Liberty and Freedom in Cities or
States, though they have truly served their Time, and are honest and civil men,
unless they will put off their hats and show their bare Heads: And have not
some of you made a law against such as will not put off their hats, and show
you their bare heads, yea and to compel and force them to do it, and fine such
as do not, Two Guilders, as at Lansmeer in Holland; in Waterland? And is not
this the Honor that you seek one of another? Did not the Pharisees and Jews do
the same.

Now as for your saying, the Apostle commands To honor all men, and such as
rule well are worthy of double Honor. Now if this Honoring all men, were to
put off the Hat to all men, and show all men their bare Heads, then this
command you break your selves; for you do not do this to all men generally; and
if they that rule well must have Double Hat-honour, then they must put off
their Hats twicej and show their bare Heads twice. Now if this Hat-Honour and
showing the bare Head be an Invention of man, and not from God, and ye cannot
prove it by Scripture, and yet you say it is your Rule, then you act beside the
Rule, and compel People to act conrrary to your Rule; for where did ever the
Prophets, Christ or the Apostles command any such thing? let us see a Command,
a Practice or an Example for it.

Nebuchadnezzar who was a Persecutor, and cast the Three Chidren of Israel into
the fire, With their Hose, Cloaks and Hats, we do not read that he was offended
at them, because they did not p^t off their Hats, and show him their bare
Heads, but because they would not bow to his Image. And is it not in the Margin
of the Pible, where it is said, Honor all men, it is said, Have all men in
Esr^em; then they that rule well are worthy of Double E^te^^^; and this Esteem
must be truly in the Heart, without any Envy, Malice or Hatred, as all men are
the Workmanship of God, they are to be esteemed in the Heart, wi h the Spirit
of God; and they that Rule wellare worthy of double Esteem; and here is true
Honor from the Heart, both to God and man his Workmanship; for People may put
off their Hats, and show their bare heads one to another, and put off their
Hats, and show their bare Heads twice to the Officers and to the Megistrates,
and be full of Envy, and Malice, and Hatred, and Murder in their Hearts one
against another, and give them that Honor as you callit, and yet speak or wish
bad things of them, when they have turned their Backs on them, which the true
Honor or Esteem in the Heart to all men as they are God's Creation, is without
any evil Wish or Thought in the Heart to all men, and to them that rule well,
which have the double Esteem; whom God has placed over People, there is no
Evil in the Hear, that gives this Respect, Esteem or Honor, and brings them to
love their Neighbor as themselves, and to do unto all men, as they would have
them do unto them, in that they esteem all men, and they have a Double Esteem
to them that rule well; and that is beyond all the Honor of putting off the
Hats once to the Commonality, and twice to them that are worthy of Double
Honor (as you call it) We would ask the Christians that practice the Hat
Honor, and show one another the bare Head, who did invent the single Honor
and double Honor, that they should put off their Hats one to another, and show
one another their bare Heads, seeing they cannot prove that ever Christ or his
Apostles did command or pra^tise any such thing.

Now concerning Persecuting, imprisoning and Banishing God's People, in whom
Christ is manifest, and dwells in their ^earts; does not Christ t^ll you, that
you imprison him? and then, do not you banish him, and persecu^e him ou^ of
your Cities and Corporations? And how can you ente^ into his Kingdom, and ^are
a Share of his Kingdom, though you may profess him in words? And d^d not they
g^^^t^ verlasting Punishment that did not visit Christ in prison, then what
will become of you that do banish and imprison him, when e he is manifest in his
Members, not suffer them to meet together to enjoy him amongst them, according
to his Promise.

And therefore you that will not let Christ reign in his People, and have his
Liberty, and exercise his Offices in them, in your Cities and Countries, you
will not have your Liberty in Heaven; and you that will not let Christ reign in
your Hearts, nor suffer him to reign in his Peoples here upon the Earth, in
this World in your Kingdoms; you will not reign with Christ in Heaven in his
Kingdom, nor in the World without End.

And so you that banish the Truth out of your Cities o^ Countries, or his
People for its sake, you do banish the Truth and Christ out of your Hearts,
from ruling there, and exercising his Kingly, Priestly and Prophetical Office
in his People, and so you your selves are not the Temples of God: And then,
when you have banished Christ and his Truth out of your own Hearts, then you do
banish such in whom he rules out of your States and Countries, and then see
what Judgments the Lord does bring upon you, when you are left to your selves;
yea, Fears and Truobles, and one Judgment after another comes upon you, that
you are even silled with them; but the banished and Sufferers for Truth and
Christ's Sake, have a peaceable Habitation in the Truth, which the Devil is out
of and cannot get in, which Habitation w ll out-last all the Habitations of the
Wicked and Persecutors, though they be never so full of Words without Life and
Truth; for the Life and the Truth will out-last all airy Notions, and Christ
the Lamb and patient Seed will overcome the Devourer and un patient Seed; and
they that have the Garments, the Righteousness of Christ, which is the fine
Linen, it will out-last all the Rags and Inventions of men; for Christ says
to his Learners, Be of good cheer, I have ov rcome the World, the Perscu^ting
World: And so he said unto his Disciples, Marvel not if the World bate you; for
it hated me before you

And therefore let all that profess themselves Christians lay away Persecution
about Religion, Churches or Worship, Fasting or Praying-dayes; for you have no
command from Christ and his Apostles to persecute any: For Christ who is the
King of kings, and Lord of lords when they called him a Deceiver, and
blasphemed him, and said he had a Devil, he did not persecute any of them for
it, nor force or compel any to hear or believe him, nor the Ap^stles aft^r him,
but he said to them that would have been plucking up the T^res, Let the Tares
and the Wheat grow together until the Harvest. So you have no Command from
Christ or his Apostles, to Persecute, Imprison or Banish, or Spoil the Goods of
any, for matter of pure Conscience, and Religion, Worship, Faith and Church, in
the Gospel Times.

George Fox.
Amsterdam, in Holland the 15th of the 7th Month, 1677.
THE END.

