Something in ANSWER to a LAW Lately made at the first Sessions of the General
Court held at Boston in New England May the 28th, 1679. And published by their
Order, Edw, Rawson Secretary
The Title of the LAW, viz. Meeting Houses not to be Erected without License,
etc.
Answer. What would the New England Governors and Priests have done to Christ
and his Twelve and Seventy Disciples, if they had been in their day?

For does not Christ say, (to encourage Meetings) Where Two or Three are
gathered together in my Name* I will be in the midst of them; to exercise his
Offices in the midst of them, as he was a Prophet and a Priest, etc.

And did Christ or his Disciples go to get License of the Freemen of every
Town where they came to meet in? or did they go to the Jews for License to meet
in such and such Houses? or must they not meet except they had Licenced Houses
from the Jews, or Herod, or Pontius Pilate the Governor?

Now you say, That the Scripture is your Rule; then what Scripture have you,
that the true Christians must not meet, and have Meeting Houses on their own
Ground, except they have a License from you? Have you not this from the Papists
or Heathen? And would not you have plucked down the Houses and Places where
Christ and his Disciples met, or take away and sell and demolish them, if you
had been in their day? and do not you manifest your selves to be more like Jews
and Heathens than Christians?

Now New England's Presbyterians Law is as follows.

FOrasmuch as it has too often happened, that through Differences arising in
several Towns, and on other Pretenses, there have been Attempts by some Persons
to erect Meeting Houses, although on pretense of the Public Worship of God on
the Lord's Day, yet thereby laying a Foundation (if not for Schism and
Sedition, for Error and Heresy) for perpetuating Divisions, and weakening such
Places where they dwell in the comfortable support of the Ministry, orderly
settled amongst them. For Prevention whereof for the future, it is ordered by
this Court, and the Authority thereof, That no Person whatsoever, without the
Consent of the Freemen of the Town where they live, first orderly had, and
obtained at a public Meeting assembled for that end, and License of the County
Court, or in Defect of such Consent, and License by the special Order of the
General Court, shall erect or make use of any House, as abovesaid: And in case
any Person or Persons shall be convicted of transgressing this Law, every such
House or Houses, wherein such Persons shall so meet more than Three Times, with
the Land where such House or Houses stand, and all private Ways tending
thereto, shall be Forfeited to the Use of the County, and disposed of by the
County Treasurer, by Sale or Demolishing, as the Court that gave Judgment in
the case shall order.

Answ. So hereby we understand, that none shall erect any House to keep them
from the Wind and Weather to Worship God in, without your License and
Authority. But will your Court or Freemen grant any License in these things to
the People of God in Scorn called Quakers, if they desire it?

And did ever Christ and his Disciples or Apostles Take, Sell or Demolish
Meeting Houses, and the Ground and Highways of any other People, that were
not of their Religion, because they had not a License from them? Prove this by
Scripture, who say, It is your Rule, and call your selves Christians? Or has
the King of Old England given you any such Authority in your Patent to make
Forfeiture and Sale of, and to Demolish the Meeting Houses, Lands and
Highways of God's People, that they have erected to Worship him in? We do not
believe that your Patent will justify you in this thing; but contrary to it is
your Practice, and contrary to the Scriptures of the New Testament also.

But as Solomon says, When the Righteous are in Authority, the People Rejoice;
but when the Wicked bear Rule, the Righteous Mourn, Prove. 29.2.

But are not you in the steps of the Gentiles, with your Authority? Read Mat.
20.25. and Luke 22.25.

And did not the Elders, and the Chief Priests, and the Great Professing Jews,
ask Christ, By What Authority he did those things? and Who gave him that
Authority? showing that he had not that Authority from them. And did not he and
his Disciples often meet together? Mat. 21.24. and Mark 11.28.

And in Luke 20. The Chief Priests, and Scribes, and the Elders came unto
Jesus, when he was preaching the Gospel and teaching the People, saying, Tell
us by what Authority thou do these things: or Who is he that gave thee this
Authority? And Christ asked them, Whether the Baptism of John was from Heaven,
or of Men? And they reasoned with themselves, saying, If we shall say, from
Heaven, he will say, Why then believed you him not? And if we say of Men, all
people will stone us; for they did believe that John was a Prophet; and so they
answered, They could not tell: And so it seems the Chief Priests, and Scribes,
and Elders did not believe in John's Testimony for Christ, though many others
did.

And also, did not then the Chief Priests send Scribs to watch Christ, to take
hold of his words, that so they might deliver him to the Power and Authority of
the Governor?

And had not Saul Authority from the Chief Priests, to bind all that called on
the Name of Jesus? and did not he breath out Threatenings and Slaughter against
the Disciples of Christ Jesus, and went to the High Priests, and desired of
them Letters to go to Damascus to the Synagogues, that if he found any of this
Way, whether Men or Women, he might bring them bound to Jerusalem? And have not
you gone on with your Authority in the Way of Saul, breathing out your
Threatenings and Slaughtering the Disciples of Christ, and bringing them bound
to your Courts at Boston, instead of Jerusalem, and Prisoned and Hanged them on
your Gallows? But is not your Authority and Commission larger than Readiness? for
though Saul breathed out Threaning and Slaughter against the true Christians,
yet we do not read that they gave him such Authority, as to make Sale of, and
Demolish their Meeting-places, and Land, and Ways to them; read Acts 9, and 26.

And does not Paul, when he was Converted, call this Madness in himself? then
is it not the same in you, and not Soberness? Acts 26.

And did not the Dragon give the Beast Power, and his Seat and great Authority?
and did not he cause all, both Small and Great, to worship him; and them that
would not worship the Image of the Beast, should be Killed? And all did worship
him, but those whose Names were written in the Lamb's Book of Life, slain from
the Foundation of the World, Revelat. 13.

And so now try your selves, whether you are not like the Beast, and Jews, and
Papists, and worse than some of the Heathen Romans, who let Paul preach the
Kingdom of God, and those things that concerned the Lord Jesus, in his own
Hired House, and no man forbidding him, and received all that came in unto him
(to wit, his Hired House.) So Paul had a Meeting Place in his Hired House, for
all that came unto him. But the New England Priests and Governors, it seems,
would have forbidden him, if they had been in that day; and not let (...) an
House to Hire, for Paul to preach Christ in; no more than you will now let the
People of God called Quakers have Meeting Houses, and Ways unto them.

And was not the Church in Philemon's House? so was not his House a
Meeting Place? see in Philemon.

And does not Paul say in Col. 4.15. Salute the Brethren which are in Laodicea,
and Nymphos, and the Church which is in his House? Had they not a Meeting Place
then in his House to worship God in?

And Priscilla and Aquilla the Church was in their House, Romans 16. and had they
not there a Meeting Place then in Priscilla's House to worship God in?

And the Apostle Paul says in 1 Cor. 14. When the Church is met together in
one Place. Now though the Church did meet together in one Place, or in a House,
yet the Church is built upon Christ the Rock, which the Gates of Hell cannot
prevail against, as in Matthew. 16.

So it is not like for the New England Magistrates and Priests for them to
prevail against this Rock, nor the Church that is built upon it; neither can
they sell this Highway of Light and Righteousness that leads to it.

But what if the New England Governors and Priests had lived in the days of
Philemon, and Priscilla, and Aquilla, and the Romans, and the Corinthians, who
kept the true primitive Christian Meetings in their Houses, would not the Horn
of their Law have pushed their Houses down, and thrown them out, and have made
Forfeiture and Sale of, and Demolished the Houses, Lands and Highways to
them, and yet professed themselves Christians, and the Scripture their Rule
herein? Oh! that ever men should make a Profession of God, and Christ, and
Christianity, and yet Themselves, who did flee in the time of Persecution for
the Liberty of their Consciences, do persecute others for their tender
Consciences, that cannot bow to their Image, that they have set up in the
Wilderness of America.

And as for the Differences arising in Towns, and on other Pretenses, as you
say, there have been Attempts by some Persons to erect new Meeting Houses, etc.

Answ. Now have not your Governors, and Priests and Elders been the Cause of
the Differences? and is not every one to be fully persuaded in their own Hearts
and Minds? For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin.

And by what Law of Old England have you Power to take peoples Lands,
Highways and Houses from them, and make them Forfeit, Sell and Demolish them,
if that you do own the Laws of England, which are to preserve people in their
Houses, Lands and Properties. But your Laws will take them from people, and
Sell and Demolish them, with their Lands and Highwayes, because people worship
God in them really in Spirit and in Truth, which the Devil is out of; this is
more than Pretense: And because they cannot own nor join with you Persecuting
Rulers and Priests in your pretended Worships, no more than the three Children
could join with Nebuchadnezzar's. For if that persecuting spirit in the Priests
and Rulers of New England can worship God with it, that do Whip, and Hang, and
Burn in the Hand, and Banish upon pain of Death, and Cut Off Ears, and Spoil
the Goods of the Servants of Christ; and now to make Forfeiture and Sale of,
and to Demolish their Meeting Houses, Lands and Ways to them: If this
persecuting Spirit be a Worshipper of God, then Pharaoh, and Nebuchadnezzar,
and Herod, and the Beast and Whore were Worshippers of God; and the Chief
Priests and Jews that Crucified Christ, and Saul with his Authority and License
from the High Priests to persecute, were Worshippers of God. But Paul will tell
you, whilst he did such things, he was a Mad Man; and so your Madness has been
known herein, and not your Moderation and Sobriety.

And the Truth (which we have received, profess and practice) lays no
Foundation for Error, nor Heresy, nor Schism, nor Sedition, nor for
Perpetuating Divisions, nor Weakening the Places where they dwell in the
comfortable Support of the Ministry settled amongst them (as you say.) For
there is no other Foundation to be laid, but what is laid already (to wit,
Christ Jesus) who was the Foundation of the Prophets and Apostles: And all the
Believers in the Light, as Christ commands, build upon him, the Foundation
which the spirit of Schism, and Error, and Heresy, and Seducing cannot build
upon. But the preaching of Christ and his Gospel disquieted Diana's
Worshippers, as now it does you. And the Jews Priests and Elders, Scribes and
Pharisees were disquieted; yea, the very Birth of Christ made such an Uproar in
Jerusalem, where was the highest outward Profession and Worship in the World.
And also Herod gathered the Wise Men and Priests together, to know where Christ
should be born; and they said, At Bethlehem; and then Herod slew the Young
Children for his sake.

And did not you the Herod's of New England, Whip and Banish, and after HANG
four Servants of Christ, when he was manifested in his people in New England,
Herod-like?

And so, has not the Forming of Christ in his People made the New England
Magistrates, and Priests and Professors all of an Uproar; and that by your Law
now, the people of God shall neither have Land nor Houses to meet together to
worship God in his Holy Spirit and Truth, who cannot live under your
persecuting murdering Priests spirit? For Christ says, Such as destroy Men's
Lives, though it be even their Lives who would not receive him, they do not
know what Spirit they are of themselves. And therefore, how can we trust our
Bodies, Souls and Spirits in the Hands of such Uncomfortable Mischievous
Ministers? For they preach War, and Bloodshed, and Persecution; and that is not
the Gospel of Peace: And the Wars, and Strivings, and Fightings arise from your
own Lusts, and not from the Truth, nor Gospel of Peace. For would you think it
well, if the King should send over some Bishops, and set up his own Religion
among you, which he judges is better than yours, and make a Law, that you must
all come and hear the Common Prayer; if not, you must he Hanged on the Gallows,
as you did the Quakers, and have your Ears cut, and branded with a Hot Iron,
and have your Bodies (both of Men and Women) stripped to the Waste, and Whipped
until your Bodies are made like a Jelly, and your Women's Paps cloven in the
midst with whipping, and your Goods spoiled, and Houses taken from you and
forfeited, and Land, and Houses and Ways all sold, and given to the use of the
Country? what would you say to this? Have not you served the King's Subjects
so, only for their Tenderness of Conscience, you that pretend Liberty of
Conscience? And this was never the practice of true Christians, nor the
Apostles, nor Ministers, nor Messengers of Christ Jesus. And so the Strife is
from that inwardly Ravening Spirit, like Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, and Lust in
your selves, from whence arises your War, who will not let peaceable People
meet to worship God in Spirit and in Truth, as Christ has commanded.

For it is not the Work of you Herodian Caesar's to prescribe God a Worship: For
Christ has set up a Worship above sixteen hundred years since. But God be
thanked, that your Beasts Horn reaches no farther than New England; for if it
did, it would soon pull down our Meeting Houses in England, and other
Meeting Houses also, that are contrary to you, in all the Kings Dominions, and
make their Houses forfeited, and sell them, and the Land and Ways too. And
though you say the price of them must be given to the Country; but is it not
very likely, that the Beast after he had pushed them down with his Horn, would
swallow down the price of all?

And did not Ananias the High Priest tell Felix, That Paul was a Pestilent
Fellow, and a Mover of Sedition among all the Jews throughout all the World,
and a Leader of the Sect of the Nazarenes, Acts 24.

And so are not you found in the very same Language and Spirit, against the
Life of Christianity, and such as walk in it.

And did not the Jews ask Paul, What he thought of that Sect, to wit, of the
Christians? and they said, They knew it was every where spoken against, Acts 28.

And so we know, it is not only spoken against now (by you that are of the
Birth of the Flesh) but they are persecuted that are born and led of the
Spirit, and walk in Christ the New and Living Way.

And does not the Apostle call Strife, Wrath, Sedition and Heresy the Works of
the Flesh, with Envyings, Murders and Revellings; and they that do such things
should not inherit the Kingdom of God? Galat. 5.

And have not these Fruits of Error, and Heresy, and Sedition, and Division
you speak of, been found in you, with your Wrath, Strife, Envy, Murders and
Revilings, which is a Work of your Flesh, and not a Work of the Spirit of God?
as witness your envious Reviling and Murdering of the Servants of God, whom you
^^^nged.

For when it was asked Broadstreet, one of your New England Rulers, By what Law
he Hanged the King's Subjects and Servants of Christ? He said, By the Law that
they put Jesuits to Death in England. And farther, he was asked, Whether he did
believe they were Jesuits? And he answered, Nay. And he was asked, Whether he
had a Hand in Hanging them? He said, Yes: and from that time we could not get a
sight of him, but like a Wild Beast that had worryed the Doves and Lambs of
Christ, hid himself in his Burrows.

And are not you them that seduce people with vour fleshly Minds, and preach
Peace to the Birth of Flesh, to which there is no Peace, and not to the Birth
of Spirit, but war against it; and one builds a Wall, and another daubs it with
Untempored Mortar; but when the Storm, and the Overflowing Shour, and the
Hailstones of God's Fury shall fall upon your Wall, it will destroy it, Ezekiel.
13. where you may read and see how he marks you out.

And as Solomon says, The Righteous is more excellent than his Neighbor; but
the Way of the Wicked seduces them, Prove. 12.26. Examine your selves, if you be
not in that Way.

And did not the Heathen look upon Jerusalem and the Jews to be a City and a
People of Sedition? Ezra 4.

And so was not God's People always branded with such Calumnies, and
persecuted, as you have done in New England, by the Birth of the Flesh, that
persecutes them that are born of the Spirit.

And did not Paul confess to Felix, when Ananias the High Priest and the Jews
accused him, That after the Way which they (to wit, the High Priests and
Elders, and professing Jews) called Heresy, so did he worship the God of his
Fathers, believing all things that are written in the Law and the Prophets,
etc. and herein did he exercise himself always, to have a good Conscience,
void of Offense both toward God and toward Men, Acts 24.

And so can the People of God called Quakers say now concerning the Persecuting
Priests and Governors of New England.

And in 1 Pet. 2. there you may read of the Damnable Heresies of the Covetous
False Teachers, who with feigned words made Merchandise of people, which denied
the Lord that bought them, which went in the Error of Balaam, who loved the
Wages of Unrighteousness. And was not Balaam hired to prophecy against Israel,
and to Curse them? And are not all your Priests hired? Read Numb. 13. and Deuteronomy.
23.

And so have not your Teachers turned from the Command of Christ? who says,
Freely you have received, freely give.

And do not you deny the Lord that has bought you in your Lives and Practices,
though you confess him in words? Christ, who has given himself a Ransom for
all, and tasted Death for every man; and says, He came not to destroy men's
Lives, but to save them: But you destroy the Lives of them that Christ dyed
for: Here do not you manifest your selves to be in this Heresy, and pernicious
Ways? And are not your Teachers such as covet after Money, and have erred from
the Faith, etc. which Faith the Apostles were in, which coveted no man's
Silver, nor Gold nor Apparel? And are not you all erred from this True
Christian, Catholic Faith, who have made Laws to Banish, Hang and Whip, Spoil
Goods, and take away the People of Gods Meeting-places to make Merchandise of
their Houses and Lands, and Highways to them?

And the Apostle says, A man that is an Heretic after the first and second
Admonition reject. Here the Apostle does not say, Whip him, and Banish him, and
Hang him, and pluck down their Meeting Houses, and sell them, and their Land
and Ways, though he was an Heretic: But such you have not proved us, the
People of God called Quakers to be; but have made a great Noise (like a great
hollow Cask that will hold no Water) about Error and Heresy, Schism and
Sedition; but have not defined what any of these things are, nor wherein they
are guilty of these things, whose Meeting Houses you make Laws to forfeit,
pluck down, sell and demolish, with the Land and Highways to them belonging.

And you may also read your Error in 2 Pet. 2.17, 18, 19. and in Jude 11. such
as went under the Name of Christians, like you, but out of the Faith and Love
of God: For is not your way Cain's, who kill about Religion? and in Corah's,
that gainsay it? Now where did ever Abraham, Isaac and Jacob kill any because
they would not be of their Religion, and pluck down their Meeting Houses, and
make them forfeited, and sell them, and the Ground and Highways to them?

And where did ever Christ (who is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, who sent
his Disciples into all Nations to preach the Gospel to every Creature under
Heaven) give any command to his Apostles and Disciples, that them that would
not receive their Gospel some of them they should Hang, and others they should
cut off their Ears, and others they should Whip and Imprison, and spoil their
Goods, and brand them with an Hot Iron, and some they should Banish upon pain
of Death pluck down their Meeting Houses, and make them forfeited and sell and
demolish them, and the Land and High ways to them? Now show us a Law from
Christ and his Apostles for this your practice; or else acknowledge your selves
to be no Christians: And the Scriptures of the New Testament are not your Rule,
neither have you an Example for this your Practice in all the Scriptures of
Truth. And will not ye for a piece of Bread transgress the Command of Christ,
who says, Freely you have received, freely give? Prove. 28.21. And do not your
Teachers eat the Bread of Idleness? But the Apostle says, They that will not
work, shall not eat.

And do not you Workers of Iniquity go about to eat up God's People as you eat
Bread, and devour them? as David says, Psalm. 14. and Psalm. 53. And have not
you Gnashed upon them with your Teeth? And do not you think but the Lord will
break the Long Teeth of the Ungodly, Psalm. 58. and Psalm. 35. And have not your
Teeth been like Spears and Arrows? Psalm. 57. But see what Christ says in Mat.
13. how in the end the Wicked shall wail and gnash their Teeth, who in their
Lifetime have gnashed them against God's People, and haled them before their
Judgment-seats, as Christ foretold his Disciples. And have you not condemned
and killed the Just, which have not resisted you, and baled and drawn them
before your Judgment-seats? as in Jam. 5. And did not James pronounce Woe
against such? And have not you lifted up the Fists of Wickedness, and smote
them with it? And does not Isaiah testify against such Fists and Fasters? Isa.
48. And does not the Apostle exhort the Christians to pray, and lift up holy
hands without Wrath and Doubting? 1 Timothy 2. And are not you Breakers of this
Command with your unholy hands and fists of wickedness? who in your Wrath have
Hanged and Whipped, and now would make Forfeiture, pluck down, sell and
demolish the Meeting Houses of the People of God, with their Land and Ways to
them? And does not John say in the Revelations, The Beast with his Horns was
like a Leopard: and don't you know the Nature of that spotted Beast? And his
Feet were like a Bear: and has not your Bears Paw, with your Claws been felt
and seen? the Marks are seen on the Backs of the Righteous. And has not this
Beast a Mouth like a Lion to devour? and the Dragon the Destroyer gives unto
this Beast his destroying power, and the Dragons Seat and great Authority,
which is to destroy, and not to save. And has not he given you in New England
this Seat and Authority to destroy the Lambs of Christ, and to make war against
him and his Followers? but the Lamb will overcome, Rev. 13, and 17. And your
Faith is not the true saving Faith that works by Love, but a destroying: nor
your Gospel is not the true Gospel of Peace and Glad-tidings, who destroy men's
Lives, but a destroying one: and your Religion is not the true Religion, which
is, to visit the Fatherless and Widows, etc. who destroy men's Lives, and make
Fatherless and Widows: and your Church is not the true Church, but the Whore,
who drinks the Saints Blood, which the true Church of Christ never did: and
your Worship is not the true Worship of God, in his holy Spirit and Truth, but
from the foul unclean spirit, that is out of Truth, which destroys men in
their Estates and Lives, and not save them: and your Way is not the true and
living Way, Christ Jesus, who never hanged nor spoiled the Goods of any that
could not follow him, as you have done to such as could not follow you: and
your Foundation is not the true Foundation, who have hanged, and branded, and
whipped, and spoiled the Goods of them that would not build upon it, which Christ
and his Apostles never did, though he was a Lamb slain from the Foundation of
the World, and at last crucified by your Generation.

And what a dreadful Fear are you in of your False Religion, and Faith, and
Way, and Worship? for what Fines have you laid on Masters of Ships that bring
over the Servants of the Lord, and Fines upon them that do receive them, and
Fines on them that do bring or receive a Book, as your Laws declare! Oh, what a
pitiful, fearful, evil Spirit you are of! And the Apostle says, Quench not the
Spirit: and why should you quench the Spirit in any? And he says, Despise not
Prophecy: and is not this despising of Prophecy, who will not suffer such to
come among you to prophecy? And how far from the Apostles Doctrine are you,
who says, Prove all things, and hold fast that which is good 1 These. 5. And
the Apostle John says, These things have I written unto you, concerning them
that seduce you; but the Anointing that you have received of him, abides in
you, and you need not that any man teach you, but as the same Anointing
teaches you of all things, and is Truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him. Now are not the New England Governors,
Priests and Elders these Seducers, that hang, banish, whip, prison, brand with
an hot Iron, spoil their Goods, make their Meeting Houses forfeited, and sell
and demolish their Houses and Lands and Ways to them, of such as cannot
forsake the Anointings Teachings within, according to the Apostle's Doctrine,
which Teachings of the Anointing within brings them to continue in the Son of
God, and in the Father, which Anointing they cannot forsake, to follow the
seducing spirit of you and your persecuting Priests, who have hanged some, and
branded some, and banished others, and whipped and spoiled their Goods; and now
made a Law, to forfeit their Meeting Houses, and Lands and ways to them. But
all these things cannot separate them from the Love of God, which they have in
Christ Jesus. And as the Saints have formerly said, Who shall separate us from
the Love of Christ? shall Tribulation, Distress, Persecution, Famine, Nakedness,
Peril or Sword? as it is written, For Christ's sake we are killed all the day
long; we are counted as Sheep for the Slaughter: and you Slaughterers, who have
your Slaughtering-place to slaughter and hang God's People in. But in all these
things we are more than Conquerors through Christ who has loved us. And the
Devil and his Angels, with all his Principallities and dark Powers, are not
able to separate and seduce God's People from Christ, and the Unction which
they have from him, by which they come to continue in the Son of God, and in
the Father, through which they feel the Love of God, by which they are kept
above the fear of man, and what he can do unto them, which Love bears and
endures all things, and envyes not. So blessed be God through Christ for this
Love, who has shed it abroad in his Peoples Hearts.

And the Lord forgive you all your Persecution of his People, and that you may
Repent, if it be his Will, who desires not your Destruction, but your
Salvation. G. F.
The 19th of the 7th Month, 1679.
Postscript.
AND whereas Joseph Shaddeck writes to William Croutch a Letter, dated the 30th
of the 4th month, 1679. That one John Higginson preached at Salem the 29th of
the 4th mon. 79. and in his Sermon said, That Fox, and Penn, and several others
of the Quakers, were now found out to be Jesuits, and had a great hand in
carrying on the Plot in England; and that the Wandering Quakers were the Cause
of stirring up the last bloody Wars by the Indians in these parts.

But these are all invented and forged Lies, as it is well known in England,
that are cast upon Fox and Penn; but Fox and Penn abhor their Slanders, and the
forged Lies which the said John Higginson preached at Salem for Gospel: It is
like he wanted something to make up his Hourglass. And those are also forged
Lies from a slanderous Mouth and Tongue, to say, That the Wandering Quakers were
the Cause of stirring up the bloody Wars by the Indians in New England. Nay,
these are the Wandering Stars, that forge these Lies, and cast up their Mire and
Dirt against the Innocent: For the very Records of the beginning of those Wars
give the New England Priests, with the Raisers of the Forgeries before, those
Wandering Stars, the Lie; and that they are Forgers of Lies against the Innocent
People of God called Quakers: For their very Innocent Principle, and the Nature
of their true Christianity, who are Partakers of the Divine Nature of Christ,
does abhor and deny such Practices and Plots of the Jesuits, of stirring up
Bloodshed and Wars. For, our Lord Jesus Christ came not to Destroy men's Lives,
but to Save them. So it is contrary to the Nature of Jesus Christ our Lord, and
contrary to the Nature of the true Christians, that receive him, as Fox and
Penn do; and such receive him whom the Priests of New England call [Wandring
Quakers] with their slanderous Tongues and Forgers of Lies, who make Lies their
Refuge, and are the Preachers of Lies to the People instead of the Gospel; and
we do believe, that the Magistrates, Priests and Agents of New England would
have had it so; and therefore endeavoring to make people believe Lies, that
they might be damned; and this is to stir up Wars: and it is the Devil's Wo^k
in them, who is their Father, and a Liar from the beginning, to stir them up to
Lies, Envy, Malice, Wrath and Evil-speaking against the Innocent. And
therefore, as Paul says to Timothy, Such Evil Men and Seducers as you shall
wax worse and worse, deceiving and being deceived, whose latter-end is worse
than your beginning; which are Wells without Water, and Clouds carried about
with Tempests, though you may speak great swelling words of Vanity; to whom is
reserved the mist of Darkness and Blackness forever. But the Proverb is upon
you, The Dog (the Biter) is turned again to his Vomit, and the Sow to the
wallowing in the Mire; who throw your stinking Vomit and silthy Mire upon the
Innocent People of God in scorn called Quakers: So you have eaten of the Fruit
of Lies, and are compassed about with them, as you may see in Hosea 10, and 11.
And a False Witness will utter Lies; a Deceitful Witness speaks Lies, as you
may see in Proverbs. And have you not bent your Tongues like Bows to utter
Lies, and taught your Tongues to speak Lies? Jer. 9. And have you not caused
the people to err by your Lies? Jer. 23. And a Lying Tongue is but for a
moment; and Lying Lips are an Abomination to the Lord, Prove. 12. And so have
not you like Ahab, sold your selves to work wickedness, as in 1 Kings 21.20. in
your Lying, and Slandering, and Persecuting the Servants of the Lord? and what
you cannot do with your Hands, you do it with your Tongues.

THE END.

