THE Royal Law of GOD REVIVED: Wherein You may see, That all Nations of Men may
keep in it a Royal Society; and by obeying the Principl^ of God in them, which
brings Men to do the Roya^ Law; and to do unto all men, as they would have al^
men to do unto them: which Royal Law of God answers that of God in every Man
and Woman in the whole World, which they transgressing, are judged by the Royal
Law of God, in doing that unto others, as they would not have others do unto
them, and they to be without natural Affections; which Royal Law brings all men
to have Natural Affections, and to do unto all men, as they would have them to
do unto them.

G. F^^.

Jam. 2.8. If ye fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall
Love thy Neighbor as thy self, ye do well. ^^t. 7.12. Whatsoever ye would that
men should do unto you, do ye even so to them. Printed in the Year, 1671/2

Who they are that break this Royal Law of God.

Them that Quench, Vex and grieve the good Spirit of God; and hate the Light of
Christ; and walk despightfully against the Spirit of Grace; and make Shipwreck
of Faith, and of a good Conscience.

And also, They are them that keep the Royal Law of God, that walk in the
Spirit of God, and in Faith, and a good Conscience; and love the Light, Christ,
who inlightens every man that comes into the World.

The Royal Law of God Revived, etc.
ALL People upon the Face of the whole Earth, both High and Low, Rich and Poor,
know that (as the Apostle Paul says, Acts 15.26.) God has made of one Blood
all Nations of Men, for to dwell on all the Face of the Earth. So all Men and
Women are of God's making, his Workmanship, and the Works of his Hands and
Creation; and he it is that gives Life and Breath unto all: And has determined
the Times before appointed, and the Bounds of their Habitations, says he.

And says Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.8. The Most High divided to the Nations their
Inheritance, when he separated the Sons of Adam, etc.

And the Psalmist acknowledges, Psa. 24.1. The Earth is the Lord's, and the
fullness thereof; the World, and they that dwell therein; which he has
distributed unto the Sons of Men.

And the Lord is called, The God of the Spirits of all Flesh, Number. 27.16. And
so says likewise the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.6. One God and Father of all, who is
above all, through all, and in you all.

Now seeing the Lord has made all Nations of Men and Women upon the Earth of
one Blood and Mould, to dwell upon the Face of the Earth; and that the Earth is
the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; and he gives the increase, and has
distributed unto the Sons and Daughters of Adam; What then is the matter, that
makes a Discord amongst all the Sons and Daughters of men, but the Devil (the
Cause of all Discord) who is out of Truth, and so leads them out of Unity with
God, and with one another; so that they cannot Commerce, Trade, and hold a
Correspondence and a Concord in Civil things of the Creation of the Earth:
seeing the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof: that all Nations of
Men cannot hold a Commerce, Unity and Concord (I say) in these outward things,
though they cannot agree in and about Matters of Religion and Worship, and
about their Teachings and Ways? What is the matter now, that they do not
agree; seeing there is no Discord nor Disagreement in the Way of the Lord,
which is Christ Jesus, the Heavenly Man, who is the Way to God the Father:
Neither is there any Disagreement in the Fellowship of the Spirit, nor in the
Worship, nor in the Spirit, nor in the Truth. And therefore are not all the
Disagreements and Discords throughout all the World about Religions, Worships
and Doctrines; about, I say, such as men have made, which are called National
Worships, National Ways, and National Religions, that are all the Works of
Men's hands? And there are such a Multitude of them in all the Nations of the
World, which hinders them from Civil Commerce, Civil Society of Natural
Affections, that ought to be amongst Mankind: For where these Natural
Affections, or Affections of Nature are not, they will destroy one another
about their Religions, Worships and Ways: and certainly such doings are not of
God, nor of Christ, who said to his Disciples, when they would have had Fire to
come down from Heaven, to consume them that would not receive him, That they
did not know what spirit they were of.

Therefore do all people that Persecute others for not receiving their
Doctrines, their Worships, their Ways, and Religions; yea; persecuting for not
receiving of Christ; they know not what Spirit they are of.

Now mark the tender Nature of Christ, Who, says he, came not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them. Therefore they that would have men's lives taken away
for Religion or not receiving of Christ, They have not the Affections of
Nature. 2d, They do not know what spirit they are of themselves. 3d, They have
not the Mind of Christ. 4th, No man will trust his Body, Soul or Spirit in the
hands of such, that do not know what spirit they are of themselves.

Have any of all these, that make Religions, VVayes and Worships, and Doctrines
of their own, any Affections to Nature, who will destroy people because they
will not conform to that Religion, Way and Worship that they have set up. As
now look over all the whole World, and all the Religions therein, and see and
consider, Who they are that have destroyed, burnt, and put to death such as
would not conform to the Religion, and Way and Worship, that they have made:
And have not these first been Truce-Brea^^^^^ to and with God, and then with
Man, and fallen from that Religion that is from above, and from his Religion,
his Worship, and Truth, his Way Christ Jesus; and then the Devil entered them,
who has led them to destroy one another about their Religions, VVayes, and
their Worships which they have set up, and were not set up by the Lord, but
forbidden by Christ (and says the Apostle, He is not worshipped with the
Worships of Men's Hands, Acts 17.24.) who is Lord over all, and would have all
Repent, and feel after him; and so to Repent as to change from their Worships,
and the Works of their own hands, the Religions, the Worships, and Ways that
they have made; and come to God by Christ Jesus, who is the Way to God; and so
through him receive that Religion that is from above; and so to worship God in
the Spirit and in the Truth.

And is there any Religion to be owned, or any Worship, from such which are
without Natural Affections? And is it not the Devil that makes Religions,
VVayes and Worships, and leads them to be so peevish about them, and in a
blind Zeal to contend so earnestly for them; which brings them from a civil
Commerce, and makes them incapable of a civil Society, and a Correspondency
amongst Mankind: And that spirit that has led them to make Religion, Worships
and VVayes, and to fall out when they have done, that Spirit has destroyed the
civil Society, the civil Commerce amongst Mankind almost over all the whole
World; that when they come into civil things, a civil Commerce, that tends to
a civil Society in Natural things, they fall out about the several natural
Worships, Religions and VVayes, which they have made, by which a peevish and
perverse spirit arises in a blind Zeal for the Works of their own Hands, so as
that they forget their Natural Affections, and fall upon destroying one another
about Religions; and so break all civil Society and Commerce amongst men; which
if there were but Natural Affections, it would carry them above that peevish
and perverse spirit, that draws them after their own Handy-works; whereas, I
say, if Natural Affections were but set over that, it would keep and preserve
the Bond of a civil Commerce, and civil Society with Mankind over the whole
Universe.

O! How short is all Mankind, both Christians, Jews, Turks, and all the rest,
of that Royal Law, which is, To do to all Men as they would have them do unto
them? If this Royal Law were duly kept, the true weight would be set up
amongst all Mankind in the whole world; and the true Measure, to measure every
man, and to weigh every man, and to weigh himself, and to measure himself, and
to measure others; and to do nothing to any Man or Woman, but as they would
have them do to them: This would keep up a Society in the whole World, that so
Men might Trade. Commerce, and hold Correspondence one with another amongst all
the Nations of men. And this is the Royal Law, in which all Mankind have their
Liberty, For all to do to others, as they would have others do unto them: And
here is Religion, which is above all religions that they have made with their
hands; and this will keep down that perverse spirit in all Mankind in the whole
world, if they keep and obey the Royal Law, which is, To do to all Men, as they
would have them do to them; then all Mankind would have their Liberty in this;
and in this no man will overreach, cousen, defraud nor oppress in any Bargain
and Merchandise whatsoever; for if he would not that they should do so to him,
then surely he will not do so to them.

So here then is Justice set up, and the Line of Righteousness, and the
Plummet; and every Nation, Country and Island might serve one another in this
Royal and Just Law; doing unto them as they would have others do to them, in
all things that are civil; that one Neighbour-country has not, or another
Country is destitute of, to serve one another with those things that are civil,
and natural, and outward: For the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof,
who gives the increase.

And all Nations of men are to use, and order, and dispose of these earthly
things, and the Fullness of the Earth, where the Lord has given the Increase,
with his Royal Law, one Nation to another, one Country to another; which Royal
Law is to do to another, as they would have them do to them; and so one Country
to another, one Nation to another Nation, to be exercised by this Royal Law of
God, which is above all other Laws of men's making, which is, I say, To do to
others, as they would have others do unto them: And in this Equity, Truth,
Justice and Honesty is set up by this Royal Law of God, amongst all the
Countries, Tongues, and People, and Nations of men in the whole World, and
preserving civil Society, and right Manners; for if no man would have any
corrupt Communication spoken unto him, then he must give none to any other; or
if a man would not have another to oppress or exact on him, he not doing so to
any other, thereby the Royal Law in so doing is kept; or if he would not have
any man to abuse, kill, or wound him, he not doing so to another, here the
Royal Law is kept.

And thus one Neighbor-town serves another with such things that that Town has
not; and the other serves them likewise with such things that they want: and
one Country serves another with the things that another has not, and that
serves the other again with the things that they have not: So one Nation serves
another with the things that they have not, and they serve them again with the
things that they have not; and so all Nations to serve one another with the
things that the Lord has given them: For the Earth, in the first place, is the
Lord's, and the Fullness thereof; and he gives the increase, and has
distributed these things unto the Nations of Men, whom he has made of one
Blood and Mould to dwell upon the Face of the Earth.

So that these Towns, Countries and Nations, by this Royal Law of Liberty (by
and with which Law, they have Liberty to serve one another in Equity, Truth and
Justice) they may have and preserve a true Commerce, a true Correspondency, a
true Society in all Towns, Countries and Nations in the whole Universe of
Mankind one with another, whereby, and in which they will honor the Lord, and
be preserved in all Towns, Countries and Nations, I say, as men, by this Royal
Law, and will have their Liberty in and by this Royal Law.

Object. But if you object and say, That all men in all Towns, Countries and
Nations have nothing of God in them to answer this Royal Law of God, and to
keep it; and consequently to preserve this Society amongst all Countries Towns
and Nations.

Answ. They have something of God in them to answer that Royal Law of God: For
God, who gave forth that Royal Law, he is the God of the Spirits of all Flesh,
by which Spirit they may answer his Law; and God will judge the World in
Righteousness, according to the Secrets of every ones Heart, by the heavenly
Man Christ Jesus, Romans 2.16. 1 Cor. 14.24, 25. Whereby is signified, that there
is something, that is secret, of him in them. God (says the Apostle) shall
judge in that day the Secrets of Men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel,
which Gospel is the Power of God.

Now if God judges the world of Men according to the Gospel, that is,
according to the invisible Power of God; it denotes that there is something
invisible of God in man; else, how can the invisible God judge the World in
Righteousness, according to his invisible Power, which is the Gospel, which
this invisible Power in man does answer the Royal Law of God. And as Christ
says, Mat, 13.19, etc. The Word is sown upon all Grounds; and his Word is the
Seed of God, which is Divine and Invisible; to wit, The Stony, Highway,
Thorny, and the Good Ground; so that no man is exempted, but all are left
without Excuse. And as he says, speaking of the Tallents, Mat. 25.15, etc.
That to every man is given a Measure, according to his Ability; yea, to the
very sloathful Servant that hid it: So now, if every man has a Measure
according to his Ability, it is but just for him to give an Account thereof
according to his Measure, that answers the Lord, who has given him his Measure
according to his Ability; therein is his Judgment Just, and God is Righteous in
his Judgments, who rewards every man according to his Works and his Words, for
which he must give account, and according to his Doings, Mat. 12.36.

So then it may clearly be seen here, that there is something of God in man, to
answer his Royal Laws, to keep a Society in it. And as the Apostle says, Romans
1.19, 20. concerning the Heathen Gentiles, That that which might be known of
God is manifest in them; for God has showed it unto them: And further, says
he, For the invisible things from the Creation of the World are clearly seen,
etc. that is to say, His Eternal-Power and Godhead are seen, forasmuch as they
are understood by the works of the Creation of the World; so that they are left
without Excuse, because, when they knew God, they glorified him not as God.

Now mark, Here you see it is plain, that here was something of God in the
Heathens, by which they knew God, which God has manifested to them, by which
they might answer the Royal Law of God: But when they went from this of God in
them, and glorified him not as God, then they set up their own Worships and
Ways, and lost the course of Nature, and did things against Nature: so here
they forsook the Lord, and his Ways, and Religion; and then persecuted others,
that would not follow them, and their Ways and Worships; and so break the
Royal Society which is in the Royal Law, going from that of God in them, which
should answer it: and then you may see downwards in the same Chapter what they
worshipped, and what they followed, and how they brought the Wrath of God upon
them; and how they held the Truth in Unrighteousness, which was filled with all
manner of evil; which men, though they knew that the Judgment of God was upon
such as commit such things, yet they did not regard God, but were without
natural Affections: So here when they erred from that of God in them, they lost
Natural Affections, Affections of Nature to them that were of the same Blood
and Mould; and also, going from that of God in them, they went from the Royal
Law of God, which should have kept them in Natural Affections, and in a Royal
Society by the Royal Law; and so thereby Indignation, and Wrath and Anguish
came upon every soul of them that do Evil, of the Jew first, and also of the
Gentiles; signifying thereby, that there is something in the Gentiles, as well
as in the Jews; to which, if they act contrary, they go from the Royal Law, and
so bring the Judgments of God upon them, who Rewards every one according to his
Works: For the Jews, that had the Law, the outward written Law, and the
Gentiles, that had not the outward written Law, do by Nature the things
contained in the written Law, which shows the deeds of the Law written in their
hearts; so according to this the Lord shall judge the secrets of men by Christ
Jesus, according to the Gospel.

Now the Gentiles having the Law written in their Hearts, and do the deeds of
the Law; the Jews having the outward written Law, and not doing the things
contained in the written Law; the Gentiles were Judges over them; that is, The
Gentiles were set over them. Now here its plain, that there was something in
the Gentiles, as also in the Jews, to answer the Royal Law of God, which should
bring them to do (if they would but obey it) to all men as they would have them
do unto them, and to keep both the Natural Affections and Royal Society.

For now, If they that are called Christians, who have a written Gospel, and
are Transgressors of it, as the Jews, that had a written Law, and were not the
Keepers and the Doers of it, whereby the Gentiles judged them that did not the
things contained in the Law, having the Law written in their hearts, and were
the Doers of it.

So likewise now in our Ag^^ as is said before, All Christians, that have a
written Gospel, and do not the things contained in it; these, whom they call
Heathens, or Indians, or Turks, that do the things contained in the Gospel,
viz. The obeying of the Power and Spirit, which led them to do unto all men, as
they would have them do unto them; these are Judges of the Christians, so
called; who say, They have the Gospel, and yet do it not, and do to others
those things that they would not have others do unto them; these, I say, are
Breakers of the Royal Law: Christians, in the first place, are judged before
the Heathen; and as the Jews first, and then the Gentiles; so the Christians
first, and then the Heathen: And so God is a Respecter of no man's Person, who
judges the World in Righteousness; but is a Rewarder according to every ones
Works, who walk not according to his Royal Law of Liberty. And so its clear,
that there is something of God in all Jews and Gentiles, Christians and
Heathens, to bring them to answer that Royal Law, and to follow it, and not
their own Imaginations; through which they may come to natural Affections, and
do unto all men, as thou would have them do unto thee: So God, I say, is no
Respecter of Persons, who judges the World in Righteousness.

For the Apostle says, If the Uncircumcision, which by Nature keep the Law,
judge the Jews, which being under the Letter of Circumcision, and do transgress
the Law. So I say, They that be under the Profession of the Letter of
Christianity, and do transgress the Letter of Christianity, he that has not
the Letter as Christian has, and yet by Nature does keep in the Law of
Christianity, judges the Christians, and that that is set up in them: And
therefore, as the Apostle says; He is not a Jew, that is one outward; neither
is he a Christian, that is one outward in Profession, without Possession; but
he is a Jew that is one inward in the Spirit, and not in the Letter; and so he
is a Christian that is one inward, and not in the Letter, a Letter Professor;
but one who is in the Heart, and in the Spirit of Christ Jesus; though the
outward Letter Professor of Jew and Christian has something of God in him,
which should lead him to obey that which he does profess, and to possess that
which he does profess; for that has the Praise of God, and not of men.

And in Romans 3.9. says the Apostle Paul, What better are the Jews then the
Gentiles, spoken of before? they are in no wise better; for we have proved
already, that both Jew and Gentile were all under sin. So now, What difference
is there between the Professor of God, and of the Scriptures, and them that did
not profess? So what difference is there between Christians, that do profess,
and those that do not profess; seeing all are concluded under Sin, out of the
Life, so as to Jew and Gentile there is no difference, out of Christ,
unconverted? But now Jew and Gentile in Christ converted, Sythian and Barbarian
are all one in Christ Jesus, Gal. 3.28.

Now though there be no difference between Jew and Gentile (being concluded
under Sin) in an unconverted Estate, nor no difference between Christian and
Heathen (concluded under Sin) unconverted; yet nevertheless there is something
of God in them which they do disobey, both in Jew and Gentile, Christian and
Heathen, which brings the Wrath of God upon them for their Disobedience; which
if they did obey that of God in them, both Jew and Gentile, Christian and
Heathen, it would bring them to the Royal Law of God, and to the Royal Society,
and to the Natural Affections, and to keep their Word, and to do to all men as
they would have them do to them; For certainly they would have no man break
their Word with them, and therefore they must break their Word with no man;
That is a just Law, Do unto all men as, etc.

Hear the words of Christ to his Disciples, who is the Second Adam, the
Heavenly man, Joh. 16.8, 9, 10, etc. I tell you of a truth, it is expedient for
you that I go away; for if I go not away the Comforter will not come unto you:
but if I go, I will send him unto you; And this Comforter is the Spirit of
Truth, the Holy Ghost; and this Holy Ghost will lead the Disciples into all
Truth, and show them things to come. And he shall take of mine (says he) and
give it unto you.

Now mark, in the first place, He shall lead them into all Truth; namely, his
Disciples, the Learners of Christ Jesus.

2dly, The same Comforter, which is the Spirit of Truth, shall reprove the
World of sin, which they live in; and of the righteousness they live in, which
is the Righteousness of Christ Jesus; and shall reprove the World of their
judgment; for all the world have a judgment, which is not the Judgment of God,
which they judge one another about, and by which they set up their Religions
and Ways of Worship, by which they judge others that will not conform to them;
and judge the Prophets of the Lord, and spiritual Men, to be Madmen, and
Fools; and Christ, the Son and Light of God, to be a Blasphemer, a Devil; and
the Apostles, as Babblers, Turbulent Fellows, etc.

Now what spirit were they in that had this judgment? and with what spirit did
they judge, who are reproved by the Spirit, namely, the Comforter, the Holy
Ghost? So all the World that comes from sin, their judgment, their
righteousness, they must turn at the Reproof of this Spirit, the Holy Ghost,
which leads the Saints into all Truth.

And by this Heavenly Man's Doctrine, Christ Jesus, you may see here is
something of God in every man, which would lead them to the Royal Law of God,
and to do it, and act by it, and to lead them to Affections that are above, and
to have Natural Affections, Affections of Nature, and to receive the Royal
Society in the Royal Law; and not to destroy Men and Women, who are part of the
Creation of God, and of his Workmanship, for they that do destroy them about
Religion, and VVayes, and Worships, that they have made themselves, and set up
(but not by the Command of God) they destroy part of God's Creation. and God's
Creatures, and the Workmanship of his Hands; though they do profess God, yet
they destroy Man, who is made in the similitude of God, and in so doing they
would destroy God, if they could: For, as it is said, he that hates his Brother
is a Manslayer; and so no Manslayer, having not eternal Life abiding in him,
he cannot set up Religions, Ways, nor Worships by which God is honored. And
these Men-slayers break the Concord, the Society, the Commerce, and are Judges
and Breakers of the Royal Law, and Destroyers of the Creation of God, and
Workmanship of his Hands (and Destroyers of Natural Affections) which he has
made for his Praise, and his Honor, and Glory. Neither have they the Mind of
Christ nor of God guiding of them, who would not have all men to be saved; God
would have all the Workmanship of his hands, and Creation, and Works to be
saved, which is man and woman; Christ indeed came to destroy the Devil and his
works, who made man and woman imperfect, who were God's works; so the promise
of God was to mankind, but not unto the Devil; and that his head should be
bruised, his power broken, and his Law of Sin, and Death, and Members should be
disannulled, and Christ's Power, and his Law of Life, Faith, and Love, should
be set up amongst God's Creatures, which are his Creation; and so Christ came
to save Men's lives, and not to destroy them?

Object. Now if any should object, and say, Who are our Brethren.

Answ. First all Nations of Men God has made of one Mould, to dwell upon the
sace of the Earth, Acts 17. so I say, all are Children of God by creation, and
there is a Brotherhood which by the Royal Law is preserved according to the
Principle of God in every Man, by which they should do unto all their Brethren,
as they would have them do unto them.

2d. They are Sons of God by adoption, all being born again of the Immortal
Seed of the Word of God that lives, abides, and endures forever; and being led
by the Spirit of God, are Sons of God, Romans 8.

Also it may be seen and taken notice of, what the Apostle lays down in Ephesians.
2.2. wherein he speaks to them, who were once Heathens, but then converted;
That in times past they walked according to the course of this World, according
to the Prince of the Power of the Air, the spirit that now works in the
Children of Disobedience -- in the Lust of the Flesh, fulfilling the desires of
the Flesh, and of the Mind, and were by Nature the Children of Wrath as well
as others. Now mark, these Heathens before conversion, there was something in
them, that did disobey, and therein did not fulfill the Will of God, but
fulfilled the will of the Flesh, and walked according to the lust of the same,
which brought them by that nature to be Children of Wrath: Now had they obeyed
that which they did disobey, they had not walked according to the Power of the
Prince of the Air, but walked according to the Prince of the Power of Life,
Christ Jesus: and so by that which they do disobey, they would have come to
have known the Royal Law, to do unto others, as they would have others do unto
them: but none can fulfill this Royal Law of God, that fulfills the Lust of the
Flesh, and walks according to that Will, which makes them Children of Wrath by
Nature: so then all people must come to that which they have disobeyed, and
still do disobey; then they will walk according to the Will of God, and the
Royal Law of God, and not according to the Prince of the Power of the Air; for
all they that disobey, and walk according to the Prince and Power of the Air,
have not affections to Nature, but they walk according to that Prince and Power
of the Air, who destroys Nature in themselves, and then the Nature of others
without them; and these have not affections to Nature, Natural Affections in
themselves, nor to them without, and are out of the Royal Law of God, viz. to
do unto others, as they would have others do unto them; now the Religions,
Worships and Ways of such, are no Religions, Ways, nor Worships of God, who
do disobey the Spirit of God in their own selves, and such do not come to this
Noble Royal Law, and Royal Society in it, wherein all men might commune,
commerce, and hold correspondency with all Mankind, and one with another.

We read in Neh. 9.20. how the Lord gave the Children of Israel his good Spirit
to instruct them, but in the 28th. verse it is recorded, how that they were
disobedient, and rebelled against the Spirit of the Lord, and cast the Law
behind their backs, and slew the Prophets of the Lord, which testified against
them, etc. Now mark, after they had rebelled against the Spirit of God, and
disobeyed the Lord, they cast the Law of God behind their backs, and slew the
Lord's Prophets that testified against them, and came to turn them to God again.

Now but consider whether or no, this has not been your Work in Christendom,
nay, you have been more dark then these Jews, and worse; for you that be the
Teachers in Christendom say, that every Man and Woman has not the Spirit of
God to rebel against, and God has not given to every Man and Woman his Spirit;
and therefore you preach up Rebellion, who are found all in the Disobedience
and Rebellion to the Spirit of God in your selves, that he has given to
instruct you: and likewise, also you rebel against the Spirit of God, that he
has given to others instruct them with; so by that you not only cast away the
Royal Law of God behind your backs your selves, but are also a means to bring
others to disobedience to do the same; and this Royal Law being cast behind
your backs both of Christian and of Jew, you are out of the Royal Society and
concord, in which you might commerce together among your selves; and not only
so, but with all Nations that obey the same Principle of God in them.

But all you Christians, Jews, Turks and Heathens, that disobey the good Spirit
which God has given you to instruct you, you do cast the Royal Law behind your
Backs, and then you follow all your Ways, Religions and Worships; and then are
peevish about them, and for them persecute others, with a disobedient spirit,
that will not conform to them, and to you; and destroy people, as the Jews did,
that would not conform.

So in that (as I said before) you destroy God's Creatures which he has
created; and the Works of his Hands; and so in that is manifested, that you
have no natural Affections, nor no Love to God, nor his Royal Law; being
disobedient to the Spirit of God? which would lead you to his Law, To do unto
all as, etc.

In this you might keep a Correspondency, viz. In this Royal Law, one with
another, I say, above all your Religions, Ways and Worships: And if you all
lived in this Royal Law, both Jews, Turks, Heathens and Christians, so called,
your Religions, Ways and Worships would all fall to the Ground: For in this
Royal Law all Men and Women would have Liberty in a common Society, and common
Commerce, and in the Worship of God, and might receive a Religion pure from
above; for Religions, Ways, and Worships are below, of men's making, which are
Works of their own hands, about which they do persecute their Fellow Creatures,
and their Brethren. And also, Such as grieve the Spirit, quench and vex the
Spirit of God, signifying that they have a Measure of it; else, how could they
quench, vex and grieve it? so quenching, grieving and vexing that which would
lead them unto the Royal Law, To do unto others as they, etc.

And that spirit that quenches and vexes the Spirit of God in them will never
lead them to the Royal Law of God, but lead them to do such things as they
would not that others should do unto them; but they would judge it hard
measure, if others should do unto them as they do unto others. And so all they
(let them be Christians, Jews, Turks or Heathens) who quench, vex, and grieve
the Spirit of God, and set up Religions of their own, and are peevish about
them, to force and draw others to them; those have neither Affections to
Nature, nor Natural Affections; but are in that spirit that destroys Nature,
and the Affections to it; and such do to others as they would not have them do
unto them, and come not up to that Royal Law, To do unto all men as they would
have them do unto them.

And also you may read of some, That turned the Grace of God unto Wantonness,
and walked despightfully against the Spirit of Grace, and hating the Light, as
you may see, John 3.19, 20. Jude 4. and in other places.

Now their hating the Light signifies that they had it; for Christ says, They
would not come to the Light, lest their deeds should be reproved; that is, by
the Light; and therefore it was their Condemnation.

So all Religions, Ways and Worships, whatever men make, that hate the Light,
they are made in Darkness; both they and those are condemned, as in John. 3. So
every man that comes into the World being enlightened by Christ, the Heavenly
Man; in whom was Life, and this Life was the Light of Men; so every man that
comes into the World, being turned to this Light, they are turned to Christ,
they are turned to this Royal Law, To do unto all men as they would have them
do unto them; for there is the Liberty: Now this shows, that every Man and Woman
that comes into the World is enlightened with the divine Light of the Heavenly
Man, Christ Jesus; which while they hate it, they break the Society with their
Fellow Creatures, who are of God's Creation; as also the civil Commerce and
Correspondence one with another. And none that hate the Light have Affections
to God, to Christ, Affections to his Royal Law, or Affections to a general
Communion, or Affections to Nature it self; or his Creation; for they that hate
the Light, are under the Power of the Prince of Darkness, to wit, the Devil,
who is the Destroyer; and his work as well as theirs is to destroy th^s Royal
Society; yea, and Nature it self, and God's Creatures, which are the Works of
his hands? and those works of theirs are not of God; and the Grace of God,
which has appeared unto all men, Mark, all men whom this Grace brings
Salvation to.

Now they that turn this Grace of God into Wantonness, and walk despightfully
against the Spirit of Grace, they have no respect to Salvation in themselves,
nor to others, nor no Affections to God, nor to Nature: but in that corrupt
nature that walks despightfully against the Spirit of God; such, as I said
before, do destroy the Natural Affections, which should be amongst all the
Creatures of God in the whole World: that is to say, All Mankind, all Men and
Women, such as turn the Grace of God into Wantonness, they live wantonly, they
live ungodly, they live unrighteously, they live in the Lusts of the World, and
have a heap of Teachers after this Lust that they live in, and not after
Christ. And such as set up Religions, that turn the Grace of God into
Wantonness, and say, That every one has it not; and so denying the Doctrine of
the Apostle, and of Salvation; they set up their own Doctrine, Religion,
Worships, and Ways, and Force and compel people to them, in which there is no
Salvation; and say, There is no Assurance there: And such as do turn this Grace
of God unto Wantonness are never like to come to the Royal Law of God, in that
state, namely, To do unto all men as they would have, etc. For they that turn
the Grace of God unto Wantonness, do unto others as they would not have others
do unto them; and so rend from the Royal Society, in the Royal Law: For the
Grace of God is the Saints Teacher, which brings the Salvation, and teaches
them to live Soberly, Righteously, and Godlikely, etc. and brings them to know
the Royal Law, and to do and fulfill the Royal Law, viz. To do unto others as
they would have others do unto them.

Now by all you may see its clear, that there is something of God in all
Mankind to witness the Spirit; and every one that comes into the World are
enlightened by Christ, the second Adam: And the Grace of God has appeared unto
all men, to teach them, and will bring them Salvation; but they that forsake
this Grace, and turn it unto Wantonness, they turn that unto Wantonness, and
forsake that that should teach them, and bring their Salvation; yea, I say,
teach them to do that unto all as, etc.

And likewise you may see in John 3.16, where its said, God so loved the World,
that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believes in him should not
perish, but have Everlasting Life: And God sent not his Son into the World to
condemn the World, but that the World through him might be saved.

This was the World of Mankind (for the Devil, he came to destroy, and leads
men into Destruction, and astray from God) that Christ comes to save; and that
through Jesus Christ they might be redeemed, and brought into an Accord, and
into a Unity one with another, and with the Son that saves them, and with the
Father who sent his Son; and he would that all men should be saved in that: 1 Timothy 2.3, 4, 5, etc. For this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our
Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and come to the Knowledge of his
Truth; for there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the Man
Christ Jesus, who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due time.

Now here you may see the general and universal Love of God in Christ toward
all Mankind, to all his Creatures that he has created, that he would have all
men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of his Truth; for he tasted Death
for every man, as Scripture of Truth says, which was to be testified in due
time. And so whosoever is against this Doctrine, are the Deceivers and Makers
of Sects, and do stop or abridge people from coming to that which they have a
Right unto, viz. To him that was a Ransom for them, and who is their Mediator.
Now he being given a Ransom for all, that is for all without exception; and he
that has given himself a Ransom for all, would have all to come to the
knowledge of the truth of this.

So then they would by this means come to the Royal Law and to the Royal
Society indeed, which is above all Societies that Nations, Peoples, Tongues and
Languages have made, in all which th^^e is Discord; but there is no Discord in
this Royal Law, which brings all people to do unto others as they, etc. For
here in this are Natural Affections, Affections of Nature to that which God
has created, to wit. Man and Woman, who are made after his Similitude; so that
they would not have them destroyed, nor hurt; but they will do in this Royal
Law unto all Men and Women that are made after the Similitude of God, as they
in that Similitude should do unto them, that are in the same Similitude.

And further, says the Apostle, in 1 John 1.1, 2. We have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous; and he is the Propitiation for our Sins,
and not for ours only, but for the Sins of the whole World.

Now mark, This is a large word for all people to take notice of, That Christ
Jesus is the Propitiation for the sins of the whole world, Therefore every one
of you in your own particulars, know this That Christ Jesus, who is crowned
with Glory and Honor, did taste Death for every man: Mark, for every man; and
whosoever denies this Doctrine is an Antichrist, and preaches another, is a
false Preacher and Seducer, and brings people to trouble and loss, from that
which is right, and their due, in which is their Satisfaction: So these are
universal things to all Mankind, whereby all Mankind might come out of the
Earthly old Adam in the Fall and Transgression, to him that has dyed for them
all, and purchased them all, and tasted Death for all, and enlightened them all,
and gave his Grace to them all; and he wills that all might be saved, and
come to the Knowledge of the Truth of Christ, who does this: And whoever
teaches another doctrine brings people into Sects and Confusion, to destroy
one another, where they have not Natural Affections, and will do that to
another which they would not have others do unto them, who break the Bonds
thereby of civil Commerce amongst Mankind; and the religions, ways and
worships of all such, are no Worships, Religions, nor VVayes to God; but set up
by a dark peevish spirit, by which they destroy one another, which are God's
Creatures, about them; all which come from him who is out of Truth, whom Christ
came to destroy.

We have likewise another Expression of the Apostle Paul to the business in
hand, in 1 Timothy 4.9, 10. This is (says he) a faithful Saying, and worthy of
all Acceptance; for therefore we both labor and suffer Reproach, because we
trust in the Living God, who is the Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe: these things command and teach.

Mark now, that whosoever does teach the contrary, he is a false Teacher, and
his Doctrine is false; for this is a great word, He was the Savior of all men,
especially them that believe; and they that taught this did suffer Reproach,
and were rebuk't by them that opposed this Doctrine; as they that preach this
Doctrine now are reproacht, and suffer by the Opposers of it now; and those
that are the Opposers of it now, are those that keep people from their
Salvation, yea, from God, and from Christ: And such are they that are Makers of
Sects, and then destroy one another about them, who have no Natural Affections,
and do not to others as they would have others do unto them.

And Christ Jesus says, He came to call sinners to Repentance, that were in
the old Adam, that they might change from the old earthly Adam, and turn to
Christ, the second Adam, the Heavenly Man.

Now they that stopped their Ears and closed their Eyes then, they were the
greatest Professors upon the Earth; and so they are now, and the Highest
Priests: For by it is signified, that there is something in them that they
should see withal, and hear withal; and such as did so, had no Affections to
Nature, nor to the Royal Law of God, nor to Christ, neither then, nor now, to
do to others as they would have others do unto them.

And Christ Jesus says, Mark 13.37, What I say unto you, I say unto all,
Watch: Intimating as if there was something of God in them, by which they must
watch against something that was not of God in them, but of the Devil, the
Tempter, who is out of the Truth, and tempts men that they should not walk in
the Way of Truth; so they that were tempted, and obeyed him, went from their
watch; and those stop their Ears, and close their Eyes from the Spirit of God
in them.

As also those whom Christ calls, Ravening Wolves inwardly, who come to be like
a Thistle and Thorny-Tree, that did deceive men; when they went out to gather
Figs or Grapes from them, they could meet with nothing but Thorns and Thistles:
And as such then, so now are the greatest Professors in the World, but inwardly
ravening Wolves, who were ravened from the Life; and the Wolves, and Thistles,
and Briars will hurt and destroy Nature. And so it is the spirit of the Devil
that makes them Wolves, and it is the Spirit of God that makes them Lambs: and
therefore these Wolves, Thistles, and Briars, are such as have not the least
Practice of the Royal Law of God among them, in doing unto all as they would
have all men do unto them.

But yet this denotes, that there was something in these Wolves that they were
ravened from, that would have kept them and led them to the Royal Law of God,
namely, as I said, To do unto all as they would have all do unto them.

For they would not have Thorns and Thistles to prick and tear them, like a
Woolf, in pieces; and therefore, if they will be obedient unto that which they
are ravened from, and come to it again, it will lead them. To do unto others,
etc. Not to thistle prick, and worry others; for they would not be so done to
themselves: so that this brings to the Royal Society, in the Royal Law of God,
where all Mankind might keep a Concord.

And says the Lord, in Exodus 23.4, 5. If thou meetest with thine Enemies Ox or
his Ass going astray, thou shall surely bring it back again to him. If thou
see the Ass of him that hates thee lying under his Burden, and shall forbear
to help him, thou shall surely help with him.

Mark the Law and Command of God, this was an Enemies Ass, and an Enemies Ox;
much more the Beast of a Friend, and those Jews that were called the Children
of God; but how short are Christians of this very thing, in that many of them
will, and do put the Cattle of them that are called Christians astray, turn
them out of way on purpose: But here are three things.

First, Here is that that will overcome the Enemy. 2d. Here is that that will
preserve the Creation of God. 3d. That here they should do to others, as they
would have others do unto them; for the Law of God, which was the same to the
Jews, is also the same unto the Gentiles, that were among them: so one Law was
to those that were within, and to those that were without; for this Law of God,
which was, and is called the Royal Law, to wit, to do to all men, as they, etc.
that is, to do that which is Righteous, Just, Holy, and Good unto all Men, as
they would have all Men do Righteously, Justly, Holily, and do that only which
is good, etc. and now in so doing, this will keep up a Just, Holy, Righteous,
and a good Society amongst Mankind: and this was the Law that was added
because of Transgression, the Transgression of the Command of God, by which Man
lost the Image of God; he lost Righteousness, and Holiness, and that Power that
gave him Dominion Gal 3.19. therefore the Law was added upon man, when he had
lost Righteousness, and the Image of God, and the Power of God within him:
therefore the Just, Holy, Good and Righteous Law of the higher Power, I say,
was added because of Transgression, upon Man and Woman; which Just, Righteous,
Good and Holy Law, answers the Good, the Just, the Righteous, and the Holy
Principle of God in every man, that they have transgrest. So now, if they come
to that again, which they have transgrest, and to obey the Good, Just,
Righteous and Holy Law of Liberty, they come to the Holy Society, and Holy
Communion and Concord: and so this Just, Good, Holy, and Righteous Law is over
all Transgressors, whether they be Christians, Turks, Jews, or Heathens: It
answers I say, the Good and Righteous Principle in them, that they have
transgrest; now would they but mind that good Principle in them, that brings
them to the Good and Righteous Law; it will bring them to do to all men, as
they would, etc.

Now this Law commands to entertain Strangers; for says the Lord, You were
Strangers in Egypt, and there you were entertained; and therefore do unto
others, as you would be done to by them; relieve the Fatherless, for your
Children may be Fatherless; and would you not have them relieved? relieve the
Widows, for your Wives may be Widows; and would you not have them to be
relieved in case of necessity? So do unto all, as you would have them do unto
you. Again, you would have none to kill you, or to covet your Goods, or to
steal from you; you would have none to commit Adultry with your Wives, or
defile your Children; which things are an Abomination unto the Lord; therefore
do not you so to any others, but mind the Righteous Law that answers the
Righteous Principle of God in you, that keeps you in Holiness, and
Righteousness, that is good; and in this you will have esteem of God, and his
Royal Law; and will have an esteem of your Souls and bodies, which are the
Lords, that they may be kept holy, that so they may be an acceptable Offering
unto the Lord, who is holy, whose they are; for Christ came to destroy the
Devil and his Works, who had sowed the evil Seed of Discord among the Children
of men, who are the Creation of God, his Creatures: And Christ that came to
redeem man, and save him, says, Love your Enemies, and love one another, for
that is of God; then Hatred and Enmity is not of God: so here they were to love
the Creature^ but not the Evil; for the Creatures were of God's Creation; for
Christ came to destroy the Devil, and not Mankind, but that only which would
destroy them. This is the General and Universal Love; for God so loved the
World, in sending his Son into the World, when Jews, and Gentiles were
concluded under Sin, to be an Offering, and Sacrifice for the sins of the whole
World: And therefore Christ Jesus says, Love one another and love Enemies; for
that shows, and answers the Mind of God, and of Christ, who lays down his Life
for Enemies, and dies for Sinners; and so loved the World, though they were
Enemies, that he sent his Son into the World, that the World through him might
live; and so God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself; and God
causes his Son to shine upon the Just, and the Unjust, and the Rain to fall
upon the Good, and the Evil, Mat. 5.44, 45.

So here is the Universal Love of God to Mankind, his Son shines upon the
Unjust Man's Field, as well as on the Just Man's, and his Rain falls upon the
Unjust Man's Ground, as well as on the Just Man's: And therefore you should be
of the same mind with Christ, for that was the end of his speaking those words,
that so you might go, and do likewise. If your rain do not fall upon the Unjust
Man's Field, as upon the Just, you are the wandering Clouds, that are said to
have no Water in them, and so deceive people; and your Sun is turned to
Darkness, that think it shines upon no Body but your selves.

So you be out of Christ's Doctrine, that do not practice his, namely, to love
Enemies, and to have your Rain, and your Sun; if your Rain be from God, and
your Sun be from God, it will shine upon the Unjust as well as upon the Just,
even for their good; and it will fall upon the Unjust, and the Just, I mean the
Rain: now they that have not this, let them profess what they will, God's words
and Christ's words, they are Hypocrites, and are blind Guides, that lead into
the Ditch.

Now the Lord says, Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; and so commands
his Law.

Mark, Thy Neighbor thou shall love as thy self; for all Nations of men has
God made of one Blood and one Mould to dwell upon the Face of the Earth: So
mark, they are made of one so there is the Natural Affections out of that one,
to the one, all men made of one; and there comes the love to his Neighbor, of
the same Blood and Mould as himself; and there comes the Royal Law to be
received, to do to all men of the same Blood and Mould of the Lord's making, as
he would have them do unto him.

And whosoever professes godliness and christianity, or God, or Christ, or
whatsoever other Religion in the whole World, and do not love their Neighbor
as themselves; and all being made of one Blood and Mould on the face of the
Earth, they are all Breakers of the Law of God, and Dishonourers of God, and
are Hypocrites that do profess the Law and Gospel, that come short of this, and
do not practice, that is to say, love your Neighbors as your selves, and are
out of the Royal Society, and the Royal Law: And whatsoever Religion, Way, or
Worship people have made, and are out of this, that is to say, Love thy
Neighbor as thy self, and do unto all men, as they would have them do unto
them; their Religion, Way, and Worship, is no Religion, it is but Vanity, and
their profession of God and Christ is but Vanity and Hypocrisy, and do call
upon God with their Lips, and their Hearts are far off from him, and his Royal
Law; and such destroy Natural Affections, and Nature it self; for they that
love their Neighbor as themselves, (which is above all the Religions in the
World of men's making) do show forth Natural Affections, if they love their
Neighbors as themselves, which is the general Command.

And in this here is a general Unity, a general Concord, a general Commerce and
Correspondency with all their Neighbors in the whole World, neighbor Nations,
neighbor Countries, neighbor Towns.

And 1 Pet. 2.13. Honor all men, love the Brotherhood, fear God, honor the
King.

Now to honor all men, is to have all men in esteem, as you may read, and if I
esteem all men, I shall certainly hurt no man, neither would I have any other
to hurt any man, or to hurt one another; for I esteem and honor them, Why?
Because they are of God's Creation, and God's Creatures, and made after the
Similitude of God, and therefore I am to honor them all.

2d, To love the Brotherhood; those that are Brethren, born again and begotten
again of the immortal Seed, which are living Stones, and made a Spiritual
Household of Brethren.

3d, Fear God, Honor the King; so there is none can honor the King, but those
that fear God; and none can fear God, who live in Evil and in Sin.

And in Heb. 12.14. the Spirit of God by the Apostle commands us, To follow
Peace with all men; and elsewhere says he, Seek the Peace of all men, and the
Good of all men.

So now mind this, All men must seek the Good of one another, one another
Peace, which is in Christ Jesus (not in old Adam) and in his Royal Law, in
which they may come to a Concord, and demonstrate a Natural Affection, and
divine Affections to all men, who seek the Peace of all men: And they that seek
the Peace of all men, they will not seek their Trouble, nor Captivity, nor
their Slavery, nor their Hurt, but their Eternal Good, and Eternal Peace; and
this is that that is wanting among them, that have been Professors of
Christianity. So they that have professed, and not in the Possession of this, in
not seeking the Peace of all men, are Hypocrites; to seek the Peace of Jew,
Gentile, Heathen, and all men; for they are the Workmanship of God, God's
Creatures, and their Fellow Creatures, made of the same Flesh and Mould to
dwell upon the Face of the Earth: and they that be out of this, whatever
Worship, Profession, or Religion they are of, its worth nothing.

And says the Apostle further in 2 Cor. 10.12. For we dare not make our selves
of the number, or compare our selves with some, that commend themselves; but
they measuring themselves by themselves, and comparing themselves amongst
themselves, are not wise: But we will not boast of things without our Measure,
but according to the Measure of the Rule which God has distributed to us, a
measure even to reach unto you.

Now this Rule, this Measure, was the Spirit of God, by which they reached unto
the Corinthians, by which they were one another Epistle to one another
Hearts, and known and read of all men. Now they that measure themselves by
themselves, and compare themselves among themselves, which was not Wisdom, they
were without this Rule, and this Spirit, and Measure: As now look over all
Christendom, and you shall find them without this Measure and this Rule, who
say, The Letter is the Rule; and are broken into so many Sects one against
another, measuring themselves and comparing themselves with themselves, which
are not wise; for none are made wise but by the Spirit of God, which is indeed
the Rule and the Measure; and that is it which brings, To do unto all men as
they would have them do unto them; to that Royal Law, and Royal Liberty, and
Royal Society; and they that do so, do show their Loyalty and Obedience unto
God and his Law.

So all people in the whole World, of what Sect, or Worship or Religion soever,
they must come to their measure of the Spirit of God, and so to the Rule; and
lay away their own Rule, that they rule things by, and rule their religions by,
and their worships by, and righteousness by, that they have made; and lay aside
their Measure, by which they have measured their religions, and worships, and
their Righteousness, and have measured others. Now if People would not come
according to their Measure, and their Rule, they have been ready to destroy
God's Creatures, who are made after the similitude of God, and to curse them,
and to damn them: This is the Practice of such that measure with their own
Measure, and that walk according to their own Rule, who have not Natural
Affections, that do come to the Royal Law and Liberty: Therefore all, I say,
must lay aside their own measure and rule, and come to the Spirit of God, and
so to the Rule, which is the Spirit of God, by which they may come to the Royal
Law of God, and so to the Royal Society, and so to the Natural Affections, to
the Divine and Natural Affections.

And that of the Apostle in 1 Cor. 13. is very remarkable, where the Apostle
speaks of Love, which ought to be amongst all Christians, who profess the Name
of Christ; which Love, if a man has not, he is nothing, nay, his Religion and
Worship is nothing; yea, if he has Faith, it is nothing, if he has not Love;
if he (says he) has Knowledge, and knows Secrets, if he (says he) has
Prophecy, if he speaks with Tongues, and has not Love, all is nothing; and so
his Profession is nothing.

So all ye Scholars, all ye Sects in the whole Christendom, if you have not
this Love, if out of it, all that you have is nothing; if you feed the poor,
and give your Body to be burnt, and will burn others, all this will profit you
nothing, if (I say) you have not Love; Love to one onother, Love to God, Love
to Christ, Love to Enemies, Natural Affection, through which you will not
destroy Nature; you will not destroy God's Creatures, God's Creation, Man and
Woman, whom God has made after his own Similitude. Ye profess ye love God, and
yet hate your Brethren (for ye are all Brethren in Adam) you are all Liars; for
how can you love God whom you see not, and hate your Brother whom you do see
daily.

Now this Love it suffers long, and is courteous and kind, and envieth not God's
Creatures, God's Creation, Man and Woman, who are (I say) made after the
Similitude of God: It does not behave it self unseemly, whereas they that are
out of this Love behave themselves unseemly, and are not courteous and kind,
which are the works of the Flesh.

Now Love seeks not her own, nor is she easily provoked, thinks no Evil: Now
they that be out of this Love, are easily provokt, think Evil, and do it; seek
their own Welfare, and not the Welfare of another; their own Good, and not the
Good of another.

Love bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things: Whereas they
that are out of Love cannot believe all things, nor hope all things, nor cannot
endure all things; full of Unbelief, and Impatience; now this is that that has
been wanting in Christendom: and who be out of this Love, though they may
profess Christ, and the Prophets and Apostles words, yet all their Profession
is nothing; and such as be in this Love have Natural Affections, and do not
despise the Royal Law of God, nor his Creatures, viz. To do to all as we would
have all do to us: And none come to receive this Love, but those alone who come
to the Principle of God in themselves in their Measure.

And also, for further Proof, you may see in the Scriptures of Truth, how those
whom you style Heathens, many of them that speak good of God, and of his
Kingdom, which they could not do without the Spirit of God; as what Abimilech
spoke to Abraham; and the King of the Philistines to Isaac; Pharaoh to Joseph,
as also Potiphar his first Master; and the very Jailer was sensible of God's
being with Joseph in Prison, and blessing him; so likewise Cyrus, and King
Darius spoke good of God; and Nebuchadnezar in his Dream saw Christ and his
Kingdom; Cornelius we read in the Acts prayed to God, though a Heathen; and the
Queen of the South acknowledged the Lord; likewise Rahab the Harlot, who
entertained the Spies; King Hyram; the Mariners with whom Jonah was embarked;
not forgetting the King of Nineveth: all which (with a Cloud of other
Witnesses, which for brevity we pass over) denote, that there is something of
God in all people; whereas Christian Professors and Jews fondly imagine, That
none have the Spirit of God, but them; and so these and others Scriptures judge
them: and these are those that make themselves a Sect, and are the blind
Guides, who do not see the Seed sown upon all Grounds, and how the Grace of God
that brings Salvation has appeared unto all men, nor the Light by which Christ
enlightens every man that comes into the World: So these blind guides lead into
the Ditch, a corrupting place, and see not Christ, who tasted Death for every
man, and shed his Blood for all, and enlightens every man (I say) that they
might see the Salvation, and the Grace, and Truth, that comes by Christ, which
brings their Salvation. And such as have a Profession of the Letter, Jew,
Christian, and others, that are not in the Spirit of God, who gave them forth,
but in another dark spirit, do not see the Spirit that is given to every one to
profit withal; and so they cannot bring people into that by which they might
profit, and come to the Royal Law, To do unto all as they would have all do
unto them; and so to a Royal Society, where they might all honor God, and keep
Communion among themselves.

Now every Man and Woman in the whole World must first be turned to the Spirit
of God in themselves, that has reproved them, which they have grieved, quenched
and vexed; and must turn to the Light, that they have hated; and turn to the
Grace, that appeared to them, which they have turned unto Wantonness, and walked
despightfully against: to this they must all turn to, before they come to the
Royal Law, that brings them, To do to all as they, etc. and so to keep the
Loyal Law, and holy and just Society in the Royal, Holy, and just Law. So it is
that because both Jews and Christians have had the Letter of the Scripture,
they have bin envious against others, and call them Heathens; and because they
have the Letter, therefore they thought None but they had the Spirit, and that
the Heathen had it not: But you may see in the Scriptures before mentioned
(whom they call Heathen) whether they have the Spirit of God or no; read (I
say) but the Scriptures before mentioned, and convince your selves, and let
such stop their own mouths, and say with the Apostle, That there is no
difference between Jew and Gentile, who has the Letter, and he that has not:
so there is no difference between Jew and Christian that have the Letter, and
Gentile now that has not the Letter, who are without him (to wit) the Spirit
of God that gave it forth; for that makes the difference, and is the Leader
into all Truth, and to the Royal Law, both Jew, Christian and Gentile, who obey
it; and so to do unto all men as they, etc. and so in the holy, just and
righteous Royal Law, to keep a just, a righteous, and a good Society, that is
Royal, and have the dominion over all other societies in the whole Universe out
of this Law: and these will come to nothing which are of men's making, though
they may hold them up for a time before the National Law; but they will come to
an end, if they be not in the Royal Law of Liberty, where in every man must do
unto others as he would they should do to him;

Jam. 3. Where you may see how the nature of Beasts, and of Birds, and of
Serpents, and of things in the Sea, are tamed by the nature of man; but the
Tongue of man can no man tame, it is such an unruly Member, full of deadly
Porson; therewith we bless God the Father, and therewith curse we men, who are
made after the Similitude and Image of God. Now consider all Christians, and
others, who profess Scripture, and all others who have not the Scripture,
called Heathens; yea, consider this, I say, all mankind upon the face of the
Earth, by whom things in the Sea and in the Earth are tamed; and now seeing
that your Tongues are untamed, that unruly Member in your selves, that is full
of deadly Poison, with which you bless God the Father, and with it you curse
man, who is made after the Image of God; O do not you all in this bring a curse
upon your selves, who were made in the same Image and Similitude? and can you
curse another, and not curse your selves? Now what is it that must tame this
unruly Member in your selves, that is full of deadly Poison, and bring it under
a Power to tame it? Is it not the Spirit of God in the Jew, in the Christian,
and in the Gentile or Heathen, by which you may have power over your Tongues,
by Obedience to the Power of God? And therefore the Spirit and Power of God
has a Bridle upon your Tongues, to hold them fast from Cursing, and all manner
of Evil-speaking, whereof you must give an Account: And so that Power and
Spirit of God in you all, both Heathen, Jew and Christian, that tames the
Tongue, and bridles the Tongne, which brings you to the Royal Law, To speak and
to do to all men, as you would have them speak and to do to you; so that your
words may be few, and gracious, and virtuous; that so the words of Life may be
in your Tongues, which hammers down the Evil, and cuts and burns it out of the
Tongue, and comes to be a Bridle and a Bit unto it; that, as was said before,
You may speak and do unto all, as you would have them speak and do unto you.
For mark, With your Tongues you curse men, which are made after the Image and
Similitude of God; and with the same Tongue you bless God the Father.

Now in this that you curse men, who are made after the Image and Similitude of
God, do you not curse the Maker? then do not you curse God? do not you curse
his Image and Similitude, when you curse Men who are made in the similitude of
God? And so is that Blessing accepted think you of God the Father, in that you
bless him, and yet curse that which he has made in his own Likeness, after his
own Image?

Now consider this, Whether this be not the wisdom from below in you, that is
Devilish, Earthly and sensual; and so would you not have others to curse you?
Would you not be ready to say (if they should do it) They have cursed that that
God has made, and cursed his Image? And would not you say to them; Though they
bless God the Father, it is not accepted, when as they curse you? And therefore
if you fulfill the Royal Law, according to the Scripture, Thou shall love thy
Neighbor as thy self, Jam. 2.

And so he that does fulfill the Royal Law, will not hate his Neighbor; for he
would not have his Neighbor hate him, neither will he curse his Neighbor, nor
speak Evil of him; for he would not have his Neighbor do so to him; and
therefore so speak, and so do: For Love does not Steal, does not commit
Adultery, Love does not. Covet, Love does not bear False Witness, and Love
seeks not her own, Love does not Kill; and so the Law is fulfilled in one word,
viz. Thou must love thy Neighbor as thy self, and God above all; who is over
all, blessed forever: Now this keeps a Royal Society in the Royal Law of
Liberty:

Christ persecutes no man, for not receiving his Doctrine, nor yet the
Apostles; and both Christ and his Apostles gave forth their Doctrine freely to
his People, and the World: Though Christ was as good as called ( Mat. 12.24.) A
Devil, and a Madman, a Blasphemer, a Deceiver, a Maker of Tumults; yet he did
not exercise any Power, or any outward Authority over them (though he had all
Power, both in Heaven and in Earth, given unto him) so as to imprison any, or
persecute, or banish them; neither did any of those that followed him, who did
convert people unto God.

Isa. 12.5. Sing unto the Lord; for he has done excellent things: this is
known in all the Earth.

So then you may see, that there is something of God in people, that brings
them to know those excellent things, that the Lord has and does work in the
Earth; which if people would but mind seriously, it would lead them to do his
Law, viz. To do unto all, etc.

Jer. 23.23, 24. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord, and not a God afar off?
Can any hide himself in secret places, that I cannot see him, says the Lord?
Do not I fill Heaven and Earth, says the Lord?

So the Lord God is the Lord, the Creator of all things in the Heavens, Earth,
and in the Sea, so then he is Lord of all, and they are all his, and has
created them to his glory: But man, that grieved his Spirit, and transgressed
it, and his Royal Law cast away, he jars with the Creation of God. And ofttimes
you may see throughout the Scriptures, how the Lord and his Prophets did
declare against them that did cast his Royal Law behind their backs.

So now, if you say, This was in reference to the Jews; may it not be verified
of you called Christians, and others? for, Do you do unto all men as you would
have all men do unto you? Do you keep this Law of Liberty, in which the right
Natural Affections are? It Is said, The Jews did cast the Righteous Law behind
their backs, which Law was Just, Holy and Good; and do not you called
Christians, who profess the Gospel, and others do the same, who may be ready to
find Fault with the Jews for doing it? So both you and them have cast the Law
of God behind your backs, which (I say) is holy, just, good and righteous; so
as you do not to others as you would they should do to you: you have broken the
Royal Society, you have thrown away Natural Affections, you do that that is
unjust to people, you do that that is not good to them nor righteteous; and
would you have all people do unrighteously, and unjustly, and that that is not
good nor holy to you? For, casting away the Righteous, Good and the Just Law
behind their backs; you cast away that whereby you should do that which is
Just, Righteous and Holy to others. And so all your Societies, that are not
upheld by this Just, Righteous and Holy Law of God, are upheld by that which is
not Just, nor Righteous, nor Holy, nor Good; so that people do that to others
that they would not have them do unto them. Mark the End of all that.

Hab. 3.3. The Glory of the Lord covered the Heavens, and the Earth was full of
his Praise, etc.

Zach. 14.9. And the Lord shall be King over all the Earth; in that Day shall
there be one Lord, and his Name shall be one.

And Genesis 9.1, 2, etc. where we read, how the Lord God blessed Noah and his
Sons, saying unto them, Bring ye forth Fruit, and multiply, and replenish the
Earth; and the Fear of you, and the Dread of you, shall be upon every Beast of
the Earth, and upon every Foul of the Air, and upon all that moves upon the
Earth, and upon all the Fish of the Sea; into your hands are they delivered:
every thing that moves it self, every thing that lives, etc.

Mark here, God, who is the Creator of all, and the God of the whole Earth,
which is full of his Praise, and created all things to his Glory, and Man in
his Image, and set him above all the Works of his Hands, and gave him his Law,
by which he was not to oppress any Creature that he had created, nor to spend
them on his Lust, to the dishonor of God; and gave him his Spirit, by which he
should know his Law, and know him the Lawgiver: For that which might be known
of God was manifest in them, and God has showed it unto them: And so with this
of God in Mankind, he might know his Royal Law, which is just, righteous, holy
and good, and within the limits of this, that all Mankind do keep a Royal
Society, a just, good, and holy Royal Society, and do unto all men as they
would have them do unto them in all things; for this Royal Law teaches so to
do, in which is the Liberty.

All people in the whole World consider, Do not all your Religions, Ways and
Worships lie in external and outward things that you have made? and yet many of
you Christians, and others, will find Fault with others; that is, such that
worship the works of their own hands: And are not all Religions that are made
(and Worships) by men, which are the works of their own hands, in the whole
World? And do not every Sect in their Way, Religion and Worship do unto another
Sect and Religion as they would not have them do unto them? And so is not all
the Conversion of people (as you call it) one Sect beget people from another
Sect, and it is but a Sect when all is done; and yet not come to the Royal Law
of Liberty, nor yet the Gospel? For let the eye go over the whole World, and
see how one Sect strives and and makes it their Business to pluck from another
Sect; and the more People they get, the more Wages, Tithes and Augmentations
they get: So this is not getting people to God, but to themselves; this is not
preaching Christ, nor God, but themselves.

And now all people but consider, Has not the Conversion been by outward
Powers, by Queens Powers, or Kingly Powers, by States Powers, or by an
Emperor's Power, for many Hundreds of Years? For before the Pope got up, did
not the Arian Heresy (when he got up I say) that is, got the power in his
hands, made most turn Arians by his Sword? insomuch that it became a Proverb,
Totus mundus Arianus.

And then when the other Power got over Arian, then they turned from him. And
further, When the Pope got up, did not he by his Inquisition and outward Sword,
by his Prisons and Goales convert people unto his Sect and Faction? and this
has been the Conversion all along. And then when the Turk got up, did not he
by his outward Power convert people to him? yea, many that were Christians,
were turned by his outward Sword and Power.

And did not the King of Spain convert abundance of Indians by his External
Power and outward Sword, when he put so many to several sorts of cruel Deaths,
as their own Historians relate? Now this Conversion was not of God, nor of the
Spirit of God, nor of the Word of God, which is the Sword of the Spirit; but by
the outward Power and Sword.

And how have many people been converted in Germany think you? Were not many
their Converts by the Magistrates Sword? and did they not turn as the
Magistrates did, and as the Pope, and as the King of Spain, and King of France?
Was not there once a King of France a Protestant? and did not he turn? and how
many did turn with him?

And how many were converted by Henry the eighth from the Pope, by his regal
Sword and Power? yea, how many Priests and People? And so likewise, how many
turned Protestants in his Son Edward the sixth Reign, which was not long? And
then how many turned Papists again in his Sister Queen Mary's Reign,
immediately after his decease? for did she not by her Power convert both
Priests and People to the Pope? And shortly after, How many did Queen Elizabeth
convert from Popery to Protestancy, both of Priests and People? Thousands of
Thousands.

So were not all these converted by the Laws and outward Powers all along,
since that Conversion has been lost by the Power and Spirit of God, that the
Apostles were in, in their Day, by which (I say) they did convert people to
God; and not by the Magistrates Sword, nor by humane coercive Laws, contrary to
a man's Conscience.

And how did the Presbyterians convert to their Directory from the
Common Prayer, by virtue of their outward Power and Sword, when they had in
this last Age got it into their hands? And how many did the Independants
convert to their Church-Faith, from the Presbyterians, and from others, when he
had got the Sword and Power into his hands? And now how many have the
Common-Prayer-men got back again by their Power and outward Sword, when they
had got it into their hands, both from the Presbyterians Directory, and
Independent Church-Faith, etc. to the Common Prayer again? So that much of the
Conversion since the Apostles days, or about this Thousand Years, have been by
outward Law and coercive Power, by Prisons, Inquisitions, Gallows, Fire and
Faggot, etc. and by this means they have forced men to their Religions, that
they have made, contrary to their Consciences; and have done to others, as they
would not have others do the same thing to them.

And so the Priests turned with the Magistrates, and preached stiffly against
that that they preached up not long before, and preached up that now that once
they preached against; this has been clearly seen? And so as one Power has got
up, by the Sword and the Law, they have put down other Religions, that were set
up by Law and the Sword; and if others should get over them, then they would
put down their Religions, and set up again Religions and Worships of their own:
And so men make Religions, and then set them up, and then again others in power
put them down; and men open men's Mouths, and others stop their Mouths that
formerly had preached; and so men are put up and plucked down, so as every man is
uncertain in his Religion and Worship, and knows not what may be set up in a
year, or what Religion or Worship he may be forced to conform to, or suffer in
not doing of it.

So happy are they that are in the Religion that comes down from above, and in
the Worship that Christ Jesus set up above One Thousand Six Hundred Years
since, that Heavenly Man, that changes not; who is yesterday, to day, and
forever the Alpha and Omega.

Now if all the people in the World, who are in so many Religions, Ways and
Worships, would come to the Principle of God in them, by which they may come to
the Royal Law, and to do unto all men as you would have all men do unto you;
you would come to the Royal Society, and the Fellowship in the Royal Law, which
is far above all the Fellowships and Societies in all the Religions, Ways and
Worships that they have made and set up, where they do not do to others, as
they would have others do to them: For when one Religion is put down, and
another set up, that which is put down is often times called Heresy: And again,
when at any time that Religion is put down, and the other set up again, then
that i^ accounted Heresy which accounted the other so before; so tha^ one
putting down another (in case they do not join) they ar^ called Heretics and
Schismatics; And so all Christendom are or have been Schismatics or
Heretics, one time or other; bu^ this has not been Life. Therefore it is our
desire, that men may all come to the Light and Grace of the Spirit of God, that
is given, whereby they may come to this his Royal Law, and Roya^ Society, and
Natural Affections; for the others have been with out Natural Affections, who
have persecuted, imprisoned, and pu^ to death people, for not conforming to the
Ways, Religions an^ Worships which they have made and set up with their hands,
and such, I say, have not had Natural Affections, all being mad^ of one Mould,
and of one Blood upon the Face of the whole Earth and that by one God, who is
in all, through all, and above al^ who has given you his Royal Law, but that
you cast it behin^ your backs, Jew like; and yet made a Profession of Christ,
his Prophets and Apostles words; but that Profession is no Profession, that
Religion and Worship is worth nothing, in that they cast the Royal Law of God
behind their backs, which teaches you, To love your Neighbors at your selves,
and to do to all men as you would have them do to you.

And now all you Christians (so called) in Christendom, and elsewhere, Do not
your Religions, Worships and Fellowships stand in outward things? yea, in such
things as the Kingdom of God stands not in: For as the Kingdom of Heaven stands
not in Meats, nor Drinks, nor Images, nor outward Crosses, nor Beads, nor
Bells, nor Candles, nor your Masses you make, nor your Holy Days which you make
holy, and call them holy; nor in your Steeple Houses, and old Mass-Houses,
called by you Churches and Temples; Neither does the Kingdom of God stand in
your Pictures, nor Relics of, etc. nor Tippits, nor Hoods, nor Sursingle, nor
White Coat, nor Black Coat, nor Altars, nor Organs, nor Surplices,
Lawn-Sleeves, Coapes, Corner-Caps; nor does it stand in your Sacraments of
Bread and Wine, which some take standing, some kneeling, some litting; some
say, it is Christ's real Body and Blood no more then it stands in outward
Jewish Offerings: and so do persecute one another about these things which be
merely outward, the Inventions of your own Brain and Hands, since you have
apostatized and ravened from the Spirit, since the Apostles days; And thus you
follow your own Traditions, and compel others to follow them, and so neglect
the Commands of God, and of Christ Jesus, who said, Seek first the Kingdom of
Heaven, and the Righteousness thereof; and then in the Righteousness there is
Peace one with another, and with Christ, who is our Righteousness. And so give
over Envying, Hatred, and Persecution, and Imprisoning, Murdering and Killing
one another about these outward things, which the Kingdom of God stands not in:
for it stands in Righteousness, Faith, and in Love, and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

And come all of you to the Light of Christ, that you have hated, and to the
Spirit of God in you, that you have vexed, grieved and quenched, and the Grace
of God, that you have walked despightfully against, and turned unto Wantonness;
that by it you may come to see your Salvation, and cease from Evil, and learn
to do well, from the Evil (I say) that you have done in times past, and do not
do so any more for the time to come; but as God has given his Spirit to profit
withal, obey it, that so you may profi^ in Truth and Righteousness, and the
Love of God, that edifieth the Body, and which Love fulfils the Law, the Royal
Law, which is, To do unto all as you would have all do unto you; then you will
come to a holy Society, a good, righteous and just Society; and then you will
have your equal weight and measure to weigh and measure withal: for such as
transgress the Royal Law of God, did and do unto others as they would not have
others do unto them; and upon such the Royal Law of God takes hold, and judges
them; yea, upon all Jews, Christians, Turks and Heathens; it does not take
notice of their Profession, nor respect them for their Profession; but it
respects them if they love their Neighbors as themselves, and do unto all men
as they would have all men do unto them: then it shows, that they have a
Profession of Righteousness that is good, and that which is just and holy,
which is the Law of Liberty, which gives another Liberty, if he would have
Liberty himself in this Royal Law, which is answered by the Spirit in every
man, and the Royal Law answers it.

And this Royal Law takes hold upon all Men and Women in the whole Earth, let
their Profession be what it will be, if they grieve the Spirit of God; it
judges all that walk not according to the Spirit of God in them, that brings
them to the Royal Law, in which they have Liberty; and then they come to
confess the one Legistator, or Lawgiver, one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom is
all, and one Lord, who is over all.

So then let this be read seriously with the Spirit of God, in every Male and
Female, that they may answer the Royal Law of God, in which they may all have
Liberty, Unity, Commerce, Fellowship and a Society, a holy, a just, a righteous
one, in which all do to others as they would have them do to them; and they
come to love their Neighbors as themselves. And in this all Nations of men may
keep a Society, a Unity, a Trade, a Traffic, and a Communion, and Commerce,
and hold a Correspondency one with another; and this will preserve him in a
natural Affection: And as they all keep in this Royal Law, that answers the
Spirit of God in them all, and his Light and Grace, in which they will have a
Unity, and by it to be kept above all the Religions and Worships they have made
with that peevish spirit that has led to disobey the Spirit of God, from which
they have not natural Affections, who cannot do to others as they would have
others do to them, that cannot bring you to the Royal Law of God: This Royal
Law will slay that peevish spirit in you all; and that being slain and fallen,
then falls all Religions that you have set up together in the whole World. And
the Spirit of the Lord turns you to the Royal Law, whereof God is the Donor,
and judges them that transgress it: And so in this Royal Law you keep dominion,
and you keep your Love to your Neighbors, as to your selves; and the Royal Law
keeps you in that Spirit, To do unto all as you would have all do unto you.

If any man (Jam. 1.23.) hears the Word, and declares not the same by his
Works, he is like unto a man, beholding his natural Face in a Glass; for as
soon as he looks on himself he goes his way, and forgets immediately what
fashion he was of: But who so looks into the perfect Law of Liberty, and
continues therein; if he be not a forgetful Hearer, but a Doer of the Work,
this man shall be blessed in his Deed.

Now consider this all ye that profess God and Christ, you Christians, Jews,
and others; for, is not this your Condition? Have you looked into the perfect
Law of Liberty? and if so, With what have you looked into it? Is it not by the
Spirit of God, and the Light of Christ? which when you have looked into by the
Spirit and Light of Christ Jesus, and not done the same, you may read your
selves, as in a Glass that you look into, and after forget what manner of men
you are.

And so are not all that look into this perfect Law of Liberty, whether they be
Jew, Christian, or Heathen, who look into this perfect Law of Liberty, and does
it not, are like unto the natural Man or Woman; that look into a Glass, and
after that, forget what manner of Men and Women they are of: and so they that
look into the perfect Law of Liberty, and do it not, are not blessed, nor happy
in their Deeds; though they may be Hearers of this perfect Law of Liberty, and
yet not Doers, they are like (I say) unto the Natural Man and Woman, that looks
(as says the Apostle) into the Glass, and after know not what manner of Men or
Women they are, though they see themselves when they look into the Glass. But
they that look into the perfect Law of Liberty, and do the same, do not forget
what manner of men they are, but see what manner of men they are, and what
manner of men they have been. And so by the perfect Law of Liberty, looking
into it, and doing it, they mend; so that they who have been without Natural
Affections, it brings them to Natural Affections; who have not loved their
Neighbors as themselves, it brings them to love them as themselves; who have
not done to all men as they would have all men do to them, this perfect Law of
Liberty, looking into it, and doing of it, will bring them to do unto all as
they would have all do unto them.

So look upon all Christendom, and all that profess God and Christ in the whole
World, and those also that do not, who do grieve, and quench and vex the Spirit
of God, and hate the Light of Christ, and walk despightfully against the Spirit
of Grace, though these have the Word of God sown upon all their Grounds; and if
they hear it, and declare it not in their Works, Lives and Conversations, they
are like a natural man beholding his Face in a Glass, and forgetting what
manner of man he was.

Then they, as was said before, that do look into the Law of Liberty, and do
the Law of Liberty, do know what manner of men they are, and have been, and
what manner of Works, and what manner of Conversations they have been of: And
so as the Word is sown upon all Grounds, for all to hear it, to wit, the Stony
Ground, the Highway Ground, the Thorny Ground, and the Good Heart; and though
all these hear the Word, and do it not, they are all deceivers of their own
Souls, though they may cry out against Deceivers without them.

All Sects and People in Christendom, among Jews, Turks, Heathens and
Christians, upon whose Ground the Word of the Lord is fown, if it be the
Highway, or the Stony, or Thorny, or Good Ground; now they all hearing of this
Word, and not doing it, though they may cry out against Deceivers without them,
yet they are all Deceivers of their own Souls themselves: For, who so hear the
Word, hears that that puts a difference between the Precious and the Vile Words
and Thoughts, Deeds and Actions: And it is this Word that must Sanctify and
Reconcile them to God, and hammers, and cuts, and hews down that that has made
a Separation between them and God. And so they that will not hear nor regard
God's Law, which is Royal and Perfect, called, The Law of Liberty, wherein the
Royal Society is preserved, and the Royal Communion, and the Royal Commerce,
and Natural Affections, and love their Neighbors as themselves, and do unto
all others as they would have them do unto them: And this Royal Law is from
God, and reaches over all Transgressors, and answers that which has
transgrest in all Mankind, which man must come to, if he comes to this Law, and
comes to acknowledge, There is one Lawgiver.

Now there is something of God in the Heathens, Turks and Gentiles, that when
you called Christians do them any Injury, they are sensible of the Evil, and
may say unto you, You would not be dealt so with your selves: And the Heathen,
Turks and Indians, if they do at any time that which is bad to one another,
there is that in them tells them, They should not have done so and so; which
manifests something of the Royal Law in them, which if seriously and diligently
minded, would bring them To do that unto others, as they would have them do
unto them.

And so all you called Christians, or that go under that Name, Do you begin
first to do unto others as you would have others do unto you; and so do you all
unto the Heathen, Turks, Jews and Indians, as you would have them do unto you;
seeing there is something of God in all, that answers in measure his Royal Law,
viz. To do unto all as you would have them do unto you.

Now all Mankind, that is, all Men and Women upon the Face of the Earth, being
made of one Blood and Mould, being the Sons of Adam by nature, and all Children
of God by Creation; and the Earth is the Lord's, and the Fullness thereof, which
he has given unto Men and Women, who dwell upon the Face of his Earth; and so
all being the Lord's Workmanship and Creating, he is the Lawgiver which is, to
do unto all as they would have all do unto them: and God, who has given them
this just, good, and holy Law to all Mankind, has placed something in Man and
Woman to answer this Law, which if they obey, then they come to do the Royal
Law of God, and all confess the one Lawgiver, who is the Lord, and to love
God: all Nations of men come to confess, That the Lord is the Lawgiver; which
Law is, To do unto all as they would have all do unto them; for if they do not,
they disobey the Principle of God in them, in the first place; and then
transgress his Law, and lose the true Weight and Measure, whereby they come
short of their Duty, In not doing unto others as they would have others do to
them.

Now all Magistrates and Princes in the whole World amongst men should see to
it, that this Law be carefully and diligently observed and kept; namely, To do
unto others as they would have others do unto them: then a royal, just, good
and holy Society with all mankind among the several Nations in the world might
be preserved: and this would keep people out of the many other Encumbrances of
National Laws, whereof few know the end of, no not themselves. For this Royal
Law respects no man's Person, and is free, and is to be obeyed, and does freely,
and keeps freely; and in obeying and doing of it God is honored in every
heart, the Just and Holy God, by his just and holy Principle in man and woman,
which brings them to do his just and holy Law; and by this, out of every mouth,
from the Principle of God within, will the Lord be confessed to be the Lawgiver,
one Lawgiver and one Law, To do unto all as they would have all do unto them.

Now weigh the thing seriously, That should all, or did all obey this Royal
Law, it would be a special means to prevent a great deal of Violence,
Corruptions and Cruelties now exercised amongst the Children of men, as also
that that breeds these Corruptions and Cruelties, it will put a check and stop
to them, by obeying (I say) of it. And should all people in the Universe obey
the royal Law of God, according to the Principle of God in them, they being
encouraged all to this, and taught all by this, it will bring them off of those
Debaucheries, Adulteries, Fornications, Thefts, Murders, etc. which so rage in
the whole World; for the Royal Law of God, nor yet the Principle of God within,
admits of no such thing. And also this Royal Law of God, according to the
Principle of God in every man, will bring all people in all their Merchandise,
in buying, selling, and in their Husbandry, Trading and Shop-keeping, To do
unto all as they would have all do unto them: now in so doing, they honor the
Lord in their Lives and Conversations, in fulfilling (I say) this his Royal Law.

But now, as long as the Priests or Teachers (who are like the Framers of
Religions for the diversity and several sorts of people in the World) do speak
against this Principle of God in every man, and say, That every man has not a
Principle of God in him, to bring him to do his Royal Law; they teach thereby
the people, as well as themselves to transgress this Royal Law, To do unto
others that they would not have others do to them, as has been sufficiently
made manifest. And therefore those Teachers, who do frame Religions for people
in all Nations under the whole Heaven (for they have their Religions, and their
Priests, as well as Christians, who frame Religions, as the Christians Priests
do for their people) yet these Teachers say, That every man had not something
of God in him, nor of his Spirit. And so these Teachers in the whole world do
bring their people to those Religions that they have made; and do get the
Magistrates Power and Sword to hold then up, and allow them a Maintenance for
their Preaching of it to them: And so hereby is begotten a great deal of
Peevishness, Fury and Rage one against another, and one Religion maker against
another Religion-maker, as may easily be seen over all the world; the National
Religions differing one from another, and yet the people are bound to observe
all that which their Priests have framed: whereas if all men and women came to
the Principle of God in themselves, by which they might come to the Royal Law
of God; namely, In doing to others as, etc. then all these peevish religions,
and the Makers and Upholders of them, would quickly fall, wherein they did unto
others as they would not have others do unto them. And this would be Religion,
to do the Law of God, which is, To love thy Neighbor as thy self, and God
above all; and then thou would be ready to entertain Strangers: For if thou
should be a Stranger, thou would think it hard, should thou not be
entertained and relieved; the Sick, and the Widow and Fatherless the same
compassion as thou would have done to thy self, being in the like condition,
capacity and necessity. And this Principle of God within, in keeping the Royal
Law, keeps up the mind to God, who is the Lawgiver, who is blessed forever,
from whom they receive their Religion. And this Royal Law of God being kept by
all the Sons and Daughters of men in the whole World, which is according to the
Principle of God in them all, and one with it: this preserves natural
Affections, and so Nature in its course, where Nature may not be destroyed; for
where Nature is destroyed, it is but by the Transgressor of the Royal Law;
whereas this Royal Law being duly kept, it preserves (I say) the Creation of
God (part of which are men and women) in order and government themselves, and
to walk and to do to all as they, etc. And out of this Royal Law of God all the
Disorder is, and all the Ill-government in the whole Creation, by disobeying
and transgressing (I say) this Royal Law of God; yea, and all the unequal
measuring Weights and false Judgments that are among them that do transgress
and disobey this Royal Law, which is, To do to all etc. yea, and all the
Ill-neighbourhood in the whole World is amongst them who disobey this Royal Law
of God, and quench the Spirit of the Lord in themselves, which would lead them
to obey it: And all the good Neighborhood in the whole Universe is, by obeying
the Principle of God in them to do the Royal Law of God, whereby they love God
above all, and their Neighbor as themselves.

And in Ezekiel. 5. where the Lord said, That the Jews had despised his Judgments
and his Laws more then the Gentiles, and had broken his Commandments more then
the Nations. Now mark, May not this be applied unto Christians, who have broken
and despised the Law of Life, the Law of Love, and the Law of Faith, and the
Commands of Christ, who says, Love one another, and love Enemies? Have not (I
say) Christians broken this more then the Gentile Nations and Heathens? yea, we
can say, we have found it so; for they are more ready to entertain Strangers
then Christians, who have cast away that Command; nay, many of them are more
Christian in their Dealings then such as are called Christians; which
signifies, that there is something of God in these Heathens and Nations, that
brings them to a sensibility of the Law of God, which is, To do unto all, etc.

Psalm. 117. Where David says, Praise the Lord all ye Heathen: Which imports as
much, that there is something of God in the very Heathen; else it would be a
vain word to bid them praise the Lord. And again, says the Psalmist there
following, Praise the Lord all ye Nations, etc. He does not say, one Nation,
but all Nations must do it. Now mark, This likewise imports th^^ there is
something of God in them all, whereby they may praise him; agreeable to that of
the Apostle, who says, That which is to be known of God is manifest in them:
This he speaks to the Romans, who were sometime Heathen. So if the Priests
Doctrine be received, who say, There is not something of God in all Nations of
men, and in the Heathen; then by their Doctrine (I say) David's words are
needless, who exhorts all Nations and Heathens to praise the Lord: But David
full well knew what he spoke, who saw Christ; but the Priests see not
themselves, and so are Judges in their evil Thoughts of the Scripture and holy
Men's words, whose judgment is judged by the holy men's words.

Psalm. 100. Be joyful in the Lord all ye Lands, and serve the Lord with
Gladness, and come before his Presence with a Song: be ye sure that the Lord is
God; he it is that made us, not we our selves. Now mark this general Doctrine
of David's, who would have all the Lands to be joyful in the Lord, etc. Here
David made no Sect, as if some people only were to serve him, and as if some
people only were to praise him; no says he, All Nations and all Heathen are to
praise the Lord: And now, if they all serve the Lord, and praise him, then they
all obey his Law, his Royal Law, which is, To do to all as they would have all
do to them.

Isa. 51. The Islands of the Gentiles shall hope in me, and put their trust in
my Arm. Here you see is a Promise made unto the Heathen, that they should trust
in the Arm of the Lord, and hope in God; which clearly implies, that there is
something of God in them.

And in Romans 15. where the Apostle writes to those that were sometime Heathens,
how that the Offering of the Gentile should be accepted of God; now this was a
spiritual Sacrifice: and how the Lord would be praised among the Gentiles, and
he should be lauded among all the Nations; and praise him (says he) among all
the Nations.

And again, the Prophet Isaiah says, There shall be a Root of Jesse, and he
shall arise to reign over the Gentiles, in him shall the Gentiles trust.

So that it is undoubtedly clear here, that there is something of God in all the
Gentiles, in all the Nations and People, which would praise the Lord; and by
that of God in them they come to know the Root of Jesse, viz. Christ Jesus to
reign over them; who is the Light, and enlighteneth them, they see him, by
which Light Christ has enlightened them withal; all such trust in Christ, who
reigns over them, and rules over them: and so they come to do his Law and
Commandments, his Royal Law of Love, of Life, and of Faith, by which they come
to do unto all as they would have all do unto them, and to love their
Neighbors as themselves.

George Fox.

THE END.

