A WARNING To all the MERCHANTS IN LONDON AND Such as Buy and Sell.

WITH An Advisement to them to lay aside their superfluity, and with it to
nourish the POOR.

By G. F.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons, at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate,
1658.

A WARNING To all the MERCHANTS IN LONDON, etc.
FOR them to keep to yea and nay to all people in their common occasions, for
whatsoever is more then these, comes of evil; and to take heed of deceitful
merchandise, and cozening, and cheating, and defrauding one another, and
dissembling one with another; and to take heed of deceitful Merchandise in all
their buying and selling, and in all their Exchange; away with all deceitful
Merchandise, for as a swift Witness is the Lord come to plead with you, and
against you that use deceitfulness in your Merchandise, and use it in your
buying and selling, and Sir, and bow the Hat, and scrape the foot, and make the
coursie, and Master, and Mistress, in your service, and forsooth, this is your
vain custom, and ask many times the worth double of the thing to some people;
and under this complementing way, and in it, lies the deceit and overreach,
and lurks to cozen and cheat, telling a falsehood, a flattery; so by fair
speaking and flattering words, often times the simple is deceived: Therefore this
is a Charge from the living God to you all, Be true, be faithful to God, be
just, be innocent, and ask no more for the thing then you would have; be at a
word, so say, and so do, when you ask more, then you will have, or almost
double, and say you will not take it except you have so much, and then send
your boys after them, and so take it, you are not here at so say, and so do;
and here are you judged with the Law of Liberty to be out of it, far off the
life of Christians, like Heathen in life and practice; therefore be at a word,
and then you will be a good savor, for the Lord is come near to judgment
among you; for while you are not at so say, and so do, you are not in the law
of liberty, you are not in the Prophets, you are not in the Gospel, you are
found out of them all.

And again ye Merchants, great men, and rich men, what a dishonor is it to you
to go in your gold and silver, and gold Chains about your necks, and your
costly attire, and your poor blind women and children, and creeples, crying and
making a noise up and down your streets, a dishonor to your City, showing that
you are not under the Law, nor under the Gospel; for under the Law they had
tithes and tenths to feed all the fatherless and strangers, for tithes was for
that work and end; for how can you go up and down in your superfluity, and
abound in your riches, and see the poor, blind, and creeples go about your
streets? which of all other, the blind should be taken care of; therefore let
these things be minded and considered, and fear God, and do that which may be
an honor to you, and Christianity, and your City; and in all your Shops, and
Warehouses, and Exchanges, keep to your words, and so say, and so do, and that
you may not cozen and cheat one another, nor no people; for this City has a
name and a bad report of deceitful Merchandise, which deceives the Country
people that deals with you: O therefore blot it out, and do so no more, but
judge one another in these things, and be a good savor, and commend your
selves to the innocent and simple, that a child may come among you and not be
wronged, and that will be pleasing to God that you do righteously, and to the
just God, that you do justly; and then to the righteous just God you will be a
good savor, and to the country people, when you are turned from the bad to
the good, so that you may be trusted for faithfulness and honesty, which on the
contrary doing, it is dishonesty; and you that scrape, and cap, and coursie,
and Sir, and Master, and Mistress, and flatter one another, with the deceitful
titles, and ask more for your commodity then it is worth, and are not at a
word, so say, and so do; but tell people you will not take it, and then have
your Boys and Lasses to fetch them back again; this is the way to make the
simple fear you, and the innocent to stand afar off, and to keep up a bad
savor, and a bad name; therefore this is the word of the Lord God, and a
charge to you in the presence of the Lord God, and to you all, That you charge
your servants not to cozen and cheat any, nor to ask more for your things then
you will take, and to keep to yea and nay in your common occasions, and to keep to
a word, and that will be pleasing to God, and a good savor to all sober people.

And all you Merchants whatsoever, and Shopkeepers, take heed of cozening and
cheating of people with your dark back-windows; for truth is risen that will
keep out all deceit; therefore be sober, and take it patiently, and live in it,
for truth will make you free; therefore if you will be made free by truth, give
over your deceitful Merchandise, and give over your many words, and keep to
yea and nay; Mark, you must be judged by the Law, and all your profession and
crying up Ordinances, and your notions and experiences, while you live in
deceitful merchandise, and above yea and nay in your common occasions, you are
in the evil, and are not at so say, and so do; you are all judged by the law of
liberty, that are deceitful in your merchandise, in your buying and selling,
and cozening and cheating poor country people in your merchandise, you are not
to name the Name of Christ but as you depart from Iniquity; and the truth has
not made you free who are found in the evil, Judged by the Law of liberty, and
all your deceitful merchandise; therefore come to a word, come to yea and nay,
all you young and old whatsoever, so by the Lord you will be received into his
Kingdom; least you be turned out with the rich Glutton, and the poor Lazarus
taken into Abraham's bosom: Therefore take in the blind, halt and lame, and obey
the things that Christ commands you, ye that call him Lord, take in the blind
and the creeples that cries up and down your streets, and feast them when you
make your feasts; for the rich feast the rich, and not the poor that cannot
feast them again; and see now if you will take up the Cross of Christ, and obey
his command, then you will become like unto them, when you obey Christ's
command, and show that you have his spirit and mind in you, and are
Christians; for while you are not made free by truth, all your Religion and
Profession of Christ and the Apostles words, is vain, and your conversation is
below in the earth, and not with Christ in Heaven. And again, all the while
your poor, and blind, and lame creeples, and women, and children are crying up
and down your streets, and Steeplehouse-doors, and alleys, and corners, after
you that call your selves Christians, and yet they Christians as well as you,
and so members of the same body; so you may say, Be clothed, be filled, be
warmed, and be such a people the Apostle speaks of, yet let them be crying up
and down the Streets not provided for; so this is to hang gold on one arm, and
let the other go bare; or hang gold on the back, and let the leg go bare; for
all are members of one body, the poor as well as the rich; and this declares
that you are out of the law: For the Lord took the tithes and gave them to the
strangers, and fatherless, and widows, and gave all enough, that there was not
a beggar in Israel among them, Now judge your selves, and see how short you
come of them in life and practice, which say you are Christians, and profess
the Gospel; these things are a grief to many sober people in the City, to see
that Magistrates has no more feeling of these things, and yet so much
profession of Religion, and preaching among them, and so much riches that men
never knew want of; and thereby many comes to be hardened, which they might
think if it were but to keep the honor of their City, they would not let above
all things, blind men, and creeples, and lame people, and poor fatherless
children make a noise up and down the streets, and Steeplehouse-doors; but out
of their abundance they would lay a little aside, and have a place provided
that all the poor, blind, lame creeples should be put into, and Nurses set over
them, and looked to, cherished, and seen unto that they do not want, and thus
them that could work, to work; and this would be a good savor of the City, and
of the Magistrates, Aldermen, and Merchants of the City, and to the sober
people, and to the Lord God, that there should not be seen a beggar walk up and
down the streets, but that there might be a place where they might be
maintained with a little out of their superfluity; yea, before there should be
such a noise with the poor, the blind, the lame, and the fatherless, every one
lay by a little out of their abundance, and spare some off of their backs in
gold and silver lace, or their chains and rings; for who considers not the
cry of the poor, but turns his ear from them, them their Maker will not
regard; and all who do not visit the fatherless, and the poor, and the sick,
and feed the hungry, and clothe the naked, and are of a profession of Religion,
and makes a talk of Christ's words, and the Prophets, and Moses; such are in the
wisdom below, which is earthly, sensual, and devilish, not preservers of the
Creation, not in the wisdom that is from above, which is gentle, easy to be
entreated, by which the creation is to be preserved, by which it must be
ordered again to the glory of God; you going in your gold and silver, yea in
your very shoes laced, and the poor want bread, want stockings and shoes; and
you your many dishes, change of dishes, and that you call novelties, and the
poor cannot get bread; spare one of your dishes, and let it be carried to the
place for the poor, and do not let them come begging for it neither, but let
them have a place where they may be kept, and that will be for your honor and
renown; for consider what abundance of riches is in this City, and what good
you might do with it, or how soon you may be taken from it, or it from you, by
fire or sea, and yet for all this ye will not consider your poor brethren which
are made of the same blood and mould, to dwell upon the face of the Earth:
Therefore mind truth that makes free from deceit, and from all cozening and
dissembling, and will bring you to a word in all your common occasions, and to
so say, and so do, and to worship God in the truth, and to worship God in the
spirit, that the Devil is out of, and come to the pure Religion, which is, to
visit the fatherless, to visit the sick, and relieve the hungry, and clothe the
naked, that brings you to practice and to do the will of God; and give over
your living in words, and your hearts afar off, surseiting in riches, iniquity,
and deceit; but come to honesty and plain dealing, and mercifulness, and take
heed of pride, and loftiness, and wantonness, and haughtiness, and walk humbly
before the Lord, that you may come to the life the Saints was in, the Prophets,
Christ, and the Apostles were in.

For the mighty day of the Lord is coming, wherein every one of you must give
account of his deeds done in the body, and every man's work must be tried by
fire, and every man's works shall be brought to the light, and manifest by it.
So your day is not past, while you have time, prise it.

G. F.

The End.
(...) has defiled his Heart, his Soul, his Mind, his Conscience, his Spirit;
that which purges this out of him, is the Blood of Christ, who by his Blood and
fiery Baptism has purged out our sins, and sanctifies us.

So they that be without understanding, Pharisee like, knows not that which
purges all meats; for whatsoever goes into the mouth, and so into the belly,
and so into draught the Purger of all meats.

And also knows not Christ, and is without the understanding of him who purges
with his Blood, the Mind, Heart, Soul, Spirit, and Conscience, with his Blood,
through which they come to serve the Living God.

And all they that pleads for a Purgatory when they are dead, to purge them;
and they that pleads for a body of Death and Sin to the Grave, and forbids
meats, as if they should defile them, that goes into the belly, and so into the
draught, the Purger that purges all meats, they are as blind as the Jews,
chief Priests and Pharisees, and are as ignorant of the draught which purges
all meats, and of Him that purges the Conscience, to wit, Christ Jesus, the
Seed in whom all Nations is blessed, and therein Sanctified and Reconciled to
God, and all things in Heaven, and all things in the Earth, and receives his
Blessing and Promise in the Seed, and sees all things is blessed and clean to
them, as they were in the Beginning, by Christ Jesus.

the 7 th. 1676. the 7th Month 1676 G. Fox


