Vera Effigies Reverendi Mar. Franck SS T. P. Aul: Pembro: Cantab: Custodis
Eccl: Sti. Paul's Prebend: S. Albani Archidiac. etc.



LI SERMONS, Preached by the Reverend Dr. Mark Frank, Master of Pembroke Hall
in Cambridge, Archdeacon of St. Albans, Prebend, and Treasurer of St. Paul's,
etc.

BEING A Course of Sermons, Beginning at Advent, and so continued through the
Festivals.

To which is added, A Sermon Preached at St. PAUL'S CROSS, in the Year Forty
One, And then Commanded to be Printed By King CHARLES the First.

Idem and Sermo and Vita.

LONDON, Printed by Andrew Clark for John Martyn, Henry Brom, and Richard
Chiswell, and are to be sold, at the Bell in St. Paul's Churchyard, at the Gun
at the West End of St. Paul's, and at the Two Angels and Crown in Little
Britain, 1672.

To the most Reverend Father in God, GILBERT, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury,
his Grace, Primate of All England, and Metropolitan, one of His Majesty's Most
Honorable Privy Council, etc.
May it please your Grace,
THough by that infinite distance I am in to your Grace, I ought to make all
the Apologies in the world for this Attempt; yet when I reflect upon your own
admired Candor in receiving the most inferior Addresses, and my own Duty in
making this, I need not, I hope, use a Complement to excuse that, which I
neither could, nor ought not, but to have done. For the Author of these
Sermons, had that Relation to your Grace, and your self that Favor for him,
that no other name is so fit, or so worthy to prefix to any thing of his as
your Graces. And besides, I may very reasonably suppose, that there may be
something in the following Papers, that may not be unfit to be offered to such
a Personage. I humbly therefore pray, that either the one, or the other may
excuse the forwardness of this Dedication. As to my own very great obligations
to your Grace, I will not be so Conceited as to mention them. For when I have
told so Public, I need not add any Private Reasons. And besides, it may be
looked upon by the World as a design to gain a Reputation to my self, by
talking of Favors from a Person of such Eminence. Yet I beg that I may have
leave to say, that I reckon it my greatest Honor, in having the Advantage of
presenting this Offering, which ought to be made to your Grace, by

Your Graces Meanest and most Dutiful Servant Thomas Pomfret.

TO THE READER.
THough I do not call, I suppose Thee judicious, and shall therefore give to
Thee, and to my self the ease of saying little. For I am sensible enough, that
the Author of these following Sermons will be to all that read them, so much
his own Advocate, that they will not want any Orator in the Preface. And to
those that read them not, he said nothing, nor shall I. Passing then by on
purpose those Artifices of Procuring a fair reception to the Book, by the
ordinary Pageantry of Commendations; I think it will be enough to assure Thee,
that as the Author left the Copies fairly writ by his own hand, so they come as
truly his to thine. For this Reverend Person doing me the Honor of leaving me
his Executor, by that I had the Possession and Care of all his Papers. And
amongst them, These I found to be so worthy of the Public, that I concluded it
a Trespass against the common interest to keep them in my own hands. But that
too which made me the more confident of their value, was the earnestness of
many, and to that the Approbation of as great a Person as the Church has any,
for their Impression. And accordingly I did forthwith upon the Doctors death,
committ the Copies to a Stationer, who very disingenuously for some years
delayed, and at last utterly refused (for what ends I know not) the Printing
them. But retriving them from him, I have put them now into honest men's hands,
from whence I hope they will come well corrected into thine. And then I am very
confident they will speak enough for themselves, and need no more from him who
is

Thy humble Servant Thomas Pomfret.

IMPRIMATUR

Hic Liber cui Titulus, A Course of Festival Sermons, Preached by Dr. Frank.

June 29. 1670. SAM. PARKER.

A SERMON ON The First Sunday in Advent.
S. MATTHEW. xxi. 9. And the multitudes that went before, and that followed,
cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; Blessed is he that comes in the
Name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.
BLessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord! Blessed is any coming and
going that comes so: Hosanna to him, God bless him, or Hosanna for him; God be
blessed for him, whoever he be. All that went before, and all that follow, all
men will say so.

And yet in Nomine Domini incipit omne malum, said Luther once, In the Name of
the Lord begins all the mischief. (And we still find it so) the whole game of
mischief begun and carried on in nomine Domini, under the Name of God, as the
Lords work. How should we do then to discern the right in Nomine Domini, when
he that comes in the Name of the Lord, comes truly so? Many ways peradventure
may be given to know it by; but this is the shortest; If the multitudes that
went before, and that followed after, cry Hosanna to him, if the Saints of
former Ages and their successors approve the manner of his coming, if it be in
a way the Church of Christ has from its first beginning allowed for Christian;
that is, if he come meek and lowly, humbly riding upon an Ass, with Palms and
Olives, the ensigns of Peace and Love; then he comes in nomine Domini right;
but if proud and scornful, with Horse and Chariot, Sword and Spear, instead of
Olive Boughs and Branches, with a Sword to cut in sunder the bond of Peace and
Unity, and a Spear to keep off Charity: Let him cry out in nomine Domini, talk
of the Lord, and take his name into his mouth never so much, it is but a mere in
nomine, and no more, a mere pretense and name, no Domini, nothing in it really
of God; nor the multitudes before, nor the multitudes that follow, nor any of
the Primitive Christians ever sung Hosanna, gave any blessing or approbation to
such comers or their comings. He that comes here in the Text, came nothing so;
and he that will come after him, must not come so, Hosanna to no such.

But Hosanna to him that truly comes in the name of the Lord: Gods blessing
with him. To him that comes so in the Text, to the Son of David, to him no
question. It Is the business, both Text and Time, the words in hand, the days in
hand, the days of holy Advent are to teach us, to sing Hosanna's to our
Savior, to bless God for his coming, to bless him for his coming, all his
comings, all his ways of coming to us; to bless his day that is a coming,
whence all his other comings come: to bless him in the highest, with heart and
tongue, and hand, to the highest we can go, that he may also bless us for it in
the highest.

That it might be done the better, Holy Church has designed four Sundays to
prepare us for it, wherein to tune our pipes, and fit our instruments and
voices to sing Hosanna in the right key, the highest pitch, to praise God as is
fitting for Christ's coming.

A business sure well worth the doing, and some good time for it worth the
observing, if we either think him worth it, that is here spoke of as coming, or
his coming worth it. Indeed the coming in the Text is not the coming of that
Feast that is now a coming, but it is one of the ways prescribed by the Church
for our better coming to the Feast, by preparing with these multitudes some
boughs and branches, some Hosanna's and Benedictus's, some provision of holy
thoughts and divine affections for it. They that went before, and they that
followed in the Text, sung Hosanna for a lesser coming of Christ's, then that
was in the flesh: we may well do it for a greater; especially making this in
the Text a degree or note to ascend to that, one coming to usher to the other;
the humility of his coming to Jerusalem, a way to exalt the greater humility of
his coming into the world. And we have the multitudes before, and the
multitudes that follow, all Patriarchs before rejoicing with Father Abraham at
his day, and all the Fathers since; all that went before or followed since his
coming, former and later Christians for our example. They all in their several
Generations thought fit yearly to remember it, and so long, even four Advent
Sundays together, to prepare the multitudes and people for it; that so by
preaching to them the way and manner of all Christ's comings, they might 1.
perfectly be instructed who it was and is, that truly comes blessed in the name
of the Lord, and not be deceived by pretenders and pretenses: and 2. also truly
and duly give the blessing where it ought, sing the Hosanna when, and where,
and to whom we should, celebrate the memory of Christ's coming right, and
Hosanna it as is meet.

Thus did all that went before; and it is fit they that come after should do as
much, unless they were wiser or better then all that went before them. And all
will do it, but those who are afraid to have their comings discovered to be no
comings in the name of the Lord by the unlikeness of their comings; afraid to
lose their in nomine, the name however, to have the multitudes that follow them
fall off from them, if they should be taught by day, or time, or Text, how far
different their ways and comings are, from the humble lowly comings and ways of
Christ, whose name they so much pretend to come in, though their own name be
the only name they truly come for.

Better example we have here before us, and by Gods blessing we will bless with
them; follow them in blessing Christ, both himself and coming, in the time and
manner all that have followed him ever did it. And to do it the better, and
more according to Text and time, let us consider,

I. Who they were that here blessed Christ for his coming. The multitudes that
went before, and that followed, both of them says the Text.

II. What was their way of blessing, how they did it, (...) says the
Evangelist, they cried, cried it aloud.

III. Their Song of Blessing, what they cried, Hosanna to the Son of David:
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest.

When we have thoroughly considered these particulars, there will remain nothing
but a word of Exhortation to follow them that thus go before us; as they cried
it and sung it before, so we still to cry it and sing it after them. I begin
with the persons, that we may in the first place know whom it is we follow, the
multitudes that went before, and that followed.

And that to the Letter is no more then those companies of people, Men, Women,
and Children who went out to Mount Olivet to meet our Savior at his coming to
Jerusalem, when he came riding thither upon an Ass, some of them before him,
some behind him, crying out Hosanna.

Many they were it seems, and not a single multitude neither, (...), multitudes
in the plural, several multitudes that did it; and though it be no argument to
prove any thing good or lawful, because the multitudes do it; yet when the
multitudes do good, it is good to take some notice of it: nay when so many do
it, it looks the better. The Song of praise sounds never better then in the
great Congregation, and among much people. The Music never sweeter in the ears
of Heaven, then when the Choir is fullest; a good note to teach us to fill Holy
Assemblies, to bear our parts in the Congregation.

And in this Congregation 2. the Music it seems has all its keys and voices:
Men, Women, and Children, all sing their parts: no Sex or Age to think
themselves exempted from bearing part in Gods Service: though the Apostle will
not suffer Women to preach and teach, he will give them leave to sing and pray,
to answer the Responses, Antiphones, and Versicles, the Hymns and Psalms; the
little Children too to learn betimes to lisp them out: no better seasoning of
their mouths then with Prayers and Praises to their Redeemer.

Nor 3. were these multitudes merely the rout of people; there were men of all
conditions in them, though it may be not many Joseph's or Nicodemus's, yet some
no doubt; so many of the Rulers having had their sick Servants or Wives or
Children healed by him. There are none too good or great for Gods Service. It Is
no disparagement to any man's honor to be among those multitudes that go out at
any time to meet Jesus, no dishonor to say Amen with the meanest in them, to
join with them in any part or point of Gods Service. You may remember the
nobility of the Bereans above the Thessalonians, is by the Scripture Heraldry
placed in this, that they received the word with all readiness of mind, and
searched the Scriptures daily, Acts xvii. 11. in short, were more religious and
devout, and earnest in the way of Christ, to worship him then the other.

Nor 4. were these multitudes Choirs of Priests and Clerks, or only Orders of
Religious men; it was a Congregation of Seculars, though there were Priests and
Apostles in it: it is St. Chrysostoms own note, to tell us, men are not to put
off the work of Devotion and Religion wholly to the Priest and Clerk, as if
they only were to sing the Benedictus, Hosanna's, or Allelujahs, and the
multitudes only stand looking on; or think men in some Religious Orders were
only obliged to live orderly and like Christians, all secular or laymen as
they pleased. Non ita sane, non ita est, says he, It is not so indeed, it is
not so: Hoc plane est quod evertit orbem universum. It Is this. It is plainly
this, this false opinion or fancy, that ruins all the world. Behold the
multitudes here going before, crying, and the multitudes following after,
answering them in their Hosanna to the Son of David, all ranks of people, the
most secular, so religious grown since Christ's coming. It Is to be feared he is
going from us, or will be quickly, if we omit our parts, if we forget our
duties, if we once begin to think too much of bearing part or share in his
Service, either in the Congregation, or out of it.

But 5. however, they that pretend to go out to meet Christ, to have more sense
of Devotion, and Zeal to it then others, they above all surely will be easily
heard in their Hosanna's or Benedictus. The more devout we are, we sing the
louder; the more earnest we be to meet our Lord, the more welcome will we give
him, the higher gratulations and acclamations to him. Whoever fail in their
parts, methinks such should not. If we pretend to love him more then others,
then more prayers and praises to him then others: if we love him more, they
will be more, and we will not be ashamed to profess it in the multitude, nor
think much to be in the multitude among the meanest or poorest at it.

Surely not, seeing 6. the Jews themselves think not much to do so, seeing them
so ready, so eager, so violent, in giving honor to him; can it be expected
that Christians should be behind? but they before, and we not behind? Too much
it is that they before and we behind; it should be rather, we before and they
behind: though they got the start in time to get before us, we should sure in
measure get it, go there before them. Christ came to them, and they go out to
meet him: He comes to us, and we go from him. He came to them at this time with
a sad message of destruction, and therefore weeps in the mount of his triumph
to look upon the City, and yet they entertain him with Hosanna's. Blessed be
the name of the Lord: so come things to pass. He comes to us with tidings of
great joy, such the Angels term it, his Birth no other coming; yet we think
much to sing Hosanna's for it, to keep a day of praise, or a song of praise, or
a face and garb of praise: the more unchristian they that do so, less sensible
of Christ's favors then the very multitude, then the Jew himself. Rare
Christians the while, that think no better, speak no better, rejoice no better
at Christ's coming, at his greatest and most gracious coming.

I cannot say this multitude to the Letter, and in the Story are any
unanswerable argument for our Hosanna's. Yet when a multitude does well, it is
good to follow them: but take it now 2. in the mystery, and there needs no
greater to persuade us.

The multitudes before are in the mystery, the Holy Patriarchs, and they that
followed are the Prophets. Now what the Patriarchs and Prophets have rejoiced
at, that must we. Abraham, says Christ himself, rejoiced to see my day, he saw
it and was glad. Yes, your Father Abraham was glad. He was glad to see Christ a
coming, S. John viii. 56. The Prophets are every where full of joyful
expressions, at the mention of the Messia's coming; their eyes looked, and their
hearts longed for him: and the Prophet Zachary calls to us to tell it out with
Joy, to the Daughter of Sion, tells punctually even of this very joy and coming
too, Zach. ix. 9. And what was written before time, either by Patriarch or
Prophet, was written for our learning, says the Apostle, Romans xv. 4. We may do
what they did, what they would have us.

Or 2. The multitudes before in the mystery are the Jews, the multitudes that
follow are the Gentiles. Both bidden by the Apostle to rejoice, Romans xv. 10.
Rejoice ye Gentiles with his people, his people, the Jews, before, and the
Gentiles behind, all shall rejoice in his salvation: for glory is now coming to
the Jews, glory to his people Israel, and light unto the Gentiles, to light
them by his coming. So sang old Simeon in his Song, S. Luke ii. 32.

3. The multitudes before is the Jewish Synagogue, the multitudes behind the
Christian Church; a multitude indeed that cannot be numbered, Revel. vii. 9. of
Emperors, and Kings, and Princes; Bishops and Priests, Doctors, Martyrs,
Confessors, and Virgins, all in their several Orders and Generations, crying,
Hosanna to the Son of David, the whole world gone after him. Before indeed
only, Notus in Iudaea Deus, God only known in Jury, Psalm. lxxvi. 1. his coming
only talked of in Israel, but after quam admirabile nomen tuum in universa
terra! Psalm. viii. 1. O Lord our Governor, how wonderful or excellent is thy
name in all the world. All these multitudes, the Jew with his multitude of
Patriarchs, Priests, and Levites, and Singers, and Prophets, with his
Sacrifices of Bulls and Rams, and Goats, and Sheep, of Types and Figures, all
crying out Messiah's coming. The Christians, Apostles, Martyrs, Confessors,
Doctors, Virgins, Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, and all several Orders in
their Choirs and Churches throughout the world, crying out he is come; all the
corners of the earth resounding out Hosanna's and Allelujahs to him. Vna est
fides praecedentium at que sequentium populorum, says St. Gregory; all
believing and professing the same he that comes here; they the Jews before
crying he that comes; we the Christians crying he that is come, or rather he
that comes still, that every day comes to us by his Grace, and through his
Word, and in his Sacraments: Blessed is he that comes still, not a tense or
tittle changed; he that comes being the same for ever, eternity and things
eternal being ever coming, never gone or going.

So now the Congregation is full, what should we do but begin our Service? when
we have Law, and Prophets, and Gospel to countenance and bear us company in our
Te Deum and Benedictus, at our Prayers and Praises; in our Joys and Festivals,
all of them crying nothing but Christ, nothing but Christ, blessed be he,
blessed be he, and blessed be his coming, and blessed be his day, and blessed
be his deeds; the whole practice of all Christian Churches and Congregations,
that ever were gathered together in nomine Domini, in the name of the Lord,
till these mere nominal verbal Christians that are afraid of the name of him
that comes, of the name of Jesus, of blessing it or bowing at it; all
Christians, all that came before in the name of Christ, till these pretenders
that follow no body but their own fancies; all agreeing in the same welcome to
their Redeemer, joining in the same prayers and praises: what should we do but
add our voices and sing with them? better sure with the multitudes before and
behind, the whole multitude of Saints of so many Ager, then with a few
scattered headless heedless companies forbear it; better pray and praise with
them, then prattle and prate with these; better their Hosanna and Benedictus to
him that comes in the name of the Lord, then these men's senseless Sermons and
Discourses, who come in their own name, and of their own heads, without Gods
sending them at all. Having then so full a Choir, so many voices to bear us
company, let us also now sing with them.

Yet that we may be sure to sing in Tune, let us first listen a little to the
key and more they bless in: It Is a loud one, for it is a crying; they cried: not
in the sense we often take it, for a mournful tone or note (for it is an
expression of joy and gladness. So S. Luke xix. 37. They began to rejoice,
etc.) but with a loud voice it was they praised him, that is the meaning, so
expressed in the same verse by that Evangelist.

Indeed true it is, God has turned our songs of joy into the voice of weeping
(as the Prophet complains) taken away our Feasts and gaudy days; and we may
well cry, and cry aloud in that sadder sense of the word crying: yet for all
that, must we not lay down the other, or forget the Song of prayer and praise,
especially upon the point of Christ's coming to us. Here it must be crying in
another tone, singing, speaking, proclaiming the great favor and honor of him
that comes in the name of the Lord. Blessing, and honor, and glory to him
that so comes. Now that we be not out in tune or note, let us mind the word, we
shall find the sweetest ways of blessing in it.

1. It Is a loud crying, such is (...), and that teaches us to be devout and
earnest in our prayers and praises, in blessing Christ.

2. It Is loud and to be heard, to instruct us not to be ashamed of our way of
serving Christ; he that is, Christ will be ashamed of him: so Christ professes,
S. Mark viii. 38.

3. It Is the crying of a multitude, many multitudes, and intimates to us what
prayer and praise does best, even the Pu^lick and Common Service.

4. It Is the crying of several multitudes, the same thing, and insinuates peace
and unity; that is the only Christian way of praising God: one God, and one
Faith, and one Christ, says the Apostle, and one heart and mind of all that
profess them; and 'twere best one way of doing it; the same Hosanna, the same
Benedictus, the same voice and form of prayer and praise, and Worship, if it
could be had.

5. It Is of some before, and some that follow; it is not a confused or
disorderly note, or way, hudling and confounding all together, but the voice of
Order, where every one sings in time, in tune, and place; some begin and others
follow, and the Chorus joins, all in decency and order: this to preach decency
and order to them that come in at any time, or call any where upon the name of
Christ, even the very multitude here in Christ's praise keep their parts and
order.

6. It Is a crying, yet of joy we told you, the voice of mirth and gladness,
that we may know Christ is best served with a cheerful spirit. Christianity is
no such dull heavy thing as some have fancied it, it admits of Mirth and Songs,
so they be in nomine Domini, either to the praise of God, or not to his
dishonor, so they be not light, or wanton, or scurrilous, or such like.

7. This crying here is general, and our praises of God must be so too; all
that is without me, and all that is within me praise his holy name: all the
powers of my soul, superior and inferior, all the organs of my body, all the
instruments of my life and living, my estate and means, all to concur in giving
praise to God, in celebrating the mercies, the humilities, the condescensions,
the outgoings and in-comings of my Redeemer.

Thus we have the key and tune of blessing God and Christ devoutly,
confidently, publicly, unanimously, orderly, cheerfully, and universally, with
all our faculties and powers. Let Us now hear the Song of praise, Hosanna to the
Son of David, Blessed is he, etc. And that we may sing in tune, let us know our
parts.

Three parts there are in it as in other Songs, Bassus, Tenor, and Altus, the
Bass, the Tenor, and the Treble. Hosanna to the Son of David, there is the Bass,
the deepest and lowest note, the humanity of Christ in filio David, being the
Son of David; the Bass sings that, that is low indeed for him, we can go no
lower. Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, there is the Tenor or
middle part, he and the name of the Lord joined together, God and Man united,
that is a note higher then the first, the Mediator between God and Man; God in
the highest, Son of David in the lowest; the middle note then follows. And
Hosanna in altissimis, the Altus or Treble, the highest note of all, we can
reach no higher, strain we never so high.

We begin low, that is the way to reach high; Hosanna to the Son of David: Yet
as low as it is, it is hard to hit, hard to reach the meaning of it. Hosanna a
hard note, so Interpreters have found it.

St. Augustine will have it an Interjection only, to express rejoicing, like
that (...) among the Greeks, or Io triumph among the Latins. The truth is,
it is an expression and voice of joy and gladness, though no Interjection: an
expression used by the Jews at the Feast of Tabernacles, a joyful acclamation,
enough to authorize common and received expressions of joy, though it may be
they that use them do not perfectly understand them; especially joy
inexpressible (such as ours should be for the Son of David's coming) may be
allowed to express it self as it can, or as it does in other rejoycings, when
it can do no better.

Some interpret it Redemption, others an Hymn, or Praise, others Grace, others
Glory, others Boughs to the Son of David: All yet concur in this, that it is a
joyful wish for prosperity to Christ under the title of the Son of David;
Grace, Redemption, Praise, and Glory, Psalms and Hymns, and all the other
outward expressions of Thanks, Respect, and Joy be given to him who now comes
to restore the Kingdom of his Father David. Nothing too much to be given to the
Messiah, for him they always mean by the Son of David: No inward or outward joy
enough for the coming of our Redeemer.

But though Hosanna mean all these several rendrings, yet the construction is
no more then Salvum fac, or salva obsecro, Save we beseech thee, like our Vivat
Rex, God save the King. Save the Son of David we beseech thee, and save us by
the Son of David. For both it is: A prayer to God to preserve and prosper him,
that he may have good luck with his honor, and ride on; and a prayer to God to
save and deliver us by and through him, or to him to do it, Salva o^^cro, O
fili David, O fili for filio. Save us we pray thee, O Son of David.

By this time you understand Hosanna to be both a prayer and a thanksgiving, a
short Collect and a Hymn both, an expression of rejoicing for Christ's coming,
with a prayer that it may come happy both to him and us. Thus you have it in
Psalm. cxviii. 24, 25. whence this seems either to be taken or to relate. This
is the day which the Lord has made, We will rejoice and be glad in it; there is
the voice of rejoicing: then follows (...) Help me now O Lord, O Lord send us
now prosperity: the prayer upon it.

It Is an easy observation hence, that our rejoycings are to consist in Prayers
and Praises, in Hymns and Collects; no true Hosanna's to Christ, no true
blessing him but so; no keeping Christmas or any Feast without them. To spend a
day in idleness, or good cheer, is not to keep Holiday: To keep Christmas is
not to fill our mouths with Meat, but our lips with Prayers and Praises; not to
sit down and play, but to kneel down and pray; not to rest from work and
labor, but by some holy rest and retirement from temporal labor, to labor so
to enter into eternal rest. The business of a Holiday is holy business; Hosanna
business of Christmas, Christ's coming so to be solemnized with solemn prayers,
and praises, and thanksgivings.

And there is more then so in this Hosanna. It was the close of certain Prayers
and Litanies used by the Jewish Synagogues; like our Libera nos Domine, our
Good Lord deliver us, in our Litanies. They first reckoned up the names of God,
God, Lord, King of Kings, etc. and to each Hosanna; then his Attributes, his
Mercy, Truth, etc. to each Hosanna; then what they desired, both in public and
private, and for each Hosanna. All resound Hosanna, all echo out Hosanna,
save, and help, and prosper us. It Is no new thing it seems, or of Popish
Original, to use public Litanies, and Liturgies; it is but what the Church of
God has ever had in use, the way from the beginning it always served him in.
The very Petitions of the Lords Prayer are all taken out of the Jewish Sedar,
or Common Prayer Book: and if Christ himself who wanted neither words nor
Spirit to pray, thought fit yet notwithstanding to make use of received
expressions and ancient forms; I conceive not why any that profess him, should
think themselves wiser then their Master, and reject old and accustomed Forms
of Prayers and Praise. Yet indeed we cannot well expect they should keep a
Form, that will not keep a day to bless him for his coming. We that resolve of
this, may be resolved of the other, that no way like the old to do it in.

That teaches us to pray the Messiah that Christ may Reign, that his Kingdom
may prosper and be enlarged, that we our selves may be of it, and prosper in
it, that we may have Redemption and Salvation, Grace and Glory, sing Hymns and
Songs of Praise to him both in his Kingdom here upon Earth, and in his Kingdom
in Heaven. This the way of entertaining him at his coming to entertain our
selves, and time in blessing him for his goodness, and desiring of his blessing.

And yet besides there is as much Faith as Devotion to be here learned from the
multitude in this Hosanna. There is an acknowledgment of his Office, that he
was Messiah. They it seems believed it. I suspect they that love not to have a
day to mind them of his becoming the Son of David, of his Nativity, do scarce
believe it: If they thought his coming real, we should have some real doings at
it; they would be as busy in it as the best. Were filio David well grounded in
us, did we really believe him the Son of David, we would also become the Sons
of David, who was a man of Prayer and Praise, sons of Praise, sing Hosanna's as
fast as any: It Is only want of Faith that hinders Works; we believe not in him
as we should, what e're we talk, else we would do to him as we should, accept
all his comings, even upon our knees, at least with all thankfulness, and such
Devotion as time and place required of us.

And 2. we would raise our voices a note higher, add Benedictus to Hosanna.
Blessed is he that comes, etc. Bless God, and bless him, and bless his coming,
and bless his goodness, and bless his power, and bless his fullness, and bless
his work, and bless his purpose; desire God to bless him, and man to bless him,
and also bless our selves in him; for no less then all these is in the words.

Blessed first be God the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Blessed be the Lord
God of Israel, that he has visited and redeemed his people, and has raised up
a mighty salvation for us in the house of his Servant David. So old Zachary, S.
Luke i. 68. 69. Blessed be God the Father for the Son, God the Father for the
Son of David 's coming to us.

Blessed 2. be the Son, blessed be he that comes, blessed be Our Lord Jesus
Christ for his coming, for to him is blessing due, that he would vouch safe to
come and bless: bless the Father for sending, the Son for coming; blessing to
them both for thus blessing us.

Blessed 3. be his coming, all his comings, his coming in the Flesh, his coming
in the Spirit, his coming in Humility, his coming in Glory: his coming in the
Flesh, that is a blessed coming for us, whereby all other blessings come unto
us; his coming in the Spirit or by his Grace a blessed coming too, and still
daily coming; his coming in Glory, that may be a blessed coming to us too, if
we bless him duly for his other comings: if we truly and devoutly rejoice at
his first and second coming, no doubt but we shall also triumph at his last.
That he comes, came, and will come unto the end, is blessed news; we therefore
with these multitudes so bless him for it.

Blessed 4. be his goodness, and that is evident enough in his coming to us:
bless him for that he would be so good to come, when all good was going from
us, when we our selves were gone away from him, run away as far as well we
could, that he would come after us.

Blessed 5. be his power and authority, for in the name of the Lord he comes,
not in his own name, but in the Fathers that sent him, S. John v. 43. confess,
acknowledge, submit to his power and authority; that is the true way to bless
him.

Blessed 5. be his greatness and fullness of blessing, blessed be his
blessedness, for he is full of blessings; in him all fuluess is and dwells,
Col. ii. 9. God blessed for ever; Romans ix. 5. Let Us make this acknowledgment of
him, profess and proclaim it as they do here call him, the ever blessed.

Blessed 6. be all his works, actions, and passions, the works of our
Redemption, Justification, Sanctification, Glorification, which all come to us
only through his Name and Merits. Attribute we all to him and to his Name, Not
unto us O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name be the praise and glory of all
these great and wonderful things.

Blessed lastly be all his purposes and intentions toward us, he came to
reveal his Fathers will unto us; bless him for that: bless we should all such
that make known unto us the will of God; Beati pedes Evangelizantium, Blessed
be the feet of the Ministers of the Gospel; much more this great Archbishop of
our Souls that sends them. He came to glorify the Father, S. John viii. to
teach us to do so: bless him for that. He came to save and deliver us from all
kind of evil, however we wilfully thrust daily into it, some or other; bless
him for that, say all good of him, that wishes and works all good to us: but
which is only truly to bless, further we all purposes what we can, and help
them forward, that he and we may be glorified by the hand.

For this blessing is not merely a form of words; we must 1. earnestly and
heartily desire God to bless, to bless all Christ's ways of coming to us, that
we may joyfully, and cheerfully, and devoutly entertain him. Desire God 2. to
bless him that comes in his name, him whoever he be that he sends to us: but
this (...) especially, that his coming may come abroad to all the world, all
come in unto him. Desire 3. that man may bless him, incite the sons of men to
sing praise too unto him. Praise him all ye Nations, praise him all ye people;
strive what we can to get all we come nigh, to come with us, and bear a part in
blessing him.

In a word, bless we our selves in him, think, and profess, and proclaim our
selves blessed that Christ is come to us, that we have our part and portion in
him; place all our joy, all our rejoicing, all our triumph that he is with us,
that the name of the Lord is declared unto us, that by his coming the name of
the Lord is called upon us, that we are now of his retinue, that we now belong
unto him, that he is daily coming in us.

And for this Hosanna now 3. in excelsis, indeed, Hosanna to him in the
highest, sing we it as loud as we can reach, as loud as we can cry it.

And that may pass for the first interpretation of in excelsis, that we are to
cry it as loud as we can cry it, do what we can to express our joy, how we can
to give him thanks, to exalt his praise what we are able, in excelsis, to the
highest of our power; so Psalm. cxlviii. 1. Praise him in the height.

We all of us in excelsis, in our highest, yea, and 2. the very highest, the
very most in excelsis of us all, the highest of us, is too low to praise him
worthily; yet praise him, O ye highest, ye Kings and Princes of the earth,
Kings of the earth and all people, Psalm. cxlviii. 11. come down from your
excelsis, and lay your Crowns and Scepters at the feet of this King (as S.
Luke) that comes, and submit all your Kingdoms to the Kingdom of Christ; make
ye all your Kingdoms to bless his, that your Kingdoms also may be blessed.

Nay, and yet there are higher then these highest, who are to praise him,
Praise him all ye heavens, Psalm. cxlviii. 4. Praise him all ye Angels, praise
him all his Hosts, ver. 2. So S. Luke intimates it when he expresses it, peace
on earth, in Heaven, and glory in the highest: glory in Heaven for the peace
that is made between Heaven and Earth by him that comes here in the name of
the Lord, by whom says the Apostle all things are reconciled, Whether they be
things in Earth, or things in Heaven, Col. i. 20. Hosanna in the highest, for
this peace with the highest, sung be it by Heaven and Earth, by Angels and Men;
the Angels sung somewhat a like Song at his Birth when he was coming into the
world; according as St. Luke interprets it, and will sing it again if we invite
them as the Psalmist does, to sing with us: and we must desire it, that God may
be praised: all glory both in Heaven and Earth.

That Is the way indeed to Hosanna in the highest, as it is a Song of Praise:
but it is also we told you a prayer, that even our praises and the ground of
them may continue.

A prayer 1. to God in excelsis, the most highest, as the Psalmist speaks. Save
us O thou most highest. No salvation but from those everlasting hills of mercy,
salvation to be looked for from none else, the very meanest of the multitude
know that.

A prayer 2. for salvation in excelsis, that he would deliver us with a high
hand, work salvation with a mighty arm; such as all the world might see it:
that he would magnify this King that comes, and exalt his Kingdom that comes
to the clouds, set it above the reach and power of malicious men, make it grow
and prosper, maugre all contradiction and opposition of the highest and
strongest of the earth.

A prayer 3. for salvation in excelsis indeed, for salvation in the highest
Heavens; not only to be delivered here, but to be saved hereafter; not only for
Grace and Righteousness here of the highest pitch, but for glory of the highest
order: a prayer that God as he has exalted him that here came in his name, so
he would exalt us all that call upon his name, to sit at his right hand in
heavenly places, in the highest right. So these multitudes pray, and so pray
we; so praise they, and so praise we. Do what we can our selves to praise and
bless him, and do what we can to get others do it; call upon the Angels to join
with us, do it with all our might and strength, stretch out our voices, scrue
up our strings: nothing content or satisfy us in our prayers or praises, but
the highest, the highest thankfulness, the highest devotion, the highest
expression and way of both, that either the multitudes before, or the
multitudes that follow, Jews or Christians, former or latter Saints ever used
before us.

All perhaps cannot spread carpets, cloths, and garments to entertain him; nor
have all Boughs of Palms, or Olives to meet him with; all have not wherewith to
make a solemn show and flourish; but all have tongues, all may sing Hosanna's
to him; or if that word be hard, all may cry Save us Lord, and Blessed be he
that came and comes. If we have neither substance to praise him with, nor
solemn Ceremonies allowed us to praise him by, nor solemn Services permitted to
pray to him, or to praise him: we have yet Words, and Psalms, and Prayers to do
it with, and times and places that none can hinder us. And if we set about it
in excelsis with high courage, such as becomes the Servants of the highest, and
neither fear the face of man nor Devil: we may do it in excelsis too, with high
Solemnities. Our Hosanna to be saved, Save us O King of Heaven when we call
upon thee: our Prayers will save us from any thing that can hurt us; he that is
in the highest will succor and defend us, preserve and bless us, and if we
follow him strongly with our cries, follow these multitudes close in their
Devotion to follow Christ, sing out his praise with courage, pray with
fervency, go out to meet him with joy, entertain him with gladness, own his
coming with confidence, celebrate it with holy Worship, do all to the highest
of our powers: our Hosanna's shall be quickly turned into Allelujahs, our
blessing him into being blessed our selves by him, and we with all the Saints
that went before or followed him, sing Benedictus's and Allelujahs in the
highest; to the highest God in the highest Heavens for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON ON The Second Sunday in Advent.
S. MARK i. 3. Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
SAint John Baptist is here sent in the verse before the Text to prepare his
way. Holy Church sends her Baptists, and Preachers still, four several days
together before the time (for so many Advent Sundays or great days of
Preparation there are in her* Holy Calendar) to do as much. Conceive me the
voice of one of them to day, of one crying in the Wilderness, in a Land as wild
and barren of good, as any Wilderness of Water. Prepare ye the way, etc.

Indeed he had need of a better voice than mine, that cries it now to any
purpose. Need there is of a loud crier indeed, of Vox clamantis at the highest,
one to cry it aloud, and ring it in men's ears, to get them to it; they have so
almost forgotten, many of them, both day and preparation; his day and his way,
so many new ones have they of their own.

Nay, and where old day and way are both pretended to be observed, there is too
much Wilderness and Desert; so many wild, irregular, unmortified passions and
affections, such dry, barren doings, so much of our own ways, and ends, and
interests even in religious business, the straight way deserted but too much,
that we had need of some rough John Baptist to thunder it to awaken us.

Nor will once crying it serve the turn. One single prepare will do no good.
Prepare, make straight, both little enough; and three Evangelists to cry it so
after the Baptist has done crying: again and again, over and over, scarce
sufficient to keep wild passions under, to work us to a sufficient preparation,
to make straight paths, or keep them.

St. John the Gospeller for the day, has only the first part of the Text, the
other three have both, S. Mat. iii. 3. S. Luke iii. 4. and S. Mark here in the
Text. The Prophet Isaiah, whence the words are taken, has so too, with some
addition. Were we what S. John would have us, we should need no addition; but
being what we are, line upon line, precept upon precept, here a little and
there a little, are too little for it. It is best to take the fullest, that our
preparation may be the fuller, to take it too, out of the mouths of two or
three witnesses; that so every word may be established in our hearts, and in
our memories: the Lords way prepared, his paths made strait, the work done
against his coming, whenever, and howsoever, and which way soever he shall
vouchsafe to come unto us.

The words are originally the Prophet Isaiah's, Isa. xl. 3. prophesied by him,
but proclaimed by S. John Baptist, Christ's Herald to proclaim his coming, and
his Harbinger to take up his lodging for him in the hearts of the sons of men.
And a Proclamation they are to all to prepare and to make ready, make all ready
to entertain him: And two points there are of it; two parts of the preparation
required in it.

1. To prepare his way.

2. To make straight his paths.

This way of his divides it self you see into the great open road, and into
narrow paths: and each has its proper way of ordering; prepare to one, and make
straight to the other. Prepare his way, make straight his paths.

But to prepare it for the fuller and easier understanding (for I preach to
all) I shall do with the Text as we do with our Rooms and Houses when we
prepare and make them ready; in doing that we turn things upside down, remove
them this way and that way, hither and thither, till we find where to place
them best. I shall use the words so here, disturb their order, that I may bring
all into the better order, and we all make the better preparation, and set all
things straight.

Be pleased then to forgive me the disorder, and consider this way and Paths:
First, what they are: Then secondly, whose they are: Then thirdly, this
Preparation, that it must be: What fourthly, or how it must be: And fifthly, by
whom it must be.

1. What the way that is to be prepared, and what the paths to be made
straight, we must understand by the connection of these words with the former,
and by the way St. John went before us.

2. Whose they are, the Domini will tell us, the Lords they are.

3. That prepared they must be, the Mood and Tense of the Verbs Parate and
facite, being the Imperative command here to do it, will assure us.

4. How prepared, the use and sense of the same words will show us, when we
examine what it is ordinarily to prepare and make straight.

5. By whom they must be prepared and straightened; the number of the verb
plural, and indefinite, will satisfy us. We are all to do it.

So 1. What this way is, and what these paths mean. 2. Whose they are. 3. That
prepared they must be. 4. How prepared they should be. And 5. by whom prepared
they ought to be, are the particulars, by which I shall lead you in the way,
and in the Preparation, prepare you the way to prepare the way of the Lord, and
make his paths straight; the only way to have any comfort of his coming. I
begin with the way, to show you what it is, that we err not from it.

First, This way say some, is the Soul of man, Cor spatiosum, so Origin; and
these paths the powers and operations of it. His way is in this Sea, and his
paths in these deep waters. Here the wind blows, and the tempest rises, and the
waves roar; the unruly passions make a noise and tumult, and so as the Psalm
has it, His footsteps are not known, Psalm. lxxvii. 19. We cannot discern his
track by reason of their tumultuous doings. These are they that are to be
prepared, and stilled, and quieted, the Soul calmed, and laid, and smoothed,
that Christ may come into it. But this is the way into which, and not by which
he comes.

The way by which he comes, or we meet him, is, first, the way of Faith. Faith
is the way by which he comes into the souls of men, the way in which St. Paul
worshipped the God of his Fathers, Acts xxiv. 14. in and by which we first come
unto our Lord, and worship him as did our fathers. Prepare your hearts for it,
prepare them for him, that when he comes he may find faith upon the earth, in
this earth of ours, where e're else he miss it. And here as Faith is the way,
so the several Articles of it may pass for the paths. God grant we keep them
right, and straight, and our selves straight to them, in this perverse and
crooked generation.

2. The way secondly by which we meet him, is the Law, Mandata Legalia, says
another. Not much distant from St. Paul's stiling it, Schoolmaster to Christ,
the way to bring us to him. The terrors and threatenings of the Law a good way
to prepare us for his coming: the Types and Figures a good way to lead us to
him, that we may see he is the same that was, and is, and is to come, the
Savior of all that were, and are, and shall be saved, the same the Patriarchs
promised, the Sacrifices prefigured, the Prophets prophesied of, the Jews
expected, the Apostles preached of, the world believed on, and all must be
saved by. With such thoughts as these then are we to set upon our preparation:
1. To break our high and haughty spirits by the consideration of the terrors of
the Law, the curses due to them that break it (and alas! who is it that does
not?) so to make way to let him in. Then 2. by the Types and Figures, to
confirm our faith, and make them so many several paths to trace out his
footsteps, and know his coming.

3. The third way by which we are prepared, or which we are to prepare for him,
is Repentance. The very way St. John Baptist came to preach. His Repent for the
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand, being the same with this, Prepare ye the way of
the Lord, make his paths straight. Those words of the Prophet the Text, and his
the Comment. No way indeed to Christ but by this way. No way but by Repentance
to begin it. Turn ye, turn ye, says the Prophet, we are all out of the way God
knows from the beginning. If we will into the way again, into the way of our
Lord, turn we must, repent we must of our former ways, and doings, get us into
better ways. And then paths here will be the straight and narrow ways, the
rigours and austerities of repentance, the streightning our selves of all our
former liberties and desires, making our paths so straight and narrow, that no
tumor of pride, no swellings of lust, no pack-horses or heavy carriages of the
world* or Devil may pass by that way any more, nothing but Christ and his
little flock of humble virtues, such as can enter at the straight state, none
else henceforward to walk in it. Prepare we repentance and all its parts and
paths for the third way and its paths.

A fourth is Baptism, the way St. John Baptist came in too, a way that named
him so, the way that was always thought to lead all to Christ and his Kingdom,
that came there in any ordinary way. Arise and be baptized, Acts xxii. 16.
that is the way to the Lord Jesus. The way he sent his Disciples in to bring in
the world unto him, St. Mark xvi. 16. whatever shorter way our new men of late
have found for their Disciples. The Articles and conditions of the Covenant of
Baptism promised and undertaken by the baptized either in their own persons, or
by proxy, are the title paths of this great way, the several tracks that make
it up, the ways and paths we are to walk in, if we intend ever to meet the Lord.

The fifth way is Gods Commandments, a way that we all must make ready for him,
his own way indeed, drawn out by his own hands and fingers; a way of which
himself professes, that he came not to destroy it (as some vainly delude
themselves) but to fulfill it, to perfect, to exalt it to a greater height, from
the outward act, to the inward thought; from the lower degree of virtue, to the
highest of it; from bare precepts to additional counsels, from mere, external
performances to right and regular intentions in them. And here as the moral
Precepts are the great plain way, so the Christian Enh^^sements of them to the
highest pitch, the regulations of them to right intentions, and Christian
counsels are the paths, the narrow and straiter paths. The sum and short is
this. Holy Christian life and conversation in all its parts according to our
powers and capacities, is the fifth way to be prepared by them that seek the
Lord, and expect to see his face.

And yet if there be room and leave for a private conjecture, the way of Gods
providence in his judgments and mercies toward Jerusalem; the way of his mercy
in saving the believing, and destroying the unbelieving Jew, now near at hand,
may come in for a sixth way of the Lord: A way indeed past finding out in all
its secret paths, yet to be prepared for, and more then pointed at by the
Prophet Isaiah in that place whence the words are taken, and by St. John in
this. God there bids comfort his captive people, for their deliverance from
Babylon was now nigh at hand, and their enemies near destruction; calls to them
therefore to prepare themselves for it, to make ready and expect it: And here
S. John Baptist tells the people the Kingdom of Heaven is now at hand, S.
Matthew. 3. 2. which (by comparing it with that wrath to come, threatened to the
Pharisees and Sadduces, v. 7. with his exhortation to flee from it, and by the
coming of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, mentioned by the Prophet
Malachi iv. 5. in the place where S. John Baptists coming is foretold; and the
dreadfulness of it expressed, Chap. iii. 2. where he is said to come to prepare
his way before him: but ver. 1, etc. S. John's inviting to repentance to divert
or shun it) can be no other than Christ's coming in Judgment against Jerusalem,
to execute vengeance upon his enemies, and deliver his faithful servants:
vengeance and deliverance, the two great manifestations of his Power and
Kingdom; and sure no more then need to cry out to us to prepare and make right
paths against that coming, make way for his judgments to pass by us, and his
mercies to come to us.

Thus you have the way and paths, observe them: many several paths, but one
only way to Christ and Heaven, observe that too; and though many ways I showed
you, they all come into one Law and Gospel, Baptism, and Repentance, Faith and
Obedience, Mercy and Judgment, Precepts and Counsels, all into one. It Is way in
the singular, to show that peace and unity is the only way of the Lord, the
only way of Christ.

Yet 2. both paths and way it is. We must descend to particulars, every one to
cleanse his own, his own private paths. Not only show me thy ways, O Lord, says
David, but teach me thy paths too, Psalm. xxv. 3. Not only to rectify the
outward action, but the inward thoughts; not to content our selves with a
general profession, but to come to a particular practice of Religion of the way
of Christ. Observe that too.

Particular practice I say, and yet 3. of the general way, of the way generally
and Catholickly held by all: and 2. of all things generally in that way, all
the several tracks of virtue, none to be omitted, seeing the paths
indefinitely, one as well as another, (none as I hear excepted) are here to be
made strait: that is a third thing I wish observed.

But lastly the way first prepared, then the paths made straight. Christ's way
is a way of order. First, a general resolution to make all straight and ready,
then a particular entering into every path to do it. Resolve first upon the way
of Piety, then take the paths that lead best to it; parate first, then facite,
prepare good resolutions, then set to do them. Nothing done well before them,
nothing well done without them. And viam first, then semitas, the plain way of
the Commandments for beginners, the harder and streighter way of Counsels for
great proficie^ts and perfect men.

II. The way and path thus now found out, we are next to enquire whose it is,
or to whom it leads. Viam Domini, the Lords it is; so the Septuagint and
Evangelists all render it, in the Genetive: and Domino it is too; so the Hebrew
in the Dative, to him it is, or for him it is; to him it is it leads, for him
it is prepared, the preparation all for him.

Viam Domini 1. His way first, and not our own. Non sunt viae meae, viae
vestrae, Isa, lv. 8. His ways are not ours, ours are Lust, Covetousness,
Ambition, Hypocrisy, mere superficial and external Works, Vanity and Error.
The ways we spoke of, Mercy and Truth, Faith, Hope, Charity, Obedience, and all
good ways are his, not ours; we have no good ones of our own. Nay even our
Souls, those ways too into which he comes, are his: his and not our own; the
Soul of the Father, and the Soul of the Son; of all Fathers and Sons: all mine,
says God, Ezekiel. xviii. 4. Our Bodies too, they are Gods, 1 Cor. vi. 20. bodies
and spirits all his, made and prepared for his own way and Service; all again
to be prepared by us, that they may be fit for him to walk and be in.

For 2. Viam Domino it is. To him all our ways and paths must be directed, to
his Glory and Worship: all lead to him as to the end of all; from him all good
ways come, to him all good ways tend: he is Alpha and Omega, is and must be the
beginning and end of them. They are Domini and Domino, both of the Lord and to
the Lord, all our ways and preparations, or all are wrong. To him as to my Lord
the King, visiting us in mercy and gracing us with his presence; and to him as
to my Lord Judge to visit us in judgment, and punish all offenders; as a Lord
to us, or a Lord against us; as our own King in triumph, or another King in
fury, and to him in each consideration there is a proper way, and a proper way
of preparing it.

III. And now 3. Be it what way it will, and to the Lord, under what notion or
way we will; a preparation there is due, a preparation next enjoined us.

Indeed there is no meeting him unprepared, better meet a Lion in the way, or a
Bear robbed of her Whelps than him unprepared. Prepare your hearts unto the
Lord, says the Prophet Samuel, 1 Samuel vii. 3. And make straight paths for your
feet, says the Apostle, Heb. xii. 13. Law and Gospel both for preparation. If
thou come to serve the Lord, prepare thy soul, says the Son of Sirach, Ecclus.
ii. 1. 2. If thou go into his house, prepare thy foot, keep it, keep an eye
over it, that it slip not there, says the Son of David, Eccles. v. 1. go not in
rashly, and in haste. 3. Prepare thy mouth too, that it be not too hasty to
utter any thing, says he, ver. 2. 4. If thou go any where to pray, before
thou prayest prepare thy self, Ecclus. xviii. 23. they that fear the Lord will
do so, Ecclus. ii. 17. will prepare their hearts, yea and ponder their paths
too: for so Solomon advises us, Prove. iv. 26. Ponder the paths of thy feet, and
let all thy ways be established. Nay ponder them, and all thy ways shall be
established, so it may be read; and so Iotham found it, became mighty, says
that Text, 2. Chron. xxvii. 6. because he prepared his ways before the Lord his
God. No way to become great, mighty, and powerful with God or Man, like
preparing Gods way in righteousness, keeping our selves straight to the ways of
God; a reward sufficient to establish it for a duty. That we may do it as we
should, we are now next to enquire what is meant by this preparing and making
straight, and how we are to do it?

The word in the Original is either from (...) panim, facies, and may be
construed either by faciem date, h. e. speciem, make the way look fair, give it
a handsome face; and so to prepare the way will be to cleanse the way: or by
faciem obverter, or a facie amovere, change the face of it, or remove things
off the surface of it: and so to prepare it, will be to clear the way of rubs
and blocks, to remove our sins out of the way. Or 2. from (...) angulus a
corner, and may be rendered Angulate, corner it out, and lay it to the line and
rule. And then to prepare, will be to make it smooth, regular, and equal.

Put them together, and to prepare the way will be to remove all soil and
filth, all blocks and impediments, all roughness and unevenness out of our
ways, which are like any ways to hinder our Lords coming to us, so to put all
by, that he may have way to come to us, and we the easier and fullier receive
him when he comes. Thus to prepare his way will be to remove all hindrances,
and to make his paths straight will be to bring all furtherances to his coming.
To remove our sins by repentance, which else would hinder him from coming, is
to prepare the way; to regulate and order our paths to the rule of his
Commandments, to the squares of righteousness, is to make straight paths: both
together complete the preparation, which we will consider first in general,
then in particular: first how his way generally is to be prepared, then how
particularly, after a more particular and special way and manner.

We cannot find how in general to prepare his way better then by the words that
follow immediately in the Prophet Isa. xl. 4. and are so repeated also by S.
Luke ii^. 5. Every Valley shall be filled, and every Mountain shall be brought
low, and the crooked ways shall be made straight, and the rough ways shall be
made smooth.

Every Valley must be filled, the empty valleys of our Souls filled up with the
fruits of all good works; these valleys must stand so thick with such holy
corn, with all good fruits, that they laugh and fing, make us sing merrily, the
praises of the Lord. 2. Every Mountain and Hill must be brought low, all our
proud high thoughts laid down. The greater Mountains and lesser Hills,
mole-hills as well as Mountains, as well great as less, and as well less as
greater sins cast down; our very natural reason and understanding submitted to
the obedience of faith. 3. The crooked ways must be made straight, all our
crooked ways, distorted actions, perverse affections, all that is awry or
swerving from the rule of Gods Commandments must be rectified and set right. 4.
All the rough ways made smooth, all our roughnesses and unevennesses natural or
customary made smooth and level, no stones of offense, no thorns, or bushes,
hedges or ditches in the way.

That the way be neither mountainous with pride, nor dark with ignorance, nor
dirty with lust, nor thorny with worldly cares, nor hollow with hypocrisy, nor
slippery with riot, nor washy with drunkenness, nor tedious through
slothfulness, nor uneven with irresolution and inconstancy. Fill the low
valleys we must, with high heavenly affections and contemplations, with high
degrees of Piety and Devotion. Bring down the hills by humility and obedience.
Streighten the crooked by righteousness and uprightness. Smooth the rough ways
with meekness, gentleness, and charity. Rull down the haughty towering thoughts,
raise up the grovelling mind, rectify the perverse intentions, smooth the rough
and uneven passions of the soul, prepare them all; remove out of them every
thing that may offend, and bring them all into the way of the Lord.

Thus in general. But we have a more particular and special way: for we may
consider the way of the Lord, either as the way of a King; (for he is both Lord
and King) coming against us with his Armies, or as a King coming to us in his
Triumph, to honor us and rejoice with us.

If we consider the way of the Lord as of one coming against us for
destruction, prepare we then as the men of Bethulia did against Holofernes,
Judeth iv. 4, 5. They sent messengers into all the coasts, they possessed
themselves beforehand of the tops of the high mountains, they fortified the
villages, laid up victuals for the provision of War, and gave charge to keep
the passages, ver. 7. so they prepared, do we so too; possess we the tops of
the mountains by setting our affections upon things above; fortify we the poor
villages of our weak natures by strong and holy resolutions, gather we together
all kind of provision for our souls out of the Holy Scriptures, by constant
reading and meditation, keep all the passages of them with care and vigilance,
and send out messengers into all the coasts of heaven and earth, send up our
prayers to the God of Heaven for help, our desires to the Saints upon the earth
to assist us with their devotions, advice and company.

Prepare we armor too with Vzziah, 2 Chronicles xxvi. 14. Shields, and spears, and
helmets, habergeons, and bows, and slings. Stand we thus ready armed in the
way, our head covered with the hope of salvation for a Helmet, our breast armed
with righteousness for a Breast Plate, our body defended with the Habergeon of
a holy conversation, in our left hand the Shield of Faith, and in our right
hand Alms far better then the strongest Spear, says the Son of Sirach, Ecclus.
xxix. 13. the Sword of the Holy Spirit, the word of truth girt to our loins,
the bow and arrows of the holy fear of Gods Judgments hanging on our shoulders,
the Cross of Christ for our Sling, and himself for the stone to smite our grand
enemy in the forehead, and put him to a perpetual shame. Thus make ready to
entertain him.

But if 2. he come to us in the way of triumph, or grace, and favor, then
prepare we the way as is usual at the entertainment of great Princes. Now at
such times they sweep or wash the ways and streets, they pave, they gravel
them, they rail them in, they hang them with Tapestry, they strew them with
Rushes and Flowers, they set guards to fence the ranks, and place themselves in
order to cry out Vivat Rex, or some such thing to receive them with joyful
acclamations.

Let us go and do likewise. Wash all our ways with tears, sweep them with the
besom of confession, pave them with pious vows and purposes, spread them over
with fair amendment, rail them in by the obedience of faith and daily caution,
adorn them by the imitation of the lives of holy Saints, set them like so many
pictures in Tapestry before thee, shrew them with sweet Herbs and Flowers; the
Roses of Chastity, the Lillies of Purity, the Balm of Charity, the Hyssop of
Humility, the Violets of Patience, the Woodbines of Hope and Love, the Bays of
Constancy, all the sweets of piety and virtue, guard the way, guard all the
ways with attention and godly zeal, and make all the streets and ways resound
again with the echo of praises and thanksgivings. This it is to prepare his
way.

And thus every way of his we spoke of must be prepared. Our Souls so ordered,
out Meditations of the Law so regulated, our Repentance so adorned, our
Baptisms so accompanied, our Obedience so fulfilled, Gods Providence and way of
dealing with us so accepted, with clean hearts, grounded resolutions, an even
temper, with care and diligence, with exemplary virtue, sweetness, and
moderation, zeal and attention, humility and thanksgiving.

All this while make straight, must not be forgotten. All this must be done now
also with upright hearts, sincere intentions; not in outward form and
appearance only, not for fear of punishment, not for hope of reward and praise,
not merely to avoid danger, nor yet lastly to be seen of men. All these the
Pharisees did, and yet for all that, none of them keeps the Law, says Christ.
The Law is not fulfilled by the external act, the Commandments not kept by the
outward performance, it is the inward spirit of Charity, when they are done with
that, that only keeps them: it is that only that makes right ways, sound paths;
without it they are but rotten ways, or hollow ones; such as Christ will not
choose to come by, or rather will choose not to come by: right good sound ways
they must be, if they be his.

And 2. right straight ways too, no turning to the right hand or to the left:
not do one way in adversity, another way in prosperity: one Religion when the
days are calm and quiet, another when the days are stormy and troublesome.
Rectas facite in deserto, so it is in the Prophet and Hebrew Text, Isa. xl. 3.
Make his paths straight in the Desert, even when we are deserted of all, when
we are in the barren and dry Wilderness, where no water is, no earthly comfort
about us, in the greatest tribulation, we must keep us still to uprightness and
honesty; that is the way to Christ: however for a while he seem to be far from
us, thither it will bring us after a while; keep innocence, and do the thing
that is right, and that will bring a man peace at the last.

Yet 3. one path or two made straight is not sufficient, semitas, it is an
indefinite somewhat a kin to an universal; it must be all: he that fails or
offends in one is guilty of all, S. James ii. 10. If all be not straight, all
the paths as well as the ways that you have heard, all the little ways as well
as the great, according to our poor power, if at least we do not study and
endeavor it, it is not, it is not right.

Nor is it so, or will it be, unless we take in 4. the Prophets in deserto too;
desert and forsake our selves a little, renounce our own ways quite, seek not
our own but his, streighten our selves a little of our own lusts and liberties,
of our own desires and ways, that the only way to make his straight, and make
Christ come straight to us.

V. We have one point yet behind, who it is to whom all this is spoken, and is
given in charge. I confess the Ministers and Preachers of the Word are the
public messengers and harbingers who are sent to prepare the Lords way (as S.
John Baptist was) before him: yet every one must sweep his own door. For the
words are by S. John Baptist preached to all Pharisees and Sadduces, Publicans
and Soldiers, and all the people that came to him; every one to have a share,
and so he gives it them. S. Luke iii. 10, 11. verses, and so onward, tells
people, and Publicans, and Soldiers what to do, sets every one his path, his
part of the way to prepare and streighten. Give me leave to do so too.

The Ministers of the Gospel, they come first, they have the greatest share
with S. John Baptist, to go before the face of the Lord to prepare his way; but
how? To give knowledge of salvation, says old Zachary, to his people, for the
remission of sins; or somewhat more, even to give remission too, to give
absolution; so to give knowledge to the people, or instruct them, and to
absolve them, is some part at least of the Ministers share; but to Baptize also
with the Baptist, and to consecrate with Christ himself, is to prepare his way
too, to make way for him, to raise the Valleys, to comfort the dejected, the
cast down and afflicted soul against his sorrows, the penitent against his
sins, the fearful against the fear of death, the weak hearted against trouble
and persecution, to encourage them to lift up their heads and look to the
recompense of reward, to raise up the grovelling souls of men from earth and
flesh to heaven and heavenly business. 2. To cast down the Mountains of Pride
and Singularity, Schism and Heresy, that lift up themselves against the
obedience of Christ. 3. To rectify the perverse and crooked souls of men. And
4. to smooth and soften them, to lay the way of Christ smooth and plain before
them, make them know his yoke is easy and his burden light, by continual
preaching to them, and instructing them, so preparing them for the way of
Christ. Thus the Minister prepares his way in the peoples hearts; sometimes
cleansing the young Infants way by Baptism, and sometimes rectifying the young
and old man's ways by advice and exhortation; sometimes clearing them with
Absolution, sometimes purifying them with the Holy Sacrament, some way or other
always preparing them against the Lords coming. And it lies upon him so to do.

And 2. for the People. There needs no more then has been said. The ways
already mentioned concern us all. There is none so righteous but needs some
kind of preparation. And he that is not, he needs them all.

And if we consider now the time, so much the more in that his coming is nearer
whom we prepare for, It Is now but a few days to the day he once came to us in
the flesh. Let Us think of that, and prepare our selves to give him thanks, to
cry Hosanna, blessed is he that comes, blessed this blessed way of his coming,
and blessed the blessed day of his so coming.

It Is not many more days 2. to the coming of his flesh and blood in the Holy
Sacrament unto us. We are expecting and hoping for it, and it is fit we should
be preparing for it. Better preparation then you have heard I cannot give you
for the one or the other. Only I may add in solitudine again. Withdraw your
selves aside into some desert and solitary place to prepare you in; retire in
private to your souls, and to your business. I will bring her into the
Wilderness, says God, concerning Israel, and speak comfortably unto her, Hos.
ii. 14. The place to hear the voice of divine and heavenly comfort is in our
Solitude. When we are alone, God only and our selves together. Remember then we
go into our Closets, and there prepare our selves, forget no point of the
preparation, but sweep, and cleanse, and smooth, and adorn our souls with all
holy virtues or resolutions, and come well guarded with attention, care, and
vigilance, that nothing unbeseeming pass from us in the way, raise up our
spirit with holy thoughts and heavenly desires, cast down our souls with
reverence and humility, come without any roughness or unevenness in our
affections or behavior, in our ways or paths; so shall the Lord come; and come
with comfort, and take us with him, and bring us safely to the end of our way,
the end of our hope, to those things which neither eye has seen, or ear heard,
or ever entered into the heart of man, which he has prepared for them that
prepare for him, in the City prepared for us in the Heavens.

A SERMON ON The Third Sunday in Advent.
S. LUKE xxi. verse 27, 28. And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a
Cloud, with power and great glory.

And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up your
heads, for your redemption draws nigh.


AND because the day of your Redemption draws nigh, the day in which your
Redeemer came in a Cloud of Flesh and Clay, we are this day by the course of
Holy Church to wish you to look up, and lift up your heads to see the Son of
man your Redeemer in his second coming, coming in a Cloud of Glory.

That we knowing it is the same Son of man, who was once born in a Stable, and
cradled in a Manger, that shall one day come to be the Judge of Heaven and
Earth, we might so celebrate his first coming in flesh, that when all flesh
shall stand before him, we might lift up our heads with joy and comfort.

For many there are which shall hang down theirs, such who have not thought
aright of his coming into the world, or not worthily entertained it, or not
walked with him in it along the stage of his humility, or never rightly
pondered the terrors of this second coming in the day of Judgment, which he
himself here Preaches to his Disciples, that they might take heed to themselves
lest at any time their hearts should be overcharged with surfeiting and
drunkenness (the Disease that usually infects all our Christmasses) and cares
of this life (the Disease that infects all our days) and so that day come upon
them unawares; but that watch they should, and pray always that they might be
accounted worthy to escape all these things that shall come to pass, and to
stand before the Son of man, ver. 34.

They had but three days before accompanied him to Jerusalem in his progress of
meekness, and now in one of his returns he begins to tell them of another kind
of coming to it in judgment and fury. His Disciples, who by the sight of such
strong and goodly buildings could not conjecture they should end unless the
world fell with them, ask him presently upon it, when those things should come
to pass, and when should be the end of the world. Their Master, that he might
at once both satisfy and blind their curiosity, mingles the signs of the
particular destruction of Jerusalem, and of the general ruin of the world
together: that he might the better keep them awake, to attend both his general
and particular coming, and make both them and us, at the approach of particular
judgments upon Cities or Nations always mindful and prepared for the general
judgment of the last day: which he here calls the coming of the Son of Man, and
tells us how to entertain it.

So that in the Text, as the verses, so the parts are two.

1. Christ's coming. Then shall they see the Son, etc. ver. 27. 2. The
Christians comfort. When these things, etc. ver. 28. In Christ's coming.
1. The time when. Then, after the signs forementioned, then shall they see.

2. The generality of it. They, all that can see, shall see his coming.

3. The evidence of his coming, so plain, he may be seen, seen by the eye of
Faith.

4. The certainty. They shall see him, to be sure.

5. The form in which he comes, as the Son of man.

6. The end to which he comes. He comes with power, with the power of a Judge
for quick and dead.

7. The manner of his coming. In a Cloud with power and great glory. In the
Christians comfort.

1. Where it begins. When these things begin to come to pass, then that begins
too. Then look up.

2. To whom it belongs. You Disciples, do you look up.

3. What kind of comfort it is, A looking up, a lifting up the head, when all
heads else droop with fear and grief.

4. Whence this comfort arises, from what ground it springs; for your
redemption draws nigh.

I go on with all in o^der as they lie; so that if you remember the words, you
cannot forget the order and method. Then shall, etc.

At Christ's coming there we begin; but when is that? the Heavens shall tell
you, the Earth shall tell you, the Sea shall tell you, Men shall tell you: The
Heavens by signs and wonders, by storms and tempests, the lights of Heaven
shall lose themselves in darkness, and forsake their Spheres, and their
constantest powers shall be shaken out of their course and harmony. The Earth
shall quake for fear, and change its place. The Waves shall fright themselves
with their own roarings, and men's hearts shall fail for fear; neither knowing
how to stand, nor to avoid this dreadful coming. When these with all the host
of heaven and earth startled out of their natural seats and postures, shall
have prepared and ushered him the way; then shall he come. He comes not till
all things else have done their motion and have gone their last.

Nor is it fitting so great a coming should be without an universal
preparation, where every creature forgetting its own nature begins at last to
study his. There is nothing that can stand when God comes: Heaven it self is at
a loss, and remembers not its perpetual motion, when it but apprehends his
approach: Every thing is a wonder to it self when he appears. If nature it self
be thus terrified, which groans not for it self but (...); what shall we be
with all our sins about us, how can (...) abide his coming?

Yet then shall he appear, when we know not how to appear: Heaven and Earth
will change their faces, Men and Angels will hide theirs, only he it is that
dares be seen. Sins or imperfections make all the creatures cover themselves
with some disguises, or endeavor it, only he who is all purity, all perfection
comes then to show himself.

Yet when this Then shall be, when that day and hour shall come, no man knows,
no not the Son of man himself, S. Mark xiii. 32. as man: He that could tell you
that come he would, and could tell you the immediate signs that would fore-run
it, knew not then the time when those signs should be, or knew it not to tell
you. That we might always be waiting for his coming.

Had it been fit for us to know, no doubt he would have told us; but so far
unnecessary it seems to be acquainted with that secret time, that he gives us
signs which rather puzzle then instruct us: signs which we sometimes think
fulfilled already, signs which have often been the forerunners of particular
ruins, and fates of Countries and Kingdoms; signs which at the same time we
fear past already, yet think they are not; that so by this hard dialect of
tokens in heaven and earth, we might behold our presumptuous curiosity deluded
into a perperual watching for this last coming.

There were in the Apostles times, and there are still in ours, men who loved
to scare the people with Prophesies and Dreams of the end of the world, as if
this then already were at hand; such as would define the year and day, as if
they had lately dropped out of Gods Council Chamber: but we beseech you, says S.
Paul, that you be not troubled neither by spirit, nor by word, nor by letter as
from us, as that the day of Christ is at hand, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 2. Let no man
deceive you, ver. 3. they do but deceive you, they vent their own dreams, and
fond presumptions. They know not when the Master of the house will come,
Whether at midnight, or at the Cock crowing, or at the dawning, S. Mark xiii.
35. for as a snare it shall come on all them that dwell on the face of the
earth, ver. 35. of this Chapter.

It is enough for us to know there shall be a day of Judgment, against which we
must provide every day to make up our accounts, lest that day come upon us
unawares, lest death at least hurry us away to our particular doom, which will
there leave us, where the last judgment will be sure to find us in the same
condition; no power or tears of ours being then able to change or alter it.

So that the punctual time of this coming, as Christ did not intend to declare,
so it matters not to know. A then, a time there will be of his coming.

2. A time when they shall see him come. They, and who are they? but all
mankind; but all the creatures? Every eye shall see him, they also that pierced
him, Rev. i. 7. They also that crucified him, and condemned him, S. Mat. xxvi.
64. Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power,
says Christ himself, to those who were his torturers and his judges. Nay, we
shall all stand before the judgment seat of Christ, Romans xiv. 10. None of us
all must think to escape. There we must give account what we have done amiss,
every action, every idle word, every vain and wanton thought, every inward
desire must we yield account of in the day of judgment. Thy Crown and Throne, O
King, cannot exempt thee. Your Honors and Complements, O ye Nobles, cannot
excuse you. Thy Riches, O thou son of Pelf, cannot buy out thy absence. Thy
sleights, O thou crafty Politician, cannot evade it. Thy strength, O Soldier,
cannot defend thee from the Angel that will drive thee thither. Your Learning,
O ye Learned of the earth, can find no argument to keep you from it. Nor can
ye, O ye Worms of the earth, ye meanest, find holes in it to hide you at this
coming.

Come you must all together at this coming, and see you shall the Son of man as
he is coming. The wicked eyes indeed though Christ comes in glory, shall see
nothing of his glory: The Son of man they shall behold, his Humanity, but not
his Deity. They shall see the wounds their sins have made, the hands and feet
they have nailed, the side they have pierced, the head they have planted with
thorns, all these to their grief and sorrow, to see him their Judge, whom they
have so abused and wronged, so trampled and scorned, that he yet bears the
marks of their malice and cruelty even in his Throne of Glory.

But the good man's eyes, they shall see his Glory too; they shall behold his
glorious face, which the eyes of the sinners and the ungodly are not able to
perceive, by reason of that veil of sin and darkness that covers them. Both
then shall see him, these only the Son of man, those the Son both of God and
man, in his Cloud, and in his Glory.

Who are they then that think to hide themselves, who live as if they never
thought to come to judgment? Did men certainly, but seriously ponder, that will
they, nill they, they must one day see Christ, they would use him better in his
Members then they do, better in his Church and Ministers, better in his Worship
and Service. Do they not, think you, imagine they shall never see him, that
they can shelter themselves somewhere from his presence, that dare use him thus
contemptuously, thus proudly, thus sacrilegiously and profanely. Lay but this
close every day to your bosoms as you rise, that you must one day come to
appear before him, and all your actions will be more regular, and your thoughts
higher concerning Christ, and all that is his, or pertains to him, and you the
better able to answer them when you see him.

3. For thirdly see him you shall, not only hear your doom and pass away, but
see him pronouncing it. When he came to Redeem the world, the eye saw him.
Simeons and Anna's, and all Iudea's, many Greeks and Gentiles too. He came then
that all might see him. But in his second coming, when he comes to judge it,
then he comes that all shall see him; every eye behold him. The eyes that slept
in dust before his first arrival, the eyes that in the time of his abode could
never see him for their distance, the eyes that ever since have seen the world,
shall all then see him, as well as they that pierced him, nay as well as they
who lived with him, and daily saw him.

He might, considering how unworthy the best of us carry our selves of that
corporal presence, which he once vouchsafed us, considering how he was then
misused and handled, have for ever denied us any sight of his glorious Body;
but he forgets the injuries he met with, and will once more show himself to our
bodily sight; not so much to confound his persecutors, as to manifest the
justice of his judgment; that the whole world may evidently see, that he who
came into the flesh then only to redeem us, comes in the same flesh again to
judge us, that all may see our Faith in our Crucified God was neither vain nor
unprofitable, but by the evidence of their own eyes confess and acknowledge it
the only true way to eternal happiness.

And if these eyes now must one day behold their Lord and Master, how should we
wash them every day, and cleanse them from earthly defilements with our tears,
that they may be worthy to see that blessed object. Wash your eyes ye wantons
from unclean and lascivious glances. Cleanse your eyes ye proud ones from
scornful looks. Wipe your eyes ye covetous minded from that yellow dust that
blinds your sight. Open your eyes ye ignorant and seduced souls, that ye run
not headlong to your own destruction, hoodwinkt to Hell, then only to unclose
your deceived sight, when you can see no comfort. Remember you are all one day
to appear before Christ's tribunal, where if you expect any comfort to your
eyes, you must come thither with them washed, and wiped, and cleans'd, and
pure, no spots, no films, no blemish, no blood-shot in them. Whether to your
comfort or no, see you shall. That Is certain.

4. Shall see. Can we not shut our eyes then when this day shall come? Can
nothing lock up our eyelids in eternal night, no bar set before us but we must
see this Son of man? Can no Hills hide us, nor no Mountains cover us? Can we
not sleep in dust, and rest quiet in our confusion? Can we not vanish into that
nothing out of which we first arose, or at least lie hid in that eternal pit
from ever seeing any thing but the regions of everlasting darkness? Must we
needs rise out of our wretched Caves to see him, who cannot but afflict us at
his coming? so it is: we must see him. See we must, though but to see the
justice of our own damnation.

Nothing can be more certain then this sight, sight, it is the surest sense,
and to see him at his coming is to be certain of it at the least; but to see
the Son of man at his coming, is certainly with evidence; and to be bound to
see it, to have such a tie upon us, such a condition on us that we shall see
it, whether we will or no, is a certainty with a necessity upon it.

That so no man may doubt of a final retribution, whilst he is certain, he
shall one day see him, who will reward every man according to his work. Let not
then the unjustly oppressed innocent, let not the less prosperous godly spirit
droop, or the glorious and yet triumphing sinner: the prosperous Rebel, or
thriving Atheist pride himself in the success of his Sins; for he is coming
that shall come, and make the just man's eyes run over with joy and happiness
for his fore-passed tears, and fill the others eyes with shame and confusion
for all their glory. It may be long before he comes, but come he will at last,
and his reward is with him.

5. But who is this that comes? so the Prophet once: so we now, or in what
shape will he appear? God is the Judge of all the earth, and who is it that can
see God? Or if he has committed all judgment to the Son, as it is, S. John iii.
Yet who can see him either, being of one substance with the Father, the same
individual and invisible Essence? That therefore he may be seen, he comes in
the form of the Son of man.

This was that which Daniel foresaw in his night visions, Dan. vii. 13. one
like the Son of man coming with the Clouds of Heaven: that which S. Peter told
Cornelius, that he it was, who was ordained to be the judge of quick and dead,
Acts x. 42. Not as he was Lord of Heaven and Earth, or as he was the eternal
offspring of the Deity (for so he could not be ordained, he himself being from
all eternity) but as the Son of man, for he has given him authority to execute
judgment also, because he is the Son of man, St. John v. 27.

That was it by which he obtained the Throne of Judgment, having in that form
both done and suffered all things for our salvation. God thinking but just that
he should be our Judge, who came to save us from judgment; that he should judge
us, who had been partaker of our infirmities, and knew our weaknesses: and
would by the compassion of nature easier acquit us, or with more evidence of
justice condemn us, himself having once been subject to the like humane, though
not sinful passions.

This is the form in which all eyes may see him, all Nations behold him: nor
shall the scars of his wounds be covered, but that even by them we may
acknowledge our crucified Savior is become our Judge. Who whilst he judges us
in the form of man, will condemn us for nothing above the power of man. And yet
even by his actions, as he was man, will he condemn ours. His Humility our
Pride, his Abstinence our Gluttony and excess, his Patience our Impatience, his
Chastity our Lusts, his paying Caesar beyond his due, our undutiful
with-drawings from him; in a word, his Goodness, Piety, and Devotion, our
ungodliness, impieties, and profaneness.

And as it is a mercy thus to be judged by one who is sensible of our frail
condition, so is it a glory, besides, that our nature is so high exalted as to
be the Judge of the world, not of men only, but Angels too. What favor may we
not expect, when he is our Judge, who is our Savior, who will not lay aside
our nature in his Glory, that he may retain that sympathy and compassion to us,
which was taken with it, when he took it from us?

6. I shall not here need to spend much time to tell you 6. what he comes for,
who have told you so often of a day of Judgment, and the Son of man, to sit on
the tribunal. His coming is to Judgment, for he comes with power, and that
power of a Judge.

Only I must tell you, 2. that his motion is no faster then an easy coming. So
loath is he to come to Judgment, so unwilling to enter into dispute with Flesh
and Blood, that he delays the hasty prayers of the afflicted Saints under the
Altars of Heaven, seems a little to withold the full beams of mercy which he
has laid up for the Saints, rather then to post to the destruction of the
wicked. Yet for the elects sake to hasten he does a little; and therefore he
makes a Cloud the Chariot of his Power, that when he once begins to come, he
may come quickly.

And not so only, but come in Glory, which is the last observable in his coming
in a Cloud, with Power and great Glory.

In a Cloud he ascended, Acts 1. and the Angel told the Disciples there, that
he should so come as they saw him go. In the Clouds say the other Evangelists;
they speak of more then one: His cloud is not a single cloud, there are
attendant clouds upon it. Angels surround his Throne, S. Mat. xxv. 31. the
Trumpet of the Archangel sounds before him, 2 Thessalonians. i. 7. his Throne is a
throne of Glory, S. Mat. xix. 28. and his Apostles Thrones are round about him,
and all things are in subjection under his feet, 1 Cor. xv. 27.

Thus is he rewarded with Majesty and Glory, for his meekness and humility;
that we seeing the recompense of those despised virtues, may learn to embrace
them, by so strong incentives and allurements.

What will ye one day say, O ye obstinate Jews, when you shall see his Glory,
whose poverty you so despised? What will ye do at his Throne of Judgment, who
would not receive him in his Cradle of Mercy? How will his enemies bemoan
themselves with them, Wisd. v. We fools thought his life madness, and his end
without honor: How is he now numbered among the children of God, the first born
amongst many brethren! Fools indeed to count him what we did, for he shall come
again with Majesty and Glory.

Glory is a word, by which Christ seems as it were ever and anon to refresh the
fainting spirits of his Disciples, which are ready to betray their Masters to
despair upon the apprehension of the fears and terror which their Lord had told
them should precede and accompany the latter day. This word recalls their
spirits, that they begin to look up again, and lift up their heads: For having
thus as it were amazed their thoughts, and unhinged their patience, he setles
them again with some special comfort, that when these things begin to come to
pass, they should look up, and lift up their heads, for (however it fall out to
others) their Redemption draws nigh.

Never could words of comfort come better then in the full discourse of the day
of Judgment; nor can comfort ever be more welcome, then in the midst of those
affrightments. Christ never spoke out of season, but here he seems to have even
studied it. When these things begin to come to pass, before they are at their
full height, even then look up. Worldly comforts come not so early. The heat
and fury of the Disease must be abated e're they yield us any refreshment. They
are only heavenly comforts that come so timely to prevent our miseries, or to
take them at the beginning.

Nor is it yet only when the day begins to dawn wherein the Son of man comes
forth to Judgment, that we should first begin to take courage to approach, but
whilst the foregoing signs of that day are now first coming on. Those terrors
that affright others, should not startle us, even whilst the lightnings run
upon the ground, whilst the Earth trembles, the Sea roars, the Winds blow, and
Heaven it self knows not how to look, the Righteous is as bold as a Lion, he
stands in the midst of security and peace. This is the state we are to labor
for, so to put our trust in the most High; that no changes or chances of this
mortal life may either remove or shake it, or make us to miscarry. Every
calamity should teach us to look up, but these should teach us also to lift up
our heads. Whilst common fears and troubles march about us, our Christian
patience will teach us cheerfulness; but when these things begin to come to
pass, these, which are the ushers to our glory, these should rejoice and cheer
us up, that our reward is now a coming to us.

Us, I say; for this comfort is not general to all that shall see the Son of
man coming in glory, but his Disciples only, such as have followed him on earth
to meet him in heaven. Lift up your heads: to his servants he speaks, such as
hear his words, and attend his steps, and do his precepts.

Others indeed must hold down theirs; the ungodly shall not be able to look up
in judgment. The covetous man has looked so always downward, that he is not now
able to look up. The Drunkard has so drowned his eyesight in his cups, so
over-burthened his brain, that he can neither lift up his head nor his eyes at
this day. The voluptuous man has dimmed his eyes with pleasures, that he cannot
look about: and the ambitious man has so lost his hopes of being high and
glorious, and is become so low and base in the eyes of God, that he is ashamed
to lift up his head.

These only that are the true Disciples of their Master, whose eyes are used to
heaven, who have so often lift up their eyes thither to pray and praise him,
they only can look up when these things come to pass.

Nothing can affright the humble eye, nothing can amaze the eye that ever
dwells in heaven; nothing can trouble the eye that waits upon her God, as the
eye of a Maiden upon the hand of her Mistress. The humble, devout, and faithful
eye may look up cheerfully, whilst all things else dare not be seen for shame.
O blessed God, how fully do thou reward thy servants, that wilt thus have
them distinguished from others by their looks in troubles, who have so ordered
all things for them, that nothing shall affright them, nothing make them to
hold down their heads?

This is a kind of comfort by it self, above ordinary, that grief or amazement
should not appear so much as in our eyes or looks, though so many terrors stand
round about us.

I will lift up my eyes unto the Hills, and I will lift up mine eyes to thee, O
thou that dwell in the heavens, are the voice of one that looks up for help;
and in the midst of these dreadful messengers of Judgment, it will not be amiss
for us even so to lift up our eyes, to beg assistance and deliverance. But that
is not all our comfort (though it be a great one that we can yet have audience
in Heaven amidst these fears) we have besides, the refreshment of inward joy,
whereby we rejoice at our approaching glory. The righteous shall rejoice when
he sees the vengeance, Psalm. lviii. 9. even when the day of vengeance comes,
and the righteous shall rejoice in their beds, Psalm. cxlix. 5. whilst they are
now rising up and lifting up their heads out of their graves to come to
Judgment.

Nor must it seem strange to see the righteous with cheerful looks, whilst all
other faces gather blackness. It is not the others misery that they rejoice at,
but at their Saviors Glory, and their own happiness. For their Redemption
draws nigh, that is the ground of all their joy.

And would you not have men rejoice, who are redeemed from misery and
corruption, from the slavery of sin, and the power of death? would you not have
poor Prisoners rejoice at the approach of their delivery: you cannot blame'um
if at such news with Paul and Silas they sing in prison? sing aloud for joy, so
loud that the doors dance open for joy, though the Keepers awake and even sink
for fear.

Your redemption draws nigh.] They are words will make the scattered ashes
gather themselves together into bones and flesh; words that will make the soul
leave Heaven, with joy to lift up the head of her dear beloved body out of the
Land where all things are forgotten: Yea the insensible creatures that groan
now under the bondage of corruption, will at these words turn their tunes when
they see at hand the days of the liberty of the Sons of God.

Death and destruction are things terrible, but when the fear of them is once
overpois'd by the near approach of a redemption to eternal life and glory, OF
Death then, where is thy sting! O Grave then where is thy victory! They shrink
in their heads, and pull in their stings, and cannot hurt us while we with joy
and gladness lift up our heads.

What are all the signs and forerunners of the day of Judgment, that they
should trouble us, when we know the day of Judgment is our day of redemption,
our day of glory? What are the darkness of Sun and Moon, the falling of the
Stars, the very totterings of Heaven it self to us, who even thereby expect new
heavens; where there is neither need of Sun, nor Moon, nor Star to give us
light, for the glory of God shall lighten it, and the Lamb, this Son of man
that is coming in his cloud, is the light of it, Rev. xxi. 23. What are the
quakings of the Earth, and roarings of the Sea, to them who neither need Land
nor Sea in their journey to heaven? What are Wars and rumors of Wars, Famines,
and Plagues, and Pestilences, and false Brethren? what are persecutions and
delivering up to Rulers, to death and torments? what are those perplexities and
fears, that rob men of their hearts and courages, for looking after those
things which shall come upon the earth? what are all these together to them who
are thus by those very things redeemed out of all their troubles? Saint Paul is
bold to set up a challenge, Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
shall tribulation, or distress, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or
peril, or sword? Nay in all these we are more then conquerours through him
(this him in the Text) that loved us, Romans viii. 35. 37. And he goes on yet
higher, For I am persuaded, says he, that neither death, nor life, nor Angels,
nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from the
love of God which is in Christ Jesus, ver. 38, 39.

And if thus nothing can ever separate us from Christ's love, what should
trouble us at his coming, whose coming is but to draw us nearer to himself? Be
not troubled, be not terrified, says he, ver. 9. but in patience possess your
souls, ver. 18. for there shall not a hair of your heads perish, ver. 17.
Others may fall, and sink, and perish; but do they what they can against you,
those that hate you, yet care not for it, look up, look up to me, I am coming
to redeem you, lift up your heads, and behold the glory into which I am at hand
to lift you up.

The sum of all now is, that in the midst of all your troubles, all your
amazements, all your fears and dangers, you first still lift up your heads, and
look to Heaven for comfort, and fetch it thence by prayers and petitions.

2. That in the midst of all calamities, you yet remember your redemption is a
coming, and so lift up your heads with joy in the heat and fury of them all;
knowing that they are nothing else but so many forerunners of your glory.

Lastly, that you look up and lift up your heads with thankfulness, that he has
thus accounted you worthy to see him in his glory, and that your redemption is
no further off. That having thus begun to look up and lift up your voices in
praises and thanksgiving upon earth, he may lift you up into Heaven in soul and
body, at his coming there, to sing Allelujahs with the Saints and Angels, and
the four and twenty Elders, to him that sits upon the Throne, and to the Lamb
for evermore: there to be partakers of all his Glory.

A SERMON ON The Fourth Sunday in Advent.
PHILIPPIANS iv. 5. Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at
hand.
THE Text is a part of the Epistle for the day, chosen you may conceive,
because the Lord, that is the time of his coming is at hand. A fit preparation
thought by the Church for Christmas now so near, to prepare us how to entertain
the happy day, the joyful news of our Lord Christ's coming in the flesh. To
entertain it, I say, not with excess and riot, but moderation; not with rude
tricks and gambols, but softness and meekness; not in vanity of clothes, but
modesty; not in iniquity but equity, somewhat departing from our own right, and
seeking occasions to do others right, that all men may see and know we behave
our selves like Servants, expecting their Lords coming, according to all the
several senses of the (...) translated moderation in the Text, but stretching
further then any one English word can express it.

A word chosen by the Apostle to comprehend the whole duty (if it might be) of
a Christian preparing for his Lord in the midst of much affliction, and long
wearied expectation, backed with an assurance that the Lord was now hard by a
coming to deliver them. The poor Philippians were somewhat sad, or sad-like by
the persecutions they suffered from the unbelieving Jews, and Gnostick
Heretics that were among them; many were daily falling off by reason of them,
ver. 18. of the former Chapter, and much hurt those dogs, as the Apostle calls
them, ver. 2. of that Chapter: the concision, that is, those Heretics had done
or were like to do them. But for all that, says he, Rejoice, and again, Rejoice
in the verse before the Text, rejoice too that all men may see it, see your joy
in the Lord, and in your sufferings for him, yet so that they may see your
moderation in it too, that as you are not sad like men without hope, so you are
not merry like men out of their wits, but as men that know their Lord is nigh
at hand as well to behold their actions, as to free them from their sufferings,
to see their patience and moderation as well as their trouble and persecution.

A persuasion it is, or exhortation to patience and meekness, and some other
Christian Virtues (which by examining the word you will see anon) from the
forementioned consideration. A persuasion to moderation from a comfortable
assurance of a reward, the Lord at hand to give it. A persuasion to prepare our
selves, because our Lord is coming: A persuasion so to do it, that all may know
what we are a doing, and what we are expecting, that they may see we are
neither ashamed of our Religion, nor of our Lord, that we neither fear men's
malice, nor our Lords mercy, that we are confident he is at hand, ready to
succor and rescue all that patiently and faithfully suffer for him, to take
vengeance on his enemies, and deliver his Servants out of all. The time is now
approaching, even at the doors.

And if we apply this as we do all other Scriptures to our selves, to teach us
moderation and whatever else is contained under the word which is so rendered,
and draw down the Lords being at hand in the Text to all Christ's comings in
Flesh, in Grace, in Glory; it will no way disadvantage the Text, but advance it
rather, improve the Apostles sense and meaning to all Churches and times to
prepare them all to go out to meet the Lord when or howsoever he shall come
unto them.

And moderation must be it we must meet him with, be the times what they will,
come the Lord how or when he please, know we time or know it not; be what will
unknown, our moderation must be known, and yet his coming as unknown as it may
be, must be considered: always in our minds it must be, that the Lord is one
way or other continually at hand.

Indeed I must confess the times were troublesome and dangerous when the Apostle
thus exhorted and comforted the Philippians, but the best times are dangerous;
danger there is as much of forgetting Christ in prosperity, as of falling from
him in adversity: and as much need there is of moderation when all happinesses
flow in upon us, as when all afflictions fall upon us: so the advice cannot be
unseasonable: And though we called the Text St. Paul's advice, or the Christians
duty in sad times, and his comfort in them, and so divide the words, yet they
will reach any times, ours to be sure, which, call we them what we will, much
danger there is in them of falling away from the true Faith of Christ, and so
as much need of the Apostles counsel and comfort in them.

Yet take the division of the words in the most proper sense.

I. St. Paul's counsel, or the Christians duty in sad times: In the first words,
Let your moderation be known unto all men; that it be, is the Christians duty;
that it should be, is S. Paul's counsel.

II. The Christians comfort in such times, or S. Paul's comforting them with it,
in the following, the Lord is at hand. With this they are to cheer up their
spirits, and S, Paul tells it unto that purpose. Which will afford us a third
Point to be considered.

III. The Connection of them, that our moderation is therefore to be known to
all men, because our Lord and the Lord of all men is at hand to see what we do,
and do to us according to our doings: therefore set down here indefinitely,
only the Lord is at hand, without determining how, or where, or when, or to
what purpose, that we might be the more careful in our duty, more universal in
our moderation.

And the Apostle dealing thus indefinitely, and but silently pointing at the
sad condition of the times they saw, we shall take leave to be as general, and
not bind the counsel or the comfort to sad times, though so they would fit us
too, as well as the Philippians. The advice is good, and the comfort sweet,
both necessary at any time whatsoever. I begin with St. Paul's counsel, or the
Christian duty for moderation. Let your moderation, etc. Three Points I shall
consider in it. 1. Let there be moderation. 2. Let it be known. 3. Let it be
known unto all men. Let our moderation be, he manifested, be extended unto all.

Let there be moderation, or let our moderation be; let moderation be ours, be
our practice, that stands first to be considered. And the word so rendered, has
diverse significations, all indifferently appliable both to the context, and the
Christians duty against his Lords coming.

The word is (...), and first and primarily signifies equity. So Aristotle take
(...). A duty as fit for Christianity as any; not only to be just, but equal:
nay to prefer equity before justice, to depart somewhat from our own right
rather then exact the extremity of justice, rather to let go a Coat or a Cloak,
then go to law about it, rather to take a blow, an affront, an indignity, nay
turn the cheek for a second, then draw a Sword; for a third turn the other
cheek rather than venture turning out of Heaven, for turning violently again
upon them out of a false opinion of gallantry and valor: rather go a mile or
two above our stint and share then to make disturbance for it. This our Masters
counsel and command too, to all his Disciples. S. Matthew. v. 40, 41, 42.
confirmed to us by his example, S. Matthew. xvii. 27. Tribute paid by him that
was not due, only lest he should offend them.

Indeed it is not equity but iniquity in them that require more then is right;
yet it is a point of a Christian sometimes (in petty matters always) not to
stand rigorously upon our right, when there is like to come nothing but
continual dissension, and long-lived enmities by exacting it.

So far should we be from doing so, that we should be ready by all fair
compliances to remove all unneighbourly contentions from among us; if the
parting with trifles, giving way a little, or the forgiving small trespasses
will do it. More then so there is in this (...), in seeking occasions and
opportunities to do good. Our blessed Lord went about doing good, says S.
Peter, Acts x. 38. from City to City, says S. Matthew. ix. 35. from one place to
another, all the Cities of Judea over, from one opportunity to another, seeking
distressed souls, to do good unto: one point of that (...), that gentleness of
Christ, by which St. Paul beseeches the Corinthians, 2 Cor. x. 1. His was, not
to leave sinners as they deserve; ours, not deal with our Brethren always as
they perhaps deserve of us, but deal better with them then so; to proffer them
some condescensions, seek some such ways and means to reconcile them to us.

This is truly Christian, if to be like Christ be to be truly Christian, and as
fit it is for such times as the Philippians then were in; nothing more fit in
the times either of growing Heresies, or pressing troubles, then to descend a
little to win the one, and give a little to avoid the other.

And as well it answers to our English rendering it, Moderation. Equity is
nothing else but a moderating that summum jus, a bringing rigorous right to
moderate terms, and so striving to be good to them with whom the contestation
is, to overcome them into peace and agreement with us, and so avoid the trouble
and vexation, that else is like to come from them to us, and likely from us to
them again, that we be not found smiting our fellow Servants, fighting with one
another when our Lord comes. A fit virtue this, to answer that part of the Text
too, the Lords being at hand.

2. A second interpretation there is that suits as well; for humanity and
civility it is taken. And truly Christianity teaches not to be uncivil, allows
not uncivil language, not so much as a thou fool, threatens Hell fire to such a
tongue, S. Matthew. v. 22. allows not that which is less, a Racha, any kind of
expression of contempt, or vilifying our Brother. Such a fault must come before
the Council, we must be brought to the Council. Table for it of God and Christ,
and fined at what they please for the misdemeanour, though the Common Law
peradventure will not reach to punish it. It Is none of Christ's Religion that
teaches men to be uncivil; no, not to return one incivility with another: no,
not revile again though we be reviled, says St. Peter, and brings Christ for an
example, 1 Pet. ii. 23. Others doing us wrong, nay shrewdly persecuting us too,
will not authorize us to do it, to requite our very persecutors with any
incivility. A good memorandum for those who make it an especial sign of their
being better Christians then others, to be rude and uncivil to their betters,
to be saucy and unmannerly to any, to all that run not riot with them into the
same madness and folly, Sacrilege and Heresy, that cannot be content to do
men wrong, and rob them of their dues, but must do it with ill language and
incivility. They forget sure the Lord is at hand, that there is any such thing
as a Lord, any superior above them, either at hand, or afar off, either in
this world or in the other. The Apostles (...) is for moderation in this point
too, civil and handsome terms, gestures, and carriage, that we should carry our
selves like men, at least, if we will not like Christians. And for such times
as the Text refers to, it is but seasonable: 1. That the sufferers do not
increase their sufferings with their own incivilities, or corrupt or dishonor
them, by so doing: and 2. That those that cause them to suffer, do not enhance
the others sufferings, remembering that themselves also are but men, and the
spoke of the wheel, ( as that Captive King observed) which is now above, may by
and by be below again, especially if it be true (as true it is) that the Lord
is at hand, his Chariot is coming after, and the Mother of Sisera, the greatest
Captain, need not ask, why tarry the Wheels of it so long, why is it so long a
coming? It will come and will not tarry; it is happy if it come not on us whilst
we are ra^ting and railing against any whosoever.

3. There is a third signification of the word for Modesty, so the Latin
renders it Modestia. As fit a posture for sad times, for any times, be the Lord
at hand, or be he not, as any whatsoever. Not the peculiar virtue of women
only, though of them, 1 Timothy ii. 9. but of men too, an especial way to win our
adversaries, to win Infidels to Christianity, when they shall behold our
conversation in all sweetness and composure, our bodies comely and decently
apparelled, our gate sober, our gesture grave, our eyes modest, our countenance
composed, our speech discreet, our behavior all in order: when they shall see
us merry without lightness, jesting without scurrility, sober without
sullenness, grave without doggedness, composed without affectedness, serious
without dullness, all our demeanor wholly bent to all Christian
well-pleasingness, at all times, with all companies, upon all occasions, in all
places, and businesses. This is nothing but moderation neither; we may keep the
English still, moderation in our garb and habit, and discourse, and motion;
modesty, that is moderation in them all.

4. Yet there is a fourth acception of the word, for that sweet, and meek, and
gentle temper of the mind, whereby we carry our selves patiently and unmoved in
persecution, not rendering evil for evil to them that persecute us, not vexing
and tearing our selves upon it, not studying revenge, or returning mischief,
but on the contrary good for evil, blessing for cursing, prayers for
imprecations, committing our cause, and our selves to God, that judges
righteously; this is the true Christian moderation, that to which we are
called, says S. Peter; that of which Christ gave us an example, suffered as
well for that to give us an example of it, as any thing else, 1 S. Pet. ii. 21,
22, 23. That to which belongs the blessing, S. Mat. v. 5. from this Lord that
is at hand. It Is the very vocation of a Christian, the very design of the
Christians Lord, a blessedness there is in the very doing it, when and whilst
we so suffer, we are blessed, S. Mat. v. 10. even before that great reward in
heaven, bidden therefore, ver. 12. to rejoice and be exceeding glad upon it,
bidden by S. James to count it all joy, S. James i. 2. bidden by S. Paul in the
verse before the Text; to rejoice and rejoice again upon it. Nay so exceeding
joy it seems the Christian feels in it, that he is fain upon the back of it in
this very verse to call to us to be moderate in the expressing it, to call to
us for moderation in it, lest we should even burst with it, or overflow into
some extraordinary effusions of it, and so provoke more affliction by it.
Rejoice the Apostle would have us in our sufferings for Christ, but yet with
moderation, be meek, and patient, and contented, and resigned in them, yet not
as we were senseless, careless, or desperate, but discreet and moderate in them
all: neither so sensible of them, nor anxious in them, as to forget others, and
our respects due to any of them; nor so senseless and careless to forget our
selves, and the care due unto our selves. This the moderation most proper to
the persons and time, persons under persecution, and in the time of being so,
the most seasonable advice: and as seasonable to be given when the Lord is at
hand: moderation to be observed in the expectation of his coming. They were not
too hastily to expect it. The Thessalonians were almost shaken in mind, and
troubled by so hasty a conceit, that the day of Christ was at hand, 2 Thessalonians.
ii. 2. That Christ was just then a coming; S. Paul was fain to stop their
haste, to moderate their expectation, to tell them though the day was near, it
was not so near as they supposed it, they must be content to expect a little
longer, some things were to be done first. So necessary seems moderation in
this point too, lest expecting the Lord too soon, and failing of him, they
should be shaken, and fall away from him, as if he had deceived them, quit
their Faith and Religion for want of patience and moderation. Thus you have the
four senses of (...), four kinds of moderation. Equity or Clemency, Humanity or
Civility, Modesty or Sobriety, and Meekness or Gentleness. It follows next that
they be showed, that we show them all, that we make them known. Let your
moderation be known.

For sufficient it is not always to do well; we must be known to do it, though
not do it to be known; yet be known to do it. Indeed when we fast, or pray, or
give alms, or do any good work, we must not do it, that we may appear to men to
do so, St. Mat. vi. 3, 4, 6, 18. yet it must appear to men, for all that,
sometimes that we do so. Ye, that is, ye Christians are the light of the world,
and a light is not to be put under a bushel, S. Mat. v. 15. but on a
Candlestick, to give light unto all that are in the house. Let your light
therefore shine before men, ver. 16. Shine so before them, that they may see
your good works, see and glorify, glorify God that has given such graces unto
men: glorify him again by taking thence an example of such things to
themselves. There have been, are still, doubtless, many that brag much of Faith
and Holiness, and Purity; nay of Meekness and moderation too; but if we call
them to S. James his show us them, as he requires them, by their works, we may
say as Christ said of the Lepers that were cleansed, S. Luke xvii. 18. There
are scarce found one of ten that show that return of Glory unto God; if one,
they count him but a Samaritan, no true Israelite for it: though S. James says
expressly, Faith is dead, where there is no such expression: and for those other
virtues, the very action is so evidently outward, that they must needs be known
where they are, they cannot be hid, are not the virtues they pretend to, if not
known. It were strange to hear of equity, or civility, or modesty, or
moderation that could not be seen; ridiculous to call him merciful or equitable
that shows it not by some condescension, to style him civil whose behavior is
nothing less, him modest who shows nothing but immodesty, him meek who
expresses nothing but fury and impatience. These are virtues we must needs see
where e're they be.

It is reported of S. Lucian the Martyr, that he converted many by his modest,
cheerful, and pious look and carriage, and of S. Bernard, that In carne ejus
apparebat gratia quaedam spiritualis, etc. There appeared a kind of spiritual
grace throughout his body, there shone a heavenly brightness in his face, there
darted an Angelical purity and Dove-like simplicity from his eyes, so great was
the inward beauty of his inward man, that it poured out it self in his whole
outward man abundantly over all his parts and powers. No motion in them but
with Reason and Religion. Where such virtue is, it will be known; must be too:
must so be expressed that men may know and feel the benefits and effects; (...),
Let your moderation speak for you, whose servants you are, what Lord you are
under, what is your expectation and your faith.

3. Nor is it thirdly enough to have it known to one or two, to a few, or to
the household of faith alone. To all men, says the Apostle, Jew and Gentile,
Friend and Foe, Brethren and Strangers, the Orthodox and Heretics, good and
bad, Christian and Infidel. Condescend to men of low estate, the very lowest
says our Apostle, Romans xii. 16. Provide things honest in the sight of all men,
ver. 17. live peaceably with all men, ver. 8. do all possible to live so:
having your conversation honest among the Gentiles, that by your good works
which they shall behold, they may glorify God in the day of visitation, 1 Pet.
ii. 12. full of equity, that they may not speak evil of you as rigorous and
unmerciful; full of courtesy and civility, that the Doctrine of Christ be not
blasphemed for a Doctrine of rudeness and incivility; full of modesty, that the
adversary speak not reproachfully of the word of truth, have no occasion to do
so by your immodesty; full of moderation, that all good men may glorify God
for your professed subjection to the Gospel of Christ, to those hard points in
hard times, to meekness and moderation, when your adversaries are so violent
and immoderately set against you. Known must our moderation be in all its
parts, that all may know the purity of our profession, the soundness of our
Religion, the Grace of God appearing in us, the adversary be convinced, the
Christian Brethren incited by our examples to the same grace and virtue.

One note especially we are to carry hence, that it is no excuse for our
impatience, harshness or any immodest or immoderate fierceness against any,
that they are men of a contrary opinion, we use so ill: Men they are, and even
under that notion moderation to be used toward them; much more if we
acknowledge the same Lord or his being any way near either to reward or punish.
And so I pass to the second General, the Christians comfort that holds up his
head in the bitterest storms, and makes him moderate, quite through them all.
The Lord is at hand.

Now the Lord is several ways said to be at hand, many ways to be near us.

He is at hand, or near us by his divine essence, not far, says S. Paul from
every one of us, Acts xvii. 27. he is every where, we therefore no where, but
that he is near us.

He is near us 2. by his Humanity. The taking that upon him has brought him
nigh indeed to be bone of our bone, and flesh of our slesh.

He is nearer us yet 3. by his Grace. One with us, and we with him; one Spirit
too, he in us and we in him, S. John xiv. 20.

He is at hand, and nigh us 4. in our Prayers. So holy David, The Lord is nigh
unto them that call upon him, all such as call upon him faithfully.

He is nigh us 5. in his Word, in our Mouths, and in our Hearts, by the word of
Faith that is preached to us, Romans x. 8. we need not up to heaven, nor down to
the deep, says the Apostle, to find out Christ, that eternal word is nigh
enough us in his word.

He is nigh us 6. in the Sacraments, so near in Baptism as to touch and wash
us, especially so near in the Blessed Sacrament of his Body and Blood, as to be
almost touched by us: there he is truly, really, miraculously present with us,
and united to us. It Is want of eyes if we discern not his Body there, 1 Cor.
xi. 29. in that, or see not his power in the other.

He is at hand 7. with his Judgments, Behold the Judge stands at the door, S.
James v. 9. Just before he had said the coming of the Lord draws nigh: but at
the second look he even sees him at the door. Now of this coming two sorts we
find expected even in the Apostles times, his coming in judgment against
Jerusalem to destroy his Crucifiers, the unbelieving Jews, and the Apostate
Christians the Gnostick Heretics, that together with the Jews persecuted the
Church of Christ; and his last coming at the general Judgment. We may add a
third, his being always ready at hand to deliver his faithful servants out of
their troubles, and to revenge them in due time of all those that causlesly
rise up against them. The first kind of his coming to Judgment, that against
Jerusalem, is the coming by which the Apostle comforts his Philippians, that
the Lord was now coming to deliver the persecuted Saints out of their hands.
The third is that by which our drooping spirits are supported in all
distresses, that he is near to help us in them all. The second his coming at
last in the general Judgment, then howsoever, to make a full amends for all, is
the great stay of all our hope, all Christians from first to last. No great
matter how we are here from time to time driven to our shifts, the time is
coming will pay for all.

Nor do any of the other comings want their comfort: It Is a comfort that God is
so near us in his essence, so that in him we live, and move, and have our
being: our life and being are surely the better by it. 2. It Is a great comfort
that our Lord would vouchsafe us so great an honor as to become like one of us
to walk and speak, and eat, and drink, and be weary, and weep, and live, and
die like one of us. 3. It Is an inward and inexpressible comfort that he will
dwell in us by his Grace and Holy Spirit; make us Holy as himself is Holy. 4.
It Is a gracious comfort that he suffers us so ordinarily to discourse with him
in our Prayers. 5. It Is an especial comfort, and that such a one as he affords
not to other Nations, to give us by his word, the knowledge of his Laws, to
reveal unto us his whole will and pleasure. 6. It Is a comfort to a miracle that
he will yet draw nearer to us, and draw us nearer to himself by the mysterious
communication of himself, his very Blood and Body to us. No greater
establishment to our souls, no higher solace to our spirits, no firmer hopes of
the Resurrection of our bodies, then by his thus not only being at hand, but in
our hands, and in our mouths. I speak mysteries in the spirit, but the comfort
never a whit the less: the joy of the Spirit far the greater ever. But all
these comforts heapt together, what comfort in the world like the faithful
Christians, all so great, so certain, so nigh at hand?

And yet if I take hint from the Churches choice of this Text for the front of
her Epistle this day to her Children, and say, the Lord may be said to be at
hand too, because the Feast of his coming, that coming which gave rise to all
the rest, the original of all the rest of his gracious comings is at hand to
us. I shall not strain much, and to those that truly love his appearance, that
can really endure to hear of his coming, any day that shall put 'um in mind of
his being at hand must needs be a comfort, a day of good tidings: and this as
well as any of the rest will afford us an argument to persuade to moderation,
to make it known to all men whatsoever at the time when the Grace of God
appeared to all men whatsoever. Which passes me over to the third general, the
connection of the Christians Duty and his comfort, or the persuasion to the duty
from the comfort of the Lords coming. And so many persuasive arguments there
are from it, as there are comings, so many reasons to persuade moderation as
there are ways of our Lords being at hand: nay one more, and it shall go first
because it stand so.

The Lord it is we do it to, to the Lord, and not unto men: let that go for the
first reason. It Is to him, and for his sake we are enjoined it. St. Paul
thought it a good argument to persuade Servants to their duties, Ephesians. vi. 7. to
do their service with a good will too; and we all are Servants, and here is our
Lord.

Here 2. and at hand, on every hand. We cannot go out of his presence. Let that
teach us righteousness and equity, modesty and moderation, to do all things as
in his presence. Would we but think this when we go about any thing, did we but
consider seriously the Lord was so near us, heard us, and looked upon us; our
words would be wiser, and our actions better. We durst not look an immodest
look, nor speak an uncivil word, nor do any iniquity, or any thing out of
order. The Lord is at hand, and sees what we are doing; let all then be done
with moderation.

3. The Lord has taken on our nature, and come nearer; yet given us by it an
example so to do; to be so moderate as to wash even Iudas's feet, to do good,
to be civil and modest, and moderate, even toward them that are ready to
betray us, who will do so the next hour, have bargained for it already: he came
so nigh us in our nature, that we might so come nigh him in his Graces; took up
our nature, that we might take up his example; drew so nigh us, that we might
not draw off our affection from our brethren, but serve them in love, how ill
soever they serve us: he took hands and feet to be at hand, to teach our hands
and feet how to behave and moderate themselves toward others.

4. He is at hand with his Grace to help us: there is no excuse of
impossibility. By him I can do all things, says the Apostle, by Christ that
strengthens me, Phil. iv. 13. Be it never so hard, his grace is sufficient for
us, sufficient to enable us to all grace and virtue, even the hardest, and in
the most difficult exigencies and occasions. This he offers to us, offers it
abundantly, more abundant grace. Let us accept it then and walk-worthy of it in
all modesty and moderation.

5. He is at hand to our Prayers: let us then desire the grace we just now
spoke of. Deny us he will not; do but knock and he comes presently. To him that
knocks, says he, it shall be opened. Let us but come with meek and patient
spirits, in love and charity with all men, forgiving them that we may be
forgiven, and speed we shall; be merciful and moderate toward them, so will
God be merciful and moderate toward us: moderate at least the punishments due
to our iniquities. The Lord is at hand always to hear such a man's prayers;
learn we therefore moderation.

6. The Lord is near us in his word. This is his command and will, must
therefore be performed. If the will of the Lord be so, that we must suffer for
righteousness sake, let every answer to our persecutors be with meekness and
fear, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. iii. 15. for happy are you, says he, and therefore
be not afraid of their terror, neither be troubled, ver. 14. moderate your
passions and your fears, and esteem your selves happy by so suffering, by so
doing. It Is your Masters revealed will that so it should be, it is his way to
draw you nearer to himself, by working you to the image of his sufferings.

7. The Lord is at hand, the Judge is coming: At hand to reward us for all our
sufferings, all our patience and moderation, all our modest and civil
conversation, all our righteousness and mercy. Not one Sparrow, not the least
feather of a good work shall fall to the ground, not one half farthing be lost,
not a hair of any righteous action perish: he is at hand to take all up that
nothing be lost. At hand he is 2. to deliver us out of the hands of all that
hate us: if temporal deliverance be best, to give us that; if not, to deliver
us however over into glory. At hand 3. to take revenge upon his enemies, to
repay his adversaries. He came presently after this Epistle to do so to
Jerusalem, to destroy the incredulous Jews and Apostate Heretics, those
persecutors of the Christian Faith, came with a heavy hand, that they fell to
their utter ruin and desolation. Thus he being at hand to reward and punish,
may well serve as an argument to persuade us to be patient for so short a
while, to be moderate both in our fears and desires, in our words, and in our
actions, to bear a while and say nothing, to endure a while and do nothing; for
one there is a coming, nay, now at hand to deliver us, to plead our cause, to
revenge our quarrel: let us commit it to him. He is the Judge of all the world,
and judges right: Let us do nothing but with moderation, and not think much to
show it unto all, when we are sure to be rewarded for it: and those that
observe it not, are sure to be punished.

8. The Lord is at hand in the blessed Sacrament, and that is also now at hand;
but a week between us and it. And moderation of all kinds is but a due
preparation to it, some special act of it to be done against it: Righteousness
and equity is the habitation of his seat, says David: the Lord sits not, nor
abides where they are not. The holy Sacrament that is his Seat, a Seat of
wonder, is not set but in the righteous and good soul, has no efficacy but
there. Modesty and humility are the steps to it; into the modest and humble
soul only will he vouchsafe to come. All reverence and civility is but
requisite in our addresses unto it. But moderation, meekness, and patience, and
sweetness, and forgiving injuries is so requisite that there is no coming
there, no offering at the altar till we be first reconciled to our Brother. Go
be first reconciled to thy Brother, says our Lord himself, S. Mat. v. 24. so
that now if we desire a blessing of the blessed Sacrament unto us; if we desire
the Lord should there come to us, let our moderation be known to all men before
we come. Let us study the art of reconcilement, let us not stand upon points of
honor or punctilio's with our Brother, upon quirks and niceties; let us part
with somewhat of our right; let us do it civilly, use all men with courtesy
and civility, express all modesty and sweetness in our conversation; all
softness and moderation, patience and meekness, gentleness and loving kindness
toward all, even the bitterest of our enemies; considering the Lord is at
hand: the Lord of Righteousness expects our righteousness and equity; the Lord
in his body, and looks for the reverent and handsome behavior of our bodies;
the Lord of pure eyes and cannot endure any unseemliness or intemperance either
in our inward or outward man: the Lord that died and suffered for us, and upon
that score requires we should be content to suffer also any thing for him, not
to be angry, or troubled, or repine, or murmur at it, or at them that cause it.
At the Holy Sacrament he is so near at hand, that he is at the Table with us,
reaches to every one a portion of himself, yet will give it to none but such as
come in an universal Charity with all the forementioned moderations.

Give me leave to conclude the Text as I began it, and fix the last Argument
upon the time. The time is now approaching wherein the Lord came down from
Heaven, that he might be the more at hand. Fit it is we should strive to be the
more at hand to him, the readier at his command and service: the time wherein
he moderated himself and glory as it were to teach us moderation, appeared so
to all, that our moderation also might appear to all of what size, or rank, or
sect whatsoever.

I remember a story of Constantia Queen of Arragon, who having taken Charles
Prince of Salerno, and resolving to sacrifice him to death to revenge the death
of her Nephew Conradinus, basely and unworthily put to death by his Father
Charles of Anjon, sent the message to him on a Friday morning to prepare
himself for death. The young Prince (it seems not guilty of his Fathers
cruelty) returns her this answer; That, besides other courtesies received from
her Majesty in Prison, she did him a singular favor to appoint the day of his
death on a Friday, and that it was good reason he should die culpable on that
day whereon Christ died innocent. The answer related, so much moved Constantia,
that she sends him this reply: Tell Prince Charles if he take contentment to
suffer death on a Friday, because Christ died on it; I will likewise find my
satisfaction to pardon him also on the same day that Jesus signed my pardon,
and the pardon of his Executioners with his Blood. God forbid I shed the blood
of a man, on the day my Master shed his for me. I will not rest upon the
bitterness of revenge, I freely pardon him.

Behold a Speech of a Queen worthy to command the world, worthy a Christian
indeed. To apply it, is only to tell you, we may often take excellent occasions
of virtue and goodness from times and days, and bid you go and do likewis^* The
time that is at hand is a time to be celebrated with all Christian joy and
moderation, some particular and special act of Charity, Equity, Modesty,
Meekness, Moderation to be sought out to be done in it, or to welcome it: The
Feast of Love to be solemnized with an universal Charity; the Lord at hand to
be honored with the good works of all our hands. His coming to pardon and save
sinners to be accompanied with a general reconcilement and forgiveness of all
enemies and injuries, of a moderation to be exhibited unto all. Let your
moderation then keep time as well as measure, be now especially shown, and
known, and felt, and magnified by all with whom we have to do, that thus
attending all his comings, he may come with comfort, and carry us away with
honor; come in grace and hear us, come in mercy and pardon us, come in his
word and teach us, come in spirit and dwell with us, come in his Sacrament and
feed and nourish us, come in power and deliver us, come in mercy and reward us,
come in glory and save us, and take us with him to be nearer to him, more at
hand, to sit at his right hand for evermore.

THE FIRST SERMON ON Christmas Day.
ISAIAH Xi. 10. And in that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall
stand for an Ensign of the People, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest
shall be glorious.
AND in that day there shall be. And in this day there was a root of Iesse that
put forth its branch. That day was but the Prophecy, this day is the Gospel of
it. Now first (to speak it in the Psalmists phrase) truth flourished out of the
earth: now first the truth of it appeared.

Some indeed have applied it to Hezekiah, and perhaps not amiss in a lower
sense; but the Apostle who is the best Commentator ever upon the Prophets,
applies it unto Christ, Romans xv. 10. There we find the Text, and him it suits
to more exactly every tittle of it, and of the Chapter hitherto, than to
Hezekiah or any else.

He was properly the branch that was then to grow out of old Iesse's root. For
Hezekiah was born and grown up already some years before, thirteen at least. He
2. it is whom the Spirit of the Lord does rest upon, ver. 2. upon Hezekiah and
all of us; it is the Dove going and returning. Upon him 3. only it is, that the
Spirit in all its fullness, with all its gifts, wisdom and understanding, and
counsel, and might, and the rest is poured out upon. He 4. it is alone, that
judges the earth in righteousness, which is said of this root, ver. 4. He 5. it
is that shall smite the earth, with the rod or spirit of his mouth, as it is,
ver. 4. so attested, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 8. He 6. it is that can make the Wolf and
Lamb, the Leopard and the Kid, the Calf, the young Lion and the fatling lie
down and dwell together, as is prophesied of him, ver. 6. He the only Prince
and God of Peace, that can reconcile all enmities and difference, that can
unite all disagreeing spirits. In a word, He is the very only He whom God has
set up for an Ensign to the People, to whom all the Gentiles flock in, to whom
rest and glory both properly belong; the only root too from whence all good
things spring, or ever sprung either to Iesse, or David, or any other. Nor is
it the Apostle, or we Christians only that thus expound it of Christ, the
learned of the Jewish Rabbis do so too; Tam Christiani, quam tota
Circumcisio fatetur, says S. Jerome, all the Circumcised Expositors confess as
much, all understand it of the Messiah, only a temporal Messiah they would
have, and err in that, because ours the true one, they will not acknowledge.
But we have enough from what they do, from their own ^onfessing it to be spoken
of the Messiah, or the Christ.

Of whom we have here four particulars to consider, the stock from whence he
was to come. The design upon which he was to come. The success of his design,
and the glory of his success.

1. The stock from whence he was to come, is the Root of Iesse. 2. The design
upon which he was to come, is, to stand for an Ensign to the people to come in
unto him. 3. The success of his design, is their coming in, and seeking to him,
to it shall the Gentiles seek. 4. The glory of his success, and his rest shall
be glorious. Rest he shall have in it, and glorious he shall be by it.
And to bring both ends of the Text together, nay all the ends of it together,
I shall lastly add the time, when this Rest shall spring, when this Ensign
shall stand up, when the Gentiles shall seek, when this Rest and Glory, or
glorious rest shall be. In that day, says the Text. In this day says the Time.
In the Birth of Christ. In the Times of Christ all this should be, and all this
was. Both days are one, and this of his Birthday, the very first of all these
things here, beginning to be fulfilled.

And the sum of all is no more but this, that notwithstanding the most
calamitous times (such as were threatened to the Jews, by bringing upon them the
Assyrian in the former Chapter) there should a day of deliverance at last
appear, a day of rest and glory, when the Messiah or Christ should come to
perfect all their deliverances, and not only theirs but the Gentiles also, and
build up a Church out of them both unto himself, and dwell and rest gloriously
among them, and bring them also to his eternal rest and glory. I begin at the
root of this great design, to show you who it is, and whence he comes, that
shall thus stand up for the rest and glory of the People. And the Root of Iesse
here he is called: There shall be a root of Iesse.

In the first verse his style somewhat differs: He is called a Rod out of the
stem of Iesse, and a branch out of his Roots, and he is them all; and this root
in the Text, but a Metonymy to express them all.

1. He is a Rod, the Rod, the staff that so comforted old David, Psalm. xxiii.
that even raises his dead bones out of the Grave, and makes him as it were walk
still among the living.

The staff that supported dying Jacob, which he leaned upon, and worshipped,
Heb. xi. 21. which we may worship too without any Idolatry. A Rod, a Staff he
is to lean upon, a staff that will not fail us, not like the reeds of Egypt,
the supports and succors that the world affords us: they will but run into our
hands and hurt us, to be sure never be able to hold us up. This Christ is the
only staff for that. A staff that will comfort us when we are ready to die,
that we may trust to upon our deathbeds, that we may commit our dying spirits
to, as S. Stephen did, Acts vii. 59. No other can do that but this of Christ.
Indeed no rod has either comfort or strength to hold by but only He.

Yet a rod 2. he is, to rule and correct us too, as there is need; a rod of
iron by which God bruises the rebellious spirits, Psalm. ii. 9. The rod or
Scepter of Judah, the Shepherds rod or hook; one to show his Kingly power, the
other his Priestly power over us. So the word denotes two of his prime offices
out to us, and may yet intimate a third; the Shepherds rod being not so much to
strike, as to direct and lead the straggling Sheep into the way: a part of his
Prophetic Office. So a word well chosen to signify unto us all his three
Offices. And the Rod or Wand that is carried before the Judge, when he goes to
the Judgment Seat, may not unfitly be added to the other, and put us in mind
that this our King, and Priest, and Prophet, shall also come to be our Judge;
and we therefore so to carry it, so to yield our obedience to him, so to submit
to his Rod, as we intend to answer it, when he comes to be our Judge, as we
expect or hope to have his favor in the day of Judgment.

But he is a Rod 3. new springing out of the root, a kind of pliable tender
thing, so styled for his meekness and humility, ready to be wound and turned
any way for our service, to become any thing, to become all things for our
good. A rod so pliant, so flexible, so pliable, so tender; never any son of man
so pliant to his Fathers will, so flexible to all good, so pliable to do or
suffer, so tender over us, never so meek, and humble, and lowly, never any.

Nor did 4. ever rod grow out of a more unlikely stem, (...): the word used
here imports a dead trunck cut close down to the earth, no appearance of life
or power in it. The Royal Family of David was come to that, nothing appeared
above ground that could give hope of the least bud or leaf. And then it was,
that notwithstanding this Rod came forth. So low may things be brought to
humane eyes, and yet rise again: Gods time is often then. When our eyes are
ready to fail with expectation, and all hopes have given up the Ghost; when the
Family of David, from whence all the promised and looked for hope was in a
condition near an extinguishment; when Herod had usurped the Throne, and the
Romans settled him, and his succession in it; when not so much as a sprig, or
bud, or string of hope could be seen by the quickest sight, then out starts
this rod upon a sudden, and prospers to a wonder. Well might the Prophet put
Wonderful for one of his names; there was never any like him: and it may teach
us first to adore this wonder, to kiss this Rod, support or comfort us, rule or
correct us how it will; and 2. thankfully admire Gods goodness that thus does
so unexpectedly often for us.

And upon this next title we may do as much: For he is not only a bare single
rod, but a branch that spreads it self abroad into twigs and little boughs. Two
main ones at the first, his Divinity and his Humanity; from which infinite
little twigs and leaves, infinite graces and blessings are extended to us. My
servant the branch, God calls him, Zach. iii. 8. And the man whose name is the
Branch, Zach. vi. 12. The word in both places descends from (...) which
signifies any thing that springs or rises either from above or from below. His
Divinity that springs from above, from Heaven; and to that alludes the Latin in
both those places, which translate (...) by Oriens, the East or rising Sun, and
is alluded to by Zachary in his Benedictus, when he calls him the dayspring
from on high, Oriens ex alto, S. Luke i. 78. His Humanity that rises from
beneath, from earth, and is sufficiently signified by the root of Iesse: You
have them both together, Ier. xxiii. I will raise unto David a righteous
branch, ver. 5. and this is his Name, the Lord our righteousness, ver. 6. And
from these two all the leaves and fruits of righteousness whatsoever.

For it is not 2. a mere sprout, or yet a barren one, but flourishing and
flowring too. Beautiful and glorious, Isa. iv. 3. excellent and comely in the
same place. Flos the vulgar reads it, a fair goodly flower. The Rose of Sharen,
and the Lilly of the Valleys, Cant. ii. 1. a sweet smelling Flower, that sent
forth its odor into all the world. Flos odorem suum succisus reservat, and
contritus accumulat, nec avulsus amittit; ita and Dominus Jesus in illo
patibulo crucis, nec avulsus evanuit, nec contritus emarcuit, sed illa lanceae
punctione succisus speciosior fusi cruoris color vernavit, mori ipse nescius
and mortuis aternae vitae munus exhalans, says St. Ambrose. A Flower when it is
cut off loses not its scent, and being bruised it increases it: So our Lord
Jesus, says he, lost none of his beauty, or sweetness, by being broken and
bruised upon the Cross; when he was here taken off from the stock of the
living, the Blood that issued out of his Wounds, made his beauty more fresh and
orient; and his bruising there extracted from him so sweet an odor, that even
still every day raises the fainting soul out of its swoon, and revives even
the dead, that they flourish out of their Graves by a Resurrection to life
eternal. The original of the word (...) is from (...) servavit, to reserve or
keep; and may therefore not unfitly denote the great sweetness and virtue that
is reserved and laid up in Christ to sweeten and adorn the stinking and nasty
houses of our sinful souls and bodies.

And from the same Hebrew root, so signifying servavit, we have Servator, our
Savior and Conservator, pointed to us. This (...) this Branch, this Flower
bears in its name the Savior, and has been by some drawn into Nazareus, to
raise a conjecture that Christ was called a Nazaren from Isaiah's Netzer, from
the word here translated Branch, or Flower. But this to be sure can be no
mistake, to tell you either from the Word, or any way else, that our Savior is
designed by it; and this Rod, and Branch, and Root is none but He.

And Root indeed he is, as well as a Rod or Branch; a Root without a Metonymy,
as well as by it. The very Root of all our happiness. The Root in which our
very life is hid. Our life is hid with Christ in God, says the Apostle, Col.
iii. 3. The Root 2. and foundation upon which we all are built; we are all but
so many twigs of this great Vine-root, so many Branches from him, S. John xv.
5. The Root 3. whence all good springs up to us, all Flowers of Art, of Nature,
all the staves of comfort, and rods of hope, all the branches of grace, and
glory; no name properer to him in all these respects. Nay 4. Even the very Root
of Iesse too, from whom Iesse had his original, from whom Iesse's family throve
into a Kingdom, from whence his youngest sons Sheephook sprang into a Scepter:
the Root of David himself too, so says he of himself, Rev. xxii. 16. Why then
say we, or why says the Prophet, the Root of Iesse? Why? not without reason
neither. Iesse was but a poor man in Israel. My Family what is it? says David
himself, 1 Samuel xviii. 18. yet from Iesse would God raise up Christ, that we
might know God can bring any thing out of any thing. He can raise Empires out
of Sheepcotes; so he did Cyrus, so he did Romulus: the one the Founder of the
Persian Monarchy, the other of the Roman. He raised the first Governor of the
Jews, out of a bulrush-basket, and the first States of the Christian Church out
of a Fisher-boat: And not many mighty, not many noble, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. i.
16. But God has chosen the weak things of the world to confound the things
that are mighty, and base things of the world, and things that are despised
has God chosen; yea, and things which are not, to bring to naught things that
are, ver. 17. 18. So little is God taken with our greatness, our great birth or
breeding.

And it is 2^ to shame our pride, who undervalue mean things; ready enough to
say with the unbelieving Jews, can any Good thing come out of Nazareth? can any
great eminent person spring out of the Root of Iesse? Yes it can.

And our great Ancestors will but shame us, as well as be ashamed of us, if we
have nothing to glory of but our relation to their ashes: Our high descent is
not worth the speaking of, and perhaps if we but trace it a little higher than
our own memories (to be sure if to the first beginning) the best and
gloriousest Princes will find themselves derived from as mean an original as
any poor Iesse whatsoever. And this may serve well to cut our plumes, to stop
our rantings of our descent and birth, or any thing, and teach humility.

To drive that lesson homer, I may note to you 3. that it is the root of Iesse
here, not David, (though otherwhere he is called the Root of David, as Rev. v.
5.) lest he should seem either to receive glory from David, or need his name,
to cover the obscurity of his beginning. There is no glory to that of humility,
nor any so truly honorable as the humble spirit.

And of Iesse 4. not David, to point out as it were the very time of our
Messiah's coming; even then when there was scarce any thing to be seen or heard
of the house of David; the Royal Line as it were extinct, and David's house
brought back again to its first beginning, to that private and low condition it
was in in the days of Iesse. Thus again would God teach us to be humble in the
midst of all our ruff, and glory, by thus showing us what the greatest Families
of the greatest Princes may quickly come to, where they may take up e're they
are aware. And 2. to give us the nearest sign both of Christ's coming, and of
himself; that when things were at the lowest, then it would be, and that his
coming would be in a low condition too; in poverty and humility: Root and Iesse
both intimate as much.

And lastly, if we may with some Etymologists derive it from (...) and
interpret it a gift, there will be as good a reason as any, why it is here said
rather of Iesse than of David; even because this root of all this good is to
us, comes merely of free gift, So God loved the world, says S. John iii. 16.
that he gave his only begotten Son; and not by works of righteousness which we
have done, but according to his mercy, says St. Paul: this great kindness of
God our Savior appeared toward us, this Lord our Savior appeared to us, Tit.
iii. 4, 5. as a root, as a rod, as a branch; a root to settle us, a rod to
comfort us, a branch to shelter us; a root to give us life, a rod to rule us in
it, a branch to crown us for it; a close stubb'd root, a weak slender rod, a
tender branch full of loveliness, meekness and humility.

And he appeared as they all do out of the earth, watered by the dew of Heaven;
they have no other Father than the heavenly showers: so by the descending of
the Holy Ghost upon the Blessed Virgin, as rain into a dry ground, this holy
Root put forth, this Branch sprung up without other father of his humanity;
which is the meaning both of erit in the Text, and egredietur in the beginning,
both of this shall be, here, and that shall come forth, or there shall grow up,
in the first verse of the Chapter. And thus we have the first part of the Text,
the descent, and stock, and nature, and condition, and birth of Christ, with
other things pertaining to it. And now for his design, to be set up, or stand
for an Ensign to the people.

II. And indeed, for that he was born to gather the straggling world into one
body, to unite the Jew and Gentile under one head, to bring the straying sheep
into one fold, to draw all the Armies of the earth together into one heavenly
host, that we might all march lovingly under the banner of the Almighty, under
the command of Heaven.

Men had long marched under the command of Flesh, Earth, and Hell. God had
suffered all Nations, says St. Paul, to do so, to walk after their own ways,
Acts xiv. 16. But now he commands otherwise, commands to repent, and leave
those unhappy Standards to come in to his, Acts xvii. 30.

And he exempts none, debars none, all men every where are called to it, Acts
xvii. 30. every nation, and every one in every Nation, that will come shall be
accepted, Acts x. 35. every creature, says he himself, St. Mark xvi. 15. Jew
and Greek, bond and free, male and female, all one here, Gal. iii. 28. Be we
never so heavy laden with sins and infirmities, under this banner we shall find
rest, St. Mat. xi. 28. Be we never so hotly pursued by our fiercest enemies,
here we shall have shelter, and protection. For he is not only an Ensign set up
to invite us in, but an Ensign to protect us too by the Armies it leads out for
us.

And as it first is set up to call us, and secondly to bring us into a place of
defense and safety, so does it thirdly stand to us, and not leave us. An Ensign
may be set up and quickly taken down, but this stands and stands for ever. It
is not idly said, when it is here said particularly, it is to stand. Humane
forces, devices, and designs may be set up, and not stand at all; but God's and
Christ's, theirs will: the gates of Hell it self cannot disappoint them, cannot
throw down this Banner, St. Mat. xvi. 18. His counsels shall stand, he will do
all his pleasure, Isa. xlvi. 10. They do but fight against God that go about to
resist it, says Gamaliel the great Doctor of the Law, Acts v. 39.

And will you know the Staff, the Colors, and the Flag or Streamer of this
Ensign? why, the Staff is his Cross, the Colors are Blood and Water, and the
Streamer the Gospel, or preaching of them to the world. The Staff that carried
the Colors, was of old time fashioned like a Cross, a cross bar near the top,
there was, from which the Flag or Streamer hung; so as it were prefiguring,
that all the Hosts and Armies of the Nations were one day to be gathered under
the Banner of the Cross, to which Soldiers should daily flow out of all the
Nations and Kingdoms of the earth. By Blood and Water, the two Sacraments, is
the way to him; and the Word or Gospel preached is the Flag waved out to invite
all people in.

Come we then in first, and let not this Flag of Reconciliation, of peace and
treaty; for to such ends are Flags sometimes hung out, be set up in vain; let
it not stand like an Ensign forsaken, upon a hill: come we in to treat with him
at least about our everlasting peace, lest it become a Flag of defiance by and
by.

Come we in 2. and submit to the conditions of peace, submit to his orders and
commands. The Septuagint reads: (...), here, to intimate this: He that stands
for an Ensign is to be the great Ruler and Commander of the Nations; it is
requisite therefore that we come in and obey him.

Come we 3. to this Standard, and remember we are also to fight under it:
That Is the prime reason of Ensigns and Banners. We promise to do it when we are
Baptized, and it must be our business to perform it. It is not for us to be
afraid of pains or labor, of danger or trouble, of our lives and fortunes for
Christ's service, a Soldier scorns it, even he who fights but for a little pay,
and that commonly ill paid. And shall we turn cowards when we fight for a
Kingdom, and that in Heaven, which we may be sure of, if we fight well?

Above all 4. if this Ensign stand up for us, let us stand up to it, and stand
for it to the last. A Soldier will venture all to save his colors, rather
wrap himself up in them, and dye so, than part with them. For Christ, for his
Word, for his Sacraments, for his Cross, for our Gospel and Religion we should
do as much. But I am ashamed, the age has showed us too many cowards that have
not only run away from this Standard, but betrayed it too; the more unworthy
certainly that they should ever reap fruit or benefit, twig or branch from the
root of Iesse. The very Gentiles in the next words will sufficiently shame
them. For to it, to this Ensign do all the Gentiles seek.

III. Shail, it is, I confess in the future tense here, reached no further in
the Prophets time, but now it does; the Prophecy is fulfilled, it so came to
pass. And it quickly came so, after the Ensign was set up, the Cross reared,
and the Resurrection had displayed it. For I, if I be lifted up from the earth,
says he himself, will draw all men to me, St. John xii. 32. Parthians, and
Medes, and Elamites, the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and Cappadocia, Pontus and
Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Egypt and Lybia, Rome and Cyrene, as well as the
dwellers in Judea, Cretes and Arabians, as well as Israelites, Proselites, as
well as Jews, he will draw all in to him. The vast multitudes that came daily
in from all quarters of the world, so many Churches of the Gentiles, so
suddenly raised and planted, are a sufficient evidence to this great truth. And
the term, the Jews at this day give the Christians of (...) the very word in
the Text for Gentiles, confirms as much by their own confession. So true was
both Isaiah's Prophecy here, and Father Jacob's so long before, that to him
should the gathering of the people be, Genesis xlix. 10. But that which is an
evidence as great as any, if not above all, is, St. Paul applies the Text as
fulfilled then, Romans xv. 12. And there is this only to be added for our
particular, that we still go on and continue seeking him.

IV. But there is Rest, and Glory here added to the success of this great
design, His rest shall be glorious.

Now by his Rest, we in the first place understand the Church, the place where
the Psalmist tells us his honor dwells, Psalm. xxvi. 3. the place of which
himself says no less, than, This shall be my rest for ever; here will I dwell,
for I have delight therein, Psalm. cxxxii. 14. And glorious it is the Apostle
tells us, a glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, Ephesians. v. 27. glorious
all over, so glorious, that the Prophet says, the Gentiles shall come to its
Light, and Kings to the brightness of its rising, Isa. lx. 3. they shall bring
Gold and Incense from Shebah, the flocks of Kedar, and the rams of Nebaioth
shall come with acceptance to his Altar, ver. 7. the glory of Lebanon shall
come unto it, ver. 13. They shall call the walls of it salvation, and the gates
praise, ver. 18. The Lord is an everlasting light unto it, and God is its
glory, ver. 19. So that we may well cry out with David, Glorious things are
spoken of thee, O thou City of God, thy Church, thy Congregation, O thou root
of Iesse, thou Son of David, which thou have gathered, and thy Churches or holy
Temples too which are raised to thee, exceed in glory; the beauty of Holiness,
thy holy mysteries, thy blessed self art there.

And indeed in the holy Mysteries of the Blessed Sacrament, is his second place
of Rest. There it is that the feeds his flock, and rests at noon, Cant. i. 7.
And he is glorious there, glorious in his Mercies, illustrious in his Benefits,
wonderful in his being there. No such wonder in the world, as his being under
these consecrated Elements, his feeding our souls with them, his discovering
himself from under them, by the comforts he affords us by them.

His Cratch to day was a third place of his Rest, glorious it was, because 1.
the God of Glory rested there: because 2. the glorious Angels displaid their
Wings, and gave forth their light, and sung about it, St. Luke ii. 13, 14.
because 3. Kings themselves came from far to visit it, and laid all their
glories down there at his feet. There his rest was glorious too.

Nay 4. his Sepulcher the place of his rest in Death, was as glorious, is as
glorious still as any of the other: And I must tell you, the Latin reads it
Sepulchrum ejus Gloriosum; From thence it is he rose in glory: by that it was
he gained the glorious victory over Death and Hell: from thence he came forth a
glorious Conqueror. Thither have devout Christians flocked in incredible
numbers. There have Miracles been often wrought, there have Kings hung up their
Crowns, there have millions paid their homage. And thence have we all received
both Grace and Glory; from his Sepulcher, where he lay down in Death, and rose
again to Life.

There is one Rest still behind, and it is not only glorious, but it self is
glory: His rest, himself calls it, Heb. iii. 11. yet a rest into which he would
have us enter too, Heb. iv. 9, 11. And in Heaven it is; no rest to this, no
rest indeed any where, but there, and perfect glory no where else.

And now to wind up all together. This rest and glory, or glorious rest, which
ends the Text, (and it is the best end we can either make or wish) springs from
the root at the beginning. The Church it self, and all the rest and glory the
Churches ever had, or have, or shall enjoy, grows all from that. Our Holy
Temples, our Holy Sacraments, our Holy Days, this day the first of all the
rest, all the benefits of his Death, Resurrection, and Ascension into Glory;
nay our greatest glory in Heaven it self, comes from this little Branch of
Iesse, this humble Root: and the way to all is by him and his humility.

And the time suits well, and the day hits fair for all. In that day says the
Text, all this you have heard shall be; and that day now is this. To day the
Root sprang forth, the Branch appeared. To day the Ensign was displaid to all
the people. From this day the Gentiles began their search. This day he began to
call in his Church, and the Shepherds were the first. To day he first was laid
to mortal rest. To day the glory of his Star appeared, to wait upon his Cradle.
To day we also may enter into his rest, one or other of them.

One of his places of rest we told you was in the Church, or holy place: let us
seek him there. Another Rest of his we mentioned to be in the Blessed
Sacrament: let us seek him there. His Ensign is there set up; let us go in to
him, and offer our lives and fortunes at his feet, proffer to fight his Battles
and obey his Commands: strive we as the Apostle advises us, Heb. iv. 11. to
enter into his rest. Root we and build our selves upon him. Root we our selves
upon him by humility, build we upon him by faith: grow we up with him rooted
and grounded in love, and sprouting out in all good works: rest we our selves
upon him, and make him our only stay and glory. So when this Root shall appear
the second time, and blow up his Trumpet, as he here set up his Ensign, and our
dead roots spring afresh out of their dust, we also may appear with him, with
Palms and Branches in our hands to celebrate the praises of this Root and
Branch of Iesse, and enter joyfully into his rest, into the rest of everlasting
glory.

THE SECOND SERMON ON Christmas Day.
St. LUKE ^i. 7. And she brought forth her Firstborn Son, and wrapped him in
Swadling-clothes, and laid him in a Manger; because there was no room for them
in the Inn.
I Shall not need to tell you who this She, or who this Him. The day rises with
it in its wings. This day wrote it with the first Ray of the morning Sun upon
the posts of the world. The Angels sung it in their Choirs, the morning Stars
together in their courses. The Virgin Mother, the Eternal Son. The most blessed
among women, the fairest of the Sons of men. The Woman clothed with the Sun:
The Sun compassed with a Woman. She the Gate of Heaven: He the King of Glory
that came forth. She the Mother of the everlasting God: He God without a
Mother: God blessed for evermore. Great persons as ever met upon a day.

Yet as great as the persons, and as great as the day, the great lesson of them
both is to be little, to think and make little of our selves, seeing the
infinite greatness is this day become so little, Eternity a Child, the Rays of
Glory wrapped in rags, Heaven crowded into the corner of a Stable, and he that is
every where want a room.

I may at other times have spoke great and glorious things both of the Persons
and the Day; but I am determined to day to know nothing but Jesus Christ in
Rags, but Jesus Christ in a Manger. And I hope I shall have your company along:
your thoughts will be my thoughts, and my thoughts yours, and both Christ's;
all upon his humility and our own. This is our firstborn, which we are this
day to bring forth (for it is a day of bringing forth) this we are to wrap up
in our memories, this to lay up in our hearts; this the Blessed Mother, this
the Blessed Babe, this the condition, and place, and time we find them in, the
taxing time, the Beasts Manger, the Swaddling- clouts, all this day preach to us.

The day indeed is a high day, the Persons high Estates; but the case we find
them in, and the esteem too, the day is lately in, is low enough to teach us
humility, and lowliness at the lowest.

With this the day is great, and the Persons great, and the Text great too, and
time (perhaps) you think it is that it bring forth. Come then let us see what
God has sent us in it.

A Mother and a Child, Swaddling Clouts to wrap it, and a Manger for a Cradle to
lay it in, and all other room or place denied it quite. These are the plain and
evident parcels of the Text, in number five.

But the whole business is between two persons, the Mother and the Child; and
it has two consideratiens besides the letter, a moral lesson and a Mystery:
The one sufficiently brought forth, and laid before us; a plain lesson of
humility from all points and persons. The other wrapped up and involved in the
Swadling-clothes, and Manger, and want of Inn-room; nay in the tender Mother,
her care and travel. For each may have its mystery, and the Text no injury, nay
has its mystery, and the Text injury if it be not so considered. That Is the
way, that not one (...), one tittle of the Law or Gospel may fall to the
ground, or scrap or fragment may be lost.

We shall do so then. Read you first that great Lecture of Humility which
Christ this day taught us by his Birth, and all the circumstances of it here so
punctually expressed: and then show you a mystery in every circumstance. For so
great a business as this fell not out by chance, nor the circumstances at
hap-hazard; but a reason of all there is to be given: why Christ was born, why
of such a Mother, at such a time, under such a name, in such a place, why so
wrapped and laid, and no fit room allowed him. And when we have done so, we will
see whether he shall now meet better usage with us, than in the Inn he did to
day, and learn you by his happy Mother, how to wrap, and where to lay him.

I begin to run over the words first as so many points of his humility. And
seven degrees it rises by, seven particulars in them, we take it from. 1. His
being brought forth or born. 2. His Mother, She. 3. His wrapping up. 4. His
clothes he was wrapped in. 5. His laying in the Manger. 6. The no respect he
meets with in the Inn, no room there for him. And lastly, the time when this
was done. In the days of the taxing, then was this blessed Mothers time
accomplished, in the words just before: and then she brought forth her
Firstborn Son. Thus the Et, the And, couples all, and gives us the time of the
Story, that we may know where and how to find it, in the Roman Records by the
year of the Taxes.

The first step of his Humiliation was to be born, and brought forth by a
Woman, the only begotten Son of the Immortal God, to become the Firstborn of a
mortal Woman. The Firstborn of every Creature to become the Firstborn of so
silly a Creature. Lord, what is man, that thou should become the Son of a
woman? But if thou would needs become a Man, why by the way of a Woman? why
did thou not fit thy self of a Body some other way? Thou could have framed
thy self a humane Body, of some purer matter, than the purest of corrupted
natures: but such is thy humility, that thou did not abhor the Virgins Womb,
would be brought forth as other men, that we might not think of our selves
above other men, how great or good soever thou make us.

But 2. if he would be born of a Woman, could he not have chosen an othergates
than she, than a poor Carpenters Wife? some great Queen or Lady had been fitter
far to have made as it were the Queen of Heaven, and Mother to the Heir of all
the World. But Respexit humilitatem ancillae, it was the lowliness of this his
holy Handmaid, that he looked to, it was for her humility he chose to be born
of her before any other. That we may know 1. whom it is that the eternal Wisdom
will vouchsafe to dwell with, even the humble and lowly. That 2. we may see, he
even studies to descend as low as possible, that so even the meanest might come
to him without fear. That 3. we should henceforth despise no man for his
parentage, nor bear our selves high upon our birth and stock.

Our descent and Kindred are no such business to make us proud; Christ comes as
soon to the low Cottage, as to the loftiest Palace, to the Handmaid as to the
Mistress, to the Poor as to the Rich, nay prefers them here, honors a poor
humble Maid above all the gallant Ladies of the world. For God thus to be made
Man, man of a Woman, the eternal Being begin to be, Infinity to be encompassed
in a Virgins Womb; he whose goings out are from everlasting, now to seem first
to be brought forth, but now lately born; Riches it self, the Son of Poverty;
so far to debase himself! who indeed can sufficiently express this his
generation; also the poorness, meanness, contemptibleness, humbleness of it?
His delight surely is to be with the lowly, that thus picks and culls out low
things.

You will say so 3. most, if you consider his wrapping up, as well as his
coming forth: He that measures the Heavens with his Span, the waters in the
hollow of his hand, who involves all things, all the treasures of Wisdom and
Knowledge, in whom all our beings and well-beings, the decrees and fates of the
world are wrapped from all eternity; he now come to be wrapped and made up like a
newborn child; who can unwind, or unfold his humility? will our Master be thus
dealt with as a Child? thus handled like the common infant? and shall we
hereafter think much the best of us to be used like other men? away with all
our nicenesses henceforward, and be content that our selves and ours should be
in all things subject to the common fate of the sons of men.

Nor think we much 2. to be wrapped up, and bound sometimes, and denied the
liberty of a straggling power to hurt our selves, but ever thank the hand that
binds us up, and takes care of us when we either cannot or know not how to help
our selves, would undo our selves, if we were left loose, which in another
English is too true, too often left undone. He that binds all things with his
Word, makes them up in his Wisdom, and wraps them in the Mantle of his
protection, was content to be bound up as a Child, when he was a Child; as if
he had wholly laid aside his power, humbled himself to be under the power and
discretion of a simple Woman, Nurse and Mother. To teach us again the humility
of a Child, to behave our selves in every condition, and submit in it as it
requires; if Children, to be content with the usage of children; if Subjects,
with the condition of subjects; if Servants, of servants, and the like.

The Clothes his dear Mother wrapped him in are 4. the very badges of humility;
(...) is a rag, or torn and tattered Clothes: such were the clothes she wrapped
him in, such he is so humble, he will be content with, even with rags. What
make we then such ado for clothes? Jacob would bargain with God no further then
for raiment to put on: he covenanted with him not for fashion, nor color, nor
stuff, nor trimming: and our Blessed Lord here is content with what comes next.
But, Lord! to see what ado have we about our Apparel! this Lace, and that
Trimming; this Fashion, and that Color; these Jewels, and those Accoutrements;
this Cloth, and that Stuff; this Silk, and that Velvet; this Silver, and that
Gold; this way of wearing, and that garb in them; as if our whole life were
Raiment, our Clothes Heaven, and our salvation the handsome wearing them. We
forget, we forget our sweet Saviors rags, his poor ragged Swadling-clothes,
and our Garments witness against us to our faces, our pride, our follies, our
vanities at the best. He that, as Job says, Job xxxviii. 9. makes the Cloud the
garment of the Sea, and thick darkness a swadling-band for it, he lets his own
Swadling-bands be made of any thing, his own Clothes of any (...), any torn
pieces, to give us a lesson not to be solicitous of what we should put on, or
wherewith we should be clothed, but be content to be clothed as he does the
Grass, when and how he pleases. It Is no shame to be in rags and tatters, if
they be but Christ's, if they come by him, not by our own ill husbandries, and
intemperances; if for his sake or cause we are brought to them. Clothes are but
to cover shame, and defend us from the cold; they make not a man, nor commend
any to God. Lazarus's rags are better wearing than Dives his Purple and fine
Linen. There is a part of humility as well as modesty, that consists in
Apparel; and this part is here commended to us by our Saviors condition, that
howsoever the giddy Gallants of the world think of it, the sober Christians of
the Church should not think strange to see themselves in rags, which our Lord
has thus rent and torn out to us.

5. Well, but though he was content to be wrapped in Swadling-clothes, and those
none of the handsomest neither, may we not look for a Cradle at least to lay
him in? No matter what we may look for, we are like to find no better than a
Manger for that purpose, and a lock of Hay for his Bed, and for his Pillow, and
for his Mantle too. A poor condition, and an humble one indeed, for him whose
Chariot is the Clouds, whose Palace is in Heaven, whose Throne is with the most
High. What place can we hereafter think too mean for any of us? Stand thou
here, sit thou there, under my Footstool, places of exceeding honor compared
to this. What, not a room among men, not among the meanest, in some smoky
Cottage, or ragged Cell; but among Beasts? whither has thy humility driven
thee, O Savior of mankind? Why, mere pity of a Woman in thy Mothers case, O
Lord, would have made the most obdurate have removed her from the Horses feet,
the Asses heels, the company of unruly Beasts, from the ordure and nastiness of
a Stable: But that we, O Lord, might see what we had made our selves, mere
Beasts, as lustful as the Horse, as sottish as the Ass, as proud, and untamed
as the Bulls, as bent to earthly drudgeries and yokes as the Ox and Heifer,
that thou were fain even to come thither to find us out and redeem us. This
note will humble us if any can, and make us not think much if God at any time
deal with us as Beasts, whip us, and spur us, beat us with the staff, prick us
with the goad, feed us with hard meat, like such things as they, seeing we are
now become like them, as says the Psalmist, Psalm. xlix. 12. 20. To descend from
the Society of Cherubims and Seraphims, and all the Host of Heaven, to be the
companion of Beasts; from the bosom of his Father, to the concave of a Manger,
is such a descent of humility, that we have no more understanding than the very
beasts to express it. Go man, and sit down now in the lowest room thou can,
thou can not sit so low as lay thy Savior. S. Jerome was so much devoted to
the contemplation of this strange humility of his Master in this particular,
that he spent many of his years near the place of this hallowed Manger. And S.
Luke in S. Ambrose's interpretation pleases himself much in the recounting of
this circumstance of his Savior's Birth; and indeed any may so conjecture it,
that considers how often he repeats it in so little compass, thrice within ten
verses, the 7. 12. and 16. And say I, let others seek him in the Courts of
Princes, in the head of an Army, under a Canopy of State, in a Cradle of Gold,
or Ivory; I will seek him to day where he was laid, whither the Angel sent the
Shepherds to seek him, where the Shepherds found him in a Manger, in a Stable,
in the humble and lowly heart; that in an humble sense of his own unworthiness
cries out with Agur, Prove. xxx. 2. Surely I am more brutish than man, and have
not the understanding of a man, even thinks himself fit for a Manger, nay, not
worthy of it, since his Lord lay in it.

6. But the Manger is not the worst, the dis-respect that forced him thither,
that is the hardest, that there was no room for them in the Inn, (...), eis, no
room for them, mark that; it is not said there was no room, no room at all in
the Inn, but none for them; they were so poor it seems, and their outward
appearance so contemptible, that notwithstanding the condition of a Woman great
with Child, and so near her time, they were put away without respect or regard.
To have fallen by chance or some accident into so mean a place, or have been
driven thither by some sudden storm, or tempest, and so frighted into travel,
had been no such wonder peradventure; but to be driven thither by the
unkindness and inhumanity of ones own Countrymen, and Tribe too, is a trial of
humility indeed; but to choose to be so (for he knew all from the beginning
before it came to pass) so to contrive all things for it, and suffer the
uncivil ruggedness of men to drive him out to dwell and lodge among Beasts; to
have contempt thrown upon his poverty, and neglect added to all inconveniences,
is sure to teach us humility in the harshest usages we meet with. He that made
all places, finds none himself, and is content. He that has many Mansions for
others in his Fathers house, has not the least lobby in an Inn, and repines
not at it. He that would have given this churlish Host an eternal house in
Heaven for asking for, cannot have a Cabin for any hire, because his parents
seem so poor; and yet he fetches not fire from Heaven to consume him for his
inhumanity.

How unlike us, I pray, for whom no downy pallets are soft enough, no room
sufficiently spacious and Majestic, no furniture enough costly, no attendance
sufficient, all respect too little. Do we ever call to mind this our Saviors
first entertainment in the world, or think we are no better then our Master? He
could have come in state, in glory, in all magnificence and pomp, attended with
all respect and honor, but would not for our sakes most, that we might see
what he most delights in, and learn it as much by his example as his precept.

7. And yet there is a seventh degree of his humility, to let all this be done
to him in such a public time and place, when the whole world was met together
to be taxed, where so many were gathered in such a place of meeting as an Inn,
when the whole City is filled from one corner to another, there and then to be
so used, so despised, so scorned, as a sign of men, and the outcast of the
people, ranked with the Horse and Ass, to have so many witnesses of affro^ts,
and contempts put upon him, to condescend and order so to have it done, is the
highest of humility: for not only to think meanly of our selves, but to desire
to have all others think meanly of us, is so hard a Text that I fear me few can
bear it. Whatever we suffer, or to whatsoever meannesses and under offices we
condescend, we would not willingly have others think the worse of us for it:
there is too often a pride in our good works, that lies lurking under them, we
scarce can throw it off; but it is that, it is that above the rest that we should
endeavor, to be content to be trampled on, and despised for him who was so for
us.

Sum we up now the points of Christ's humility, to leave his Fathers bosom for
the Virgins Womb, the great riches in Heaven for great poverty upon earth, to
wrap up his immensity in Swadling-clothes, his Robes of glory in Clouts and
Rags, forsake his Throne for a Manger, the adoration of Saints and Angels for
the dis-respects of a surly Host, to be seen in this mean pickle to all the
world. Domine in quis similis tui? O Lord who is like to thee, who is like to
thee may we say this way also in thy humility as well as in thy glory. And sure
we cannot hereafter any of us grudge to be in rags, in Sheepskins, and
Goat Skins, in Dens and Caves of the earth, destitute, neglected, forsaken,
repulsed, contemned, but humble our selves to the meanest condition without any
great reflection upon our Birth or former estates and conditions, if Christ
shall at any time require it of us; seeing the Servant is not better than his
Master, nor the dry tree than the green: and if to him all this was done, we
should frame our minds at least to a humility ready to undergo it.

I have run over the plain song of the words, the plain lesson of humility that
is in them without straining. I must back over again to descant out the
mysteries that lie under them.

And she brought forth. Before she traveled she brought forth, before her pain
came she was delivered of a man-child; so prophesied Isaiah, Isa. lxvi. 7. and
so the Fathers do apply it: She conceived without corruption, and brought forth
without sorrow; the very Text may bear witness to it: for she wrapped it in the
Swadling-clothes, and she laid it in the Manger, says St. Luke. No women it
seems near to help her: for she who needed not the help of man to conceive,
needed no help of woman sure to bring forth: no corruption, no sorrow. A great
mystery, none ever like it, to begin with.

But she a Virgin, thus bringing forth, affords us a second too, to instruct
us, what souls they are of whom Christ is born; Pure and Virgin, Chaste and
Holy only that bring forth him. And the Firstborn he will be, ever should be
of all our thoughts, will be acknowledged so whenever born, primogenitus, one
before whom none; for that only is the sense of Firstborn here, not referring
to any after, but to none before, Col. i. 14. begotten before any creature, in
honor above all creatures, endued with all the rights of primogeniture, even
as man also. Now three things belonged to the Firstborn Son, the Priesthood,
the pre-eminence, or regal Dignity, and a double or larger portion. He is the
High Priest of our profession, Heb. iii. 1. The great High Priest of the
Christian Profession and Religion. He 2. the Head of his Church, Col. i. 18. To
whom all power is given in heaven and earth, S. Mat. xxviii. 18. He 3. also
anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows, Psalm. xlv. 8. A portion of
grace far above others, S. John i. 16. That in all things he might have the
pre-eminence, being the Firstborn, as well of the dead as of the living, says
S. Paul, Col. i. 18. All these mysteries we have wrapped up in the title of the
Firstborn, that by it he is intimated to be our Prince, our Priest, our elder
Brother, one in whom all fullness, who should be therefore so acknowledged and
used, be first entertained in our affections, be the first birth our souls
should travel with, and our affections and actions bring forth.

But there are more wrapped up in his being wrapped in Swadling-clothes, then can
readily be expressed. All the benefits that came by him were wrapped up and not
understood, till the Clothes both of the Manger and the Grave were unwrapt by
his Resurrection. He seemed not what he was, showed not what he came for until
then. All the while before nothing but folds, and things folded up, the Cross
made up or involved in his Cratch (for of the form of a Cross the Cratch some
say was made) man's salvation in Gods Incarnation, the Churches growth in the
Virgins bringing forth, many brethren in the Firstborn among them.

His Glory 2. that was wrapped up in those Clothes, his Godhead in the Manhood,
the Word in Flesh, Eternity in days, Righteousness in a body like to a body of
Sin, Wisdom in the infancy of a Child, Abundance in Poverty, Glory in
disrespect, the Fountain of Grace in a dry barren dusty Land, eternal light in
Clouds, and everlasting life in the very image of death; will you see the
Clothes that hid this treasure, not from men only, but from Devils? The
espousals of just Joseph, and holy Mary hid Christ's Conception of a Virgin. The
crying of an Infant in a Cradle, the bringing forth without sorrow. The
Purification her entire Virginity. The Circumcision his extraordinary
Generation, without any sin. His flight concealed his Power, his Baptism his
unspotted Innocence. His open Prayers to his Father his infinite Authority and
Equality with him. His sad sufferings obscured his perfect Righteousness. The
poverty and meanness of his life the height and greatness of his Birth: and the
ignominy of his Death the immensity of his Glory.

His Gospel 3. that was wrapped up in Clothes, that seeing we might see and not
presently understand, a mystery kept secret since the world began; his Doctrine
wrapped in parables, his Grace covered in the Sacraments, the inward Grace in the
outward Elements, his great Apostolic Function in poor simple Fishermen, his
Universal Church in a few obscured Disciples of Judea, the height of his
knowledge in the simplicity of Faith, the excellency of his Precepts in the
plainness of his Speech, and the Glory of the end they drive to in the humility
of the way they lead: well may the Prophet exclaim, Vere tu es Deus
absconditus, Psalm. lv. 15. Verily thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of
Israel, the Savior. Well may we admire thy folds and wrappings up, O God, and
not strive to pry into thy secrets, thy goings out, and thy comings in; and all
thy counsels are past finding out: to thee only it belongs to know them, to us
to obey and submit to them, and adore them.

Yet 4. he was thus wrapped up to show us our condition, that the beauty and
sweetness of Christianity as well as Christ, of Christians as well as Christ,
appears not outwardly, or but in rags. We cannot see the Christians strength
for the weaknesses that surround him, nor his joy for the afflictions that
encompass him, nor his happiness for the worldly calamities that oppress him,
nor his wisdom for the foolishness of Preaching, that so much delights him, nor
his riches for the poor condition he is sometimes brought to, nor his honor
for the scoffs and reproaches of the world he often labors under. He seems
unknown, when he is well known; dying when he only lives, killed when he is but
chastned, sorrowful though always rejoicing, poor yet making rich, as having
nothing, and possessing all things, 2 Cor. vi. 9, 10. Thus the Christian you
see is wrapped up, as soon as he is born; nay, and his very life also is wrapped up
with Christ in God, Col. iii. 3.

Nay lastly, our practice and duty is wrapped up with him. He is wrapped up in poor
Clothes, that we might be wrapped up in stola prima, the best Robe, his Robe of
Righteousness, that we might put on the white Linen of the Saints. Wrapped up
again. 2. he was, his hands and feet bound up like a Child's, that by the virtue
of it our hands and feet might be loosed to do the works of Christ, and run the
way of peace: he is made a Child that we might be perfect men in him; he
brought forth, that we might bring forth the fruits of good works, and godly
living.

The next mysteries lie coucht with him in the Manger; where in a strait and
narrow compass he lies, that he may open Heaven wide to all believers, all that
keep a strait and strict watch over their ways and actions.

Where 2. uses to lie the Beasts provender; there lies he also who is the bread
that came down from Heaven to feed us, who are often more unreasonable than the
Beasts; they know their owner: the Ox and Ass does so, says God, but my people
do not theirs; they will but satisfy, nature, we burden it; they will but eat
and drink to satisfy, men are grown so sensual they cannot be satisfied. We
have made our selves fit for the Manger, which made Christ lie there, to see if
he could fill us, seeing nothing can.

3. In the Manger among the Beasts, that we might sadly consider what we have
made our selves, and change our sensual lives, now he is come into the Stable
to call us out.

4. There he lies in a place without any furniture or trimming up, that we
might by the place be instructed that the beauty of Christ wants no external
setting out: that 2. his beauty is omnis ab intus, all within, and his Spouse
is all glorious within, Psalm. xlv. That 3. our eyes might not be diverted from
him by any outward splendours, but wholly fixed upon himself. That 4. by his
very first appearance we might know his Kingdom was not of this world; he was
no temporal King, we might see by his Furniture and Palace: that lastly we
might know he came to teach us new ways of life, and sanctify to us the way of
poverty and humility.

5. In the Stable. For so (...), the word for Manger is, a place for Horses by
the way; that we might understand our life here is but a journey, and our
longest stay but that of Travelers by the way; and therefore there he places
himself for all comers, by his Incarnation and Birth, to conduct them home into
their Country, our Country which is above.

Nor is it 6. without a mystery that there was no room for him in the Inn. Inns
are places of much resort and company, and no wonder if Christ be too commonly
thrust out thence. They are made houses of licentiousness and revelling; no
wonder if Christ be not suffered to be there. They are places of more worldly
business; and no wonder neither that there is often there no room for him, when
the business is so different from his, and men's minds so much taken up with it:
Into the Stable, or whither he will he may go for them, they heed him not;
there is no room for him in the Inn, that is where much company, or riot, or
too much worldly business is.

That there was no room for him in the Inn, puts us to enquire how it came
about, and we find it was a time of the greatest concourse; and in that also
lastly there is a mystery, all this done at such a time, that so all might know
that it belonged to a^l to know the Birth and posture of their Savior, his
coming, and his coming in humility to save them. At such a time, in such a
place, in such a case, so poor, so forlorn, so despicable, without respect,
without conveniences wast thou born, O Lord, that we through thy want might
abound, through thy neglect might be regarded, through thy want of room, room
on earth, might find room in heaven: O happy Rags, more p^ecious than the
Purple of Kings and Emperors! O holy Manger, more glorious than their golden
Thrones! The poverty of those Rags are our riches, the baseness of the Manger
our glory, his wrapping and binding up, our loosing from Death and Hell; and
his no room, our eternal Mansions.

Thus we have twice run over the Text, picked out both the moral and the mystery
of every circumstance in it of our Saviors Birth; I hope we have showed you
mysteries enough, and you have seen humility enough. But it is not enough to see
the one or the other, unless now we take up the Virgin Mary's part, which is
behind, bring forth this Firstborn to our selves; suffer him to be born in us,
who was born for us, and bring forth Christ in our lives, wrap him and lay him
up with all the tenderness of a Mother.

The pure Virgin pious soul is this She that brings forth Christ; the
nourishing and cherishing of him and all his gifts and graces is this wrapping
him in Swadling-clothes; the laying up his Word, his Promises, and Precepts in
our hearts, is the laying him in the Manger.

What though there be no room for him in the Inn, though the world will not
entertain him? the devout soul will find a place to lay him in, though it have
nothing of its own but rags, a poor ragged righteousness: for our
righteousness, says the Prophet, is but menstruous rags; yet the best it has
it will lay him in: and though it have nothing but a Manger, a poor strait
narrow soul, none of the cleanliest neither to lodge him in; yet such as it is,
he shall command it, his lying there will cleanse it, and his righteousness
piece up our rags.

What though there be no room for him in the Inn? I hope there is in our houses
for him: It Is Christmas time, and let us keep open house for him; let his Rags
be our Christmas Raiment, his Manger our Christmas cheer, his Stable our
Christmas great Chamber, Hall, Dining Room. We must clothe with him, and feed
with him, and lodge with him at this Feast. He is now ready by and by to give
himself to eat; you may see him wrapped ready in the Swadling-clothes of his
blessed Sacrament: you may behold him laid upon the Altar as in his Manger, do
but make room for him, and we will bring him forth and you shall look upon him,
and handle him, and feed upon him: bring we only the rags of a rent, and torn,
and broken, and contrite heart; the white linen cloths of pure intentions and
honest affections to swathe him in: wrap him up fast, and lay him close to our
souls and bosoms: it is a day of mysteries, it is a mysterious business we are
about; Christ wrapped up, Christ in the Sacrament, Christ in a mystery; let us be
content to let it go so, believe, admire, and adore it. It Is sufficient that we
know Christ's swadling-clothes, his Righteousness will keep us warmer than all
our Winter Garments: his rags hold out more storms than our thickest clothes,
let us put them on. His Manger feeds us better than all the Asian delicates, all
the dainties of the world; let us feed our souls upon him. His Stable is not
hanged here with Arras, or decked with gilded furniture: but it is hanged
infinitely with gifts and graces: the Stable is dark, but there is the Light of
the world to enlighten it. The smell of the Beasts our sins, are perfumed and
taken away with the sweet odours of holy pardon and forgiveness: the incondite
noise of the Ox, and Ass, and Horse are stilled with the music of the
heavenly Host; the noise of our sins, with the promises of the Gospel this day
brought to us. Let us not then think much to take him wrapped up, that is in a
Mystery, without examining how and which way we receive him; it is in the
condition he comes to us. Let us be content with him in his rags, in his
humblest and lowest condition; it is the way he comes to day: let us our selves
wrap and lay him up in the best place we can find for him, though the best we
have will be little better then a Manger.

What though there be no room for him in the Inn, in worldly souls, I hope yet
ours will entertain him, invite him too, and say as Laban said to Abraham's
servant, Genesis xxiv. 31. Come in, thou blessed of the Lord, come in, come in
thou blessed Child, come in; wherefore stand thou without? I have prepared
the house, and room for the Camels, the house for thee, my soul for thee thy
self, and my body for the Camels, those outward Elements that are to convey
thee. They are not fitted, they are not fitted as thou deservest; but thou that
here acceptedst of rags, accept my poor ragged preparations. Thou that
refusedst not the Manger, refuse not the Manger of my unworthy heart to lie in;
but accept a room in thy Servants soul; turn in to him and abide with him. Thy
poverty, O sweet Jesus, shall be my patrimony, thy Weakness my Strength, thy
Rags my Riches, thy Manger my Kingdom; all the dainties of the world, but chaff
to me in comparison of thee, and all the room in the world, no room to that
wheresoever it is, that thou vouchsafest to be: Heaven it is wheresoever thou
stayest or abidest; and I will change all the house and wealth I have, for thy
Rags and Manger.

These holy births and raptures, or the like, must our souls this day bring
forth to answer this days blessed birth. It Is a day of bringing forth, sure
then there is no being barren. Bring forth fruits therefore worthy of
repentance; these, Christ this day came to call for: bring forth fruits worthy
of the day, and the blessing of it, Holiness, Thankfulness, and Humility, Faith
and Piety, they become it. Bring our firstborn, our first and chiefest
thoughts, our prime and chief endeavors to attend him from his Cratch to his
Cross: wrap we up and bind our souls with holy resolutions to his perpetual
service, lay them humbly at his feet, let not his Poverty, or Rags, or Manger,
or Reproach fright or scare us from it, but make room for him, and receive him;
lay him up and bind him fast unto our souls, visit him with the Shepherds, and
sing of him with the Angels, and rejoice in his Birth, with all its happy and
mysterious circumstances. So when the firstborn from the dead shall come again
to raise us up, come wrapped in Clouds, and robbed in Glory, we shall be caught up
to meet him in the Clouds, and be received of him into eternal dwellings, there
to follow him in long white robes, and be with him for ever.

Be it so unto thy Servants, O Lord.

THE THIRD SERMON ON Christmas Day.
St. JOHN i. 16. And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
OF his fullness! of whose fullness? of Verbum Car^'s ver. 14. for thither this
Ejus points us, this day leads us. To the Word made Flesh, to Christ's, to His.
Yet of his fullness when so made? Of his emptiness it would be rather. Of his
emptiness to day it is, that we have all received, that we still receive all:
There is nothing we receive, but it is from this days emptiness; and there is
nothing that we receive not from it, from his this days emptying himself into
the form of a servant, from this days exinanition.

Yet is it a day of fullness too. His thus very emptying himself for us, his
thus very emptying himself upon us, is the very fullness of his grace, and
favor to us: the day then, wherein it was, a day of fullness, wherein he was
full, and we were filled; he full of grace, and we filled from it. The fullness
of time, the Apostle calls it upon this account, Gal. iii. 4. A day wherein Law
and Prophets, Types and Promises came all to their full, were fulfilled: we
received them all fulfilled to us. A day wherein he gave, and we received, gave
himself with all his fullness, and we received him. So then we here did, and I
hope we here will do so too.

A day then this worthy to be observed in our generation, wherein to fill our
hearts with gladness, and our tongues with joy, to return back somewhat for our
great receipts, to confess we received a great grace to day by his coming to
us, grace upon grace, favor upon favor by it. To return therefore 2. Gratiam
pro gratia, thanks to him for his grace, and do it 3. to the full too, with
full mouths, in full Congregations, so to answer to his fullness somewhat like.

For to Us, this, We, reaches too, this fullness pours out still. We therefore
in all reason to acknowledge it, as well as any we whosoever, at any time
whenever, at all times whatsoever; but at the full time, this time howsoever.
No time comes amiss to do it in, but this time it comes best, a word in season
always best. Now here is a day of fullness, and a Text of fullness. There wants
nothing but our fullness of praise and duty for it; fullness of humility and
thankfulness to receive it. All the We in the Text received it so no doubt, all
that will be of the We, of St. John's Congregation, will receive it in the day,
will be glad this day to receive it, and thank God for it. God for sending,
Christ for coming with this fullness to us: be glad with Abraham to see a day,
with the Shepherds to hear a Text, that brings news and tidings of it, be full
glad at it.

And it will become us well to do so, we have good reason, for all this fullness
is for us. His fullness for our filling: He full that we might be filled. The
fullness his, the redundance ours, ours the benefit, we receive the grace, grace
for grace, one grace after another, till we also come to a kind of fullness too,
the fullness of the stature of Christ.

That we may then receive it as we ought, know we that in the Text there is a
fullness and a filling to be considered: the fullness his, the filling ours. Of
his fullness we all, there is his fullness, a complete, gracious, glorious,
communicative, universal fullness. Of his we have all received, and grace for
grace; there is our filling, a good, plentiful, gracious, universal filling too.

Yet to understand them fully both, both the fullness and the filling, we must
consider this fullness. First, whose it is. 2. What it is. 3. In what respect it
is. 4. How great it is. 5. How large it is, five particulars. First, His it is
whom we read of a verse or two before; for ejus is a Relative, and refers to
the Antecedent. Secondly, A fullness it is that is answerable to his greatness,
fullness with a double Article (...) an emphatick fullness, a perfect fullness.
Thirdly, To him it is, or his it is, as he is Verbum Caro, ver. 14. God and Man
both, both natures fullness, according to them both: for this ejus has not more
syllables than natures, and relates as well to the one as to the other.
Fourthly, So great it is, that it may, nay, that it does communicate it self,
and yet is fullness still. De plenitudine, nor case, nor preposition can take
any thing from it, to diminish it. Fifthly, So large that it extends as far as
all: all some way or other partake of it, more or less, according to their
capacity and receipt.

Consider we must again 2. in the filling. That 1. it is not an Active, but a
Passive filling, as it were, a being filled, a receiving: that 2. it is a
receiving of, not a receiving all, not a perfect fullness, but a proportional.
That it is 3. a receiving gratis, nothing but mere gratia in it, of grace, not
of desert. That it is 4. yet a receiving sufficient, full, every one enough; and
that not single grace neither, but one for another, one after another, one upon
another. That it is 5. a general business, all receiving somewhat, some grace or
other, and that seldom or never by it self: none without receiving. That 6. it
is from Christ, from him it is, from his grace, and from his fullness, that we
receive whatever we receive. That lastly, grace for grace it is, for some end
and purpose it is, that we receive it, receive grace, that we may say grace,
give thanks, and acknowledge it. 2. Receive grace, that we may show grace;
receive grace from God, that we may show it unto men. 3. Receive grace even for
grace it self, to increase and grow in it daily more and more, till both it and
we come both to perfection.

Of all these this is the sum, that in Christ there is fullness, all fullness,
fullness in both natures, fullness that contents not it self, till it have filled
others, till it fill us all. That from this fullness we receive, receive all we
have; all we have, though not all he has, all sorts of graces fitting for us;
and all gratis, are therefore to give thanks for it, as we have received, so to
repay again grace for grace. And of all, this is the scope, the Exaltation of
Christ, and of his grace, the scope of the Text, the Sermon, and the day. It Is
but making it yours too, and then all will be full. And that it may so, I begin
now particularly to open to you all this fullness; where I am first to show you
whose it is. His fullness.

1. His you know is a Relative, must relate to somewhat that is before; His, to
some that was spoken of before: who is that? one to whom Saint John bare
witness, that he was before, ver. 15. long before in the beginning, ver. 1. but
was fain to draw nearer, e're we could see him, or his fullness; to draw himself
into the flesh, e're we could fully discern his grace, or behold his glory, was
made flesh, the word made flesh, ver. 14. the only begotten of the Father,
become the only born of a Virgin Mother, before we hear of any one full of
grace and truth.

This word, this eternal word, this only begotten Son of God, is He, this, His,
belongs to: yet this fullness, then fully His, when he was made the Son of Man.
In that first appeared the fullness of his love, the fullness of his Word and
Promise, the fullness of his Grace and Mercy, the infinite grace and favor done
to our flesh, the fullness of his truth, and reality above all those empty types
and shadows, which more amused, then filled the world. The body, that is of
Christ, says the Apostle, Col. ii. 17. the full body of truth, full bodied
grace, never till he took a body to make it full. The Law that could not fill
us; the very life of things there was poured out at the foot of the Altar, and
all the rest went into smoke. The Prophets they could not fill us with any
thing but expectation, fill us with good words; but alas! they are but wind,
would have proved so too, had not he embodied them. All the world could not
fill us, the fullness of time was not come upon it, till the Son of fullness
came: all that was in it till he came was vanity and emptiness; could neither
satisfy it self nor us. It Is Christ that fills all in all, Ephesians. i. 23. He
the end of the Law, the completion of the Prophets, the fullness of the World.
To him it is that this fullness is attributed, to the fullness of Christ, Ephesians.
iv. 13. In him it is, it dwells, Col. i. 19. So it pleased God, says the
Apostle there; so to gather together in one all things in Christ, both which
are in heaven, and which are in earth, even in him, Ephesians. i. 10. Fullness must
needs be his, in whom all things are gathered altogether, in whom earth and
heaven together.

2. Thus the fullness you see is his, and it being the fullness of Heaven and
Earth, you see in general what his fullness is. In particular it cannot be
measured. It is as high as Heaven, what can thou do? deeper then Hell, what
can thou know? the measure of it is longer then the earth, and broader then
the Sea, Job xi. 8, 9. There is no end of his fullness, no more than of his
greatness: In him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. ii.
3. all wisdom and knowledge treasured up in him, all in the very knowing him,
all the very treasures of wisdom and knowledge, the choicest to be found there,
all even hidden and obscured by his, swallowed up in that; he knows all, and to
know him is to know all the highest Wisdom, the deepest knowledge is but
silliness and ignorance, in respect of his, hides it self at the comparison, as
lesser lights do at the Suns glaring Beams, in him is all knowledge, and in the
knowledge of him is all wisdom hidden and contained. In him 2. is the fullness
of grace, Full of grace are thy lips, Psalm. xlv. 3. and if the lip's full, the
heart's not empty; for out of the abundance there, the fullness here, the very
stature of fullness, Ephesians. iv. 13. In him 3. is the fullness of truth, ver. 14.
so full, that he is styled the very truth it self, St. John xiv. 6. I am the
truth, the truth of the promises, all the promises since the Creation. All the
promises of God are in him yea, and in him Amen, 2 Cor. i. 20. The truth of all
the Types, and Shadows, and Sacrifices from the worlds first cradle: the true
Paschal Lamb, the true Scapegoat, the true High Priest, Adam, and Isaac, and
Joseph, and Joshua, and Samson, and David, and Solomon, were but the
representations of him, or what was to be more substantially done by him. They
are but the draughts and pictures, he the substance all the way. To him they
all related, had not their offices, actions, or passions, scarce their very
names fulfilled but in him, all their fullness was in him. Their truth, and all
truth besides, the doctrine of truth never fully delivered, never fully
revealed or known till he came with it. We knew it but in pieces, we saw it but
in clouds, we heard it but in dark and obscure Prophesies, till he came a light
into the world, to manifest it all; it is then we first hear of the whole will
of God, and the declaring that, the whole counsel of God, Acts xx. 27. truth
was not at the fullness, till he taught it.

Nor 4. was his the fullness of wisdom and knowledge, grace and truth, but of
the Spirit too: not by measure, St. John iii. 34. but immeasurably full He, all
the graces of the Spirit, and all of them to the full in him. The Spirit
himself proceeds from him, St. John xv. 26. he must therefore needs be full of
that.

Full 5. with the fullness of Riches too, the unsearchable riches of Christ,
says St. Paul, Ephesians. iii. 8. so full that we can find out no bottom of it, come
to no end of it, unsearchable.

His fullness 6. was the fullness of Glory too, we saw it, says St. John, two
verses before the Text; such a glory as of the only begotten Son of the
Father, and that sure is all the fullness of God. Yet to put all out of doubt,
this fullness was the fullness of the Godhead too expressly, all the fullness of
it, and all of it bodily too, says St. Paul, Col. ii. 3. Bodily, how is that?
why, that is full in all dimensions, in all dimensions of a body, length, and
breadth, and height, and depth; the length and infinity of his Power, the
extent and breadth of his Love, the height and eminency of his Majesty, the
depth and unfathomedness of his Wisdom, all met together in Christ.

3. Nor will this seem strange at all, if we consider for our third point, in
this fullness, how and in what respect it is his: and it is his both as he is God,
and as man. He could not be thus full as I have told you, unless he were God,
could not have the Godhead dwell in him bodily, unless God were in the body,
unless he were incarnate God. Nor could other kinds of his fullness be in him,
unless he were man. He could not be a full and sufficient Sacrifice, and so
offered for one, had he not been man, nor a perfect High Priest to mediate for
us, if not taken from among men; the great promise that contains all the rest,
that of the seed of the Woman, could not have been fulfilled, would not have
had its fullness from him but as man. The very attribute of fullness speaks him
God; none full but God; no fullness or satisfaction but in him; yet some kinds
of his fullness evidence him man, are not the fulnesses of God, as God; but as
God made man: and so the Evangelist by the Context delivers it: as the fullness
of the word made flesh, of the eternal word becoming man. This fullness is the
fullness of Christ, and Christ is both God and Man, so the fullness of both.

4. And such a fullness, that none runs over, anointed with the oil of gladness
above his fellows; that is fullness, but that is not all; so above them too it is,
as it runs down upon his fellows: he is not full only for himself, for us it
was, that he was born, that he was given, that he was anointed, that he was
full, full of grace, and full of truth, and full of glory, that we might be
filled with grace, and truth, and glory. He indeed is the head that was
anointed with oil, but that head is ours; the Church is the body upon which it
runs down from the head.

5. And that not to the near parts alone, to the beard or shoulders, but even
to the skirts of the garment it runs, so full it runs. Ex hoc omnes, all the
members, nay all the clothes; not only those that are true members of the
Church, but even those who have but an outward relation to it: all that have
but an external right or adherence, as skirts, and clothes, have yet some
benefit of this oil, of this fullness of his. Christ is no niggard, his fullness
nothing so stinted ( as some narrow and envious souls will have it) here is
enough for all: enough for the whole world to take, and yet leave all full
still. You may light a thousand candles at one, and yet the light of it no way
lessened by it. You may fill a thousand worlds, if there were so many, from his
fullness, and yet he never a whit the less full. Take all you can cope, all that
will, nay all that are or shall be, here is still for all, as much as at the
first; O the depth of the riches of the fullness of Christ! I could fill the
hour, I could fill the day, I could fill all the remnant of my days with the
discourses of it; and should I do it, I could yet say nothing of it, near the
full, but be as far from sounding the depth of it at the end, as I was at the
beginning. I pass therefore to that which we can better comprehend, easier
reach, our filling out of this fullness, the second general.

2. Our filling is here said to be receiving. Be our fullness never so great, it
is no other, we have received it all. Alas poor things, we have nothing of our
selves. What have thou that thou have not received? says the Apostle, 1 Cor.
iv. 7. Is it grace? that grows not in our gardens; it comes from Paradise: what
we have is transplanted from thence. Is it nature? why that too is received. We
did not make our selves, we received as well our natural as our spiritual
endowments, from him that made us. Is it glory? why, God calls it his glory: a
thing he will not share, but by beams and glances. What should I now mention
worldly Riches, Estate, and Honor? they are too evidently received, to be
denied they are so. It Is the blessing of the Lord that makes rich, Prove. xx.
22. so Riches are received. I shall deliver him, and bring him to honor, says
God, Psalm. xci. 15. so Honor is received. And the earth has God given to the
children of men, Psalm. cxv. 16. so our Estates and Lands, every Clod and Turf
of them is received. For the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof; and
from his fullness we receive of it what we have.

Enough this to humble us; for if thou have received it, why do thou glory,
as if thou had not? it is St. Paul's inference upon it. Thou have no reason to
boast thy self O man, thy Honor, thy Riches, thy good Parts, thy Graces, they
are not from thy self, thou did but receive them, thou have nothing of thine
own, why art thou proud?

And 2. if all received, all we have nothing but so many receipts; look we then
well to our accounts, they are things we are to reckon for: we had best see how
we expend them, that at the general Audit we may give up our accounts with joy.

To do so, 'twill be convenient to think often of our receipts, our own
poverty, and indigence; a third business we may learn hence, to grow sensible
of our emptinesses and necessities, that we are a mere bill of receipts, so
much received to day, so much yesterday, so much day by day; item our souls,
item our bodies, item our health, item our wealth, and so on ward, nothing but
received, and without receiving, nothing.

Upon this reflection upon our own vacuities, we cannot 4. but open our hearts
to receive, our hands to take any thing from his fullness to supply us; to
desire to have them filled, our selves filled out of his fullness, something
thence to make us full.

2. Yet 2. we must not expect to be so filled, that we should have an absolute
or perfect plenitude, a plenitude without a diminishing preposition before it:
Plenitudinem, properly speaking, it will not be; de plenitudine, that is the
proper speech, somewhat taken from fullness, a kind of ablative secondary,
proportional one. We are not capable of other, somewhat taken off the height,
somewhat bated of the perfection of it. With this fullness it was, that the
blessed Virgin, the Protomartyr St. Stephen, St. Peter, St. Paul, St. Barnabas,
and other Saints are said in holy Scripture to be full or filled, full of
Grace, or full of Faith, or full of the Holy Ghost, full as the Bucket, not as
the Spring; full as the Streams, not as the Ocean; full as the measure, not as
the immeasurable; full with a fullness of abundance, not of redundance; of
sufficiency, not of efficiency; full enough for our selves, but not for others:
Alas poor narrow shallow things that we are, we cannot hold enough for our
selves and others too.

Take from the Bucket or the Stream, and the Bucket will not be full, and the
Stream will want of what it had. Lest there be not enough for us and you, was
more then a just fear of the wise Virgins: there is not, will not, cannot be
enough. No man is sanctified by another Grace, no man justified by another
Faith: the Fathers goodness will not satisfy for the Sons ungraciousness, nor
the Mothers Piety for the Daughters Vanity; their Righteousness be it as full
as it can, will but suffice only for themselves; it is only Christ's Fullness, his
Grace, his Righteousness, that can communicate it self, that we can take any
thing from to fill up our own. Sufficient I think this, to read us a second
lesson of humility, not to think too much of our own Righteousness, nor to
pride our selves in our receipts; for of another they are, but from them no
other; they are received of his, but none receive of ours.

Sufficient 2. this too to teach us, not to trust to the Piety of our
Forefathers, as if their fullness of good works should excuse our emptiness.
They had but their share, what would serve their turns, we must afresh to the
Springhead, to have enough to serve ours. And the comfort is in the next
point, that it will cost us nothing, we have it gratis, for gratia it is, of
free grace and favor that we receive it.

3. That we may not doubt it, it is doubled in the Text, redoubled; grace, all
merely grace, nothing but grace, from it, and for it, and by it. Nothing from
desert, nothing from works; for if of works, not of grace, says St. Paul, Romans
11. 6. that is plain; for if of desert, not of grace, but duty: not bought or
purchased neither, freely without money, says the Prophet, Isa. 55. 1. Come
drink, and eat, and fill your selves. The Ocean runs not freer than his grace.
Who has first given unto him, says the Apostle, Romans 11. 35. Who first? why no
body sure, for before there was any body, before the foundation of the world,
Ephesians. 1. 4. he begun with us; even then gratificavit nos, he accepted us; all
grace from the beginning.

Hence too is a lesson of humility, the Text and day is full of it, from one
end of the Text to the other, one end of the day to the other: grace, grace, to
put down all opinion of merit or desert; as if it meant to teach us to be
filled with humility from the fullness of it this day showed by Christ, and to
be read from all the Texts that concern it; as if grace it self had this day
appeared to teach it.

4. So much perhaps to be pressed the rather from the fullness of the grace that
now follows to be considered in the next particular, lest by the abundance of
it we should be exalted above measure, as St. Paul by the abundance of his
Revelations, 2 Cor. xii. 7. For men may be proud of graces, and here are store
received in the Text.

1. Gratiam pro gratia, the grace of the Gospel for the grace of the Law,
that is the more abundant, says St. Paul, Romans v. 17, 20. though this was a
grace too, a favor when time was, and that such, he showed no such grace to
any people, as to the Jew. To them the Adoption, the Glory, the Covenants, the
giving of the Law, the Service of God, the Promises, the Fathers, the coming of
Christ also according to the flesh; all these graces appertained, Romans ix. 4,
5. these all were great ones, but the Law brought nothing to perfection, Heb.
vii. 19. The very end of it was Christ, Romans x. 4. The Law, as great a favor
as it was, was but the Law still; full of shadows and imperfections, full of
rigours without ability to perform them: That came by Christ, the very grace
and beauty, and glory of the Law was Christ, the grace of the Gospel, that was
it which was the perfection of the Law, the fullness of the Adoption, the
performance of the Covenants, the finishing, bringing in a better service, the
fulfilling of the promises, the expectation of the Fathers, the fullness of
Christ, not according to the weakness of the flesh, but according to the power
of the Spirit, and of an endless grace. This is de plenitudine right, over and
above all graces and favors that were showed before, all that ever any
received before us.

So much above them, as spiritual and eternal blessings are above the temporal,
as the reward of glory is above all other rewards; for grace for grace 2. is
grace for glory: grace given us by Christ, to the end we may obtain eternal
glory by it; all the graces ( If I may so call the good works of the Law)
tended only to temporal promises; read the whole Law over, and show me any
other if you can; the grace of the Gospel of Christ it is, that first revealed
the hopes of glory, thence the Kingdom of Heaven is heard of first, there first
of grace for glory, grace was single grace, till Christ took a second nature to
double it, to grace all to us.

And 3. here is glory again for grace, according to other Interpreters; the
reward as sure as the work is: Grace is not only given us to purchase Glory,
but Glory as surely given us for that Grace. The glory of the Law, or the works
of the Law had no grace at all, was but a kind of dark dusky thing: The glory
of the Gospel, and the glory after it, and from it, is that only that exceeds
in glory. Thus Grace is doubled upon Grace; we have Grace for Glory; Grace to
come to Glory, and Glory again to reward our Grace: two great ingredients of
the fullness we receive, and gratiam pro gratia, even each of these for the
other.

Yet to make the Glory yet more glorious, the Grace more gracious, here is 4.
Grace for Grace; yet in another sense, one Grace for another, one to advance
another; Grace upon Grace, that we may have Glory upon Glory. For Christ will
fill us, if we will, with more than a simple Grace or Glory, increase and
advance us by degrees in both. Grace for Grace is put to signify abundance of
Graces: as Job ii. 4. Skin for skin, skin after skin, one thing after another
will a man give for his life; Grace for Grace, that is Grace after Grace will
God give us, one after another: never leave giving, will not only give us one
or two simple graces, but a confluence and full tide of them; one crowding upon
the other, gratiam cumulatam, Graces upon heaps, all spiritual blessings, Ephesians.
i. 3. redemption, forgiveness of sins, ver. 7. the knowledge of the mystery of
his will, ver. 9. the Seal of the Spirit, ver. 13. all the gifts and graces of
the Spirit, all holy Virtues and Accomplishments, all sanctifying and edifying
Graces, for to procure us Grace in the eyes of God, and Graces to gain us Grace
in the eyes of men: Grace to make our selves gracious in the sight of God, and
Grace to make others gracious also, to bring others into Grace, into the Grace
of the Gospel. Thus also we receive, and this And here has an emphasis, and
it is this, to denote this fullness and abundance of Grace, that especially,
whatever else.

Yet this And may be an adversative, as much as sed, or quamvis; peradventure
thus we receive, and Grace we receive, and Grace in this abundance, but not all
Grace alike, but Grace for Grace; that is, either according to his Grace
wherewith he loves us, some more, some less, one this, another that, according
to the measure of the gift of Christ, Ephesians. iv. 7. Or 2. Grace for Grace,
according to the measure of the use we make of one Grace, we receive another.
He that has, to him shall be given, St. Mat. xiii. 12. Or 3. Grace for Grace,
that is one after this manner, another after that, 1 Cor. vii. 7. One receives
one Grace, another receives another, not all alike, not all the same. To one is
given the word of Wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another Faith,
etc. 1 Cor. xii. 8. and so onward: and which adds much to the fullness of this
Grace, it reaches now fifthly unto all, we all have received.

5. All is a large word, yet no larger then Christ's Grace. Ho every one, cries
the Prophet, every one come take it, Isa. lv. 1. he disgraces Christ's Grace,
nay ungraces it, that ties it up only to I know not what elect ones. All things
were made by him, ver. 3. and received they nothing by it? He fills all things
living with plenteousness, Psalm. cxlv. 16. and receive they nothing? He
enlightens every man that comes into the world, ver. 9. and is that nothing
neither? 1. Does he that receives light from Christ, receive nothing? Yes, yes,
all receive some benefit or other from Christ's coming; It were to deny his
fullness, to deny that.

All the Patriarchs that went before, all drank of the same Rock, which Rock
was Christ, 1 Cor. x. 4. they received their fill of him, according to the
capacity of their Vessels. All the Prophets that followed after, they also were
partakers of the same Grace, in another manner. But they that followed him,
they, Gentiles as well as Jews, they above all received and Grace for Grace.
Nay, I am persuaded, that there was no man, no creature; there is no man, no
creature ( the Devils only excepted) but receive some benefit or other from
this fullness; the goodness of God which is not willing that any should perish,
but that all should come to repentance, and to everlasting life, 2 S. Pet. iii.
9. would not suffer any to perish for want of receiving that without which they
could not but perish, that first Grace which might in some measure dispose him
for a second, and so forward, were he but willing to work with it.

Nay, even We, and what were we? We that were his enemies, St. Paul tells us,
we receive reconcilement by his Grace; and why not any enemies as well as we?
We that were haters of God, Romans i. 30. and hateful to men, Tit. iii. 3. We
that were dead in trespasses and sins, Ephesians. ii. 1. full of all abominable
iniquities; we received pardon of them all, and were received to Grace: and
what reason have we then to exclude any, who be they what they will, cannot be
worse than we were once, nor in less capacity to receive it: To be sure, omnes
will reach them all, and God is gracious to all, not only to them that call
upon him, but to them also that never seek him, nor call upon him, Isa. lxv. 1.
This is Grace indeed, and it is that makes up the fullness, that shows it full.

6. It Is time we should know to whom we owe it: look we back again once more to
the ejus, and you have it. Of his fullness, that is, of Christ's, it is that we
thus all receive; that we receive all this, Ephesians. i. 6. In the beloved it is,
that we are thus gratified, thus graced, thus begrac'd. And the beloved is he
in whom he was well-pleased with us all, S. Mat. iii. 17. Grace and Truth, why?
that is true Grace, and that came by Jesus Christ, in the verse next the Text.
We were all ungracious Children; he the only gracious Son, who makes us
gracious. In him he chose us, Ephesians. i. 4. In him he predestined us to the
adoption of Children, ver. 5. In him he has made us accepted, ver. 6. In him
we have redemption, forgiveness, and the very riches of grace, ver. 7. All in
him, and without him nothing. So get him, and get all; lose him, and lose all.
Acts iv. 12. There is no other name but his, no other Grace but his, by which
we can be saved. From the Grace he had with his Father from the beginning, we
have ours in time, from the Grace he has purchased with him, to which he was
exalted by his obedience, Phil. ii. 9. we are also exalted to his Grace. From
the Grace wherewith he loved us, are we made partakers of his Grace. He
designed it for us, he he deserved it for us, he infuses it into us, he works
it in us, and after all he has yet reserved a greater for us, an eternal Glory
for the reward of Grace.

7. How can we now then, lastly, but render Grace for Grace? say grace, and
bless him over this plenty and fullness; cry Grace, Grace unto it, as the
Prophet has it, Zach. iv. 7. proclaim, and tell it to the world, fill our lips
with Songs and Hymns of Praise, fill the Congregations with his Glory, and the
world with telling out his goodness.

To do it the better, to do the greater right to his Grace, let us take the
Grace-cup in our hand and do it: the Cup which Christ blessed, and gave to us
to remember him, and his Grace in. We call it a receiving, let us then receive
it, receive, and answer this receiving in the Text, with the receiving in the
day; receive we him and his fullness, him and his graces, him with all
thankfulness, reverence, and devotion. Set we our selves to do it, to draw
waters out of these wells of salvation, Isa. xii. 3. by the hand of Faith, and
bucket of Humility, out of these Fountains of our Savior: So the Latin reads
it, whose side runs out blood and water, full streams of grace and pardon, and
all the gifts of the Holy Spirit, if we will but come hither to draw or drink
them. We call it a receiving, and so it is, the most signal receiving, that we
have, a receiving him full and whole, Body and Blood, Flesh and Spirit, really,
though not corporally both; let us therefore receive it: Open we but our mouths
wide, and he will fill them; open we our mouths to beg, and we shall receive;
open them wide and full, and we shall be filled with fullness too, to day at
this full table, a table at this time full of all heavenly delicates and
dainties.

Yet as we must open our mouths, so we must open our hands too, our mouths to
receive, our hands to give. We receive of Christ, it is fit we give somewhat out
of our receipts; we receive of his fullness, it is but proportionbale, that we
give out of our fullness to those that are not full, that our abundance may be
the supply of others want, as Christ's fullness is of ours: It Is a day of
fullness, and all would be full, the poor as well as the rich, that all mouths
might this day be filled with his praise, 1 Cor. xi. 20. This is not to eat the
Lords Body, for one to be full, ( I give it the easiest word) another to be
hungry, the poor must have their share; they that have not, says the Apostle,
that is the poor. It Is a Communion, and all must communicate, one way or other,
poor and all. It Is a feast of fullness both in the Church and in the House, all
must communicate of this days fullness one way or other, in one sort or other;
and surely when we have filled our selves with the fullness of this house, we
cannot but fill others with the fullness of ours.

And yet there is one more (...), another fullness, to which this grace and
fullness leads us, to be filled henceforward with goodworks, to be filled with
the fruits of Righteousness, and all the knowledge of Christ. For this it is,
that this fullness is received, that this grace is received, that this
Grace-cup, the cup of Salvation is received, that all gifts and graces are
received, that we increase in grace, go on in goodness, proceed in all kinds of
holy virtues, till we come to the fullness of Christ, to the fullness of his
grace here, and of his glory hereafter.

Send down thy Grace, O heavenly Father, that we may all receive this fullness
at thy hand; empty us of our sins, empty us of our selves, that we may
henceforward be only filled with thee: fill us this day with the plenteousness
of thy table, and reject us not, though too unworthy; fill us every day with
the plenteousness of thy Grace, and leave us not to our own weakness, that we
may go on from grace to grace, from strength to strength, from virtue to
virtue, till we come to be filled with the plenteousness of thy house, to the
fullness of joy, and pleasure, and grace, and glory for evermore. Amen.

Now to the God and Author of all this fullness, all our receipts, all good
gifts and graces; to the Father that gives, to the Son that purchased, to the
Holy Ghost that conveys them to us, be all the fullness of thanks, and praise,
and honor, and glory, for ever and ever.

THE FOURTH SERMON ON Christmas Day.
1 TIMOTHY i. 15. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance,
that Christ Jesus came into the world to save Sinners, of whom I am chief.
THis is a faithful saying. And this is the day that made it so, faithful and
true, wherein it could first be truly said, that Christ Jesus came into the
world to save sinners: for which both Text and Day are well worthy of
acceptance.

Turn the whole Scripture over, you will find no saying there more faithful,
that speaks God more faithful, more to have kept his promise, than this that
tells us that Christ Jesus is come into the world. He in whom all his promises
are fulfilled. And run through the year you will find no day more faithful than
this that presents us the ground of all our Faith, Christ Jesus come to save
sinners.

Worthy of all acceptance, too, they must needs be both, both Text and Day,
that brings salvation: above all to sinners (of which ye are a part, and the
Preacher chief.) I cannot but with gladness preach it, nor you but with joy and
attention hear it: especially to day, the day he came in; in a time accepted,
in the day of salvation, when Text and time so happily meet. The day makes the
Text seasonable. The business of the Text makes the Day acceptable. The
necessities of poor sinners make both comfortable. God make the Sermon
profitable too, and we have all we can desire to day.

The Text to be sure promises fair: and St. Paul himself finds so much comfort
in it by his own experience, of the truth and sweetness of it in the former
verses 12, 13. that he here commends it to us, as a saying worthy all the
respect that we can give it, worthy to be preached, worthy to be believed,
worthy to be laid hold on, worthy to be laid up faithfully and remembered, That
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. After which saying, nor he
nor we have any more to say then that we are the chief of them, so particularly
to apply it. [And that I hope we will to day.

For the whole end both of the saying it self, and S. Paul's saying it, is but
to dispose and move us worthily to accept Christ now he is come (for whose
coming the Church and we have been this month preparing.) And the sum of it to
put us 1. in comfort, first that how sadly soever things looked with us before
his coming, by his coming now we may be saved, for Christ Jesus came to save
sinners, and to put us secondly in the way how we may; by believing, 1. this
faithful saying for a truth: by accepting it 2. for a word worthy all
acceptance; by confessing lastly our selves the most unworthy of it, yet the
chief that need it.

Thus you have the full sense of the Text, and both the Doctrine and Use of
Christmas in it.

The Doctrine, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; the
Doctrine of Christmas.

The Use of it, to take it every one of us to himself; take himself to be the
quorum primus, the chief of the quorum concerned in it, the chief of sinners;
and therefore chiefly interessed in Christ's coming. This the Use both of the
Doctrine and the Day, to apply them both, and cry out every one of us with St.
Paul, It Is I, and I, and I, for whom He came.

In the Doctrine there are these particulars.

1. That Christ Jesus came into the world. 2. That He came to save sinners. 3.
That He came to save the chiefest of them, the very quorum primi of them. What
is it else to S. Paul or us? or why does he bring himself in upon no better
title? 4. That all these are faithful sayings, and worthy of acceptance; all
single, such; but all together make up a saying worthy all acceptance: the
very (...), the saying above all sayings, the whole Word and Gospel it self;
the Word after which no word can be said: nothing beyond it.
Of which therefore surely the Use 2. must needs be great if we thoroughly apply
it: and four ways there are to do it in the Text, four Uses we are to make of
it.

1. If a saying, a faithful saying it be, we then faithfully to believe it. 2.
If worthy acceptance, we then worthily to accept it. 3. If it reach the chief
sinners too, our chief business then, with St. Paul, humbly to apply it to our
own particular; not think much any of us to say, quorum ego primus; not to
stick to confess our selves the chiefest among them that are sinners, so we may
be found chief, or second, or any one among them that are saved. 4. (...) it
is, a special saying this is, not to be wrapped up in silence then, nor hudled up
within private walls, but to be spoken, and spoken out, cried and proclaimed to
all the world.
And all this lastly I add to be done to day. That indeed is not in the Text,
but it is in the Time, and never better to be done then now to day: That Is the
right use of this Holy time, that to which the Church designs Christmas: to
proclaim Christ's coming into the world to save sinners, and to call them in all
to come to him.

To carry on the design, I go on now with the Text, and begin with the first
branch of the Doctrine there, that Christ Jesus came into the world.

1. That he did so this great day is witness, worthy therefore to be kept for
ever for a witness of it; and they that keep it not, to be suspected that they
do not think he did, nor believe that there was any such matter.

Yet that such a one there was, one Jesus that went about doing good, the Jews
his rankest enemies will not deny it.

That that Jesus was the Christ, though the Jews will not, the Samaritans will
confess it, S. John iv. 43. Christ and Jesus too, the Christ, the Savior of
the world; nay, the Christ indeed, and the Savior indeed, and they know it,
they say there. Nay of the Jews too, many believed it, S. John vii. 31.
believed and justified it.

Nor did they it without good ground; the many Miracles that he did in the
confirmation of it, the performing what was prophesied of the Messiah, Isa.
xxxv. 6. and lxi. 1. The opening the eyes of the blind, the making the lame to
walk, the deaf to hear, the dumb to speak, the cleansing the Lepers, the
raising the dead, the preaching to the poor the Gospel of peace, those pure and
holy, and comfortable Doctrines that he taught; were a sufficient resolution to
S. John Baptists question: that it was He that should come, and we should look
for no other, S. Mat. xi. 3, 4, 5. no other than He.

Indeed we need not: for this Jesus is a Jesus of another sort, of another
manner of spelling ('it is observed) then all former Iesus's, then Jesus the Son
of Nun, or Jesus the Son of Iosedec, or Jesus the Son of Syrach; this
Iehoscuah, Jesus or a Iehoscuah (for it is so in the Hebrew) is with the points
of Jehovah in it, a Jehovah, Jesus, a Savior that is the Lord, as the Angel
tells us, St. Luke ii. 11. A Jesus never the like before, a Jesus above every
Jesus, a name now above every name, a name to which Heaven, and Earth, and Hell
must bow: never did they to any Jesus else.

And as this name now above every name, so this coming of his above every
coming. We sometimes call our own births, I confess, a coming into the world;
but properly, none ever came into the world but he: For 1. He only truly can be
said to come who is before he comes, so were not we; only he so. 2. He only
strictly comes who comes willingly; our crying and struggling at our entrance
into the world, shows how unwillingly we come into it. He alone it is that
sings out, Lo, I come, Psalm. xl. 3. He only properly comes, who comes from some
place or other: Alas! we had none to come from but the womb of nothing. He only
had a place to be in before he came. Now such a Jesus, as this, as has God in
his name, and must be conceived to be also so by the way of his coming, may
well be the Messiah that should come into the world, Jesus the Christ. We need
seek no further, especially if it be the Jesus that comes to save sinners. And
he it is says our next particular.

2. Nay the Angel said so before he was born. He had the name given him for the
purpose, S. Mat. i. 21. Thou shall call his name Jesus: for why? For he shall
save his people from their sins. Himself professes he came for the purpose, to
call sinners to repentance, S. Luke v. 32. and that is to save them; yea so for
them, that there is a non veni to others; he came for no other: to speak truth,
there were no other to come for. Omnes aberraverunt, We were all sinners: So if
he came for the best of us, he yet came for sinners, for them or no body. But
so, for such, as not for them that were not such; so altogether for sinners, as
not at all for the righteous. I came not to call the righteous, not them, but
sinners as it were in opposition to them. Indeed, Opus non habent, they had no
need of his coming. The whole need not the Physician, S. Mat. ix. 12. but they
that are sick, and they are sinners. In a word, not only so for sinners, as
before the righteous, and as it were against the righteous, but so for sinners
too; as for the worst first, for the greatest of them above the least, the
quorum primi to be the primi, the chiefest sinners he chiefly came for: that is
the third Point of this great Doctrine of the Text.

3. Look the company he keeps, you will say so. Publicans and Sinners (the most
emphatical of the name) there you find him, so often, that he is accused for it
by the righteous, the Scribe and Pharisee, S. Mark ii. 16. So for the most
enormous sinners it seems, that the righteous cannot bear it; they are
scandalized at it. One would think they were so still, that are so much against
Christ's saving any body but themselves, that they will allow him neither to
save, nor come to save any body but the Elect. True indeed he saves none but
the Elect, that is, he saves none but them that are and shall be saved, but he
came to save even them too that shall not be saved. Not for our sins only, says
S. John expressly, but for the sins of the whole world, S. John ii. 2. The whole
world, be it as large as it will, and the sins of it, be they as great as they
can, and all the sins of the world indefinitely, be they whose they will in it;
for wicked Manasses his as well as good Hezekiah's; for Noah's Drunkenness, Lots
Incest, David's Adultery, Solomon's Idolatry, S. Peter's Apostasy, S. Paul's
persecuting and blaspheming, for all sorts of sins and sinners. So they be
Saints say they, though they be of the world says He, He is a propitiation for
them all* would have all men saved, says S. Paul, 1 Timothy ii. 4. even them that
deny him. When he has bought them, says S. Peter, 2 S. Pet. ii. 1. It Is neither
a true nor faithful saying, nor much worth the accepting, as many receivers as
it has, that says otherwise, that binds up his coming only to the Elect. For if
not for all, they may be out for all their brags, may be too righteous to be
in, among the sinners; among the righteous, that he says himself he came not
for. This saying that we are for, That Christ Jesus came into the world to save
sinners, is a faithful saying, worthy all acceptance, even the chiefest the
world affords, to be received by all, whilst it self rejects none. And that it
is so we are now to show you in all particulars: That it is a faithful saying,
first, That word has many senses, and this saying is faithful in them all, in
all those senses, in all its parts.

1. (...) is certus and indubitatus, and a faithful saying, is 1. a certain and
undoubted truth. Christ's coming is no less. We know it, says S. John; know that
the Son of God is come, even his Son Jesus Christ, 1 S. John v. 20. Come, and
come in the flesh, 1 S. John iv. 3. that is sure enough into the world; and none
but the spirit of Antichrist, says he, none but Heretics will deny it. An
Angel this day proclaimed it; a whole Choire came this day down to celebrate
it, the Wisemen a while after came from the ends the earth to see it. Nothing
but what we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands
have handled, do we declare in it, says S. John, 1 S. John i. 1. The whole Land
of Judea daily saw it, millions have died for the truth of it, and the whole
world is witness of it.

And it is certain, he came for sinners, to seek and save them, S. Luke xix. 10.
keep them from being lost, came and went for them, came into the world, and
went out of it, died to save them. Whilst we were yet sinners he did so, Romans
v. 8. gave commission besides, that when he was gone remission should be
preached to sinners all the world over in his name, S. Luke xxiv. 47.

This takes in the chiefest, makes that certain too, that he excludes none; for
to save the world he came, says he that lay in his bosom, and knew his heart,
to save and not to judge it. That comes but ex eventu, when men will not be
saved. To judge or condemn them was not his business, unless they were such as
would not be saved; and are there any so great sinners as would not?

2. And all this is not only true and faithful, or certain in it self, but
makes 2. all Gods former sayings to be so too. It fulfils the Promises, it
perfects the Sacrifices, it answers the Types, it compleats all the Prophesies
that went before: all was shadow till this substance came; all their good and
happiness was but coming till Jesus came; all was but say and say, mere words,
till this eternal Word leapt down from Heaven. This coming of Christ gave faith
and credit to them all. Now God is fully proved to be faithful, and all his
Promises and Prophesies full and true: Now Jacob's Shiloh, Isaiah's Immanuel,
Ieremiah's Branch, Daniels Messiah, Zachariah's Dayspring, Hagga^'s desire of
all Nations is come into the world, and all the Sacrifices of Bulls, and Rams,
and Lambs, and Goats recapitulated in this Holy Lamb; and all the Types from
the beginning of the world completed in this great antitype to day beginning
to appear, in the end of the world, as the Apostle speaks, to put away sin,
Heb. ix. 26.

Ay, that is the business that makes this saying yet more faithful in the way we
are now speaking of; this putting away sin, or saving sinners. This Lo I come
puts an end and period to all Burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for sin, Psalm. xl.
No more of them to be heard of when this true Sacrifice is once brought into
the world: All the old Prophesies end here too. For to bear our iniquities, to
make his soul an offering for sin, to make intercession for the transgressors,
comes this righteous Servant, as the Prophet Isaiah styles him, Isa, lxiii. 10,
11, 12. And, to finish the transgression, to make an end of sins, to make
reconciliation for iniquity, comes Daniels Messiah, Dan. ix. 24. And now he is
come, they all are at an end, their words made good, and all is true, all
faithful and true. And if iniquity, transgressions, and sins be enough to take
in all sorts of sinners (as no doubt it is) his coming to save the chiefest of
them, does but the more fulfill the truth of all.

3. But the words are faithful 3. in another sense, not the fulfilling only of
our Forefathers Faith, but the full of ours. For to believe Christ Jesus came
into the world to save sinners, is to believe all we are obliged to believe,
either of God, or Christ, or of our selves.

In the word Christ is the whole Trinity, his own Person and Offices comprised;
in Jesus and his coming both his Natures: in sinners is our own. And in his
coming into the world to save them, is the whole work and business of our
Redemption. Will you see them how they rise?

Why? to be Christ is to be anointed, and to be anointed supposes as well him
that does anoint, which S. Peter says, was God the Father, Acts iv. 27. the
first Person, and that with which he is anointed, which the same Apostle tells
us was the Holy Ghost, Acts x. 38. the third Person, as well as him that is
anointed, whom the second Psalm makes God the Son the second Person. And this
anointing too implies all his Offices of King, Priest, and Prophet: they
anointed all of them, and he anointed to be them all. Here are all the Persons
in the Trinity, and therein his own, with all his Offices besides.

2. Jesus is his name; that signifies a Savior, and that speaks him God. Ego
sun^, and praeter me non est, Isa. xliii. 11. None can be truly so but He. But
his coming into the world, that showed us he was man. There Is both his natures.
And

3. In the title of Sinners, there is our own, that tells us what we poor things
are: poor wretched sinners that want a Savior.

Lastly, his coming into the world is but a short expression of all he did and
suffered in it: and to save sinners is to take thence a Church unto himself, to
purify and cleanse them from their sins, to raise them first from the death of
Sin here, to the life of Righteousness, to the communion of Saints, and to
raise them at last from the death of the Grave unto the life of Glory; yea, the
communion of Saints hereafter. This is the sum of the Christian Faith, and it is
all summed up here: all the Articles of the Creed, nay the whole Gospel it self
in this one single period; Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. A
saying which is not only (...) but (...), now not only faithful, but the full
Faith it self.

Faithful it is 4. in another acception. Fidelis est qui nunquam fallet, not
like those Aquae infideles, that the Prophet Jeremiah complains of, Ier. xv.
18. those faithless streams, those shallow brooks that fail and dry away when
we most need them. When all other waters fail us, this Fountain that was set
open for Judah, and Jerusalem, Ezekiel. xiii. 1. will run still. When all other
comforts are dried up and gone, this of Christ Jesus coming will be coming
still: When all other sayings put together will not heal our wounds, nor
refresh our weariness, nor cool our heat, nor quench our drowth: this will do
all. When all things else desert and leave us, and nor Friends, nor Fortunes,
nor Wit, nor Eloquence, nor Strength, nor Policy will help us; this will be
faithful to us, this Christ Jesus will stand to us. No such wellspring of life
in the world as he, and nothing can come so bad to us in the world, but his
coming makes good, a world of good of.

Nay, this very saying, that he came into the world to save sinners, and the
chiefest not excepted, well laid to, will stick close to us in all distresses,
disperse the terrors of our sins, defeat the devices of the Devil to disturb
and fright us: this will support us in our weaknesses, sustain us in our
faintings, raise us out of our despairs, relieve us in our sicknesses, ease us
in our pains, refresh us in our agonies, comfort us on our deathbeds, revive
us when we are even dead, go with us out of the world, and never leave us till
it has brought and laid us at his feet who came to save us; and is not willing
that any should perish, says S. Peter ii. 3, 9. No not the greatest sinner, not
any, first or last.

5. Well may this saying 5. pass for (...) now as St. Ambrose and St. Augustine
seem to have read it, as well as (...), be styled humanus, or jucundus sermo, a
sweet and pleasant saying, as well as faithful. Pleasing and joyful news it is
to hear that such a person as this speaks of is come among us: for all the
while we were without this Christ, we were, says St. Paul, without God, too, in
the world, Ephesians. ii. 12. From his coming only it is, that we can say with St.
Peter, Bonum est esse hic, that it is good being here, that the world is worth
the staying in. It were not without him; no company worth being with till he
came, no pleasure in it till he brought it with him. For this it is that (...)
makes no mistake; the saying may be said pleasant without an error.

Indeed what more pleasant, if to save sinners be his coming? liberty, and
health, and life, and salvation are pleasing news; liberty to the Captives,
health to the Sick, life to the Dying, salvation to the lost and perishing; and
to save sinners is to give all of them to them all. Such a saying to them must
needs please them all.

And upon this we must needs allow it lastly to be faithful in another sense:
(...) is fide dignus, a saying worthy of our faith, worth our believing. All
true, and certain, and profitable, nay, and pleasing sayings are not so. No
matter whether some of them believed or no. This is a truth of so great
concernment, and so truly all, that St. Paul himself, that great Doctor of the
world, is content, nay determined to know nothing else, nothing but Jesus
Christ, and him Crucified, 1 Cor. ii. 2. Him crucified is him come into the
world to save sinners: for by his Cross he saved them, and upon his Cradle the
foot of it was reared; and from his coming into a cross and peevish world, he
began to be crucified and bear it. All other knowledges are not worth the
knowing, all other truths not worth the believing: the Law of Moses is but an A
B C learning to this knowledge. All the Jewish Kabala, all the wise sentences
of the wisest Rabbis, all the wisdom of the Heathen world, of all the world:
all that is without Christ Jesus in it, but mere fables, endless genealogies,
to no end or purpose all of them but to fill the head with empty notion, and
the heart with vexation, and the tongue with strife: all mere (...), Phil. iii.
8. Very dross and dung in respect of the knowledge of Christ Jesus coming into
the world to save sinners.

Yet after all this, were there not (...) to them all; were either not the
chiefest sinners in, or might not the chiefest of them make a particular
application of it to himself; were Christ's coming only to a few, and all the
rest excluded by some inevitable decree, there would be but a starved kind of
comfort in it at the best: nor could it well command our faith, seeing it might
so command us to believe a lie, and cheat our selves. To make the saying either
worth the saying or the believing, it must be applicable to the chiefest
sinners, and so it is here; and the greatest sinner among us may lay hold upon
it.

And now it being a saying so faithful and true in it self, faithful both to
our Fathers and to us, the fulfilling of their Faith, and the ground of ours,
and the sum of it too; a saying that will never fail us in any exigence and
distress, but bear up our spirits at every turn, and stick firm to us upon all
occasions: a saying so pleasing, so worthy of our Faith, and so close to every
one of us: it is worthy sure lastly of all acceptance, all the best
entertainment we can give it.

It Is worthy of it 1. for the Person it brings to us: one that is fairer then
the children of men, Psalm. xlv. worth entertaining.

Worthy 2. for the way it brings him to us, in an humble and familiar way (such
was his coming) he comes into the world like other men, that we may the easier
approach him, and so the more readily entertain him.

Worthy 3. for the good things it tells us he brings with him, for the
salvation he comes with to us: a thing worth accepting.

Worthy 4. for the persons it brings all this good to, or for the extent and
fullness of that goodness, that it is to sinners, sinners indefinitely and at
large, sinners of all sizes, all degrees and latitudes; this certainly worthy
all acceptance, by all to be accepted, for all interessed in it.

And 5. to be accepted too with all acceptance, all the best ways we can
imagine, with soul and body, with hand and heart, with all the expressions of
love, and reverence, and joy, and thankfulness; love of his Beauty, reverence
to his Humility, joy in his Salvation, and thankfulness for the freeness and
fullness of it. If a friend come but a long Journey to us, we give him all the
welcome we can make, and think nothing enough. This friend came to us as far as
Heaven is from us, farther then all the corners of the earth. If a great person
come to visit us, we meet him with all the respect and reverence we can
contrive: none too much. This is the greatest person can come to us. If there
come one to save to when we are now ready to perish, how do our hearts leap,
and our spirits dance for joy? how glad are we? nothing can be more. Here Is one
comes to do it, and to do it to the utmost; that none or nothing of us may be
lost: what can we now do to him again, who is, and does all this for us? All we
can do is all too little, all expressions too low to receive him with, and this
saying that thus assures him to us, worthy to be written in tables of Gold,
with pens of Diamonds, to be written however on all our hearts, never to be
razed out, nor ever to be brought forth but with devotion and reverence, with
exultation and joy.

And now I am fallen upon my second general, the use we are to make of this
faithful saying, and a fourfold use it will be, to believe; To accept, to
apply, to proclaim it: I add, to make this the day to begin it in.

I: This is a faithful saying; we are first therefore to believe it: such it is
to them that believe, to others not: St. Paul I confess says, only to them
especially, cap. iv. 10. But that especially is only too; for Christ is
effectually the Savior of none else. The Savior truly of all, come down for
all, set up for all; yet not any saved by him but Believers for all that. Nor
all they neither, only such as are careful to maintain good works, Tit. iii. 8.
This saying not faithful but to Believers; nor any Believers faithful, but such
as show it by good works. Thus St. Paul limits the words, This is a faithful
saying, in those two last cited places, that we may not cheat our selves out of
the Text, or the good things in it.

Indeed if we believe not, yet he abides faithful in himself, he and all his
sayings too; that is a faithful saying too, 2 Timothy iii. 11. 13. But, nor he, nor
any of his sayings faithful to us, whatever in themselves, if we be not
faithful and believing, if we distrust either the beginning or end of his
coming to us, or by our sins, or foolish scruples, or despairs, thrust our
selves out of our interests in any of them. For the second Use we are to make
of this saying is, not only to believe it but to accept it.

Use 2. Now to accept it, is very highly to prize and value it: and well we
may, it is worthy of it. Prize it we then as we do Jewels, as that Merchant in
the Gospel did the Pearl, sell all to buy it: there is none to it. Lay it up
safe, as we do treasures, that neither Moth corrupt nor Thief steal it from us,
nor Sin nor Satan rob us of it: there is no treasure like it. Keep it as we do
the Records and Tenures of our Estates, part with it upon no score. Our state
in heaven depends upon it; It Is our title to it. Lord, where were we without
this assurance to save sinners? where all our hopes if this were lost? whereto
all our treasures if this were gone? We had need prize and value it, and keep
it sure: and this is to accept it.

And yet to give it all acceptance is somewhat more. To accept it as Tertullus
tells Felix they did his noble deeds, Acts xxiv. 3. (...), always, and every
where, and with all thankfulness.

Do we it then 1. not now and then, not to day only, or one day or two, but
every day, every day we rise, every opportunity that presents it self, on every
occasion that appears; that is (...).

Do we it again 2. (...) in all places, engrave it upon our doors, carve it
upon our posts, write it upon our hands, profess it every where we come; not in
our Closets and our Chambers only, but in the Church, in the Highpriests
Palace, in Pilates Hall, at the Pillar, and at the Cross, no where ashamed or
afraid to own it.

Do it 3. (...) with all thankfulness. And how is that? by some good deeds sure
as well as words. Present we him ever and anon with some good thing or other:
now a basket of good Fruits (so St. Paul sometimes styles good works:) Now a
bottle of good Wine, the Wine of devout and pious tears: Now with a present of
Gold or Silver to adorn his House or his Attendants: Now with a garment to
clothe his naked members: Now with a dish to feed his poor and hungry Children:
Now with this gift, now with another. This is the way of thankfulness among
men, that they call good acceptance among themselves. These and all the ways we
can, (...), (for so some Greek Copies read for (...)) will take all in. But
above all our souls and bodies a living Sacrifice will be the most acceptable
present we can make him. Romans xii. 1. and indeed the fittest for him that came
to save them.

This will do well yet 3. St. Paul's quorum ego primus, the Apostles applying
the only bad word in the Text with an emphasis to himself: his reckoning
himself the chief of sinners shows us the best way to apply this faithful
saying to our selves, the confessing our selves no ordinary sinners. The third
Use of the Doctrine of the Text.

But thou, O blessed Apostle, the chief of sinners! What then (O Lord) are we?
Primo primi, the chief of chiefs is a style too little. And yet, can either He
or We now say it, and say truth? if not, the lie may redound peradventure to
Gods Glory, but it will work to our own damnation. Best look to that.

It Is an Hyperbole most think; yet it is no handsome hyperbolizing with God,
methinks. We may find out a way, I doubt not, so to say it, as yet to say
nothing but our own bosom thoughts.

Three things observed, we may both say and think we are any of us the chief of
sinners. 1. Look we upon our own sins with the severest eye, with all the
aggravations of them we can imagine. Look we 2. upon other men's with the most
favorable one, with all the extenuations we can invent. And then 3. compare we
them so together, and the work is done: we may really suppose our selves of all
men the greatest sinners.

To begin with our own sins, and to aggravate them to purpose, consider we them
ever in their foulest colors, how base and wretched in themselves, how
dishonorable to God, how prejudicial to our Brother, how scandalous to our
Religion, and how destructive to our selves. Consider we next upon what poor
grounds they were committed, upon what slight temptations, to what silly ends,
with what perfect knowledge, with what full deliberation, with what impudent
presumption, how wilfully against all good motions, how resolutely against all
assistances, and persuasions to the contrary, how desperately against all
dangers threatened from them; and how in gratefully to God and Christ. In a
word, what a long train of mischiefs they probably draw after them, how many we
involve commonly either in the guilt, or in the punishment, or in the example,
and thereby lay as it were a seed of wickedness for ever, and so sin even in
our worms and dust. Thus we are to look upon our own transgressions.

But 2. When we look upon other men's, we must do that but cursorily and
glancing, think they are never so bad as they are represented, not so foul by
much as they appear at first; that their intentions perhaps were good, or that
it falls out far otherwise than they intended; that what was done was upon
mistake or error; that it was but a slip, or weakness, or surreption; that they
have not the light, the strength, the grace, the power that God gives us; that
they had not the means or opportunity to shun those sins; that they were
overpowered by strong temptations, or were merely overtaken, or plainly forced
to it and could not help it, or had not the opportunity to do better; that they
did it ignorantly, meant no hurt at all, and possibly none may come of it; that
what e're it be they are heartily sorry for it; that however they have a
thousand virtues and good things in them to overpoise the evils they have done.
These are the ways we are to consider the sins of other men.

And then 3. if after this we compare our sins and theirs together, ours under
all the circumstances of aggravation, with theirs under all extenuating
considerations, our greatest sins with their little ones, our presumptions with
their infirmities, our vices with their virtues, our bad or sinister intentions
with their good and fair professions, our corrupt natures with their good
dispositions, our selves as we are by nature and deprest by sin with them as
exalted by any grace and virtue; it will be no marvel, no way strange if we
think our selves the greatest sinners.

And indeed we have no reason to do other: we know only our own hearts, those
we are sure are wicked; but we cannot say so of other men's, can at the best but
suppose theirs; of which in charity we ought always to think the best; ever at
least better than our own, especially, when even little and ordinary sins in
some, may be often worse than crying sins in others, according to the
difference of light and grace, and the variety of circumstances that may attend
them. All which considered, if we profess our selves the worst, we shall now
need no hyperbole to make it good; nor fear it will be any whit worse for us
though it be true. St. Paul it seems held it the surest course thus by the
greatest and humblest confession of his own unworthiness to plead his interest
in this faithful saying, in Christ Jesus coming into the world to save sinners.

And now sure 4. we may proclaim it, must do so too. It Is not a saying to be
kept secret, no mysterious Cabala not to be revealed, or committed only to a
few. This thing, says St. Paul, was not done in a corner. Into the world he
came that came to save us. And, to the world and through the world let it
therefore be proclaimed for ever. It Is good, says the Angel to old Tobit to
keep close the secret of a King, but it is honorable to reveal the works of
God, Tob. xii. 11.

And to day is a good day to do it in. A day wherein the Lepers said among
themselves, 2 Kings vii. 9. If we hold our peace some mischief will come upon
us. I am sure there was enough upon us, when men upon this day held their
peace. Well, tell we now our news as they did theirs, to the Court, to the
City, to the Country, to the world. The Church bids us do do so to day. Let the
Preacher preach it, let the people tell it, let the singers begin it, and go
before, and the Minstrels and Music follow and answer it to day, that Christ
Jesus is come into the world to save sinners.

Yet to day we must do more then tell it. We are to believe, to accept, to
apply it too. We have to day the best opportunity to do all, to exercise our
faith, and to advance it, to give a proof of our acceptance of Christ's saving
mercies, and the sense of our own sins and miseries.

Yonder under the blessed Elements we shall meet our Savior coming to us.
Shall I tell you how to accept that favor, how receive and entertain him? why!
when great Personages are coming to us, we make clean the House, we trick up
the Rooms, we set every thing in order, we set forth our choicest Furniture,
put on our best Apparel, we look out ever and anon to see if they be coming,
and when they are, we go out to meet them, we make our addresses with all
humble and lowly reverence, we welcome them with the best words we have, we
present them with some lovely present, and take care that nothing unseemly be
done before them whilst they stay.

Let us do so to him that came into the world to day. Cleanse we our hearts,
and purify our hands, dress up all the rooms, all the powers and faculties of
our souls and bodies with graces and virtues, set our affections and passions
all in rule and order, put on the garments of righteousness, and true holiness;
let us long, and thirst, and hunger after him, let us go out to meet him,
accost him with reverence, welcome him with Prayers and Praises, present him
with holy vows and resolutions, and so every way demean our selves with that
humility and devotion, that care and diligence over all our ways and steps,
that nothing appear in us distasteful or offensive to him now he is come: and
say we to him in the words of Elizabeth to his Mother, Whence is this to me
that my Lord himself is come unto me, to me a sinner, to me the chief of
sinners!

Thus if we will entertain him when he comes, thus if we will receive him now
he is coming toward us, he will not only come unto us, but tarry with us till
he take us with him to himself; make us his world to be in till he remove us
into a better; where the soul that humbly here confesses it self the chief of
sinners, shall be saved and set among the chiefest Saints, when he shall come
again in glory.

THE FIFTH SERMON ON Christmas Day.
PSALM xlv. 3. 2.
Thou art fairer then the Children of men, Grace is poured into thy lip^.
full of grace are thy lips: therefore.
because God has blessed thee for ever.
MY heart is inditing a good matter; So the Psalm. begins, and so the Sermon.
and I could wish my tongue were the pen therefore of a ready writer, that I
might speak the things I have made touching the King, this days newborn King,
as I ought to speak, as they ought to be spoken. But, Non mihi si centum
linguae sint, oraque centum, Had I a hundred mouths, and as many tongues, and
they the tongues of Angels too, I could not yet sufficiently set forth the
Beauty of this Fair one, the Majesty of this King, the grace of his Person, or
the comfort of his Day, this day wherein he came to be first reckoned among the
children of men.

Yet something must be said both for the days sake, and the persons. It Is a day
of good tidings, so the Angel tells us, and then we must not hold our peace;
the very Lepers that are to hold their hands upon their mouths cannot hold them
at this. Say we do not well, if we do, some mischief will come upon us, 2 Kings
vii. 9. And lips so full of grace will require the return of the lips at least.
We can do little if we cannot speak again when we are spoken to, when God
speaks to us, as the Apostle tells us, by his Son; if we will not render a word
in answer to this eternal word, speak of the beauty, and grace, and blessing
that we see in him, and find by him. God has blessed him for ever, blessed us
to day, will bless us too, has already blessed us in blessing him, will bless
us more and more in him, too day and for ever: good reason then, we bless him
to day, who from this day began to bless us for ever.

All this while you understand me who I mean, who is so fair, so gracious, so
blessed. The question is, whether the Psalmist means the same. Indeed they give
it out for an Epithalamium, or Marriage-Song at Solomon's Espousals with
Pharaohs Daughter. And in such Songs the praise and commendation of the
Bridegroom and the Bride, and good wishes to them are the usual subjects. It is
so here; Solomon and his Bride commended, blessed, well-wisht to in it: but yet
behold a greater than Solomon is here, a fairer, graciouser, blesseder than he:
Christ married to his Church, or rather the Divinity contracted to the
Humanity, Christ made the fairest of the children of men, (...) as well as
prae, more gracious words out of his mouth than ever out of Solomon's, more
truly ever blessed (...), than he, the Song sung in a fuller key, the words
more punctually appliable, the Prophecy more exactly fulfilled in him than in
Solomon himself. The Fathers have so expounded it before us, the Church has
added authority to it by the choice of the Psalms for a part of the Office of
the Day: nay, S. Paul has so applied it, Heb. i. 8, 9. So I am no ways
singular: Indeed I love not to be in such points as these, I tread the ancient
track; though I confess I think I can never take occasions enough, nor I nor
any else to speak of Christ, of his beauty, and grace, and blessedness, either
to day or any day, though every day whatsoever.

And though I must say with St. Hilary, Filium men's mea veretur attingere, and
trepidat omnis sermo se prodere. I can neither think without a kind of fear,
nor speak without a kind of trembling, of a person of that glory; yet because
it is our eternal Solomon's, the Words wedding day, and the Text part of the
Wedding-Song; and in such days and Songs the very children, all comers bear a
part; and if they did not, the stones would do it, (indeed the stones and walls
should this day all ring of it) and if they, I must not be the only senseless
stone to hold my peace. Indeed here is a beauty would make any man an Orator:
lips that would make the dumb man eloquent, grace would make the most
ungratious full of good words, and holy language, were they well conceived and
considered.

That so they may, the words are now to be considered as a part of an
Epithalamium, or Marriage-Song, wherein Christ our eternal Bridegroom is set
forth in all his luster. Now in a Bridegroom, the chief things we look at are
good parts, and a good estate. Our Bridegroom here has both. Fair faced, and
fair spoken, full of grace and beauty for his parts, and a fair estate he has
too, God be thanked for it; a blessed lot, a goodly heritage in a fair ground,
blessedness it self enstated upon him, and that for ever; both far above the
parts and portions of the children of men, the Sons parts above the parts of
the children of men, and the Fathers blessing above the blessings of the
fathers of men; and neither the one nor the other to be concealed, but even
spoken and sung of while you will. By us as well as David, as loud too, and in
as high a key. Run this division upon it if you please, and take these parts,
to sing of in their order.

1. His Beauty, Christ's excellent beauty. Thou art fairer then the children of
men. 2. His eloquence, Christ's infinite grace in speaking. Full of grace are
thy lips. 3. The original whence they come, from Gods blessing; Eo quod in one
way of rendering, Because God has blessed thee for ever: because he has
blessed thee, therefore art thou so fair, so full of grace. 4. The effect of
them, what they cause. Gods blessing again: so the other rendering the word by
Propterea; therefore, that is because of this excellent grace and beauty:
therefore has God blessed thee for ever. 5. The end whether they move and tend,
the great business they aim at, even to the blessing of God again: for so the
Hebrew Writers supply the sense, with a dico ego. Therefore say I, and so say
we, or are to say so, God has blessed thee for ever. Blessed be God the Father
of our Lord Jesus Christ, and blessed be our Lord Jesus Christ, for all this
grace, for all this blessing. If our Spouse so fair, then we sure should be
faithful: if his lips so full of grace, our lips as full of thanks: if he
blessed of God, we again bless God and him, for so great a blessing: so great
blessings, so continually descending upon us; so lasting, so everlasting, never
sufficiently answered but by all our ways of blessing; and so blessing him
always, all our days, whilst we live, for ever. We to sing our parts, and
praise him in the Song, sing or say, Thou art fairer, thou O Christ art fairer,
etc.
For this is the sum and whole meaning of the Text, to give us a view of
Christ's Beauty, and the Christians Duty both together; so to show and set forth
to us the luster and splendor of Christ's incomparable Beauty, and the
overflowing fullness of his Grace, as to make us really in love with him, to
ravish our (...), and tongues, and hands to his Service, and praise, that we
may to (...) and every day serve, and praise, and magnify him all the day
long, (...) way to blessedness for ever. I begin with his Beauty, for that is
(...) attractive to him.

When I shall be lift up, shall draw all men to me, says he himself, S. John
xii. 32. That lifting up was upon the Cross, and if that be so attractive, if
he be so powerful in his humiliation, when his face is clouded with darkness,
his eyes with sadness, his heart with sorrow, when his body is so mangled with
wounds, deformed with stripes, besmeared with blood, and sweat, and dust, that
will draw all men to him; how infinitely prevalent then must he needs be when
we see him in his excellence, smooth, and even and entire in all the parts of
his soul and body. For in both, fair he is, formosus, fair, formosus prae, very
fair, formosus prae filiis, fairer then the fairest and sweetest child, in whom
commonly is the sweetest beauty; prae filiis hominum, than the children of men,
when they come to their full strength and manly beauty. By these degrees we
shall arrive to the perfection of his beauty; fair he is, very fair, fairer
than the sweetest, fairer than the perfectest beauty of the sons of men, so in
both his body and his soul.

In his Body first. And fair and comely sure must that Body be which was
immediately and miraculously framed by the Holy Ghost; pure flesh and blood
that was stirred together by that pure Spirit, out of the purest Blood and
Spirits of the purest Virgin of the world. The shadows of that face must needs
be beautiful that were drawn by the very finger and shaddowing of the Holy
Ghost: those eyes must needs have quid sidereum, as St. Jerome, some star-like
splendour in them, which were so immediately of the heavenly making. The whole
frame of that body must needs be excellent, which was made on purpose by God
himself for the supreme excellence to dwell in, to reside in, to be united to,
so united by the union hypostatical. A body without sin must needs be purely
fair, a body without concupiscence must needs be sweet, without defect must
needs be lovely, without vacuity must needs be complete, without superfluity
must needs be so far handsome, without inordination must needs be perfect,
without death must needs be firm, without dust must needs be singular, without
corruption must needs be curious and delicate, without any of them must needs
be excellent. And all these were Christ's body, without sin, without
concupisence, without defect, without vacuity, without superfluity, without
inordination, death and dust and corruption could not get the least dominion
over it; thou shall not suffer my flesh to see corruption, says the Psalm, he
did not suffer it to see it says the Gospel, raised incorruptible it quickly
was, went down into the grave but staid not there, came not into the dust at
all, into any corruption at all; had none all the while it was upon the earth,
had none under it.

Fair he was in his conception, conceived in purity, and a fair Angel brought
the news. Fair (2.) in his Nativity, (...) is the word in the Septuagint,
tempestivus, in time, that is, all things are beautiful in their time, Eccl. v.
11. And in the fullness of time it was that he was born, and a fair star pointed
to him. Fair (3.) in his childhood, he grew up in grace and favor. St. Luke
ii. 52. The Doctors were much taken with him. (4.) Fair in his manhood; had he
not been so, says S. Jerome, had there not been something admirable in his
countenance and presence, some heavenly beauty, Nunque secuturi essent
Apostoli, etc. The Apostles and the whole world, (as the Pharisees themselves
confess) would not so suddenly have gone after him. Fair (5.) in his
Transfiguration, white as the light, or as the snow, his face glittering as the
Sun, S. Mat. xvii. 2. even to the ravishing the very soul of S. Peter, that he
knew not what he said, could let his eyes dwell upon taht face for ever, and
never come down the Mount again. (6.) Fair in his Passion. Nihil indecorum, no
uncomeliness, in his nakedness; his very wounds, and the bloody prints of the
whips and scourges drew an ecce from the mouth of Pilate, Behold the man, the
sweetness of his countenance and carriage in the midst of filth and spittle,
whips and buffets; his very comeliness upon the Cross, and his giving up the
Ghost, made the Centurion cry out he was the Son of God; there appeared so
sweet a Majesty, so heavenly a luster in him through that very darkness that
encompassed him. (7.) Fair in his Resurrection; so subtle a beauty, that
mortal eyes, even the eyes of his own Disciples, were not able to see or
apprehend it, but when he veiled it for them. (8.) Fair in his Ascension, made
his Disciples stand gazing after him so long (as if they never could look long
enough upon him) till an Angel is sent from Heaven to rebuke them, to look
home, Acts i. 11.

If you ask Eusebius, Evagrius, Nicephorus, Damascen, and some others, how fair
he was, they will tell you so fair, that the Painter sent from Agbarus King of
Edessa to draw his Picture, could not look so steadfastly upon him as to do it,
for the rays that darted from his face; and though the Scripture mention no
such thing, it is no greater wonder to believe then what we read of Moses his
face, which shone so glorious that the Children of Israel could not behold it,
2 Cor. iii. 7. Lentulus the Roman President his Epistle to the Emperor
Antonius, describes him of very comely color, shape, and figure; and so do
others. Not such a beauty yet as that which darts from it wanton rays, or warms
the blood, or stirs the spirits to vain desires, or secular respects and
motions; but a sweetness without sensual daintiness, a luster without
lightness, a modest look without dejectedness, a grave countenance without
severity, a fair face without fancy, eyes sparkling only heavenly flames,
cheeks commanding holy modesty, lips distilling celestial sweetness, beauty
without its faults, figure, and proportion, and all such as was most answerable
and advantageous to the work he came about, every way fitted to the most
perfect operations of the reasonable and immortal soul; the most beautiful then
sure when beauty is nothing else but an exact order and proportion of things in
relation to their nature and end, both to themselves and to each other.

Take his description from the Spouses own mouth, Cant. v. 10, 11, 12, etc. My
beloved is white and ruddy, the chiefest among ten thousand. His head is as the
most fine gold, his locks are bushy (or curled) and black as a Raven. His eyes
are as the eyes of Doves, by the rivers of water, washed with water and fitly
set, [that is, set in fullness, fitly placed, and as a precious stone in the
soil of a Ring.] His cheeks are as a bed of Spices, as sweet flowers: his lips
like Lillies dropping sweet smelling Myrrh: his hands are as gold Rings set
with Beryl: his belly as bright Ivory over-laid with Saphyrs. His legs are as
pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine Gold. His countenance like Lebanon,
excellent as the Cedars. His mouth is most sweet, yea he is altogether lovely.
This is my beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem. This is
our beloved too. Solomon indeed has poetically expressed it. Yet something else
there is in it besides a poetic phrase. Beautiful he thus supposes he is to
be, who was to be this Spouse, have the beauty of all beautiful things in the
world conferred upon him; at least to have the finest and subtilest part of all
worldly beauties, those imperceptible, yet powerful species of them which make
them really amiable and attractive; a head, and locks, and eyes, and hands, and
feet, quantity, color, and proportion, such as darted from them not only a
resemblance, but the very spirit of heavenly beauty, innocence, purity,
strength, and vigor. Poets when they commend beauty, call it divine and
heavenly; this of his it was truly so, a kind of sensible Divinity through all
his parts.

Shall I give you his color to make up the beauty? He was white, pure white in
his Nativity, ruddy in his Passion, bright and glistering in his life, black in
his death, Azure-vein'd in his Resurrection. No wonder now to see the Spouse
sit down under his shadow with great delight, Cant. ii. 3. we sure our selves
now can do less, and yet this is but the shadow of his beauty. The true beauty
is the souls, the beauty of the soul, the very soul of beauty; the beauty of
the body, but the body, nay the carcass of it. And this of the souls he had
(2.) in its prime perfection.

2. Now beauty consists in three particulars; the perfection of the lineaments,
the due proportion of them each to other, and the excellency and purity of the
color. They are all complete in the soul of Christ. The lineaments of the soul
are its faculties and powers, the proportion of them is the due subordination
of them to God and one another. The colors are the virtues and graces that are
in them.

His powers and faculties would not but be complete, which had nothing of old
Adam in them. His understanding without ignorance, he knew all, the very hearts
of all, thoughts as they rose, what they thought within themselves, S. Luke v.
22. thoughts before they rose, what the Pharisees with other would have done to
him, had he committed himself unto them. Now Tire and Sidon would have repented
had they had the mercy allowed to Corazin and Bethsaida, S. Luke x. 13. His
will without wilfulness or weakness, his passions without infirmity or
extravagance, his inferior powers without defect or maim, his understanding
clear, his will holy, his passions sweet, all his powers vigorous. Hear the
Wise man describe him under the name of Wisdom, Wisd. xvii. 22, 23, etc. In
her, that is in him, who is the Wisdom of the Father, is an understanding
Spirit, holy, one only, manifold, subtle, lively, clear, undefiled, plain,
nor subject to hurt, loving the thing that is good, quick, which cannot be
let, ready to do good, kind to man, steadfast, sure, free from care, having
all power, overseeing all things, and going through all understanding, pure,
and most subtle spirits, and ver. 25, 26. A pure influence flowing from the
Glory of the Almighty, the brightness of the everlasting light, the unspotted
mirror of the power of God, and the image of his goodness.

The powers of his soul being thus pure, vigorous, and unspotted, they cannot
(2.) but be in order; the will following his understanding, the passions
subordinate to them both, all the inferior powers obedient and ready at
command and pleasure. He had no sooner expressed a kind of grievance in his
sensitive powers at the approach of those strange horrors of his death and
sufferings, but presently comes out, Non mea, sed tua, Not my will but thine,
all in a moment, at peace and in tranquillity. No rash or idle word, no
unseemly passage, no sour look, nor gesture or expression unsuitable to his
Divinity throughout his life: the very Devils to their own confusion cannot but
confess it, We know thee, who thou art, the Holy One of God, S. Mark i. 24.

To this add those heavenly colors and glances of grace, and virtues, and you
have his soul completely beautiful: Meekness, and Innocence, and Patience, and
Obedience even to the death; Mercy, and Goodness, and Piety, and what else is
truly called by the name of good, are all in him: insomuch that the Apostle
tells us the very fullness of the Godhead dwells in him bodily, Col. ii. 9. No
Divine Grace or Virtue wanting in him. In him are all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, ver. 3. In him all sanctity and holiness, not so much as the
least guile in his mouth, 1 S. Pet. ii. 22. So holy, that he is made holiness
and sanctification unto us, 1 Cor. i. 30. Sancti quasi sanguine uncti, We
Saints and holy become hallowed by the sprinkling of his blood. In him lastly
is all the power and virtue, omnis virtus, that is omnis potestas, all the
power in heaven and earth fully given to him, S. Matthew. xxviii. 18.

So that now we shall need to say little of the other particular of this first
general point of Christ's perfect beauty, that he is not only Formosus, but
Formosus prae, not only fair, but very fair: for where there is so much as you
have heard, exceeding and excellent it must needs be. Where the body is
complete in all its parts, the soul exact in all its powers, the body without
any ill inclination natural or habitual, the soul without the least stain of
thought, or glance of irregularity, nothing to sully the soul or body, all
wisdom, and holiness, and power, and virtue: We can say no less of him then the
Psalmist of Jerusalem, Very excellent things are spoken of thee thou City of
God, thou miraculous habitation of the Almighty, thou very dwelling not of God
only, but the very Godhead too.

Nor shall I need to say much of the third, the prae filiis, that his beauty is
more sweet and innocent then the newborn babes. Alas the sweetest fairest
child comes sullied into the world with Adams guilt. Some of that dust that God
cast upon him when he told him, Dust he was, and into dust he should return,
sticks so upon the face and body, the very soul and spirit too of the prettiest
infant, that it is nothing to this days child. In omnibus sine peccato, Heb.
iv. 15. In all without sin, says the Apostle, the very temptations he suffered
were not from the sinfulness of his nature, any original concupiscence; non
novit, says the Apostle in another place, 1 Cor. v. 21. he knew it not, knew no
sin at all: in this he might use St. Peter's phrase, Man I know not what thou
meanest, I know not what this condition of man so much as means. Prae filiis,
he is as much purer then the child we call innocent, as much before it in
purity and innocence, as he is in time and being. Nay yet again, though we see
the sweetest beauty is commonly that of children whilst they are so, yet even
that beauty must needs have some kind of stain, or mole, or some insensible
kind of defect, though we know not what, nor how to term it, which was not in
him. The very natural inordination of our powers must needs give a kind of dull
shadow to our exactest beauty, and silently speak the inward fault by some
outward defect, though we are too dull, being of the same mold, to apprehend
it; whilst there could be no such darkness in the face of Christ, no Genius in
it which was not perfectly attractive, and exactly fitted to its place and
office.

This perhaps may seem a subtlety to our duller apprehensions; but it is plain
that I shall tell you, though but briefly in the fourth particular, that he is
fairer then the children of men, then men come to their perfect beauty. Alas!
alas! before that time long, sin had so sullied them, that we may read dark
lines in all their faces: the Physicgnomist will tell you all their faults; our
sins and deformities are by that time written in our foreheads, engraven in our
hands; our beauty is almost clean lost into corruption. Could we see as Angels
do, those eyes that seem to sparkle flames, would look terrible as the fires of
Hell. Those cheeks that seem beauteous in their blushes, would be seen to have
no other than the color of our sins: those lips which we cry up for sweetness,
would stink in our conceit with rottenness: the teeth that look white as Ivory,
we should behold black with calumny and slander as the ^oot of the foulest
Chimneys: the fair curled locks, would look like snakes, the young spawn of the
great red Dragon: the hands that look so white and delicate, would appear
filthy, bloody, and unclean. We, poor we, are but blind moles and bats. We see
nothing. We know not what is beautiful, what is lovely. If we did, these
earthly beauties would seem what I have said them, nay worse; Christ only would
be beautiful, no body but Christ's body, no body but that wherein Christ dwells,
in whose eyes, and cheeks, and lips, and head, and hands, you might see Christ's
Beauty, Meekness, Love, Charity, Goodness, Justice, Mercy, Innocence, Piety,
with the rest of those lines of beauty which were in him. But whatever we would
then say of the bodies, we can say no other even now of the souls of men, that
none are fair, but that are well colored and proportioned to those heavenly
lines, and in this point freely acknowledge the pre-eminence of Christ, the
prerogative of this Spouse. And well may we say of him with the Psalmist, that
he is fairer then the children of men, whom daily sins deform and render ugly,
when the Apostle sets him before the Sons of God, the Angels, the Cherubins,
and Seraphins, which you will of them; for to which of them, says he, has he
said at any time; Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee? Heb. i. 5.
begotten thee after mine own image, the very express image of my person, the
brightness of my glory, ver. 3. Fairer then the children of men, no doubt, who
is as fair and bright as God, who is higher then all the Sons of men, all the
people by the head, by the Godhead which is in him. Which being in him, there
needs no more to say, but that it is of necessity he must be the fairest of the
Sons of men, through whose eyes, and face, and hands, and whole body, the rays
of the Divine Beauty are continually darting from within. Well may we now also
expect some of it at his lips, and so we find it here in the very next words,
very fully issuing there, Full of grace are thy lips, that is the second general
of the Text, Gratia diffusa in labiis, Grace in the lips as well as beauty in
the forehead, in face or other parts of soul and body.

Three degrees we observe in the words to make up this fullness, Gratia est,
gratia diffusa, diffusa in labiis, that Grace there is in him as well as
beauty. (2.) Grace abundant, and in full measure. And (3.) so abundant, and so
full, that it falls into the lips, comes out full spout there, there above all
it issues, and manifests, and appears.

Grace first, that is good with beauty, all beauty but deformed without is; a
good hint to you by the way, to get those souls filled with grace, whose bodies
God has made fine with beauty. If God has given thee beauty, beg of him that he
would also give thee grace, beautify thy soul as well as body; and strive thou
also what thou can possibly thy self to adorn thy beauty with grace and
goodness; or if thou have little or no beauty in thy body, make amends for it
by the beauty and sweetness of thy soul: though thy face be not fair, thy lips
may be gracious, thou may be full of good words and works, and thou may
do God more service with the grace of thy lips, than with the beauty of thy
fairest face that so amazes and ravishes worldly lovers.

Now a threefold grace there is in Christ. And (1.) The grace of his person, or
personal grace wherewith his own person was endued, so far as to be free from
all kind of sin. The grace of the Head, whereby he disperses his graces into
all his Members, as the Head of the Church into the Body, into the souls of
Christians and Believers. And then the grace of Union, that ineffable grace
whereby the Godhead is united to the Manhood. By the first, he himself is holy,
by the second he makes us so. By the third he wrought all the means to do it.
For the first, let us reverence his person. For the second, let us embrace him,
and be ruled by him. For the third, let us perpetually admire and adore him.

It Is ready to conceive now that he was full indeed, beyond measure full; the
spirit not given to him by measure, so he says himself, S. John iii. 34. and
his witness is true, though he bear witness of himself, St. John viii. 14.
anointed with it above his fellows, as it follows, ver. 8. words repeated and
applied expressly to him by St. Paul, Heb. i. 9. So full that he pours out upon
us, pours in all we have. We are but empty vessels, till he pour into us;
without grace, or any good, till he pour it in, diffusa in, as well as effusa
ex, it is spread abroad in our hearts, says the Apostle, Romans v. 5. as well as
spread upon his lips.

Yet is our fullness but the fullness of earthy pitchers, but five or six firkins
a piece at most when they are filled to the brim: His fullness the fullness of
the fountain, that pours it self over all the neighboring Valleys, and yet
empties not it self, runs still as fresh as ever; only holds when there are no
more vessels, or the vessels there will hold no more. His fullness minds us
either of our emptiness or shallowness; and if grace, we have either in our
hearts or lips, we will deplore it: fill our eyes with tears, and our lips with
prayers, that he may fill our hearts with grace, make us some way partakers of
his fullness.

And that we need not doubt of, now it is gotten into his lips. They are the
conduits of his grace, they convey it to us. Three several graces we gather
from his lips.

1. His gracious Miracles; by his bare word he healed the Lame, and cured the
Blind, and restored the Sick, and cleans'd the Leper, and dispossessed the
Devils, and raised the dead. He spoke the word and all was done. Full of grace
indeed to do such deeds of grace, so willingly, so readily, so generally, and
in the lips indeed, when it was all done only by the word of his mouth.

2. The gracious instructions that proceeded out of his mouth; insomuch that
all wondered at it, says S. Luke iv. 22. He only taught with authority, and a
grace; all other teachers, the long winded Pharisee himself, but wind and
bubble to him, St. Matthew. vii. 29. ^

3. The gracious promises of the Gospel, pardon and forgiveness, grace, and
mercy, and peace, and heaven, and happiness; all fully preached and revealed by
him. By the word of his mouth were the heavens made, says David, made over now
to us, kept in store, provided and prepared for us, with that privilege too,
prae filiis hominum, before all the children of men, that were before us, that
they without us should not be made perfect, Heb. xi. 40.

We may without question apply prae filiis hominum to this point, to say here
also that his lips are fuller of grace then the children of men; for even the
officers of his enemies were forced to confess it long ago, S. John vii. 46.
Never any man spoke like this man; never so graciously, never so comfortably,
never so effectually, never so powerfully, never so sweetly, never so much
grace, and goodness, and glory.

And it is still diffusa, lasts still. His lips are his Ministers and Preachers,
and by them he still diffuses his graces daily to us, Labia Sacerdotis
custodiunt, Mal. ii. 7. they keep grace for others, even when they keep none
for themselves. The ministry of the Word and Sacraments, though it comes
sometimes through corrupt and putrid channels, is not defiled or made
unprofitable by it. Out of the childrens, that is, ignorant simple Ministers
mouths, sometimes God perfects praise, and makes the stones, the most stony and
obdurate sinner among them, cry out loud enough to do others good, to soften
others, though they continue hard and impenitent themselves.

The Sacraments (2.) are his lips too, in which grace is diffused, full grace
given and poured out upon us, poured in into us. Never grace so fully given as
in those holy Mysteries; there you see diffusa to the eye, the outward pouring
out the Wine, and must believe though you do not see the inward pouring out the
Spirit. Never so gracious words proceeded out of his mouth as those you hear
there. This is my Body which was given for you. This is my Blood which was shed
for you. Take and eat the one, Take and drink the other. What more abundant
grace? what higher favor than thus to have our lips, and mouths, and hearts
filled with himself, and all the benefits of himself? Wonder we may at it, for
it is a work of wonder, an ineffable mystery.

Gracious indeed always were his words. Come unto me all ye that are weary and
heavy laden, and I will refresh you, S. Matthew. xi. 28. I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance, S. Matthew. ix. 13. Fear not little flock,
for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you a kingdom, St. Luke xii. 32.
Ye that have followed me in the regeneration, shall sit on twelve thrones,
judging the twelve Tribes of Israel, S. Mat. xix. 28. God sent not his Son into
the world to condemn the world, but that the world through him should be saved,
S. John iii. 17. Behold I give you power to tread on Serpents and Scorpious,
and over all the power of the enemy, and nothing shall by any means hurt you,
S. Luke x. 19. He will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax, S. Mat. xii. 20. Lo I am with you always, even unto the end of the world,
S. Mat. xxviii. 20. Great and gracious effusions these, full of grace; yet to
give himself daily for our food and nourishment, and call us to it, is to set
seal to all those other sayings, to bring them home particularly to every one
of us, the very Amen and summing up of all the rest.

It Is time now to enquire whence all this fullness, all this fairness; Eo quod
Deus benedixit, reads one Transtation, because God has blessed him. Christ's
beauty is Gods blessing, all beauty is so, be it what it will; from him it
comes, is but a ray of that eternal beauty, that inaccessible light, that sum
pulchrum, as well as sum bonum, the everlasting brightness of the Father: all
the beauty of the mind and body, all the integrity and vigor of all our
powers, are merely from his blessing, not our merit; a good lesson from it, not
to be proud of any of them. Christ himself as man had not his beauty any other
way. No nor his grace neither. His Manhood could not merit the union of the
Godhead; it was the mere gift of God so to anoint the Humanity with the Deity,
without which he could not have been the Savior, could not have made
satisfaction for so infinite a mass of sins. Gods blessing merely it was, his
mere goodness and blessing so to contrive salvation to us, to enable the
Manhood with the Godhead, to go through the work of our Redemption. God so
loved the world, that he sent his Son into the world, in our mortal nature,
thus enabled, thus beautified, thus filled, that we might all be partakers of
his fullness.

4. Yet in the fourth place, though Christ as mere man could not deserve this
grace and beauty, yet when once the Manhood was united to the Godhead, then he
deserved the second blessing. Then propterea, therefore God has blessed him,
is as true a rendering as the other: then when being found in fashion as a man,
he humbled himself and became obedient unto death: then comes in St. Paul's
therefore or wherefore rightly, Phil. ii. 8, 9. Wherefore God also has highly
exalted him, and given him a name above every name, that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bow, that we should bow our selves in humility and
thankfulness unto him, that every tongue should confess, all tongues bless him,
and bless God for him, that we might praise him in the Church, in the midst of
the Congregation.

For a double blessing has Christ purchased to himself; a blessing upon his
Person, and a blessing upon his Church. By his Grace and Beauty he has first
purchased to himself a name, and then a Church, a glorious one too, Ephesians. v.
27. made himself the head of it. For it pleased God that in him should all
fullness dwell, it pleased him also by that fullness to reconcile all things to
himself, to make him the head of all, the Savior of them all, to bless him in
the ordinary style of Scripture, where children are called the blessing of the
Lord, to bless him with an everlasting seed, a Church and people to the end of
the world, do the gates of Hell what they can against it.

5. There remains nothing now but our Benedixit to answer God's, our blessing
to answer his. We to bless him again for all his blessings: For to that purpose
is both Christ's grace, and Gods blessing, all his blessings; therefore fullness
of grace in him, that it might be diffused and poured out upon us; therefore
diffused and poured out upon us, that we might pour out something for it. Been
fecit, for Benedixit, some good works or other, at least Benedixit for
Benedixit, good words for it; blessing for blessing.

Indeed it is but Benedixit here with God, but dixit and fecit, he said and it
was done: saying and doing are all one with God, should be so with us if we
would be like him; our deeds as good as our words, our piety as fair as our
pretenses, that is the only truly blessing God.

And the likest too to last in secula, to hold for ever. Good words and
praising God in words, is but the leaves of the tree of blessing; and leaves
you know will wither: the stock, and trunck is blessing God in earnest by good
works, by expressing the diffusions of this grace in our lives and actions, by
imitating and conforming our selves to the beauty of this beloved.

If he be so fair as you have seen it, how can we now but love him? if his lips
so full of grace, how can we but delight to hear him, to hear his word? If
blessed, how can we less then strive to be partakers of his blessing? If for
ever, how can we but desire to be ever with him, perpetually attending him? If
his beauty was Gods blessing, let us humbly acknowledge ours comes all from
him. If the grace of his lips were the blessing of Gods, let us know we are not
able of our selves to speak so much as a good word as of our selves. If again
he was therefore blessed because he was so beautiful, and so diffused his
grace, used both his beauty and eloquence to bring about the children of men to
become the children of God; let us so employ those smaller glimmerings of
beauty and gifts of grace we have, to the service and glory of God and his
Christ.

We dote much upon worldly beauties, we think, we talk, we dream of them, our
minds and affections are ever on them, wholly after them. Why do we not so on
Christ, and after him? he is the fairest of ten thousand, Solomon in all his
glory not like him: none of all the Sons of Adam comes near him. Why do we not
then delight to look upon him, to discourse with him, to talk of him, to be
ever with him? What Is the reason we do not season our labors, our recreations,
our retirements, our discourses with him?

We are easily won with fair words and gracious speeches. Lo here are lips the
most eloquent that ever were; why do we not even hang upon them? why do we not
with the Spouse in the Canticles desire him to kiss us with the kisses of his
lips, to communicate his fullness to us? Indeed I can render no cause at all,
but that we are so immerst in flesh, and earthly beauties, that we cannot see
the true heavenly beauty of Christ, or we do not believe it.

And yet this Jesus is every where to be seen, his Ministers, his Word, his
daily Grace preventing, directing, and assisting, preserving and delivering us;
the creatures plainly and evidently enough discover him daily to us.

But to day we have a fairer discovery and sight of him. This Jesus that is so
fair, this Jesus so full of grace, this Jesus so blessed of God for ever, is
this day presented to us in his Blessed Sacrament: there is he himself in all
his beauty, all his fullness. Say we then to him, Come in thou blessed of the
Lord, come in, we have made ready and prepared the house for thee and for thy
Camels, for thy self and those consecrated elements that carry and convey thee.
Get we our vessels ready, and shut the door to us, as the poor Widow did shut
out all worldly thoughts and wandering fancies, that he may pour out his oil,
his grace into them, till they be full. And pour we out our souls before him in
all devotion and humility, in all praise and thanksgiving. Is not the cup we
are to take, the cup of blessing, in the Apostles style? take we it then and
bless him with it, taste and see how gracious the Lord is; see and behold how
fair he is, how amiable and lovely, and be ravished with his beauty and
sweetness, and never think we can be satisfied with it, with seeing, or
hearing, or blessing him, but be always doing so for ever.

So shall he make us fair with his beauty, good with his grace, happy with his
blessedness, bring us one day to see his face in perfect beauty, and so see his
grace poured out into glory, there to bless, and praise, and magnify him for
ever.

THE SIXTH SERMON ON Christmas Day.
S. LUKE i. 68, 69. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and
redeemed his people.

And has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David.


IT IS a Blessed Day, our Blessed Saviors Birthday; and a blessed Text we have
here for it: both a Day and Text to bless him in. A Text top-full of blessings,
and a day wherein they came. Blessed Persons, and blessed doings, in the Text.
Blessed Persons, the Blessed God, our Blessed Lord, Blessed David, and a
Blessed People; for a redeemed people are so. Blessed are the people that are
in such a case. Blessed doings in it too. God blessing, and man blessing. God
visiting, redeeming, saving mightily, saving Israel: And one of Israel in the
name of all the rest mightily blessing him for so doing to it. All these
blessings as well remembered as came in the day. Never was Text so fraught with
blessings: never rose Day so fair with blessings: never saw Israel such a one
before: never shall Israel or any people see such a Day again for blessings
till we come into the land of blessedness.

All that can be said to dim it, is, that this is not the day that blessed
Zachary gave this blessing in; it may be nor was this the day that God gave
this blessing neither. Time it self runs upon such uneven wheels, that we are
fain to borrow hours and minutes to make up the reckoning of our years and
days. It Is enough that we count near it; 'twere enough if it were a day only
set apart by Holy Church to recount it in; though it were nothing near it,
nothing near the day when the Lord God of Israel thus visited and redeemed his
people. Our business is not to be exact Chronologers of the days of our
salvation, but exact performers of our Duties, our thanksgivings and praises
for it.

Good Zachary does it here before this Redemption was fully wrought, six months
before this Horn of salvation did appear. If we do it a few days before, or
after, it matters not. To bless God for it, that is the business. Only we must
be allowed a day to do it in either first or last. But the Church having pitched
it generally every where much about this time; We take it as we find it,
quarrel no more with the Church for doing it now, then we do with Zachary for
doing it then; when he more forestalled the time, then we can possibly mistake
it.

Being therefore come hither to day upon that account, the account of blessing
God, and having here a day of blessing, and a Text of blessing, we shall divide
the words into blessings too.

Gods blessing, and man's blessing; Gods blessing man, and man's blessing God
again.

I. Gods blessing has in it these particulars.

1. His visiting, he has visited. (2.) His redeeming us, and redeemed. (3.)
His saving or raising up a salvation for us. That salvation (4.) no mean or
little one, but a mighty salvation: so one of our translations. A salvation
(5.) with a horn to hold by, a horn of salvation; so the other, a sure
salvation. For us (6.) all of us, the very people to hold by, an universal
salvation. A salvation (7.) raised up; an eminent salvation. Raised up (8.) in
the right house, in the house of David, a royal, a glorious salvation. Raised
up lastly upon a right ground too; David's relation to him, his servant David,
or Gods goodness to his servants: a singular and especial salvation for them
above the rest. This is Gods blessing man, the first general with the
particulars.

II. Man's blessing God is the second, and that has these.

1. An acknowledgment of Gods blessings, and his blessedness, visiting,
redeeming, saving, etc. That blessings they are, and His they are, He visited,
He redeemed, etc. He therefore blessed for so doing.

2. A particular applying and setting our selves to bless him for them, a
Benedictus, a Hymn set and begun upon it.

3. A desire that others, even all would do so too, for (...) may have as well
(...) as (...) after it; Benedictus as well sit as est to follow it (for there
is neither here) so may be and is as well, a Wish that others would, as a Way
that we our selves may bless him by.

This is all man's blessing God, the poor pittances we bless him with;
acknowledgments, endeavors, and desires, all that we can give him for all his
blessings. A very short return however to be given him, such as it is. And to
Day however, a Day set apart to do it in.

For all these blessings either rose upon us with the Sun to day, or are to
rise from us e're it rise to morrow. Our Lords Nativity being the chief ground
both of Gods blessing us, and our blessing him. To day it was he began to
visit, to redeem, to save, to raise up his horn and ours. To day then sure we
to raise up our voices for it in a Benedictus, in Hymns and Praises. All that
is in the Text was on his part set on foot as it were to day. No reason in the
world but what is on ours should be so too. That it may, I shall first spread
Gods blessings here before you, so the better to stir up yours.

I. Man's blessing indeed it is that stands first here; yet Gods it is that is
so. He first blesses before we bless, before we either can, or can think to do
it. But you must know it is a day, and a business too, where all things seem
out of order at the first. High things made low, and low things high: the first
made last, and the last first. God made man, and man God. The very course of
Nature out of order, quite. No wonder then that the words that tell us it are
so too; that our blessing should be set before Gods. However, this certainly it
must teach us, that the first thing we ought now to think or speak of, is
blessing God. Yet the way to do that best, is to understand His blessings
first; I shall take them in their order: so his Visiting I begin with.

Indeed, there they begin all, (...), that is the rise of all Gods blessings.
His looking down upon us, or looking over us (so the word signifies before it
comes to visiting) is the source of all his mercies. There is nothing else to
cause them, but that loving eye he has to his poor creatures, the pleasure he
takes to look upon them. That here brings him down to visit them.

For I must tell you now this visiting is a coming down, down from heaven, down
from his glory, down from himself; a coming to purpose, and down to purpose,
when he came so low as flesh; and a visiting indeed, when he came so near us.
He visited in former times but by his proxies, by his Angels, the ushers of his
glory, or by his Prophets, or by a Cloud, or by a Fire. Here it was first he
visited in person. (...) was but a looking down from heaven till now, a looking
on us at a distance, (and that was a blessing too, that he would any way look
upon such poor worms as we) it could not be construed visiting properly till
this day came. Now first it is so without a figure.

Yet is not good old Zachary too quick? Does he not cry out (...) too soon? our
blessed Savior was not yet born; how says he then, the Lord has visited and
redeemed his people? Answer we might, the good old man here prophesied ('it is
said so just the verse before) and after the manner of Prophets, speaks of
things to come as done already. But we need not this strain to help us out.
Christ was already really come down from heaven, had been now three months
incarnate, had begun his visit, had beheld the lowliness of his handmaid, says
his Blessed Mother, ver. 48. The Angel had told her twelve weeks since, Her
Lord was with her, ver. 28. of this Chapter. Blessed Zachary understood it then
(no less than his Wife Elizabeth that proclaimed it, ver. 43.) though he could
not speak it. As soon as he could he does, and breaks out into a Song of Praise
(that was his prophesying) for this new made Visit, this new raised Salvation.

That word slipped e're I was aware, comes in before the time. But it is well it
did; you might else perhaps have mistaken visiting for punishing: so it went
commonliest in Scripture till to day. It does not here. This business has
altered it from its old acception. And yet punishing sometimes is a blessing
too. It Is a mercy we often stand in need of to bring us home to God. But it is
infinitely a greater, when he comes himself to fetch us home, as now he does.
Shall I show you how great it is?

Why, then (1.) It is a visit of Grace and honor that he made us here; he
visited us as great and noble persons do their inferiors, to do them honor.
Hence, Whence it is to me (says St. Eliz.) that the Mother of my Lord should
come unto me, etc. ver. 43. She, good soul, knew not how to value such an
honor, nor whence it was. Whence then is this, O Lord, that the Lord of that
Blessed Mother, my Lord himself should come unto me? That Is a far higher
honor, and no reason of it to be given, but that so it shall be done to those
whom this great King of Heaven and Earth delights thus to honor. It Is a
blessing first, this that we speak of, by which God owns and honors us.

2. It was a visit of Charity. He visited his people as charitable men do the
poor man's house, to seek some occasion to bestow an Alms. He went about doing
good, says S. Peter, Acts x. 38. As poor as he was, (and the Apostle tells us,
poor he was) he had a bag for the poor, S. John xii. 6. and for our sakes it
was he became poor, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. viii. 9. emptied bag and himself, and
all to make us rich. His visit now (2.) is a blessing that makes us rich.

3. It was a visit of Service too. He visited us as the Physician does his
Patient, to serve his necessity, to cure and recover him. The innumerable
multitudes of the sick and lame, and blind, and deaf, and dumb, and Lepers, and
possessed that he daily healed and cured, will sufficiently evince he visited
them also as a Physician. So 'twas a blessing (3.) that cures all diseases,
makes all sound and whole again.

4. His visit (4.) was a visit of brotherly love and kindness. He visited us as
David did his Brethren, to supply their wants, carry them provision and take
their pledge, 1 Samuel xvii. 17. He did so, and much more, becomes himself by
this visit our Provision, makes his Body our meat, and his Blood our drink, and
himself our pledge; supplies all our defects, and wants, and enters himself
body for body, and soul for soul to make all good. This a visiting no brother
could do more, no brother so much.

5. His visit (5.) was not of petty kindnesses, but great mercies, abundant
mercies too. He visited us as holy David says he does the earth, Psalm. lxv. 9,
11. Thou visitest the earth and blessest it; thou make it very plenteous.
Thou waterest her furrows, thou sendest rain into the little Valleys thereof;
thou make it soft with the drops of rain, and blessest the increase of it. He
not only furnishes our necessities, but replenishes us with abundances, makes
us soft, and plump, and fat, and fruitful by his heavenly dews and showers.
This (5.) a visit of abundant superabundant mercies.

6. His visit (6.) was a visit of Friendship, and that is more yet. He visited
us as blessed Mary did her Cousin Elizabeth, came to us to rejoice and be merry
with us. So acquainted has he now made himself with us by this visit, that he
now vouchsafes to call us friends, S. John xv. 15. he eats, and drinks, and
dwells, and tarries with us, makes it his delight to be among the sons of men.
This is a visit I know not a name good enough to give it.

And yet lastly, his visit was not of a common and ordinary friendship neither,
but of a friendship that holds to death. He visited us as the Priest or
Confessor does the dying man. When health, and strength, and mirth, and
Physicians, and Friends, have all given us over, he stands by and comforts us,
and leaves us not till he has fitted us wholly to his own bosom. A visit of
everlasting friendship, or an everlasting visit was this visit in the Text.

Thus I have showed you a sevenfold visit, that our Lord has made us, made
Gods first blessing into seven. A visit of Honor, a visit of Charity, a visit
of Service, a visit of Kindness, a visit of Mercy, a visit of Friendship, and a
visit of everlasting Love. All these ways he visited his people, and still
visits them all the ways he can imagine to bless them and do them good.

And yet I should have thought I had forgot one, if it did not fall in with the
blessing we are to consider next; Redeeming. For he visited us also as he is
said to do the children of Israel, Genesis l. 24. to bring us out of the Land of
Egypt, out of the house of bondage. He visited us to redeem us, or visited and
redeemed.

2. Now if redeemed, Captives it seems we were. And so we were, under a
fourfold Captivity. To the World, to Sin, to Death, and to the Devil.

The World (1.) that had ensnared and fettered us, so wholly taken us, that it
had taken away our names, and we were called by the name of the World, instead
of that of Men, as if we were grown such worldlings that we had even lost our
natures and our names, even the best of us; the Elect are sometimes called so
too. To redeem our honors and us thence, God sent his Son, says S. John iii.
17. and he chose us out of it, St. John xv. 19.

Sin (2.) that had made us Captives too, chained us up so fast, that the best
of us cannot but cry out sometimes O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me? Romans 7. 24. And none but this visitour, could or can* God through Jesus
Christ, so S. Paul presently adds upon it, and would have us thank and bless
him for it.

Death that had also got dominion over us: for no more dominion, Romans vi. 9.
signifies it had it once, and kept us shrewdly under, Romans v. 17. But Christ
Jesus by his appearing (they are the Apostles words) has abolished death, 2 Timothy i. 10. Made us free from sin and death, Romans viii. 2.

The Devil (4.) he took us captive also at his will, 2 Timothy ii. 26. But for
this purpose was the Son of God manifested, says S. John, that he might destroy
the works of the Devil, 1 S. John iii. 8. And as high as the Fiend carries, it
he will bruise him under our feet, Romans xvi. 20. Now to be delivered from such
masters as these is a blessing without question.

All the question is, how either Zachary could say so long before our Savior's
Birth, or we so presently upon it, he has redeemed, when S. Paul says 'twas by
his Blood, Col. i. 22. S. Peter, through his death, 1 S. Peter i. 19. Why, very
well both the one and the other. At his Birth was this Redemption first begun,
the foundation laid; at his Death 'twas finished. In his Incarnation and
Nativity he took the flesh that died, and the blood he shed: and we might truly
have been said to be redeemed by his Blood, though he had not shed it, and by
his Death though he had not died; because he had already taken on our flesh and
blood, and from that very moment became mortal and began to dye: or, to speak a
little plainer, He brought the price of our Redemption with him at his Birth,
He paid it down for us at his Death. The Writings as it were and Covenants
between God and Him about it were agreed on at his Birth, were engrossing all
his Life, and sealed by him at his Death. So it is as true to day as any day: He
redeemed. And had not this day been first in the business, the other could not
have been at all, or first, or last. O Blessed Day, that have thus laid the
foundation of all our good ones. O ever Blessed Lord who have thus visited and
redeemed us; what shall we do unto thee, how shall we bless thee?

3. Nay and yet (3.) thou have saved us too. That Is the next blessing to be
considered. And it is worth considering.

For redeemed indeed we might be, and yet not saved. Redeemed and yet fall
again into the same bad hands or into worse: redeemed from evils past, and yet
perish by some to come. It Is this salvation that makes all safe.

Where (1.) we are saved from our enemies, and from the hand of all that hate
us, ver. 71. every thing that may hereafter hurt us, as well as we were
redeemed from all that did. Nor life, nor death, nor height, nor depth, nor any
thing can separate us now from the love of God in Christ Jesus, Romans viii. 39.
all things shall continually work for good, ver. 28. all work henceforward for
our salvation.

Especially seeing he saves us (2.) from our sins, as the Angel tells us, S.
Mat. i. 21. Does not redeem us only from the slavery of our former sins, and
the punishments we lay sadly under for them, but preserves and saves us from
slipping back into the old, and from falling into new ones. It Is a continual
salvation.

Nay (3.) It Is an eternal one too he saves us with, He the Author of eternal
salvation, Heb. v. 9. There we shall be safe indeed. All salvations here may
have some clouds to darken them, some winds to shake them, something sometimes
to interrupt them, somewhat or other to tarnish or soil their glory. New
enemies may be daily raised up to us. Sin will be always bustling with us: here
we had need to be saved and saved again, daily and hourly saved, but with this
salvation once saved and saved for ever. Well may we pray with holy David,
Psalm. cvi. 4. O visit us with this salvation. And well may we term it now, as
our Translation does, a mighty salvation.

4. And mighty sure we may justly style it. For it required a mighty Power, a
mighty Person, a mighty Price, and mighty Works to bring such mighty things to
pass. And it had them all.

1. A mighty Power: Almighty too. No created Power could do it. Horse and man
and all things else but vain things to save a man, to deliver his soul from the
hand of Hell, Psalm. xxxiii. 17. lxxxix. 47.

2. A mighty Person, the very God of might. I the Savior, and besides me none,
Isa. xliii. 11. No other person able to effect it.

3. A mighty price it cost. No corruptible things says S. Peter, 1 Pet. i. 18.
Nothing but the blood of the Son of God, the precious Blood of Jesus Christ, no
less could compass it.

4. Mighty works lastly, and mighty workings to work things about, Miracles and
wonders good store it cost to accomplish the work of our salvation, such as he
only who was mighty before God and all the people, St. Luke xxiv. 19. could
bring to pass. And this adds much to the glory of this salvation, that it was
done by such great hands and ways as these.

But not the works only that wrought it, but the works it wrought speak the
salvation mighty too. Mighty for certain, which neither the unworthiness of our
persons, nor the weaknesses of our natures, nor the habits of our sins, nor the
imperfections of our works, nor the malice of our enemies, nor any power, or
strength, or subtilty of men or Devils were able to hinder or control, but
that maugre all, it spread it self to the very ends of the earth, carried all
before it. A salvation we may trust to, we need not fear, in this mercy of the
most highest we shall not miscarry.

5. For (5.) we have here gotten a good Horn to hold by, A horn of salvation
the original gives it; a salvation not only strong but sure. Salvation, that is
a Savior too, one that we may confidently lay hold on, one that neither can
nor will deceive or fail us: For,

1. He is a King; so the Horn signifies in the Prophetic phrase, Dan. vii. 8.
The four, and seven, and ten Horns there, so many Kings; and it stands not with
the honor of a King to deceive or disappoint us.

2. And he is not a King without a Kingdom. He has a Kingdom (2.) and power to
help us. The Horn signifies that too in the style of Prophecy, because in the
Horn lies the strength, and power, and dominion as it were of the creature that
has it. And the power of a Kingdom I can tell you is good hold.

3. And this Kingdom (3.) is not an ordinary Kingdom neither. As this Horn is
above the Flesh, so this Kingdom too; not of this world, St. John xviii. 36.
the likelier still to conduct us to the other, and there set us safe.

And yet likelier (4.) because it is not a fading but a durable one, a horn
that will hold. Saul was anointed with a vial of Oil, 1 Samuel x. 1. to intimate
the brittleness and shortness of his Kingdom; but David with a horn, 1 Samuel
xvi. 13. to signify the continuance and strength of his; that it should be a
throne established for ever, 1 Kings ii. 45. And made good it was by this days
Horn raised out of his house; of whose Kingdom there shall be no end, says the
Prophet. So no failure to be afraid of here. It is a sure salvation we have by
him.

And if I may now have the liberty to tell you more particularly what kind of
Horn he may most fairly be said to be, you will be the more ready to catch at
it.

He is then (1.) a Horn of Oil to anoint us also Kings and Priests; for so he
makes us, says S. John, Rev. i. 6.

He is (2.) the true Cornu-copia, the Horn of plenty; full of grace and truth,
and all good things else: for out of his fullness we all receive ours, says the
same Apostle, S. John i. 16.

He is (3.) one of the Horns of the Altar, or indeed all of them, whither we
may safely fly in all our dangers and distresses; where we may lie secure when
all the world has left us. A sure hold now you will confess, that is so high,
so strong, so powerful, so above corruption, so lasting, so everlasting, so
full of lasting honors, plenties, and securities.

6. And yet as mighty, and sure, and as easy to catch hold on as this
salvation is, were it not for this (...) were it not for us, had we no claim,
no interest in it, what were we the better either for the Horn or the
salvation? It Is this for us, that comes next to be considered, that raises up
our horns, that makes us glad.

For this (...) this (...) is not the Jews alone. They had the first title,
right indeed, but not the only to it. There is an Israel of God (peace be upon
it says the Apostle, Gal. vi. 16.) as well as an Israel after the flesh. There
are Sons of Abraham's Faith as well as of his body, to whom this salvation is
sent as well as unto them. Blessed Zachary brings in those that sit in darkness
and in the shadow of death into the number, ver. 79. the Gentiles as well as
Jews into the light of it; it is omni populo, to all people whatsoever, in the
Angels message, chap. 2. of our Evangelist, ver. 10.

All people, and all degrees and orders of them, rich and poor, one with
another; so populus signifies, not the plebem taken out of it, not the lowest
or meanest of the people escaped or forgotten. It Is an universal salvation that
is here set up. God does not streighten heaven, though men do. He would have
all men to be saved, 1 Timothy ii. 4. (though some men need a horn indeed to get
such a salvation down, yet so it is) and to this purpose he has raised this
salvation up, which is the next advance of this salvation we are next to handle.

7. And he raised it (1.) as a Beacon or Standard upon a Hill, that all Nations
and Languages, all kind of persons might flock in unto it.

Raised it (2.) as from the Dead, (...). All hopes of it now were in the dust.
For the temporal condition of the Jews; their enemies oppressed them, and had
them in subjection; long they had so; and all the attempts for deliverance had
been so often baffled, that they durst hope no longer. For their spiritual
condition, both Jew and Gentile were all concluded under sin; the one blinded
with his own superstition, the other shut up in ignorance, and darkness, when
on a sudden was this dayspring from on high, this horn, this ray of light (for
I see not why this Horn, as well as those of Moses face, may not be construed
so) this ray, this Horn, I say, raised up to light them both into the ways of
salvation.

Raised up (3.) as the horn out of the flesh, a Savior raised up thence to
day. Though from above he came, into the flesh he came, that thence being made
sensible of our infirmities, he might the easier bear with them.

Raised up lastly to raise up our thoughts from all inferior expectations, and
fix them where they should be for deliverance and salvation, Cornu exaltatum,
this salvation eminent for the vastness, the opportunity, the convenience, the
proportion it carries: the seventh particular we observe in Gods blessing, the
fourth advancing of this salvation.

8. There is an eighth: And it is salvation in the right house. The Lord of the
Ascendant of our salvation in the Kingly house, the best house to make it the
more glorious, the house of David. Men would willingly be saved honorably, by
a person of honor rather then a base hand. Men love not to owe their lives or
honors to an unworthy person, would be beholding to the right King rather than
an Usurper for them. The House of David here hits right for that. And we cannot
but acknowledge a huge blessing in it, even upon this account, that how poorly,
sneakingly, and basely we every day betray our selves into the hands of our
enemies, we are yet thus by Christ brought off with honor, and enjoy by him an
honorable salvation.

9. And yet there is one thing more we would desire, not to owe our selves to a
villain, or a miscreant, or to a wicked and ungodly house or person. To crown
his blessings, God has contrived them in the house of his servant David. So God
honors his servants; so he encourages them to be good. They are the persons,
theirs the houses where salvation dwells. They are the pillars of the earth. To
David his servant, and Abraham his servant, and Isaac his servant, and Israel
his servant, so run the promises both of a Savior and salvation, to them and
to their seed for evermore.

Sum we up Gods blessings now. Gracious Visits, perfect Redemptions, Salvations
many, mighty, sure, general, eminent, seasonable, honorable salvations to us
and ours, everlasting too: what would you more? there is nothing behind now but
our blessing God for all these blessings. I hope that shall not be so long, for
it is but little that is required for so much; and but three particulars that
make it up. An acknowledgment of Gods blessings, a setting our selves to some
way to bless him for them; and a desire that all would do so too.

II. The acknowledgment begins it, the acknowledging of Gods blessings the
first part of ours; so sure a point of it, that Confiteri, to acknowledge or
confess the blessing, or him that sends it, is above sixty times in the Book of
Psalms set down for blessing. And whole Psalms you have that are nothing else
but an enumeration and catalogue of blessings, the 66. the 103. the 104. the
105. the 107. the 136. And the more particular we are in it, the more we bless
him. You have heard how particular Zachary is in it here. He has visited, he
has redeemed, etc. given us nine particulars, leaves neither gift nor giver
unacknowledged. Honorable it is to do so: honorable to reveal, to reveal the
works of God, says the Angel, Job xii. 7. honorable to him, honorable to us:
we cannot honor God without it, nor expect honor from him, if we will not
acknowledge it. Come, and I will tell you what he has done for my soul, is the
best way to begin our blessing.

2. But it is but to begin it. We must go on to the next way of blessing, set
close to it; (...) from (...), and Benedictus from Benedicere; both tell us
there is much of it in words. Only verbum is factum, and dicere is facere,
sometimes in the holy page. So we must take both words and deeds to do it with.
The word by the hand of thy servant, as the Scripture sometimes speaks, is the
best way to bless him with. Yet to our benedicere in the first sense first. And
to do that, to give him good words is the least that we can give him: let us be
sure then not to grudge him them. Confess we that he is good, and gracious, and
merciful, full of mercy, plenteous in goodness and truth. Streighten we not his
visits, stifle we not his Redemption, coop we not up his salvation to a corner,
suffer we it to run large and full, that the whole world may bless him for it.

Let us (2.) speak it out. Gods blessings were not done in a corner, no more
must ours. Public and solemn they would be. And the Church has made it (and
Text) part of the public service, that every one might bear a part in blessing
God. Every one of us, and every thing of us too, our souls and all that is
within us, heart and mind, and all. All within us and all without us, our lips
praise him, our mouths praise him, our hands praise him, our flesh praise him,
our bones say who is like him, all the members of our body turn themselves into
tongues to bless him.

Bless we him (3.) in set Hymns on purpose, in good votes and wishes, that his
Church may prosper, his Name be magnified, his Glory advanced to the highest
pitch, for been dicere, is been vovere too.

And sanctificare is no less. To bless is sometimes to sanctify. So God
blessed the seventh day, is God hallowed it; and to sanctify a day, or place
to bless him in, is to bless him by his own pattern that he has set us: well
said, if well done, I dare assure you, to set apart both times and places to
bless him in.

2. But dicere is not all, sung never sweetly, said never so well. The Lord
bless thee in common phrase is, the Lord do good unto thee. Indeed Gods
blessing is always such; his benedicere is been facere. His saying is a doing,
his blessing a making blessed. It Is fit our blessing should be somewhat like
it. To himself indeed we can do no good. He neither wants it, nor can be
bettered by it. To His we may. Though not to his head, yet to his feet: The
poor; we may bless them. And the blessing them is blessing him: for inasmuch as
ye have done it unto these, you have done it unto me, says he himself, S. Mat.
xxv. And truly it must needs be a poor blessing that cannot reach his feet. Nay
it is a poor one if it reach no higher.

Indeed he that gives alms, he sacrifices praise, says the Son of Syrach,
Ecclus. xxxv. 2. And praise is blessing. But to bless is to honor too. And
honor the Lord with thy substance, says a wiser then the Son of Syrach, Prove.
iv. Something must be done to his own honor. So nething given or offered to
support that here among us; for to bless is to give thanks, and that intimates
somewhat to be given to him, as well as said or spoken to him. It will else be
verba dare, and not gratias, a mere cheating him of our thanks. As soon as
Naaman the Syrian was cured of his Leprosy, he begs of the Prophet to accept a
blessing for it. Nature had taught him God was to be blessed so, 2 Kings v. 15.
When the Captains of Israel had found by their whole numbers how God had
delivered them, they come with a blessing in their hands of sixteen thousand
seven hundred and fifty shekels of gold for the house of God, Numb. xxxi. 52.
David and his people the story tells us blessed him so too, 1 Chronicles. xxix. 20,
21. offered incredible sums of Gold and Silver for the service of the house of
God. And let me tell you, without begging for it, that the House of God being
now by this Visit in the Text made the very office of salvation, where he daily
visits us, and entertains us with his Body and Blood, with holy conferences and
discourses, where he seals us every day to the day of Redemption, and offers to
us all the means of salvation; there can be no way of blessing God so
answerable and proportionable to his thus blessing us, as thus blessing him
again.

Yet where there is nothing thus to bless him with, there is yet another way of
blessing him; nay where there are other ways, this must be too. To bless him is
to glorify him, and a good life does that, S. Mat. v. 16. By our ill lives the
name of God is blasphemed, says the Apostle, Romans ii. 24. Then by our good ones
it must needs be blessed. Zachary seems to point at this way of blessing, when he
tells us we were delivered that we might serve our Visitor in holiness and
righteousness, ver. 75. And thus he that has neither eyes to look up, nor hands
to lift up, nor feet to go up to the house of blessing, nor tongue to bless
him, nor so much as a Cross to bless himself or God, not a mite to throw into
his treasure, may truly bless him, and be accepted. To this and all the other
ways of blessing is the Text set. And let all now come in and bear a part in
blessing. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, is now lastly a call to call them
in.

The Prophet David does so, Psalm. cxlviii. Sun, and Moon, and Stars, and Light,
Heaven, and Earth, and Waters, both above and under them, Dragons, and Deeps,
Fire, and Hail, and Snow, and Vapor, and Wind, and Storm, and Hills, and
Trees, and Beasts, and Cattle, Worms, and Fowl, Kings and People, Princes and
Judges, Young men and Maidens, Old men and Children, all Sexes, Degrees, and
Ages, Men and Angels, and all kind of Beings does he call on to praise, and
bless, and magnify their Creator: Indeed the whole Creation is blessed by this
Visit, so it is but just they should bless God for it.

Yet how should all these things we mentioned do it? many of them have no
tongues to say, many no sense to understand it. Why? they do it yet: The Sun by
day, the Moon by night may become torches to light his servants service. The
Earth brings forth her Corn and Wine to furnish out his Table; the deep gives
up her Riches, and brings home Golds and Silks to adorn his Holy Altars; the
Earth brings Stones and Minerals, the Hills and Mountains Trees and Cedars to
his House, the fire kindles Tapers for it, all the meteors of the air, and all
the seasons of the years do somewhat, every wind blows somewhat toward it. The
very Birds and Swallows get as near the Altar as they can to bless him; the
Snow, and Cold, and Ice crowd as near Christmas as they can, to bear a part in
this great Solemnity, in our solemnest thanksgivings. Only he that has no need
of this visit, no need of Christ or his Redemption, that cares not to be saved,
needs keep no Christmas, may stand out, or sit, or do what he will at this
Benedictus.

But sure when all things else thus come in throngs to bless him, and even Ice
and Snow come hot and eager to this Feast, and willingly melt themselves into
his praises, we should not, methinks, come coldly on to bless him, but come and
bring our Families, and Children, and Neighbors with us to make the Choire as
full as possibly we can. Tell one another what Christ did to day, what he every
day does for us, how he visited us to day, how he still visits us every
morning, how he redeemed us to day, how he does day by day from one ill or
other; how he began to day to raise up salvation for us, and will not leave
raising it for us till we can rise no higher. Tell we our children next, how in
this God had respect to David his anointed, and that they must learn to have
so. How he had regard to David his Servant, will have so to them if they be his
servants let them therefore be sure they be so, fit them thus to sing their
parts betimes in Hymns, and Anthems, and praises to their God; that they that
cannot speak, may yet lisp it out, and when they can speak out, sing it loud
and shrill, that the hollow Vaults and Arches may echo and rebound his
praises: not your Children only, but stones also be thus raised up for children
unto Abraham. It Is in the power of your hands (grave Senators, Fathers, and
Brethren) to make the stones cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the
timber to answer, Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power to him that has
raised up to us so great salvation.

I look upon this great Solemnity of yours as a mere design of blessing God,
and the Torches that light you hither as so many lights set up to make the
light of your good works shine the greater. You have not only these blessings
in the Text, but millions more to invite you to it. Not to repeat the blessings
and deliverances I have told you; all blessings and salvations else you owe to
this days Visit of the Almighty, to this Horn he raised up for us. Let us bring
them also into the roll, and thus bless him for them.

Some of you he has delivered out of trouble, bless you him for that. Some of
you he has recovered lately from a sickness, bless you him for that. Some of
you he has delivered lately from a danger, bless you him for that. You he has
visited in distress, visit you his Temples, his poor and needy servants, and
bless him so. You he has redeemed of late from the gates of death, redeem you
the time hereafter, walk circumspectly and soberly, and for the rest of your
life serve him better, and bless him so. You he has saved out of the hands of
Heretics and Seducers, save you your selves henceforward from that untoward
generation, and come no more among them. Pay him visit for visit, redemption
for redemption, one salvation for another, and bless him so. You he has raised
to some honor and preferment, raise you up some pillar of thanksgiving for it.
You he has raised to an estate, raise you up some memorial to him out of it.
You he has raised out of nothing, you out of a desperate condition, your house
and family out of ruins; help you God again to raise his house, and he will
say, you bless him for it. Let there be some token of gratitude set up here, as
God set the Rainbow in the Clouds, Genesis xix. 15. that he may look upon it, and
remember, and save you in the time of need, with his mercy for it.

In a word, God has signally and strangely visited us of late years with his
salvation, redeemed us from our enemies, and all that hate us; those Horns,
that like those in Daniel pusht down and scattered all before them, that threw
down our Temples, took away our daily service, set up the abomination of
desolation in these holy places, Horse, and Foot, and Arms, and all the
instruments of desolation, and stamped upon all holy things and persons: he has
raised us up a mightier horn to make those horns draw in theirs; a horn in the
house of his servant David: restored our David his anointed to us, kept him his
servant, returned him as he went, safe and sound in the principles of his
Religion, restored him and his house, us and ours, kept them at least from
utterly pulling down. O that men would therefore now praise the Lord for his
goodness, and declare the wonders he has lately done for the children of men.

As many Scarlets now as you please to adorn your gratitudes, as many Torches
now as you please that we may see them, what solemn processions now as you
judge fit to make to evidence your blessings to the Lord God of Israel, for
what he has done for us, for either our souls, bodies or estates. So shall God
again bless all your blessings to you; the poor shall bless us, and the Church
shall bless us, and these walls shall bless us, and the children yet unborn
shall bless us, and all our blessings be continued to us; we shall be visited,
and redeemed, and saved upon all occasions, in all necessities, on every hand,
and at every turn, till he bring us at last to his eternal salvation, to sing
eternal Allelujahs, everlasting Benedictus's, Hymns, and Praises, with all the
Blessed Saints and Angels to God blessed for evermore.

To this glorious blessing he bring us all, who this day came to visit us, that
he might, Jesus Christ. To whom, etc.

THE SEVENTH SERMON ON Christmas Day.
2 COR. viii. 9. For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might
be rich.
FOR ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. And do you know any grace of
the Lord Jesus Christ like this days grace, the grace of Christmas? any grace
or favor like that grace and favor he this day did us, when he so graced our
nature as to take it on him? surely, whether this grace be his becoming poor,
or our making rich, never was it seen more then this day it was. Never was he
poorer then this day showed him, a poor little naked thing in rags. Never we
rich till this day made us so, when he being rich became poor, that we being
poor might be made rich.

And rich not in the worst, but in the best riches; rich in grace, but above
all grace in Christmas grace, in love and liberality to the poor, the very
grace which the Apostle brings in the poverty of Christ here to persuade the
Corinthians to. See (says he) that ye abound in this grace also, ver. 7. For ye
know the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. He was so full of it, that though he
was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, made himself poor to make us rich;
that being made rich we might be rich: To the poor, bestow some of his own
riches upon him again, some at least upon him who gave us all, supply his
poverty who enricht ours, be the more bountiful to the poor, seeing he is now
become like one of them, that as through his poverty we were made rich, so even
in our very poverty we might abound also to the riches of liberality. So the
Macedonians did, ver. 2. So would he fain have the Corinthians too here, in
covert terms; so he would be understood, and so are we to understand him.
Christ's poverty here brought in as an argument to persuade to liberality.

A grace so correspondent to the pattern of the Lord Jesus, so answerable both
to the purport of Christmas and the purpose of the Text, that it is hard to say
whether the Day better explains the Text, or the Text the Day. For whether we
take the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ toward us, downward, or the grace of
the Lord Jesus in us toward him upward: whether for the grace he did us in
becoming poor for our sakes, or for the grace we are to show to his poor
members for his sake again, for his becoming poor, and making of us rich: I see
not how or where I could have chosen a better Christmas Text, a Text for the
Day, or a Day for the Text.

For here is both the Doctrine and Use of Christmas; the Doctrine of Christ's
free Grace, and the free Use and Application of it too. The Doctrine, That our
Lord Jesus Christ though he was rich, yet for our sakes he became poor, that
through his poverty we might be rich.

The Use, That we are to know it, and acknowledge it, know it for a grace and
favor; yea know the grace, know it for a pattern too: For ye know it, that is,
to that end ye know it, to take pattern by it, to return grace again for grace,
to show grace to his, for his grace to us, to supply his poverty in his
members, for his so gracious supplying ours, to answer the riches of his grace
with being rich; in this grace also, in the grace of love and charity to the
poor, the best way to be rich, and to abound to the riches of his glory.

But more to appropriate it to the Day, you may please to take it in these
particulars. Christ's Birth, The Christians benefit, The evidence of both. The
Inference upon all.

1. Christ's Birth. Egenus factus, when he became poor.

2. The Christians benefit. Propter nos it was, for your sakes it was, and ut
vos divites, That ye through his poverty might be rich.

3. The evidence of both, Scitis, no less then that of Science, ye know it.

4. The inference upon all, scitis enim, For ye know it, for what? for a grace
and favor; Scitis gratiam, the first. And ut vos divites essetis, that we
might be rich in the same grace he was: Then secondly, that ye may do
answerable to your knowledge; for propter nos it is, for our sakes he became
poor, that for his sake we might look the better upon the poor; for that he
made us rich, that we might be rich in good works; for that he made us rich by
the way of poverty, that we might know our riches have a near relation to
poverty, are given us for the poor, as well as for our selves.

These are the parts, and of all these the sum is, that Christ's Birth is the
Christians benefit; the knowledge of which ought to stir us up to Christian
Charity: or nearer the phrase of the Text, that our Lord Jesus Christ, though
he was rich, became poor to make us rich; rich in all good gifts and graces,
but especially in this of love and mercy to the poor; came down in grace to us
to that purpose, both in the Text, and in the Day, the whole and business of
them both. I shall prosecute it in order, and begin with those words in the
Text that seem to point us to the Birth of Christ; egenus factus: and if that
were the original, the factus would be plain for his being made man. But as it
is, it is plain enough, he could not become poor but by becoming man.

I. For there is not so poor a thing as man; indeed no creature poor but man:
no creature lost its estate, and place, and honor, thrust out of doors, and
turned as it were a begging abroad into the wide world, but man. Other
creatures keep their nature and place to which they were created; man only he
kept nothing; first lost his clothes, his robe of innocence, in which he was
first clad, was then turned naked out of his dwelling, out of Paradise, only
his nakedness covered a little with a few ragged leaves, fain upon that to
work, and toil, and labor for his living to get his bread; forced to run here
and there about the world to get it; all the creatures that were lately but his
servants stood gazing and wondering at him, and knew him not, would no longer
own him for their Lord, he looked so poor, so despicable when he had sinned;
they that before were all at his command, by the dominion he had received over
them, now neither obeyed his command, nor knew his voice, so perfectly had he
lost the very semblance of their late great Master, so perfectly poor was he
become. The Devil kept a power, and awe, and Principality, though he lost his
seat; got a Kingdom though he lost his glory: But man lost all, glory and
grace, riches and honor, estate and power, peace and ease, shelter, and
safety, and all: so that to become poor can be nothing else but to become man;
and Christ's becoming so, must be his becoming man.

Yet not to know it only, but to know it for a grace, as St. Paul would have
us, we must know who it is that became poor. (2.) How poor he became who became
poor. (3.) What he was still, though he became poor. Our Lord Jesus Christ,
says the Text, he it is, egenus factus, he came to very want, (...), to a kind
of penury like that of beggars. Yet (...) for all that it is, he continued rich
still, though he was poor; he could not lose his infinity of riches, though he
took on his poverty, quitted not his Deity, though he covered it with the rags
of his humanity.

We first look upon his person, our Lord Jesus Christ. He is a Lord it seems
that became poor, that first: and truly the first and only time that we read he
entitled himself Lord, it follows presently, he has need, St. Mat. xxi. 3.
The Lord has need. This may be true, as the Italian observes of the Lords and
Princes of the world, none need commonly so much as they, nor they before they
came to be Lords and Princes; but of the Lord and Prince of Heaven, as our Lord
surely is, that is somewhat strange that he should have any need; yet so it is:
and it may serve to teach the best of us, of men, Lords and great ones too, to
be content sometimes to suffer need, seeing the Lord of Lords was found poor.

Jesus (2.) it is, was found so. Jesus is a Savior, and that is stranger. A
Savior that is poor is like to prove but a poor Savior. Yet this is
oftentimes Gods method, the poor and base things of the world, and things that
are despised, to confound the rich, and noble, and the mighty, 1 Cor. i. 28.
that no flesh, as the Apostle infers there, might glory in his presence. This
very name of Jesus was then sent by an Angel to be given him, when he had first
told he should be born, St. Mat. i. 21. born of a poor Virgin, and yet save his
people from their sins; that we may know God needs nothing to help him; his
very poverty is our salvation. Jesus poor, the poorest contemptible means he
can save us by.

Nay even the Christ (3.) the Messiah so long expected, comes poor when he was
expected rich, to show the vanity of men's conceit and fancies, when they will
go alone. Christ the King of Israel, the great Prophet, the everlasting High
Priest, and Archbishop of our souls, he came poor, that men might give over
looking upon the outward appearance of things, and think it no diminution to
the calling of Priest or Prophet to be sometimes in a low and mean condition,
seeing the Christ himself anointed with the holy oil above all Priests and
Prophets, came in no other.

And now this we have gotten by considering the person, that if he that is
Priest, and Prophet, and Savior, and Lord, and the Lord of all may become
poor, and God do all his work notwithstanding by him; then poverty is neither
dishonorable in it self, nor so disadvantageous in its own nature, but that
God can still make use of it to his Service, does still most make use of it,
dispences his heavenly treasure to us more commonly in earthen vessels, 2 Cor.
iv. 7. then in Gold and Silver, and we therefore not to slight the Ministers of
the Lord Jesus Christ, though become poor, their bodily presence weak, and
their speech contemptible, as St. Paul's undervaluers speak, 2 Cor. x. 10. For
their Lord and ours became poor himself, as poor as the poorest, which will
appear by the second consideration. I am now to show you how poor he became, of
whom it is here said he became poor.

And that not only that poor thing called man, that poor worm and dust, that
poor vanity and nothing, we call man, but the very poorest of the name; the
novissimus virorum, the lag and fag of all, a very scum of men, says the
Prophet, and the very outcast of the people. So poor that there is not a way
to be poor in, but he was poor in.

1. Poorly descended, a poor Carpenters Wife his Mother.

2. Poorly born, in a Stable among Beasts; poorly wrapped in rags, poorly cradled
in a Manger, poorly bedded upon a lock of Hay, poorly attended by the Ox and
Ass, poorly every way provided for, not a fire to dress him at in the depth of
Winter, only the steam and breath of the Beasts to keep him warm, Cobwebs for
Hangings, the dung of the Beasts for his Perfumes, noise and lowings, neighing
and brayings for his Music; every thing as poor about him as want and
necessity could make it.

3. Poorly bred too, a Carpenter, it seems by S. Mark vi. 5. at his reputed
Fathers Trade.

4. Poorly living too, not a house to put his head in, not a pillow of his own
to lay his head on, S. Luke ix. 57. not a room to sup in but what he borrowed,
S. Mark xiv. 15. no money, nor meat but by miracle, S. Mat. xvii. 27. or by
charity, S. Mat. ix. 10. not so much as a Bucket to draw water, or a cup to
drink it in, St. John iv. 11. Nay more, for (...) is more, he was poor even to
beggary, was fain to beg even water it self, in the last cited Chapter, ver. 7.
had a bag carried always by one of his Disciples to receive any thing that
charitable minded people would put into it, St. John xii. 6. his Disciples were
so low driven following him, that they were fain sometimes to pull the ears of
Corn, as they passed by, to satisfy their hunger; five or seven loaves, with
two or three little fishes among them all, was great provision with them.
Indeed we read not punctually that he begged at any time, but we see him as
near it, as was possible, if he did not; and the word (...) in all profane
Writers never signifies less.

But let it be but what we translate it, merely poor, though the Prophet David
in the Person of Christ, Psalm xl. 18. cries Mendicus sum and pauper, I am a
poor beggar; be it yet but poor, yet so poor it is he was, that he was poor in
all, every way poor. Poor in Spirit, none poorer, none more willing to be
trampled on; suffered men to plow upon his back, and make long furrows, make a
poor thing of him indeed, do any thing what they would with him: poor in flesh
too. They may tell all my bones, says the Prophet of him, Psalm xxii. 17. they
stand staring and looking upon me, a mere gazing-stock of poverty, a miracle of
poverty, mavelous poor, poor in reputation. He made himself of no reputation,
took upon him the form of a Servant, says St. Paul, Phil. ii. 7, 8. of a
servant, of a slave, valued at the lowest price, a man could be, thirty pieces
of Silver. So poor he could scarce speak out. Non clamabit says the Prophet, he
shall not cry; he did not, says the Evangelist, S. Mat. xii. 18. It was
fulfilled. You could scarce hear his voice in the streets, ver. 19. In a word,
so poor that he was as I may say, ashamed of his name, denied it as it were to
him that called him by it, S. Matthew. xix. 17. Why call thou me good? when
yet he only was so.

Lastly, poor he was in his Death too; betrayed by one Disciple, denied by
another, forsaken by the rest, stripped off to his very skin, abused, derided,
despised by all; died the most ignominious death of all, the death of Slaves
and Varlets. And can you now tell me how he should become poorer? or can you
tell me why we should think much at any time to become poor like him? or not
rather cry out, O Blessed Poverty that art now sanctified by Christ's putting
on? How can thou but be desirable and becoming since Christ himself became
poor? If God become man, what man would be an Angel though he might? If Christ
the eternal riches think it becomes him to be poor, who would make it his
business to be rich? Give me rags for clothes, bread for meat, and water for
drink, a Stable for a Palace, the earth for a bed, and straw for a covering, so
Christ be in them, so he be with them, so this poverty be his, so it be for
him. I will lay me down in peace, and take my rest upon the hardest stone, or
coldest ground, and I will eat my brownest bread and pulse, and drink my water
or my tears with joy and gladness, now they are seasoned by my Masters use. I
will neglect my body and submit my spirit, and hold my peace even from good
words too, because he did so: I will be content with all, because he was so.
The servant must not be better than his Lord, nor the Disciple than his Master.
Our Lord poor, our Jesus poor, our Christ poor, and we striving to be rich,
what an incongruity? The Camel and the needles eye never fitted worse. Poverty
we must be contented with if we will have him; poor at least in spirit we must
be, ready for the other when it comes; and when it comes we must think it is
becoming, very much become the Disciple to be like the Master, the servant wear
his Lords livery. For our sakes he became poor, and we must not therefore think
much to be made so for his, be it to an (...), the extremest.

Especially seeing poverty is no such Gorgon, no such terrible looked Monster
since Christ wore it over his richest Robes, even chose to be poor though he
was rich, would needs be poor, and appear to be so for all his riches. Indeed
it was the riches of his grace that made him poor; had he not been rich,
superlatively rich in that, in grace and favor to us, he would never have put
on the tatters of humanity, never at least have put on the raggedest of them
all, not only the poverty of our nature, but even the nature of poverty, that
he might become like one of us, and dwell among us. And it was the riches of
his glory too, that could turn this poverty to his glory. What glory like that
which makes all things glorious, rags and beggary? what riches like his, or who
so rich as he that can make poverty more glorious then the Robes and Diadems of
Kings and Emperors? who so often for his Religion sake have quitted all their
secular glories, plenties, delicates, and attendants, for russet coats, and
ordinaty fare, and rigours, and hardships, above that which wandering beggars
suffer in the depth of Winter. Christianity no sooner began to dawn into day,
but that we find the professors selling all, Acts iv. as if they thought it an
indecency at least to possess more than their Master did; though they were rich
they became poor, because their Lord became so though he was rich.

But when men of rich become poor, the case is much different yet from that of
Christ's; men cease to be rich when they come to poverty, but not so Christ; he
is poor and rich together. (3.) (...), being rich he yet showed poor, Prove.
xxii. 2. The rich and poor meet together never truer any way then here, and
utriusque operator est Dominus, the Lord is both himself, as well as worker of
them both in others. For in this low condition of his it is that S. Paul yet
talks so often of the riches of Christ, the riches of his grace, Ephesians. i. 7. the
riches of his Glory, Ephesians. iii. 16. the riches of the glory of his inheritance,
Ephesians. i. 18. the exceeding greatness of his power, Ephesians. i. 19. the exceeding
riches, Ephesians. ii. 7. the unsearchable riches of Christ, Ephesians. iii. 8. Christ he
in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col. ii. 3. his very
reproach and poverty greater riches then all the treasures of Egypt, Heb. xi.
26. So Moses thought and reckoned, says the Apostle, when he saw his riches but
under a veil, saw but a glimpse and shadow of them, at two thousand years
distance too. So rich is Christ, (...); the only rich, so great are his riches.

Indeed the riches of the Godhead, that is, all riches indeed dwell all in him;
though he became man, he left not to be God, our rags only covered the Robes of
the Divinity, his poverty only served for a veil to cover those unspeakable
riches, to teach us not to boast and brag at any time of our riches, not to
exalt our selves when we are made rich, or when the glory of our house is
increased, but to be as humble notwithstanding as the poorest and lowest
wretch, to teach us (2.) that riches and poverty may stand together as well in
Christians as in Christ; the riches of grace and the poverty of estate; and
again the riches of estate and poverty of Spirit. To teach us (3.) not to put
off the riches of grace, for fear of poverty; not quit our Religion or our
innocence for fear of becoming poor by them: to teach us lastly that we may be
rich in Gods sight, In truth and verity, how poor soever we are in the eyes of
the world, how needy and naked soever we appear. He that being in the form of
God thought it no robbery to be equal with God, even whilst he was so, made
himself of no reputation, of as low a rank as could be; and being the
brightness of his Fathers Glory, the express image of his person, and upholding
all things with the word of his power, veils all this glory, darkens all this
brightness, conceals all this power under the infirmities and necessities of
flesh and poverty, yet only veils all this great riches, hides and lays it up
for us, that through his poverty we might be rich. The next point we are to
handle, the Christians benefit from Christ's Birth, the Christians gain by
Christ's losses, the Christians making rich by Christ's being made poor.

II. And need had he to be rich indeed to enrich so many; need to be rich whose
very poverty can enrich us: to speak the very truth, his very poverty is our
riches. It is his rags that clothed our nakedness, it is his stable that builds
us Palaces, it is his hunger that filled our emptiness, it is his thirst that
takes off our dryness, it is his necessity that supplies all ours; he made
himself a slave to make us free, a servant to make us sons; he came down to
lift us up, he became as it were nothing to make us all. The very poverty of
Christ is the riches of the Christian, and he that can cheerfully put that on
after him, is rich indeed, can want nothing: for he that can be content to be
poor for Christ, who though he has nothing is content, he wants not though he
has not; and if he want not, he is rich, nay only rich: for he that wants but
the least, though he have never so much, never so full coffers, never so many
possessions, nay and Kingdoms too, he is not rich with all his riches. The poor
pious soul that lives contented in his Cell, and feeds on nothing but bread and
water, and joys in it because it is for Christ, he is rich, and abounds, and
has all, sleeps securer in a Wilderness amongst wild Beasts, softer upon Jacobs
Pillar, warmer under the vast Canopy of Heaven, then great Princes in their
fortified Castles, upon the Down of Swans, with all their Silks and
Embroideries about them: for neither a man's life, nor his riches consist in the
abundance of the things that he possesses, St. Luke xii. 15. He is rich whom
Christ's poverty, or poverty for Christ enriches with godliness and contentment.
That Is great gain, that is, great riches, says St. Paul. So great that we need
not look after the petty, fading, transitory riches of the world, they are but
dross and dung compared to the true riches, the riches of grace and glory we
have by Jesus Christ.

For call the rich man whom you will, seek all the expressions the Scripture
has to call the rich man by: He that is rich in the grace of Christ may lay
title to them all. He that abounds in Gold and Silver, is he rich? Behold,
Christ calls to us to buy gold of him tried in the fire, that we may be rich,
Rev. iii. 18. and he sells all without money, Isa. lv. 1. it is then easy coming
by it, easy being rich: nay, the very trial of our Faith is more precious then
gold, 1 St. Pet. i. 7. A Christian in the sorest trials, poverty, or reproach,
or death, is rich you hear in being so. He that has abundance of rich clothes
and garments, is he rich? Christ calls us to buy them too at the same easy
rate, white raiment, the raiment of Princes, and great men, in the forenamed
place of the Revelation, and with the long white Robe of Christ's Righteousness,
the faithful Christian is apparelled; so none richer in clothes than he. He
that heaps up Silver like the dust, and molten Gold like the clay in the
streets, is he rich? How rich then is he that counts the silver like the dust,
and the gold like clay, who is so rich that he contemns those riches? He that
has his garners full of Wheat, and his presses with new Wine, is he rich say
ye? How rich then is he that lives wholly upon heavenly Manna, and drinks the
Wine of Angels, as the true Christian does? He that washes his steps in Butter,
and has Rivers of Oil flowing to him out of the Rock, is he rich? How much
richer then is he that is anointed with the heavenly Oil, with the oil of
perpetual joy and gladness in the Spirit, as the true believer is? He that
abounds in Cattle, who cannot number his herds and flocks, is he rich, tell me?
how mightily far richer is he that possesses God, whose are all the Beasts of
the Mountains, and all the Cattle upon a thousand Hills; and him he possesses
that possesses Christ, that is, one of his, the poorest of them; he that has
stately and magnificent houses good store, richly decked and furnished too, is he
rich think you? if he be, how infinitely more rich are they who have Heaven for
their house, and all the Furniture fit for theirs? In a word, may he be called
rich, who is highly born, richly seated, gloriously attended? how rich then is
he that is born of God, as the true Christian is? whom he makes to sit together
with him in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. ii. 6. upon whom the Angels
continually attend, about whom they daily pitch their Tents, to whom they are
all but ministering Spirits sent forth to wait upon them as upon the heirs of
salvation, Heb. i. 14. Will not all this serve the turn? what then plainer now
at last, then that he tells us he has made us Kings and Priests, Rev. i. 6.
Kings they cannot come under a lower notion then rich; and though Priests of
late are not always so, yet a Royal Priesthood, as St. Peter calls us, 1 St.
Pet. ii. 9. will be rich.

So that now after the several styles of rich men in Scripture you see the
Christian may be truly styled rich, if either abundance or increase, clothes or
furniture, houses or attendants, may be said to make one rich, or if Kings
themselves may be called such.

Yet above all this, he is richer still, even in poverty he is rich, and can
make others rich. As poor, says the Apostle, yet making many rich, and as
having nothing, and yet possessing all things, 2 Cor. vi. 10. Here Is the
prerogative of Christian riches above all others. None can rob us of them, no
poverty can lose them. I know how to abound, and how to want, says St. Paul,
Phil. iv. 12. how to abound in the midst of want. They are riches, the riches
of grace, that Thieves cannot steal, nor Moths corrupt, such as satiate the
weary soul, such as make us with St. Paul in all estates to be content, count
all riches, all joy, even the sorest and bitterest poverty or temptation. And
when the riches of grace have heaped up our treasuries here with all
cheerfulness, then open they to us the treasuries of glory, riches so far
beyond what the world call so, that all here is but mere beggary, and want, and
misery in comparison; not to be named, or thought on.

The Use of this is to instruct us henceforward to labor only for the true
riches, to be rich in grace, to be plentiful in good works, not to squander
away our days, like children in running after painted Butterflies, in heaping
up Gold and Silver, as St. James speaks, to lie, and rust, and cry out against
us not to build our dwellings, or fix our desires, or place our affections upon
earthly rubbish, not to precount our lands, or houses, our clothes or
furniture, our full bags, or our numerous stock and daily increase, our riches;
but to reckon Christ our riches, his Grace our wealth, his reproach our honor,
his poverty our plenty, his glory the sum and crown of all our riches and
glory. For if you know the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, this you know also,
that it is worth the seeking, that it is riches, and honor, and glory, how poor
soever it look to the eye of the world. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, it
is only that makes us rich, and poverty his way to enrich us by, contrary to
the way of the world: and this ye know says the Apostle. It Is so plain and
evident I need not tell you it, for ye know it. The third point the evidence of
all that has been said.

3. For ye know it; for ye know nothing if you know not this. It was a thing
not done in a corner: all the corners of the world rang of it, from the utmost
corners of Arabia to the ends of the earth. The wise men came purposely from
the East to see this poor little newborn Child, and tibi serviet ultima Thule,
sang the Poet, the utmost confines of the West came in presently to serve him:
the whole world is witness of it long ago. Nor were ever Christians ashamed
either of this grace or poverty until of late. It was thought a thing worth
knowing, worth keeping in remembrance by an anniversary too.

Indeed, were it not a thing well known, it would not be believed, that the
Lord of all should become so poor as to have almost nothing of it all. But we
saw it, says St. John i. 14. the word made flesh, this great high Lord made
little, and low enough, heard it, saw it with our eyes, looked upon it, and our
hands too handled it, 1 St. John i. 1. had all the evidence possibly could be
had, the evidence of ear, and eye, and hand; know it by them all. And not we
only, not St. John only, but all men know it. For this grace of God that
brings salvation, that is, the true grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, has
appeared unto all men, says St. Paul, Titus ii. 11. So that they either know
it, or if they know it not, it is their own fault; for it has appeared, and has
been often declared unto them; so that it is no wonder that the Apostle should
tell the Corinthians that they know it, they could not be Christians without
knowing it, nor it seems men in those days neither, that knew it not.

And yet as generally as it was known, it was a grace to know it, one of the
most special gifts and graces, the knowledge of the grace of Christ. For ye
know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and that ye know it is his grace. You
could not know it without it, none but they to whom it is given can know it as
they should.

4. That we may know it so, as well as they; we are now in the last place to
consider what the Apostle would infer upon us by it, what should be the issue
of this knowledge: (1.) The acknowledgment of the grace: and then (2.) the
practice of it. For ye know the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ, that though he
was rich, yet he so loved the poor as to bestow all his riches freely upon
them, upon us that were poor, and naked, and miserable, and being thrust out of
our first home, never since could find any certain dewlling place. And
therefore we (2.) after his example, being now enricht by him, should be rich
in our mercy and bounty to the poor; for if his grace was such to us when we
were poor, we should show the like to the poor now we are rich.

But that we may be the readier to this, we must first be sensible of the
other, thoroughly sensible of the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, acknowledge it
for a grace, a thing merely of his own good will and favor, that he would thus
become poor to make us rich. Know we and acknowledge many graces in this one
grace.

A grace to our humanity, that he would grace it with putting on.

A grace to poverty, that he would wear that too.

A grace to our persons as well as to our natures, that it was for our sakes he
did it.

A grace to our condition, that it was only to enrich it.

Know we then again and acknowledge it from hence.

1. That poverty is now become a grace, a grace to which the Kingdom of God is
promised, St. Mat. v. 3. poverty of spirit. Nay, the poor, and vile, and base
things too has God chosen, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. i. 28. the poor are now
elect, contrary quite to the fancy that the Jews had of them, whose proverb it
was, that the Spirit never descended upon the poor; answerable to which it was
then the cry, Can any good thing come out of Nazareth, any Prophet or great
good come out of so poor a place as that?

2. Know we again that Christ's poverty above all, or poverty for his sake is a
grace indeed; for to you it is given, given as a great gift of grace and honor
to suffer for his name, Phil. i. 29. And it is a part of our calling, says St.
Peter, 1 S. Pet. ii. 21. a specialty of that grace.

3. Know we (3.) that our Riches are his Grace too. In vain we rise up early,
and go late to bed; all our care, and pains, and labor is nothing to make us
rich without his blessing. The blessing of the Lord it is that makes rich.

4. Know we however these may prove, the riches of Christ can prove no other.
All the virtues and graces of our souls, all the spiritual joy, fullness, and
contentment are merely his, they the proper Grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; no
grace above them, no grace near them; nothing can render us so gracious in the
eyes of God as they, they are above Gold, and Rubies, and precious Stones.
These and all the rest being acknowledged in the Text, we may well acknowledge,
that there was good reason to put an Article, an Emphasis upon (...), the grace.

Yet to make all up, all these graces, you must know all the several graces,
outward and inward, come all from this one grace of Christ's becoming poor,
being made man, and becoming one of us. To this it is we owe all we have or
hope, to the Grace of Christ at Christmas; and therefore now are to add some
practice to all this knowledge, to return some grace again for all this grace.

Gratia, is thanks, let us return that first; thank God and our Savior for this
grace of his, whence all grace flows, and for all the several graces as they at
any time flow down upon us. Gratia Deo, thanks to God.

2. Gratia is good will and favor; let us show that to others. Good will
toward men.

3. But good will is not enough, good works are graces, let us study to increase
and abound, and to be rich in them.

4. Yet Gratia is in St. Paul's style in this Chapter, ver. 1. and elsewhere,
bounty and liberality to the poor; rich in this grace especially we are to be.
It Is the peculiar grace of Christmas, hospitality and bounty to the poor. It Is
the very grace St. Paul here provokes the Corinthians to, by the example of
those of Macedonia and Achaia, ver. 1. who to their power and beyond their
power, he bears them witness were not only willing to supply the necessities of
the Saints, but even entreated him and them to take it. By the example (2.) of
Christ, who both became himself poor, that we might be the more compassionate
to the poor now he was in the number; and made us rich, that we might have
wherewith to show our compassion to them. Now surely if Christ be poor, and put
himself among them, who would not give freely to them, seeing he may chance
even to give to Christ himself among them when he gives? however, what is given
to any of them he owns it as to himself, S. Mat. xxv. 40. What ye d^ to any of
the least of these my brethren, ye do it unto me. And can any that pretends
Christ be so wretchedly miserable as not to part with his money upon this score?
Can any be so ungrateful as not to give him a little who gave them all? shall
he become poor for our sakes, and we not show our selves rich for his? it were
too little in reason not to make our selves poor again for him, not to be as
free to him as he to us. Yet he will be contented with a little for his all;
that we should out of our abundance supply the want of his poor Members. He is
gracious: Behold the grace of our Lord, I, in this too, in complying with our
infirmities, not commanding us as he might, to impoverish our selves with acts
of mercy, but to be only rich and abundant in them; to which yet he promises
more grace still, the reward of glory. Come ye blessed of my Father, ye who
supply and help my poor ones, come inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world, where ye that have followed me in my poverty, or
become poor for my sake, or have been rich in bounty to the poor, as it were to
a kind of poverty, shall then reign with me amidst all the riches of eternal
Glory.

THE EIGHTH SERMON ON Christmas Day.
PSALM. viii. 4, 5. What is man that thou art mindful of him? and the Son of man
that thou visitest him?

For
Thou made him, A little
lower then the Angels And have crowned
to crown him with glory and worship.


BUT, Lord, What is man, or the Son of man that thou did this day visit him?
that thou this day crownedst him with that glory, did him that honor? so we
may begin to day; for it is a day of wonder, of glory and worship; to stand and
wonder at Gods mercy to the sons of men, and return him glory and worship for
it.

For, Lord, what is man, that the Son of God should become the Son of man to
visit him? that God should make him lower then the Angels, who is so far above
them, that he might crown us, who are so far below them, with glory and honor
equal to them or above them? It was a strange mercy that God should make such a
crum of dust as man to have dominion over the works of his own hands, that he
should put all things in subjection under his feet; that he should make the
Heavens, the Moon, and Stars for him; and the Psalmist might very well gaze and
startle at it. But to make his Son such a thing of naught too, such a Quid est,
that no body can tell what it is, what to speak low enough to express it, such
a Novissimus hominum, such an abject thing as man, such a castaway as abject
man, as the most abject man, bring him below Angels, below men, and then raise
him up to Glory again, that he might raise up that vile thing called man
together with him, and restore the Dominion when he had lost it; is so
infinitely strange a mercy, that it is nearer to amazement than to wonder.

And indeed the Prophet here is in amaze, and knows not what to say: Both these
mercies he saw here, but he saw not how to speak them. Gods mercy in man's
Creation, and Gods mercy in man's Redemption too. What God made man at first,
and to what he exalted him when he had made him. What God made his Son for man
at last, what he made him first and last, lower then the Angels first, higher
then they at last, that he might show the wonders of his mercy to poor man both
first and last.

But if David did not see both in the words he spoke, the Apostle did; for to
Christ he applies them, Heb. ii. 6, 7. And that is authority good enough for us
to do so, to bring it for a Christmas Text; especially Christ himself applying
the second verse, Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained
strength, as spoken in relation to himself, St. Matthew. xxi. 16. And that is
authority somewhat stronger. Yet to omit nothing of Gods mercy, to do right on
all hands to Prophet and Apostle, and Christ too, we shall take them in both
senses. To refer them to man, the plain letter with the whole design and
context of the Psalm is sufficient reason. To understand them yet of Christ, he
himself and his Apostle will bear us out. And though the Text be full of
wonder, it is no wonder that it has two senses; most of the old Testament and
Prophesies have so, a lower and a higher, a literal and a more sublime sense.
Thus out of Egypt have I called my son, Hos. xi. i. Rachels weeping for her
children, Jer. xxxi. 14. I have set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion, Psalm.
ii. 6. all applied to Christ or his business, and affairs, and yet spoken first
to other purposes, of Israel or David. I should lose time to collect more
places. It Is better I should tell you the sum of this, that it is the Prophet
David's wonder at Gods dealing toward man, and his dealing toward Christ, that
he should deal so highly mercifully toward man, and so highly strangely
toward Christ; so mercifully with man as to remember him, to visit him, to
make him but little lower then the Angels, and crown him with glory and
worship. So strangely with Christ, as to make him a Son of man, and lower then
the Angels first, then afterward to crown him with glory and worship: Things
all to be highly wondered at. And the Text best to be divided, into Gods mercy,
and David's wonder.

I. Gods mercy manifested here in three particulars.

1. In his dealing with man. What is man? etc. In the literal sense of the
words. 2. In his dealing with Christ, in respect to man. What is the Son of
man? 3. In his dealing with man, in the sublimer sense of the Text, again in
respect to Christ, what is man, and the Son of man? in the same sense too.
I. His mercy in his dealing with man will best appear (1.) by what he did: And
(2.) for whom he did it; that he should do so much for man, that he should do
it for so little; so little, so inconsiderable a thing as man.

Six branches there are here of what he did.

1. He was and is ever mindful of him. (2.) He visits him. (3.) He made him but
a little lower then the Angels, but one step below. (4.) He did that only too
to exalt him, to crown him, as we read it. (5.) He crowned him also. (6.) He
crowned him with glory and with worship too.

If you will know (2.) for whom all this. It Is

1. For man. Adam, a piece of clay.

2. For the Son of man. Enos, a piece of misery.

3. For a mere quid est, for a thing we know not what to call it.

4. It Is for one that the Prophet wonders God should mind or think on, that he
should come into Gods mind, much more into his eye to be visited by him: such a
one that it is a wonder he should be thought on.

II. His dealing with Christ in respect to man, which is the Apostles
interpretation of the words, is a second manifesto of his mercy, and showed

1. In his Exinanition, that God for man's sake should (1.) make him lower then
the Angels. That (2.) he should make him so low as man. As man (3.) and the Son
of man: Such a Son of man (4.) that we cannot know how to name him, such a quid
est, such a we cannot tell what, a wonder, a gazing-stock, not worth seeing or
remembering; and all only that man by him might be visited and remembered.

2. In his Exaltation. That notwithstanding all this, God should a while
afterward remember him, visit him, crown him, crown him with glory and honor.

III. And both Exinanition and Exaltation (3.) that he might yet visit man the
more, remember him with greater mercies, crown him with richer graces, crown
him with higher honors here then he did in the Creation, and with higher glory
hereafter then the first nature could pretend to.

Upon all these, the second general, the Prophets wonder comes in well; will
follow handsomely, as the conclusion of all, the application of all, to teach
us to wonder and admire at all this mercy, and take up the Text and say it
after David, What is man, Lord, what is man that thou, etc.

That we may wonder and worship too, and give God Glory and Worship for this
wonderful mercy, for the glory and worship that he has given us: I begin now to
show you his mercy in all the acts here specified; and the first is, his being
mindful of us, or remembering us.

1. And he remembers that we are but dust, Psalm. ciii. 14. and so deals
accordingly, blows not too hard upon us, lest he should blow us clean away:
that is a good remembrance, to remember not to hurt us; and the Lord has been
mindful of us, says the Psalmist again, Psalm. cxv. 12. has and will ever be
mindful of his Covenant, Psalm. cxi. 5. though we too often forget ours, The
Bride may forget her ornaments, Jer. ii. 32. and the Mother her sucking child,
Isa. xlix. 15. Yet will not I (says God) forget you. The Hebrew here is in the
future, as the Latin is in the present: but all times are alike with God; what
he is, he will be to us; even when he seems to forget us, he is mindful of us.
Recordaris operationum ei, says the Chaldee. Thou remembrest his works, to
reward them; but that is too narrow. Thou remembrest his substance, all his
bones and members, forgettest none, to preserve them. Thou remembrest his soul
to speak comfortably to it. Thou remembrest his body to feed and clothe it.
Thou remembrest his goings out and his comings in, to direct and prosper them.
Thou remembrest his very tears, and put them up in bottles; all these
things are noted in his book, Psalm. cxxxix. 15. put down there. When we are
shut up in the Ark, and all the Floods about us, then he remembers us as he did
Noah, and in due time calls us out. When we are unhappily fallen into Sodom
among wicked hands, and the City ready to be all on fire about our ears, then
he remembers us as he did Lot, nay, as he did Abraham rather when he delivered
Lot, Genesis xix. 29. He is so good, that he remembers us for one another:
remembers us for Abraham's, Isaacs, Jacobs, and David's sake: remembers the Son
for the Father, the Nephew for the Uncle, the Friend for the Friends, Jobs
friends for Jobs sake, Job xlii. 8. So mindful is God of us, so continually
minding us, such a care of us he has, he cares for all; no God like him for
the care of all, Wisd. xii. 13. I would we were as careful again to please him,
as mindful of him.

2. And yet (2.) he is not only mindful of man, but visits him too. And thy
visitation, says Holy Job has preserved my spirit, Job x. 12. Will you know
what that is? Thou have granted me life and favor; so the words run just
before; not life only (for his being mindful of us says that sufficiently) but
favor also: his visiting intimates some new favor, somewhat above life and
safety.

Indeed visiting is sometimes punishing, I will visit their sin, Exodus xxxii.
34. And it is a mercy to man sometimes that God visits and punishes him; it
keeps him from sin, increases him in grace, advances him in glory. And what is
man that thou thus visitest him, O Lord, and suffer him not to run headlong
to destruction, though he so deserve it?

But visiting here (2.) is in a softer, milder way, it is to bestow some favor
on us. Thus holy Job, in words somewhat like the Text, What is man that thou
should magnify him, and that thou should set thine heart upon him? and
that thou should visit him every morning, and try him every moment, Job vii.
17, 18. So, Gods visiting in Jobs interpretation is a magnifying of man, a
setting of his heart upon him to do him good, a visiting him with some mercy or
other every morning, a purging and purifying him from tin and dross. In the
Prophet Ieremiah's style it is the performing his good word unto us, Ier. xxix.
10. And in the Psalmists, a Visiting with his salvation, Psalm. cvi. 4. Great
mercy without question.

Hence it is that he visits us by his Son, to bring us to salvation. Thus good
old Zachariah understood it, when he starts out as it were on a sudden with his
Benedictus, Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed
his people, S. Luke i. 68. He visits us when we are sick, and heals our
sicknesses; he visits us in our sadness, and dispels our sorrows; he visits us
in prison, and pays our Debts; he visits us in our dangers, and delivers us
out; he visits us in our prosperities, and rejoices with us in them; he visits
us by his Mercies, by his Prophets, by his Graces, by his Spirit: yet all these
are nothing to this visiting by his Son, or little they are without it; or else
they are all included in it: health and joy, liberty and deliverance, peace and
mercy, comfort and instruction, grace and spirit, all in it, all in the coming
down of Christ to visit us. How infinite is thy mercy that thou thus do
visit poor sinful man!

3. But thou were infinitely merciful to him long before, when thou first
made him, when thou made him but little lower then the Angels. (3.) (...)
some little thing, but not much. Thou gave him understanding as thou did
them, only theirs is a little clearer, and without discourse. But they
understand, and so does man. They have wills, and so has he. They are spirits,
and he has one. They are Gods Ministers, and so is man; only they do all with
more nimbleness and perfection; for they have no bodies but to hinder them, but
man has. In that he is somewhat under them, yet not much neither, since Christ
has so exalted our nature as to unite it to the Godhead, and made all his
Angels worship it.

And which takes much too from this diminution, this minuisti eum, it is but
(...) in a second sense for a little while, (for so it is possible to be
rendered) whilst we live here, for a few years and days: It will not be long
e're we be (...) equal to the Angels we are now below, S. Luke xx. 36.

And yet we are a degree nearer to them now, if we expound the words that we
render Angels, as S. Jerome, Pagnin, and some others do. The word is Elohim,
one of the names of God; and St. Chrysostom found a Translation with (...), he
made us but a little lower then God himself. And may well seem so when he sets
a Dixi dii estis upon us, Psalm. lxxxii. 6. tells us that he said we were Gods,
and the Children of the most High.

4. But (4.) bear it what sense it will, what diminution it can, it is all but
to exalt us by it, to crown us; thou have made Christ to crown him, only to
crown; so we read it in the old Translation: our very diminutions are sent us
to augment our glory. So infinitely great is Gods mercy to us, that our very
lessenings are for our greatning: A rare excess of mercy to make us lower, so
to make us higher.

5. And it is high indeed when it exalts us to a Crown, and past doubting too,
when it comes to a coronasti, thou have done it, as it is here both in the old
Latin, and the new English, certain to hold too, not to be one of those
corruptible Crowns the Apostle speaks of, of Bays or Laurel in the Olympic
games, 1 Cor. ix. If we add the other reading mentioned by St. Chrysostom,
Coronabis, Thou shall crown him; have already, and shall again, shall continue
crowning him. Here Is a mercy will hold as well as stretch, as everlasting as
it is infinite. Two senses there are of Coronasti, of this crowning; it may
signify either plenty, or reward. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness,
Ps. lxv. 11. He crowns thee with loving kindness, Psalm. ciii. 4. In both it
signifies an abundance of mercies, and blessings. But he shall receive a crown,
St. James i. 12. is the same with a high reward. In both senses God crowns man
here, with the fullness of heaven and earth, gives him liberty to feed and
clothe himself with what he pleases, keeps nothing of all his plenty from him;
and which is more, gives him it as it were a reward for his labor, though it
be vastly far above all his pains.

6. If this reward be glory now (6.) as here it is, he has put a crown of Gold
indeed upon his head, as the Psalmist speaks. The glory to be made after the
very image and likeness of God himself, and to be made so at a consultation
with so much solemnity, that is the glory here. It was a kind of one to be made
somewhat near the Angels likeness; but to have Gods added to it is, glory upon
glory. What glory like Gods? what glory of man like that to be like God?

Having honor added to this glory, that all the creatures should do homage to
him, the fiercest and stubbornest of them submit their necks under his feet,
and the very crooked Serpent creeps away as afraid of him; none of them dare to
lift him up a head, or a horn, a paw or crest, or hiss against him; for the
Fowls of the Air, and Fishes of the Sea, all of them to serve to his command
and use, What is man become now, What have thou made him thus, O God? Much of
this glory I confess is now departed from him, or blurred, or sullied in him,
that we can see little of his former purer rays, by reason of his own sin and
folly; yet thus God made him, all this he did for him, and the glimmerings of
all these glories and mercies are still upon him. And the mercy peradventure is
the greater, though the glory be the less, in that notwithstanding all man's
demerits, he yet continues in some degree or other all these mercies to him.
You will see it still the greater if you now consider who it is all this is
done to, who it is that God thus remembers, visits, makes, and crowns with
glory and worship.

A worshipful piece God wot, a poor thing called man, styled Adam here, a piece
of clay and dirt, ex limo, a pure clod, a mere walking pitcher, brittle, and
dirty too; and the dirtier since his fall.

Miserable (2.) besides. Enos is a second word the Psalmist here expresses man
withal; and that signifies a sad, sick, calamitous, miserable, incurable
wretch; and which adds to it so by descent too, and by entail never here to be
cut off: Filius Enos, the Son of man, the son of misery; he comes crying into
the world, as if he foresaw it, e're he well could see, and felt it at his
first appearance. How innumerable are the troubles, how unavoidable the
necessities, how incredible the mischances, how numberless the sicknesses, how
unsupportable the infirmities that surround him from his first hour? infinite
need there is that God should be mindful of him, that he should have some eye
upon him, and regard him; for he comes in helpless into the world, and
continues so if God help him not.

This is that then (3.) makes the Prophet come with a quid est, Lord what a
thing is this? what a thing is man? a thing so hidden with infirmities, so
covered with misfortunes, so clouded with griefs, so compassed with sorrows, so
wrapped up in night and darkness, in sins and miseries, that one knows not what
it is, or how to christen it.

Such a thing only we may conceive it, (and we cannot conceive half of its
poornesses and emptinesses) that we can only gape and wonder at it. In the 144.
Psalm, where the Psalmist propounds this question as it were again of what is
man? He answers presently, ver. 4. Man is like a thing of naught, his time
passes away like a shadow. He is not so much as a thing; he is but like it,
though that very thing be a thing of naught too; a mere shadow of a thing of
naught he is, which we may well wonder at, but cannot well imagine, and wonder
again that God should think of such a shadow as he, that he should be mindful
of the dust of the earth, that he should regard the dirt, that he should visit
a we know not what, that he should raise a piece of clay so near Angels and
himself, that he should crown such a dunghill of wretchedness and misery, that
he should bestow his glory upon such a shadow, and worship upon the dust of his
feet, and the dirt under him. O Lord how wonderful is thy goodness toward the
children of men!

It Is more wonderful for all that, if we now consider his dealing with his own
Son, for the sakes of the Sons of men. The second particular of his mercy, that
for man and the Sons of men he has made this Text to be said of him also, made
him a thing to be wondered at, by his dealing with him both by his Exinanition
and by his Exaltation. To him now we come to apply the words, for to him they
properly belong. Where first we will find out his Exinanition, or his being
emptied and abased, to be wondered at.

What is man? so only before; but what is now the best of men, the Son of man
himself? The term of Son of man is very proper unto Christ; called so by Daniel
long before he was so, Dan. vii. 13. And it may bear a note, that Christ, he
only is properly filius hominis in the singular, the Son of man single, born of
the Virgin without a man. Others are filii hominum in the plural: every one is
so, born by the help of two, Father and Mother both. But notwithstanding man,
and the Son of man are diminutions to the Son of God; for to have been made
like Angels had been a high derogation; but lower then they, what shall I call
it?

But (2.) So low as man, can you lend me a word for it? for what is man, that
God should be made one? I have told you over and over what he is, but what art
thou O blessed God that thou should be made such a things as he?

Or (3.) if man he must be made, what need he be made the Son of man yet? He
might have brought a humane nature down from heaven, that had been fittest for
him: an incorruptible humanity. To be man and the Son of man, rottenness of
rottenness, vanity of vanity (for man in the Psalmists phrase is nothing else)
there is a debasement below debasement.

And yet (4.) to be such a Son of man, that has a quid est, a si quis writ over
him, to enquire who he is, so obscure and ignoble that neither David nor Esau
can discern him; but Esau with a quis est, Isa. lxiii. 1. and David here with a
quid est only can decipher him; without form or comeliness, form or fashion, or
name, or title, one despised and rejected even of men, a man of sorrows, and
acquainted with griefs, one that men would hide their faces from, as the
Prophet speaks of him, Isa. liii. 2, 3. to be made such a one as this; we may
all wonder indeed, Prophets and People, all of us, nay, be all amazed at it.

I can show you him yet lower, (5.) Lower then the Angels, that we have told
you; but they were good ones: but malis etiam, so S. Austin, lower then the bad
ones: Laid under their cruelty and fury in his death, and not over them surely
always in his life. When the Devil was permitted to carry him from Mountain to
Mountain, to the Pinnacle of the Temple, or where he pleases, St. Mat. iv. This
is stranger still.

Yet this might be a glory, as a trial: but (6.) to be visited, that is
punished, and not after the visitation of all men neither, but even the basest,
to be a man raised up for punishment, made to be scourged, afflicted, and
abused, A homo quoniam visitas, made man only to be punished; the Son of man
only to be under the power and lash of man, the worst of men too, the basest of
the people, scorned and spit upon, beaten and buffeted, torn, and rent, and
lashed, and pierced by who would of them: What wonder is there not in his thus
being made the Son of man?

But lastly to be as it were out of Gods mind the while, so visited by him, as
if he were no way mindful of him, as if he had clean forgotten him, who he was,
remembered not at all that he was his Son he used so, that he was forced to cry,
My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? art no more mindful of me? This is a
quid est, beyond the very Text, a wonder that is above what is explicit there.
Yet such a man he was made too; so that we may justly now ask, quid est, in the
highest key, what is man? what is this man? what is the business, what the
matter that all this is done unto him? that God thus makes and unmakes him, and
makes him again we know not what.

And we should more wonder yet, but for the following words (2.) that all this
is but to crown him with glory, and honor. But that affords us a new wonder
still, that God should so crown such a one as this he we speak of. And to speak
truth, his exaltation after all this, the exaltation of our humane nature in
him, as poor, wretched, and contemptible as it is, a new work of wonder.

Had it been a nature born and framed to glory, it had been none at all; had it
been a King, or of the Royal Lineage to have been crowned, there had been no
strangeness in it: but to crown a worm, to crown the very scorn of men, as he
terms himself, Psalm. xxii. 6. with glory, and the outcast of the people with
honor and worship, this is a quis enarrabit, who can declare this generation;
how it should come to a crown?

Yet before we come to speak of that, let us go through the lower parts of his
exaltation: And as poor a thing as God made him (and that was poor enough) yet
did he not forget him. He was so mindful of him even in his low estate, that he
gave his Angels charge over him, would not let his foot slip, or dash against a
stone, would not suffer a bone of him to be broken, or one tittle of his
Covenant to fail him: sent his Angels too to look after, to minister to him; a
whole host of them to declare him this day to the world.

Nay, (2.) came and visited him himself, he and his Holy Spirit with him at his
Baptism, he and Moses, and Elias with him in the Mount, where he gave testimony
he was his Son, his beloved Son, in whom he was well pleased.

Nay, (3.) that which might seem in one sort a diminution, was in another an
exaltation: he made him but a little lower then the Angels, was an exalting
him, when it made even his Body little inferior to their Spirit; and that it
did, when he could pass through a crowd of people as invisible as an immaterial
Spirit, S. Luke iv. 30. Nay, before that, when he came into the world without
any blemish to his Mothers Virginity; as if he had been a Spirit, not a Body:
and after that, when he arose out of his Tomb, the stone upon it, when he
entered and the doors were shut, when he vanished out of sight, etc. they knew
not how he went. Paulo minus angelis indeed: this is little less then Angels I
can tell you. But St. Austin tells you more, Natura humana Christi Deum solum
majorem, That God only is greater then Christ's humane nature. The Hypostatical
union to the Deity has made it so; and those infinite graces of his soul are
somewhat more then paulo minus, above the Angels rarest endowments.

Yet this is nothing to the Crown that follows; for we see Jesus, says the
Apostle, Heb. ii. 9. Who was made a little lower then the Angels, for the
suffering of death crowned with glory and honor. (...), so Enthymius thinks it
may be read without a comma, above the Angels with glory and honor have thou
crowned him, with a glory beyond theirs. Indeed four Crowns he was crowned
with, a Crown of Flesh, with that his Mother crowned him in his Incarnation,
Cant. iii. 11. A Crown of Thorns, with that the Soldiers crowned him at his
Passion, St. John xix. 2. A Crown of Precious Stones, De lapide pretioso, at
his Resurrection: The four endowments of glorious Bodies, Charity, Agility,
Impossibility, and Incorruptibility, were the Stones of it. And a Crown of pure
Gold at his Ascension, when he shone like the Son in gloria, and went up cum
corona, with a crown or ring of blessed Saints, into the highest Heavens. With
these two last God crowned him, these two were his exaltation, and the crown or
reward of the two other.

And to make this Crown the more glistering and glorious, here is honor added
to it, A name given him above every name, that at the mention of it every knee
is now to bow, both of things in Heaven, and things in Earth, and things under
the Earth, Phil. ii. 9, 10. made better then the Angels, Heb. i. 4. so much
better that all things, even the Angels themselves, Authorities and Powers, all
sorts of Angels are made subject unto him, 1 S. Pet. iii. 22. and are therefore
bid all to worship him, says St. Paul, Heb. i. 6. Such honor has Christ after
his humiliation; and we may expect some after ours: If we humble our selves, we
also shall be exalted, and crowned with glory. And so it seems we are entitled
to it by the sufferings of the Son of man, and by his visiting us, our glory is
much increased by his Glory, our honor higher by his Redemption, then in our
first Creation; so that we may now well take up the words again, and pronounce
them with greater astonishment still, that he should so remember, visit, and
crown his redeemed people as he does.

For what is man indeed that God should redeem him at so great a price? what
access can it be to God to raise him out of his ruins? might he not more
easily have made a new stock of men of better natures, than have redeemed
Adam's?

Or (2.) if he would have needs so much magnified his love as to have redeemed
him, because he had made him; would not a restoring of him to his first estate
have been well enough, but that he must raise him to a higher? Without doubt it
had, but that God in mercy thinks nothing too much for him.

It appears so by his remembering him. Man was a true Enos, and that is
obliviscens, a forgetful piece; yet God remembers him, and comes down in the
evening of his fall, a few minutes after it, and raises him up with a promise
of the seed of the Woman, to set all straight again. There he did as well visit
as remember him.

And in the pursuance of this singular mercy, he still (2.) visits him every
morning, morning and evening too; visits by his Angels, by his Priests, by his
Prophets, by his Mercies, by his Judgments, by his Son, by his Holy Spirit, by
daily motions, and inspirations. These are the visits he hourly makes us since
he visited us by his Son, far more plentifully than before; more abundant
grace, more gracious visits; for if his Son be once formed in us, he will never
give over visiting till he crown us.

Yet (3.) by degrees he raises us up to some Angelical purities and perfections
before he crown us: our nature is much elevated by the Grace of Christ; and
what the Jew did only to the outward letter, we are enabled to do to the Spirit
of it, to inward purity as well as the outward. Thus and thus you heard of old,
says Christ, S. Matthew. v. 21. but I say more, not a wanton look, not a
murtherous thought, not a reproachful word, not the slightest Oath. He would
refine us fain somewhat near the Angels, to be pure as they.

But (4.) we shall not do it gratis; he will crown us for it, quicken us
together with Christ, raise us up together, and make us sit together in
heavenly places, in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. ii. 5, 6. Honors us with the name of
friends, reveals himself unto us, fills us with the riches of Christ, adopts us
to be his Sons, makes us members of Christ, partakers of his Spirit, makes
himself one with us, and we with him; washes us by one Sacrament, feeds us by
another; comforts us by his word, compasses with the ministrations of
righteousness that exceeds in glory; pardons our sins, heals our infirmities,
strengthens our weaknesses, replenishes us with graces, urges us with favors,
makes us with open face behold them as in a glass, behold the glory of the
Lord, and changes us at last into the same image from glory to glory, Ephesians. iii.
18. What is man, O Lord, or the Son of man that thou should do thus unto him?
And what are we, O Lord, what are we that we are so insensible of thy mercies?
what base, vile, unworthy things are we, if we do not now pour out our selves
in thanks and wonder, in praise and glory for this exceeding glory!

Wonder we (1.) stand we and wonder, or cast our selves upon the earth, upon
our faces, in amazement at it, that God should do all this for us; thus
remember, thus visit, thus crown such things as we. That (2.) he should pass by
the Angels to crown us, leave them in their sins and misery, and lift us out of
ours. That (3.) he should not take their nature at the least, and honor those
that stood among them, but take up ours, and wear it into heaven, and seat it
there.

And there is a visit he is now coming to day to make us, as much to be wondered
at as any, that he should feed us with his Body, and yet that be in Heaven;
that he should cheer us with his Blood, and yet that shed so long ago: that he
should set his Throne, and keep his Table and presence upon the Earth, and yet
Heaven his Throne, and Earth his Footstool: that he should here pose all our
understandings with his mysterious work, and so many ages of Christians after
so many years of study and assistance of the Spirit, not yet be able to
understand it. What is man, or the Son of man, O Blessed Jesus, that thou
should thus also visit and confound him with the wonders of thy mercy and
goodness!

Here also is glory and honor too, to be admitted to his Table; no where so
great; to be made one with him, as the meat is with the body: no glory like it.
Here is the crown of plenty, fullness of pardon, grace, and heavenly
Benediction. Here Is the crown of glory, nothing but rays, and beauties, Iustres
and glories to be seen in Christ, and darted from him into pious souls. Come
take your crowns, come compass your selves with those eternal circlings.

Take now the cup of salvation, and remember God for so remembering you: call
upon the name of the Lord, and give glory to your God. If you cannot speak out
fully (as who can speak in such amazements as these thoughts may seriously work
in us) cast your selves down in silence, and utter out your souls in these or
the like broken speeches. What is man, Lord what is man? What am I? How poor a
thing am I? How good art thou? What have thou done unto him? How great things?
What glory, what honor, what crown have thou reserved for me? What shall I
say? How shall I sufficiently admire? What shall I do again unto thee?

What shall thou do? Why (1.) if God is so mindful of us men, Let us be mindful
of him again; remember he is always with us, and do all things as if we
remembered that so he were.

2. Is he so mindful of us? Let us be mindful of our selves, and remember what
we are, that we may be humbled at it.

3. Does he remember us? Let us then again remember him with our prayers and
services.

2. Has he visited us? Let us in thankfulness visit him again, visit him in his
Temple, visit him at his Table, visit him in his poor members, the sick, the
imprisoned.

3. Has he made us lower then the Angels? Let us make our selves lower and
lower still in our own sights. Is it yet but a little lower then the Angels?
Let us raise up thoughts, and pieties, and devotions to be equal with them.

4. Has he crowned us with glory? Let us crown his Altars then with offerings,
and his name with praise; let us be often in corona, in the congregation of
them that praise him, among such as keep Holy Day. Let us crown his Courts with
beauty, crown our selves with good works; they should be our glory, and our
crown: And for the worship that he crowns us with too, let us worship and give
him honor, so remember, so visit, so crown him again; so shall he, as he has
already, so shall still remember us last, and bring us to his own palace, there
to visit him face to face, where he shall make us equal to the Angels we are
now below, and crown us with an incorruptible crown of glory: through Christ,
etc.

THE NINTH SERMON ON Christmas Day.
S. LUKE ii. 30, 31, 32. For mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.


SAlvation cannot but be a welcome then at any time. I know no day amiss. But
in Die salutis, at such a time as this, on Christmas Day especially. Then it
first came down to bless this lower world.

But salvation so nigh as to be seen is more; much more if we our selves have
any interest in it, if it be for the Gentiles too, that we also may come in.
Far more, if it be such salvation, that our friends also may be saved with us,
none perish: if it be omnium populorum, to 'um all in whatsoever Nation.

Add yet, if it be salvation by light, not in the night, no obscure
deliverance, we like that better; and if it be to be saved not by running away,
but gloriously: Salvation with Glory, that is better still. Nay, if it be all,
salvation on a day of salvation, not afar off, but within ken, not heard of,
but seen, to us and ours, an universal salvation, a gladsome, a lightsome, a
notable, a glorious salvation, as it is without contradiction, Verbum
Evangelii, good Gospel, joyful tidings, so it must needs be, verbum diei too,
the happiest news in the most happy time.

These make the Text near enough the day; and yet it is nearer. What say you if
this salvation prove to be a Savior, and that Savior Christ, and that Christ
new born, the first time that viderunt oculi could be said of him, no time so
proper as Christmas to speak of Christ the Savior, born and sent into the
world. He it is, that is here styled salutare tuum. Christ, that blessed sight
that restores Simeons decaying eyes to their youthful luster, that happy
burden, that makes Simeon grasp heaven before he enter it.

Indeed the good old man begins not his Christmas till Candlemas: 'Twas not
Christmas Day with him, he did not see his Savior till he was presented in the
Temple. The Feast of Purification was his Christmas. This the Shepherds, the
worlds, and ours. This day first he was seen visibly to the world.

Being then to speak of salvation, which is a Savior, or a Savior who is
salvation. (1.) First of the Salvation it self, (...). (2.) Then of its
certainty, and manifestation; so plain and evident that the eye may see it:
Salvation to be seen. More (2.) prepared to be seen. (3.) Of the universality,
before the face of all people. (4.) Of the Benefits. They are two. (1.) A
light. (2.) A glory, with the twofold parties. (1.) The Gentiles. (2.) The
Jews. Of each both severally and jointly.

When we have done with the salvation, then of the other sense of (...), the
Savior himself, that is the prime meaning of salutare here. (1.) Of his
natures, in (...) his Godhead, in (...) and (...) his manhood. (2.) the unity
of his person in (...) (3.) His Offices in (...) and (...). His eternal
generation in (...), his temporal in (...).

Lastly, of our way to behold him, and our duty when we see him. How to obtain
this glorious sight of (...) of salvation, and how to entertain it. Of which
that I may speak with reverence, and you hear with profit, Let us pray, etc.

I begin with that which we all desire and hope to end, Salvation; and first
with (...) (give me leave to do so) in the sense of Profane Authors. It will
fit the day, (...) were dies salutares, Festivals for some famous deliverances
among them. And may not (...) then, be this great Festival of the Nativity of
Salvation, this happy day which come about by the circling of the year, expects
now the solemnities of our joys and thanksgivings? You see the day it self is
in the Text; and now we have seen that, let us look into the occasion of it,
what it is that makes it Holy Day.

Something seen or done upon it, what is that? Salutare tuum, says the Text; a
Savior seen and a salvation wrought, nay, this seen too, for viderunt oculi to
both, if they be two. There is but one word for both, and it may be they may be
but one. However distinguish them we will for a while, though we unite them in
the upshot.

Salvation. Simeon might with as much ease have called him Savior; but that he
thought too little. You would have blamed his eye-fight had he seen no more.
Saviors there have been many. Moses, and Joshua, and Ieptha, and Samson. I
cannot tell you how many, and they have brought salvation in their times and
saved their people; but none of all was ever made salvation but this days
Savior, who is made unto us righteousness and salvation.

Made to us; is that all? nay, is it in himself. Other Saviors when they have
saved others, themselves they could not save. They themselves did still stand
in need of being saved. Christ needs none other but himself. He is Salvation,
no Savior so but he.

And (...) it is, not (...), nor (...) neither. Salvation neither for male
only, nor female only, but both of the Neuter gender. Neither male, nor female,
but all one in Christ Jesus.

2. Not (...) in the Feminine, not a weak Feminine Salvation, but a strong firm
one, the mighty strength of his right hand.

3. Not a Feminine Salvation, not (...), lest we should fondly look for (...)
the Virgin Mother. Not she, but the Virgins Son: the Holy Ghost, as I may say,
afraid of Salvatrix mea, Salve Redemptrix before ever Christianity dreamt of
that Sacrilege.

But (...) is yet more salvation with an Emphasis, with an Article, This
Salvation. Many Saviors and Salvations too without doubt had aged Simeon seen
in the large circuit of his years without a Nunc dimittis; but no sooner (...),
no sooner this, but he grows weary of the world; his life grows tedious to him,
he would be going. What means this hasting to his Grave, when he folds
salvation in his arms? Why; this it is that gives it a pre-eminence above all
beside. Death now it self is conquered, and now first to die is to be saved.
Salvation not only from Death, but from the terrors of it.

Salvation is a deliverance, a deliverance is from some evil of sin or
punishment. To be delivered from punishment, be it but the loss of goods, of
liberty, or health, is a kind of Salvation; and if the loss be great we are
delivered from, the salvation great: but if the punishment stretch it self
beyond the limits of fading time, if it be to be extended through eternity, the
deliverance then great without question, well deserves the Article (...)

To be delivered from punishment and eternal punishment is no small matter
beyond all humane power: yet from sin is far beyond it. If we be not saved from
that, it is but an incomplete, a partial salvation from the other.

(...) comes from (...) or (...) salvum facere, to make all whole again, to
heal the wounds of sin by the plasters of mercy; to restore a man to his lost
health, his lapsed justice, (...) integrum facere, to give him health. Thy
saving health, O Lord. Adam lost it, in him we all, and every day we lose it
still. We confess as much morning and evening. There is no health in us.

And what is it we gain then by (...) if we so soon are at a loss? yes (...) is
salvum conservare too, to keep us well when we are so. Good God, in what need
stand we of thy salvation! We sin, we are punished, we are freed, we rise again,
we slip, and fail, and fall again, to deliver us, to restore us, to preserve us
as it requires, so it makes, (...) an emphatical, an exceeding great salvation.

Nor is this all; (...) Thy salvation; from sickness* or imprisonment, or
poverty, or death, man may sometime save us; yet not so, but that it is (...)
Gods too. God by man. But deliver us from the lowest prisons, from a Hell of
miseries, sin and its attendants, and keep us upright and entire, it is only
God-man can do it. That Is Gods peculiar (...), His wonderful salvation.

His by propriety. It had no other power but the strength of his own right arm
to bring this mighty thing to pass. It had no other motive then his own immense
love and goodness to effect it. We were in no case to deserve it, professed
enemies, we, had nothing in us to make it ours, but that it might be wholly
his. Thy salvation.

Yet thy salvation? why so? What, can God be saved? Thy salvation! our
salvation rather: yes both. Thine actively, ours passively. Thou savest, we
saved.

And may it not be His passively too? Thy salvation. Thou thy self saved. Thy
Promises, thy Truth, which is thy self; thy Mercy, which is thy self; thy
Justice, which is thy self, saved from the censure of unjust man, by preparing
him a Savior. Man had almost thought God had broke his word: now that is saved.
Some still will not let his mercy be saved, but destroy it with justice, and in
destroying that turn justice into gall and wormwood; ruin that too by denying
(...), an universal Savior. It was time, high time to tell us from Heaven by
the mouth of the Holy Spirit of (...) God himself now quitted of injustice, and
want of bowels of compassion.

You have a witness of it undeniable. (...), my eyes have seen it. Salvation
clear even to the sense, and to the certain'st, the sight. The eye may see it.

2. Viderunt oculi, he might have added and contractaverunt manus me^, and his
hands handled it; but if the eye see it, we need not sue to the hand for
certainty.

(...) these eyes. No longer now the eyes of Prophecy, those are grown dim,
and almost out. Isaiah indeed could say is born, is given, so certain was he of
it; but never viderunt oculi, for all that, be never lived to see it; one
degree, this, above the infallibility of Prophecy.

Time was when this Salutare tuum was inveloped in clouds: It was so till this
day came, a mystery kept secret since the world began; locked up in Heaven so
close, that mine eyes have wasted away with looking for thy saving health, O
Lord, sighs David, and the Church answers him with Vtinam disrumperes coelos,
Break the Heavens, O Lord, and come down: O utinam, O would thou would! But
now, as we have heard, so have we seen thy salvation.

Nor need we any extraordinary piercing eye to see it: so plain and manifest is
the object, that eyes almost sunk into their holes, eyes over which the
curtains of a long night are well nigh drawn, eyes veiled with the mists of
age, eyes well near worn out with looking and expectation, the dimmest, aged'st
sight may see it. Mine eyes, old Father Simeons.

Nor need the Manichee strain his eyesight to discern it. He need not, as is
usual when we look on curious pieces, close one eye, that the visual spirits
being contracted we may see those things which else by reason of their curious
subtilty escape the seeing. It Is no such aerie phantasm, but that we may with
open face and eyes behold it; he may see it with (...) both his eyes, without
straining, without that trouble.

But if our senses should play false with us, yet my eyes, the eyes of a
Prophet, a holy man inspired and detained a prisoner in the flesh on purpose
for this spectacle, cannot possibly deceive us.

Especially if you add but (...) to (...), That he did not perceive it only as
a far off, Balaams sight, or had a glance or glimmering of it only, but, (...),
saw it plain, so plain, as (...) to know it too. Saw it in his arms and looked
near it, nay into it, by the quick lively eye of a firm faith; for with both
eyes he saw it, the eyes of his body, and the eyes of his soul; the Savior
with the one, Salvation with the other: the child with those, the God with
these. And what greater evidence then that of sight, what greater certainty
then that of faith!

If all this be yet too little, if viderunt be to seek, and oculi fail, and mei
be deceived; yet parasti cannot but list it above the weakness of probability,
put all out of question. It was not only seen, but prepared to be seen.

It came not, as the world thinks of other salvations, by chance, but was
prepared. Parasti, Thou have prepared it, prepared by him that prepared the
world.

Higher yet, parasti thou have prepared; done it long since: the preparation
began not now, had a higher beginning, a beginning before the face of all
people, before the face of any people, before the face of the waters, before
the face of the world appeared. Chosen us in him, says St. Paul, then chosen
and prepared him for us, before the foundation of the world, Ephesians. i. 4.

But this parasti is not the blessing of this day. Parasti ab aterno, so to the
Patriarchs too; but in conspectu before our faces, made manifest in these last
times, manifested in the flesh, that is the blessing we this day commemorate. A
body thou have prepared me, that prepared, then lo I come, he will be born
presently, Christmas out of hand. Parasti now complete, this day he was first
made ready and dressed in swadlingclothes.

And prepared. So it came not at man's entreaty, or desert. Nay when he thought
not of it. When Adam was running away to hide himself, then the promise of the
woman's seed stepped in between; and when Religion and Devotion lay at the last
gasp ready to bid the world adieu, then comes he himself who had been so long
preparing, and fulfilled the promise. This a degree of certainty higher then
our imaginations can follow it, that relies wholly on Gods own parasti, without
man's uncertain preparation.

Yet something ado there was to bring this (...) to (...), this salvation to be
seen. A long preparation there was of Patriarchs, Moses and the Prophets, of
Promises, Types, and Figures, and Prophesies for the space of four thousand
years. This long train led the triumph, then comes the Savior, then Salvation.
Sure and certain it must needs be, to which there are so many agreeing
witnesses.

This then so variously typified, so many ways shadowed, so often promised, so
clearly prophesied, so constantly, so fully testified, so long expected, so
earnestly desired. This is the Salvation prepared for us. Whoever looks for any
other may look his eyes out, shall never see it. This Name the only Name by
which we shall be saved, the Name of Jesus.

Yet notwithstanding all that is said or can be said, it is but parasti still.
It Is not Posuisti, prepared for all, not put, set up for all, as if all should
be saved. No, posui te in casum, set for the fall of many, those that will not
turn their eyes up hither, that care not for viderunt, neglect this sight,
slight this salvation. But however this dismal success often comes about,
Parasti it is, that cannot be lost, and in conspectu omnium populorum, for all
it is prepared, for all in general; none excluded this parasti, he that put
parasti into this good Fathers mouth, put in omnium populorum too. Not only the
certainty, but the universality of this salvation, that is the third part of the
Text, and thither are we come. Before the face of all people.

Prepared, that is a favor, and for the people, that is an ample one, and one
step to an universal. People are men, a great company of men, and for men, and
a multitude of men it is prepared, nusquam Angelos, not for Angels, in no wise
for them, not one of them. No they are still the Sons of darkness, no
dayspring from on high to visit them.

For men, and not for the better or more honorable part of men alone, but for
the people too, the meanest sinfulest men in more favor with God then the
Apostate Angels.

And not to some few of those people neither, but to all the people, the whole
people.

But in conspectu totius populi it might be, for all one people, and the rest
never a whit the nearer to salvation; the further off rather when it is* so
restrained, ^niuscujusque populi, would be better for all the people of the
world.

It Is somewhat near the height, that of what we can desire; yet omnium
populorum, it is we need for all people whatsoever, not only all that then were,
but all before up to Abraham, up to Adam, and all since down to us that live
this day, down to all that shall survive us as long as there shall be people
upon earth. Vniuscujusque populi had been enough for the whole world then
alive. Omnium populorum it must be, or the Fathers before, and we since are men
most miserable.

But do not Simeons old eyes deceive him? (...)? what (...)? for all? I know
some quicker sights, some younger eyes that can construe (...) into pauci, can
see no such matter. It may be (...), the glory of the elect Israel at the end
of the Text dims their weak eyes, or peradventure like men overwhelmed with the
news of some unexpected fortune, they think themselves in a dream, and dare not
give credit to their eyes though they behold it; so great and undeserved a
blessing, that it is a labor to persuade 'um that they see it, though they
cannot but see it. Simeons eyes are old enough to ponder objects, he knows what
he sees, and he speaks what he knows, and he speaks no more then the Angel
before told the Shepherds, g^udium quod erit omni populo, tidings of joy which
shall be to all people, erit, shall be for ever.

And say not the Apostles the same also? The Savior of all men, says St. Paul,
1 Timothy iv. 10. specially of them that believe, of them especially, not them
only. Who will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth, 1 Timothy ii. 4. The Savior of the world, St. John iv. 14. A ransom for
all, 1 Timothy ii. 6. God not willing that any perish, not any, 2 St. Peter iii. 9.

Nay, God himself says more, Ezekiel. xxxiii. II. I will not the death, no not of
the wicked, not of a sinner. Much less his death before he be or man or sinner.
That Is no kin to salutare tuum, that is not salvation, but destruction prepared.
And it is not nollem, I would fain not have it so, but plain nolo, I will not;
or more to the word, I not will it, I deny it utterly, Thy destruction is from
thy self, it is none of my doings. Salutare meum, I will the contrary. To put
all out of question, take his oath, Vivo ego, as I live I do not.

And accordingly does the Savior himself send out his general proclamation,
St. Mat. xi. 28. Come to me all that are heavy laden, and who is not? yet do
but come, come who will, and I will ease. He calls 'um all, by that grace they
may come if they will, except you think he mocks 'um: when they are come He
will refresh them.

To take away all plea of ignorance or excuse, we proceed further, In conspectu
omnium; not only prepared for all, but in the sight of all, before their faces.
So prepared that they may see, and know it, know it to be prepared; not that it
might be, and is not, as if indeed the salvation were sufficient in it self;
but God would not suffer it to be so. So though universal, yet so hidden under
obscure and nice distinctions, that few can see it; but withal so evident, that
all may see it, in conspectuomnium, none with good reason deny it.

Had it been (...), they migh have had some pretense and color if they had not
seen it: had it been only in sight; many things are so, which we oft-times do
not see. But (...), that which is just before our faces, we must be blind if we
see not that.

If for all this, they close their eyes and will not see, then (...) is contra
against 'um to confute, to confound their vain imaginations. So (...) will be
against those that cry out the light of righteousness rose not upon us, to
prove the contrary now, (...) to their faces.

There is no idle word in Scripture; every Adverb and Preposition, and Article
the dictate of the Spirit. There are other words he might have used, (...) many
more, but (...) methinks on purpose.

1. It may be (besides what has been said) to distinguist^ the Jews and Us,
since this salvation came. (...) before our faces. When the light's before, the
shadows are behind. So it is with us ever since the Sun of Righteousness arose
this day, since this light of Salvation left the clouds. When the light's
behind, the shadows are before: So to the Jewish Synagogue. Salvation behind
the cloud to them. Nothing before their eyes but veils and shadows; nothing
else took up their eyesight, but we with open face behold the glory of the
Lord.

2. Or may it not be (...) against the face of the world, clean contrary.
That Is for nothing but glory and pomp; God works not as man works; but (...)
against the hair, will have an humble Savior, lowly born, of poor Parentage,
in a Stable, wrapped in Rags, laid in a Manger; no Royal Cradle, no Princely
Palace, without Attendants, without State. The Angels themselves at such a
sight as this could not but (...), bow down, and look, and look again, and
mistrust their eyesight to see God in a Cratch, Heaven in a Stable: and bow
down we must our high towering thoughts, and lay 'um level with that from whence
we were taken, if we would bless our eyes with so hidden secrets, or be
partakers of so great Salvation. They were poor Shepherds that first saw this
happy sight, as it were on purpose to inform us, that the poor humble Spirit
has the first rank among those whoever see Salvation.

3. Or lastly, is it not (...), according to the inclination and capacity of
all people, (...) of the people, (...) durum genus, stony-hearted people those
that set their faces against Salvation, to soften them if possible, or else to
break them in pieces like a potters vessel. Or again (...) of (...) people, so
called from the Cornerstone Christ Jesus, such as had already turned their
faces toward salvation, to further and encourage them. Or (...) and (...) not
only of the people, to their capacity, but to theirs too who were neither his
people, nor people, whose rude barbarisms had exempted them from the number of
civil Commonwealths; who did not deserve the name of people, not of men. (...)
without (...), without either Article or Adjective, such as no body could point
at with an Article, or construe with an Adjective: such as seem here to be
excluded out of (...), that yet one would think includes all. Such as if you
were to number up all the world, you would leave out them: to these (...), to
uncover and show 'um to the world, and out of their thick darkness to light
them the way unto salvation. Which brings me to the benefits, together with the
parties. Light and Glory; Light to the Gentiles, Glory to Israel. A light to
lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of the people of Israel.

I keep Gods method, Fiat Lux, begin with light, Genesis i. 2. I need not tell you
it is a benefit. Truly light is sweet, and a pleasant thing it is, says the
Preacher, Eccles. xi. 7. and Mordecai joins light and gladness together, Hest.
viii. 16. So salutare letificans it is, salvation that brings joy and gladness
with it.

2. Light of all motions has the most sudden, it even prevents the subtilest
sense. And was it not so with this salvation? When all things were in quiet
silence, and that night was in the midst of her swift course, thine Almighty
word leapt down from heaven out of thy Royal Throne, Wisdom xviii. 14. Salutare
praeveniens vota, Salvation that prevents our dreams, and awakes our slumbering
consciences.

3. And when our eyelids are past those slumbers, then Lighten mine eyes, O
Lord, that I sleep not in death. Those dark chambers have no lights. A light to
lighten them, a light to show my self to my self; (...) to reveal my inmost
thoughts, to show me the ugly deformity of my sins will be a blessing. Lumen
revelans tenebras, no dark-lanthorn light, a light to show us the darkness we
are in; our Salutare dispergens tenebras, salvation that dispels the horrid
darkness.

4. And to do that, the enlightening of the medium is not sufficient. In
conspectu, (...) just before us it may be, and the windows of our eyes damm'd
up against it. A light then to pierce the Organ, (...), into it it must be,
Lumen penetrans oculum, salvation not only presented to the eye, but to the
sight, the eye fitly disposed to behold it.

5. Every enlightening will not do that. It must be (...), the light of
revelation. No other will serve the turn; not the light of nature, not the
dictates of reason, not the light of moral virtues, or acquired habits, but
something from above, something infused, such as comes from (...) divine
inspiration. What light else? no remedy, but buried we must be in everlasting
night. Scriptures or revealed truth, the revelation of Jesus Christ, must save
whoever shall be saved. No man can come to me except the Father draw him, St.
John vi. 44. No man lay hold upon the Name of Jesus, or salvation, but by the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit. Lumen divine revelationis, salvation by the
glorious light of Divine Revelation.

6. There is an (...), which yet wants an (...) a Revelation, that wants a
Revelation, such as St. John's, a dark one. This an (...) with a (...), a
lightsome one, such as Revelations are when Prophesies are fulfilled of things
past, not things to come. Lumen Revelationis revelatae, a light of salvation as
clear as day.

It Is time now to ask whither it is this light and revelation lead us. I shall
answer you out of Zacharies Benedictus, S. Luke i. 79. They guide our feet into
the way of peace. Send forth thy light and thy truth, and they shall guide me,
Psalm. xliii. 3. So David, guide me; whither? Psalm. lvi. 13. To walk before God
in the light of the living. One light to another, the light of grace to the
light of glory. So Lumen dirigens, or salutare pertingens ad coelum, salvation
leading up to heaven.

Sum up all. Salvation to make us glad, a light, a light to comfort, not a
lightning to terrify. The lightnings shone upon the ground, the earth trembled
and was afraid: no such, no lightning: Nor St. Paul's light, a light to blind,
but to give light; nor to play about the medium only, but to open and dispose
the weak dim eye. Not by a weak glimmering of nature, nor by a dusky twilight,
but by a clear Revelation: not an ignis fatuus to misguide us out of the way
into bogs and quagmires, but to guide us to peace and to salvation. Lastly, not
a light to any to see only that they are inexcusable, ut essent inexcusabiles,
that seeing they might see, and not understand, a light to light 'um down to
Hell, that they might see the way down through those gloomy shades with more
ease, horror, and confusion; (that is the event indeed sometimes, the end
never;) but thither upward, from whence it comes to (...) at the beginning of
the Text, to (...) at the end. And can your thoughts prompt to your desires any
greater benefits? can you wish more?

And yet if we but consider in what plight the parties were upon whom the rays
of this light shone: the salvation will seem more beneficial. They were in
darkness, and could any thing be more welcome to them that sit in darkness, and
the shadow of death then a light to lighten? That was the miserable case the
Gentiles now were in; Neither have the Heathen knowledge of his laws: 'twas so
in David's time, and so continued on till this days rising Sun scattered the
Clouds: and now the case is altered, Dedi te in lucem gentium, fulfilled in his
time. The Gentiles now enlightened.

Enlightened, what is that? Those that are baptized are said to be enlightened,
Heb. x. So the Gentiles enlightened will be in effect the Gentiles baptized.
Baptized they may be with water, (and they had need of some such cleansing
element, to wash their black, dark, sullied souls:) but there is another
Baptism with the Holy Ghost, and fire, fire that is light, so to be baptized
with light, will be with the Holy Ghost. 'Twas heavy midnight through the
world. Judea was the only Goshen, the land of light, till he that was born this
day breaking down the partition that divided Palestine from the nations, gave
way for the light which before shone only there, to disperse its saving beams
quite through the world. Then did they whose habitations were pitched in the
region of death, whose dwellings in the suburbs of Hell, see a mavelous great
light spring up, that is salus personis accommodata, salvation fitted to the
parties.

Fitted, and tempestively too, to them it never could have come so opportunely.
The light of nature was almost quite extinguished, a light to lighten that
again. The light of grace quite vanished, an (...) for that. The understanding
darkened by ignorance, and error. The will darkened by hatred and malice. The
most civilized Gentiles so much degenerated from the beauty of moral virtues
(if we believe their own histories) so strongly fettered with the bonds of that
uncomfortable night, as if they there lay exiled from the eternal providence,
as the Wiseman phrases it, all in umbra mortis, next door to utter darkness:
when behold this light appears, this Sun rises with healing in his wings.
Figured in the time of his birth, born when the days are shortest, most want of
light; in the dead of night, when the nights are darkest; all, to show
opportunitatem salutis, the opportunity of this salvation.

And is not Gloria as fit for Israelis, as Lux for Gentium? Israel had a long
time walked in light, and not a whit the better for it: that which must convert a
Jew must be gloria, so bright a splendor that must rather command then invite
the eye.

Gloria, glory! and indeed they needed it. So far now were they fallen below
their former credit and honor in the world, so much beneath their ancient port
and state, under the proud tyranny of a strange power, that nothing but glory
could raise up their drooping heads.

I ask though, why gloria Israelis? why so joined? Briefly thus: of them he
came according to the flesh: to them especially was he promised, amongst them
he lived, preached, and wrought his miracles. In respect to him had all their
glory, and all their prosperity was given 'um. In a word, Salvation it self is
of the Jew, St. John iv. therefore their glory.

Yet that Israelis populi should not lift up their crest too high, or despise
those whose weaker light comes short of glorious beams: It Is gentium first,
then Israelis, the Gentiles in the first place here, Israel in the last. When
the fullness of the Gentiles is come in, then for Israel too, then gloria in
excelsis.

And as gentium has the precedence of Israelis, so has light of glory. God
works by degrees, first Lux, then Gloria, first Grace, then Glory. First, he
excites, then co-operates, then infuses, then assists, then crowns. It Is a
preposterous course to look for glory, where the light of grace never had
operation.

But is glory so much the Jews peculiar; that the Gentile never shall rise
thither? It cannot be, yet so it seems at the first blush, Lumen gentium,
gloria Israelis, as if, to each their part. Indeed all have light, and light
sufficient; but it displays not into glory, to any but populi Israelis tui.
When they are become populi tui, thy people Israel, then the light circles into
rays: sufficiens into efficax, and they are saved. But if you mark it, it is not
Israelis, but tui Israelis, Not Israel after the flesh, but the Israel of God:
there we first hear of (...) there light rises into glory, and good hope there
is the Gentiles may prove populi tui thy people; vocavi populum meum, he said
so whose vocavi is enough to make it so: and if populi tui, then Israelis tui,
then they have prevailed with God; if thy people, then thy Israel, and so
inheritors of this glory.

Glory, and glory so near the end of the Text, makes me think of something
without end; the highest pitch of this salvation, the Perpetuity. Glory is a
word proper to that life to come: false and adulterate glories they are that
are below. The glory of the people, that is eternal. Lumen and gloria both meet
in the Text, and where they meet is eternity. 'Twas the complaint of old, that
their Salvations and Saviors too gave place at length to the necessity of
Nature, and were seen no more. Here Is a Savior never dies; that for himself;
and is become the Author of eternal salvation, that for us, Heb. v. 9.

For indeed what is salvation, and salvation prepared for all, Jew and Gentile,
and the light of salvation without glory? many lights there are that go out and
set in darkness, that when the matter, the wiek is worn away, dye into dismal
shades. If the light shines not into glory, we are but in a poor case still.

And so we should be, would not this salvation now prove to be a Savior.
Salutare tuum, be salvatorem nostrum. We told you in speaking of (...), that it
was Gods peculiar. Now we tell you more, (...), must be God. None can be
salvation in abstracto but he; and none but he crown light with glory. So you
have the Divine Nature of this Savior, his Godhead; and yet there is another
word in the Text besides, for that. That Is (...), light. And God is light, St.
John i. 5.

Ay, but sinned we had, and justice required that we should suffer: God cannot.
He that must save us by suffering for us, must be man; he is so. Viderunt
oculi, my eyes have seen it. No man has seen God at any time; therefore man he
was. And prepared; God cannot be so: and prepared with a body, that is plain
enough for factus homo, his Humane Nature.

Now put both together, and you have the union of both natures, both united.
(...), and (...) salvation seen, (...) and (...) salvation prepared, or vidi
and lucem, light seen; or if you will vidi and gloriam his glory seen. We saw
the glory thereof, as of the only begotten Son of God, St. John i. 14. More,
united into one person, (...), all singular, one single person in the Deity.

But there are three persons there, as (...) a contract, the Divinity
contracted unto man: so (...) derived from (...), light fetched from light; a
person proceeding. God of God, light of light, proceeding by way of generation,
Lux lucem generat, one light begets another. So the second Person in the
Trinity, the Son begotten of the Father.

But begotten a Son may be, and not coequal with his Father; a long time after
rather: Light that is coequal with the Fountain, as soon as a light body, so
soon light to an instant. The Son coeternal with the Father, that is egressus
ejus ab aterno, His goings out from everlasting, Mich. v. 2. His eternal
generation.

He has another, his temporal generation, (...) before the face of all people.
(...) is down, so down he came, when he was prepared; that was, when born of
the Virgin Mary.

There are three remarkable differences between this generation of his, and
that of others, in the word Light.

1. Light is all diffused at once, not by parts; now this, then another; and
Christ's Body was framed all at once, not membratim, one member after another,
as other infants.

2. Light enters through solid bodies, as Glass, Crystal, or the like, without
either penetration of dimensions, or cracking the glass. So Christ from the
Virgin Body of blessed Mary, without the least hurt to her Virginity.

3. The light shines in the midst of noisome vapors, yet it self is kept pure
and sincere. In like manner the Deity of Christ joined to the humanity mixes
not with its corruption, nor is defiled by it. Marcion need not fear the truth
of his body, lest our corruption should pollute his Godhead, when the light it
self confutes him, and convinces him, by the infinite distance between it self,
and the power of the Creator.

There wants but one thing more to complete the mystery of this wonderful
Savior, that is his Offices; if we can find them too in the Text, if we can
bring them to viderunt oculi to be seen there, and stray no further, we have
lighted upon a happy Text, (...) indeed, a salvatition and a Savior to whom
nothing can be added. Let Us try.

He is a King, there is one of his Offices, that from (...), thence the Prophet
David seems to gather it, Psalm. 2. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of
Sion. How proves he that? why, within a verse in comes, I shall give thee the
heathen for thine inheritance.

He is a Priest next in gloria Israelis, there is another of his Offices. The
Priesthood the glory of the Jew. The glory is departed from Israel, cries out
Phinehas his dying Wife: why? because the Ark of God was taken, 1 Samuel iv. 20.
and because of her Father-in-law and her Husband, they dead and gone; what were
they? the Priests of the Lord; when the Ark, and Priests are gone, the glory of
Isoael is departed too. They rise and fall together. A Priest then, but not to
Israel, after the flesh alone, or after the Order of Aaron; but Israelis tui,
of the true Israel, more properly entitled to this glory, as being a Priest
for ever, after the order of Melchisedeck.

Lastly, he is a Prophet in (...), there is his third Office, his Prophetical;
the light of Prophecy is the light of Revelation. A Prophet then he is, to
reveal unto us Divine Mysteries, the will of his heavenly Father, to give
knowledge of salvation unto his people, by the remission of their sins, S. Luke
ii. 77.

A complete Savior now. God and man, God begotten the Son, coeternal with the
Father, born into the world, of a Virgin, pure and immaculate, took our nature
without sin, without imperfection, a King for the Gentiles, a Priest for
Israel, a Prophet for both: a King to defend us, a Priest to purge us, a
Prophet to instruct us.

This the Savior, God the Son. He our salvation too. Yet comes not salvation
from him alone, from all three Persons, the whole Trinity that. (...), there is
the Father preparing, sending (...) from (...), there is the Son prepared
coming; (...), how is that but by the graces and gifts of the Holy Spirit?
there is the Holy Ghost opening and enlightening our eyes that we may see him.
All three plain enough in the Text, as in the day: Viderunt oculi, your own
eyes are witnesses.

Here Is a sight indeed might well make old Simeon now desire to close up his
eyes to see no more, Ne vitam hanc posthac aliqua contaminet aegritudine, all
objects henceforth would but defile his eyes.

But what tell you me of Simeons theory? what of salvation, though never so
great? what of in conspectu omnium, though never so general? what of light and
glory, though never so excellent? if I may not back again to viderunt oculi
mei? if, I my self cannot perceive it? if it be so far distant off that I
cannot lay hold of it by mine own eyes of Faith and Hope? If I cannot see it to
be mine, and with St. Paul apply it, Who loved me and gave himself for me, Gal.
ii. 20. Omnium populorum is too large, all may, but all shall not be saved.
Viderunt oculi mei, that is somewhat, when mine own eyes can fix and dwell upon
it.

Nay, that is not full enough, if (...), these very eyes, that so long expected
it, the eyes of my body shall not be partakers of it; if they when they are
fallen into dust shall lie for ever folded up in eternal darkness, if eyes that
weep out themselves in devout tears with looking and expectation shall not rise
with these very bodies to that blessed vision: what reward for all these
sufferings? what recompense?

I Will tell you how to see all, and stay no longer, nor go no further. This is
the day of salvation, salvation day; and if ever, to day he will be seen. Cast
but your eyes up to the Holy Table thither, your very sense may there almost
see salvation, behold your Savior. There it is, there he is in the blessed
Sacrament. There it is prepared for you, a body have thou prepared; his body,
flesh and blood, prepared well nigh to be seen, to be tasted. O taste and see
how gracious the Lord is, Psalm. xxxiv. 8. Go up thither, and with old Simeon
take him in your hands, take him yet nearer into your bowels. Take, eat, you
shall hear one say so by and by. But stay not there upon your sense, upon the
outward element. Look upon him with your other eye, the eye of Faith; let it be
viderunt oculi, let it be both. Let it be viderunt mei, the applying eye of a
special Faith. And that you may be sure not to go away without beholding him,
there is lumen in the Text; and it would do well in your hands to search the
dark corners of your hearts, to examine them. While our hearts are darkened
with sins and errors we cannot see him. And if after strict examination we be
not found in charity, we are yet in tenebris. St. John tells us, do but love
your brother, He that loves his brother abides in the light, S. John ii. 10.
The sum is, Faith must be the eye, Repentance and Charity the light, by which
you shall this day see your Savior, and apprehend salvation: the three
requisites those to a worthy Communicant. So shall you there find light to
guide you out of the darkness of sin and misery. Glory to enstate you in the
adoption of the Sons of God. Salvation with Glory, salvation here, Glory
hereafter.

And when you have satisfied your eyes and hearts with this heavenly sight; Go,
return home to your private Closets, shut up your eyes, never set open those
windows to the vanities of the world again; but with a holy scorn disdain these
painted glories, and let a veil of forgetfulness pass over 'um.

For our viderunt must not end when the Eucharist is past; when we depart this
sacred place. I will take the cup of salvation, says the Psalmist: there it is;
do that here. But I will rejoice in thy salvation; do so, both here and at
home. Et exultabo; and let me see you do so. Let not your joy be stifled in
your narrow bosoms, but break out into expression, into your lips, into your
hands. Not in idle sports, excess of diet, or vain pomp of apparel, not that
joy, the joy of the world, but the joy of the Holy Ghost.

It is salvation that you have heard and seen, and are yet to see to day,
what is our duty now? If it be salvation, let us work it out with fear and
trembling. It is salvation to be seen, some eminent work: let us then confess
we have seen strange things to day. A most certain sure salvation it is, let
not a sacrilegious doubtful thought cast a mist upon it. It is prepared, let us
accept it; prepared for all, let us thank God for so fair a compass, and not
uncharitably exclude our selves or others. God has enlarged the bowels of his
mercy, let us not streighten 'um. It is a light, let us arise and walk after
it. It is a glory, let us admire and adore it.

Was our Savior seen? so should we be every day in the Congregation; was he
prepared to day? let us be always shod with the preparation of the Gospel of
peace. Does he enlighten us, O let us never extinguish or hide that light, till
this light be swallowed up by the light of the Lamb, till this dayspring from
on high prove midday, till Gentium, and Israelis be friendly united in (...),
and no darkness to distinguish them, no difference between light and glory,
till the beginning and end of the Text meet together in the circle of eternity,
till viderunt oculi meet with gloriam, till our eyes may behold that light
which is inaccessible, that light and glory which know no other limits but
infinite, nor measure but eternity.

To which he bring us, who this day put off his glory to put on salvation, that
by his salvation we might at length lift up our heads in glory, whither he is
again ascended, and now sits together with his Father and the Holy Ghost. To
which three Persons, and one God, be given all praise, and power, and thanks,
and honor, and salvation, and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON ON St. Stephens Day.
ACTS vii. 55, 56. But he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly
into Heaven, and saw the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of
God.

And said, Behold I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the
right hand of God.


YEsterdays Child is to day you see become a man. He that yesterday could
neither stand nor go, knew not the right hand from the left, lay helpless as it
were in the bosom of his Mother, is to day presented to us standing at the
right hand of God in the glory of the Father: he whom earth yesterday
entertained so poorly and obscurely; heaven here this day openly glories in.
Now the horn of our salvation is raised up indeed: the Church thus showing us
plainly to day what yesterday we could not see for the rags and stable, that it
was not a mere silly creature, a poor child, or man only that came to visit us,
but the Lord of Glory; so making him some recompense, as we may say to day, for
the poor case she showed him in yesterday.

But that is not the business. Yesterday was Christ's Birthday, to day St.
Stephens; for Natalitia Martyrum, the Birth-days of the Martys were their
death-days called: they then first said to be born, when they were born to
execution. A day placed here, so near to Christ's, that we might see as clear as
day, how dear and near the Martyrs are to him; they lie even in his bosom, the
first visit he makes after his own death was to them, to encourage them to
theirs: The first appearance of him in heaven after his return up, was to take
one of them thither.

And yet this is not all. Christ's Birth and the Martyrs Death are set so near,
to intimate how near death and persecution are to Christ's Disciples, how close
they often follow the Faith of Christ, so thereby to arm us against the fear of
any thing that shall betide us, even Death it self, seeing it places us so near
him, seeing there are so fine visions in it and before it, so fair glories
after it, as St. Stephen's here will tell you.

And if I add that Death is a good memento at a Feast, a good way to keep us
within our bounds in the days of mirth and jollity, of what sort soever, it may
pass for somewhat like a reason why St. Stephen's death is thus served in so
soon at the first course, as the second dish of our Christmas-Feast.

Nor is it for all that any disturbance to Christmas Joys. The glorious
prospect of St. Stephens Martyrdom which gives us here the opening of Heaven,
and the appearance then of Gods glory, and of Christ in glory, may go instead
of those costly Masks of imagined Heavens, and designed Gods and Goddesses,
which have been often presented in former times to solemnize the Feast. We may
see in that infinitely far more ravishing and pleasing sights than these, which
all the rarity of invention and vast charges could ever show us. Here Is enough
in the Text to make us dance and leap for joy, as if we would leap into the
arms of him in Heaven, who stands there as it were ready to receive us, as he
was to day presented to St. Stephen.

I may now, I hope, both to season and exalt our Christmas-Feast, bring in St.
Stephens story, that part of it especially which I have chosen, so full of
Christ, so full of glad and joyful sights, and objects, that it must needs add,
instead of diminishing our joy and gladness.

And yet if I season it a little now and then with the mention of Death, it
will do no hurt. I must do so, that you may not forget St. Stephens Martyrdom
in the midst of the contemplation of the glory that preceded it. That must not
be, for the day is appointed to remember it. And though we shall not designedly
come so far to decipher it (having no more then the praeludium of his death
before us) we will not so far forget it, but that we will take it into the
division of the Text; in which we shall consider these four particulars.

1. His accommodation to his Death. His being full of the Holy Ghost, that
fitted and disposed him to it. 2. His preparation for it. He looked up
steadfastly into Heaven; so that he prepared himself for it. 3. His confirmation
to it. He saw the glory of God and Jesus standing on the right hand of God;
that encouraged and confirmed him in it. 4. His profession at it. Behold, said
he, I see the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of
God: In those words he professed his faith, and proclaimed his vision of it.
By this manner of considering it, we shall do St. Stephen right, and Christmas
no wrong; remember St. Stephens Martyrdom, and yet not forget Christ's being at
it, celebrate St. Stephens memory, and yet no way omit Christ's. He being here
to be looked on as encourager of St. Stephens Martyrdom; as much as St. Stephen
for his Professor and Martyr. By all together we shall fully understand the
requisites of a Martyr, what is required to make one such, to be full of the
Holy Ghost, to look up steadfastly into heaven, to look upon Christ as there,
and as boldly to profess it; to be full of Grace and Spirit, full of Piety and
Devotion, full of Faith and Hope, full of Courage and Resolution; all
proportionably requisite to the spiritual Martyrdom of dying to the world, and
leaving all for Christ; requisite too, all of them in some measure to dye well
at any time, the very sum of the Text, to be learned hence and practiced by us.
If I add all requisite to keep Christmas too, as it should be kept, with Grace
and Devotion, with Faith and courage also against all that shall oppose it,
that our Christmas business be to be filled with the Spirit, and not with meats
and drinks, to look up to Heaven, to look up to Jesus, and never to be afraid
or ashamed to profess it; there is nothing then in the Text to make it the
least unseasonable. I go on therefore to handle it part by part. The first is
St. Stephens accommodation to his Martyrdom, how he stands fitted for it.

And surely he could not be better. Full of the Holy Ghost; Ghost is Spirit,
and what more necessary to a Martyr, then a spirit? The dreaming sluggish
temper is not fit to make a Martyr: he must have Spirit that dares look Death
soberly in the face.

Yet every Spirit neither will not make a Martyr; there are mad spirits in the
world (they call them brave ones (though I know not why) that rush headily upon
the points of Swords and Rapiers: yet bring these gallant fellows to a Scaffold
or a Gibbet, the common reward of their foolish rashness (which they
mis-reckon'd valor) and you shall see how sheepishly they die, how
distractedly they look, how without spirit. The spirit that will bear out a
shameful or painful death without change of countenance or inward horror, must
be holy. Where the Spirit is holy, the Conscience pure, the Soul clean, the man
dies with life and spirit in his looks, as if he were either going to his bed,
or to a better place. It Is a holy life that fits men to be Martyrs.

But spirit, and a holy Spirit is not enough to make a Martyr neither; though
the Martyrs spirit must be a holy one, yet to dispose for martyrdom the holy
Spirit must come himself with a peculiar power, send an impulse and motion into
the soul and spirit that shall even drive it to the stake.

And every degree of power will not do it; it must be a full gale of holy wind
that can cool the fiery Furnace into a pleasing walk, that can make death and
torments seem soft and easy. Full of the Holy Ghost it is, that Stephen is
said to be, e're we hear him promoted to the glory of a Martyr. The Spirit of
holiness will make a man die holily, and the holy Spirit make him die
comfortably; but the fullness of him is required to make him die courageously,
without fear of death or torment, cruelty or rage.

By this you may now guess at Martys, who they are: not they that die for their
folly and their humor: not they (2.) that die without holiness: not every one
(3.) that dies, as we say, with valor and spirit; not they that die upon the
motion of any spirit, but the holy one, that one holy Spirit; not they that die
in Schism and Faction against the unity of this Holy Spirit, the peace of his
Holy Church; none of these die Martyrs: die Soldiers, or valiant Heathen, or
men of spirit they may, but men of the holy Spirit, Martyrs they die not. They
only die such, that have lived holily, die in holy Cause, in a holy Faith, and
in the peace of holy Church, as in the Faith of one Holy Spirit, ruling and
directing it into unity, upon good ground and warrant, and a strong impulsion
so to do, without seeking for, or voluntarily and unnecessarily thrusting
themselves into the mouth of death.

And yet there are strange impulses I must tell you of the spirit of Martyrdom,
which ordinary souls or common pieties cannot understand. Only we must know
that the spirit of Martyrdom is the spirit of Love, the very height of love to
God, which how that can consist with the spirit of Schism, whereby we break the
unity of Brethren, or how a man can so highly love God as to dye for him, and
hate his Spouse the Church, or his Brethren, is inimaginable. Some other
engines there may be, as vainglory, an obstinate humor of seeming constant to
a false principle, an ignorant and self-willed zeal which may sometimes draw a
man to die; but if the fullness of peace and charity does not appear, there is
no fullness of the Holy Ghost, and they make themselves and their deaths but
Martyrs, that is witnesses, of their own folly. He that pretends to be a
Martyr, must have more then a pretense to the Spirit of charity.

II. And not to charity only, but to devotion too. He must (2.) prepare himself
for it, steadfastly look up to Heaven, nay, into Heaven too, fill his Spirit
with divine and heavenly provision for it, with St. Stephen here.

Who (1.) looks up to Heaven as to his Country, whither he was a going. He
longs earnestly to be there. His soul, with holy David's, has a desire and
longing to enter thither. He that looks but seriously up to Heaven and beholds
that glorious Building, those starry Spangles, those azure Curtains, those
lustrous bodies of the Sun and Moon, that vast and splendid circumference of
these glistering dwellings, cannot but thirst vehemently to be there; soul and
flesh thirst for it: O how brave a place is Heaven! how brave even but to look
on. But if he can look, (as here it seems St. Stephen did) into heaven too, and
contemplate the happy Choirs of blessed Saints and Angels, the ineffable beauty
of those inward Courts, the ravishing Melody and Music they make, the quiet,
peace, and happiness, that pleasure, joy, and fullness of satisfaction and
contentment there, the majestic presence and blessed sight of God himself,
with all the storehouses of blessedness and glory full about him, his very
soul will be even ready to start with violence out of his body to fly up
thither.

He that looks thus steadfastly, looks into Heaven, cannot now but look askew
upon the earth: To look up into Heaven is (2.) to despise and trample upon all
things under it. He is not likely to be a Martyr that looks downward, that
values any thing below. Nay, he dies his natural death but unwillingly and
untowardly, whose eyes, or heart, or senses are taken up with the things about
him. Even to die cheerfully, though in a bed of Roses, one must not have his
mind upon them. He so looks upon all worldly interests as dust and chaff, who
looks up steadfastly into heaven; eyes all things by the by, who eyes that well.
The covetous worldling, the voluptuous Gallant, the gaudy Butterflies of
fashion will never make you Martyrs; they are wholly fixed in the contemplation
of their gold, their Mistresses, their Pleasures, or their Fashions. He scorns
to look at these, whose eyes are upon Heaven.

Yet to scorn there, but especially to fit us against a tempest or a storm of
stones, there is a third looking up to Heaven, in Prayer and Supplication. It
is not by our own strength or power that we can wade through streams of Blood,
or sing in flames; we had need of assistance from above; and he that looks up
to Heaven, seems so to beg it. It was no doubt the spirit of Devotion that so
fixed his sight; he saw what was like to fall below, he provides against it from
above, looks to that great Cornerstone to arm him against those which were now
ready to shower upon his head. It is impossible without our prayers, and some
aid thence, to endure one petty pebble.

But to make it a complete Martyrdom, we must not look up only for our own
interests; for we are (4.) to look up for our very enemies, and beg Heavens
pardon for them. He that dies not in Charity dies not a Christian; but he that
dies not heart, and hand, and eyes and all complete in it cannot die a Martyr.
Here we find S. Stephen lifting up his eyes to set himself to prayer; it is but
two verses or three after that we hear his prayer, Lord lay not this sin to
their charge: This was one thing it seems he looked up so steadfastly to Heaven
for. A good lesson (and fit for the occasion) so to pass by the injuries of our
greatest enemies, as if we did not see them, as if we had something else to
look after then such petty contrasts, as if we despised all worldly enmities as
well as affections, minded nothing but heaven, and him that St. Stephen saw
standing there.

All these ways we are to day to learn to look up to Heaven: as (1.) to our
hoped for Country: as (2.) from things that hinder us too long from coming to
it: as (3.) for aid and help to bring us thither: as (4.) for mercy and pardon
thence to our selves and enemies, that we may all one day meet together there.
The posture it self is natural. It Is natural for men in misery to look up to
Heaven; nay, the very insensible creature when it complains, the Cow when it
lows, the Dog when he howls, casts up its head according to its proportion,
after its fashion, as if it naturally craved some comfort thence. It Is the
general practice of Saints and holy persons. Lift up your eyes, says the
Prophet, Isa. xl. 26. I will lift up my eyes, says Holy David, Psalm. cxxi. 1.
And distressed Susanna lifts up her eyes, and looks up toward Heaven, ver. 35.
Nay, Christ himself sighing, or praying, or sometimes working miracles, looks
up to Heaven, who yet carried Heaven about him, to teach us in all distresses
to look up thither in all our actions, to fetch assistance thence. If we had
those thoughts of Heaven we should, I know how little of the eye the earth
should have. Vbi amor, ibi oculus, where the love is, there is the eye. We may
easiy guess what we love best by our looks; if Heaven be it, our eyes are
there; if any thing else, our eyes are there. It Is easy then to tell you St.
Stephens longings, where his thoughts are fixed, when we are told he so
steadfastly looked up to heaven.

And indeed it is not so much the looking up to Heaven, as the steadfast and
attentive doing it that fits us to die for Christ. It Is (...) a a kind of
stretching or straining the eyesight to look inquisitively into the object. To
look carelessly or perfunctorily into Heaven it self, to do it in a fit, to be
godly and pious now and then, or by starts and girds will not serve turn; to
mind seriously what we are about, that is the only piety will carry it. Plus
va^^t hora fervens quam mensis tepens. One hour, one half hour spent with a
warm attention at our prayers, is worth a month, a year, an age, of our cold
Devotions. It Is good to be zealous, says St. Paul, somewhat hot and vehement in
a good matter.

And it had need be a steadfast and attentive Devotion that can hold out with
this But. To stand praying or looking up to Heaven when our enemies are
gnashing their teath upon us, and come running headlong on us, to have no
regard to their rushing fury, nor interrupt our prayers, nor omit any ceremony
of them neither, for all their savage malice, now pressing fiercely on us, but
look up steadfastly still, not quich aside: this looks surely like a Martyr. The
little Boy that held Alexander the candle whilst he was sacrificing to his
Gods, so long that the wick burnt into his finger, and yet neither cried nor
shrunk at it, lest he should disturb his Lords Devotions, will find few fellows
among Christians to pattern him in the exercise of their strictest pieties. Let
but a leaf stir, a wind breathe, a fly buzz, the very light but dwindle, any
thing move or shake, and our poor Religion (alas) is put off the hinge; it is
well if it be not at an end too. What would it do if danger and death were at
our heels, as here it was? Oh this attentive steadfast fastening the soul upon
the business of heaven were a rare piety if we could compass it. This glorious
Martyr has showed us an example, the lesson is, that we should practice it.

But all this is no wonder, seeing he was full of the Holy Ghost. That Almighty
Spirit is able to blow away all diversions, able to turn the shower of stones
into the softness and drift of Snow, able to make all the torments of Death
fall light and easy. If we can get our souls filled once with that, we need
fear nothing, nothing will distract our thoughts, or draw our eyes from Heaven.

Then it will be no wonder neither to see next the Glory of God, and Jesus
standing at the right hand of God.

I called this point St. Stephens confirmation, or his encouragement to his
death. He that once comes to have a sight of God and Christ, of Gods Glory, and
Christ at the right hand of it, of either the one or the other, much more of
both, cannot want strength to die, be the death of what kind it will. It was a
gallant speech of Luther, when he was dissuaded from appearing before the
Council (of Worms I think it was) that he would go thither, though all the
tiles of the houses were so many Devils. Had every stone that was cast at the
Martyr Stephen been a Devil, he would not after this vision have been afraid.
The Lord is my light and my salvation, whom then should I fear? the Lord is the
strength of my life, of whom then shall I be afraid? says David, Psalm. xxvii.
1. and yet he saw nothing like this sight. Gods presence is enough, whether it
be seen by the eye of sense, or by the eye of Faith, to keep us steadfast, to
make death hide its head for fear, while we stand triumphing over it.

I conceive it impertinent to make it a business to enquire too solicitously
what this glory was, and how St. Stephen saw it. That it was some glorious
sight, some high resplendent light or brightness, such as God used to appear
in, as Exodus xxiv. 17. Numb. xiv. 10. 1 Kings viii. 10. to Moses and his
Prophets, there called his glory; or some apparition of Angels in shining
garments winging about a throne of glory, visibly appearing to the eye of the
Martyr Stephen, is the probablest to conceive, and the shining of his face, as
if it had been the face of an Angel, chap. vi. ver. 15. is an evidence it was a
visible appearance.

But no doubt his understanding saw further then his eye into Heaven, that
looked and saw a glory there of which the sense though elevated to his height
cannot be capable. Divinum lumen, says St. Gregory Nissen, the inaccessible
light. Spem in re, says St. Hilary, His hope already. Deum and Divinitatem,
says St. Austin, God and the Godhead. Imo Trinitatem, and that, facie revelata,
says he again, The blessed Trinity unveiled. Futurae vita gaudia, says Bid,
The joys of the other life. These all he saw say they, and we shall make no
scruple to say, in Spirit so he did, as far as humane nature is capable in this
condition.

But without question, Christ he saw in his body standing amidst that glory;
the words are plain for that, and that alone were enough to put courage into
the most coward heart.

To see his Faith confirmed by sight, and Christ's Glory with the Father visibly
appear, to see whom he had trusted, and for whom he had labored and disputed
now with his own eyes in glory, must needs make him kiss the hands that would
now send him so soon to him.

To see him (2.) standing at the right hand of God, as if he were risen from
his sitting there to behold the sufferings and courage of his Martyr that stood
below, now made a spectacle to Christ and all his Angels: that is an honor he
may well glory in.

To see him (3.) standing amidst his hosts, as if he were coming down to help
him: that adds more spirit still.

To see him (4.) standing at the right hand of God, as if he suffered with him,
and was therefore pleading for him, as friends and advocates used to do with
the accused party at the Bar. This infuses yet a greater confidence, that
notwithstanding all his sins or weaknesses he shall now easily prevail.

To see him (5) standing as a Priest to offer him up a sweet smelling sacrifice
to his Father that still increases it.

To see him lastly standing like a judge of masteries at the end of the race or
goal to crown him with a crown of glory, cannot but make him think long for the
death that shall bring him to it.

All these ways Christ may be brought in here as standing for us. In the Creed
we profess him sitting, thereby acknowledging his place in Heaven, and his
right to be our Judge: yet when his Saints and Servants have need of him, he
stands up to see what it is they want, how valiantly they behave themselves; he
stands up to show them who it is they trust, he stands up to help and aid them,
he stands up to plead and even suffer with them, he stands up to present them
to his Father, he stands up to reward them with the garlands of Glory.

Sometimes it is, (oftener it has been when the beginning of Christianity needed
it at first) that by some visible comforts and discoveries he shows himself to
the dying Saint. Often it is that the soul ready to depart feels some sensible
joys and ravishments to uphold its failing spirits. But he is never wanting
with inward assistances and refreshments to those who suffer for him. We must
not look all of us, nor Confessors, nor Martyrs now adays to see Visions and
Revelations with St. Stephen; we are set in a fixed way, where Reason and
Religion so long proved and practiced is able to give us comfort in the saddest
distresses. God does not usually confirm our reason by our sense in the
revelation of himself, or what he expects from us. It may be because the Devil,
grown cunning now by so many centuries of years, has taken up of late (as he is
Gods ape) a way to fetch off souls by some sensible delusions from the Faith;
for he can transform himself (nay, does so, says the Apostle) into an Angel of
light. For this it may be God sends us now to the word, and to the testimony,
and leaves us to reason, tradition, and example of so many ages to expound it.
However this is sufficient that neither God nor Christ will leave us wholly
comfortless, but will surely stand by us when we need, and supply us as there
is.

Indeed he cannot look for such a profession upon it as we find here from St.
Stephen; yet to a steadfast profession of our Faith, those assistances he still
allows us are sufficient. We will look a little upon Stephens though.

And first, here is a kind of profession of the Blessed Trinity, the Holy
Ghost, here at the beginning of the first verse of the Text: God in the middle,
and Jesus at the end.

Here is (2.) a profession of Christ's manhood, whilst he calls him the Son of
Man.

Here is (3.) a profession of his Faith in all of them by his so loud
proclaiming.

Here is (4.) a profession of Gods ready help, Christ's ready assistance to his
Saints in trouble.

Here is (5.) a profession of Gods owning the Christians cause, and gloriously
standing up to confirm and maintain.

Here is (6.) a profession of Christ's opening Heaven to all Believers; that
Heaven is always open to us if we could see it; that Gods Glory shines upon us
to show us the way thither; that Christ stands there to make our way, to guide
us thither.

Here lastly is a profession of his confidence and resolution, that though his
enemies stand pressing now about him, and Death before him, he will not eat his
words, will not renounce his faith, will not slip the collar, will not deny any
thing of what he has said or done, disclaim any thing that he believed, desert
him whom he had trusted, but preach him to his death, and die upon it.

And now the heavens being open, it is good to make what haste we can to enter
it. Moneta a famous Doctor of Bononia, upon the hearing these words, Behold I
see the heavens open, preached soberly upon that they would be quickly shut if
men made no more haste to enter, betook himself presently, says his Story, to a
Religious Order. I say nothing to that particular, but yet must tell you the
words are strong enough (if we would look as steadfastly into them as St.
Stephen did into Heaven) to persuade to a Religious Life. Heaven will not
always be open to us. Patet atri ja^ua Ditis, It Is Hell that stands continually
wide open. We are told by Christ himself that the Bridegroom comes, and the
doors are shut; there will be a time if we continue in sin and negligence when
Heaven it self, nay, Christ himself will not let us in. Take we then our time
whilst Christ stands at the door. Heaven has this day been strangely open to
us, and Christ stood there in a glorious manner; though our eyes did not, our
Faiths I hope did see him there: It Is good taking this opportunity to get in,
we know not whether we shall live to the next opening. Prepare we then our
selves with St. Stephen here by steadfast looking upward into Heaven, by
disdaining and scorning all things below, by vehement earnest longings after
things above, by setting our selves attentively and constantly to our
Devotions, and our Prayers, by holy Charity and praying for Friends and
Enemies, by constant resolutions to live and die to Christ, by a bold
profession of our Faith and continuance in it, by making it our Christmas work,
our Holiday business, our Festival delight: And then, though I cannot promise
you Visions here, while we live below, I dare promise you the blessed Vision
hereafter above, where we shall see Jesus standing at the right hand of God,
and there stand round about him, with this blessed Martyr Stephen, and all his
Saints and Martyrs in the Glory of God for evermore.

A SERMON ON Innocents Day.
St. MATTHEW. ii. 16. Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the Wise men,
was exceeding wroth, and sent forth and slew all the Children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time, which he had diligently enquired of the Wisemen.
THE Text needs no Apology. It Is for the Day. The Day is that of the poor
Martyred Innocents, and the Text the Story of it. Yet what does Day, or Story
here to day? How does the relation of one of the saddest murders that the Sun
ever saw, suit with the news of the gladdest Joy that day e're brought forth?
How do the cries and screeches of slaughtered Infants keep time or tune with
the Songs and Hymns of Angels? An hellish crew of murderers to day, agree with
the heavenly host we heard of three days since? What does Herod so near Christ,
or Childermas in Christmas? Do not both Day and Story want an Apology, though
the Text does not?

Neither of them; they come well now to season our Mirth and Jollities, that
they run not out too lavishly. For we find too often there are sad days in
Christmas too; days wherein we play the Herod's, and kill our Children and our
selves by disorders and excesses, for want of some such serious thoughts: story
and day stand fitly here to mind us of it.

But besides they are well placed to teach us that we must not look only for
gaudy days by Christ; he says himself, he came to send a sword, St. Mat. x. 34.
Sent it to day amongst the little ones: sends sword and fire too sometimes
amongst the great ones in the midst of all their pleasure; and we must expect
it commonly, the closer we come to him. Nor Christianity nor innocence can
excuse us. We therefore not to think it strange when it so falls out, reckon it
rather a Christmas business, the matter of our rejoicing, to suffer with these
Infants for Christ, though we know not why, no more than they: never to think
much to lose our Children or our selves for him at any time, and so bring them
up, that they may learn to think so too. These Meditations I hope are not
unseasonable, no, not in Christmas.

Yet for all that, I ask again, Is it possible that there should be such a
thing in truth? such a wantonness in cruelty as to kill so many thousand
Children so barbarously in a time of peace? is it probable that men should
raise up fears and jealousies of their own, and make such innocent Lambs pay
for it? It Is Gospel you see, so true as that. Such a thing there was in the
days of Herod; and we have seen so much like it in our own, that we may the
easier believe it: Children and innocents slain, and undone for nothing but
because some men with Herod, here, thought they were mocked when disappointed of
their projects, when Christus Domini, the Lords Christ or Anointed had escaped
them, and the Wise men came not in to hinder it: so they grew exceeding wroth
upon it, and make poor Bethlehem and Rachel, all of us still rue sorely for it.

Well then, the Text being so true in it self, so pat to the time, and not
disagreeable to the times of late; so profitable, besides, we will now go on with
it by Gods blessing, and see what we can make of it. It Is the Martyrdom I told
you (and I have the word from S. Cyprian, and S. Austin) of a company of little
innocent babes. And we have in it these particulars.

1. Their Persecutor or Murderer, Herod. 2. The occasion of their Martyrdom,
Persecution, or Murder. His thinking himself mocked. When he saw he was mocked
of the Wise men, etc. 3. The cause of it. Wroth he was, exceeding wroth,
infinitely angry to be disappointed, that is the reason he fell upon them. 4.
The little Martyrs themselves. All the children that were in Bethlehem and all
that were in the coasts about. 5. Their Martyrdom. Slain they were, men were
sent out to kill them. He sent forth and slew them. 6. The extent and exactness
of the cruelty observed in it, all the children from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently enquired of the Wise men.
These are the Parts that make up the History. And if in the pursuing it I show
you a mystery now and then, show you there are more Herod's and more martyred
children then we see in the letter of the Text, that the story is acted over
still every day by our selves, you will be content I hope to take it for an
application, that brings all home. And it will not do amiss even now at
Christmas to mind us of it, that however we may not act it then of all times
else; never pollute our mirth with sinning against our selves or others in it,
or defile our joys with the cries of the oppressed, never bring Herod so near
Christ again, never make a Childermas of Christmas.

To go on yet in the order of the Text, we begin with the Persecutor or
murderer of the Innocents, whose day it is, and that here we find was Herod.

Indeed there were under Officers that did the deed; for some such are
intimated when it is said he sent, and some such there will be always to do the
drudgeries of sin, for them that will employ them: but the wickedness yet is
laid at the contrivers doors: that is insinuated when the (...) notwithstanding
is given to Herod by and by; he did but send, and yet he slew them, says the
Text. Let who will be the Executioner, the plotter or commander is the
Murderer; and God will brand him for it, be he never so cunning, never so
great. Herod with all his men of War shall not escape it.

But may we know what this Herod was? an Idumean first he was, you may know it
by his hands, red and rough. No such hands I hope in Israel, or in the
dwellings of Jacob. They are strangers to that at least that can be so cruel:
and it had been happy for the sheep, happy for us of late, if we had not known
the voice of strangers, men of another Country to help on our ruin, but kept
close to our own Shepherds, as Christ tells us his own sheep do, St. John x. 3,
5.

2. Herod was a man but of an obscure and private family. It Is such commonly
that build up their greatness upon blood and ruin; the noble and generous soul
abhors it.

3. Yet thirdly, this private and mean condition his subtilty and cunning had
now advanced into a Throne; the less wonder still, that he should be so savage.
Tyrants and Usurpers are so ever, jealous and suspicious, fierce and bloody.
They are they that dye their Purples in the gore of Innocents, whilst Kings
even undo themselves with their own mercies. It Is the Stepmother that would
have the Child divided; such only that are for divide, and impera, that are for
Divisions to maintain their interest or their plea. The true Mother had rather
part with her Child and all she has, then see it murdered: But the ambitious
design of power and greatness, the driving on an advantageous interest, the
keeping an unjust possession, are things that slay all before them; nor the
tears of Mothers, nor the cries of Infants, nor the relations of nature, nor
the obligations of friendship, nor the charms of innocence can do any thing
against those furies. Ahab and Iezabel, and Zimri, and Iehu, and Herod are
sufficient witnesses how cheap the heads of all sorts are that seem but to
stand in the way of their designments; how easily Judges and Iudicatories are
packt against them, notwithstanding reason and law stand whole for them.

4. From such a one as I have hitherto presented Herod, we can perhaps look for
no other. But Herod I must tell you (4.) was a great pretender to Religion, a
high dissembler of Zeal and Piety throughout; none more zealous and importunate
to know Christ, and go and worship him, then he, ver. 8. And is he the
persecutor? yes he. It is not all Religion (my Brethren) that is called so: nor
are all for Christ that pretend for him. The greatest Zealots have proved often
the greatest persecutors. And the Proselyte either to a false Religion, or to
the pretense only of a true ( and one of these was Herod) is commonly twofold
more the Child of Hell then he that made him, S. Matthew. xxiii, 15. We cannot,
you see by Herod, trust all pretenders. There are some that varnish over their
very murders with that pretext of Religion; and whilst they pour out the blood
of Innocents upon their Scaffolds, dare say they sacrifice at the Altar of the
God of Justice. And had we not seen and felt it too from some huge Saints and
Zealots, I should have spared the note. But you see e're we were aware we have
discovered mysteries from the Text, and showed you (as I intimated I should)
other Herod's there besides this one. I am afraid I shall show you more anon. In
the interim, shall I give you Herod's Character out of Chrysologus to conclude
the Point? Magister mali, Minister doli, Irae artifex, etc. says he. He was a
master of mischief, a minister of deceit, an artist in cruelty, an inventer of
wickedness, a contriver of villainy, a destroyer of Religion, an enemy of
nature, an oppressor of innocence, bad to all, worse to his own, worst to
himself, from whom Jesus fled, not so much that he might escape him, as that he
might not see him; a fiery Dragon by his name, Herodes jerud es, so Arius
Montanus etymologizes it from the Syriack, a Dragon that devours all like fires
before him, spared not his own if they came but in his way, near a kin (sure)
to the Dragon in the Revelations, Rev. xii. 17. that was wroth with the woman
and her seed, did all he could to destroy it, even the promised seed too, could
he have found him. The fittest tempered man in the world, this, to begin the
persecution of the Church, and by whom we may learn what sort of persons they
are who are still raising or continuing it; Mushromes of a sudden growth, men
newly raised, men covetous and ambitious, proud and disobedient, traitorous and
heady, men without natural affection, brethren removed as I may say, as the
Edomites from the Israelites, great pretenders, though to godliness, and the
power of it, yet without it. Such make the perilous times the Apostle speaks
of, 1 Timothy iii. 2, 3, 4. or the times perilous both to men and children. And
now let us see what occasion they take to do it. Herod's here, was his
conceiting himself mocked by the Wise men.

II. We cannot help men's conceits, though they help on our ruins, nor cure a
vain jealousy, though death attend it at the heels. We perish oftentimes by
mere mistakes. The Wise men mocked not Herod, he only thought so; nor wise nor
good men use Kings or Princes so, though they be Herod's, as bad as can be: God
calls them another way, and he takes it for an affront, that they paid not him
the complement of a visit e're they returned. A hard case, that the attendance
upon a command of God's should prove so prejudicial, that obedience should be a
crime: but we can look for no other, where an Herod is the interpreter of the
action.

And yet (2.) it is harder, a harder case to be undone for another man's error or
omission. It was so here; the Wise men offend, at least are thought so, and the
Children pay for it beyond an imagination. Delirant Reges plectuntur achivi. The
Wise men return another way; Herod fancies himself neglected by it, and the
innocent babes, who were concerned in neither of them, are punished for the ones
omission, and the others mistake.

Nay and (3.) it seems Gods own contrivement too. And does the God of Justice
so little regard innocent blood, as thus to draw it on by the way of a
particular providence, we cannot understand the reason of? It Is enough God
does. We have naught to do but to submit, and think that best that God does, be
it never so hard. Our own wisdom will mock the wisest of us, more then Herod
was by the Wise men, if we pry narrowlier.

For the only business we can see clearly here, is, how small a thing men make
an occasion to commit a villainy. How great a matter does a a little fire
kindle? says St. James iii. 5. Lord! how easily do men raise themselves into an
anger? and in their anger fall presently upon the next comes near them? dig
down a wall too to come at them? Need we had with St. Paul to cut off occasion
from them that desire occasion, 2 Cor. xi. 12. do what we can to do it; for
there are those that will take it, even concerning the Law of our God, as
Daniels adversaries served him, Dan. vi. 4. rather then want an opportunity to
do mischief.

Indeed, I know a mock, an affront, a bitter jest, a cutting word strikes deep,
wounds sore; (and I could wish men would be warier in that point then sometimes
we see them) Kingdoms and Churches have been shattered by it; but there are
mocks as well as scandals that are taken and not given. These I know not how to
cure, and to fence less.

Men think sometimes they are mocked, when disappointed of a sin, of a project,
of doing mischief. Potiphars Wife, when Joseph would not comply with her lewd
desires, she was mocked ( forsooth) the Hebrew servant came in to mock her, when
he would not come in to sin with her; nay and her Husband must bear the blame,
as if he had done it, brought him to that purpose, Genesis xxxix. 14. There, being
disappointed of a sin* was being mocked.

Dalilah (forsooth) she is mocked too, she says, because Samson will not
discover where his great strength lay, Judges xvi. 10, 13, 15. that she might
rob him of it, and destroy him by it. There being disappointed of doing
mischief, was being mocked.

Again, Balaam he is mocked by the poor Ass, smites her with his staff, and
tells her so, when she falls down and would go no further, Numb. xxii. 29.
hindering thereby the project he was going about, of enriching himself with the
wages of unrighteousness. There the disappointment of a rich or gainful
project, is a being mocked.

Nay, sometimes the very denouncing of Gods judgments seems to some men a
mocking, as it did to Lots sons in law, Genesis xix. 8. Sometimes the very
preaching a Resurrection does so too, Acts xvii. 32. I am afraid both do so
still to many now adays, whose Wits are more then their Religion, and their
parts greater then their graces; not to say their portions (too) in this life
fairer (I fear) then in the other. Sometimes (6.) when God bids one thing, and
men another, God sends us this way, and they call that; if we obey Gods order,
and not their ordinance, they are mocked, they think, and slighted, and we must
look to answer it with our peril, and the children unborn perhaps may rue it.
In a word, men will needs think they are mocked sometimes, say here with Herod
they see it too, unless you will betray Christ and his Religion to them, that
they may seize and order them how they please. That Is the brief of the business
here, that Herod so much stomacht, that the Wise men would not do so, would not
tell him where Christ was, that he might murder him.

If now the being disappointed of a sin, of a project of doing mischief; if the
obedience to Gods command, if the protecting Christ, which were all the cases
here; or if the denouncing Gods Judgments against sinners, or the preaching of
the Resurrection, or the defense of our Religion, and not betraying it (which
is almost the parallel case sometimes) must pass with some great men, and men
of wit, for a mocking of them and a sufficient occasion for tyrannical spirits
to bring on ruin and destruction even upon the innocent, and a warrantable
ground to justify War or Murder, rapine or injustice, God help us, and keep
us upon all occasions, we know not when we are safe. The comfort only is, God
is not mocked, he sees it, and disposes it. Christ is safe by the hand, and how
ill soever it falls out, man only is mocked, our enemies are so, and all is well.

III. This for the occasion that brought this days Lambs to the slaughter. But
was there not some cause besides? had Herod no cause to do it? All we find
expressed is, that he was wroth, exceeding wroth: that is our third particular.

And truly that is enough in some men's judgments to cast down all before them.
Enough, we have found it; but cause I cannot call it, to call it right. Man's
own impetuous anger will not excuse the mischief it commits. Anger it self must
have a cause, or it but aggravates the sin; is so near a sin it self, that it is
hard to discer^ and discover when it is not. The Apostle cannot mention being
angry, but he adds with the same breath, and sin not, Ephesians. iv. 26. dares not
leave anger to breath it self without that caution.

Yet supposing the anger not a sin, exceeding is. Though we may perhaps be
angry, we must not be exceeding. Moses and Aaron both paid for it, Numb. xx.
10, 12. lost the enjoyment of Canaan, fell short of their rest by it; and this
same exceeding still disturbs our rest and quiet; nothing more. Moses his just
indignation at the golden Calf made him somewhat oversee himself, when it made
him cast down and break the Tables of the Commandments which God himself had
written with his own finger, Exodus xxxii. 19. A shrewd intimation to us, that
the violence of that passion, even in a good cause sometimes, is very prone
ever and anon to make us do so too, do that in a moral and worse sense, break
the Commandments worse far then they were broken then.

But if the cause be bad, and the wrath exceeding, no wonder if it break out
into all excesses: Shall we examine what it was here? (for the causes of our
angers are not always written upon our foreheads:) Was it that the Magi
neglected his commands, came not to him in their return? that was somewhat, but
that was not it. Was it that he truly thought himself mocked by their not
returning by him? Then indeed it was, but it was not that: that was the
occasion, but not the cause. What was it think we then? why, Christ he saw was
now in a possibility to escape him, and by a misconceit, his Kingdom, he
imagined, lay now at stake, seeing the King of the Jews, whose birth he had
lately heard of, and so much dreaded, was now gotten he feared out of his
reach. This was the business that so tossed him and turmoil'd him; and from it
we learn these five particulars. (1.) What strange fears and jealousies our
interests and ambitions raise within us. (2.) What unreasonable mistakes those
fears and jealousies bring us to. (3.) What hideous cruelties those mistakes
make us run upon. (4.) How hardly Christ himself escapes from them: (5.) Or if
he does, how exceeding wroth and angry we grow upon it.

1. If interest or ambition possess our thoughts, how do we tremble at the very
whistlings of the wind, and start at every shadow? Let Adonijah but beg
Abishag, and he is interpreted to beg the Kingdom, 1 Kings ii. 22. Let Abijah
find Iereboam in the way, and foretell him the Kingdom shall be his when Solomon
sleeps with his Fathers, and Solomon cannot sleep in quiet till he has driven
him out of the land, 1 Kings xi. 40. And

2. When these fears have once seized upon us, what mistakes run we not into?
Ahimelech gives David but a few loaves of bread, and a Sword to defend him in
the way he went, and he is presently mistaken by Saul for a plotter against his
life, for a traitor and a conspirator, 1 Samuel xxii. 13. Many such mistakes men
have made of late, too late, I fear, to be yet forgotten.

Yet forgotten they would be easily, came they not (3.) attended with cruelties
at their heels. Ahimelechs being mistaken unhappily cost him and his family all
their lives, except Abiathar's: Men and Women, Children and Sacklings, Oxen and
Asses, and Sheep, all to the Sword upon it, 1 Samuel xxii. 19. There is no stop
nor bounds to the rage of that error and mistake which interest and ambition
raise or nourish for their own ends and purposes.

It were well Christ himself could escape them (4.) But Christ and Religion
bear the blame as soon as any: And when I told you Ahimelech and the Priests
suffered so deep upon mistake, it was ready enough for you to conceive Religion
cannot always defend it self, or its Priests and Votaries, from the fury even
of an unfortunate Politician, Saul or Herod. And if the Messiah himself, and
known to be so, must be sought out, to be destroyed, even by him who both knew
it, and seemed to desire it, there are men it seems that for their interests
can knew Christ, and yet persecute him. No wonder then if they deal so with his
Children and Servants, and persecute them, though they know them such.

Or lastly, if Christ himself by some peculiar providence be delivered from
their rage, if the grounds of Religion escape sound, the lesser parts, the
Rites and Ceremonies, and lesser points of Religion, the Innocents, must be
massacred, (for we are exeeding angry) and though the Head escape, the lesser
members shall pay dearly for it; which though the great ones do not, the little
ones shall. Herod sends out and slays all the children that were in Bethlehem,
and the coasts about, as many as he can lay hands on. His interests make him
fear, his fears make him mistake, his mistake makes him cruel; and though
Christ's Kingdom be not of this world, nor Christ an enemy either to Herod or
Caesar, yet the politician is bound in honor to justify his own fears, and
rather than put up a fancied affront or slighting, or confess a mistake, wreak
his anger upon the helpless Innocents, and make them both the Martyrs of
Christ, and the witnesses of his own cruelty. Those are they I am next to speak
of.

IV. And I justly call them Martyrs; for if it be the cause that makes the
Martyr (and we say it is) and Christ's cause be that which entitles them more
particularly to that name, I am sure they are no less; their cause was Christ's;
for his sake they were killed, as the Psalmist speaks, all the day long,
accounted too, as sheep, or little lambs, appointed to be slain, Psalm xliv.
22. And you may see them following the Lamb too under that notion, with the
Fathers name written in their foreheads, Rev. xiv. 1. the very first fruits
unto God, and to the Lamb, ver. 4. the first that suffered, that died for him.
Who though they could not some of them speak at all, and other of them but
jabber at the most, yet they all speak out and plain these fallowing lessons.

1. That there is no age too young for Christ's business one way or other. They
that cannot speak for Christ can die for him. They that cannot come themselves
may be brought to him. They that cannot live with him, being just going out of
the world as they are coming in, may die with him in holy Baptism e're they go.
Even of such also is the Kingdom of God, St. Mat. x. 44. and it matters not
whether they go by Blood or Water thither.

Nor (2.) is any age too young to speak out Christ's Glory neither. Out of the
mouths of babes and sucklings have thou ordained strength, thou have perfected
praise, says the Prophet, Psalm. viii. 2. S. Matthew. xxi. 16. and never more
eminently fulfilled then this day; their very cries were songs of praise,
Hosanna's to the Son of David, blessed is he that comes, Hallelujahs in the
ears of God, in whose name he comes. None ever cried it louder, or proclaimed
it higher.

The Choire is a full one too; of all the children of Bethlehem, and the coasts
about, to such an age; 14000. is the least that any say, 44. some. A full
Chorus indeed, a large first fruits of Martyrdom, to teach us, thirdly, not to
doubt of that which is attested by so many witnesses, the coming of Christ, nor
think strange of that condition, which entered with him, which entered first
with Christianity, whilst it yet was in the Cradle, Persecution, and Martyrdom;
but to bear it patiently ever when it comes, seeing Children themselves have
undergone it here by thousands, and trod the way before us.

But they not only teach us patience by their martyrdom, but innocence by their
innocence: a fourth lesson that they give us. Let Herod and all his Hosts, all
the Herod's, and Hosts, and Armies of the world do what they can, they cannot
hurt us if we keep our innocence. Out of the world they may thrust us, but into
Heaven it is they drive us. Here if they please they may truly see themselves
mocked indeed, when against their wills they undo us into a Kingdom, think they
destroy us, but will find at last to their confusion, that they have been the
great instruments to us both of life and glory. Rapiunter quidem, says S.
Austin, a complexibus matrum, sed redduntur gremus angelorum: These Infants,
says he, were snatched indeed from their Mothers breasts, but into the laps of
Angels were they carried, and into the bosom of the Almighty. Quos feliciter
nati, says he, again, How happily were they born that were thus early born for
Christ? how happily are they all born to whom it is given to die for him?
Augustus was deceived, very foully out, when he cried it was better to be Herod's
Hog, then Herod's Child: that Child surely which died among these Innocents,
whatever his other were, was born to a Throne of Glory, to the only Crown and
Kingdom. Enough this to dry up Rachels tears, to stop the tenderest Mothers
moans at any time, when she but thinks she has brought forth a Child to
Christ, and placed him so soon in innocence and glory.

After the thoughts of this, it cannot be grievous if I now tell you of their
Martyrdom or Murder; that as young, and innocent, and many as they were, Herod
sent forth and slew them all.

V. You must not look that I should give you here the several ways and modes of
this bloody slaughter, the various arts of this horrid murder, the diverse
schemes of barbarous cruelty, the cunning sleights of those inhumane Butchers
to delude the tender Mothers, and train the innocent Infants to their deaths.
You must not expect I should decipher to you the horrible fury of that grand
massacre, the terrible countenance of the savage murderers, the ghastly faces
of the astonished Parents, the affrighted postures of the amazed Kindred and
Allies, the frights and flights of the little Children into holes and crannies,
the sad lamentations of weeping Mothers, their disheveled hair, their wringing
hands, their torn breasts and garments, their wild frantic garbs, their fights
and struglings to preserve their babes, the horrible screechings of the dying
children, the moans and sighs and groans that filled all the corners of the
streets; the cries and roarings, and yellings that even rent the Heavens. You
must not think that I can tell you how those tender sucklings were some of them
in a wanton cruelty danced upon the tops of Pikes and Spears; others dashed
savagely against the Walls, some thrust through with Swords, others stabbed
with Poniards, some trampled to death upon the ground, some strangled in their
Cradles, some stifled in their Mothers arms, and others torn in pieces to get
them thence. You cannot imagine I should express the tears, the blood, the
wounds, the barbarousness, the cruelties, the confusions, the consternations,
the terrors, the horrors of that day. I am not skilled in the tracts of
cruelty, nor so good an Orator to express it. Nor were it perhaps a Rhetoric
for Christmas: Only, I can tell you what the Text does me, that slain they
were, all the children that were in Bethlehem, and the coasts about, from two
years old, and under; and Herod did it.

Not himself I confess. There are sins we are ashamed to commit our selves, as
well as sins we cannot commit without company to help us. And such was this; so
horrid, he was ashamed to stand by to own it; so great, he could not act it,
but by involving almost an host of men in the guilt and mischief. A murder
which neither the greatness of the one, nor the multitude of the other, neither
his jealousies nor their obedience, neither his command, nor their trade of
life shall be ever able to excuse, nor any Rhetoric ever find a plea for.

VI. But though I cannot be exact in the relation, I must needs say in the last
place, Herod was in the transaction so exact, that (1.) Bethlehem he thought
too narrow a Stage for this new Tragedy; he takes in all the coasts about;
though the Prophet had plainly cold Christ should be born in Bethlehem, and the
S^nhedrim had so resov'd it to him, and his main business was to murder him:
yet to make all sure, he stretches out his fury to the neighboring towns. By
the way, give me leave to observe, Great Cities are sometimes ill neighbors;
they too often destroy our children by the contagion of their mischiefs, and
ruin the young heirs of the Towns, and Mann^rs that are near them, by the
company that the infernal Herod sends out thither daily to that purpose. But I
retreat, and tell you,

2. Herod was so exact in the designs of cruelty, that he extends the time as
well as the place beyond what he had learned of the Wise men. Christ was now
but a year old at most, (and more probably not so much.) Herod stretches out
his design for two. What Is the reason? why! the bloody man and the unjust
possessor never think they are safe, till they are beyond all reason. For if
Christ was now about two years old, why are the Children of but two days slain?
if but two months or thereabouts, (as some place this business not long after
his being presented in the Temple) why are the children of two years old
demanded to the slaughter?

At least (3.) how comes his own Son into the number? so Macrobius relates the
story, and Augustus alluded to it in his witty speech. This too, to show us how
exactly wicked some men are, that spare neither Kindred nor Children to fix
themselves.

And to give you Herod's cruelty here full: According to the time he had
diligently enquired of the Wise men it was also, says the Text. Very
inquisitive about it he had been it seems, and he missed not a point of it: so
whether Christ was born when first the Star appeared, or whether he was then
only first incarnate and conceived in the Womb, he would be sure he thought to
have him; a year under or ^ver would be sure to reach him: so nice and punctual
is the cruel and ambitious nature to defend its own interest and greatness,
that it cannot rest till it have stopped all avenues and cranies of fear, and
satisfied them to a nicety; and it boggles not at any age or time, or relation,
or diligence, or inquisitiveness to effect it. But it is time now to look home.

Yet if any now should be so inquisitive to ask a reason why God should thus
suffer these innocent Infants thus to be cruelly massacred, though we are not
his counselors, yet we may say, it might be to show the absoluteness of his
Dominion, that he is Lord of life and death, gives and disposes them as he
will. It may be (2.) to teach us that innocence it self is not always a fence
against death, or violence. It may be (3.) to instruct us what they must look
for from the first, that have any relation to Christ at all. It may be (4.) it
was, that by this strange accident and occasion the Birth of Christ might be
proclaimed through the world. And yet fifthly, add but the consideration, that
they were the Children of Bethlehem where Christ could get no lodging, where he
was fain to make the Stable his Chamber, and the Manger his Cradle: and it will
not seem unreasonable that God should thus punish the Fathers in their Children
for it, and leave some of them scarce a Child for their houses, who would not
leave him a house for his Child. But lastly, God's thus advancing the deaths of
these little Infants into a Martyrdom, giving them the first honor to die for
Christ, and as it were redeem his life with theirs, so early bringing them to
Heaven by suffering, there is no reason of complaining; nothing to cloud our
Christmas joys, or disturb our rejoicing. Those little ones are singing in the
Heavens about the Lamb, Rev. xiv. 3. And 'twill do well that we here upon earth
should sing Blessing, and Praise, and Glory, that God has so exalted them, and
comforts us; make it one of our Christmas Carols, our songs of joy.

Yet somewhat to allay your joy, that your mirth run not too high, I shall
after this long story tell you a tale in your ears will make them glow. Herod
is not dead, nor sleeps. We are all of us Herod's, or Herodias's, men and
women, one way or other.

We have been as deep dissemblers of piety, some among us, as ever Herod; many
as bloody too, upon it. Many sad errors and mistakes have many of us made, and
many a thousand souls have miserably perished by them. Angry men have been
exceeding angry, that the Magi, many a wise man and good, would not comply with
their interests and projects, or communicate with their sins. Angry, some I am
afraid still, that Christ, that Religion is escaped their fury, that their
kingdoms are not established, though it was Christ's that was by them pretended,
but just as the Worshipping him was by Herod. And I cannot tell but there may be
yet some projects of sending out to slay men and children to begin Herod's work
anew, the War afresh.

But I am sure, though we cannot reach that mystery, there is one you will
easily understand, shall serve for an application to drive all home. Our own
children are daily murdered by us, their very souls destroyed: a sadder
cruelty than Herod's.

Not to tell you that the Mother kills them often in the Womb by the folly and
vanity of a dress, by an unruly humor, by a disordered appetite, by a heedless
or giddy motion; nor that the nurse kills them at the breast by her
intemperance and excess, though it be too true: Yet it is a less murder, that,
than to kill the soul, and yet this done oftener. And I Will assure you first,
they venture their Children hard that deny them Baptism: I Will say no more. But
after that they are smothered, some in their Mothers lap, killed with kindness
and indulgence; stabbed through with poniards, others, undone with cruelty and
unkindness; trampled to death others, and perish by their friends carelessness
and neglect. Some are dashed against the Walls, their brains beat out at least,
wholly corrupted by false principles from their cradles: Some we trail along
the streets, and destroy them by our ill examples; some we choke with
intemperances and excesses, even in Christmas too; some we destroy our selves,
others we send out servants and companions to destroy, give them such to tend
them as teach them pride, and scorn, and anger, and frowardness, and vanity,
and wantonness, e're they understand them; such as teach them to bestow a
curse, e're they can ask a blessing, and to speak ill e're they can well speak.
And as if we were resolved to make all sure, we send them abroad to be bred
sometimes to places of licentiousness and debauchery, that they may be sure to
be gallant sinners, because forsooth it is pedantick and below a Gentleman to be
a through Christian, to suck in the tame and conscientious principles of
Christianity; and all upon Herod's mistake, that wise men will mock us for them,
when it is only that they are wisely wicked and mistaken.

And now shall we cry out of Herod's cruelty, and do worse our selves? shall we
complain he killed the Innocents to day, and we make nothing every day to
destroy even innocence it self? A less, far lesser cruelty it would be to take
these tender blossoms and shake them off the tree, than to suffer them to grow
up to fruits which we can but curse our selves, and others will curse the tree
from bearing them. Nay, a greater mercy it were to the poor children, to dash
them against the stone^, to smother them in the Cradle, to overlay them in the
bed, to dispatch them any way innocent into the other world, than to nurse them
up to our own follies, than to pollute them with our debaucheries, than to
corrupt them with atheistical and ungodly principles, than to defile them with
lusts, than to train them up to be wicked, or merely vain and unprofitable,
breed them up to Hell, to eternal ruin. Yet the tender and delicate woman,
that can scarce endure to set her foot upon the ground for niceness, thus daily
murders her beloved darling without scruple.

But indeed, do men and women pray for Children as a blessing, that they may
only turn them into a curse? only desire them, that they may destroy them?
surely one would think they did so, that sees how great a study it is to make
them vain, and proud, and envious, and lewd, and wicked. Our Herod's and
Herodias's cut off the baptized Infants heads, as they of old did the Baptists.
We even dance them to death, and compromise them to Hell as soon almost as the
baptismal waters are dried upon them. And must old Herod and Herodias only bear
the blame of murdering Innocents, and we that do it over and over escape without
an accusation? In this too, worse then Herod: He only slew the Children from
two years old and under, we under and above too, from their first day upward,
till we have rendered them incorrigible to age, and past recovery. The subtilest
policy of the Devil, this, thus to kill poor Children from their infancy, when
they neither know who hurt them, nor how they came in the confines of that
spiritual death they dwell in; can only say, they were so dealt with in the
house of their friends.

What shall we say my beloved, when these murdered Children shall cry out
against us, out of their miserable Cells at last (for they will do then at
least as these did from under the Altar long ago) How long, O Lord, how long, O
Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them that
spilt it, on our Fathers, and on our Mothers, and on our friends, that thus
untimely sent us hither, when we might otherwise have come to thee? whither
shall we turn, what shall we answer? or rather because we cannot answer, let us
take heed we handle the matter so, that we come not to it. We pretend to love
our Children, and thereupon we strive to make them rich, and fine, and great,
and honorable: why do we then beggar them from their Childhood, with bringing
them up to those vanities that will undo them? why do we deform them with sins
and vices, lessen them with education, make them dishonorable by training them
up in ignoble and dishonest principles? why do we in all these ruin them from
the first? At least why do we not love our selves who (for ought I know) must
needs perish with them, and perish for them, for thus destroying them?

Were we but kind to our own souls, we would be to theirs: But to fill up the
measure, we play the Herod's, and act the murderers lastly upon our selves. We
daily stifle those heavenly births of good desires and thoughts that are at any
time begotten in us by the Holy Spirit, and walk on confidently to death and
darkness.

But we have acted Herod's part too long, and I fear I have been too long upon
it. To be short now, let us turn our slaughtering hands upon our sins and vices,
kill them, mortify them, and henceforward act the part of the blessed
Innocents; set our selves from this day to better practices, study the two
grand lessons of the day, Innocence and Patience; Innocence in our lives, and
Patience in our deaths, or rather patience in them both. Study them our selves,
teach them our Children, and continually preserve them in those happy ways,
that when we shall have served our several generations, and go hence, we may
all meet at last, Fathers, and Mothers, and Children at the great Supper of the
Lamb, and together with these blessed Innocents in the Text, follow the Lamb
for evermore. Who, etc.

THE FIRST SERMON ON THE Circumcision.
2 COR. v. 17. Old things are past away, behold all things are become new.
AS face in water answers face, so does the face of the Text the face of the
Church in the times we live in, where old things are past away, all things
become new. But as where the faces are like, the minds often are not so, so the
sense of the Text, and the sense of the Times are as unlike as may be, however
like the words be to them. Old legal Ceremonies and old corruptions past in the
Text; Old corruptions, and old heresies and errors renewed in the Times. The
glorious Gospel of Christ newly appearing with affections answerable to it in
the Text; A Gospel I know not whose, not of Peace, but of War, not of Love and
Unity, but of Faction and Schism, with affections and courses according, in the
times. New things, such as belong to the new Man, righteousness and true
holiness, passed over, as unnecessary or unprofitable, all good order
antiquated and out of date, cast away as old things, all good things quite
ruined and decayed.

It were to be wished (but it is but merely to be wished, scarce hoped, I fear)
that the sense as well as the words might fit us, that the new things in the
Text, were the new ones of the Times; that the old ones here, were the old ones
there; That the new year but lately entered, might bring us this news.

But however, I may wish and hope too, I hope, that we in particular will take
occasion from it to renew our hearts with the year, and begin it in newness of
life and conversation, to live the new year like new men, better than of old.

And though the new times, as now they are, will not agree with the Text, no
more than these new men of the times their Sermons do in words only, at the
most; yet, because I love to speak seasonably as well as soberly, a Text in
season, if I may have leave to fit the Text to the old time of Christmas, there
can be nothing more suitable to both the words and meaning of the Text, than
this holy Feast, and the meaning of it.

From this Feast, from Christ's birth it was that all old legal ceremonies had
their pass, to pass away; from hence all things both in Heaven and earth are
reconciled, by him all things made new, by him the old man abolished, and the
new man created in us; the old Law abrogated, the new Law come in place; the
old Law of Works anulled, the new Law of Faith established; all old things past
away, all things become new, through his coming into the world.

And the use and moral of the whole Feast, and the three solemn great days in
it, is no more than that we would let old things pass, old worldly affections
die, lay off the old, and become new men all; Be (1.) regenerate in our
spirits, and new born with him upon Christmas Day. Have our old man (2.)
circumcised, our old fleshly members mortified upon Circumcision-day; and be
wholly renewed in all our parts upon the same, as New-years-day. Begin (3.) the
public profession of our renovation, and new service with the Wise men,
worshipping, adoring, and presenting him our gifts upon the Epiphany, or
Twelfth; so changing our old Master, and the service of sin, for our new Master
and his service; forgetting the old, and pressing on to the new.

Thus you have a perfect Christmas Text, and more evidently a New Years one;
yet both, both in words and sense. I have given you the whole sense of it from
the Feasts of Christmas, and both told you their meaning, and the Texts; what
the several days of the Feast teach you, and what all the parts of the Text
would have you learn: of which this is the sum, That through Christ all old
things, the old Law, the Law of Moses, the old corruptions of Nature, the law
of sin are past away, done away, and abolished, and a new law established, new
grace brought to us, new affections created in us; all through him, and by his
coming: and that whosoever is in Christ, in whom he is come, in him old things
are past away, all things are become new, he is a new creature quite, in the
words that usher in the Text: so the parts of it will be two.

1. What since Christ's coming is become of all things? What is the state of the
Gospel? And 2. What upon that is become of those that are in him?
For to understand the Text fully, we are to consider it, (1.) as a general
proposition, concerning the state of the Gospel of Christ, that old things in
general are past away, and all things altogether become new, through it, and
him. (2.) As a particular application made to any man that is in Christ, it is
truly in that state, that in him old things are past away, all things become
new.

1. Now in the general, old things are past away, that is become of them, of all
old things, since Christ's coming; and all things else are become new, that is
become of them, or so are they become.

2. In particular, this is become of them in whom Christ is, or who are in him,
true sons of the Gospel; old things are past with them, and all things in them
become new.

I shall add, a third as the proper Use both of Text and time of the old days
and the new year; what is most becoming us, for whom also Christ came, to whom
still he daily comes, even to cast away all old corruptions, and in all things
to become new.

I begin with the Text as it may be applied to the general state and condition
of the Gospel, where we shall consider it first respectively, then absolutely:
(1.) In comparison with the estate of things, both under the old Law, and under
the Gentile infidelity; that the Gospel is a state where both all those old
legalities are abolished, and heathen errors done away. (2.) In it self, that
the Gospel is a new state of affairs and things, where all things are become
new.

Old things, those must be first; and they may all be reduced to these two
heads, God's way of dealing with the Jews, and his way of dealing with the
Gentiles. With the Jews first, where both the old way of his Service, and the
old way of his Providence, those two grand things that include all the rest,
are to be examined how they pass.

His service consisted (1.) in Sacrifices, and they are done; no more blood of
Bulls, or Lambs, or Goats; they could not make the comers thereunto perfect,
Heb. x. 1. so they are gone.

His service (2.) consisted in outward washings, Heb. ix. 10. but they could
wash no further than the flesh, cleanse no more then the outward man: Not the
putting away the filth of the flesh, says S. Peter, 1 S. Pet. iii. 21. that is
nothing, for that is but a vanity to stand on, vain, and to so little purpose,
no wonder if that way of serving God be vanished too.

His service (3.) was much then in meats and drinks, Heb. ix. 10. this they
might eat, and that they might not; but all to perish with the using: Why are
you any longer subject to those ordinances about them? says St. Paul, Col. ii.
20, 22. For meats for the belly, and the belly for meats, but God shall destroy
both it and them, says he again, 1 Cor. vi. 14. so they pass too.

His service (4.) stood much in Holy Days, new Moons, and Sabbaths, Col. ii.
16. but they were but shadows of things to come, the Body is of Christ, ver.
17. 'twas time they should be packing, when the reality of things were come.

His service (5.) was especially notified by Circumcision; but Circumcision is
nothing, 1 Cor. vii. 19. that is passed away indeed to purpose, the greatest
passing, to pass into nothing.

His service (6.) was confined to the Temple of Jerusalem, to that only Altar
there: but it was but a figure, for the time then present, says St. Paul, Heb.
ix. 9. and you see how the present time is past; there was no way into the
holiest, ver. 8. whilst that was standing, 'twas but necessary that also should
pass away, and neque in hoc neque in illo, the time was coming that they should
neither worship in this nor that, nor that at Gerizim, nor that at Jerusalem,
S. John iv. No, there should not be left so much as one stone upon another,
says Christ, St. Mat. xxiv. 2. that is passing away indeed.

His service (lastly) was in a manner all type and shadow, Heb. x. 1. Not so
much as the image of things themselves. And the shadows must needs away, when
the Dayspring begins to visit us, and the Sun arises. Away shadows, get you
behind us; we see our Sun of Righteousness up, and risen on us: and it is fit we
should turn our backs upon our shadows, and worship and adore him. The Persians
did so superstitiously to the Sun in Heaven, we must do it devoutly to the
spiritual and eternal Sun of Glory.

For how much are we bound to Christ, to God in Christ, that he has freed us
from those imperfect, yet costly Sacrifices, those troublesome abstinences,
those unprofitable washings, those strict severities of new Moons and Sabbaths,
that painful Rite of Circumcision, those long Journeys to Jerusalem to worship
those empty shadows, and given us full perfect liberty of meats and drinks, and
all things else; the doing whereof is no real profit, and brought home his
Temples and Service to our doors, our happiness into our bosoms. Though all
those old things be passed away, let not his goodness in passing them away ever
pass out of our memories, nor a day pass without praises to him for it, nor the
relation of it pass out of our lips without all thankfulness and humility.

And there will be more reason for it, if we reflect now upon the course of his
old providence, altered toward us. In the old way of his providence and
dispensations with the Jews, He first led them only with temporal promises, fed
them only with such hopes, Deuteronomy. xxxviii. no other to be found the whole old
Bible over. We must not now look for the same dealing, we; Afflictions are made
our glory, 2 Cor. xii. 9. and we blessed by them, St. Mat. v. 11. our hopes
higher, our promises better, Heb. viii. 2. So let the other pass, no matter.

He awed them, secondly, with temporal punishments; they could not sin but they
were presently punished for it; sometime a Plague, another while the Sword,
then wild Beasts and Serpents, now Dearth and Famine, sometimes a fire from
heaven, another time a gaping of the earth and swallowing all; seldom but some
exemplary or sudden death, or some strange visitations, were the method God
used to bring the rest into order and obedience. Such things are rare among us,
whom God terrifies with the threats of future judgments, that we might have the
longer time for our repentance and amendment; his providence is now much fuller
of patience and long suffering to bring us to it, his anger and fierceness is
passed away.

He comforted them, thirdly, by only obscure and dark Prophesies, so dark that
he often that spoke them did not perfectly understand them. All those
Prophesies are now plain to us, and those shadowy expressions lightened and
cleared by Christ. He opened his Disciples understandings, St. Luke xxiv. 45.
that they might understand them, and from them we have all those former
Praedictions clear as the midday Sun: Those obscure things, or the obscurity of
those things, are also passed away.

Fourthly, The old way then was, Do this and live, a sad Covenant of Works,
which yet we were not able to perform. That is done away in Christ, and the
Covenant of Faith come in the room, Iustus ex fide, to live by that an easier
way for us.

Fifthly, Gods way then with them was by Rites and Ceremonies, old things which
neither we, nor our old fathers were able to bear, if we believe St. Peter,
Acts xv. 10. these, to be sure, a good providence for us that they were among
the things that were done away, 2 Cor. iii. 7, 11.

Lastly, The very subject, as we may say, of his Providence, is altered too. In
the days of old it was commonly none but the rich and honorable, very few else
that were employed in the great services of the Law, insomuch as it was a
Proverb, Spiritus Sanctus non requiescit super animan pauperis; The holy Spirit
never lights upon the poor man's soul. But now the contrary, (...) the poor are
preached to, and the poor preach too, and Blessed are the poor. The way of Gods
dispensation is strangely changed, that old way past too.

What can we then do less than pass our selves into his service, under his
protection? Than pass our souls and spirits out of our lips in praises and
thanksgiving? That all those beggarly Elements, as the Apostle calls them, Gal.
iv. 9. those temporal promises and threats; that heavy slavish servitude, that
dealing with us as with untoward children under the rod, or as slaves and
servants is past from us; that we are now at the liberty of Sons, and the
honor of being the friends of God, such to whom God is now pleased in Christ
to reveal his secrets and mysteries so long hidden, even from the beginning of
the world, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. iii. 9. and into which the Angels desire
to look into, 1 Pet. i. 13. That he has now revealed them unto babes, Mat. xi.
25. That no condition now, be it never so poor, or mean, or weak, but is made
partakers of his grace and glory in the face of Jesus Christ. How great a
comfort and glory is it to us, that all old things are thus past away, and all
things become new? Yet there are worse old things behind, the old things of the
Gentiles, which we are to consider now, both what they are, and how they too
are past away. The old errors, and the old sins of the Gentiles, they are the
old things of the Gentiles, and they are past.

1. The old heathen ignorance and error; They were in a shadow indeed, the very
shadow of death, Luke 1. 70. a thick black darkness, the very Region of death,
and Land of darkness, says the Prophet; they knew not God, says the Apostle,
Romans i. having their understanding darkened, because of the blindness of their
heart, Ephesians. vi. 18. All these shaddows are dispersed, all this darkness past
away when Zacharies day spring rose upon them; they are not now what they were
before Christ came, they are much enlightened.

2. Nor appear their sins now of so deep a blackness, since Christ suffered for
them also. Before we read of nothing but the Idolatries, the Vanities, the
Abominations of the Heathen: that they were alienated, wholly alienated from
the life of God through the ignorance that was in them, Ephesians. iv. 18. walking
after their own lusts, and in the vanities of their wicked mind, being
delivered up to the Prince of the air, who wholly ruled and worked in them,
Ephesians. ii. 2. But these things were passed over by the mercy of God in Christ,
and even they also received the new Covenant of Grace and Pardon.

And in the second place, the way of Gods Providence toward them also, as well
as toward the Jews, past into another mode. It was in old time, but a Job, but
an Vriah, but an Ittai, but a Iethro, but a Na^man in an Age; an Vzzite, a
Hittite, a Gittite, a Midianite, a Syrian but now and then; Israel was the only
Goshen, the only Land where the light shone free. The case is altered now by
Christ. Indeed for a while, till the Children were first served, or at least
first offered meat, it was, Go not into the way of the Gentiles, St. Mat. x. 5.
But when Christ had now completed his work, and was going up to heaven, then
Go and preach to all Nations was the style; and Lo I send thee far unto the
Gentiles, Acts xxii. 21. was St. Paul's Commission, and others after him. So the
Partition Wall is now past through, and the distinction of Jew and Gentile,
that old difference, past away.

Nay, secondly, the other branch of Gods dealing with them is so too. In those
times of ignorance God winked at them, tolerated, or at least not punished
them, says St. Paul, Acts xvii. 30. But now he commands all men every where
to repent, says he; the old course is past, Gods way of dealing with them now
is become new.

Thus we have another ground of thanks and praise, that God has not only freed
us from the servitude of the Law, but from the slavery of Satan; not only from
the dusky shadows of the Jewish, but from the dismal darkness of the Gentile
Coasts. Let not this pass further without a Song of praise.

But how shall we now worthily praise him for the next, for making all things
new: Novus Rex, and nova Lex, a new King, and a new Law. Novus Grex, and novum
Regnum; a new Church, and a new Kingdom. Novum Testamentum, and novum
Sacramentum: new Covenants, and new Sacraments: Novum Sacrificium and novus
Sacerdos; a new Sacrifice and a new Priesthood: Novum Templum, and novum
Altar; a new Temple, and a new Altar. Novus Spiritus, and nova vita, a new
Spirit, and a new kind of life: All new.

1. Novus Rex, a new King; we have no ordinary one neither: a King with an
Ecce, Ecce venit, both in Prophet and Evangelist; Behold thy King comes, says
Zachary, Zach. ix. 9. and S. Matthew xxi. 5. says the same. A King worth
beholding: The Wise men came I know not how far to see him, S. Mat. ii. 2.

2. And with a new Law he came, a new Commandment, S. John xiii. A perfect Law,
S. James. i. 25. A Law of liberty, chap. ii. 12. A royal Law, ver. 8. of the
same Chapter, The Law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, Romans viii. 2. The
old Law was a bondage, this new one makes us free, as it follows there.

3. A new Church he came to gather, much different from the old: A Church
purchased by his Blood, a costly one, Acts xx. 28. A glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but holy and without blemish, Ephesians.
v. 27. much larger than the old; an universal Church, all the Gentiles also new
come in, the utmost parts of the earth, the confines of it, Psalm. ii.

4. A new Kingdom there is come too; a Kingdom above all Kingdoms, the Kingdom
of Heaven, S. Mat. iii. 2. A Kingdom of Grace; and a Kingdom of Glory; a
Kingdom never heard of before Christ's coming with it: no news, no hopes, no
mention of the Kingdom of Heaven all the old Scripture through; those exceeding
great and precious promises reserved for us, 2 S. Pet. i. 4. They under the Law
were led like Children with the nuts and rattles of temporal promises and
rewards: Christ first promised a Kingdom for the recompense of reward; a
Kingdom too wherein we are all Kings, Rev. i. 6.

This new Kingdom (5.) brings a new Covenant, novum Testamentum; take
Testamentum how you will, for a Covenant or a Writing; and novum either for the
Covenant of Grace, or for a new Schedule of Scripture that contains it: we find
both new now, Heb. ix. 15. I will make a new Covenant, says God, Ier. xxxi. 31.
And he did so, says the Apostle, Heb. viii. 6. But what was it? I will put my
Laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; and I will be to them a
God, and they shall be to me a people, etc. for I will be merciful to their
unrighteousness, and their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more,
ver. 10. 12. a Covenant of pardon and remission, such as the Sacrifices of the
Law could not give, were not able. And new Books we have it written in, as
authentic as those old ones in the Jewish Canon, where we may find all sealed
by the testimony of the Spirit, Heb. vi. the Author of the new Testament as
well as of the old.

6. The new Church has its new Sacraments. Ite and Baptizata, for Ite and
Circumcidite; Baptism for Circumcision, and the Lords Supper for the Passover;
in both which of ours there is more than was in theirs, in those legal
Ceremonies; not only outward signs as they, but inward graces.

7. New Sacrifices, the calves of our lips, instead of Calves and Goats; the
sacrifices of Praises and Thanksgivings, nay the sacrifice of a contrite heart,
and humble spirit, the sacrificing of our lusts, and the offering up of our
souls and bodies, a living, holy, acceptable Sacrifice, Romans xii. 1.

8. A new Priesthood to offer them, an unchangeable Priesthood now, Heb. vii.
24. Christ our High Priest, and the Ministers of the New Testament, 2 Cor. iii.
6. as so many under-Priests to offer them up to God. Christ offered himself a
Sacrifice, offers up also our Prayers and Praises to his Father, has left his
Ministers in his Name, and Merits to do it too: and this a lasting Priesthood,
to last for ever.

9. We have a new Altar too; so St. Paul, Heb. xiii. 10. an Altar that they
which served the Tabernacle have no power to eat of. Take it for the Cross on
which Christ offered up himself; or take it for the holy Table, where that
great Sacrifice of his is daily commemorated in Christian Churches: Habem, says
the Apostle; such an one we have, and I am sure it is new.

10. Temples we have many new; the Temples of our bodies, 1 Cor. vi. 19. those
both to offer in, and offer up: and (2.) Churches many, for that one Temple so
long since buried in dust and rubbish.

11. There is above these a new Spirit, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. not the spirit of
bondage again to fear, but the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba Father,
Romans viii. 15. the spirit of love, and not of fear; the spirit of Sons, and not
of Servants; a spirit that will cause us to walk in Gods Statutes, keep his
Commandments, and do them, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 27. a new thing indeed, that can make
the Beasts of the Field to honor him, as the Prophet speaks of it, Isa. xliii.
19. the Dragons and the Owls to do so, the most sensual, fierce, cruel, and
dullest natures bow unto him, that gives waters in the Wilderness, and Rivers
in the Desert, Isa. xliii. 19. 20. that blows but with his wind, and these
waters flow, Psalm. cxlvii. 18. this is a new spirit that is so powerful.

And from this spirit it is that we (12.) receive new life and vigor, that we
walk not under the Gospel so dully and coldly as they under the Law, where the
outward work to the letter served the turn; but according to the spirit, in the
inward purity of the heart, as well as in the outward purity of the body.

To which, lastly, there is a new inheritance annexed, a new Heaven, and a new
Earth, which we may look for according to his promise, 2 St. Pet. iii. 13.

And are not these new things all good news, worth our rejoycings? Can we be
ever old that enjoy such mercies? are they not enough to revive the dying
spirit, nay to raise the dead one to set forth his praises, who thus renews us
as the Eagle renews his mercies to us every morning, makes us Kings and
Priests, gives us easy Laws, and pleasing Covenants, effectual Sacrifices, and
saving Sacraments; turns our bodies into his Temples, and our hearts into
Altars; makes us a glorious Church, and builds us Churches; inspires us with a
new Spirit, and gives us a second life, gives us a Kingdom, gives us Heaven and
all? This is the new state under Christ, since his coming ended and renewed our
years unto us. And therefore says our Apostle, just before the Text, If any man
be in Christ, he is a new creature; all this new work is done upon him: that is
the second way we are now to consider the words, That in the Christian, truly
such, all old things are past away, and all things become new.

He is dead to sin, Romans vi. 2. and he is dead to the Law, Romans vii. 4. or if
you will, sin and the Law are both dead to him, they can hold him no longer, he
is alive unto God, Romans vi. 11. new created in righteousness and true holiness.

Will you have it more particular? Why first then, the Heathen ignorance and
error that is past with them, they are enlightened, Heb. vi. they know God, and
are known of him; they are light in the Lord, the very children of it. The
Heathen sins they are past with them: in them they walked once, Ephesians. ii. 2.
such they were some of them, 1 Cor. vi. 11. but now they are washed, but now
they are sanctified, but now they are justified.

Nor are they now (2.) under so slender a providence as the poor Heathen were:
God visits them often now, and not only now and then, and suffers them not to
go on, or fall back again into the old ways of infidelity.

But they are not only out of the Heathen condition, but out of the Jewish too;
no more in bondage to the Law. The sacrificing of Rams and Goats, of all
sensual affections, is done already; the unreasonable part is mortified in
them; they have been washed, and need be washed no more; they are obliged to no
differences of meats; no Jewish Sabbatizing, no Circumcision, no one particular
place of Worship, no legal Rites or Ceremonies, Christ having abolished in his
flesh the Law of Commandments, says S. Paul, contained in ordinances, Ephesians.
ii. 15. We are now at liberty, he has made us free.

And we are now (3.) under a new course of providence. God leads us now by
spiritual and eternal promises, he threatens spiritual and everlasting
punishments, guides us by a clearer light than Prophecy, the evidence of the
Word and Spirit, ties us not up to the Covenant of Works, nor empty Ceremonies;
these things are past: Makes us not rich that he may accept us, but accepts us
as we are: He reckons not of us by our wealth, or honor, or learning, or our
parts, we know no man so now, ver. 16. not Christ so now according to the
flesh; we value not any man now for any thing but holiness and righteousness,
for so much as he is in Christ. Nor does the Christian value himself now for
any thing but for that of Christ which is in him: riches he contemns, honor he
despises, learning he submits; all outward and external privileges and
commendations he lays at the foot of Christ, devotes them to his commands;
these are all old, worn, tattered things, not worth the taking up; nothing now
worth any thing but Christ, nothing but Christ, and those new things those
graces are in him.

Thus old things are past with the true Christian; but (2.) all things also are
become new in him. He has a new heart, and a new spirit; he has no more a heart
of stone, but a heart of flesh; a soft, tender, pliable heart, a meek and well
disposed spirit, a loving spirit; he is no more what he was, the old ego, he
has a new understanding; things look not to him as they did of old, he vilifies
the world and worldly things. His affections new, he affects not what he did
before; he contemns all things below: He is a King, and rules over his
passions; he is a Priest, and sanctifies them with his Prayers: he lives under
a new Law, the Law of the Spirit, and not the Flesh; he makes every day new
Covenants with God: A Member of the Church he is, and the Kingdom of God is now
within him. He is a great adorer of the Sacraments of the Church, and daily
offers up himself a Sacrifice to God, his Soul and Body, and all he has, and
pours out his praises. His Body is the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and the Altar
of his Heart burns with the continual fires of Devotion and Charity. He now
lives no more, but Christ lives in him, that is the new life he leads, and it
leads him into glory. A new thing of which he has a glimpse, and a kind of
antipast here, that makes him relish nothing else, but cast all behind his back
as old rags and dirt, to press forward to the mark for the price of the high
calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. iii. 14. This is the new Creature, the
new man, in whom old things are past away, and all things become new.

And shall all things become new, and not we? shall all old things pass away,
and we remain in our old sins still? every thing be clothed with a new luster,
we only appear in our old rags still? Certainly we cannot judge it reasonable.
Better use I hope we will make of this days Text, of this New Years lesson. Put
off, says the Apostle, concerning the former conversation, the old man, which
is corrupt according to the deceitful lusts, and be renewed in the spirit of
our minds, and put on that new man which after God is created in righteousness
and true holiness, Ephesians. iv. 22, 23, 24. It Is his counsel must be our practice.
The time past of our life may suffice us, says S. Peter, 1 Pet. iv. 3. to have
wrought the will of the Gentiles. It is sufficient, it is sufficient. It Is time
now we unlearn our old lesson, unravel our old work, leave off our old course
of life, and begin a new to live henceford to righteousness, and not to sin; to
God, and not to men. The new entered year calls for it, the Text calls for it,
the Blood of Christ spent at his Circumcision lately past, which yet this day
(and some days still to come) commemorate, cries for it, that we would no
longer count the blood of the new Covenant an unholy thing, but betake us to
it, and live by it after a new fashion in newness of life. I call you not to
legal washings, but the washings of Baptism and Repentance; not to Jewish
Feasts, but Christian Festivals; not to sacrifice Lambs and Sheep, but your
Souls and Bodies; not to old Ceremonies, but the new substance, the
Righteousness of Jesus Christ. Let him now begin his new reign in you, let his
new Commandment of Love be obeyed by you, his Church, purchased so dearly, not
be cowardly deserted by you; keep his Covenant, frequent his Temples, adorn his
Altars, reverence his Priests, follow the guidance of his Holy Spirit, when he
inspires good motions into your hearts; amend your lives, and become all new
men in Jesus Christ.

And when all these old things shall pass away, and the new Heaven and Earth
appear, when he that sits upon the Throne, Rev. xxi. 5. shall make all things
new, then shall we be all made new again, even these old decayed ruins of our
bodies too, and both souls and bodies clothed with the new Robes of Glory, that
shall never pass away, but be ever new, ever glorious for evermore.

THE SECOND SERMON ON THE Circumcision.
St. LUKE ii. 21. -- His Name was called Jesus. --
ANd to Day it was that He was called so, when eight days were accomplished for
his circumcising. And they did well to call him so, for it was the Name the
Angel named him before he was conceived in the womb. And he could be called by
no better: For Nomen super omne nomen, says St. Paul of it, Phil. ii. 9. A name
it is above every name, for above all principality, and power, and might, and
dominion, and every name that is named not only in this world, but also in that
which is to come, Ephesians. i. 21. A Name that has all things in it; that brings all
good things with it; that speaks more in five letters, than we can do in five
thousand words; speaks more in it than we can speak to day, and yet we intend
to day to speak of nothing else, nothing but Jesus, nothing but Jesus.

The sooner then we begin the better. And to begin the sooner, we shall set
upon it without either the Circumstances before or after in the verse, or the
Ceremonies either of Preamble, or of Division of the words.

Only for Method sake, and memory, I shall show you the fullness and greatness
of this Name in these seven Particulars:

It Is a Name of Truth and Fidelity. It Is a Name of Might and Power. It Is a Name
of Majesty and Glory. It Is a Name of Grace and Mercy. It Is a Name of Sweetness
and Comfort. It Is a Name of Wonder and Admiration. It Is a Name of Blessing and
Adoration.
A faithful, mighty, glorious, gracious, comfortable, admirable, blessed Name
it is, given Him to Day to be called by; but to be called by, and to be called
upon by us for ever, that we also may be filled with the truth, and power, and
glory, and grace, and sweetness, and wonder, and all the blessings of it. This
is the sum of what we have to say of this Great Name; and now we go on with the
Particulars.

A Name it is first of veracity and fidelity, of faithfulness and truth. This
Jesus is but the old Ieshua (...) so much mentioned, so often fortold, so long
expected all the Scripture through. The Greek termination (of^) only added, that
we might so understand that all those Types, Prophesies, and Promises were now
terminated, and at an end in this (...) in this Jesus: the Greeks and Gentiles
taken in too, to fulfill all that had been before named or spoken any way
concerning him. The testimony of Jesus is the very spirit of Prophecy, Rev.
xix. 11. Prophecy had neither life nor spirit without it; and the Name of
Jesus is the very Amen to it, Rev. iii. 14. All the Promises of God, too, in
him are yea, and in him Amen, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. i. 20. His very name is
the Amen, Rev. iii. 14. The faithful and true witness in the same verse.
Absolutely faithful and true, Rev. xix. 11. Nay, This same Name Jesus, from
(...), to save, was rightly given him in this sense, first, that it saved the
honor of God, and the credit of his Prophets, that their words fell not to the
ground, but were all accomplished and made good in his blessed Name. A good
Name the while, for us to hold by, for our souls to rest on, for our hopes to
anchor on, that is so faithful and true to us, will not fail us in a word or
tittle.

II. And indeed it need not, for it is (2.) a Name of Power. A Name (1.) at
which the Devils roar and tremble, Jesus, thou Son of God, what have we to do
with thee? A Name (2.) that not only scares the Devils, but casts them out, and
unhouses them of their safer dwellings. A Name so powerful (3.) that pronounced
even by some that followed not Christ with the Apostles, St. Luke ix. 49. that
were not of so confident a faith, or so near a relation to him, it yet cast
them out. So mighty (4.) that in it many of those also cast out devils, did
many wonderful works, St. Mat. xvii. 22. to whom he will profess he never knew
them, who must therefore at last depart down to those Devils they cast out; A
name, it seems, that though in a wicked mouth, has often done wonders. So
powerful (5.) that no disease or sickness, no ach or aile, no infirmity or
malady could stand against it. His Name, says St. Peter, has made this man
whole whom ye see and know, Acts iii. 16. His name made that man, makes all men
whole. So powerful (6.) with God himself, that he cannot stand against it,
cannot deny us any thing that we ask in it. If ye shall ask any thing in my
name, I will do it, says Christ, St. Ioh. xiv. 14. whatsoever it be, verse 13.
and my Father will do it too, St. Ioh. xv. 16. In a word, Jesus signiffes a
Savior, and a Savior is a name of power. He that saves either himself or
others must be no weakling; The stronger man in the Gospel at least, St. Luke
xi. 22. mighty to save, as the Prophet speaks, Isa. lxiii. 1. But he that saves
us from the powers of darkness must be the strong and mighty God too; and so is
his name, Isa. ix. 6. or the devil will be too strong for him. O thou God, who
art mighty to save, save thy Servants from him; save us from all the evils and
mischiefs he plots against us, that through thy Name we may tread them under
that rise up against us.

III. So will this Name be glorious too: so it was, and so it is we are to show
you next, a Name of Majesty and glory.

Take it from the reason the Angel gives of the Imposition, St. Luke i. 31, 32,
33. Thou shall call his Name Jesus. Why? Why, he shall be great, and shall be
called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give him the Throne of
his Father David; and he shall reign over the house of Judah for ever, and of
his Kingdom there shall be no end. The whole together nothing, but the Angels
comment upon the name Jesus, nothing but the interpretation of the name: where
we consider first, that it is a royal name, the name of a King; not of any King
neither, but a King by succession; not any new upstart King, but of a King from
the lineage of ancient Kings: not of any hereditary or successive King neither,
but of one from the Kings of Judah, Kings of Gods own making; none of Ieroboams
lineage, or any others of the peoples setting up: more glorious than so. And
yet more of a King, whose Kingdom shall have no end; that is a glorious King
indeed. All other Kings die and leave their Kingdoms and their names behind
them half wrapped up at least in dust and rubbish: this has an everlasting
Kingdom, and an everlasting Name; he lives ever, and that lives so too. But of
his Kingdom there shall be no end, has another sense too. All the ends of the
earth shall come in unto him, there shall be no particular end or bound of his
Dominion. Upon his holy hill of Sion indeed it is God sets him, Psalm. ii. 6.
But so there, that he gives him the Heathen for his inheritance, and the
uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, ver. 8. that he may rule them
thence. He is both an everlasting and an universal King. Nay lastly, the King
of Kings, his Name is written so upon his thigh, Rev. xix. 16. So glorious a
Name has he, such a superexaltavit there is upon it, so highly exalted is this
name Jesus, Phil. ii. 9. So highly, that some Commentators and Grammarians
would have it the same with the Name Jehovah; then surely it is full of Majesty
and Glory: (...) only, say they, is added either to make it effable, which was
before ineffable; to make it possible and lawful to be uttered, which was
before scarce either; so infinite was the Majesty of that great Name: Or (2.)
to intimate to us that God now is become man, (...) taken out of (...) which
signifies a man, and put into his own Name of Jehovah, so making it Iehosuah,
or Iesuah, which is our Jesus, and the Name now given us to be saved by.
Whether this Criticism will hold or no, the name Emmanuel, which, says S.
Matthew, was fulfilled in this of Jesus, so fulfilled that the Evangelist
quotes the Prophets words of calling him Emmanuel, fulfilled in the calling of
him Jesus, S. Matih. i. 21, 22, 23. as if both were the same; that name (I say)
has Gods Name in it to be sure; El is one of his, so with us it is there
joined; enough to render it glorious: and the Angel telling us in his
interpretation and reason of the Name, that he was the Son of the Highest,
intimates it was a Name of the highest Majesty and Glory. And what can we say
upon it less than burst out with the Psalmist into a holy exclamation, O Lord
our Governor, O Lord our Jesus, how excellent is thy name in all the world! It
is all clothed with Majesty and Honor, it is decked with light, it spreads out
it self in the Heavens like a curtain, it lays the beams of its chamber in the
waters, it makes the cloud its Chariot, it comes riding to us upon the wings of
the wind, the Holy Spirit breaths it full upon us, it makes the Angels its
Spirit to convey it, it makes the Ministers of it a flaming fire, it laid the
foundation of the earth, it covers the deep with its wings, covers Heaven and
Earth with the Majesty of its glory.

IV. Yet so it might, and we never the better, but that, fourthly, it is a Name
of Grace and Mercy, as well as Majesty and Glory. Jesus is a word of which I
may more justly say, as Tully says of the Greek (...) that it contains so much
ut Latino uno verbo exprimi non possit, It cannot be expressed in any one Latin
or English word, or any one indeed besides it self. Mercy and Grace dwell in
it; it engrosses all, and without it there is none any where to be found; no
Mercy out of Jesus, no Grace but from Jesus, no Name under heaven given by
which we can be saved, but the Name of Jesus, Acts iv. We are Baptized in the
Name of Jesus, Acts xix. 5. We receive remission of our sins in the Name of
Jesus. Ye are justified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, 1 Cor. vi. 11. Ye are
sanctified in the Name of the Lord Jesus, in the same verse. We are glorified
by the Name of Jesus, in that Name we live, in that name we die. To Jesus it is
we run for grace and assistance whilst we live. To Jesus we cry for Grace and
Mercy when we die. To Jesus we commit our spirits when we breath them out. We
can neither live nor die without our Jesus.

Thy name, says the Spouse, is ointment poured forth, Cant. i. 3. Now Oil has
three special uses, for light, for meat, for medicine. We have all in Jesus,
(1.) He is the light that lights every one that comes into the world, St.
John i. 9. (2.) He Is the meat that never perishes, S. John vi. 27. and feeds us
up to everlasting life, S. John vi. 54. (3.) He Is the cure and medicine of all
our maladies. He wants nothing that has Jesus, and he has nothing that wants
him.

Omnia Jesus nobis est si volumus, etc. says St. Ambrose. Jesus is all things
to us if we will. Curari desideras medicus est, si febribus aestuas fons est,
si gravaris iniquitate justitia est, si auxilio indiges virtus est, si mortem
times vita est, si ire desideras via est, si tenebras fugis lux est, si cibum
appetis alimentum est. Do thou want health? he is the great Physician. Art
thou fried in the flames of a burning Fever? he is the wellspring to cool thy
heat. Art thou over-laden with thine iniquity? he is thy righteousness to
answer for thee. Do thou want help? he is ever ready at hand to succor thee.
Art thou afraid of death? he is thy life. Would thou fain be going any
whither? he is the way. Art thou in darkness and fear to stumble? he is a
light to thy feet, and a lanthorn to thy paths. Art thou hungry, or thirsty? he
is nourishment, and food, and meat, and drink, the truest. What is it that thou
desire, that he is not, that this name will not afford thee? Why, it heals
our sicknesses, it supports our infirmities, it supplies our necessities, it
instructs our ignorances, it defends us from dangers, it conquers temptations,
it inflames our coldnesses, it lightens our understandings, it rectifies our
wills, it subdues our passions, it raises our spirits, and drives away all
wicked spirits from us; it ratifies our petitions, it confirms our blessings,
and crowns all our prayers. In this name they end all that end well, through
Jesus Christ our Lord. In thy name, O blessed Jesus, we obtain all that we
obtain, through it we receive all that we receive; so that say we may well with
that holy Father, Jesus meus and omnia, Jesus meus and omnia, Jesus is my all,
Jesus he is and all. I have nothing else but him, I will have nothing else but
him, and I have all if I have him.

V. And well may we now say fifthly, it is a name of sweetness and comfort too,
a seet name indeed: ointment we told you it was, and a sweet ointment it is,
that fills all the house with its precious odor; insomuch as it makes the
Virgins therefore love thee, says the Spouse there, in the forecited place of
the Canticles, Mel in ore, in aure melos, in cord subilus, says S. Bernard,
It Is honey in the mouth, it is music in the ear, it is melody in the heart. The
soul, and all its powers; the body, and all its members, may draw sweetness
thence. O how sweetly sounds the Name of Jesus or a Savior to one in misery,
to one in danger, to one in any calamity or distress! how does it rejoice the
heart, and quicken the very bones! Gyra and regyra, versa and reversa, says the
devout S. Bernard, and non invenies pacem vel requiem nisi in solo Jesus.
Quapropter si quiescere vis pone Jesus ut signaculum super cor tuum, quia
tranquillus ipse tranquillat omnia. Turn you, and turn you again, which way you
will, which way you can, you can never find such peace and quiet as there is in
Jesus, you will find none any where but in him. If you would fain therefore lay
you down to rest in peace and comfort, set the seal of Jesus upon your heart,
and all will be quiet: no dreadful visions of the night shall affright you, no
noon days trouble shall ever shake you. In the midst of that terrible storm of
sto^es about St. Stevens ears, he but looking up and seeing Jesus, falls
presently into a quiet slumber, and sweetly sleeps his last upon a hard heap of
pebbles, more pleasantly than upon a Bed of Down or Roses. For it is remarkable
that the holy Martyr there calls out upon the Name of Jesus rather than that of
Christ, as if that only were the name to hold by in our last and greatest
agonies. Nor is it to be forgotten that this Name was set upon the Cross, over
our Saviors head, to teach us that it is a Name which set upon the head of all
our Crosses will make them easy; the thought of Jesus, the reference to that
holy Name, the suffering under that, will give both a sweet odor, and a
pleasant relish to whatever it is we suffer. This looking unto Jesus, as the
Apostle advises, Heb. xii. 2, 3. will keep us from being weary, or fainting
under them, will make us conquerours, more than conquerours, Romans viii. 37.
sure of our reward to sweeten all: For neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor
Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature shall be able to separate us from
the love of God which is in Christ Jesus, ver. 38, 39. This same Jesus at the
end fixes and fastens all: the love of God in Jesus will never leave us, never
forsake us: keep but that devoutly in our hearts, and piously in our mouths,
and we need fear nothing. Come what can, it sweetens all. Methinks St. Paul
seems to find a kind of delight and sweetness in the very repeating it, he so
often uses it, begins and ends his Epistles with it, garnishes them all through
with it, scarce uses the very name of Christ without it; as if it even sweetened
that, at least made it sweeter, and made the Oil and Chrism with which Christ
himself was anointed, run more merrily and freely to the very skirts of his
clothing. So that now, is there any one sad? let him take Jesus into his heart,
and he will take heart presently, and his joy will return upon him. Is any one
fallen into a sin? let him call heartily upon this Name, and it will raise him
up. Is any one troubled with hardness of heart, or dullness of spirit, or
dejection of mind, or drowsiness in doing well? in the meditation of this Name
Jesus, a Savior, all vanish and fly away. Who was ever in such fear that it
could not strengthen? who in any danger that it could not deliver? who in so
great anxiety that it did not quiet? who in any despair that it could not
comfort and revive? That we are not sensible of it is our own dullness and
experience. If we would but seriously meditate upon it, we should quickly find
it otherwise. Nothing would please us where this Name were not; No discourse
would please us where it was not sometimes to be heard; No writings delight us
if this Name were left out. All the sweetest Rhetoric, and neatest eloquence
would be dull without it; our very prayers would seem imperfect which ended not
in this very Name. Our days would look dark and heavy which were not lightened
with the Name of the Son of Righteousness; Our nights but sad and dolesom which
we entered not with this sweet Name, when we lay down without commending our
selves to God in it. Our very years would have been a thousand times more
unhappy than even those which we have seen of late, would be nothing but
trouble, discontent, and misery, did they not begin in this Name, were they not
yearly ushered in under the protection of it. Were not this, His Name was
called Jesus, proclaimed to day, to begin it with, we might call the year what
we would, but good we could not call it. This setting forth Jesus a Savior in
the front, is that which saves us all the year through, from all the unlucky
and unfortunate days that men call in it. All the ill Aspects of Heaven, of all
the Stars and Planets grow vain and idle upon it, and our days run sweetly and
pleasantly under it. The Psalmist seems thus to prophecy and foretell it, Psalm.
lxv. 12. Thou crownest the year with thy goodness, and thy clouds drop fatness.
This day crowns the year, this Name crowns the day, all our dwellings would be
but a sad wilderness all the year without it; but they rejoice, and laugh, and
sing, Hills and Valleys too, being thus blessed in the entrance of the year with
this happy Name. I end this point (though so sweet that I part with it
unwillingly) with a stave or two of devout Bernards Jubilee or Hymn upon it.

Nil canitur su^vins, auditur nil jucundius,
Nil cogitatur dulcius, quam Jesus Dei filius, etc.
Jesus dulcedo cordium, Fons viv^s, lumen mentium,
Excedens omne gaudium, and omne de^iderium.
Nec lingua valet dicere, nec litera exprimere,
Expertus potest oredere, quod si^ Iesum diligere.
There is nothing sweeter to be sung of, nothing more delightful to be heard,
nothing more pleasant to be thought of than this Jesus. Jesus the delight of
hearts, the light of minds, above all joy, above all we can desire; the tongue
cannot tell, words cannot express; only he that feels it can believe what
sweetness is in Jesus. A long song he makes of it: It would not be amiss that
we also made some short ones, some ejaculations and raptures now and then upon
it. Give us but a taste and relish of the sweetness of thy blessed Name, O
Jesus, and we shall also sing of it all the day long, and praise thy Name for
ever and ever, and sing with the same Father, Jesus Decus Angelicum, in aure
dulce can^icum, in ore mel mir^fic^m, in csrde nectar coelicum, O Jesu, thou
joy and glory of Men and Angels, thy Name is Music in our ears, honey in our
mouths, heavenly nectar to our hearts, all sweetness, all pleasure to us
throughout, wonderful sweet.

VI. Nay, wonderful in all, for it is a Name of wonder and admiration. Wonderful
is one of the names the Prophet calls him by, Isa. ix. 6. And Cabalistical wits
have picked wonders out of it from every letter in all three languages.

In the Hebrew there are four letters (...) and (...), and from the
signification of these letters rise the mystery. Iod signifies a hand, Schin a
tooth, Vau a nail or hook, and Ain an eye: the hand is the instrument of power,
the teeth one of the instruments of voices and words, the nail an instrument in
his passion, and the eye an instrument or great discoverer of mercy and pity.
By all these he is our Jesus; by his power he overthrew our enemies, which
would have slain us; by his word he revives our souls when they were slain and
dead: by his Passion he redeemed us from our sins, and for his own mercy sake
he did all these.

In the Greek there are six letters (...), which according to the old device of
vailing names in numbers, amount to the number of 888. the first letter is 10.
the second 8. the third 200. the fourth 70. the fifth 400. and the last 300.
which put all together, make up that number: and by reason that eight is the
number they say of the Resurrection, that falling out the eighth day, the day
after the Sabbath, which is the seventh, include this Mystery, That in Jesus is
our rest and Resurrection, to eternal quiet. The name of Antichrist is covered
in the Revelation under the number of 666. Now the six days are days of labor,
pain, and trouble; the seventh is but a short day of rest whilst we are here,
it is only the eighth day that follows after all, which must close up all in
everlasting glory, free from all labor, pain, and troub^^ and this is found in
no other name, than in the Name of Jesus, nor given us in any other. And that
it may not pass for a mere fancy, the Cuman Sybills verses thus foretold his
Name many years before.

Tunc ad mortales veniet mortalibus ipsis,
In terris similis natus patris omnipotentis
Corpore vestitus, vocales quatuor, autem
Fert, non vocalesque duas, binum geniorum.
Sed quae fit numeri totius summa docebo,
Namque octo monades, totidem decades super ista,
Atque hecatontadas octo, infidis significabit
Hominibus nomen. T^^ vero mente teneto.
There shall come, says she, into the earth the Son of the Almighty Father,
clothed with flesh like unto us. Four Vowels and two Consonants shall his name
consist of, and the number of them be, eight unites, eight tens, and eight
hundred, that is, 888. So here is wonder upon wonder, to make it wonderful.

3. In the Latin we have five letters, JESUS, and by the old short way of
writing among the Romans, of the first letter for the whole word, the subtle
fanciers of the Cabala will tell us these five letters in the Name of Jesus
intimate the fullness of its perfection, that it is jucundum, efficax, sanctum,
verum, salutiferum, that it is full of joy, efficacy, sanctity, verity, and
salvation. Thus you see we have so rendered it as to find the Mystery in English
name, that it is a sweet and joyful Name, an efficacious and powerful Name, a
sanctifying and justifying Name, a Name verifying all Types, and Prophesies,
and Promises, and a salutiferous and saving name too. Five glories to himself,
five benefits to us by it; or as I may have otherwise as fully expressed them,
Justification, Election, Sanctification, Victory, and Salvation.

And now let the Jew come with his Rasche Theboth, with his first letter for a
word, and write (...) for Jesus; meaning thereby maliciously (...) Let his Name
be blotted out: it will fall upon himself. His name will surely be blotted out
of the Book of Life, who goes about to abuse this, or who has not his portion
in the Name of Jesus.

I should add one Mystery more, (...) which is in the Hebrew Name of Jesus is,
say they, a letter with three equal fangs joined all together, and may denote
the Trinity, where the three Persons are equal and all united. And then we have
a mysterious Name indeed, the whole Godhead, Trinity in Unity in it; and yet a
(...) besides (as we told you before) for the Humanity. So a perfect Savior of
both Natures, expressed perfectly in his Name. God and Man, and all the whole
Trinity employed in the business of our salvation. A wonderful Name indeed.

But (2.) it is also wonderful without a Cabala, full of plain wonders, as well
as of mysterious.

1. It Is a new Name, and yet Ioshuah the Prince, and Iosuah the Priest, and
Joshua, or Jesus the Son of Syrach had the same name all; and is it not then a
wonder that it should yet be new? But theirs were given them by men, this him
by an Angel. Theirs signified only a temporal deliverance, this spiritual and
temporal both: theirs a particular, this a general salvation: Theirs lastly,
merely signified, this very name effects also our salvation and deliverance.

2. A name that no man knew but himself, Rev. xix. 12. No man can tell the
wonders of it. No man can pronounce it right neither, without an immediate
assistance from above, 1 Cor. xii. 3. No man can say, the Lord Jesus, but by
the Holy Ghost.

3. The wonders that are wrought by it make it truly wonderful, that in it, or
by it, or through it, such mighty things both are and have been done, even by
men that only outwardly professed it, and only sounded the letters of it, as you
have heard already.

It Is wonderful (lastly) sure, that it should force even the Devils to bow down
to it; not only depart their Lodgings to give it room, but even be compelled
themselves to worship it: yet so we find it, Phil. ii. 10. Those things under
the earth, that is, the Devils also, so doing and confessing.

And shall we now think much to do as much, to do what all things in Heaven,
and Earth, and under it, even in Hell too, do to it? bow the knee and worship
it? It is a Name, says the Apostle, given him to that purpose, for us to pay
our duty and homage to, ver. 9. It Is a Name of blessing and adoration, says our
last point, Venerandum nomen Jesus, a Name to be blessed and adored.

First then, bless we God for his holy Name, for the benefits and comfort we
receive by it.

Bless we (2.) the Name it self, praise, and magnify, and glorify, and give
thanks unto it. They are the expressions of the Holy Pen, Psalm. cxlv. 2.
cxxxviii. 2. lxxxvi. 9. cxl. 13. they are not mine: so you have authority
enough to do it, if you think the Holy Ghost knows how to speak.

Bless we (3.) our selves in this Name, when we lie down, and when we rise up;
when we go out, and when we come in: for in thy Name, O blessed Jesus, shall we
tread them under, that rise up against us: Nothing shall be able to hurt or
damage us, when we put our selves under the protection of it. If afflictions
and troubles press hard upon thee, and embitter all thy days, this Name is the
tree whose wood will sweeten the bitterest waters, cut down a branch of it and
throw it in. Do thy sins and conscience rent and tear thee? this Name is the
Oil to lenifie and cure them, pour it out upon them. Art thou to encounter
death it self? in this Name thou shall overcome it, deliver up thy soul but in
it. It Is a Name of truth and fidelity, thou can not distrust it. It Is a Name
of might and power, thou may rest upon it. It Is a Name of Majesty and glory,
thou must exalt it. It Is a Name of Grace and Mercy, thou must praise him for
it, and commit thy self unto it. It Is a Name of sweetness and comfort, thou
must rejoice and be glad in it. It Is a Name of wonder and admiration, thou must
admire and declare it. It Is a Name of adoration, thou must now adore it too.

Bow the knee, says the Apostle, or bow down at it. Holy and reverend is his
Name, says the Psalmist, Psalm. cxi. 9. And if reverend, it may be revered, it
may be worshipped. I speak not of the syllables and letters, but of the sense.
When we hear the Name of Jesus, I suppose there is none so little Christian but
that he will confess, I may lift up my heart and praise him for the mercy and
benefits that I remember, and am put in mind of by it; and where I bow my soul,
may I not bow my body? The Text is plain enough, That at the Name of Jesus
every knee should bow, Phil. ii. 10. Should, though they do not, or else shall
when they will not; and where they would not, when they come among those that
are under the earth: and was ever more need to do it than in an age where it is
doubted whether he be or God or Savior? where it is questioned so often,
whether there were ever such a Name to be saved by, and we not rather saved
every one in his own? Is it not high time to revive this honor to it, that the
world may know we acknowledge him to be God, to be the Lord, and are not
ashamed to confess it? But to sift the matter, and speak home, Is this doing
any other, than only one particular way of praising, glorifying, and magnifying
of the Name? and are not all the Scriptures expressions so for doing that, and
for declaring it? and is this any more? How ordinary are the phrases of
exalting, and blessing, and praising, and sanctifying of his Name, and making
of it to be glorious, of a glory due to his Name, Psalm. xxix. 2. of the honor
of his Name to be sung forth, Psalm, lxvi. 2. And sure the Scripture knows how
to speak. And though the Name of Jesus be not I confess directly and
immediately meant in those places, but the Name of God; yet thus much we have
certain thence, that (1.) the honor done to his Name, be it by words or any
expression else, (for all our outward expressions have the same ground and
reason) are duties of the Text: And that (2.) the Name of Jesus being now the
Name of God, it can be no superstition to do the same to that. Now the Jews, I
must tell you, never mentioned the Name of God without an adoration, and a
Benedictus; when ever they mentioned it, they bowed themselves, and added
always, Blessed for ever, or blessed for evermore, as you have St. Paul, Romans
i. 25. 2 Cor. i. 3. Ephesians. i. 3. 1 Pet. i. 3. 2 Cor. xi. 21. 1 Timothy vi. 15.
nay, doing no less to the Name of Christ, Romans ix. 5. mentioning him there with
the same words after it. So that it is but reasonable to suppose the Christians
should do as much to the Name of Jesus, thereby to possess themselves that he
was God, and to possess others against those rising Heresies that were then
starting up to rob him of the honor of his Godhead. And I cannot but fear
that such as obstinately deny this worship to it, do as inwardly grudge at that
Article of Faith that believes him to be God; and are little better in their
hearts than old Arians, or new Socinians, or well looking toward them. But I
add no more, only remember you, that we daily cry out in the Te Deum, We
worship thy Name ever, world without end: and if we do not, why do we say so?

But say that or not, say good of it however I hope we will; and as David's
phrase is, speak good of his Name: omnia bona dicere, say all the good, speak
of all the good we receive by it.

Say good of it, and make others (3.) say good of it; not give others occasion
to speak ill of it, to blaspheme that holy Name by which we are called; not
blaspheme it our selves, neither by our words nor by our actions; not blaspheme
it by Oaths and Curses, not blaspheme it by our evil lives, not use it
irreverently, not speak of it slightly, not cause others to say, Lo, these are
your Christians, these your professors to worship Jesus, men that cannot so
much as speak well of his Name, which they pretend to be saved by! Carry our
selves we will I hope as men that have a portion in Jesus, a share in salvation.

Praise his Name (4.) and give thanks to it; that sure no body will deny him,
praise and thanks for what he has done by it.

And (5.) love his Name we must too, love to think of it, love to be speaking
of it. It Is reported of the holy Ignatius, that the Name of Jesus was so
frequently in his mouth, that it was even found written in his heart when he
was dead, found written there in golden Characters: And it is affirmed by good
Authors. Oh that this sweet Name were written in our hearts too while we are
living; that it were daily meditated upon, and heartily loved by us as it
should.

We would then (6.) call upon it oftener than we do, be ever calling on it. We
have a promise to be heard for whatever we ask in it, St. John xiv. 13, 14. And
we have an authentic example, Christ's first Martyr, so to do, Acts vii. 59. Be
we not afraid then of the tongues of foolish men, but open we the morning, and
shut in the evening with it, begin and end our days with it in our months.

Nay lastly, begin and end all our works and actions with it, do all in the
name of the Lord Jesus, Col. iii. 17. whatsoever we do in word or deed, says
the Apostle there: we can neither begin nor end better. How sweet is the Name
of Jesus, or a Savior, at the onset of our work, to save and keep us from all
miscarriage in it! How sweet is it again when we have done, if we can say Jesus
again, that we have saved by it, been saved in it, and shall one day be saved
through it; that Jesus runs through all with us! So then remember we to begin
and end all in Jesus; the New Testament, the Covenant of our Salvation begins
and ends so. The generation of Jesus, so it begins; and come Lord Jesus, so it
ends. May we all end so too, and when we are going hence, commend our spirits,
with St. Stephen, into his hands; and when he comes, may he receive them, to
sing Praises and Allelujahs to his blessed Name, amidst the Saints and Angels,
in his glorious Kingdom for ever.

THE FIRST SERMON ON THE EPIPHANY.
St. MAT. ii. 11. And when they were come into the house, they saw the young
Child with Mary his Mother, and fell down and worshipped him; and when they had
opened their treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense,
and Myrrh.
A Day, this, of the luckiest Aspect; a Text, this, of the happiest success
that ever Travelers met with: Never had Journey better success, never pains
more happily bestowed, than in the Text, and on the Day. Christ, the end of all
our travel, the full reward of all our pains, was here this Day found by the
Wise men after a twelve days Journey. And what wise man would not think himself
well paid for all his labor, were it not so many days, but years; not so many
years, but ages; so that after all he might bless his eyes with this happy
sight?

Well may these fortunate Travelers in thankfulness fall down and worship, and
offer presents. Wise men could do no other: and we, if we be wise, will do no
less. For ordinary and common blessings we bend our knees, and present our
offerings to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; but for the Lord Jesus Christ
himself, it is not bending, but falling down; not offering of all praises only,
but praises and offerings of all, our selves, and all we have, which can any
way look like a thankfulness correspondent to so great a benefit.

This is a mercy not to be forgotten, this Day, especially so falling out,
affords us by its double holiness, as our Lords Day, and our Lord Epiphany,
an invincible occasion to remember and praise him in it.

Double holiness said I? trebble I may say, and more. Three Epiphanies the
Church reckons upon this Day* Christ, three sundry and diverse ways manifested
to the world. (1.) The first to the Wise men, Strangers, and Gentiles, by a
Star. (2.) The second to the Jews by a voice from Heaven; and the Holy Ghost
descending thence in form of a Dove upon him at his Baptism. (3.) The third to
his own Countrymen of Galilee, at the Marriage at Cana, by his first Miracle.
All three commemorated upon this Day; the first in the Gospel, the other two in
the two second Lessons for the Day.

Of these we have pitched upon the first, as most concerning us, who once were
Gentiles as well as they, who this Day, by the conduct of a Star, were brought
into the house, and into the presence of their newborn King and Savior. We
then, as men concerned in these first forerunners of our Faith, the first
fruits of us sinners of the Gentiles, are to take notice of their good
behavior, as well as their good fortune; as well how they carried themselves
to Christ when they had found him, as how they found him; as well how they
carried themselves toward Christ, as how they were brought to him.

Four points we have of it: They came, They saw, They worshipped, They offered.
This is the sum of this Days solemnity, of the Wise men's Religion, and should
be of ours. Such service was done then, such service is due still to Christ the
Savior.

So four parts we have of the Text.

1. The Wise men's coming, And when they were come into the house. 2. Their
seeing, They saw the Child with Mary his Mother. 3. Their worship, They fell
down and worshipped. 4. Their offering, When they had opened their treasures,
they presented to him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh.
Their coming, their seeing, their worshipping, their offering, are the parts of
the Text, and shall be of my comment and discourse. I enter first upon their
Intrantes, and When they were come into the house. Their coming, that first;
where we are to consider: (1.) The parties, who. (2.) Their coming, what. (3.)
Their place, whither.

Who they were, the first verse expresses, Wise men from the East. Wise men,
and come so far to see a Child in his Mothers arms! certainly either the Child
is some extraordinary great personage, whose birth also much concerns them, or
they have lost their wits, to take so long and troublesome a Journey to so
little purpose. A great personage indeed, and this the wisest act that ever yet
they did in all their lives. The King of the Jews they style him, the Messiah
they meant; one indeed that should be born King of the Jews, but should be made
King of the Gentiles too. In him shall the Gentiles trust, says the Prophet;
rule over them as well as those he should, protect and save them too from their
enemies, out of the hands of all that hate them. And to get interest in him
betimes, to get to be among the first of those that submit to him, and bring
him presents, was the wisest piece of all the wisdom of either East or West.

Wise men the Scripture calls them, Wise men this act proves them, had they
never done any thing wise before; and Wise men they shall ever be in holy
Language (whatsoever the world esteem or style them) who at any time think no
pains or cost too much to come to Christ, to come and worship him.

(...), the Greek names them. A word which latter ages have always, or most
commonly taken in the worser sense, for men addicted to unlawful Arts, as we
sometimes in our own tongue also call such Wise men, whom we deem little better
than Wizards. The word had not that acception from the first, 'twas time, and
some men's ill practices that corrupted it; but be it what it will, this we may
learn by it, that (1.) God, qui suaviter disponit omnia, the sweet disposer of
all things, does often draw a testimony to his truth, even from the mouth of
falsehood, makes even the Devils to confess it. That (2.) he sometimes calls men
to himself by the violence of their own principles, be they true or false;
makes some Star or other sometimes guide those great doaters on Astrology
beyond what is right; as here, to Christ's Cradle; so at other times to his
Chair, to learn of him, and become Disciples: makes them sometimes burn their
Books to study his: Makes the Heretic sometimes to confute himself by his own
wandering principles into the truth again; makes the perverse and obstinate man
weary himself at last into. Christian meekness and moderation, by the
wearisomness of his own perverseness. Thus the wisest may be caught in his own
net e're he is aware (if God please to do him so much good) and wound into a
truth or a piece of piety, which he so much struggled to avoid. Nay (3.) by
these Wise men's coming, such kind of wisemen from the East, you may see there
is no sin so enormous, of so orient a dye; no practice or trade of it so
strong, though taken up at the East, or Sunrise of our days, which Grace
cannot overcome; no sinner so great from the East to the West, but the Grace of
Christ can either draw, or win, or catch, or force to him.

Antiquity delivers these Wise men for Kings, or some great personages to us.
Magi both in Persia and Arabia was a name of honor, and the men Princes at the
least. So that, as before we told you, sinners, great sinners, might by their
example come to Christ; God often brought them: So we now must tell you, that
persons of honor, the greatest persons must not think much of a little pains,
or a few days Journey upon Christ's errand, or to do him service, nay, but to
pay their worship to him. He that shall consider our days, and our addresses
now to God and his Son Christ, and compare them with what these Wise men did
here, will say, we are the Heathen, these the Christians; we, mere Arabians,
strangers from the Covenant of Grace, men born and bred in the Wilderness of
Arabia, where there is nothing but perpetual drought, no heavenly shower of
grace ever comes: these only Believers. We the great persons that Christ
himself must wait upon, if he will be seen; these the humble servants that will
undertake any thing to see him.

And here it seems (if we now secondly examine their coming) they thought much
of no pains or care to find him out. They came into the house.

Many a weary step had they trod, many a fruitless question had they asked, many
an unprofitable search had they made to find him; and behold yet they will not
give over. Twelve days it had cost them to come to Jerusalem, through the
Arabian Deserts, over the Arabian Mountains, both Arabia Deserta and Petraea;
the difficulty of the way, through Sands, and Rocks; the danger of the
passages, being infamous for Robbers, the cold and hardness of a deep Winter
season, the hazard and inconvenience of so long, so hard, so unseasonable, so
dangerous, and I may say so uncertain a Journey, could no whit deter them from
their purpose: to Jerusalem they will through all these difficulties. But after
all this pains, to lose the Star that guided them, to hear nothing at Jerusalem
of him they sought, to be left after all this at a loss in that very place they
only could expect to find him, and hear nothing there but a piece of an obscure
Prophecy without date or time, to be left now to a mere wild-goose search, or
a new Knight-errantry, and yet still to continue in their search, is an extreme
high piece both of Faith and Love, that considers no difficulties, that thinks
much of no pains, that, maugre all, will set afresh upon the pursuit, that will
be overcome with nothing, is resolved, come what will, to find what they
believe and desire; such a piece of faith and love that we later Christians
cannot Parallel.

How would a Winter journey scare us from our faith? A cold or rainy morning
will do it; a little snow, or wind, or rain, or cold will easily keep us from
coming to the house where Jesus is, from coming out to worship him. How would
so long a voyage make us faint to hear of it? How would the least danger turn
us back from the House of God? Alas! should it have been our cases, which was
theirs here, if we could not presently have found him at Jerusalem, the Royal
City, or had we lost the Star that led us, how had we sat down in sorrow, or
returned in despair? We would have thus reasoned with our selves. Alas! we are
come hither, and have lost our labor: Certainly, had this King been born, it
would have been in the Royal City, or there certainly the news had been; but
there we hear of no such matter, there neither any believes, or regards, or
thinks of such a birth: What then do we do here enquiring, seeing his own
people so much neglect it? Surely the Star that led us hither was but a false
fire of fancy, and we are quite misled: Nay, and it appears no more, so that if
we would still go on our wanderings, we know not whither, we had best return.
Thus should we have reasoned our selves from Christ, fainted, and given over
quite. It Is the fashion with us thus to reason our selves out of our Devotion
and Religion. It Is the fashion too, to object any thing to save our pains in
Christ's business. Others Customs, or others Negligences, or others Ignorance,
are sufficient excuses to authorize ours: and if perchance we want a guide
(though every man now thinks himself sufficient to guide and direct himself in
all Points of his Religion, yet even this he cares not for, this he refuses and
rejects) shall yet serve him for an excuse for his negligence and irreligion:
nay, God himself shall sometimes bear the blame, his taking away, or else not
giving us a Star and light to guide and lead us; his not giving us sufficient
grace, shall be pretended the cause why we come not to him. When, did not our
own coldness more chill our joints than the cold of Winter; were we not afraid
of every puff of wind when we are called to do any good; did not the fear of I
know not what, only fancied and imagined dangers, make us cowards in our
Religion; did we not fondly reason our selves out of our patient expectance of
Christ; did we not guide our selves more by the Fashions, Customs, and
Ignorances of others, than by the constancy of that which is only just and
good; did we not forsake our guides, while we prefer our own carnal reasons,
interests, and respects, and lose the Star, the Guide that heaven had sent us
to conduct us, by going to Jerusalem, by addicting our selves to the vanity
and fashion of Court and City, by asking counsel of Herod, of Scribes and
Pharisees, mere Politicians and Pretenders of Piety and Religion, or Jewish
Priests, men addicted wholly to their own way, to Iudaizing observations,
I^daizing Sa^batizing Christians; were it not for these our doings and
compliances with flesh and blood, the Star would not fail to guide us, Gods
grace would shine unto us, the day star would arise in all our hearts, and
conduct us happily and safely too into the house where we should truly find
Christ. The truth is, if our coming to Christ, if our Religion may cost us
nothing, nor pains, nor cost, nor cold, nor heat, nor labor, nor time, nor
hurt, nor hazard, nor enquiry, nor search, then it may be we will be content to
give Christ a visit, and entertain his Faith and Worship, but not else; if it
may not be had, nor Christ come to without so much ado, let him go, let all go;
so we may sit at ease and quiet in our warm nests, come of Christ's Worship, and
of his house what will.

Yet thither it is (3.) to his house that these Wisemen make with all their
eagerness. Many stately Buildings, and Royal Palaces, no doubt, they had seen
by the way, fitter far for a King to be born in than the Inn they found him in;
but at these they stay not; they and their Star rest not any where but at this
house; here indeed they may, both heaven and earth, set up their rest; this
house truly the house of God, which now contained the God of heaven and earth.

To teach us that we are not to look to outward appearances, nor judge always
according to sight. Christ may lie in the poorest Cottage, in the meanest Inn,
as soon as in the highest Palace: Nay, in the low humble soul, in the Beggars
soul as well as in the Kings, whose bodily presence, as St. Paul speaks, is
weak, and whose speech contemptible, you shall sooner find him, than under the
gilded roofs of a vainglorious virtue, on a self-conceited and boasted
Religion and Piety.

Indeed where ever the Star stands, whatever house the heavenly light
encompasses, there must we alight and enter; we must not think much of the
meanest dwelling that heaven points out, of the poorest condition that God
designs us to. That house is glorious enough that Christ is in; that habitation
and condition happiest, how poorly soever it appear, which the finger of God
directs us to, and the light of his countenance shines on and encompasses. O my
soul! enter there always, O my soul, where God points out unto thee, where the
heavenly light shines over thee, however earth look on thee: Thou shall find
more contentment in a Stable, amongst beasts, in the meanest employment, than
in the highest Offices of state and honor; in an Inn amongst strangers, than
with thy brethren and kinsfolk at home; in a thatcht Hovel, in the poorest,
hardest lodging, meanest dwelling, and lowest condition, than in the fairest
house, the sweetest seats, the softest bed, the most plentiful estate, if God
by his special finger, or Star of providence guides thee to it out of his
secret wisdom, and Christ be with thee in it.

I do not wonder Interpreters make this house the Church of God; It is the Gate
and Court of Heaven now Christ is here; Angels sing round about it, all
Holiness is in it, now Christ is in it; Here all the Creatures, reasonable and
unreasonable, come to pay their homage to their Creator; hither they come, even
from the ends of the earth, to their devotions; a house of Prayer it is for all
people, Gentiles and all; hither they come to worship, hither they come to pay
their Offerings and their Vows; here is the Shrine and Altar, the glorious
Virgins Lap, where the Savior of the World is laid to be adored and worshipped;
here stands the Star for tapers to give it light; and here the Wisemen this Day
become the Priests, worship and offer, present prayers and praises for
themselves, and the whole world besides, all people of the world, high and low,
learned and ignorant represented by them.

This House then is a place well worth the coming to; here might the Wisemen
well end all their Journeys, sit down, and rest where the eternal Wisdom keeps
its residence; here may the greatest Potentates not disdain to stoop and enter,
where the King of Kings and Lord of Lords vouchsafes to make his Lodging. Here
only in this blessed Inn, where Christ is lodged, can the soul truly rest; no
Wisdom but what is here, no Greatness but what is his, no house but what is
sanctified by his presence, no bed but where his right hand becomes our Pillow,
and his left our covering, can satisfy the wearied soul, or give so much as
one wink of rest, or quiet, or contentment to it. Well may the Wisemen pass by
all other houses tocome to this; slight all the magnificent Palaces in the
earth, to take up a lodging in this Inn; leave all other sights for this
blessed sight, and count nothing worth the seeing till they see him, nothing
but him.

Wise men will do so still, esteem Gods House, how mean soever it appear, above
all houses; his sight above all that can be seen, count all things dross and
dung so they may gain Christ, one glance of him, one beam of his glorious
brightness. Any place shall be worth being in where he is; no journey tedious,
that at last brings to him; no way troublesome, that leads to him; Rocks and
Mountains easier than flowery plains and Meadows; Sands and Deserts pleasanter
than the Spicie Gardens of the East, and the Hesperian Orchards; Ice, and
Snows, and rain, and hail, and stormy weather, the greatest hardships that all
these lower Regions can pour upon us, more delightful than continual Summers,
and perpetual Springs, than uninterrupted sun-shines and gaudy days, if by
those endurances we may at length arrive at the feet of Christ. All the
injuries and inconveniences that can befall us here, are not worth the naming
so they bring us to our Savior. O my God, let me loose all so I may find him,
let me want any thing so I want not him, let me have nothing so I may have him.
He is the only thing the Wise men sought, and he it is that thus seeking they
found, and saw at last, And when they were come into the house, they found the
young Child with Mary his Mother.

And he was a thing worth finding. And found he would be, because they sought
him; will be so of us, if we seek him diligently, carefully, and constantly as
they did here: For the words here may as well carry the title of a revvard
for their pains, as of a posture of their faith. Some ancient Copies (which the
Latin follows) read (...) invenerunt, they found the Child; and thus it seems
to speak their success, and the recompense of their labor in the search.
Others, they say, as ancient read (...), viderunt, they saw the Child, which
our English follows; and though there be no great difference, or matter of
distinction, yet being authorized by our Church, we are willing to make use of,
as being of a larger capacity, as well somewhat expressing the Wise men's
carriage as their success. For we intend to handle both.

1. As it presents to us their success. A success sufficient to encourage us
all to turn perpetual travelers to find Christ in the flesh. Christ a Child,
to find him as soon almost as he can be found, a young Child, not yet full a
fortnight old; to find him with his Mother too, Christ and the devout soul
together, Christ and the soul united; to find him and Mary together, Christ
exalted in our hearts, (for so Mary signifies exalted) his Kingdom and Power
set up and exalted in our hearts; to find all this, all this for one poor
journey, for the pains and labor of so small a number of days and hours, is a
success than which no journey, no undertaking can have better: yet all these
are here.

1. They found, first, an incarnate God, their Savior in the flesh, a sight
that the very Angels desire to look into, Bow down to look into, says St.
Peter, 1 Pet. i. 12. A sight which all the Patriarchs and Prophets still
desired to see, but could not: A sight which made the very Angels leave their
heaven to come down and see, and seeing, sing for joy; A sight which made the
Stars rejoice in their courses, and wait upon poor mortals steps that they
might be admitted to behold it. For indeed, what wonder ever saw they like it?
He that spans the Heavens become a span breadth himself. The eternal word
without a word to say, the infinite wisdom become childishness, the
incomprehensible greatness wrapped up in swadling-bands. He that fills heaven and
earth, not big enough to fill a Virgins arms. He that opens his hand and fills
all things living with his plenteousness, sucking himself a little milk out of
his Mothers Breasts to live by; He poor himself who makes all rich: God a man!
Eternity a child! who would not travel the world over to see this miracle, and
think his time and pains never spent so well as then?

2. But secondly, to have the first sight almost as it were of so happy a
wonder, adds something to the glory of the success, to be admitted among the
first into Christ's presence, to be so honored as to be of the number of his
first attendants, to be with him whilst he is yet a child, to wait upon this
newborn King, and have relation to him from his Cradle, to meet with him so
young, so tender, so pliable, so easy to be approached and dealt with, is a
success of so much honor and obligement, that we may expect any thing from his
hands, being of his first followers and servants in so tender a condition
toward us.

3. Thus far the Journey seems sufficiently successful; yet not only to find a
Savior in the flesh, so near allied unto us, and so soon almost as he is so
made to us, but also thirdly to find him in his Mothers arms, fast claspt
within our souls (for every faithful soul is Christ's Mother, as well as blessed
Mary, conceives, and brings him forth, and nourishes him, as well as she, the
soul spiritually, as she naturally) to find, I say, Christ thus conceived and
brought forth in our own souls, this Child in our own arms too, Christ with us,
is that indeed which makes this finding worth the finding, this sight worth
seeing. Should we only know Christ after the flesh, though amongst the first
that knew him; had we no more than an outward sight, did we not see him with
his Mother in a mysterious sense, in the soul and spirit, born in our souls,
they also made his Mothers (as all that believe and do Gods will, he himself
calls so, St. Mark iii. 34, 35.) unless we thus see him, our success will be
but lame and poor, no better than those Jews that saw and perished.

4. Yet the success here is one degree beyond it, They saw the young Child and
Mary his Mother. Mary signifies exalted, to see him with his Mother Mary, as to
see his exalted Mother, the soul exalted by his presence, his Power and Kingdom
exalted in it, to see this King in his Kingdom, to see Christ reigning and
ruling in us, this newborn King triumphing in our souls, our understandings,
wills, affections, and all our faculties subjected to him: and this is a good
sight where e're we see it. This is then the sum of the success we shall find
of our travel after him. (1.) The perfect sight: And (2.) the easy knowledge
of him: (3.) Our union with him: (4.) Our exaltation by him. He will reveal
himself to them that seek him, discover himself betimes to them that carefully
search for him, unite himself and be with them that follow after him, and set
up his throne and excellency in them that find him.

2. Indeed this, now secondly, is worth the seeing, worthy the beholding. They
saw it (1.) they saw it and admired it: their seeing him, it was the Lords
doing, and could not but be admirable in their eyes. They could not certainly
but admire and wonder to see the Star had pointed out the Child, so poor a
Child; a King in rags: so glorious a Child, so blessed a Mother in so poor a
plight. Saw it and fell down (say the next words) fell down in amazement and
astonishment it may be, as well as any way else, to see so great a mercy, so
strange a sight.

2. Yet saw it, secondly, and believed: saw by the eye of faith, as much as by
the eye of sense; believed presently it was the Child they sought, and
therefore fell down and worshipped; which certainly they would not have done,
had they not believed. Indeed the strange guide that conducted them, the
resolution for the place at least ( Bethlehem by name) which they met with at
Jerusalem, the new return of their lost starry Leader as soon as they were got
out of Jerusalem, the very standing and fixing of it self (which all the while
before was in perpetual motion) over this very place where they found this
Child, might sufficiently assure them that it was his Star, that he was the
Lord whom this Star attended: so that they might not only believe out of
credulity, or an impatient desire to be at their journeys end, or at home
again; but out of prudence, as it became wise men, who lay all together e're
they fix their Faith. Saw and believed, that is the second.

3. Saw it and were glad too; that is a third adjunct of seeing such a sight. If
the seeing of the Star again, in the former verse, made them to rejoice with
exceeding great joy, which could only confirm their hope to find him, how
exceedingly exceeding great joy, gaudio valde, valde magno, must it needs be
they rejoiced with when they found him?

4. Saw and worshipped, that should be a fourth; but it is the third and next
part of the Text, which the time and season now forbids me to look into. Only
this to recapitulate the rest and apply it home.

1. Behold we, first, and admire this sight, the mercy and goodness of our
Savior, thus for us to become a Child, to take upon him the infirmities and
inconveniences of our nature, even from its first weaknesses; to make himself
so accessible to us, so easy to be approacht, to vouchsafe to be daily
conceived again, and born in our souls and spirits; to take upon him besides
the rule and guidance over us; to set up his throne in so poor a place as our
unworthy souls, amidst so much frailness and unpreparedness, souls more filthy
and stinking when he first comes to them, than the very Stable he was born in,
amidst the dung and ordure of the Beasts. Behold, and see if there were ever
goodness like this goodness, see and admire it.

2. See, secondly, and believe it too. The most incredulous among the Apostles,
St. Thomas, when he once saw, he soon believed. See but how the Star moves and
fixes, and even points us to him; how readily the Wise men entertain the sight,
and fall down and worship: see how all the Prophesies concur and meet in this
young Child, see how the world is overspread with this Faith, and has so many
hundred years continued it, notwithstanding so many persecutions, and I shall
not need to persuade you to play the Wise men too, and upon so many testimonies
and evidences believe the same.

3. Yet I exhort you (3.) to see it and be glad. Heaven rejoiced at it, and the
Earth was glad. Angels sung proper Anthems for it. The Shepherds joyfully tell
it out, The Wise men here scarce know how to carry themselves for joy, open all
their treasures, and fling about their gifts to express their gladness; only
Herod and the Jews, Herodian Jews, Jerusalem Jews, men addicted wholly to the
pomps, and pride, and vanity of the City, are troubled at the birth of so
humble a Savior. It is a Day of rejoicing, this. It Is the Lords Day, the day
which the Lord has made, let us rejoice (says the Psalmist) and be glad in it.
It Is the Day of showing himself to us Gentiles who sat in darkness, and the
shadow of death. It Is fit therefore we should be glad for so great a blessing.
It Is the Day he was Baptized in, and that ever uses to be among us a joyful
day; great joy and feasting at it. It is a Marriage Day, the Day he wrought his
first Miracle upon, when he turned Water into Wine, on purpose to make us
merry; the water of tears, into the wine of joy. So many blessings together, so
many good tidings in one day, so many glorious things, so bright a Star, so
glorious a Child, so blessed a Mother, so miraculous a Baptism, so cheerful a
Miracle, so triumphant a Resurrection; all together on one day, must not,
cannot be found out, cannot be seen of Christians so much concerned in them
all, without perpetual Songs of gladness and rejoicing.

I should leave you here, but that we must needs yet see a little, one step
farther. See and learn: Is Christ our Savior here a Child? see then that we
become like little children, in humility, and innocence; we shall not see
Heaven, nor him in it else (he tells us) S. Mat. xviii. 3. Is he so little? let
not us then think much to be accounted so, to be made so. Is he content to lie
in his Mothers lap? let not us grudge then if we have no where else to lie than
upon our Mother earth. Is he content to partake our weaknesses? let not us then
be impatient when we fall into sicknesses and infirmities. Is he a Child to be
adored and worshipped? let us then be careful in all places, and at all times
to adore and worship him. Will he accept our presents? let us present our Souls
and Bodies, and Estates, and all to his service; lay all our treasures at his
feet, worship him with all that is precious to us, think nothing too precious
or good for him. In a word, is he to be found, is he so easy to have access
to? Call we then upon him whilst he is near, and seek we him while he may be
found, seek we him how he will be found, for always he will not, nor every way
he will not.

Follow therefore the Wise men's steps, so soon as ever the Day Star arises in
our hearts, so soon as ever any heavenly light of holy inspiration shines into
us; begin we to set forward, get we out of our own Countries, from our sins,
arm our selves against all temptations, against the pleasures, the perfumes and
spices of Arabia Faelix, of prosperity and honor; against the sandy Deserts of
Arabia Deserta, against dryness, and dullness, commonly the first temptations
that we meet with in our way to Christ, that make us to have little or no
relish of it; against the rocky and thievish passages of Arabia Petraea;
against the rocks of temptations, and afflictions; against the subtleties, and
treacheries, and violences of the suggestion of ill companions, wherewith the
Devil does way-lay us. Get we up to Jerusalem the Holy City, enquire we there
of the word of God, and at the mouth of the Priest (which God has said shall
preserve knowledge for others good, whatever for his own.) Ask I say, and
enquire there how we shall find out Christ; rejoice we ever in the light of
Heaven, walk by it, make much of it, of all holy motions and inspirations,
continue in it; and let neither the tediousness of the way, nor the frailty of
our own flesh, nor any stormy or tempestuous weather, any cross or trouble, nor
any Winter coldness of our own dull bosoms, nor sometime the loss even of our
guides, (those heavenly and spiritual comforts which God sometimes in his
secret Wisdom withdraws from us) nor any carnal reason or interest deter us
from our search after this Babe of Heaven, after Christ the Savior; but go on
constantly, and cheerfully through all these difficulties to the House of God,
to the Church of Christ; then shall we be sure to find him, find him with his
Mother, our souls find him, our affections embrace him, then will he be exalted
in us, and exalt us from this House, the Church Militant below, to that above,
the Church Triumphant in the Heavens; this Child make us grow from grace to
grace, till we come to the perfect stature of himself, here of Grace, and
hereafter of Eternal Glory.

THE SECOND SERMON ON THE EPIPHANY.
St. MAT. ii. 10. When they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great
joy.
JOY, and great joy, and exceeding great joy! What Is the matter? truly, no
great matter one would think; only a Star appearing. Who is it then that are so
much rejoiced at it? may we not call their wisdom into question? their joy into
dispute? For the men, they were Wise men I can tell you, ver. 1. Wise men from
the East, great Wise men: and for their rejoicing, it is the wisest action they
ever did, because it was the best sight they ever (...)* the luckiest Aspect
they ever beheld in Heaven: the happiest Star, that thus led them out of the
region of darkness into the land of light, that thus conducted them to Christ's
abode and presence; the greatest reason in the world to be glad at.

Ye hear much talk of a late Star or Comet, and much ado about it; but no great
joy as I can hear. It comes they tell us upon a sad errand, is sent to us with
heavy tidings: no such but is, that I believe; though I have no confidence of
their wisdom that pretend to tell us its intent, and business. But those They
in the Text, I know were truly wise, because the Letter tells us so; especially
guided and directed into the knowledge and meaning of the Star they are so glad
at. And the Star comes with the best news that ever came, is but a Ray of the
Star of Jacob, the Morning Star to usher in the Sun of Righteousness, or our
usher to him. Other Stars do commonly but befool their Students, delude their
observers, and make them sad: This makes us wise, and glad, and glad to
salvation too. The other too often tend from Christ, cause men to forget him;
take away the faith and trust that is due to him, to put it to a wandering
Planet, its Aspect and Position. This brings us to him, brings us to Jesus and
his holy habitation. And because it does so, we will look upon it and be glad,
follow it and be exceeding glad.

For to us still the Star shines, and we may see it in the Spirit, in the
spiritual sense and meaning. And indeed that is the best, the only seeing. The
eye of sense could not in these Magi, that saw it then in being, cannot in us,
that see it now only in the notion, work the joy the Text expresses. There was
an inward light, that made the outward then so comfortable; the mere light of a
Star, though never so glorious, could never else have done it; cannot now if it
should appear again. It was some internal light and revelation then concerning
it made them so glad, will make us as glad as they, if we so look upon it as
well as they. And they and we are but the same, of the same stock and kin,
Gentiles both, both equally concerned in the Star, and in the joy; they only
the first fruits, we the lump; they saw it in the heavens, we see it in the
word; a thing as clear and firm, every (...) of it, as the heavens, and we as
much reason as they had to be glad.

So both the sum and division of the Text will be comprehended in these two
particulars. The ground of their joy and ours, and the extent of it. The ground
and occasion of their joy and ours, what they did then, what we are still to
rejoice in. When they saw the Star they rejoiced, when we see it, we must do so
too.

The extent and measure of this rejoicing both theirs and ours, joy in the
positive; great it was, if compared with other joy, above other joy in the
comparative, and exceeding great joy, the greatest joy in the superlative, as
high as may be. They rejoiced with exceeding great joy.

The Star, any Star or light that leads unto Christ, is a just occasion and
ground of joy; and when such an one we have, when such an one we see, we cannot
be too glad, we cannot exceed, though it be exceeding. This the sum, these the
particulars of the Text. I begin with the ground of our joy, and theirs, that
we may rejoice the more, that our joy may be the greater, when we see how great
the ground is, that their joy was not for nothing; nor will ours be, if it be
for nothing but what theirs was.

Yet before we enter upon either, it is requisite we consider the persons, look
upon them, before we look upon the Star, that we may see how this They, may
become We; how we are interested either to look or rejoice with them.

The first verse tells us who they were, Wise men from the East: four points we
may have thence, and all so many grounds of joy.

1. Gentiles they were. And that to them a door is opened unto life, Acts xiv.
27. that to them that sat in darkness and the shadow of death, light is here
sprung up, is a good ground of joy: to such the light is comfortable. And to us
also upon the same account; for we were Gentiles, nay, and darkness too, Ephesians.
v. 8. good reason to rejoice, that now we are not, that we are come into the
light.

2. If Gentiles, then sinners too: I know not then who can be out; for if
heaven notwithstanding our sin and wickedness vouchsafe so to look upon us, nor
they nor we, no body sure, but must needs be glad.

3. Great men they were, foretold in the Psalm, under the notion of the Kings
of Arabia and Saba bringing gifts, Psalm. lxxii. 10. This is more cause of joy
then you would think at first. St. Paul's, Not many noble, not many mighty are
called, 1 Cor. i. 26. were enough to startle and amaze the rich and great men
of the world; and, how hard is it for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven? Our Saviors words might very well trouble us, spoil all our mirth, all
our joys, but for this, that the Magi, great Princes, and rich and honorable
have an interest in Christ's Star, for all that, as well as any

4. They were learned too. Magi, Wise men is the name the story gives them. And
the Apostles, Not many wise, not many learned, again might well amaze us, and
make us more than sad; but for this They, that such as they, are not yet such,
but that they may come one day to see Stars under them, and in the mean time
have their part and portion in the Star that leads to Christ. A sound cause of
joy, that however the new lights count of Princes, and great and learned men,
as enemies to him whose this Star was; yet this Star shines to them too, them
before any, was lighted up for them above all the rest. Shepherds, and Women,
and ignorant People are not to be taught or led by Stars, they understand not
their voice and language, that is for the wise and learned, to guide them. Mean
and ordinary capacities must have other ways, other guides and lanthorns to
lead them to Christ.

Thus from the persons we have four grounds of the great joy we hear, that
neither Heathen Ignorance, nor Heathen Learning, nor Honor, nor Greatness;
neither great temptations, nor great sinfulness, no condition or quality how
sad or cumbersom, but this Star rises for, and is ready to attend into the
presence of Christ; all may have a portion in the Star, and in the Joy. And
good reason we have to rejoice for our selves, and our relations, that no
persons or condition is debarred it.

Proceed we yet deeper into the grounds of this joy. Three there are, that they
(we speak of) saw: (1). Saw somewhat to speak of. (2.) Saw the Star. (3.) Saw
it at that time, when they were even at a loss, had but a while before quite
lost the fight, that is, when they saw it, the time when they saw it in.

The first point is, that see they did, and a point worth noting; that
notwithstanding their great distance from Judea, the only Nation that then sat
in light, that had the knowledge of his Laws, these yet came seeing: That God
has some particular persons all the world over to whom he has given eyes to
see him. No Nation indeed, no whole people but the Jews were seeing, yet Job in
Vz, and Iethro in Midian, and Rahab in Jericho, and Ruth in Moab, and Ittai in
Gath, and the Queen in Sheba, and the Widow in Sarepta, and Naaman in Syria;
some in every Nation that could see the light of Heaven and rejoice in it.

Corporal sight then of the eye, is one of the greatest temporal comforts our
life is capable of; we lose the chiefest of joy and pleasure of a mortal life,
when we are deprived of that. It Is worth rejoicing then, worthy rejoicing in
the Lord too, that that we have, that we can see, that we are not blind.

But there is a spiritual, and immaterial eye, and seeing with it; the eye of
Faith, and our believing by it, that is far beyond the bodily sight and seeing.
It Is that by which we live, Heb. x. 38. it is that only by which we truly see
Heaven, or behold Stars, that is a great ground of joy.

Especially if we add hope to it, the other eye of the Spirit, that pierces
within the vail, that sees all the joys and pleasures of beatitude, with
affection and delight, that does, as it were, bring Heaven, home into not our
eyes only, but our bosoms. The hope of Heaven, and heavens happiness, how glad
and jocund will it make the heart; more than when the Corn, and Wine, and Oil
increase, a better sight by it, than all the riches and pleasures of the earth,
all the profit and assistance of it, all the beauties and glory of it, can
afford us.

This sight of Hope, and that of Faith, were they the Wise men had. It was thus
they saw the Star, believed it was the Star of the Messiah, the only guide to
their newborn Savior, their convoy to him; and that such an one there was,
they should come to by and by; this they saw by the eye of faith. Thereupon
they proceed to hope, to see their hopes also in him; hope ere long to be
admitted to the sight and service of him: hope this Star will now bring even
them to its Master, and give them a place hereafter with him among the Stars,
that they may one day shine in glory like them.

Thus you see Videntes will easily enough be brought home to us. We, even at
this day, thus see the Star by the two eyes of faith and hope, believe what
here they saw, that such a thing there was, a Star lighted up on purpose to
lead the Gentiles to Christ; hope what here they felt within them, some
spiritual ray and guidance to him; both believe and hope that as an outward
visible Star there was to them; so an inward and invisible Star still there
will be to us, by the light of which we may all come to the knowledge of
Christ. We are next to see it what it is; what it is to them, what it is to us;
how this star looks to them, how it looks to us.

To them this Star was a material Star: to us it is a spiritual, and both bring
their joy with them. The Psalmist seems to be ravished with joy upon the sight
of the Stars of Heaven, when he considered the Heavens the works of Gods
fingers, the Moon and the Stars that he had ordained, Psalm. viii. 3. Then in a
kind of Ecstasy he cries out, Lord, what is man that thou art mindful of him?
That thou thus spanglest the Heavens with Stars for him? That thou thus
visitest him by the Stars? Methinks the very beholding of that golden Canopy,
now our covering, hereafter to be our footstool; the casting up of our eyes to
heaven in a bright starry night, and considering that all those glorious Lamps
are for the use of us poor men here, and for our glory too hereafter, cannot
but raise a sweet delight and pleasure in the devout and pious soul, and force
out an ejaculation of thankfulness and joy to God that made them for us. Sure I
am, that when neither Sun nor Stars appeared, Acts xxvii. 20. it follows
presently, that all hope of being saved was then taken away: O the joy of a
Star then! the appearing of a Star would have made them then have leapt for
joy. We see them commonly, that makes us so little to regard them. If we behold
them seriously, we would sing together with them, as Job says, they do
together, Job xxxviii. 7. and praise him together, as the Psalmist speaks, with
those stars of light.

But yet if we should have a Star made on purpose for us, we would be gladder,
that God should descend to so immediate and special a care of us, as to light
up one of those bright Candles for some particular intent and service to us;
and such an one this is; great reason therefore sure to rejoice in it. So much
the more, in that commonly the new raised Stars portend mischiefs and
misfortunes to us; but this was, as all the Astrologers and Wise men then
observed, a healthsom, gladsom star, that brought health, and happiness, and
saving in its wings; never any such, or like it, before, or since. When God
thus vouchsafes to make heaven dance attendance on us, make all the Stars and
Lights speak good to us, some of them more than others; those heavenly
Creatures thus wait upon earth and dust, who is now so dull and earthy as not
to rejoice and glory in it? Yet if the star not only portend happiness, but
eternal happiness besides; if it foretell not only earthly, but heavenly
blessings too; if it be a Star that leaves us not till it have brought us to
the Child Jesus, till it has brought us to God himself, there is matter indeed
of great exceeding joy. So a fourfold ground of joy you have in this very Star;
First, Gods general providence over man, to make even the heavenly Creatures
serve him. Secondly, God's special Providence in it, now and then sending a
Star, some special token to forewarn or guide him. Thirdly, God's comfortable
Providence in so doing, sometimes to bless and comfort us, to uphold and cheer
us. Fourthly, Gods saving Providence, thus to make all things, though never so
distant from us, signally instrumental to our eternal happiness and salvation;
making the Stars and Heavens thus minister unto us. For these four we may well
take up St. Paul's resolution, Phil. i. 18. We therein do rejoice, yea, and
will rejoice.

And yet I must give you a fifth ray of this Star, God's particular Providence
over the Gentiles, strangers from the Covenant of Promise, aliens from the
Comman-wealth of Israel, men without promise, without hope; that had neither
promise, nor hope of mercy, Ephesians. ii. 12. that to them this Star should appear,
for them be made and sent, is such a ground of joy to us, that are of the same
stock and lineage, that without it we had had no joy at all, who ever had. It Is
upon this title we have our share in this happy Star; upon this particular
dispensation of thus gathering the Gentiles to him by it, as by a Standard or
Ensign for them to flow in unto him, as the Prophet Phrases it. This is the
fifth ray of the material Star, and it may go for a sixth, That the Gentiles
not then only, but even to this day still enjoy the benefit of that Star, have
oftentimes material and sensible convoys unto Christ; are often by the things
of sense, by sensible blessings, drawn and persuaded to his service. Thus you
have the six Rays of the Star, six comfortable Rays to ground our joys upon in
the material Star.

We come now to the mystical or spiritual, those Stars and Lights which yet
remain, even to this day, to guide us to the same Jesus! For more than one
there is of this sort, and all sufficient grounds of Joy.

1. The first sort of Stars are devout and holy men, shining, as Daniel
represents them, like the Stars, Dan. xii. 3. Stars they are in this world
whilst they live; burning, and shining Lights, the very light and life, and
glory of the earth, while they are upon it; and Stars they shall be in the
heavens when they come thither. Here they go before us with the light of good
examples to lead us to Christ, and his righteousness, to all holy and heavenly
conversation; And for it they shall one day shine as Stars for ever and ever. A
ground of joy it is to us, that this Star we have, that such guides we have, by
whose examples to conform our selves to the obedience of Christ, in whose light
to walk to him.

2. A second sort of Stars are the Bishops and Pastors of the Church. For,
however men now reckon them, or however now much darkened in their heaven, in
this our Church, in our Hemisphere, Stars they are in the hand of Christ, Rev.
i. 16. in his right hand too, the vision so interpreted, v. 20. the seven
Stars, the seven Angels of the Churches; the Church it self crowned with twelve
such Stars, Rev. xii. 1. the twelve Apostles. All crowned Churches, all that
are complete and perfect, are crowned with such Stars, with Bishops, Pastors,
and Teachers. And a solid ground of joy it is, that we have such Stars to guide
and direct us into the knowledge of Christ, into the ways and means of
salvation. Let Heretics and Schismatics think their pleasure, an exceeding
joy it is, to all that either understand Religion, or practice it, that God
still allows us the glory of these Stars, though one differing in glory from
another; that he has not yet totally darkened our heaven upon us, nor removed
our true, lawful, and faithful Pastors clean away; that we wander not from Sea
to Sea, and from the North, even to the East; that we run not to and fro to
seek the Word of God, to see a Star, and cannot find it, but have them yet
standing over us and directing us. It will be a thousand to one but we miss of
Christ when we lose this Star; a thousand to one that we go into the wrong
house instead of his when we lose our Bishops, and Teachers, the days we now
see tell us so already. For his House being undoubtedly the Church, and the
Church not to be seen or found, but by the light and brightness of successive
Bishops and Ministers, who are the Churches glory, and its Crown and joy,
nothing but sad and giddy errors can be expected where they are not.

A third Star is the Word of God, and there, first, the sure Word of Prophecy,
a light, as St. Peter styles it, shining in a dark place, to which he tells us
we do well if we take heed, 2 Pet. i. 19. Then secondly, the sure Promises of
the Gospel of Grace, and Truth, and Pardon, the comfortable and glorious light
by which we are led to the knowledge of Christ; full glad and merry with the
hopes of such pardon and forgiveness, of such grace and favor.

A fourth Star is inward Grace, the light of the holy Spirit, by which we are
not only led to the place of this newborn Child, but this Child it self even
newborn in us. This is a Star that rises in the very heart, the Day Star
rising there, 2 Pet. i. 19. without which we should sit in perpetual shades,
the day never dawn upon us. All the former Stars, good Examples, and
Instructions, and spiritual Predictions, and Promises, Pastors, and Teachers,
can teach little without this Star. St. Paul may plant, and Apollos water, and
no increase; the Preachers speak and preach into the air, nothing stay behind;
good example be spilt as water on the ground, divine Prophesies and Promises
only strike the outward ear, to little purpose all of them together, unless the
Spirit speak within, and warm and lighten the soul with its fiery tongue, and
comfort it with inward light and heat. Hence is the joy that is unspeakable,
and full of glory, which the Apostle speaks of, 1 Pet. i. 8.

A fifth Star, which is heavenly glory, a bright morning Star it is, that
Christ promises to give him, that continues and holds out unto the end, Rev.
ii. 28. I will give him the morning star, that is, eternal life, the Star of
glory. This is a Star will show us Christ as he is; bring us to him, not in his
Cradle, but in his Throne; not in his Mothers lap, but in his Fathers bosom: A
Star that will lead us, both here and hereafter, to his presence. Here the
great Star that most surely brings us, and most effectually persuades to
Christ, and Christian Piety, is the hope of Heaven, the promise of Glory. In
the strength of this hope we suffer any thing for him; we hunger and thirst,
endure cold and nakedness, poverty and scorn, whips and fetters, halters and
hatchets, racks and tortures, ignominy and death, whilst this Star seems to
open heaven unto us: thus it brings us to him here, and hereafter it fills us
with the beatifical vision of him for ever. I need not tell you this is a very
sufficient ground of the greatest joy, it self being almost nothing else.

And yet there is a sixth Star, the Star that was foretold should come out of
Jacob, Number. xxiv. 17. I am the bright morning Star, Rev. xxii. 16. I Jesus,
says he himself, am the root and offspring of David, and the bright and
morning Star. He the Star that leads us to himself; his own beauty, the great
attractive to him; his mercy the sure convoy to himself; his humility, his
being the root, so low and humble, the conduct to his Highness; his Incarnation
and Nativity, his becoming the offspring and Son of David, being made man, the
only way above all to bring us unto himself. Here Is the ground, the very ground
indeed of all our joy and comfort, that he thus came into the World to save
Sinners, thus clouded his eternal brightness, his starry nature, his glorious
Godhead, with the dark rays of flesh and matter, appearing at best but as a
sublunary Star, the Doctor and Bishop of our souls, that we might so the easier
come unto him, and be comforted, not confounded, in his brightness.

Thus we have multiplied the Star in the Text by the perspective of the Spirit
into Six, or showed you the six spiritual rays which issue from it, which reach
to us, and even shine ( God be thanked) still, though that be gone, or shut up
in the Treasuries of the Almighty; all of these signal grounds of true
Christian joy; Good Examples, good Teachers, a good Word of God, the good
Spirit of Grace, the good hope of glory, the good of goods, our good and
gracious Savior; so good Stars, and so good occasion of rejoicing, that there
can be no better.

3. And yet a degree may be added, from the third Consideration of the time
when this Star appeared. Indeed it had long before this day been seen; had led
the Wise men all the way, comforted and cheered them up all their long journey
through; only at Jerusalem there it left them, there where one would think the
Star should shine the brightest. But (1.) What need Starlight, when the Sun of
righteousness is so near? Or what (2.) should need a Type, when the Substance
was so hard by? Or what necessity (3.) of a Star, when they were now in a surer
and brighter light, so says St. Peter, 1 Pet. i. 19. the Law and Prophets at
hand to point out him they sought? Or how (4.) should we expect any special
favor from the God of Heaven, while we stay in Herod's Courts, in Satan's
territories, in wicked company? Or why (5.) should we think the Star should
stay upon us, when we leave it? That God should help us, when we, as it were,
renounce his direction, to enquire for men's? Go to the Jews and Herod for it?
How should we but lose God's grace, if we neglect it?

It Is the great ground here then of their rejoicing, that after they had lost
it, they here recover it; that they are now got out of Herod's Court, a place of
sin and darkness, and are now refreshed again with the heavenly Light. No joy
in the World like that of recovering Heaven, when it is almost lost. No joy to
the woman's for finding again the Groat that she had lost. No rejoicing like the
Shepherds for the lost sheep when he has found it. The joy reaches up to
heaven, says Christ; the very Angels rejoice at it, when a sinner is returned
from the error of his way, when God lights anew this Star to him. Truly, when
we have lost any of the aforementioned Stars, and afterward recover them,
whether they be the Examples of the Saints, that have unluckily slipped out of
our memories; or our Bishops and Pastors, that have been forced or driven from
us; or the truth of the holy Word, which false glosses and corrupt
interpretations have hidden from us; or the inward comforts of the Spirit,
which our sins have for some time robbed us of; or the true relish of heavenly
joy, and eternal happiness, which has a while been lost by reason of our
delighting our selves wholly in sensual pleasures or employments; or lastly,
the beauty of this holy Child, which has been somewhat clouded from us, through
our weakness and infirmity in apprehending it, which soever of them it is that
we have first lost, and then recovered; when we either recover our memories, or
our Ministers, or the truth, or the holy Spirit, or the sight of heaven, or the
beauty of Christ into us; the joy is far greater than it was at the beginning,
Carendo magis quam fruendo intelligimus, because we never thoroughly understand
the comfort and benefit of any of them, till we see the distress we are in with
out them.

And (2.) their seeing the Star again when they were, as it were, in most
distress, and when they were more like to be at a greater loss than ever
amongst the Cottages of Bethlehem, like utterly to be confounded by the horror
of poverty, and the sight of nothing but unkingly furnitures; this it was that
so raised their joy. And it will do ours at any time, to have help and succor
come timely to us, to be delivered and raised in the midst of distresses and
despair. It Is the very nick of time to enhance a joy.

It Is not less neither (3.) to creatures compounded of flesh and blood, to have
even some sensible comforts renewed to stir us up. To see a star, to behold
comfort with our eyes, to have the inward comfort augmented by the outward, to
be led to Christ by a Star, by prosperities and blessings, rather than a cloud,
by crosses and distresses, this is more welcome, more gladsom, to the heart;
and so it seems to the Wise men themselves, that God, though he had given them
inward guidances, and backed them with Prophetical instructions out of his own
Word and Prophets, had not yet deserted them of his outward assistance, but
even added that also to all the former. Now then thus to have star upon stat,
material and mystical; time after time, when we most desire it, when we
greatliest need it, to want no guide, no opportunity, no occasion at also to
advance our happiness and salvation, how can we but, with them in the Text,
rejoice now, and that with exceeding great joy? Three degrees you see are
apparent in the words, all to be spent upon the Star that leads to Christ. We
can never be too glad of him, or of his Star; any conduct or occasion to come
to him: joy, and great joy, and exceeding great joy is but sufficient.

Nor is any joy but spiritual, that which is for Christ, really capable of
those degrees; that only is truly called joy; the joy in Christ only dilates
the heart, all other joys straiten and distress it, fill it up with dirt and
rubbish; worldly joys can never fill it otherwise: It Is only then enlarged
when it opens up to heaven, earthly comforts do but fetter and compress it.

That joy (2.) is only great. Earthly ones are petty and inconsiderable, for
petty things: Heaven only has great things in it; Christ the only great one.

That only (3.) is exceeding. That Is the joy that passes understanding, that
exceeds all other, that exceeds all measure, that exceeds all power, none can
take it from us; that exceeds all words and expression too, no tongue whatever
can express it. So you see our joy, that a spiritual joy it is, because so
great, so exceeding.

Yet being so exceeding, it will exceed also the narrow compass of the inward
man, will issue out also into the outward, into the tongue and heads; Joy is
the dilatation, the opening of the heart, and sending out the Spirits into all
the parts. And if this joy we have, it will open our hearts to praise him, open
our hearts to Heaven to receive its influence, open our hearts to our needy
brother, to compassionate and relieve him; it will send out life, and heat, and
spirit into all our powers; into our lips to sing unto him, into our fingers to
play to him; into our feet even to leap for joy; into our eyes perpetually to
gaze upon him, into our hands to open them for his sake plentifully to the
poor; into the whole body to devote it wholly to his service. This is the Wise
men's joy, great and exceeding. Give me leave to fit it to the parts, to apply
the joy to the several grounds, Gaudium to videntes, magnum to stellam, valde
to the autem of the Text. They saw, and so rejoiced with joy. They saw the
Star, and so rejoiced with great joy when they saw it; saw it so opportunely,
they rejoiced with exceeding joy.

Let us then (1.) rejoice with them, with a single joy for both the seers, and
their seeing; make it our joy, that neither our ignorances, nor our sins can
keep us always from Christ's presence; that our riches and honors, our learning
and wisdom may rather help than hinder us in the search of Jesus Christ. And
rejoice we then again that God has given us eyes and sight to see the ways and
means of salvation. This will at least deserve our joy in the positive degree.

But the Star, or Stars, we mentioned, will add this magnum to it. Let us then
(2.) rejoice greatly, or with great joy, that God thus vouchsafes to lead us to
his Son both by outward and inward means; That he has given us so many lights
of good examples to walk by; That he has lighted up his Stars, Pastors, and
Teachers in the Church to direct and guide us. That he continues to us the
light and brightness of his truth; That he enlightens us daily inwardly by his
grace; That he fills our hearts with hopes of glory; That he is ready more and
more to show us Christ in all his beauty, to give him to us with all his
benefits, to bring us to him in all his glory. Great joy is but little enough
certainly for such great things as these.

And (3.) exceeding it must and will be, if we but consider the time when such
great things are done, or doing for us. It Is when we had, in a manner, diverted
from him, gone aside out of our way, left his Star for Herod. For God then to
renew his mercy to us, to shine upon us in his former beauty, to point us even
to the very house, and place to find Christ in; to do it then when we had
wilfully departed from his conduct, is so exceeding a grace and favor, that no
joy of ours be it never so exceeding, can exceed it.

And if the Wise men, for the direction of that singl^ Star, were so extremely
affected with joy and gladness, how infinite^y should we be for so many? Alas,
they saw nothing then in comparison of us. The Child was then but in rags and
swaddling clothes: he is now in robes of glory. He was then lying in an earthly
Cottage, he is now sitting in an heavenly Palace. All the ways of Salvation
were then but mysteries, they are now revealed. Salvation then was but in its
Clouts, it is now in its perfection. They saw Christ but once, we daily see him:
See him and all his Stars, see him amidst his Stars, walking with some of them
in his hands; the Stars or Angels of the Churches, amongst other of them his
Saints, with them in glory, creating stars daily in our hearts, shining to us
every day in his Word and Sacraments, there opening his glory unto us, and us a
door into it, and all the while the material stars even under his feet.

Seeing all these so much above what they here saw, our joy should be much
above what they rejoiced with. But theirs being exceeding, ours can be no more,
when we have said all we can. And that it may be so, I shall only tell you, It
must exceed the joy we take in earthly things, we must more rejoice in Christ,
and in his Star, than all the World besides; more in the holiness of a Saint,
than in the highness of a Prince; more in a faithful Pastor, than in any
Worldly Counselor; more in the Word of God, than in all the Writings of men;
much more in the History of Christ, than in all the Romances and Histories of
the earth; more in the Promises of the Gospel, than in the promises of all
earthly pleasures, and felicities; more in the inward work of grace, and the
inward comforts of the Spirit, than any sensual satisfactions and contentments;
more in the meditation of Heaven, and heavenly Glory, than in all the glories
of the World; more in Christ, than in all things, or hopes together; It must
exceed them all.

And when it so exceeds, it will bring us to an exceeding high condition, make
us exceed in grace, exceed in glory; do great and wonderful things by the power
of grace to express our thankfulness, and bring us by it to the reward of
exceeding glory, where we shall need no more Stars to guide us, nor Sun or Moon
to give us light; but this eternal light, now pointed at by the Star, shall
give us light both day and night, shall fill us with joy, such as neither heart
can imagine, nor tongue express; that exceeds all we can speak or think; give
us joy for joy, great for great, exceeding for exceeding, in his blessed Light
and Presence for evermore.

THE THIRD SERMON ON THE EPIPHANY.
St. MATTHEW. ii. 11.
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary his
Mother, and fell down and worshipped him: and when they had opened their
treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh.
OUR last years business from the Text, was to see what the Wise men saw:
Philips counsel to Nathaniel, S. John 1. to come and see. This years shall be
to do what the Wise men did, what all Wisemen will do still; Holy David's
invitation, to fall down and worship. For having found this blessed Child, the
end of all our Journeys, the crown of all our labors, the sum of all our
desires and wishes: this infant-God, this young King of Heaven and Earth: what
can we less then do our obeisance, and pay our Homage? All Wise men will do so,
adore the rising Sun, make sure of somewhat, or in the Psalmists phrase,
Rejoice with reverence, and kiss this Son, lest he be angr^, and so we perish;
fall down before him, and even kiss his feet in an humble adoration, that he
may lift us up, and advance us in his Kingdom, at least remember us when he
comes into it.

To come into the house else where Jesus is, and there to see him, to stand and
look upon him only, and no more, is a journey and sight to little purpose. The
Ox and the Ass saw him; and many no doubt to as little purpose, upon the
Shepherds report, and the rumor of these Wise men's coming from the East, came
to see and gaze upon him. It is this worshipping that sanctifies, prospers all
our journeys; we begin them but untowardly, and finish them but unluckily
without it. If we fall not down upon our knees before we go out, and bow not
our selves, and worship not in thankfulness when we come in, we cannot assure
our selves of any great good, either of our goings out, or of our comings in,
how successful soever they seem at first, even to have obtained their ends,
even found Jesus too. This same worshipping is both the end and blessing of all
our journeys, if they be blessed; nor see we, or understand we any thing thoroughly
or comfortably where that is wanting, where the worship and service of God and
our Savior is not both the aim and endeavor of all our motions.

Wise men they were here, that now for these twelve days have made it theirs;
And the Ethiopian Eunuch, Acts viii. 27. a great Counselor, made it the only
business of his Journey to Jerusalem, to worship only, and so return. And in
the devouter times of Christianity, the devout Christians, when their haste was
such they could not stay out a Prayer or Collect, would yet never pass a
Church, but they would in and bow themselves, and worship, and be gone.
Tantiest adorare; so weighty a business it is to worship, though but in
transitu, to prosper any thing we are about.

It was so thought then: it would be so now, did we not more study to make
enquiries about Christ, than to serve him; to dispute about Christianity, than
to practice it: Christianity here begins with it. These first Christians I may
call them, thus professed their service to their Savior, thus addict themselves
to the faith and obedience of Christ; and were there no other reason in the
world to persuade it, it were certainly enough, that the first Faith in Christ
was after this fashion, thus acknowledged and performed.

Three acts there are of it in the Text, (...), falling down, worshipping, and
offering. The first, the worship of the Body; the second of the Soul; the third
of our goods: With these three, our Bodies, our Souls, our Goods, we are to
worship him; with all these his worship is to be performed, without them all it
is but a lame and maimed Sacrifice, neither fit for Wise men to give, nor
Christ to receive.

Two points of the Text we are gone through: the Wise men's Journey and success;
their coming and their seeing; their labor and their reward. Three now we have
to go through, Procidentes, Adorarunt, and Obtulerunt; the three acts, or
parts, or points of Worship we are to perform to Christ: each in its order as
it lies, and first of Procidentes, their Prostration.

Here it is we first hear of any worship done to Christ, and this falling down,
this prostration; the first worship, as if no other, no lesser adoration could
serve turn after so great a blessing as the sight of a Savior: as if his
taking on a body, challenged our whole bodies now; his coming down from Heaven,
our falling down upon the earth; his so great humiliation, our greatest
expression of our humility.

Many sorts of adoration have been observed, greater and lesser, Bowing the
head, Exodus i. 10. Bowing the body, Genesis xviii. 2. Bending the knee, Isa. xlv.
23. Worshipping upon the knee, Psalm. xcv. 6. God thus worshipped by them all.
And falling down before him is no news to hear of, neither in Scripture or
Antiquity; whatsoever niceness, or laziness, or profaneness of late have either
said or practiced against it.

They were Wise men here that did it; yet it is well that the Scripture calls
them so. I know who have been counted fools, superstitious fools, for as little
a matter, for the same: though I cannot but wonder to see as much done in a
complement to a thing worse than a reasonable man, whilst God himself is denied
it. Indeed it may be if we compare the persons, we shall quickly see the
reason: These in the Text were Wise men, of credit and reputation, men of some
quality, men that understood themselves, and knew the language of Heaven; and
can turn the Stars to their proper uses, that think not much of much pains, to
find a Redeemer, that know how to use a King, and serve a God; that run readily
at the first call of Heaven to pay this worship: Your selves can inform you
what they are that deny it, I shall not tell you.

Poor ignorant Shepherds may perhaps through ignorance or astonishment omit the
Ceremony and be pardoned, so they go away praising and rejoicing; but great
learned Clerks cannot be excused if they pretermit it: but neither the one nor
the other, if they deny it. Ignorance will be no sufficient plea for the one,
nor a distinction or a pretense of scandal for the other, in a point so plain,
as perpetual custom from the beginning of the world, and plain words of
Scripture make it.

Abraham falls upon his face in a thankful acceptance of Gods promise, Genesis
xvii. 17. His servant Eleazar bows down and worships. Genesis xxiv. 26. Old Jacob
did as much as he could toward it on his bed, Genesis xxi. 31. And the people of
Israel, Exodus iv. 31. and this before the Law was given. And Moses before the
Law was written, fell down before the Lord, as he tells the people, Deuteronomy. ix.
18. So it was no Jewish Law or custom then, but even a point of the Law of
Nature, though practiced also by the Jew, by David, Ps. v. 7. by Solomon, 2 Chronicles. vi. 13. by Ezekiel, chapter xi. 13. by Daniel, chapter vi. 10. by all the
Prophets, by all the people; all the children of Israel together bowed
themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped and
praised the Lord, 2 Chronicles. vii. 3. Christ himself allows the people to do as
much to him; takes it, and takes it kindly from them. Iairus the Ruler of the
Synagogue falls at his feet, St. Mark v. 20. Mary does as much, St. John xi.
31. Others often do the same, and none forbidden it: nay, he himself does it to
his Father, St. Mark xiv. 35. fell down and prayed; and do we then think much
to do it? The very Saints in Heaven, where there is nor shadow certainly nor
Ceremony, fall down before him, even before the Lamb. Rev. v. 8. and xi. 16.
and xiv. 4. and are we too good to do it? Is the practice of all ages, of
Heaven, of Earth, and Christ too, not strong enough to bow our stubborn necks?
Is there Judaism and Superstition in Heaven, in Christ too? Oh then let me be
superstitious, I am content to be so, to be called so by any generation upon
earth.

But to make it yet more evident, if it can be: nature it self in the midst of
its corruptions keeps yet this impression undefac'd, and more plainly professes
this Reverence due to the Deity, than even the Deity it self. Never did any the
most blind and foolish Heathen yet acknowledge a God, but presently they
worshipped him with their bodies. Nay never did any ever pretend either honor
or respect to man, but he expressed it some way by his body, by some gesture or
other of it. And must God that made it, and Christ that redeemed it, only go
without it? must man be reverenced with the body, and the Devil served with it,
and God be put off with the worship of the soul, which yet neither can express
it self, nor think, nor do any thing without the body whilst it is in it? It
was thought a good argument by S. Paul, to glorify God in our body as well as
in our spirits (and in old Manuscripts I must tell you, (...) is not found,
(...), the body only, is) because they are God's, he has bought them with a
price, 1 Cor. vi. 20. good reason then that he should have them. The body is
for the Lord, ver. 13. of that Chapter; Who then should have it but he? it is
for no body else: he only can claim it, others do but borrow it, or usurp it:
let him therefore have it, it is his own, and it cannot be bestowed better: he
knows best to use it, how to keep it, fear we not: Indeed it is so unreasonable
to deny it him, so unprofitable to the very body to keep it from him, that I
know not why we should expect to have it either safe or well, when we deny it
him. Who can keep it better? who can easier lift it up when it is down, raise
it up when it is fallen, preserve it in health and strength than he? And are we
such fond fools then, not to present it always to his protection, and lay it at
his feet, who if he tread upon it, does yet do it good?

Though we were Heretics of the highest impudence, and denied his Godhead,
yet confessing his humanity, we can do no less than give the worship of our
bodies to him; We can give him nothing less. I may without breach of charity, I
fear, suspect that this generation that are so violent against the worship of
the body, will e're long neither confess his Godhead nor his Manhood, turn
Arian and Manichee both together, and prove a kind of mixed Heretics unheard
of hitherto, beyond all the wickedness and folly of all their former
predecessors, come so far at last, to think all done in a fancy, or a dream,
make all the work of our redemption come to nothing. For certainly, did they
either seriously think him true God or true man, we should see it by their
bodies, especially seeing we cannot see any thing by their spirits to the
contrary. Even men used to be thus worshipped, 1 Kings i. 31. and Prophets, 2
Kings ii. 15. So that did they confess him any thing, they would certainly fall
down and worship him, not deny it to be sure, whether do it or no.

For all falling down is not adoration. It is the mind that makes that; the
intention of the soul, that turns this outward expression of the body into
adoration, that makes it either (...) or (...), either a religious or a civil
worship, as it pleases.

This is the reason together with the Authority of the Fathers, St. Augustine,
St. Leo, St. Bernard, and others, that I make adorarunt here, this word
worship, to relate to the soul, as procidentes, falling down, to the body.
Though I am not ignorant that both in the School, and Grammar sense it is
seldom or never found without the interest and posture of the body, yet must it
of necessity most refer to the soul, that being able only to specify the
worship, and give it both its nature and its name, by either intending it
religiously as to God, or civilly only as to a creature, where it gives it; the
outward posture being often the same indifferently to God and man.

That these Wise men intended it as an act of Devotion and Religion, as to an
incarnate God, not a mere carnal man, is the general opinion of the Church, and
not without good ground. For first, Wise men, who ever propound some end to all
their motions, would not have undertaken so long, and tedious, and troublesome a
journey to have seen a child in a Cradle, or in the mothers lap; no not a Royal
babe: they were Kings themselves; so the Ancients delivered them to us: and the
72 Psalm foretells them by that name; and they had often seen such sights, in
as much pomp and glory as they could expect it in Judea. At least cui bono?
what good should they get by it? ( that is a thing Wise men consider) by any
King of Judea? what was such an one or his child to them, who had nor
dependence nor commerce with him; or if they had, needed not make such a
needless journey themselves, to no more purpose than in a complement to visit
him?

But (2.) They tell us they had seen his Star; now we and they knew well enough
that the Kings of the earth, though they have the Spangles of the Earth, have
not the Spangles of the Heaven at their command; though they have Courts and
Courtiers beset with sparks of Diamonds and Rubies, they have not yet one spark
of Heaven in their attendance. No King of Stars, but the King of Heaven; none
under whose command or dominion they move or shine, none that can call them
his, but God that made them; to worship one then who not only can alone call
all the Stars by their names, but by his own too, is certainly, in any Wise
man's language, to worship God. Our very Star-gazers, who confess no King, and
for ought we can see, worship no God, will yet confess, that in the Latin they
have regit Astra Deus, that the Stars are only Gods; and though a Wise man may
by his wisdom divert their influence, he can in no wise either command or
direct their motion.

3. They tell us too they came to worship, their whole business was nothing
else; and we would think they had little indeed, if they came so far only to
give a complement to a child that could neither answer them nor understand
them; We must certainly take them not for Wise men, but very fools to do so.
And if worship be the end of their coming, we may quickly understand by the
phrase of Scripture, that it is divine worship that is meant. Of worship indeed
and adoration we may read in other senses there, but it is never made a
business, said to be any ones aim or purpose, but when it is referred to God
and his House. The Eunuch is said to come to Jerusalem, and worship, Acts viii.
27. David invites us to fall down and worship, Psalm. xcv. 6. St. Paul comes to
Jerusalem to worship, Acts xxiv. 11. and certain Greeks are said to come up to
worship, St. John xii. 20. but all this while it is to worship God, never made
a work to worship man. To fall down before, or bow, or reverence to any man,
how great soever, is but an occasional piece of business, on set purpose never.
When we come before Kings and Princes we do it, but never come before them to
this end only for to do it.

4. Had they conceived no other of him than as man, or a Child of man, that
poor contemptible condition, and unworshipful pickle they found him in, the
rags of poverty, the place they saw him in, would have made them have forborne
their worship quite, they would have been so far from procidentes adorarunt,
that it would have been dedignantes abierunt; instead of falling down and
worshipping, they would have gone their ways, disdaining at him. But so
powerful was his Star, and so had the Day Star risen in their hearts, so had
the eternal light shined to them, that they could see what others could not; in
carne Deum, God in the Child: He that led them without, taught them within,
both whom they worshipped, and how to worship.

And indeed, he that knows and considers whom he worships, will worship both in
Spirit, and in truth, with his soul and with his body, in truth else he does
not worship. Adorare, adoration consists of both, nay, cannot be well
conceived, if you take away either the one or the other. The word it self in
its primitive signification is, manum ad os admovere, concerns the body, and is
no more than to kiss the hand, and (...) of (...) is just the same. So was the
fashion of the Greeks to worship, and it seems ancient through the East; for it
is an expression of holy Job, chap. xxxi. 21. If I have beheld the Sun when it
shined, etc. or, my mouth has kissed my hand, that is, if he had worshipped
any other God. But it falls out with this as with other words, they enlarge
their signification by time and custom; and so adoration is come to be applied
to all worship of the body, bowing the head, bending the knee, falling on the
face, kneeling at the feet, according as each particular Country perform their
reverence. Time yet has enlarged it further, and our Savior, that eternal
word, and therefore the best Expositor of any word, has applied it also to the
soul (...), St. John iv. 23. nay more, calls them the truest worshippers that
worship in Spirit.

And indeed the Spirits, the Souls part is the chiefest, the worship of the
body is but the body of worship. The soul that is it that enlivens it, the
spirit and soul of it that completes it, the inward intention, direction,
submission, and reverence is that which makes all to be accepted. To fall down
in humility with the body, and lift up the soul with pride; to give an outward
respect to him, and inwardly neglect him; to do the worship cursorily, or in a
complement, without attention or good meaning, is to use Christ as the
Soldiers did, worship him in a mockery, cry, Hail King, and smite him; to give
a Crown of Thorns, and a Scepter of a reed: to make a puppet, or a may game of
him, or with Herod pretend to worship, and mean nothing less: seem devout,
forsooth, in all haste, but nourish profane and murtherous, that is, sinful,
careless, or Atheistical thoughts against him.

They do best joined: God has joined them, and one word has joined them; and
when joined, we best understand them; and soul and body being so nearly joined,
why should we go about to separate them? The Prophesies foretell them both, as
to be solemnly performed to him: All Kings shall fall down before him, all
Nations shall do him service, Psalm. lxxii. 11. and ver. 15. Prayer shall be
made ever unto him, and daily shall he be praised. The Gospel, that assures it
was done: and the Apostle tells us, that God had so ordained it should be,
given him a name, which is above every Name, that at the Name of Jesus every
knee should how, of things in heaven, things in earth, and things under the
earth, Phil. ii. 9, 10. If all things in heaven and earth do do it, then
spirits and bodies too. For bodies are things, and spirits are things; and in
heaven and under the earth, there be no bodies, in earth there is both: so
there sure to be done by both. And this name had not been long given before
these wise men come to do it reverence; before it was given they came not,
presently after they come; not before, that they might know how to call him
they were to worship: yet presently after, that we might know it was in his
name only that the Gentiles were to trust, at which to bow and worship. To
worship him, to worship his Name, or at his Name, is but the same in Scripture,
or little difference. Yet if we owe him worship, we owe also a respect unto his
Name; we are not to take it vainly, or count it light, but pay a reverence to
it, as to his; for therein also we worship him. As we worship his Humanity, as
it is united to his Divinity, so his Name too we may well worship, that is,
reverently esteem and speak of it, and so express it; spiritually rejoice too
at the hearing of it, without fear of Superstition or Idolatry. We else but
poorly and lamely worship him, God knows, if we give no respect at all to his
Name, or any thing that belongs to him. We may as well be afraid to worship him
at all, now since he has taken on a body, lest we should commit Idolatry to
it, being a creature, as to fear Superstition in worshipping at his Name before
his footstool, as the Scripture sometimes speaks; when the adoration on both
hands is only directed to, and terminated in his Godhead.

If any then, as alas too many be so little Christians, as to give to Jesus, or
his holy Name, or his holy Altars and Sacraments, no more reverence than does a
Turk or Pagan, let not us for Christ's sake bear them company: we have better
examples here before us; nay, we have Angels too before us at the work. When he
brought his first-begotten into the world, he said, And let all the Angels of
God worship him, Heb. i. 6. and certainly they do it, they fulfill his command,
and do his pleasure. And are we then too holy to do it? Is it a command upon
them, whom the benefit does no way so much concern; and is it left at our
pleasure, who have the most reason in the world to do it, to whom chiefly this
Christ was born and given? may we choose whether we will worship him or no? and
yet be the greatest gainers by it, and the more holy by not doing it?

Faith's the business they tell us, no matter for any thing besides: only
believe and all is done. Well, but is Faith the business? and is it not a
strong belief indeed, this, that can bring men out of their own Country, and
that a far one too, through Arabian Deserts in the depth of Winter only to
worship? and is it not as high a piece of Faith, notwithstanding that poor,
outward, contemptible, appearance of Christ, yet to fall down and worship him,
and believe him to be their God and Savior, and to trust the guidance of a
Star, or the word of an obscure Prophecy, or an inward motion from Heaven,
before their own eyes, and all sense, and reason? To leave his Country, and to
believe against hope and reason, was counted to Abraham for Faith, Heb. xi. was
so to these Wise men of the Text, will be to all that follow their example. Our
Worship is but the expression of a Faith, fides facta, or fides faciens, Faith
done. We worship, therefore we believe, or, we believe, and therefore worship.

And therefore, thirdly, offer too. Open our treasures, the treasures of our
Faith, and present our gifts: And when they had opened their Treasures, etc.

The ancient Fathers have here observed both Letter and Mystery; and I am no
wiser, I shall do so too. The Letter is plain enough to tell us, that God looks
to be worshipped with our Goods as well as with our Bodies, and our Souls; and
that those whom he leads by his Star or Spirit, any that will come to Christ,
must no more come empty handed, than those that come to God, Exodus xiii. For
God he is, and God he gave us them; God therefore, every person in the
Godhead, to be served with them: the first fruits it should be in all reason,
and in justice, all it might be; but some part or offering out of them
howsoever. I shall open the Wise men's treasures, and show you them, the
outside of them, the Letter first.

Treasures they are called before they are opened, that we may learn God is not
only to be served with mean things and ordinary ware. Nothing can be too good
for him; the treasures of our Hearts, and the treasures of our Cabinets and
Coffers are never better opened than for him. David would not offer what cost
him naught, and Araunah when he does but understand God's business toward,
gives like a King, 2 Samuel xxiv. 23. The Israelites, hard hearted Israelites,
are yet so tender of Gods Service, that they pluck off their Jewels and golden
Earrings for the Service of the Tabernack. The first Christian Emperors give
their stately Halls to make Churches, and nothing is thought too costly by
pious souls for God's worship. Are the treasures and precious things of the
earth for men only, and not for God? that were strange indeed, and a bondage
and usurpation the creature indeed might well groan under.

Gifts they are styled when they are presented (2.) to tell us that God expects
gifts as well as dues. Falling down and worshipping are due upon command: the
second Commandment, that forbids it to an Idol, must necessarily thence infer
it due to God; and if we do no more than pay our dues, what thank have we? God
loves a free will offering, and expects it too; unless we can suppose the Jew
more bound to him than are we: our selves know how we value a voluntary service
above any; and think we that God less accepts it? he accepts of the will when
there is nothing else, so much he esteems it; and will he not accept it when he
sees it pour out it self with fullness upon him?

3. Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh they prove when they are opened; such best
presents as the Country affords, and the best of them: that we may know there
is no Country so barren, no man so poor, but may afford something to Gods
service. Nor the Rocks of the one Arabia, nor the Sands of the other so dry and
fruitless, but that they yield some fruit for Christ. They have but little
indeed, that have not to offer a Turtle, or a Pigeon; if they have no Gold,
they may have Francincense and Myrrh, no such great cost: Even the poor Widow
has a Mite or two, something at least to bestow on God, to present him with,
that none may plead excuse.

Yet (4.) as they are such as the Country yields, proportinable to that; so
they are, as it falls out, very proportionable for them that offer them. Gold
and perfumes, fit presents for Kings and Princes, and persons of Estate and
Honor, to present, or be presented with; they are things either costly or
delicate: and such is fittest for them to present to Christ, to offer up their
golden Crowns, and readily part with all their sweetnesses and delicacies for
his honor and service. Great men must not give mean presents; it is unworthy
of them.

Not mean ones said I? (5.) Not few neither: here is three together for one
present at a clap; and three is all: It Is the perfectest number, and intimates
all. Of every thing we are to give God somewhat; it is as it were a grace to
sanctify the rest: Nor can we methinks promise our selves a blessing upon any
thing we enjoy, till we have first offered it, or of it, to God. Certain it is,
I dare assure him, he loses nothing of any thing, that gives any of it to God,
but increases best by that diminishing.

6. Yet proportionable only to our condition are we required to offer: every
one cannot offer Gold. These Wise men therefore, the Type of all the Gentiles
that were to come in to offer, not only offer like Kings, but like persons of
meaner condition also; Frankincense and Myrrh, things of a lower value, that
we may know, God accepts all, any thing, so we offer it willingly. Turtles and
Pigeons, as well as Lambs and Bulls; Mites as well as Talents; Prankincense and
Myrrh as well as Gold; the poor man's present as well as the greatest Kings and
Princes.

7. God as he loves men should keep proportion to their abilities, not that
they should be burdened; yet he loves also that they should keep some
proportion to himself. We must have regard to God's honor, as well as our own
low estate; not offer lame, or maimed, or refuse things. To Christ here Gold
comes very fitly to relieve his necessity, his poor Mothers Poverty:
Frankincense does well to perfume the Stable, and Myrrh comes seasonable to
strengthen and confirm his infant limbs. He gives twice, that gives in season.
No gift so welcome as that which comes in the time of necessity, when we have
most need. Cast we about hence, ever to proportion our presents to God's
convenience, and the Churches; to supply it in want with our Gold and Silver;
in contempt, and under the ill scent of scorn and ill report, to defend it with
the sweet incense of Good Works; in weakness and declining, to uphold it with
the myrrh of our Patience and Courage.

8. Do we it lastly, largely, with open hearts, and hands, and purses; open all
our treasures, spread them all before him, bid him please himself, take what he
will, all if he will, reserve nothing, detain nothing, no part nor portion from
him, as did Ananias and Saphira, who paid dearly indeed for being so close
handed, Acts v. but open we all our treasures to him, keep we nothing from him;
knowing this, that he that sows plentifully, shall reap plentifully, and he
that gives most, shall yet never lack. And where he takes it not himself, let
us our selves pick the choicest out of all; and with these wise and happy souls
present them to him. Somewhat out of our Gold, our abundance and superfluities;
somewhat out of our Frankincense, our competencies and conveniences; somewhat
out of our Myrrh, our necessaries that are to uphold nature: And as Myrrh
does the dead body, keep it from stinking. Somewhat out of all I say, the more
the better; but some at least, some of all three. Our goods indeed, as says the
Psalmist, are nothing unto thee, O God, nothing unto thee, in comparison of
thee, the chiefest good: our riches nothing to thine; thou need them not
neither; yet for all that, give him them we must: for he needs not our prayers
neither, our souls neither; nothing of ours indeed at all: Yet does he lay his
claim to all, and require some of all. You will understand better what he
requires, if we open the treasures a little further, go on to the Mystery, what
Antiquity has conceived infolded in the treasury of the Text; what is the
mystery of this threefold present, Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

For why these rather than any other? or why so specified, being no such
rarities in Judea? somewhat certainly there is in it; a double mystery, say the
Fathers: an allegory and a moral; an allegorical, and a moral sense. The
Allegory is to teach us what to think or believe of Christ. In offering Gold
they acknowledged him for a King, and so paid him Tribute. In offering
Frankincense, or Incense, they confessed him to be a God. It is to the gods only
that even the Heathen offer Incense. Yet (3.) In offering Myrrh, they yet
profess he should die like men: Myrrh has little other use than in Sepultures
and Embalmings. So the sum of the Wise men's Faith, or the Magi's Creed is thus
professed, that this Child they thus adored was the King, Messiah, God and Man
who should die for them.

I shall take leave to expatiate and enlarge their Creed out of the same
oblations yet a little further, seeing the Fathers have led the way, and point
them out, how they thus doing seem to believe all that is to be believed of
Christ. First, his two natures, his Godhead by the Incense, his Manhood by the
Myrrh. (2.) His Offices, his Kingly Office by the Gold, the very matter of the
Crown that makes him King. His Priestly Office by Incense, the Priests Office
being to offer Incense, S. Luke i. 9. Levit. xvi. 13. His Prophetical Office by
the Myrrh, representing the bitter and mortified life of a Prophet. (3.)
Here Is his Birth, his Life, his Death, and Resurrection all acknowledged. His
Birth fitly resembled unto gold, the purest metal; his birth the purest without
any sin at all, of a Virgin pure as the most refined Gold; his Life well
represented by the Incense, being nothing but a continual service of God, and a
perpetual doing of his Fathers business. His Death, the very manner of it
evidently pointed at by the Myrrh, which in his Passion was given him in Wine
to drink: the usual draught of those that died upon the Cross. And his
Resurrection, easily enough understood by the same Myrrh, whose chief use is
to preserve the dead body from Corruption, out of an hope of a Resurrection;
and was even literally done unto him by Nicodemus, who brought a mixture of
Myrrh and Aloes to embalm him, St. John xix. 39.

So now we see what it is to present Gold, Francincense, and Myrrh to Christ,
even no less than to believe him to be God and Man, our King, and Priest, and
Prophet, born of a Virgin, without stain of sin, living in all holiness without
blame, and dying for us; yet not seeing Corruption, but rising again to
Incorruption. This is the Faith we are to offer up, this triple Faith. Fear we
not any adversaries or calamities, he is our King to protect us; King of Kings,
and Lord of Lords, 1 Timothy vi. 15. Despair we not though we be grievous sinners;
he is our Priest, our High Priest to offer for us, and reconcile us. Let not
even Death affright us; by his death, Death has lost its sting: the Myrrh of
his embalming will preserve us, and by his Resurrection he will revive and
raise us up. Let us thus think of Christ, and trust upon him, and we still
offer this same offering of Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

This is the Allegory, the Moral is behind: and in the moral sense we offer
Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, who present God with those virtues that
resemble them.

First, He offers Gold, who patiently and constantly suffers for his Faith,
which is far more precious, says St. Peter, than of Gold that perishes, though
it be tried with the fire, 1 Pet. i. 7. The Martyrs flames are brighter than
Gold, and the constant Faith will endure the fire better than the Gold it self.

He (2.) offers Gold who sets himself to keep Gods Commandments, which in the
Psalmists account, Psalm. xix. 10. are more desirable than Gold, yea, than the
finest Gold.

He (3.) offers Gold who disperses it abroad, and gives it to the poor; he that
gives Alms, properly offers Gold; to the poor indeed he gives it, but to God it
is he offers it: an offering of a sweet savor to him.

2. He offers Frankincense who offers Prayers, whose Prayers ascend like
Incense: It Is holy David's expression, Prayers set forth as Incense, Psalm.
^xli. 2. no Incense so sweet, so acceptable to God, as the devout Prayers of
his servants.

He (2.) presents Incense whose hope is only in the Lord his God, whose desires
and hopes are always ascending upward.

He (3.) presents Incense who presents humility and obedience: the nature of
Frankincense is binding and restringent, well imitated by obedience and
humility; the best binders and restrainers of our wills and passions.

3. And lastly, he offers Myrrh who mortifies his affections, which are upon
the earth. Myrrh is a mortifier. One quality of Myrrh is to kill Worms; he
that kills these worms of our inordinate desires, that come crawling on us,
those covetous desires that lie gnawing us; those wrigling motions of any lusts
that are ever tickling, disturbing us, he offers Myrrh.

2. He presents Myrrh that presents his body chaste and pure. Judith that
chaste Matron is said to wash her body and anoint it with Myrrh, Judith 10. as
it were a preservative against lust, and the Spouse in the Canticles, so fair,
so pure, so undefiled, is much delighted with bundles of Myrrh; her very hands
drop sweet smelling Myrrh. It is so great an Antidote against all impurity and
corruption.

3. He presents Myrrh, who though he has not perhaps altogether kept his body
pure, or his affections in order, yet begins now at last to take his Wine a
little mingled with Myrrh, that takes of the bitter potion of repentance, who
in the bitterness of his soul repents him of his sins.

You know now how you may still offer Gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh, a
constant Faith, a regular Life; Charity and Alms is as good as Gold, devout
Prayer, a lively Hope, an humble Obedience will pass for Incense, a chaste
body, mortified affections, and true repentance will be accepted instead of
Myrrh. See we to it then, that we have them always ready to present to Christ.

Yet there is one mystery more to be observed, when they had opened their
treasures, says the Text, and it says it that we may know, we are to open our
treasures as well as offer them. Now to open them before him, is, as it were to
say, take what he will, we are content. A voluntary resignation of our selves
and all that is ours to his choice, order, and disposing, to deny and renounce
our selves, and all that is ours; our own desires, our goods, our good deeds,
our merits: or to leave all to follow him, if he so will have it, is the most
perfect of all our offerings, and the perfection of them all. It is both the
beginning and end of Christianity; so we begin our Christianity with the same
resignedness, we must continue it to the end.

And we may yet observe how to offer here as well as what to offer. Open we our
treasures first, do it freely, that we do, all our treasures. (2.) Do it
plentifully, and largely, Dorcas-like, full of good works, and alms-deeds: let
our good works and graces glitter like the refined Gold. (3.) Do them pure and
sincerely. (4.) That they may ascend like Incense, do them religiously and
devoutly. (5.) Let them be wrapped up in Myrrh, to keep them from corouption.
(6.) Let them all be like sweet smelling Myrrh of good odor and report. (7.)
Let them also be imbittered with Myrrh, with the bitter tears of repentance,
that we have presented God so little good, and the tears of sorrow that we can
present no better. (8.) Let them be done in order, our incense in the middle,
our prayers winged on the one hand with the golden wing of Faith, on the other
with purity white (as is says Pliny) the purest Myrrh, a faithful heart, and
pure hands, encompassed on the one side with Alms, on the other with
Mortification and Fasting: First believe, then pray, then practice. First
believe Christ's word and promises, then pray for his assistance, then practice
his obedience. And lastly all our doings, all our offerings must be presented
by falling down, with humility, and prayer. So we began the Sermon, and so we
end it.

So will he who accepted the Wise men and their gifts accept us and ours, and
for our gifts give us better; for our earthly, heavenly treasures; for our Gold
the Crown of Glory; for the incense of our prayers that we offer here, the
honor to offer there, the holy odours of eternal praises; for our bitter
Myrrh we suffer here, the full sweetness of all pleasure there; and for our
falling down shall one day raise us up again to everlasting glory, to worship
him that sits upon the Throne, and the Lamb for evermore. Amen.

A SERMON UPON St. Paul's Day: Preached at St. Paul's.
NEHEM. xiii. 14. Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my
good deeds that I have done for the house of my God, and for the Offices
thereof.
ANd even to remember our selves concerning this, of the good deeds done to
this House of God, and to the Offices thereof have I chose the Text to day.

A day, by all probable conjectures from the ancient great solemnity we find
upon it, the Feast of the Dedication of this reverend and aged Pile, either at
the first or second building of it, when it was first presented to God to be
remembered by him. A Day here observed, not only in memory of St. Paul's
Conversion, but of the Conversion also of this place (now St. Paul's) either at
the first from the Temple of Diana, to the House of God; or of this Part of it
wherein we are, some hundred of years after from common use, and the renewing
of the rest of it out of ashes to the vast proportion it now carries.

And it falling out this Year to be a Day crowned with so honorable an
Assembly, I hope it may fall out happily to remember you of some kind offices,
some good deeds to it. Now after a third Conversion of it from a Stable, a
Magazine, a Market, a Meeting place of Schism and Rebellion, to a Church again,
and the Holy Offices in their beauty, to set to your pious hands to help it out
of dust and rubbish, and raise it up to its first luster and glory.

But if the day should have no such reflection, no day could be amiss to
remember either our selves, or you, of such good works as God here is not only
content to be remembered of, but pleased to remember, puts here upon record too,
that we also may remember them; Remember what good Nehemiah, and other pious
souls have done in their several times to the House of God, and forget not our
selves to do the like.

We have a command from St. Paul (whose day it is) to charge them that are rich
to do so, 1 Timothy vi. 18. to be rich in good works, and such are these. We have
a good warrant for it hence; We have a good Pattern here, and the works put,
all, as it were, upon Gods score to pay for Thrice it is so in the Chapter,
ver. 22. and 31. as well as in the Text; as if God were little less than bound
to recompense and reward them. And he will, if we carry not our selves too high
upon them; if we do them with sincerity, and reflect upon them with humility.
Nehemiah does so. For how good soever the works were, the words are but a
modest recommendation of them to God when they were done, with an humble
Petition to Him to accept them. An excellent Precedent to Us, what to do in the
Case, and how to do it.

That we may the better understand his, and do our own, we make the Text into
two generals.

I. Nehemiahs good deeds done to the House of God. And, II. His Petition to him
to remember and accept both him and them, and not blot out either himself or
them.
Or to be more distinct, we shall draw those Generals into these Particulars;
and consider,

I. What it was that Nehemiah did to the House of God, and to the Offices, that
he would have remembered; the good deeds that he did. II. That such things done
to the House of God, or to the Offices, though but Ceremoniis, are good deeds;
good indeed, and so to be reputed and remembered. III. That as good as they are,
such (yet) they are as God may in rigor of justice wipe out, and not remember;
such as we had need still, with Nehemiah, pray him not to wipe out, but
remember. IV. That, yet notwithstanding, they are such too, as God may, and
will be, easily entreated to remember, and not wipe out; That he, God, does
remember them, and sets them here upon Record for such. V. And not only
remember them, but the person also for them; Him that does them, Remember Me.
VI. But then (6.) This must be remembered too, why they stand here; that this
Scripture, as well as others, was written for out learning, to remember us,
that (1.) still such a House there is, a House of God, with many Offices
belonging to it, and good still to be done to It and Them. That (2.) good it is
to do so still. That (3.) God even now also will remember such good deeds; and
such also (4.) as shall do them. Would have us (5.) do so too. Would have us
(6.) remember sometimes our selves to do them. But be sure (lastly) when they
are done, to beg of him not to touch too hard upon them, lest he wipe them out.
Remember, etc. you have both the Sum, and the Particulars of the Text. I go on
with the First of them, What it was that was here done to the House of God; and
there, first, show you the Person, then his good deeds.
I. For the Person; our Book tells us it was Nehemiah, but the Text has only a
plain Me to decipher him. That Is enough too, so God but remember him. For God
is not taken with our titles. The less we make of our selves, the more always
he makes of us.

Indeed, there is not much said any where of his Genealogy, and no where so
much what he was, as what he did. The best reckoning Pedigrees is that of
Noah's, Genesis vi. 9. These are the Generations of Noah; Noah was a just man, and
perfect in his Generations, and Noah walked with God. This shall be Nehemiahs.
Nehemiah was a good man, pious in his Generations, and Nehemiah did good to the
House of God. He Is of the noblest House who is thus near allied to the House of
God; that thus comes closest to it.

And yet Nehemiah was no mean man, neither Cup Bearer to Artaxerxes King of
Persia, Chap. i. 11. the Tirshatha, Chap. viii. 9. or Governor of Judea, Chap.
v. 14. had honor and eminence enough; but stands upon record most for his
Piety. That out-vies all Names of Honor. The Repairer of Gods House a better
Title to be remembered by in Gods Catalogue of Nobility, and in the Court of
Heaven; than the greatest Emperors Cup Bearer, or the Viceroy of Judea, nay,
of Emperor of East and West.

This only by the way, that He forgets himself, and God will not remember him,
who thinks his Honor and greatness exempt him from the service of Gods House,
or values any beyond it. King David himself had rather be a doorkeeper there,
than dwell any where else; One day there better, says he, than a thousand,
Psalm. lxxxiv. 9, 10. And one poor Me is worth as many Worships and Honors;
that single Syllable, of as few Letters as you can make it, with a few good
deeds to back it, better than all glorious Titles without them.

But enough of so small a Particle. Enough too here of the Person considered in
himself, because I shall speak of him all the way in his good deeds. To which
now I pass, and enquire (1.) What he did to the House of God; and then (2.)
What to the Offices thereof.

And the several readings give us them under two Heads: Misericordias and
Beneficentiam. His Mercy and his Bounty to them both; both House and Offices.

His Mercy to the House, that I begin with; and that take in these particulars:
In his Compassion toward it, his Petitioning for it, his Repairing, his
Cleansing, his Protecting it. Give me leave to trace the Story, as it is fit I
should, and I shall show you them in some or other of the neighboring Chapters
as they rise.

1. His Compassion toward it, that we may easily see in his sitting down and
weeping over the ruins, in his fasting and sadly praying for it, Chap. i. 4.
For it is not Jerusalem only, or principally either, (though first mentioned)
for which he does so, but Sion, the place that God had chosen to put his Name
there, ver. 9. For that it is; because of the House of the Lord his God that he
thus seeks, O Jerusalem, to do thee good. David plainly professes so for
himself, Psalm. cxxii. 9. And for Sion, Thy servants, says he, they think upon
her stones, and it pittieth them to see her in the dust, Psalm. cii. 14. All
good men still it does as much, they more bewail the ruins of God's houses
than of their own. Alas! Jerusalem is but a sad dwelling without Sion, no more
than any other City, any ordinary Heathen City; not the City of the great King,
or a sure refuge without that. Even a Fox as Tobiah the Ammonite jeered it,
Chap. iv. 3. if he go up shall break down the wall, if the wall of the House be
not joined to it, and built with it. It Is for this principally Nehemiah
mourn's, and maks as it were a Cement for it out of the rubbish by the mixture
of his tears. It Is a Tender mercy; that first.

2. But he does not merely and dully sit down and weep, end the business there;
Up he gets (2.) and to the King he goes, and petitions him for a Commission to
repair it, Chap. ii. 7. Begs of him some supplies and materials toward it.
Good it is to do good to the House our selves, but it is doubled when we can
work others to it too; when we promote it with our friends, and put our selves,
as it were, to the blush to beg for it. It Is yet a mercy we need not blush at,
a holy impudence in doing good; a very serviceable mercy, a mercy not ashamed
of any thing to do good to Gods house, or any thing that is his. That Is a
second.

3. These yet are but the Proems of his mercy. He, thirdly, sets closely to the
work: provides necessaries and materials for the House, and begins the repairs,
completes the unfinished Walls and Turrets, not of the City only, but the
Temple too, where ere they wanted, Chap. iii. It had been begun to be
re-edified by Zerubbabel, Ezra vi. Where, by the way, take notice they began
their building with Gods House then; yet it seems it was not fully finished.
Great works are not the business of a little time, not of days, but years.
(Above forty years in building was this House wherein we are.) Nor are such
Houses at any time so perfect at the last, but that a religious hand will
easily find somewhat or other always to be added to their beauty and glory. And
this is a point of Nehemiahs mercy too; A mercy that thinks no pains too much,
no time too long to continue doing good to the House of God: a laborious and
continued mercy. That Is the third.

4. Nay, sometimes it seems (and we have found it by our own experience) that
the House is not fully finished, yer it is afresh polluted. Nehemiah (4.) is
fain to cleanse it. Tobiah, the Ammonite, his household stuff was gotten into
the House, Chap. xiii. 5. The High Priest, his Allie, had brought it thither.
When the Priest himself profanes the House, lets the Ammonite come in, or
suffers it, God help us. God help us indeed to some good Nehemiah to throw out
that stuff, as you may see ours does, Chap. xiii. 9. A cleansing, purifying
mercy the House needs sometimes, needed it we remember too long. Such is
Nehemiahs too. A clean, pure mercy. That Is the fourth.

5. And yet the Ammonite is not so easily cast out. Nehemiah must stand to what
he has done, and still protect it, or Sanballat, Tobiah, and Geshem, the
Horonite, the Ammonite, and the Arabian, all Sects, Schism, Atheism, and
Profaneness will in again. If the Princes Authority, and the Magistrates Sword
do not protect, as well as recover it from unhallowed hands and Offices; 1.
From corrupt Priests, such as Eliashib, ver. 7. 2. From false ones, such as
cannot prove their succession, Chap. vii. 64. 3. From such as pollute it with
strange marriages, as one of the Sons of Ioiada, ver. 28. strange mixtures,
(suppose the waters of the Tiber, the Frith, or the Leman Lake with the Springs
of Sion.) 4. From strange Levites too, so strange that we know not whence they
came, nor what their Pedigree; even in those mercies of the most Highest, which
he has lately showed us, contrary to the Psalm, we shall all miscarry. It Is
the highest Commendation of Nehemiahs mercies, that he does not forsake the
House, but strill protects it both from open enemies, and from treacherous
friends; the one, by his Sword and Spear, Chap. iv. 16. the other, by the
restoring good order and Discipline, Chap. xii. 24. And this is a courageous
and constant mercy; The Fifth Commendation of Nehemiahs.

And thus you have his Mercies to the House it self, His compassion on the
Ruins, his soliciting the Repairs, his setting himself upon the work, his
delivering the house from profanation, his protecting it from the prophaners;
1. a tender, 2. active, 3. laborious, 4. pure, 5. constant goodness to the
House of God. These are the first branches of those Mercies which God here
commends to us, to be shown by his to his House.

The Second sort are those to the Offices. And Misericordias in Custodiis, in
Observantiis, in Ceremoniis, the several translations of the words again shall
serve to head them. Nehemiahs good deeds, First, To the Officers; Secondly, To
the Offices; Thirdly, To the Ceremonies of the House; these three shall be the
Heads.

1. Misericordias in Custodiis, taking the Abstract for the Concrete, His
mercies to the Officers and Keepers of the House, those who are set to watch
and keep it, them we take the first. And indeed the Officers and Ministers they
had need of them first and last; need all the mercies that Nehemiah, or any of
you can show them. For not only, unless the Lord keep the House, but unless
Nehemiah, the Magistrate, do so too, (you the Reveverend Judges, you the
renowned Governors of the City) the Watchmen, the Priests and Levites, will
all labor but in vain. Tobiah, by his acquaintance and alliance, Sanballat, by
his subtilty and pretenses, Geshem, by his wealth and power, will down with the
Walls ere they be well dry, and out with the Officers ere they are warm in
their work and business. Nehemiah therefore, like a stout Governor, sticks to
them against those enemies of Sion and Jerusalem, of peace and order, whether
open or concealed ones; The first of them, Chap. v. the other here, ver. 10.
Against all that have ill will at Sion, that envy the prosperity of the House
of God, he stands to them and protects them.

He, Secondly, disposes and settles them in their proper places, ver. 30. of
this Chapter, descends to take care even of the Singers, and Porters, or
Vergers of the house, Chap. xii. 45.

He calls home, thirdly, the poor Levite, who had been forced to forsake the
house for want of maintenance, Chap. xii. 11. delivers him from the oppression
of such whose policy it was then, and we know is still, to starve the Levite or
Minister out of the House, that so they may either have no Minister at all, and
so scandalize the Government; or none but such as will say and do what they
would have them, and so preach it down again.

He, fourthly, restores them all to their rights and dues, establishes them to
them too by a Law for time to come, Chap. x. 32. and so on.

Lastly, For their better maintenance, and the readier performance of of the
holy Office, he commands the holy things and Vessels, Meat Offerings and
Oblations, to their proper Chambers, in custodias, to be reserved in their
several Wards, Chap. xiii. 9. And these in brief are Nehemiahs Misericordiae in
Costodiis, his good deeds to the Officers or Ministers of the House of God: He
defends them against their Enemies; He confirms them in their Places; He
delivers them from their Oppressors; He establishes them in their Rights; He
Orders all things to their best convenience. Mercies never to be forgotten; and
I would our Age would remember them.

2. Yet not them only, but these that follow too. And Misericordias in
Observantiis are the next. His Mercies to the Offices themselves. Trace we him,
as we did before, and we shall find him (1.) restoring the observing of the
solemn Fasts and Feasts in their due seasons, Chap. viii. 9, 10, 14.
Vindicating (2.) the Sabbath from profanation, Chap. xx. 19. Making them (3.)
a solemn Form of Prayer, Chap. ix. 5. Settling (4.) solemn Music, Hymns and
Anthems of thanksgivings, Chap. xii. 27. Setting up (5.) the public reading
and teaching of the Law of God, Chap. viii. 1. and ix. 3. Re-establishing (6.)
the whole Office of Gods Public Worship and Service according to the
commandment of David, the man of God, Chap. xii. 24. according to the ancient
form and fashion.

3. Follow we him a little further, and you will see him (3.) at Misericordias
in Ceremoniis too, how he behaved himself in the Ceremonies, what good then.
And if you consider how reverently his people demean themselves at holy work;
how devoutly they all stand up at the reading of the Law, Chap. viii. 5. how
unanimously they answer Amen at the Prayers and Blessing; how they lift up
their hands, and bow their heads, and worship the Lord with their faces to the
ground, ver. 6. how content they are to be bound to the Statutes and Judgments
as well as the Commandments of God, that is, to the Ceremonials, and Judicials,
(for so the words Statutes and Judgments do import) as well as to the Moral
Law, and how he solemnly binds them to it by an oath, Chap. ix. 29. You cannot
but say he has wrought a good work indeed upon them, and by this Mercy kept
them from disorder and confusion. Mercy I say, for there is none greater than
to preserve the Sheep within the Fold, than to keep all in peace and order, and
oblige men by Laws and Oaths to do their duties, to attend the holy Offices
diligently in a comely uniformity, who otherwise would some of them never think
of it, and others, under pretense of Christian Liberty, run every day into all
unchristian licentiousness and profaneness, and wander up and down in eternal
errors, and perish in them. And sure, to save them, though against their wills,
is a mercy they need not quarrel with.

These now are the several Mercies of Nehemiah to the House of God, and to the
Offices thereof.

You will understand them better by his Bounty. Misericordias fuller by
Beneficentiam, which is the second sort of his good deeds.

And the first kind of his Bounty is his own and his servants labor freely
bestowed upon the Work. (For it is no matter now whether we divide or join the
House and Offices.) In effect it is no less than the whole Revenues of his
Command and Government; whilst refusing the Pay of the Governor, Cha. v. 15,
18. he suffered it so to run on toward the repairs. It seems he was resolved
not to enrich himself (however) by the Church, but (as the Phrase is) rather
lay out himself upon it.

The second Expression of it is, the free entertainment of one hundred and
fifty of those that labored in the Work at his own Table, at his own charges,
ver. 17. of that cited Chapter. He would neither grow rich upon the Churches
charge, or spare his own to enrich, or at least recover that to its former
greatness.

The third Manifestation of his Bounty is his voluntary gift of one thousand
Drachmes of Gold to the Treasury of the House, Chap. vii. 70. a kind of
springing stream of supplies unto it.

Add now the fifty Basins (and Gold or Silver they must be) the five hundred
and fifty Priests Garments, (and they were no little cost, as the Priests
Garments then were made, Exodus xxviii. 40. for beauty, all, and glory) the
charging himself, besides, and all the people, with a yearly Tax, or Public
Revenue for the repair and service of the House, and you will confess it a
bounty beyond expression.

Especially, if you consider not only that and what, but when and how, as the
Story will inform you, you will say Misericordias and Beneficentiam are lean
and meagre words to tell you what he did.

For to undertake this business when all others had given it over, and left it
in the rubbish, Chap. i. 2. when their enemies without the Walls eagerly
opposed, and as scornfully derided it; and false friends within as subtly
undermined it, Chap. vi. 17. when some of their Nobles dishonourably drew back
for fear or interest, Chap. iii. 5. then in a time so difficult, so dangerous,
so troublesome; then so vigilantly, so courageously, so industriously to pursue
it, as not so much as shift themselves, from weeks end to weeks end, till all
was finished, Chap. iv. 23. to be so bountiful to it, too, in a time of dearth
and scarcity, as it seems it was, Chap. v. 3. when they had scarce money to buy
bread for themselves and families, then to draw both great and small, the chief
Fathers, and the meanest people to great Contributions to it, Chap. vii. 71. is
so many good deeds together, and so good together, that it is nor Greek, nor
Hebrew, nor Latin, no^ Original, nor Translation can express the goodness. I
am sure I have all this while but injured it.

And if we sum up all his Mercies and Bounties, all together; his Tears and
Prayers over the desolations, and ruins of Gods House; his Petition and
diligence for the repairs; his care and labor in the Work it self; his Zeal
and Courage in the cleansing and protecting it; his Friendship and Faithfulness
to the Officers and Ministers; his Justice to settle them in their Office; his
Mercy to deliver them from such as would disturb them in it; his establishing
them in their Rights, and his studying all Conveniences for the holy Office;
his restoring the whole Service of the Church for days, for Forms, for State,
for Beauty, for Order, for all Solemnity. Methinks I might spare you the
trouble of the next Particular I am to give you, to prove them good. Yet,
because there are some that are not willing to believe it, I must do it.

If we would yet but believe the very words of the Text, we should need go no
further.

Misericordias the Text calls them, Mercies; and Acts of mercy are good sure.
We say so when we want it, and call it a doing us good.

Beneficentiam, (2.) Bounty it styles them too, and that is good; Bonum been,
good well done; so is benefacere; makes him so good that does them, that one
would even die to do him good again; for a good man, that is, for a merciful,
bountiful man some would even dare to die, Romans v. 7.

If (3.) you examine the Object of these actions, that is good, for it is God.
That which is done to his House, is done to him: for if the robbing It be
robbing Him, as he tells us it is, Mal. iii. 8. the doing good to it must then
be the doing good to him.

If you (4.) enquire the intention, that is good too. It Is in Observantiis and
Ceremoniis, for Gods Service all; that he may neither dwell slovenly, nor be
served so.

Will you have (5.) a point of faith to sanctify it further? Why, Deus meus,
is the very cloze of faith; the believing God to be his God, the very reason he
is so good to God and His.

To put all out of question. Deeds of this nature God himself styles good.
David had it but in his heart to build God a House, and God sends the Prophet
purposely to tell him, he did well to think on it; Forasmuch as it was in thy
heart to build a House to my Name thou did well, 2 Chronicles. vi. 8. Our blessed
Savior himself says as much in the case, of Mary's anointing him, ( a work
which all the Fathers reckon of the same sort with these we speak of) she had
wrought a good work, St. Mar. xiv. 6. Indeed, Judas, and some that he had
seduced, with a pretense that it might have been bestowed much better, they
disdained at it, ver. 4. and thought it waste; but remember, I pray, that 'twas
but Judas thought so, and some few that he had abused; Christ says, the doing
good to the poor (which was the pretense against it) might stay a while, and
must give way to it, ver. 7. Charity must give way to Piety; Charity to them,
veil to Piety toward him. Nay, so far is is from a waste that is so spent,
that Christ seems to justify the very wasting our selves upon it, whilst he so
highly commends the poor Widow, that had cast into the Treasury of his house
all that she had, even all her living, St. Mar. xii. 44. Indeed, it was but two
Mites in all, yet that he accepts; the least that is done to him: but 'twas all
she had, and that it was which made him prefer it above the richest gifts and
presents that were cast in by all the rest. After all this I must tell you, he
affects these works so well, ( and then they must needs be good) and loves the
House so much, that he sets us a pattern of some of them himself; he will not
suffer any Vessel to be carried through it, St. Mar. xi. 16. and in indignation
whips the buyers and sellers out of the very out-parts of it, St. Luke xix. 45.
Twice he did so: First, after he came up from Capernaum, St. Ioh. ii. 15. And
again when he went up from Bethphage and the Mount of Olives, St. Mat. xxi. 12.
Nay, and he cast out all their Seats, and Merchandise, and Moneys; would not
suffer the least marks of profane or common use be left upon it. I wish we
would learn to be so scrupulous in the point, for now you see no reason to
scruple their being good.

III. Yet good though they be, they thirdly stand in need of Gods goodness to
remember them, as great mercies as we have shown them, they yet want his mercy
to expound them, a Secundum multitudinem miserationum tuarum, and a magnitudine
bonitatis, as it is expressly, ver. 22. a verse parallel to this, to construe and
accept them. Our works are not so perfect but they require it. Verebar omnia
opera mea, says holy Job viii. 28. He was afraid of the best of them. Nay,
though he were righteous, he would not answer God, ver. 15. nor pretend to
answer for them. No more will holy David, I have walked innocently, O Lord,
says he indeed, but yet be merciful to me for all that; both in the same verse,
Psalm. xxvi. 11. That must be the Plea when all is done. And he that here cries
out, wipe them not out O Lord, or remember me concerning them; and ver. 22.
Spare me O Lord, or co^nive super me, wink at me a little; and ver. 33.
Remember them for good, intimates plainly enough, they are not so good but they
may do well to be winked at, may want a pardom, or fear cancelling, or be as
well forgotten, or be remembered for evil as well as good.

Yet good notwithstanding we will allow them. But by Gods grace it is they are
so: Good but by the Covenant of the Gospel, not the rigor of the Law. Good by
an Evangelical (...), Gods favorable interpretation and acceptance, not by the
strictness of worth and merit. Good, but overpoised with many bad ones. David's
Delicta sua quis, etc. Who knows how often he offends? Enough to remember us, we
may offend when we think we are doing good; may do best therefore, and shall do
safest, not too much to remember them our selves, but leave God in his goodness
to remember them.

IV. And that we may do, without any presumption, put God in mind of them now
and then. It Is my Fourth Particular plain in the Text. And plain too it is,
other good men have done so as well as Nehemiah, Hezeki^h does so, 2 Kings xx.
3. I beseech thee* O Lord, remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart, and have done that which is good in thy sight. Some of it
was good deeds to this House we speak of. Holy David particularizes his, Psalm
cxxxii. 1, 2, and so on. Lord (says he) remember David: Why! What of him? Why!
How he swear unto thee, O Lord, and vowed a vow unto the Almighty God of Jacob.
Well, What was that? Why, That he would not come within the Tabernacle of is
house, nor climb up into his bed, he would not suffer his eyes to sleep, nor
his eyelids to slumber, nor the Temples of his head to take any rest, till he
had found out a place for the Temple of the Lord, an habitation for the mighty
God of Jacob. This he prays there that God would remember him and all his
troubles for it, how he was troubled till he had found it. Him in all his
troubles, too, whenever* he should come in any to deliver him out of all,
because of the good he had vowed and intended to the House.

V. But is it only a Prayer that God would remember, Is it not a Record too
(5.) that he does? He truly does; you see it here upon Record he does, in the
books of his eternal Remembrance. It is here remembered in every Chapter. Your
memories cannot be so short but they can tell you it.

The Gospel will tell you it too, tell you God remembers all such deeds as
these. Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached (and it shall be as long as
there is any preaching) there also that which this woman has done shall be told
for a memorial of her. (...), St. Mat. xxvi. 13. Told, and told again; every
body shall speak of it; and it shall never shall be forgotten. The Beam out of
the Roof, and the Timber out of the Wall shall tell it. The Ointment upon
Aarons head shall run down upon his beard, to wet even the skirt of his
clothing, and the dust it self shall not be able to lick it up.

If we speak of the House it self, that stands an everlasting monument of the
Founders Piety. The very Walls of holy buildings, that scarce now raise their
heads so high as to be seen, speak yet plainly forth their Founders and
Benefactors. God raises up some good soul or other even in the worst of times
to revive their Names, (and blessed be they for it.) If we speak of the good
done to the Offices of it; those very Offices are but so many Records therefore
from Generation to Generation. Not a Rams, not a Goats, not a Badgers skin
offered to the building of the Tabernacle, but stands upon Gods File. Not a
Cherubs head, not a Lilly, a Flower, or Pomgranate, not a foot or Inch in the
sacred Fabric, not a Farthing, not a Mite to the Treasure of it falls to the
ground unremembred, un-numbred. Nay, even Sacrilege and Atheism, after so many
Centuries of thriving wickedness, have not yet had the power to obliterate the
memories of the Houses of God in the Land. So are the good deeds themselves
remembered.

Nor shall they that have ever done them, or shall ever do them, be forgotten.
Remember Me, prays Nehemiah; and he was heard in what he prayed. And you not
only see it here, but in the Catalogue made by the Son of Syrach, and long
since added near to the very Book of Gods own remembrances. Among the Elect
(says he) was Nehemias, his renown is great, who raised up for us the Walls
(and some of them were to the house of God) that were fallen, and raised up our
ruins, Ecclus. xlix. 13. There are others reckoned there upon the same
account, Zorobabel was a Signet the right hand, so was Jesus the Son of
Iosedec, who in their time builded the House, and set us an holy Temple to the
Lord which was prepared for everlasting glory, v. 11, 12. there is a memorial
indeed.

And if you would know what this, to be remembered is, the parallel verses will
tell you three things of it: Connive super me, and parce mihi; Wink at and
pardon me, ver. 22. and Memento in bonum, remember me for good, ver. 31. To
have our weaknesses winck'd at, our sins pardoned, and our good with good
rewarded; these three make up Gods remembering us. And he shows it particularly
to those who do good to the place where his honor dwells.

1. Many a default had Jacob made, and done some more than justifiable sleights
in his transactions with his Brethren, but one vow for Bethel, Genesis xxviii. 22.
sets all straight again, and makes God go on his journey with him. There are
weaknesses winked at, and no reason so probable as Bethel for it.

2. David had some faults, and great ones, yet God says, he turned not aside
save only in the matter of Vriah the Hittite, 1 Kings xv. 5. Save that, save
many other that we could tell you of, but that we will not rake up those sins
that God passed by. But why is God so tender in the point? Why! David was
tender over Sion, could not pray for the very pardon of his sins, in that great
Penitential Psalm of his, but he must needs in the same breath, as it were,
remember Sion, Psalm. li. 18. O be gracious unto Sion, as if God else could not
be gracious unto him; or as if otherwise, either the pardon of his sins would
do him little good, or else there were no readier orsurer way to get them
pardoned than by remembering Sion. There Is the pardon of sins upon the score.

3. Would you have a remembrance for your good, as well as a forgetting for
your evil? Would you have God remember you with a blessing too? Why, your
kindness to his house will do it. God blessed the house of Obed Edom, and all
that appertained unto him, because of the Ark of God, 2 Sant. vi. 12. All that
appertained? It Is good dwelling nigh such a man as he. Again, David would fain
have been building God a house, had gotten many materials, and much money ready
for it; and God promises him upon it, that He will build him a House for it,
and establish him a throne for ever, 2 Samuel vii. 11, 12, 13. God will be behind
hand with none that do good to his Habitation, or really intend or go about it.
Nay, the very Sparrow is blessed, and the Swallow is blessed that love but his
House, that sing their Mattens and Vespers at his Altars; the devout Prophet
even envies them for it, Psalm. lxxxiv. 3. So great are the blessings of the
House of God, and so ever are those persons under his eye, so in the eye of
blessing, whose good deeds are there continually putting God in mind of them.

If you would but remember how God forgets his mercy, (or which is the same)
how he remembers them in Judgment who do ill to his House or to the Offices;
how he strikes Vzzah dead for an irreverent touch of the Holy Ark; how he
smites Vzziah with a leprosy for an encroachment upon the sacred Office, 2 Chronicles. xxvi. 19. and turns Saul out of his Kingdom for the like fault, 1 Samuel
xiii. 14. How he thrusts Nebuchadnezzar out of doors, Dan. iv. 33. because he
had burnt up his Houses in the Land, 1 King. xxv. 9. It Is just, indeed, he
should have no House who will let God have none. How he despoils Belshazzar of
his Kingdom, because he had spoild his Temple, and was now profaning those
holy spoils, carouzing in the sacred bowls, Dan. v. 30. How he quite forgets
all mercy to the Jews, and casts them out as soon as they profaned his holy
Temple, and abused his Messengers, Priests and Prophets, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 14.
and professes he could hold no longer when they had arrived at that height of
insolent wickedness; How he makes the Heavens forget their dew, and the earth
her fruit, because they let his house lie waste, Hag. i. 9, 10. you will
readily conclude, how he remembers those that raise the Walls, and repair the
Ruins, and reverence the Sanctuaries, and love the Priests. If them with
Curses, then these with Blessings; if them with diseases, then these with
health; if them with exile, these with quiet dwellings; if them with scarcity,
these with plenty, Vbertate Domus, the plenty of his house; if them with
desolate and decaying Families, these with happy and full Posterities; if them
with death, then these with life even for ever and ever.

VI. But it is time now to remember our selves. And many things we are here to
be remembered of.

That (1.) We have a House of God, as well as Nehemiah, to do good to. Many
houses of God in the Land now, as well as in the Psalm, lxxiv. 9. This above
the rest, whose decayed Towers, and ruined Pinacles, and ragged Walls, and open
Windows, and falling Roofs, and broken Pavements, call loud for a Repairer of
the breaches. And it is not Nehemiahs Mercy and Bounty, nor the Levites thin
revenue added, that can do it. Blessed indeed be God, that he has put it into
the heart of the King to begin, and offer so freely to the Work. But I hope we
shall ere long have reason to bless him for your offerings too.

This House is Gods: all such houses Gods, as well as that of Bethel, or that
of Sion, or those Synagogues of the Jews, styled several times his houses. That
they are so, the solemn Dedications always of them to his Name with so much
glory say enough. And if Domus orationis be Domus mea, the House of Prayer be
Gods (and Christ says it is, and sure he knows both what is his own, and how to
call it) the daily celebration of that Public Worship there will give a second
proof. That some such there were even in the Apostles times, some house besides
such as we eat and drink in, that must not be so used, must not be so despised,
the Apostle tells us, 1 Cor. xi. ^^. and that it was then called the Church of
God in the same verse, is to tell you in plain English our Churches are Gods
houses.

And God has in our days owned them for his own. That signal preserving them in
the heat of War and Plunder, rage and fury, when men were so wrathfully
displeased at them, and so implacably set against them. That protecting them
(2.) through all the Triumphs of a godly Atheism, and a sacrilege out of
Conscience, both as unsatisfied as the grave, so miserably greedy that they
would violate their Fathers Sepulchers, and scatter their ashes in the air and
wind, for an inconsiderable piece of lead, or brass, or stone; That miraculous
restoring them (3.) to all the holy Offices; this Church in particular destined
to a sale, and deferred only to see who would give most, are evidences of it,
too great to be disputed, that God has vindicated his right, and kept it for
himself. And I hope you will all remember it, and now help him in it, Court and
City, both of you.

And remember, (2.) These Houses have their Officers, their Offices, their
Ceremonies* as well as that here in the Text. Offices to be performed, Officers
to perform them, and Ceremonies to perform them with. Your countenancing, your
encouraging, your protecting them, are the good deeds you may do to them.

Remember therefore (3.) I beseech you that you do so. Three arguments there
are in the Text to persuade it. (1.) Good it is to do so, good deeds they are.
God (2.) will remember them when they are done. God (3.) will remember you for
doing them.

1. Good they are, remember that. And good works are a good foundation, 1 Timothy
vi. 19. a foundation upon which you may lay hold on eternal life, says St. Paul
there; and can you desire a better?

Indeed, Judas tells us, it would do better upon the poor. But had he had the
selling of the Ointment then, or when some of his Disciples had the selling of
it since, Were the poor ever the better for it? Were not thousands sent a
begging by it? Sure, sure, he that can be content to see the Church in ruins,
will not much pass to see the poor in rags. He that envies the Church-mans
wealth, will never pity the poor man's want; and he that one time sells the
Church, will next time sell the poor, if he can get by him. But we will not set
good deeds together by the ears. It Is enough that these are good: but it is more
(2.) that God remembers them; that he takes a particular notice of them.

2. I may say, too, a notice of the particulars. The Scrowles of them are laid
up for an everlasting remembrance. Feasts of Dedication have been always kept
for a memorial of them; and Christ himself vouchsafed to be present at them,
St. Ioh. x. 22. And if the Syriac Translator may be allowed to read the last
verse of the Chapter, Et ad oblationes, and ad sacra temporibus and Festis
Statutis memoriam hujus rei mihi serva; we see these good deeds were solemnly
remembered in those solemn Feast; and Nehemiah expected his should be so. Their
persons have anciently been remembered in the Christian Dypticks. And you see to
day we have revived the Custom here.

3. But it is not a mere remembering them for honor, but also a real remembering
them, and them that do them for a blessing, all sorts of blessings. So that
would I commend to my dearest friend a Trade to make him rich and happy, it
should be doing good to the House of God. It Is an old Jewish saying, Decima ut
dives fias; Pay thy Tyths if thou will grow rich. Build God a House, say I, and
he will build thee one again; Do good to His House, say I, and he will do good to
thine; and a wicked Son shall not be able to cut off the Entail. For it is worth
the notice, that when God promised David a House upon this account, he tells
him, that though his Son commit iniquity he would not utterly take his mercy
from him. I know there are that to be excused, talk much of unsettled times.
This is the way to settle them: When God and man shall see we are in earnest
for the House of God, and the Offices thereof, all your Sects will cease to
trouble you, and vanish. Some cry, the State must be settled first. Why!
Fundamenta ejus in montibus Sanctis, says the Psalm; the foundations of
Jerusalem are upon the Holy Hills. Lay your foundations there, and you shall
never be removed, God of his goodness will make your Hill so strong. No better
way to fix the House of the Kingdom, or your own, than to begin with His.
Others (to get loose) tell us of the decay of Trade. Why! how can it be other,
says God, Hag. i. 9. You looked for much, and it came to little, and when you
brought it home, (and 'twas scarce worth bringing home) I did blow upon it;
blew it into nothing. And why was it says the Lord of Hosts? Because of my
house that lies waste, and ye run every man to his own house. You dwell in
Cedars, and you lap your selves in Silks and Silver, and you have all neat and
fine about you; but the House of God, that lies in the dust and rubbish. But is
it time for you (O ye, says he, for I know not what to call you) to dwell in
cieled houses, and my house lie no better? Did God, think you, make Gold and
Silver, Silks and Purples, Marbles and Cedars, for us only and our houses, and
not for himself also or his own? Or do you think to thrive by being sparing to
it, or holding from it? No, says God, from the day that the Foundation of the
Lords Temple was laid, consider it, from this, that day will I bless you, Hag.
ii. 18, 19. And prove him so (say I, for he bids so himself, Mat. iii. 10.) and
see if he will not pour you out a blessing.

Indeed, he has been before us with it. He has brought us home, and stablisht
our Estates, and restored our Religion; done more to us, and to our houses than
we durst desire or hope; and is it not all the reason in the world we should do
good to his again? Hang up our remembrances upon the Walls, pay our
acknowledgments upon his Altars, and bless all the Offices of his house for so
great blessings? God will remember you again for what ever it is. If you would
yet more engage him to you, know God loves the Gates of Sion more then all the
dwellings of Jacob, Psalm. lxxxvii. 2. must needs therefore love these most,
that most love them.

And I doubt not but we shall find many here that do so, many too, that will so
express it. Yet not according to what a man has not, but to what he has, says
our St. Paul, does God accept him. We cannot expect that all that love most can
express most. Yet according to their abilities they will do it. A cup of cold
water, I confess, to a Prophet, in the name of a Prophet, shall not lose the
reward, no more shall a single Mite to the house of God as his. Every one
however may do somewhat toward it. They that cannot give much, may give a
little, they that cannot pay, may yet pray for it. And to wish it well, and to
rejoice in the prosperity and welfare of it, the repairing and adorning of it,
are two mites that any one can give, and God will accept where there can be no
other. Only, where there is most, we must present it with humility, as David
did, 1 Chronicles. xxix. ( What am I, O Lord, that I should be able after this sort
to offer, thus to do it?) And where there is but little, we must present it
with a regret that we can do no more.

Will God remember and accept us; remember and pardon us; remember and bless
us, with blessings of the right hand, and blessings of the left; remember us in
all places, both at home and abroad; in all conditions both in the days of our
prosperity, and in the time of trouble; in our goings out, and in our comings
in; in our Persons, and in our Estates; in our selves, and in our Posterities,
with them shall remain a good inheritance, and their children shall be ever
within the Covenant. And when all earthly glances shall be forgotten, that
which we have done to the House of God shall be still remembered; when our
bodies shall lie down in dust, our names shall live in heaven; when a cold
stone shall chill our ashes, our bones shall flourish out of their graves; when
time shall have eaten out our Epitaphs, our righteousness shall not be
forgotten, God will remember it for ever. And though the general conflagration
shall at last calcine these glorious structures into ashes, we shall dwell safe
in buildings not made with hands, eternal in the heavens, where the Lord God
Almighty, and the Lamb shall be the Temple, and we sing the Offices of heaven
with Angels, and Archangels, and all the holy Spirits, with joy and gladness
for evermore.

To which glorious House and Office God of his mercy bring us in our several
times and orders through, etc.

THE FIRST SERMON On the Day of the PURIFICATION OF THE Blessed Virgin.
St. LUKE ii. 27, 28. -- And when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus, to do
for him after the custom of the Law.

Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God.


AND when. That When was as this day. When the days of the blessed Virgins
Purification, according to the Law of Moses, were accomplished forty days after
Christ's Nativity, this day just, then they brought him to Jerusalem to present
him to the Lord, ver. 22. Then blessed Mary and Joseph brought, then devout
Simeon, and Anna, blessed; and if we be either Mary's, or Anna's, Joseph's, or
Simeons, holy men, or devout women, we too, will this day bless God for the
blessing of the day.

For this day also of his presentation, as well as those other days of his
Birth, Circumcision, and Manifestation, Candlemas-day as well as Christmas Day,
New-years-day, or Epiphany, is a day of blessing; a day of Gods blessing us,
and our blessing of him again: of Christ's being presented for us, and our
presenting to him again; of his presenting in the Temple, and our presenting
our selves in the Church, to bless God and him for his presentation, his
presentation-day, and our Candlemas, our little candles, our petty lights; our
souls reflecting back to this great light, that was this day presented in the
Temple, and then darted down upon us,

The Shepherds blessed God in the morn of his Nativity, the Wisemen upon
Epiphany, Simeon and Anna to day. All conditions before, all sexes to day;
ignorant Shepherds, and learned Clerks; poor Countrymen, and great Princes: no
condition out before, and both Sexes in to day. Sinners both of Jew and
Gentile; men that most stood in need of a Savior before, just and righteous
souls to day, that we might know there is none so good but stands in need of
him one day or other, that will want a Savior, if not at Christmas, yet at
Candlemas; if not among sinners, yet among the righteous, either first or last.
Mary the blessed, Joseph the just, Simeon the devout, Anna the religious, all
in to day, secular and religious of all sexes and orders; all come in to day,
as at the end of Christmas; like the Chorus to the Angels Choire, to bear a
part in the Angels Anthem, to make up a full choire of voices to glorify God
for this great present, which brings peace to the earth, and good will among
men.

And this day first is it given into our arms. In all the former Festivals he
is either in his Mothers lap, or in his Cradle, or to be sure not out of doors;
there only, or within only is he to be seen. This day first he comes abroad to
be handled by us. Before indeed he might be thought to concern us somewhat: Now
first, are we made sensible of it, when we may take him into our own arms, and
kiss him, in the Prophet David's expression, kiss this Son of the most high, as
he lies in our arms.

He was made man at his birth, made under the Law at his Circumcision, made
manifest to the Gentiles at his Epiphany, but all this while at a kind of
distance from us. This is the day of a nearer application to us, when he is
first made a present and offering for us; for us, who were none of us, I am
sure, in any case to be presented for our selves; not pure, not clean, not
whole, not holy enough any of us to be presented before God, till he was first
presented to make us accepted. When he is (2.) made a present and offering to
us, presented and offered to us to be taken, embraced, and offered up again by
us, to make all our offerings and our selves accepted in this beloved.

For this it is in the sum, that we are this day to bless God (as I hope we
have done on other days for the other) that this beloved of his would thus
still, again and again, more and more, undergo the condition of men, make
himself of no more account than an ordinary man, be valued and redeemed at the
ordinary rate of the poorest Child, as this day he was. That (2.) he would let
his Mother too, be reckoned in the rank of the meanest women that were not able
to offer beyond a pair of Turtles, or young Pigeons, and go for one that had
need of Purification as well as other women; as if she were no better than the
rest after this great Childbirth, though without the least spot or impurity in
the whole business both of Conception and Childbirth: In a word, that he would
thus condescend, and descend too into our very arms to be offered for us, and
offered by us.

There are four remarkable passages of the day. (1.) The blessed Virgins
Purification. (2.) Our blessed Saviors Presentation. (3.) Good Simeons
Exultation. And (4.) Religious Anna's Gratulation. There are but two of them in
the Text, Christ's Presentation, and Simeons Exultation; The other two are not
now within our compass; some other time they may. These two will at this time
be enough; especially being not only to consider what was done then, but what
must be still; not only what by others, but also what by us; our own duty as
well as Christ's Parents, and Simeons performances; what they did for him then
after the custom of the Law, what we for him now after the Law is out of
custom, and fashion, after the fashion and custom of the Gospel. For does
blessing or blessedness belong only to the Law? do they not more to the Gospel?
certainly much more. Simeon only was the Precentor, began the Song which is to
continue to the end of the world. And though Simeon be departed according to
his wish, yet has the Church throughout it taken up the Hymn, and sings it
every evening, as a perpetual memorial of this days Benediction. So our
blessing to continue, as well as God's; ours to him, as well as his to us: and
his is such, that it will never fail, but extend the virtue of this days great
present unto all generations.

I have already divided you the Text, whilst I told you two of the great
remarkables of the day were in it, Christ's Presentation, and Simeons
Gratulation: Christ's Presentation to God, and his acceptance by man. Christ
presented in the Temple according to the Law, Christ received into the arms
according unto Faith.

The first of these in the 27. verse, which runs thus, And when the Parents
brought in the Child Jesus, to do for him after the custom of the Law. There Is
his Presentation.

The second of the points is in the 28. verse, Then took he him up in his arms,
and blessed God. There Is his Reception, or Simeons Acceptance of him, or
Gratulation and Exultation over him.

Of each of these first in reference to them, then afterward to our selves.
First, to inform you what was done, then to teach you what to do. I begin with
what was done, and first with Christ's Presentation, where we are to pass through
these particulars. The presenters, the presented, the time, the place, the
manner of presenting this great present.

The Presenters were the Parents, the Presented was the Child Jesus, the time
was when the days of her purification were accomplished, the place, the Temple,
and the manner according to the custom of the Law: all according to order, and
that also keep we now.

The presenters first in that, first in order, and first in fitness too. Who
fitter to present the Child then its own Parents. Ius liberorum, the power over
the Child is properly theirs. Nature makes it so; they give it being; and
therefore surely have most right to it when it is in being, and whilst it is
so; till God by a second Law either take it to himself, or dispose it to
another, for which it naturally almost leaves its Parents to increase it self.

Upon the first title, of Gods claim to it they here bring it to him; but so
they receive it back again with greater comfort: we lose nothing that we give
to God, we do but bring it to him only for a blessing to it, and depart with
both. The Parents never can be surer of the Child, then when they first give it
unto God: Fathers and Mothers may learn by these good folks thus to sanctify,
as it were, their Children from the breast.

Both Parents agree here, nor the tenderness of the one, nor the austerity of
the other think much of Gods demands, though it seem to entrench much upon
their right, their very natural right. Nature it self must veil and submit
where God pleads interest: even that eternal and inviolable law of preserving
our selves, and ours, is circumscribed within the limits of Gods prerogative,
and we must do neither, but with submission to his pleasure to dispose of us
and ours.

Yet Parents here under the notion of (...), seems very strange. Joseph having
no part in his geniture; yet so the law sometimes calls both the Step-father
and Stepmother: No wonder then to hear Joseph so entitled, who in the eye of
the world, and term of law (that reaches not extraordinaries, nor provides
words for miraculous conceptions) was counted father in the very proper
acception. Only this to be said. Common fame may be deceived, and names affixed
where not deserved. And titles often to be accepted too rather than venture an
harsh and untimely censure upon our selves or them, that are very near us, by
the discovery of an unseasonable truth.

Truth it was that Joseph was not his Father, that both Joseph himself and the
Evangelist well knew. Yet would the one speak after the vulgar language rather
than cross received terms at the first in the recital of a story which might
lose its credit by so early a discovery of a mysterious truth, but might with
little offense be corrected in the progress: nor would the other proclaim
himself no Father, lest that most pure and immaculate Virgin should run the
hazard of lewd tongues, and the great wonders of the most high be blasphemed,
and his Son dishonored with a name, which these late sons of Hell only durst
belch out.

Call we them both then, still, if we think good, the Parents of this Child:
However a Foster-father Joseph was, and by that relation had a title to this
presentation, and we by it another lesson to take care of those we undertake
for, as for our own, to present, and offer them also to God, to consecrate them
also betimes to Gods service. Seasonable words hence remember we ever to
observe (2.) not upon every hint to cross the road of speech. (3.) To conceal a
while unseasonable truths. (4.) To take care of the same and honor of others.
(5.) To perform our duties with all tenderness to our charges, and however
dedicate them to the disposal of the Almighty.

Thus much we may learn by the Presenters and their title, and our unhappy
times make us the readier to make another note to take notice of this happy
juncture, where both Parents agree about the Child, both bring him. Our
divisions are so increased upon us, that those whom God has nearest joined are
so wide separated in this business, that the unfortunate Child is kept from
being presented unto God: God deprived of his right, and the Child of the
benefit by the perverseness of the one or other of the Parents; the Child
neither brought to the Church, nor God, done for neither, according to Law nor
Custom, but debarred Christianity, denied to God at first, and in danger to be
denied by him at the last, through the division of the Parents in Religion and
Sect. A joyful sight it is methinks to see them here united for the Child's
good; the more for that our dissentions of Parents look so ugly, and are so
deeply prejudicial to Gods honor, and the Child's both benefit and right which
it has to be presented to God in holy Baptism. It may yet prove worse in the
education, if the difference still continue between the Parents; and the Child
which unbaptized cannot be conceived to have any greater assistance of inward
Grace, than the Child of a Heathen or a Jew, being both by nature; and it is to
be feared by the Parents irreligion, yet further punished by a leaving it
merely in that state, proner far to evil than good, to error than truth: Such a
Child it cannot be expected in reason, but that it should adhere to the worser
part: and as it lost its Baptism at the first, so at the last miss its Religion
too. God being denied it when he would have it, and calls for it to have it
brought to him, we can have no great confidence that he will at another time
accept it, when it is grown out of that number of little ones, whom he calls,
become greater in its corruption, and the first fruits of his age dedicated to
another Master. God send better agreement among Parents, say I, be it for the
Childrens sake, that they may be presented to the Lord.

A Child it is that is presented in the Text, and in the day, and the Child
Jesus; such a Child is both example and authority enough for us to bring ours
also to the Lord, whilst they are such: unless we think our Children are holier
than he, want less than he, can be without God better than he, more above the
Law than he.

But he calling for them himself, Suffer little children to come unto me, St.
Mat. xix. 14. It seems to me both ingratitude and impudence to keep them from
him; to say nothing of the infidelity in so doing: as if we believed him not,
that he meant it when he called, or we thought he could do them no good if they
came; or that he would not, or that they were as well without him as with him,
without his blessing as with it. It may be they will tell us he called them
indeed, but not to Baptism, did not Baptize them when they came. Poor silly
men! would they have him Baptize the Children before their Fathers, before they
themselves were fitted for it; by whom only the Children have right to it? or
Baptize them when they were not brought by them to that purpose? Is it not
enough that Christ desires, and accepts the Children that are brought to him,
that come to him? And how come they now to him, but by Baptism? How has the
Universal Church from that day to this brought Children to him? Has it not been
to Baptism, in all Catholic Doctrine and Practice to this day? Have we now at
all found any better way to bring them to him? None at all, alas! and is that
better?

Their Children (forsooth) are holy, because their Fathers are, alike I think,
that is, under the bondage of corruption; their Fathers holy! I would we could
see it once: But suppose them so, were there no holy Fathers among the Jews,
that their Children must all receive the Sacrament of Circumcision, to which
our Baptism succeeds to hollow them? Ay, but God now has promised to be the
Father of them, and of their seed; and did he not so to Abraham first, Genesis
xvii. 7. and yet must his Children be Circumcised. What is it (trow) that these
men would have? Must the Jews dedicate their Children, and must not the
Christian? were the Jewish Children Gods right, and are not the Christians? Do
not we owe ours as much to him as they theirs? Or must their Births be happy by
an early Consecration, and ours not? theirs in a better condition under the
wing of the Almighty, ours in a mere natural state in our own mere protection?
theirs sealed for Gods own, ours without seal, or any thing but their Fathers
sin to know them by, challenged wholly to our selves; as if God had neither
part nor portion in them. Certainly did men but thus consider, Children would
not be so much injured by their Parents frowardness; and could Children and
sucklings understand it, they would complain of so great an injury done to
them, the most imaginable that can be done to that tender age, thus to be
deprived of the blessing, and taken out of the protection, as much as lies in
their Parents power, of their God and Savior.

Thus far we have considered only Gods right, and the Child's good in being
brought into the Temple. See we now the Parents Devotion, and God honored by
it.

They brought in the Child; and what better present can they bring, can any
Parents bring and offer than a Child? how can they express their Devotion more
to God, than by offering what is dearest?

Now he brings his Child to God, that brings it to be Baptized, to be
instructed, to be brought up in the fear of God, and the practice of true
Religion.

He (2.) brings him more peculiarly that devotes him to some peculiar Service
of the Church, as Anna did Samuel, to the service of the Tabernacle.

He (3.) brings him to God, that commends him daily in his prayers to God for a
blessing; as Abraham did Ismael in that Petition, O that Ismael might live
before thee.

He (4.) brings him to God, that resigns him wholly at any time to God's
disposal both in health and sickness, both in plenty and want, for any fortune
or condition that God thinks fit or convenient for him. Indeed there was a
strange offering of a Child prescribed to Abraham, Genesis xxii. 2. to Sacrifice
him on an Altar; and God sacrificed this Child at last, his Son upon the Cross
for us: but he requires not that we should do so with ours. Yet this he does,
that with Abraham we should so resign the dearest of them to God, that if at
any time for his Service he command them from us, and please for the profession
of his Name or Truth, to sacrifice them to the flames, or to the Cross, any way
understood, we should not think much to be so bereaved of them to their greater
glory.

All these ways the Child is brought to God, according to the Letter; but in
the Mystery, he also brings his Child even who has none, that brings what is
dearest to him, and submits it to Gods pleasure. He (2.) that blesses all his
actions at the beginning with his prayers. He (3.) that devotes his first
morning thoughts to Heaven. He (4.) that dedicates his first thoughts, motions,
and intentions, the firstborn of his soul to Gods honor and glory. So we may
offer Children, that have no Children, bring a Child, who have no Child. Nay
more, we may bring the Child, that is, the best of Children, above all
Children, the Child Jesus; as well the barren Maid, as the most fruitful
Mother, may do this. It may be better too; they that have no other Child may
best tend upon the Child Jesus: they that have none other to care for, have the
more care to bestow on him; they that have no other to nurse or bring up, may
the easier and fuller apply themselves to nurse him up in their souls, till he
be grown up in them to a perfect stature; and having no other to bring to the
Temple, may every day bring him. He was brought here by a Virgin, and I know
not how he can be brought by any better. Yet by a Virgin Mother here, that both
Virgins and Mothers, Parents and others, all conditions might have an interest
to present him.

And sure no greater present, none more acceptable, no Child to this, to the
Child Jesus. Bring him with us, and come and welcome; welcome at any time with
him. It Is in him that all our offerings are accepted; his Cross the Altar that
sanctifies our gifts: he the beloved Child in whom alone God is well pleased.

His Parents brought him in without a figure: brought he was before in the type
only; and the shadow prefigured in Isaac, and Solomon, and Josiah, and in the
offerings and sacrifices of the Law. The great light or candle of this day
first dispersed those shadows; all legal Purification days turned into so many
Candlemas's by the bringing in of this eternal light, this bright only Child of
the Father of lights.

But are our candles all put out? ceremony and substance vanished too? is it
not Candlemas still with up? are we returned to that former darkness, and no
light left us to offer up? no Child Jesus to offer still? Yes, still we have?
it is an eternal light that this day sprung up beyond the splendour of the Lamps
of the Temple. We offer Christ even to this day still.

He offers Jesus, that forms himself to the image of Jesus, by putting him on
as the Apostle speaks in righteousness and holiness, by meekness, patience,
obedience, charity, and brotherly love, growing up by what degrees he can to
the stature of Christ, so presenting himself before God: and he that does it in
his youth at the first spring of his understanding days, brings the Child
Jesus, the most acceptable, because the most early and timely offering.

2. He brings and offers Jesus, who when he has done all he can, offered all he
is able, given all he had, yet renounces all as unworthy; claims nothing by
them, thinks them not worth acceptance, but wraps them all up in Christ's
Mantle, presents his Merits as the only offering, his Righteousness and
abundant satisfactions to sanctify all his other presents, stands to none,
pleads nothing, claims by nothing but only him.

3. He offers Jesus, that in a thankful remembrance of his love, offers him up
in the holy Sacrament, as the only sacrifice of Thanksgiving, beyond all other
possible praises; and for an atonement and reconciliation for his own sins, and
the sins of all the world. It Is time we set aside some time for such an
Offering, and in the Text we find it, though not explicitly, yet necessarily
implied. For, When the Parents brought in the Child, will easily tell us, that,
a when, a time there was, and is a kind of relative conjunction, that by
joining the context will quickly be resolved, within a few years backward, verse
22. to be when the days of her Purification, the Mothers purification, were
accomplished.

The Law would not sooner suffer the Mother to come near the Sanctuary, so
scrupulous did God seem to be of the pollution of his Temple, that he would not
accept his own dues and offerings from a hand of that body which had but on it
the least semblance of impurity, though it was no other than a mere natural
course which himself had made. Nature it self it seems when its motions are but
merely natural, must have nothing to do at the Altars of Holiness. God made all
things good, makes many good things which yet he thinks not good enough to
approach his holiness, without a previous purification. Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, and their followers may cry out, the whole Congregation is holy, all
holy enough, any thing good and pure enough for the Temples, Altars,
Sacrifices, Services, ministrations of the Lord and his Christ: but it seemed
they wanted fire to cleanse them and their Censers; and God sent it with a
vengeace: They would not keep apart from holy Offices, but God parts the earth
to sever them from his Altars: and when our sins are sufficiently punished,
their followers will find some strange purging fires for thus boldly daring,
without purifying their hands, after the law or custom of the Church, to lay
them to Christ's plough, before their days be out, either themselves or their
days accomplished, not their very apprentiships out, some of them; so
presumptuously intruding into holy Offices, Functions, Offerings, and places:
such men's damnation slumbers not, though it tarry, it will come sure at last.
The holy Virgin, who needed no purification for this Childbirth (as not
conceiving, as the Text runs, Lev. xii. 2. suscepto semine) must be purified
before she come, though to bring an offering as pure as purity it self. So is
Gods method and order, so he requires it, after the custom of the Law, it is
said here; and were there no reason else, Church-law and custom in Church
business in all reason should carry it.

And it being holy business, purification cannot but be a necessary disposition
to it; some kind of separation to prepare for it. There is a legal separation,
and it did well when it was in use. There is an Evangelical still in force, an
external and an internal both. Holy things not to be meddled with, but with holy
hands, hands separated from civil and secular employments: none to offer as
Priests, but those that are so accomplished with that kind of separation. And
none to present neither any thing to be offered, but such as have holy hearts,
accomplished with inward purity: Unsanctified hearts and unhallowed hands are
not fit to bring in Jesus; nor touch the offerings of so pure a God: Not the
word, not the Sacraments, not the Services, none of them to be either offered
or taken by any he whoever, that hates to be reformed, who is not purified and
disposed rightly before he comes.

Forty were the days of this Purification: something there may be in the
number. So many days Moses prepared for the receiving of the Law, Exodus xxiv.
18. So many E^ah in his advance to the Mount of God, 1 Kings xix. 8. So many
Christ himself before he entered upon his Office, St. Mat. iv. 2. So many the
Church designs for a preparation to Easter, as a purification of our souls and
bodies, by Prayer and Fasting, against our Easter offerings. Whether this
number tell us by ten, four times multiplied, that the Decalogue of Moses is in
the four Evangelists completed, the Law perfected by the Gospel. Or that these
bodies we bear about us consisting of four Elements, are by the observation of
the ten Commandments accomplished with all virtues, and thereby best purified;
or that the tenth parts of all our years, to which forty days do well near draw
(so many being but little more then the tenth portion of a year) are hereby
required to be spent in Gods Service, the purifying of our souls and bodies for
his use. Whether it be for the one reason or the other, or the third: for this
sure it is, that we may understand a large and considerable portion of our
days, is to be always spent in good preparations, purifications, and
retirements. Christ can never be too much provided for, nor we too much
purified, when we come to take or offer him.

Nor is the place (3.) for that is the next point, where we are to offer, though
a great way off, to be complained of for its distance. If it be the place where
God has set his name, and appointed for his worship, as far as Mount Moriah
from Abraham's Tents, or the uttermost borders of Judea from the Temple; go we
must thither, and not think much of it. They brought him in, says the Text,
that is, into the Temple at Jerusalem. From Bethlehem to Jerusalem is a pretty
walk to go with a young Child to offer: but where God commands there is no
gainsaying. There is no burden neither to such souls as just Joseph's and
blessed Mary's; and the Child will get no cold by the way it goes to God. Our
niceness makes the trouble, and betrays us to the fear. The Child gets no hurt
by being carried to the Font; nor did it in devouter times when it was wholly
dipped, no more than so great a pain as Circumcision, hurt the Infants health.
Our tenderness and fooleries, who have not Faith enough to trust God, with
them, or to submit mildly to God's Ordinances, are the only causes of all
miscarriages in holy business, where we will be wiser than God, tenderer than
God, and more careful than God would have us. The greatest argument for this
generation not turning Jews, is, I think, for fear of Circumcision; lest they
should put themselves to any pain, or fear to lose their Children by that
bloody Sacrament: else I fear they are too well disposed toward it. One thing
would much persuade (I am sure) if they might so pull down all our Churches,
and have but one to go to once a year: So godly is the age we live in, so well
are we reformed.

Yet the fittest place sure for Gods offerings, are God's houses; his own
Altars for his own Service: holy places for holy works, for holy offerings:
Templum Domini, for Dominum Templi, as devout Bernard, The Temple of the Lord
the fittest place for the Lord of the Temple; that the fittest, the likeliest
to find him in. So the prophecy, so the desire, call it which you please, of
holy David fulfilled, Suscepimus misericordiam in medio Templi, Ps. xlviii. 8.
We have found, or we wait for thy loving kindness in the midst of thy Temple.
Mercy it self there this day found. We may pray any where and offer, and offer
any where either our own Children, or the Child Jesus, if necessity so be: but
the best souls love the best places, holy souls holy places. David professes
so, Psalm. lxxxiv. 3. Nay the very Sparrows he observes will build as near the
Altars as they can; and it may be for that kind of sensible and natural piety,
they particularly, above other creatures are said by Christ not to fall, one of
them, to the ground, without Gods more peculiar providence.

I shall make no further note upon this particular, it is but implicitly
implied, though yet so necessarily in the Text: They brought him in, in
whither? Into the Temple it was: and the very words immediately before, in that
very verse, express it. Yet being but so expressed, so briefly and implicitly,
I take leave to be brief too, because there is still so much of the Text, and
so little of the time behind. And the point next behind is the manner and form
of Christ's presentation, or the cause, or reason why he was presented, why they
brought him in; to do for him after the custom of the Law. And three points of
it there were to be observed upon such occasions to offer him, to ransom him,
to offer for him.

He was the firstborn, and therefore to be offered, and presented. The
firstborn was Gods, all the firstborn are mine, says he, Numb. viii. 17. both
of man and beast. And Christ, he is the firstborn of every creature, says St.
Paul, Col. i. 15. So in him they are offered all together, man and beast, all
sanctified by him: men that live like men, and men that live like beasts, Qui
computruerunt sicut jumenta in stercore suo, who wallow in their own dung, in
their own sins, like the beasts that perish: for the righteous and for the
sinner both is he offered, that both might have access to God through him. That
(2.) man and beast too, according to the letter might, as the Psalmist says, be
saved, that is, blessed and preserved through him.

He was the firstborn (2.) of his Father, the first and only begotten Son of
God, so to be presented upon that title.

He was (3.) the firstborn of his Mother, the first and only Son, first born,
though not begotten there: but first born was sufficient to entitle him to God.

The Apostle calls him (4.) The firstborn among many brethren, Romans viii. 29.
He our elder, and we the younger brethren.

The same Apostle (5.) calls him the firstborn of the dead, Col. i. 18. So
that now being the firstborn both by Father and Mother, both in Heaven and
Earth, of quick and dead, of every creature; no great wonder to hear of his
presenting to the Lord.

Yet for himself neither was he offered, but for us; he needed no such
sanctifying, but for us, to sanctify us, as the first fruits to sanctify the
whole lump; as the true Lamb of God that takes away the sins of the world; as
the firstborn in relation to his brethren to rule over us as a Prince, and
offer for us, and bless us as a Priest; the two appendices of a primogeniture.
Thus is he made to us our morning Sacrifice, as he was after our evening
offering, when he was offered upon the Cross. Thus both offered for himself
after the custom of the Law, and for us in the interpretation of the Gospel.

But the custom of the Law was next to ransom him; five shekels was his price,
the ordinary rate, Numb. xviii. 16. a goodly price for the first^born of God to
be valued at! O blessed Jesus, how little have thou made thy self for us? of how
little value? How can we sufficiently value thee, for thy thus undervaluing thy
self? And why should we now (my beloved) so overvalue our selves, as to think
no honor sufficient for us, nothing too good for us, no riches enough, no
respect answerable to our deserts? If Christ be valued but at five shekels, the
best of us, all of us, the whole world of us,; and if there were a world of
worlds were not all worth five farthings. Let us but think of this, and no
disrespect, or disesteem, or slighting from the very meanest and unworthiest
hand will ever trouble us again, certainly.

Well, ransomed he was, yet, with it, as little as it was, but it seems it was
but to pay a greater, the price of his life to ransom us. No ransom would
redeem him the second time, because his business was not to redeem himself, but
us. He was redeemed now for a little, but he was sold for less than thirty
pence; and yet would not be redeemed by any sum. He made himself of no
estimation again and again, and dealt with himself as if he were not worth a
ransom only, that he might ransom us, and set us high in God's esteem.

The ransom money here was the Priests: And holy Mary, as poor as she was, would
pay her dues. And Jesus would she should, his Mother should; and then sure all
his brethren too, would be therefore offered and redeemed. It Is a good example
for Church duties, when such pay them; and may amount to a kind of precept: for
if he who is the great High Priest himself, and from whom it was not due, pay
as he did tribute afterward, that he might not offend. I can see little of
Christ where the Church or Priest is robbed, or little Christianity where such
offenses are not heeded.

Christ would break no Law, for he came to fulfill it; nor Custom, for you see
he observes it, did so all his life, kept the Feasts, kept the Customs. He
follows not Christ that does other, who e're he follows.

Nay, Christ himself commutes too, breaks not the custom of commutation: One of
the most questionable points of custom is commutation, to exchange one for
another, to pay with the purse instead of the person. Yet such was law and
Custom, and Christ disputes it not; nor is reason against it, to change one
thing for another, when both are good; one vow into another, one penance into
another; where reason, not covetousness, respect to the condition, or inability
of persons, not partiality make the exchange. In such cases we are to submit,
not dispute, or cry out as some do; if for money, why not without it? If God
will not accept my person, why my money? If I may have or do it for the payment
of a little sum, why is it not lawful to me without it? It Is answerable enough
to reasonable men, or devout Christians; so God, so Law, so Custom will have
it, and it is no sin to do it.

There is yet one thing more to be done after the custom of the Law, an
offering to be offered, a lamb, and a Turtle Dove, or young Pigeon for the
rich, or two Turtles, or two young Pigeons for the poorer sort, Lev. xii. 6, 8.
And it was so done here. It Is thought by them that dare determine which, that
it was the latter, the pigeons, as cheaper and easier to be gotten, where there
was so much poverty as this child was born to.

Be it which it will, it was the poors offering that from henceforth poverty
might look cheerful to the Christian, that was so horrid to the Jew, become his
happiness which was the others great affliction, the poor woman's offering that
it might sanctify poverty to the poor, and offer it henceforward as an
acceptable service unto God.

That (2.) the Christian might hence know what to offer gemtus turturum and
columbarum, a sorrowful and contrite heart, bewail themselves like Turtles that
have lost their mates, and mourn sore like Doves; offer up chaste and harmless
souls, the chastity of the Turtle, and the innocence of the Dove.

That (3.) we might no more hereafter censure poverty, even when it falls to
the great man's share, seeing Blessed Mary and Joseph of the seed Royal, both,
are become so poor, that they can offer no more than this; nay, though they
should have no more to offer than their own sighs and moanings.

That (4.) we might learn now, that God will accept even the least and poorest
presents, two Turtles, two Pigeons, two Mites, where there is no more with
convenience to be spared. Yet somewhat he will have offered, be it never so
little, that all might acknowledge his right, none at all excepted.

Thus this offering concerns us, but how it concerns the Child Jesus is to be
enquired. The one Turtle could not possibly, the sin-offering to be sure; but
the other might: It was a burnt-offering that, a kind of thanksgiving only for
his safe birth, as well as for his Mothers safe deliverance. It was to have
been a Lamb, could the woman's poverty have reached it, though the sin-offering
for no woman, at her purification, had been above a Turtle: it may be to tell
'um that they are to give thanks both for themselves and their Child; great
thanks, more than double, though they offer but little, and single, for their
own natural imperfections; a Lamb for them both, though but a Turtle for
themselves: The Child's original guilt to be purged with another kind of
sacrifice, better sacrifices than those. Yet, besides, he taking on him our
persons, the sinoffering might also so far concern him as he concerned us.

And if so, the greater sure is our obligation to him, that he would not only
take on him the form of a servant, but go also under the fashion of a sinner:
that he would be brought into so dishonorable appearance, to be thus done for
after the custom of the Law; not only offered himself, but himself offered for;
as if he needed an offering to cleanse him. But so it was not, for that it was
not; that he thus submitted to the Law of offerings, but for these ensuing
reasons: and so we consider the reason of the doing.

1. To avoid scandal, not to offend the Jews, to teach us to be very scrupulous
how we offend our brother, that we use neither but our own right, nor our
Christian liberty with offense.

2. To teach obedience, not to dispute commands, nor plead privileges too much
against Laws and Customs.

3. To be a pattern of humility, not to exalt or cry up our selves, or think
much to be accounted like other men.

4. To show his approbation of the Law, and that however he might seem, yet
indeed he did not come to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it.

5. That he might thus receive the testimony of Simeon and Anna, and be made
manifest from his very beginning, who he was, that he might appear to the world
what before he did only to the Wise men and the Shepherds, to be a light to the
Gentiles, and the glory of his people Israel, and to be this day so proclaimed
by the spirit of Prophecy in both the Sexes.

6. He was done for according to the Law, that he might redeem us from the
bondage of the Law, offered as the firstborn, as a son of man, that he might
thereby make us the children of God.

7. He that needed no offering for himself, was thus offered, that we might
with holy Job suspect the best, and perfectest of our works; and though we be
never so righteous, not answer, nor know, but despise our selves, and make
supplication to our judge, Job ix. 15, 21, 28.

Lastly, He was thus presented to God, that so he might be embraced by man,
that Simeon, not for himself only, but for us, might take seisin of him, and we
be thus put in possession of a Savior. For so it follows, as on purpose, Then
took he him up in his arms and blessed God.

We have done with Christ's offering. Come we now to our receiving: his Parents
presented him to God, Simeon received him for us. And these the particulars of
the receiving, Suscipiens, suscipiendi modus, susceptionis Tempus, and
suscipientis benedictio. The Receiver, Simeon, he, (2.) The manner of taking or
receiving him, took him up in his arms. (3.) The time then, when he was brought
into the Temple. (4.) The thanksgiving for it, and blessed God.

But our receiving takes me from Simeons, I must defer his till anon, till
after ours: only I shall glance at it as I speak of ours. For which I would to
God we were all as well prepared as he for his.

The same man was just and devout, waiting for the consolation of Israel, and
the Holy Ghost was upon him, ver. 25. I would I could say so of us here, this
day, Sed nunquid hos tantum salvabis Domine, says holy Bernard, Will thou, O
Lord, save only such; and answers it out of the Psalm, Iumenta and homines
salvabis Domine. Thou Lord shall save both man and beast. Us poor beasts too,
wandering sheep at best, but too often, as unreasonable, as sensual, as
grovelling downward as any beast, dirty and filthy as Sows, churlish as Dogs,
fierce as Lions, lustful as Goats, cruel as Tigers, ravenous as Bears.
Accomplish we but the days of our purification, purify we our hearts by Faith
and Repentance, bring we this gemitus columbae, sorrow for our sins, though we
cannot this simplicitatem columbae, innocense and purity, the mourning of the
Turtle, though we cannot the innocence of the Dove, and notwithstanding all
shall be well.

It Is Candlemas to day, so called from the lighting up of Candles, offering
them, consecrating them, and bearing them in procession; a custom from the time
of Justinian the Emperor, at the latest about 1100. years ago; or as others
say, Pope Gelastus, Anno 496. or thereabouts, to show that long expected light
of the Gentiles was now come, was now sprung up, and shined brighter than the
Sun at noon, and might be taken in our hands: let the Ceremony pass, reserve
the substance, light up the two Candles of Faith and good Works, light them
with the fire of Charity: bear we them burning in our hands, as Christ commands
us; meet we him with our lamps burning; consecrate we also them, all our works
and actions with our prayers; offer we them then upon the Altars of the Lord of
Hosts, to his honor and glory, and go we to the Altars of the God of our
salvation, bini and bini, as St. Bernard speaks, as in procession, two and two,
in peace and unity together; and with this solemnity and preparation we poor
oxen and asses may come and approach to our Masters Crib. The Crib is the
outward elements, wherein he lies wrapped up. They are the Swadling-cloths and
Mantles with which his body is covered when he is now offered up to God, and
taken up by us. Take them, and take him: the candle of Faith will there show
you him, and the candle of Charity will light him down into your arms, that you
may embrace him. We embrace where we love, we take into our arms whom we love;
so that love Jesus and embrace Jesus; love Jesus and take Jesus; love Jesus and
take him into our hands, and into our arms, and into our mouths, and into our
hearts.

Take him and offer him again, take him up, and offer him up for our
sanctification and redemption, to redeem us from all our sins, and sanctify
all our righteousnesses; for without him nothing is righteous, nothing is holy.

This day was his offering day, is to be ours. Offer we then him, offer we our
selves; take we him up into our arms, into our hands and hearts; having first
lighted a candle, and swept our houses to receive and entertain him: and having
humbly, and cheerfully, and devoutly, and thankfully received him, bless we God.

God be gracious unto us, and purify our hearts and hands, that we may
worthily receive him; strengthen our arms that we may hold him, open our mouths
that we may bless him for him; accept our offering, and Christ's offering for
us, his perfect sacrifice, for our imperfect offerings; that we may receive all
the benefits of this great sacrifice, the remission of our sins, the cleansing
of our souls, the refreshing of our bodies, the fullness of all graces, the
protection of our souls and bodies in this Kingdom af Grace, and the saving
them in the Kingdom of Glory: that as we this day bless him here, so we may
bless, and praise, and glorify him hereafter for evermore.

THE SECOND SERMON On the Day of the PURIFICATION OF THE Blessed Virgin.
St. LUKE ii. 28. Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God.
ANd we have also this Day taken him, and are now returned again to bless God.
Taken him we have in our hands, in our mouths, Et dulcedine replentur viscera,
and our bowels are filled with his sweetness, filled as the Moon at the Full,
and we cannot hold our peace; we must needs give thanks after this holy Supper
for so royal a Feast.

Indeed, were the business either of the day, or the taking or receiving done
as soon as we had taken him up in our arms, or down into our bowels, Simeon
might have spared his blessing, and both you and I all further labor: But
receiving so glorious great things at the hands of God, we cannot for shame but
return him somewhat, a Thanksgiving Sermon, or an Anthem; and being in the
strength of this meat to walk not only forty days before we thus eat again of
this kind of bread, or drink of this rock, but forty years; perhaps some of us,
and all of us all our lives in the power and strength of this food, in the
virtue of this grace this day afforded us, by the efficacy of the offering this
day offered for us, we cannot after it be such unclean beasts but that we'll
chew the cud, the meat that this day we have taken, and relish our mouths again
with the taste and savor of this days food; refresh our souls and selves with
a thankful remembrance of this days mercy, and offer our Evening Sacrifice of
thanksgiving as we have already done our morning.

So that it will not be amiss to take Christ again into our arms, though but to
look upon him, and see what we have taken, what we have done; that if we have
taken him somewhat untowardly, as people that are not used to handle children
seldom but do; as people that are not enough acquainted with the Child Jesus,
as many do him, as the best handlers of him amongst us cannot altogether excuse
our selves from much imperfection in the doing, we may by a review amend what
is amiss, and what is past in much weakness in the time of receiving, or before
it in the preparation toward it, may be corrected for the future by a
continued taking him into our arms in a holy life and conversation.

For many ways there are of taking him, and that is one which above all is not
to be forgotten, as without which all other taking him, is to no purpose but to
play with him, or to mock him. But I must first remember where I left, and come
to that in order as I go.

Four Particulars I pointed at in the words, four parts of this second General
of Christ's Reception, or Simeons gratulatory Acceptance of him. Suscipiens,
suscipiendi modus, susceptionis Tempus, and suscipientis benedictio.

The Taker or Receiver, Simeon, He.

The manner of taking or receiving him, Took him up in his arms.

The time of this taking, Then, when he was brought into the Temple, and
presented there.

The Takers or Receivers Gratulation, or Thanksgiving for it, and blessed God.
Then took he, etc.

The Taker or Receiver of Christ, He comes first to be taken notice of, and
Simeon was He. The common and most received opinion of him is, that he was a
Priest. For the Priests Office it was to receive the Offerings of the Lord; and
behold here, He it is that takes him into his arms, and receives him at the
hands of his Parents, as Eli did Samuel of Elkanah and Anna, 1 Samuel i. 25. And
(2.) their Office it was to bless the people, Aarons and his Sons, Number. vi. 23.
and that does Simeon, ver. 34. Takes the Child, and blesses the Parents, He:
But the Christian Priests does more, blesses the Child too. No Priest of the
Law could do that. It Is the Minister of the Gospel only that can do that, that
has that Authority, to consecrate, and bless, and take, and all. He it is that
blesses the dead Elements, and quickens them into holy things by the
ministration of his Office, by the virtue of his Function. Till he blesses,
they are but common bread and wine; when he has taken and offered them, then
they are holy; then they are the means, and pledges, and seals of grace; then
they convey Christ unto the faithful Receivers soul. This is the mystery of the
Gospel, and so I speak it, not literally of Christ's Person, but mystically of
his body and blood, as offered and taken in the Sacrament.

But after the blessing, the taking concerns us all; and though perhaps it
concerns us not, whether Simeon was a Priest or not; yet it both concerns us,
that he that blesses and offers be a Priest, as much as it concerns us, that it
be the Sacrament we would have, which cannot be offered but by the hands to
which Christ committed that power and authority; and (2.) that we our selves
that take be some way qualified in the same respects as old Simeon here, of
whom we may be certain of his Sanctity whatever of his Priesthood.

The holy Spirit bears witness to him, that He was a just man, (...), ver. 25.
just and upright in his dealing, in the righteousness which is by the Law
unblameable, as St. Paul of himself; yet has even such a one need of Christ, is
not fully and completely righteous till he take Christ into his arms by faith,
till he add the righteousness which is by faith. Yet is that other so good a
disposition to this, that (whatever some men, to excuse their own laziness, or
looseness, and the devil to encourage it, have ungodlily vented to the World,
that the moral, righteous, honest man is further off from Christ than the most
dissolute and debauched sinner yet) we see the first that takes hold on Christ
is said to be a just, that is a moral honest man, who does all right and
justice, no wrong or injury to his neighbor; and whoever he is that Christ
suffers to take him into his arms, has already cleansed his hands by some works
of Repentance, and at least, steadfast resolution to be what is said of Simeon,
homo justus, to be righteous and just without such purposes at least, no taking
him to be sure.

He is (2.) styled (...), devout and pious, homo timoratus, the Latin renders
it, a man timorous to offend God, and reverently respecting holy things. And
with such affections, devotion, and reverence, and fear, and trembling are we
to approach the Table of the Lord, to receive and take him; we shall else take
nothing but the rags he is wrapped in, himself will vanish out of our hands.

He (3.) was that He that waited for the consolation of Israel. And none but
such a He, one that waits, and looks, and longs, and thirsts, and hungers after
Christ, the consolation of Israel, and all the Isles of the Gentiles too, none
but he shall have the honor and happiness of Christ's Embraces; to them only
that look for him will he appear either in grace or glory.

Upon him (4.) was the Holy Ghost, and he only who is the Temple of the Holy
Ghost, whose soul is so, whose body is so, shall truly and really touch the
Child Jesus. He will not dwell or come into those arms which the Holy Ghost has
not made holy. Holy things must not be cast to dogs, to the unclean and impure,
nor be laid up in unclean places; nor indeed can any receive him, or so much as
call him by his name, but by the Holy Ghost, how fain soever he would call or
come.

This Point would have done well to have been considered before your receiving,
and I hope you did; but it is seasonable too now, that if you have purified
your selves before, approach't in righteousness with devotion reverence, with
hungring and thirsting, believing and hoping for him, and in the power of the
Holy Ghost, you may so continue: if you have been deficient in any, you may
re-enforce your selves, ask pardon, and set your selves the more strictly to
righteousness, and devotion, good desires, and holy practices hereafter.

As there is none too young to be brought to him, so there is none too old to
come and take him. Old Simeon, now ready to depart the World, has yet strength
enough to hold this Child in his aged arms; him that by being held upholds him
and all the World; none too old for Christ's company. Though he be here a Child,
he is the Ancient of days elsewhere. There Is no pretending age against his
service. In the old Law the Priests at fifty were exempted from the service of
the Tabernacle, the Mosaical service of the Law: but nor fifty, nor sixty, nor
a hundred, nor any years can excuse us from the service of the Gospel, Christ's
service, nor debarr us from it. To that, the outward strength and vigor of the
body was necessary: To Christ, the inward vivacity and action of of the soul
will suffice where the body can do little. And as there is no time too long for
Christ's Service, not from our first childhood to our second; so there is none
too late, if but strength to reach out a hand, and take that which is no
burden, but an ease to bear the greatest ease of the sick, or weary, or aged
soul. This is a Point may comfort us when all worldly comforts are past us;
When, like old Barzillai, we have neither pleasure nor taste in our meat or
drink, we may find sweetness in Christ's body and blood. When the Grasshopper is
a burden, this Child is none, when the keepers of the house tremble, our hands
may yet hold him full fast; when they that look out of the windows be darkened
we may steadfastly behold him; when the grinders cease we may yet eat this bread
of life; he that rises at the voice of the bird may sleep soundly with this
Child in his arms; when all desire shall fail, this desire of the Nations will
not leave him; when he is going to his long home, this Child will both
accompany and conduct him to his rest.

O the comfort of this Child in our old age, when we are ready to go out of the
World, ready to depart; no comfort like it; no warmth like that which reflects
from the flesh of this young Child, his being flesh, made and offered to us,
and taken by us. When no Abishag can warm us, this Shunamite can. When none can
cherish us, he can stay us with flaggons, and comfort us with Apples, Cant. ii.
5. when no earthly fire in our bosoms can give us heat, with this Child in our
arms we grow young again, and renew our years unto eternity. O comfortable and
happy old age that has his arms furnished with the Child Jesus. Forsake me not,
O Lord, in mine old age, nor draw thy self out of mine arms when I am
gray headed, and I shall seek no other love, no other embraces.

Thus have I showed you Simeons silver head, and golden hands; Simeon with
Jesus in his arms, an old man holding of a Child, a Priest embracing of his
King, a servant entertaining of his Lord, the First Adam laying hold upon the
Second, the Law catching at the Gospel, the Old World courting of the New, Age
and Youth, State and Religion, Humility and Greatness, Weakness and Strength,
Rigonr and Mercy, Time and Eternity embracing. It Is a happy day that makes this
union, where the imperfection of the one is helped out and perfected by the
perfections of the other. And it is the happier, in that now in the next place
it directs us how to bear a part in this union, and communicate in this
happiness, Et ipse accepit eum in ulnas, by taking him into our arms from whom
comes all this peace upon earth, and good will among men.

Several are the ways of taking Christ. We take him in at our ears, when we
hear him in his Word. We take him in our mouths, when we confess him. We take
him into our hearts, when we desire and love him. We take him unto our necks,
when we submit to his obedience. We take him upon our knees, when we pray unto
him. We take him into our heads, when we meditate and think upon him. It Is good
taking him any of these ways, nay, all he must be taken.

But our business at this time is, in our arms or hands to do it, and so to
take him is,

First, To believe and hope in him. Faith and Hope are the two arms of the
soul, whereby we take and entertain whatsoever it is we love. And here Simeon
did so: he would not so have waited for the consolation of Israel had he not
fully believed and hoped strongly to attain it; nor would he have either so
have stretched out his hands to bless the Parents, nor his arms to receive the
Child, nor his voice to sing so loud salvation to the ends of the World, that
Jew and Gentile both might hear it.

2. To take him in our hands and arms is to receive him in the Sacraments.
Those are the two arms that the Church opens to take him. Baptism, as the left
hand, the weaker, for young weaklings; and the Eucharist, as the right and
stronger, for those of riper and stronger years; and in these arms he lies at
all times to be found, with them he is taken; and when at any time we duly and
devoutly use them we take him by them. And by the one of them we have I hope
all of us this day taken him.

3. But there is yet a way, and arms every day to take him with. Good works are
the hands, and the two branches of Charity; Divine Charity, and Brotherly love,
that divide the two Tables of the Law betwixt them, are the two arms that
embrace him: The good works that proceed from the first are the hands of the
one, and they that issue from the second are the other. And I may have leave to
call the Ten Commandments the ten fingers that make the hands that receive him.
Only here is one thing to be observed, and worth it too, that these hands and
fingers, the duties of the Moral Law, are to take Christ to them, his merits to
supply their defects, his strength to actuate their weakness, his faith to
raise their flagging dullness and earthy heaviness, which till then looks not
high enough beyond worldly interests, ere they can reach heaven.

But by these hands thus ordered, purified, and lifted up, no fear of taking
Christ wholly, with his greatest benefits and utmost relations. You need not
fear the hands, or doubt the virtue of them that are thus first enabled by
Christ, but that they are the truest power we hold him by. Let but our goodness
die, our righteousness fail, our good deeds vanish out of sight, and Christ
does too; he that is the eternal Wisdom will not dwell in a body that is
subject unto sin, that is the vassal of Satan under the dominion or habit of
any iniquity.

By these hands therefore you are daily to embrace him. These are the hands
that keep him too, that hold him fast. So long as our good Works, so long
continues he; so long as our Sanctification, so long our Justification; if the
one goes, the other does not stay; no, is not remembered, says God. God himself
forgets it, as if it had not been, when once the righteous turns from his
righteousness and turns wicked. This day (my beloved) you have taken Christ by
the hand of the holy Sacrament. That was your morning service; Take him now
henceforward by continuance in well-doing, by loving God, by loving your
neighbor, those two arms of Charity, and by all the fingers, and joints, and
nerves of good works, all sorts of good works, that you never more be deprived
of him.

And yet suscipere is somewhat more. Sub capere, and sursum capere, or in the
English, to take him up. Take up his cross and follow him. Put your neck under
even his hardest yoke if he point it out. That Is Capere sub and super too, to
take on and up, to deny your selves, and submit to any affliction, any cross,
any persecution, any loss of liberty, or limb, or life, or goods, or friends,
or any thing, rather than part with Jesus, than part our arms to let him go,
than any way part with our part, any part or portion in him.

And then lastly, Sursum capere; Take him up and offer him again unto his
Father: Offer him as our Lamb for a burnt-offering; offer him as our Turtle for
a sin-offering, for he is our Turtle, of whom it is said, the voice of the
Turtle is heard in our Land, Cant. ii. 10. offer him as our Dove for a
Sacrifice of thanksgiving, for he is our love and Dove, Cant. ii. 13, 14. Offer
him for our meat offering, for he is our meat, the very bread that came down
from heaven, fittest therefore of all bread to be offered to heaven again.

Offer we him as our Turtur in our solitude and retirement; Turtur avis
solitaria, the Turtle is a solitary bird. Offer him as our Dove, in company,
and in our Congregations. Columba avis gregaria. Doves fly by flocks together.
Offer him in our contemplation, and offer him in our practical conversation.

And offer we up our selves together with him, for it is an offering day, and
we must not stand out, nor come in empty; offer up, I say, our selves as
Turtles and Doves; some, their single estate with the Turtle; others, their
married with the Dove. Offer we up the Turtles sighs instead of wanton Songs:
The Turtles chastity and purity, and the Doves simplicity. Let our lives be
full of sorrow for our sins, and compassions to our brother, full of purity and
innocence. Keep we still this sursum in suscipere, upon the tops of the
Mountains, with the Turtle, as near heaven as can be. Set no more our foot upon
the green trees, or boughs (as the Turtle does not when his Mate is dead) rest
we no more upon the green and flourishing, the light and leavy pleasures of the
World, but spend the residue of this mournful life in bewailing the widowed
Church, our lost both Spouse and Mother, our deceased Husband and Father to.
Thus taking Christ and his Offering, and proportioning ours according to it,
our heaviness may again be turned into joy, a joyful light spring up again, our
Purification become also a Candlemas, an illustrious day of lights and glories.

It Is Candlemas day I tell you again. Let it be so henceforward with you for
ever, perpetual Candlemas, perpetual Christmas; your good works perpetually
shine before men, that they also may glorify your Father by that light, and
nothing be henceforth heard of but Christ, in your hands, and arms, and mouths,
all your words, and works, and lives, and deaths, nothing but Christ, nothing
but Christ; as if you were wholly full this day, as Simeons arms, with the
Child Jesus, with the Lords Christ.

This work is never unseasonable. Christ may at all times be taken so with
reverence, into our mouths, or arms, or hearts, or any part about us. Yet he
has a proper time besides, and that is when he is presented in the Temple after
his Circumcision, and his mothers Purification.

At such a time as that, when our hearts are purified by repentance and faith;
when the devout soul, which like his Mother, conceives and brings him forth,
has accomplished the days of her Purification, and offered the forementioned
offerings of the Turtle and the Dove, and we circumcised with the Circumcision
of the Spirit, all our excrescent inclinations, exorbitant affections, and
superfluous desires cut off, we may with confidence take him into our arms: But
till then it is too much sawciness to come so near him, at least presumption to
conceive we have him truly in our arms, that he is truly embraced by us, whilst
we have other loves, other affections, which cannot abide with him, already in
our arms, and too ready in our hands.

Profane we him not therefore with unhallowed hands, nor touch this holy Ark
of the Covenant with irreverent fingers, lest we die. Many that have done so,
says the Apostle, for so doing are sick and weak upon it, and many sleep, that
is, die suddenly in their sins, whilst the hallowed meat is yet in their
mouths. It Is as dangerous as death and damnation too to take Christ with
unpurified and unprepared hearts or hands. Take him not then till you are
prepared.

Yet (2.) if prepared, take him when you can, and as soon as you can, when he
is offered to you, whilst you may. To day if you will; it is offering day with
him yet any day too when he is offered, and whilst he is so, for he always will
not be so, 'twill not be always Candlemas, he will not be offered every day.
There is a time when he will go and not return, when he will not any longer
strive with flesh, when we shall stretch out our hands and he will not come,
nor hear, nor see us neither. To day, if you will do it, do it; you are not
sure of your selves to morrow, much less of him. To day, if you will, if not, I
know not what day to pitch, nor will you find it easy to meet another if you
at any time neglect the present. This day, then, whilst it is called to day,
lay hold of him if you be wise, and would not be put off by him with a
Discedite, hands off, I have nothing to do with you, nor you with me, it is too
late.

Many are the times and days, as well as means and ways, wherein Christ is
offered to us; but this day he has been thrust into our arms, put into our
hands, and we have taken him. Yet, say I still, take him up in your arms, and I
say it without either tautology, or impertinence, or impropriety. Into our
hands we have taken him, and I hope into our arms, into our bosoms, into our
hearts besides; take him yet up higher and higher into our affections, the very
natural arms of our souls, more and more into them, nearer and nearer to us,
closer and closer to our hearts; embrace and hug him close, as we those we most
affectionate-love, and hold him fast, that he may no more depart from us, but
delight to be with us as with those that so love him that they cannot live
without him.

Thus it is no impertinence to wish you to take him still, though you have taken
him. Thus you are every day to take him, or this days taking him will come to
nothing, or to worse. If you go not on, still taking him nearer and nearer,
deeper and deeper every day into your bosoms and hearts, as you have this day
into your hands and mouths, you will be questioned in indignation by him; Why
have you taken me into your mouths? Why have you taken me up in your hands,
seeing you now seem to hate me, are so soon grown weary of me, and put me from
you, and even cast me behind you? Take heed, I beseech you, of doing thus, of
drawing back your hands so soon, drawing back at all. For after this favor,
whereby you have been made partakers of him, whereby he has so infinitely
condescended from himself, as to be received into so unclean, and filthy, and
extremely unworthy hands and souls, to be embraced by such vile Creatures, what
can we render him sufficient for such goodness? It Is but this, O man, that he
requires, a poor thing, O man, that he requires at thy hand for this vast
infinite favor, and thou have Simeon here doing it before thee, blessing God.
And he took him up in his arms and blessed God.

Indeed, we can do little if we cannot bless, bless him that blesses us;
benedicere, speak well of him; say he is good and gracious, loving and merciful
unto us; tell and speak forth his praise, tell and declare the great and
gracious things that he has done for us, the wonderful things that he this day
did for the Children of men; Came and took their place, and was presented and
accepted for them, who were but reffuse and rejected persons, were fain to send
Bulls, and Lambs, and Rams, the very beasts, to plead for them; glad of any
thing to stand between them and their offended God, even the heifers dung, and
ashes, to make atonement for them; and as it were, her skin to cover them,
Numb. xix. 2. till this day, when this holy Child was presented for all; and
all those former poor shifts and shelters at an end: no need of those dead
offerings more, being fully reconciled by this living one for ever. Bless we
him, and praise him, and speak good of him for this.

Bless we him yet more, for vouchsafing us the touches of his sacred Body, for
so kindly coming into our arms; our own children do not sometimes do so, but
come often with much frowardness and crying, reluctance and unwillingness. This
Child Jesus comes of his own accord, slips down from Heaven into our laps when
we are not aware, is in our arms e're we can stir them up. And that this Son of
God should so willingly leave his Fathers bosom, the true and only seat of joy,
and pleasure, for ours, the perfect seat of sorrow and misery; and rest himself
in our weak arms, who have nor rest nor shelter, but in his: that he should
thus really infinitely bless us, and yet require no greater a return, than our
imperfect blessing him again: How can we keep our lips shut, our tongues silent
of his praise.

But having this day sealed all these favors and blessings to us, by the holy
Sacrament, the pledge and seal of this love wherewith he loved us; having so
really, and fully, and manifestly, and fast, given himself into our arms, we
cannot sure but bless him both with our tongues and hands; with holy Simeon
make an Hymn of his goodness, an Anthem of his love, a Psalm of his mercy, and
in sweet numbers carol forth his praise: set our heads to do it, our hearts to
endite it, our pens to write it, our voices to sing it, and with the three
Children in their Song, invite all the creatures in Heaven and Earth, Angels,
and men, all the sensible and insensible creatures to bear us company; so to
make a full noise of all kinds of Music, to set forth his praise. Do it with
our hands too, do that which will exalt his praise. Then it is benedixit
complete, when it has benefecit next it. We speak best when we do best, when
our lives and actions speak it, Benedixit and been vixit, are not so near of
sound for nothing. A holy life is not more truly Gods blessing to man, than
again it is man's chiefest and most acceptable blessing God.

Many ways may this blessing God be performed by us, but as we stand now with
some relation to this days blessing; the blessed Eucharist, the feast of
blessing, the cup of blessing, as the Apostle styles it. I shall show you now
you have taken it, what blessing is more peculiarly required after it.

Three acts of blessing there are to be performed after this act of so taking
Christ into our arms; and for it three points of blessing for this great
blessing of the Holy Communion, Thanksgiving, Oblation, and Petition. Bless him
and give thanks to him. Bless him and offer up his Son to him again, and our
selves with him; offer his Son in our own arms, him and our selves. Bless him
and present our petitions to him, our prayers as well as praises. Or in the
language of the Text, Benedicamus. Speak well of him, do somewhat for him, and
bring our requests and petitions to him. You see I need not run out of the Text
for any kind of blessing.

First then, Bless him with your tongues, Speak good of his Name, and let your
lips speak forth his glory and wondrous works; tell the world what he has done
for you, what great and mighty things, Salutem ejus evangelizate, Psalm. xcvi.
4. Tell it out for good tidings, the tidings of great joy. Be always speaking,
always telling it.

Call to all the creatures to bear you company, every thing to rejoice with
you. Tell your happiness to the Woods and Mountains, in your solitary
retirements; tell it to the Towns and Villages, speak of it in all companies;
tell it to the young Men and Maids, old Men and Children, all Sexes and Ages,
what God has done for your souls. Tell it to the Summer and Winter, both in
your prosperity and adversity: let nothing make you forget your thanks. Tell it
to the Frost and Fire, in your coldnesses and in your fervencies and zeals; to
the Earth, and to the Waters; in your drinesses of soul, and in the sorrows of
your hearts: praise him in all conditions, Tell it to the Angels, and Heavens,
as you are about your heavenly business. Tell it to the Fowls of the Air, even
in the midst of your airy thoughts, and projects, that they may be such as may
set forth his glory. Tell it to the Priests and Servants of the Lord, to
solemnize your thanksgiving. Tell it to the Spirits and Souls of the righteous,
to bear a part with you in your Song; and entreat them all, all estates and
orders, all conditions and things, to bring in each their blessing, to make up
one great and worthyblessing for this days blessing, to rejoice and sing, exult
and triumph with you for this happy arm-full of eternal blessings this day
bestowed upon you. Begin we the blessing: blessing, and honor, and power, and
glory, and thanks, and praise, and worship, and great glory be unto God, for
ever and ever, and let all the creatures say, Amen.

Bless we him secondly with our Offerings. Hold we up first our hands, and
bless him; hold we up our hands and vow, and resolve to serve him from
henceforth with hand and heart, and all our members; offer him our vows and
resolutions, holy ones; strengthen our hands, and renew our purposes to serve
him now henceforward with a high hand; maugre all the pleasures and profits of
the world, say what they will against it, with a strong hand; do they what they
dare or can against us. Bless him and resolve to bless him for ever; and every
day renew we still our resolutions, that our hands may be so strengthened by
them, that none may be able to take him out of our hands.

2. Catch we fast hold of him with our hands, when we bless him; clasp him fast
by a lively hope, as assured that all our hope is in him, all our hope in
holding him, clasp we him fast and bless him.

3. Spread your arms, and bless him with your Faith. Open your souls, and every
day more and more let him come in: let it be your continual exercise more and
more to trust him, to rely upon him.

4. Open your hands, and cast down your blessings upon the poor: He that
blesses the poor, blesses God. What you have done to them, says Christ, you did
to me, St. Matthew. xxv. Open your hands, and bless God.

5. Cross your hands, and beat your breasts: Bless him with your hands a cross,
as humbly acknowledging your vileness and unworthiness of so great a favor as
his presence; as the seeing, and touching, and handling, and ^asting him. He
truly blesses God on high, that thus makes himself low.

6. Fill your hands and bless him; bless him with a full hand, both your hands
full of blessings; blessings of all sorts, all good works and virtues. An
universal obedience is the onliest blessing God: Simeon being interpreted is
obedient; and he it is that here blesses, the obedient soul that at any time
only truly blesses God.

7, Wash we yet our hands before we either open or spread, or hold up, or
cross, or clasp, or fill them: Wash we before we bless, wash away our
impurities with our tears, bewail and bemoan our defects, and weaknesses, and
imperfections, which in our receiving have been too many; that by this hand our
oblation and blessing may be offered with pure and unspotted hands and hearts.

8. Clap we then our hands and bless him; do it with joy and not with grief: we
may do it well when we have so washed them first. Let it be our way of blessing
to do it cheerfully, to settle our selves to all the works of piety and
obedience, of faith, and hope, and charity, and humility: and in a word, to an
universal righteousness, with all the purity we can, with all the strength and
resolution we are able. Bless with a cheerful and ready hand, set our selves
ever hereafter merrily to this work.

But remember we all this while we so use our hands to bless, that we so open
and shut, so spread and cross them, that we let not Christ go out the while.
Offer we up our selves and him together: Resolve we* whoever shall take him,
shall take us too. We will not part, no not in death; we will live, and die,
and sleep, and rise again together: He that will have him shall have us,
whether he will or no: He is in our arms, there we will keep him. Yet in lieu
of parting with him we will part with our selves, and offer our selves for him
if that will do it, yes, and that will do it. Duo minuta habeo Domine corpus
and animam, says the devout Father. I have two mites, O Lord, I have two mites
to offer; to give thee for thy Son, to offer thee for him; my soul and my body.
Them thou shall have willingly: I am content to part with them, so I may keep
him, and they will content him. Offer them up then a living, reasonable
sacrifice, for it will be an acceptable service too, an acceptable blessing of
him.

Yet as we offer up our selves, we must now lastly offer up Christ too. He gave
him to us, to be an offering for us; to sanctify all our offerings, for a
blessing to us, to bless all our blessings. And for the imperfection of all our
righteousness, offerings and sacrifices, prayers, and praises, and blessings to
make them accepted, which in themselves, and their weak performances no way
deserve, he was given us to offer. His perfection will make amends for our
imperfections, his purity for our impurities, his strength for our weakness;
and for them, when we have done all we can to be accepted, we must offer him,
or have all rejected. We must when we begin to bless, turn our selves with old
Jacob, to this Caput lectuli, this beds-head, whereon only the soul can rest,
or leaning upon the top of this Staff, as the Apostle renders it, the only
staff wherein old Israel trusts; the only staff whereon we rely for mercy, and
acceptance. This is the name of the Angel, in whom only we are to bless, in
whom only we are blessed, in whom either God blesses us, or we him. This is the
sum, he the chief of all our oblations, all our blessings by oblation: and the
blessing both of our resolutions and endeavors all: without whom we can do
neither the one nor other; neither resolve good nor practice it. He therefore
is to be offered with all thankfulness to God by us; his merits only to be
pleaded by us, and the form of all our blessing thus to run, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy holy Son, the Child Jesus give the praise. It
was not our own arm that helped us to him, it is not our own arms that can hold
him, it is not our own strength that can keep him, it is not our own hands that
can present any offering worthy of the least acceptance. To God only therefore
be the praise, to Christ only the merit of all our blessings.

Thus are we lastly to pray too, that God would accept us and our blessing.
Bless him with our petitions.

1. That he would please to pardon all our sins, or pass by all our weaknesses
in this days, in every days performance: our neglects, our coldnesses, our
drinesses, our wearinesses, and all the issues of our infirmities any ways.

That (2.) he would accept our offerings, and be pleased with us in his Son,
accept us in his beloved.

That (3.) he would grant us the benefit of that holy Sacrament which we have
this day received; all the benefits of his Death and Passion, the full
remission of all our sins, and the fullness of all his graces signified and
conveyed by those dreadful mysteries.

That (4.) he would particularly arm us every one of us, against their
particular corruptions with strength and grace proportionable to every one, and
effectual to us all. For proper and particular petitions, rising from the sense
of our several necessities, are this day proper to be asked, and as easy to be
obtained, whilst it is his own day, in which he invited us to him; and will
deny us nothing that we shall earnestly, faithfully, and devoutly ask him. For
this also to pray, to petition, is benedicere, and it is a way of blessing God
to offer up our prayers; thereby acknowledging and confessing his power and
goodness, which is no less in other words than to praise and bless him: He that
offers praise honors him, and he that presents prayers, professes and
proclaims him Almighty Father, gracious, and good, and glorious God, at the
very first dash, God blessed for evermore.

Light up now your Candles at this evening Service, for the glory of your
morning Sacrifice: it is Candlemas. Become we all burning and shining lights, to
do honor to this day, and the blessed armful of it. Let your souls shine
bright with grace, your hands with good works: Let God see it, and let man see
it; so bless we God. Walk we as Children of the light, as so many walking
lights; and offer we our selves up like so many holy Candles to the Father of
light. But be sure we light all our lights at this babes eyes, that lies so
enfolded in our arms; and neither use nor acknowledge any other light for
better than darkness, that proceeds from any other but this eternal light, upon
whom all our best thoughts, and words, and works must humbly now attend like so
many petty sparks, or rays, or glimmerings darted from, and perpetually
reflecting thankfully to that glorious light; from this day beginning our
blessing God, the only lightsome kind of life, till we come to the land of
light, there to offer up continual praises, sing endless Benedicite's, and
Allelujahs, no longer according to the Laws or Customs upon earth, but after
the manner of Heaven, and in the Choire of Angels, with holy Simeon, and Anna,
and Mary, and Joseph, all the Saints in light and glory everlasting. Amen. Amen.

He of his mercy bring us thither, who is the light to conduct us thither; he
lead us by the hand, who this day came to lie in our arms; he make all our
offerings accepted, who was at this Feast presented for us; he bless all our
blessings, who this day so blessed us with his presence, that we might bless
him again: and he one day in our several due times receive our spirits into his
hands, our souls into his arms, our bodies into his rest, who this day was
taken corporally into Simeons arms, has this day vouchsafed to be spiritually
taken into ours. Jesus the holy Child, the eternal Son of God the Father. To
whom with the holy Spirit, be all honor, and praise, and glory, and blessing
from henceforth, for evermore. Amen.

A SERMON ON THE First Sunday in Lent.
2 COR. vi. 2. -- Behold now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of
Salvation.
ANd truly such a time is worth beholding. For the business of it here being of
no less concernment than Gods reconciling us to himself, ver, 18, 19. of the
former Chapter; the committing the word and office of this reconciliation to
his Ministers, ver. 20. of the same Chapter; the persuading us not to receive
this grace in vain, ver. 1, of this; the time certainly wherein we may thus be
reconciled, thus accepted to salvation, is worth the seeing, worth a Behold,
and a Behold; worth laying hold on too, a time to be accepted, being a day of
salvation.

And now is the time, says the Text, we are fallen upon. And now is the Time
say the Days we are fallen among: Times of reconciliation, both. Days of
Salvation, both. Indeed, the whole Time of the Gospel is no other. Yet the
Apostle applies it here to the Age he wrote in. We may draw it down to ours we
live in. But the Church, more particularly yet, applies it to the time we are
now in keeping, the holy time of Lent; a time wherein the Office of
Reconciliation is set open to receive sinners in; a time when the Ambassadors
for Christ (as the Apostle styles us, ver. 20. of the foregoing Chapter) we
that are workers together with him, ver. 5. are more earnestly to beseech the
people, and the people more especially to bestir themselves by the works of
mortification and repentance to reconcile themselves to God; a time when in the
Primitive Church notorious sinners were put to open penance, and punished in
this world, that their souls might be saved in the day of the Lord, says our
Church in the Commination; and she her self by making these words part of her
Epistle for the First Sunday in Lent, she cries out to us, as it were, Behold,
now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation, this very time,
make much of it, and lay hold upon it.

I shall give all their right, take in all the time we can, that seeing an
accepted time there is, a day of salvation to be had, still to be had, we may
be sure not to miss it. It Is no idle trivial business, this; We cannot be too
careful for it. General and particular days and times, all to be taken, and all
little enough to obtain salvation; not to be thought much of (though it were
much more) so we may but compass that at last.

I shall not therefore spend so precious time to study curiosity in a business
so serious, or to torture the Text into nice Divisions. It shall suffice to
show you in these particulars:

1. That an accepted time there is, some time, above others, wherein God is
most ready to accept us. 2. That this accepted time is a day of salvation too;
wherein we shall not only merely be accepted, but accepted so far also as to
salvation, one or other. Now is the day of etc. 3. That Now is the Time, this
is the Day. It is before us, it is in present we need look no further. 4. That
God himself here points us to it; bids us behold it; sets an Ecce, a mark upon
it; a red Letter, as it were, upon the Day, that we might mark and mind it,
mind it above all other days, besides. 5. That we are therefore to do
accordingly. Behold, and behold it now, and again behold it, again and again,
and so behold it as to accept it, and apply us to it: bring all ends of the
Text together, that we may find Salvation in the end. It Is an accepted Time, we
therefore to make it so as well as count it so, make it perfectly accepted by
accepting it.
These shall be the Particulars, and of them all, this is the sum; That God in
his goodness allowing us time to repent, to receive his grace, to reconcile our
selves to him, and lay hold upon salvation, giving us daily deliverances and
salvations too; nay, showing, and setting, and pointing us out here a time to
accept and save us in; It is certainly our duty to take notice of it, even now
to do it, even as soon as may be to accept his goodness and not neglect the day
of salvation. And

That we may not, but both accept and be accepted, we shall show you first that
such a time there is wherein we may. A time (1.) still wherein we may find
acceptance; that God has not shut up the day, and shut us out. A time (2.)
wherein God is readiest to accept us, readier than at other times. That there
is a (...), as well as a (...), a season, as well as time for it; (...) to, a
seasonable opportunity, when it will be the easier done, The accepted time. A
time (3.) yet so confined and limited, that, for ought we know, there may be
none beyond it. (...), it is not always, the season holds not ever. And Now is
the Time, says in effect, anon perhaps it will not be; for this time in the
next words is expounded into a day; and we know the day spends, and night will
come on apace: So that a time, a ready time, a limited time there is for our
repentance, and Gods accepting us. These three make up our first Particular we
are now to begin with.

And (1.) that God still allows us time is worth a note. He does not owe it us.
He might snatch us away in the height and fullness of our sins with as much
justice, as he does it not in mercy. But he deals not with us after our sins,
nor rewards us according to our wickedness, says Holy David, Psalm. ciii. 10.
Twelve hours of the day there are, St. Joh. xii. 9. and every one of them God
is not only ready to receive us, but goes out to seek us, St. Mat. xx. 3. and
so on. And at what time soever a Sinner does repent, (so it ran of old) and
when he does, (so it runs now) and both the same, he shall save his soul, God
will accept him, Ezekiel. xviii. 32.

2. Yet for all that (.2.) all times are not alike. We will not always find
admittance at the same rate, with the same ease. As he will not always be
chiding, so he will not always be so pleasing neither. We may knock, and knock
again, and yet stand without a while, sometimes so long till our knees are
ready to sink under us, our eyes ready to drop out, as well as drop with
expectation, and our hearts ready to break in pieces, while none hears, or
none regards. We should have come before, or pitched our coming at a better
time. God is in bed, as it were, and at rest with his Children, cherishing and
making much of them, he is not a^ leisure to open to such strangers. We must
knock hard and importunately too, to get him to open to us We are out of time.

But is he, who is no accepter of persons, become now an accepter of times? Or
would he have us turn observers of them? Is there ever a star in heaven that
can bring us into favor with the Father of lights? Any so lucky an aspect
there that can guide us up into his presence? Can any, or all the Planets in
Sextile, Trine, or Square, or any position else, make us fortunate in our new
Nativities, or second Births, or give us audience with the Almighty? Alas!
these are but as the Star of Remphan and Moloch, which only carry us into
Babylon, confound all the projects we build upon them. The Star we are to look
to, is the Star of Jacob; our Sol, the Sun of Righteousness; our Venus, the
Holy Spirit of love; our Jupiter, God the Father, the great Iuvans Pater of the
World. These are the only Planets the Christian guides his motions by, that
make our business go well, our time accepted, our days lucky. And

That such a time there is in the great Affairs of souls, a time of a readier
acceptance with God, and what it is that makes it so, is now worth the
considering.

That so it is the Scripture tells us plain. The Prophet from whom our Apostle
takes the words immediately before the Text, and which he ushers in his own
times and ours, says as much, Isa. xlix. 8. calls it (...) tempus voluntatis, a
time not only when he will, but when he is willing to hear us. Tempus (...) we
may render it, the time of his good pleasure; the Vulgar gives us it by tempore
placito, a time when he is pleased, well pleased to hear us, and be pleasant
with us. The same Prophet tells us too, of a time not only when he may be
found, but when he is near, ready and at hand to hear us, Isa. lv. 6. The
Prophet David expressly, Psalm. lxix. 13. speaks of an acceptable time to make
our prayers in. And To day if you will hear his voice, in the Psalmist,
paraphrased by the Apostle, to day, while it is called to day, shows there is a
set day, or days of audience with God, wherein he sets himself, as it were,
with all readiness to hear and help us; an accepted time.

And will ye, next, know what it is that makes it so? There are but two things
that do. Either Gods being in a good or pleasing disposition toward us, or our
being in a good and pleasing disposition toward him. Come we but to him in
either of these, and we have nickt the time, we are sure to be accepted.

1. When he is looking upon him, in whom he is always well pleased, his beloved
Son, when he is propounding him to us in his Word or Sacraments, scattering
there, as it were, his gifts unto men, then in those Solemnities is one sort of
his accepted times, wherein he is ready to do what we will desire him.

2. But (2.) when we our selves are in a good temper and disposition, that is
another. In tempore quo vos facitis voluntatem meam, so the Chaldee paraphrases
the Hebrew, the tempus voluntatis, or tempus placitum, Isa. xlix. 8. That time
when you do what I would have you, says God, that is the accepted time when I
will hear you; when our souls are in that order and obedience to our God that
he would have them, then will he be in that readiness to succor us that we
would have him.

The word (...), goes for season. And of seasons there are some, you know, more
acceptable than others. Two very acceptable and pleasant in the year, the
Spring and Summer. There are the same in the souls of men. A Spring, when our
graces and virtues begin to sprout and blossom, bespread and cloth this earth
we carry, when the Sun of righteousness begins to smile and warm us, when the
air grows temperate, our passions and affections moderate within us, and all
our powers breath nothing but Violets and Roses; this, as the Prophet styles
it, the very time of love, a disposition and time we cannot but be accepted in,
wherein God begins to be in love with us. There is a Summer too, when the
hills, the highest pitch and spirit of our souls, stand thick with Corn, and
the valleys, our lowest powers, our inferior passions laugh and sing; when the
bright rays of heaven shine hot upon us; when we are hung full with all
heavenly fruits; when our hearts do even burn within us, and the whole desires
even of our flesh, this dust, that covers us, are on fire for heaven; when our
hearts pant after the living brooks, and our souls are a thirst for God, to
come unto him to appear before him. This indeed is not only the time, but the
fullness of it, when, coming so replenisht with grace and righteousness, we
shall be fully accepted, and be sure not to be sent empty away.

Indeed, it is sometimes an Autumn and a winter season with us. A time when our
leaves fall off, our graces and virtues decay and wither; when the fair beauty
of a Summer-goodness either spent and dried away with too long a Sunshine of
prosperity; or blasted by the first approach of some cold wind, some touch of
Winter, some affliction now at hand makes the day look sad about us, and
melancholy too, no way pleasing. A time too there is when it is high Winter with
us, our faith and charity grown cold and dead; when the streams of our wonted
Piety lie, as it were, chained up in icy fetters, and the Sun of righteousness
scarce appears above the Horizon to us. These are times not to expect to be
accepted in. And such I told you were intimated here too, Now is the accepted,
seems to say plain enough there is a time coming that will not be so; that is
the third branch of our first Particular.

The one and twentieth year after the hundred and twentieth that God gave the
Old World to repent in, Genesis vi. 3. was a year too late. The next day after
Ninivies forty given her would not have done her work. Jerusalem, our Savior
tells us, had past her day. Nunc autem abscondita, the things of peace then
hidden from her eyes, were too sad a proof her day was set, St. Luke xix. 42.
Nunc autem is full opposite to Nunc dies. To day if you will hear his voice,
Heb. iii. shows, if you will not, you must not look for another. They in the
First of the Proverbs found no less, they had passed their time, refused Gods
when he called upon them, ver. 24. They shall therefore call, and he will not
answer; they shall seek him, and that early too, but he will not be found, ver.
28. he will but laugh at them for their pains, ver. 26. A shrewd Lesson to us
not to neglect our day.

Indeed, it is not in the power of Astrology to calculate this time; nor of any
humane judgment to define or point out the day when God has done accepting us,
but sure such a one there is; or it were vain to fright us with a nunc autem,
with a But, when there is no such matter; if day after day would come and go,
and yet never bring on a night wherein no man could work, Nay, it is requisite
there should be so; for were there no such time, his very mercy would undo us,
in the mercy of the most highest; in his highest mercies we should infallibly
miscarry, and go away without repentance. Nor would his justice have time to
show it self, if no time came amiss, or short of mercy. It Is mercy enough that
he allows us time of repentance, time to come in; and gives us (1.) a lesson to
be thankful, and to take it. Yet (2.) he adds a greater, tells us of an
accepted time, when he keeps open Court, and gives ready audience to all that
come, and may teach us (2.) to seek and search that out, that it slip not by
us. Nay, it is a mercy (3.) to stint it too, to bound and limit it; we else
likely would never come, put it off so long till we were past coming; and reads
us (3.) a lecture against presumption, as yet, the concealing of those bounds
and limits reads us (lastly) another against despair. All these lessons to be
learned from this first particular, that an accepted time there is, wherein
above other times God will accept us.

And yet there are degrees also of acceptance. The accepting us (1.) to
pardon, not imputing to us our former sins, nor reckoning to us our past
unkindnesses, but allowing us the liberty still of new addresses to him.
There Is a time for that. The accepting us (2.) into favor, not only leaving
open the way, but affording us the means also to bring us to him; the filling
us with mercy, and loving kindness: there is a time for that. The accepting us
(3.) to salvation too. There Is a day here next for that, and it is our second
observation.

II. A day indeed: all time, nor all accepted time neither is not day.
Salvation it is that makes it day: all time without it is but night and
darkness; and in the brightest day that shines we sit but in the shadow of
death, if we want the glances of salvation. Let God so accept us, as to hear
and prosper us with riches and honor when we desire it. Let him accept us to a
pardon when we beg it; let him admit us to new addresses, and some new favors
too upon it; it is but a dawn or twilight still, it is not perfect day till
salvation it self shine forth upon us.

I confess (...) here may have a temporal meaning, by the saving and delivering
Christ's faithful servants out of those distresses they were at that time under,
or in fear of; and (...), in St. Peter, Salvation ready to be revealed, 1 Pet.
i. 5. and (...) the saving the soul, or life, in St. Matthew, and St. Mark, St.
Mat. xvi. 15. St. Mark viii. 35. may prove the exposition good. Yet the
Apostles discourse that ushers in the Text being about Gods reconciling himself
to us in Christ, and sending his Ambassadors to us to that purpose, in the end
of the preceding Chapter, and an exhortation not to receive that grace in vain,
pursuing in that design, ver. 1. enclines me rather to apply it to a spiritual
sense. Nay the place of the Prophet, Isa. xlix. 8. to which Saint Paul alludes,
seems to point particularly at this eternal salvation, ver. 6, 7, 9. extending
it there to the very Gentiles, and the ends of the earth. But be it a temporal,
or be it an eternal salvation; be it either, or be it both: both have their
time, both have their day, and accepted ones both.

Indeed nothing can make them such so much as salvation; nothing like some
great deliverance upon them: but every time is not fit for that. It Is necessary
there should be times of trouble, and times of trial come before it: and it is
not necessary we should be delivered presently. Till the fullness of time was
come, God did not send it, nor him that brought it, Gal. iv. 4. Indeed the
Prophets that foretold it, enquired and searched diligently, says St. Peter,
what, or what manner of time the Spirit of Christ did signify when it
testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should
follow, when it witnessed of salvation, 1 Pet. i. 11. but they could get no
more revealed than this, that they did not minister to themselves but us, ver.
12. That such a time should come, that they were certain, but when it should
they could not tell us.

Other salvations and deliverances have their due times too, and as uncertain.
Those very tempora novissima, those last times, that the very Apostle speaks so
often of in their Epistles (who were under the dawning of salvation) have so
large a latitude, that the great deliverance from the persecutions then upon
them, but one of all of them lived to see, as confidently as all of them spoke
of it. Enough to teach us patience as well as confidence, to expect with
patience, and quietly wait for the salvation of God in all distresses; as well
as to hold up our heads with confidence and support our dying hopes and hearts
that salvation will surely come in its due time. And yet I may add, we may
notwithstanding fear too, that though it will be sure to come, we may not live
to see it, or have the happiness to enjoy it. We may die upon Mount Hor, or
Nebo, e're it come, unless we can now happily lay hold upon this little (...),
this now set before us in the Text, the next particular, and take it now it is
offered to us.

III. This now is but a little word, but there is much time, or rather many
several times that lay claim to it here. The whole time of the Gospel in
general. The times (2.) of the Apostles in special. Our times also (3.) among
the rest. These days (4.) we are now a keeping more particularly above any
other of ours. This very day (lastly) whilst it is called to day, before it is
past over us, before night come on us.

The time of the Gospel from Christ's coming out of the Womb, as the Sun out of
his Chamber, till he shall come again in the Clouds in glory, is this accepted
time, this salvation-day at large. The dayspring of it rose with him at his
first coming, but the day ends not till his second. There is a double emphasis
in this Now. (.1) Now, and not before. (2.) Now and now, henceforth for ever.
(1.) Now, and not before. In him it is first we hear of God well, pleased, St.
Matthew. iii. 17. All the times before he did but wink at, Acts xvii. 30, In his
time first it is that we hear of saving people from their sins, St. Matthew. i.
21. He the first of all since the world began, that saved us from all our
enemies, and from the hand of all that hate us, St. Luke i. 71. in whom we have
deliverance of all sorts, salvation of all kinds. He in whom God reconciling
the world unto himself, verse 19. of the foregoing Chapter. Nay, he the very
first that indeed made it day: It was but darkness, and the shadow of death, we
sat in before, St. Luke i. 78, 79. His is the only time, the time of the
Gospel, the only time of salvation. Here it began, and hence now it goes on
(2.) for ever; for St. John calls it, Evangelium aeternum, Rev. xiv. 6. the
everlasting Gospel, the salvation not to end even with the world; to the end of
it, sure, to continue. Moses his Law had but its time and vanished; and whilst
it had, could not pretend so far as to make it day; cloud, and shadows, and
darkness all the while: The times of the Gospel are the only lightsome day, and
a long one too, it seems; for our Sun has promised still to shine upon us, and
be with us ever, to the end of the world, St. Mat. xxviii. 20.

But some more remarkable points of this time there are we must confess, that
of the Apostles was (2.) the very especial (...) intended here, the Now in the
Text: When the time of acceptance was at the fullest, when whole families
together, Acts xvi. 34. and xviii. 8. thousands at a clap, Acts ii. 41. whole
Towns and Countries came thronging in so fast, as if this very now were now or
never; when Handkerchiefs, and Aprons, and the very shadow of an Apostle
carried a kind of salvation with them, Acts v. 15. and xix. 12. when there was
not only a large way opened for all sinners to come in, but all ways and means
made to bring them in; when there were fiery tongues, both to inflame the
hearts of the believers, and to devour the gainsayers: when there was a Divine
Rhetoric always ready to persuade, Miracles to confirm, Prophecy to convince,
miraculous gifts and benefits to allure, strange punishments to awe sinners
into the obedience of Christ, and the paths of salvation: when the time of that
great deliverance too from the destruction of Jerusalem, and the enemies of the
Cross of Christ, so often reflected on through Saint Paul's Epistles was now
nigh at hand, and the fast adhering to Christ the only way to be accepted and
taken into the number of such as should be saved from it.

Yet (3.) this Now is not so narrow, but it will take in our times too. It Is
true, those of the Apostles were furnished with greater means and power; yet
ours, God be thanked, want not sufficient. We have the Word, and Sacraments,
and Ministers, and inward Motions, daily calls, and ready assistances of the
Spirit,. It may be, too, somewhat more than they; a long track of experimental
truths, and long sifted and banded reasons, and an uninterrupted Tradition, and
a continued train of holy and devout examples, a vast disseminating the
Christian Principles, and the perpetual protection of them we have, to make
them more easy to be accepted; and tell us, that it is Now still the day of
salvation.

And yet (4.) even both in our times, and the Apostles, there has been a (...),
some signal and peculiar time culled out of the rest, and set apart for this
Reconciliation, the great affair that sets the Ecce upon it. If I tell you but
of St. Augustin's, Tota Catholica Ecclesia, or St. Leo's Institutio Apostolica,
or St. Ieromes Secundum traditionem Apostolorum, or St. Ambrose's Quadragesimam
nobis Dominus suo jejunio consecravit for this holy time we are in, the time of
Lent; that they all call it Apostolical at the least: and St. Ambrose fetches
it from our Lord, and consecrates it from Christ himself; and that it was
always purposely designed for the time of reconciling sinners, and all the
offices belonging to it, I shall need say no more to prove this Now in the Text
is not ill applied, when applied to this very time.

Most reasonable it is (1.) that some such there should be designed, some time
or days determined for a business of so great weight: we are not like else to
have it done: we would be apt enough to put it off from time to time, and so
for ever. Were there not some set days, I dare confidently affirm, God would
have but little worship paid him; thousands would never so much as think of
Heaven, or God.

And if it be reasonable some time be set us, there is (2.) no time fitter than
where we are: it is the very time of the year when all things begin to turn
their course; when Heaven and Earth begin to smooth their wrinkled brows, and
withered cheeks, and look as if they were reconciled. It Is the spring and
first fruits of the year, which upon that title is due to God, and fittest to
be dedicate to his Service, and the business of our souls. (3.) It Is the time
when the blood begins to warm, and the contest is now in rising between the
Flesh and Spirit; which now taken up at first and quelled, may be the easier
reconciled to peace, and the body subdued into obedience to the soul; and so
Gods grace not received in vain. (4.) The spring in which it is, it is tempus
placitum, the pleasant time of the year; fittest then to fit with the tempus
placitum in the Text, fit to be employed to set our selves to please God in, to
make it perfectly such. And sure we cannot be displeased that the Church (5.)
has thought so too, chosen it as the fittest. Surely it is or should be the
more acceptable for that.

And if this time (besides) has all times in it, that Solomon himself could
think of, Eccles. iii. 1. It must needs be (...), and (...) too, every way
acceptable: and all of them it has. (1.) There is, says he, a time to be born,
etc. and so goes on: this is both a time to be born in, and a time to die in.
Lent, a time to die unto the world, and to be born and live to Christ. (2.)
It Is a time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; to plant
virtue, and to pluck up vice. (3.) It Is a time to kill, and a time to heal; to
kill and mortify our earthly members, and to heal the sores and ulcers that
sin has made, by a diet of fasting and abstinence. (4.) It Is a time to break
down, and a time to build; to break down the Walls of Babylon, the fortresses
of sin and Satan, and to build up the Walls of the New Jerusalem within us.
(5.) It Is a time to weep, and a time to laugh; to weep and bewail the years we
have spent in vanities, and yet rejoice that we have yet time left to escape
from them. (6.) It Is a time to mourn, and a time to dance; to manifest our
repentance by some outward expressions, and thereby dispose our selves every
day more and more for Easter Joys. (7.) It Is a time to cast away stones, and a
time to gather stones together; to remove every stone of offense* and as lively
stones to be built up, as St. Peter speaks, into a spiritual house. (8.) It Is a
time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing; to refrain from all
wanton and loose embraces, and pour out our selves wholly into the arms of our
Blessed Jesus, (9.) It Is a time to get, and a time to lose; to get Heaven by
violence, and lose Earth, our worldly goods ( so the worldling counts it) upon
Alms and Charities, to cast away Earth to purchase Heaven. (10.) It Is a time to
keep, and a time to cast away; to keep all good resolutions, and cast away the
bad ones. (11.) It Is a time to rent, and a time to sew; to rent and tear off
all ill habits, and to begin good ones. (12.) It Is a time to keep silence, and
a time to speak; to keep silence from bad words, all idle, ad wanton, and
scurrilous language, and give our selves to good discourses. (13.) It Is a time
of love, and a time of hate; to love God, and hate our selves; or love our
souls, and hate our sins. (14.) It Is in a word, a time of War, and a time of
Peace; to make war against all our ghostly enemies, the flesh, the Devil, and
the world; and reconcile our selves to God, our Neighbor, and the Church. To
all these purposes serves the time of Lent, for them 'twas instituted at first,
and for them it is continued; and can any Christian now think it should not be
accepted upon such a score as this? or are any days liker the day of salvation
than those that are spent thus? or it is our own fault if it be not: or is any
time more fit to be styled an accepted time, than this that is the very
comprehension of all times? a time every way fitted up for all the designs of
salvation? for calling public offenders to account, for putting notorious
sinners to open penance, for reconciling penitents, and receiving them again
into the Church, for promoting piety and virtue, for admitting Proselytes to
holy Baptism at the end of it, for preparing all of us for the Blessed
Eucharist all the way, by solemn prayers and preaching, more than at other
times, by fastings, and watchings, and holy retirements, and strict devotions,
and every way conforming us to the image of Christ, the fasting, and dying, and
rising with him, that we may so also be accepted by him? These were the
practices of Lent in the Primitive Church of Christ, wished and called for too
in Ours, in the Epistles, and Collects for it, and the Commination that begins
it. And by the afflictions, and necessities, and distresses, and labors, and
watchings, and fastings, and pureness, etc. that follow immediately upon the
Text (things all so answering to this time) I cannot say but the Text may stand
as an In diebus illis; a kind of prophetic designation at least of this time
of Lent, has caused the words I am sure to be so applied by many of the
Ancients, and made a part by us also of the Lent Office.

But this very time (so dilatory are we, and so ready to put off holy duties)
is yet perhaps too large, and these forty days too many to close us to our
work. Nay, the day has many hours, twelve, says Christ, to walk in: And if we
may guess from our ordinary guise and custom, we are like enough to defer all
to the last hour. I must set an accent therefore upon this (...), this Now.
Now, Lent or not; Now fast we or fast we not; Now is the very time we must
begin our reconcilement, look to our salvation; that though the name of Lent
should be distasteful (as too much it is) yet however we may not slip our time.
It Is the only sure part of time we have, the present, the only day of
salvation; for peradventure e're the next moment we are gone, and clearly cast
without the confines of it. Not only then to day, whilst it is called to day,
but even Now, whilst it is called Now, is the sure Now of salvation. To all
these Now Is, God here points us by an Ecce, Behold, now is the, etc.

IV. And indeed it is no more than needs, that he should point and set us out
some time even to accept our own salvation. Time and times pass over us, and we
think not of it: A piece of Land, a Wife, a yoke of Oxen are more thought upon
every day than that. We our selves do but little mind it (I am sure we live as
if we did not much:) The Church cannot get us to it with all the Fasts and
Feasts she sets us. Our Ministers the Ambassadors that are sent about it
persuade little with us; we had need of Prophet and Apostle too to say it over
and over again unto us: and it is so in the verse we have the Text in. The Lords
day it self, did it not bear his name upon it, would as easily vanish into a
neglect as all other Holy days. It Is only the opinion that he himself commanded
or appointed that, which keeps it up a while above the rest: whether so or no,
we dispute not now; It is not to the Text. These things I shall tell you, are
there without dispute; (1.) Set days and times are there, times set apart for
the promoting of our salvation, particular ones too, Ecce nunc tempus, nunc
dies. Times (2.) that are so set, are so far from hindering, that they are even
the very days of salvation. Times (3.) may so still be set by the Apostles, or
their successors; they have the power to design them, with St. Paul here, to
put the nunc upon them. Times (lastly) so set have an Ecce upon them; somewhat
more upon them than other days: are to be observed, to be accepted. Do we
therefore now accordingly, says my last particular, Behold them, and accept
them, Behold now is the, etc.

V. Behold, (1.) and take notice, such a time there is, such a day as we have
been speaking of; Christ himself was anointed to preach and publish it, St.
Luke iv. 19. the acceptable year of the Lord. The Apostles were sent with the
like Commission, ver. 19. of the former Chapter of this Epistle, and they
beseech us to take notice of it, ver. 20. whilst they pray us in Christ's stead
to be reconciled upon it.

Behold therefore (2.) and again behold it; that is, not only take notice of
it, (that may be perhaps a little by the by) but consider it. There Is a double
Ecce upon it, take notice of that, and sit down and lay it to your hearts, and
chew it over and and over; say thus within thy self, God has been gracious to
me from time to time, expected me long from day to day, proffering me grace,
proffering me salvation, even beseeching and entreating me to accept them, Lord
what is man, Lord what is man, that thou should be thus mindful of him? that
thou should so regard him? that thou should thus follow him from one end
of the year unto another, from one accepted time to another; from Feast to
Feast, from Fast to Fast, from Feast to Fast, from Christmas to Lent, from Lent
to Christmas, from Christmas to Lent again: from one Lent to another, from one
day to another; begging and beseeching him not to refuse his own salvation?
Well may it deserve Ecce upon Ecce, consideration upon consideration;
admiration too as well as consideration, and admiration upon admiration: ( Ecce
may pass for a note of both) to be beheld so long, till our eyes and thoughts
are not able to behold, or think any longer.

And (3.) to day to set upon it, this nunc to begin it in. Thou know not, O
man, thou know not how short thy time is, whether this day may not be thy
last, whether this Now, this very moment may not at least be the last time that
this salvation may be offered thee. Many are the times I confess I told you
that challenged right to be among the accepted ones; but remember I told you
the present was the only sure one. The Apostle surely thought so when he was so
earnest for it, Heb, iii, that within the compass of nine verses he three
several times at least puts them in mind to take care to day to hear Gods
voice, while to day it is, as if to morrow would not serve the turn, or the day
of salvation were gone at night; salvation gone, or we gone, and all gone with
us. Thousands there be in the world who now are, who within a few minutes will
be no more; and why may not thou be one of them? so much the sooner, in that
the so long contempt of Gods mercy may justly provoke him thus to fetch thee
off, and throw thee by. It Is not without reason that St. Paul doubles his
files, doubles the Nunc as well as the Ecce; calls as it were in have, Now,
Now, catch hold on it.

Indeed nor I, nor you can time it better. There are three special points of
time that meet here now, all extremely fit to persuade and move us to set upon
the work, and business of salvation, to apply our selves seriously to our
Repentance, and Gods Service. The particular time of Lent, this special day of
Confirmation: the general and continued day of that latter great salvation and
deliverance we still enjoy.

For that particular (1.) of Lent, you have heard already all the helps it has
for the furtherance of salvation, the fastings and watchings, the severities
and restraints, the austerities and rigours it requires, and brings toward it.
I only add, it is Palm Sunday within a day or two, a day fit to go out to meet
your Savior with Hosanna's, and bring salvation home, with Palms and Triumphs.
The holy week's at hand, a Week formerly of greater devotion and strictness
than any of the rest. Good Friday and Easter are a coming, the great
Anniversaries of our salvation; the fittest days the properest (...) to mind it
in, for all to do it. But for some,

For some of you, you who come to be confirmed: this very day is a day of
salvation in particular; wherein I hope you shall have reason to return, and
say what our blessed Master said to Zacheus, This day is salvation come unto
your houses. A day wherein by the Imposition of holy hands your Savior seems
sensibly to accept you, to receive you signally now after your first straglings
into his house and Church again, to receive you into his acquaintance, to
receive you into his favor, to receive you into his protection, to receive you
to his benediction, and send you away with it, with all the blessings of his
Holy Spirit, whch are by the outward ceremony of laying on the Bishops hands,
and pouring out his prayers poured down upon you: only remember you come hither
to be reconciled, and beg a blessing; that is your business. Remember that upon
your knees you beg it, and with your hearts desire it; and then upon your heads
be it. Be it will, I dare assure you; wisdom, and understanding, and counsel,
and ghostly strength, and knowledge, and godliness, and Gods holy fea^; all
these gifts and blessings of the Holy Spirit, as they are prayed for in it, so
will be upon you by it, to confirm you in the Faith, if you now resolve (as it
is required of you in the Preface) to stand to those promises you have already
made in holy Baptism, and steadfastly determine to be Christians hereafter as
you should be, to live and die in the obedience of Christ, to keep his Faith
entire, and his Commandments to the utmost of your power. Do so to day, and to
day then will be your accepted time, will be to you certainly a day of
salvation.

But (3.) the days of salvation, we have now almost three years enjoyed may
justly demand to be remembered too to spur us on to take a little more care how
we spend our time. I am afraid our late days have been as much consumed in
vanity, as our former years were spent in trouble. We have forgot our
deliverance, we live rather as if we had been delivered up (as they in the
Prophet excused themselves, Ier. vii. 10.) to do all abominations: we seem to
have quite lost the memory of our temporal salvation; and for our spiritual we
go on daily, as if we either cared not whether God would save us or no, or at
least we would venture it; or as if we said in plain English, let him save us
if he will, be it else at his own peril if he will not; or in short, as if we
bid him damn us if he durst. Yet never were there such days of salvation as we
have seen, never such deliverances as we have found; never were such
cast-aways, never men so rejected, so despised, so trampled on, so again
accepted on a sudden. Good God, was it for our righteousness, was it for our
merits, was it by our own strength, or wit, or power, we were delivered? alas!
Lord we had none of these: was it for our Oaths, or Perjuries, or Blasphemies,
or Sacriledges, or Rebellions, or Schisms, or Heresies, or Thefts, or
Profaneness, or Wickedness, or Villainies, that thou did deliver us, to our
Kingdom, and our Church, to our peace, and plenty, and prosperity, to all the
happy means of Piety and Religion, to all the beauties of holiness, and
opportunities of salvation? Enough indeed, O Lord, of these we could have
showed thee, but these were reasons why thou should not deliver us, It was
only, O Lord, because thou would have the day, and would save us, because
thou would. But for all that (my Brethren) take heed we sin not so again.
God has set us here a time, points it out to us with an ecce, and an ecce, that
we can no longer plead ignorance to miss it; we are already encompassed with
the day of salvation, and we are never like to see such a one again, if we
should lose this; let us abuse it then no longer, lest some horrible night,
e're long overtake us, some terrible judgment come upon us, and hurry us hence,
before we are aware, into the horrors and miseries of everlasting darkness.

4. By this time you understand this ecce is not to set us a gazing up into
Heaven, or observing days, and months, and times, and years, but to retrive our
months of vanity, as holy Job calls them, and fill the days we live with more
acceptable employments. For God having so late accepted our persons, and our
complaints, and prayers, and tears, or rather us indeed without them; and
desiring only of us that we would but accept and employ those mercies, and all
others of his to our own salvation; we should be me thinks the most
unreasonable of men to be so unkind to God, as either not to receive his grace,
or receive it still in vain. Worthy it is of better usage, for (...) here is
the same with (...), 1 Timothy iv. 9. Accepted here the same with that worthy of
all acceptance there. The very time, says our Apostle, is such, what then is
the salvation of it? that surely much more.

Accept we it therefore, and the time of it, with all readiness, with all
thankfulness, with all humility. Take we all the opportunities henceforward of
salvation, look every way about us, and slip none we can lay hold on. This
ecce, ecce, reiterated, is to rouse us, and to tell us that our ecce should
answer Gods. Ecce tempus, says he, ecce me, or nos, say we. Behold the time,
behold the day, says God. Behold us, say we, O God, our hearts are fixed, our
hearts are fixed, our hearts are ready, our hearts are ready to accept it. Ecce
adsum, says Abraham, behold here I am, Ecce venio, says Christ, Lo I come to do
thy will, O God. Behold thy servants are ready, says David, to do whatsoever my
Lord shall appoint. And behold, we are coming, we are here, we are ready with
thee according to thy heart; these are the returns or Eccho's we are to make
God back again.

Nor is it time to dally now. Time is a flitting Post, Day runs into night e're
we are aware: this Now is gone as soon as spoken, and no certainty beyond it,
and no salvation if not accepted e're we go hence. There are I know, that cry,
to day shall be as yesterday, and to morrow as to day; all things continue as
they were since our Fathers fell asleep. And this thing you call Religion, does
but delude us, and our Preachers do but fright us; this salvation they talk of
we know not what to make of it, if there be such a thing (indeed) the day is
long enough, we may think time enough of it many years hence. Such scoffers
indeed St. Peter told us we should meet with. But I hope better things of you
(my beloved) and such as accompany salvation. And I have told you nothing to
fright you from it. I have not scared you with the ancient rigor, nor
terrified you with primitive austerities. I have only showed you there is such
a thing as salvation to be thought of, and it is time to set about it. You
cannot fast, you will tell me, you are weak and sickly, it will destroy you. You
cannot watch, you say, it will undo you; you cannot give Alms, you have no
moneys: You cannot come so often to Prayers as others, your business hinders you.
But however, can you do nothing toward it, toward your own salvation? can you
not accept it when it is offered; can you not consider and think a little of it?
If you do but that, I shall not fear but you will do more. When you have
business you can spare a meal, now and then to follow it; and nothing's made
on it when you are at your sports, or play, you can sit up night after night,
and catch no hurt, for a new fashion, impertinence, or vanity, you can find
money, and time enough at any time, for any of these. I desire you would but do
as much, nay half as much (I am afraid I may say the tenth part so much) to
save your souls, spend but as much time seriously upon that as you do upon your
dressing, your visits, your vanities, (not to require any thing so much of you
upon that, as upon worldly business) and dare promise you salvation, you shall
be accepted at that day, at that day, when our short Fasts shall be turned into
eternal Feasts, our petty Lents consummate into the great Easters, when time it
self shall improve into eternity, this day advance into an everlasting
Sunshine, and salvation appear in all its glories.

Accept us now, O Lord, we pray thee, in this accepted time; save us we beseech
thee in this day of salvation, that we may one day come to that eternal one,
through him, in whom only we are accepted, thy beloved Son Christ Jesus. To
whom, with thee and thy Holy Spirit, be consecrated all our times, and days;
all our years, and months, and hours, and minutes from henceforward: to whom
also be all honor, and praise, all salvation and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON ON THE Second Sunday in Lent.
1 COR. ix. 27. But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest
that by any means when I have preached to others, I my self should be a
castaway.
DVrus sermo, A hard Text you will say, a whipping Sermon toward, that begins
with castigo, and ends with reprobus; that is so rough with us at the first as
to tell us of chastning, and keeping under the body, and so terrible at the
last as to scare us with being castaways unless we do it. And that too, cum
aliis praedicaverim, the greatest Preachers; the very Apostles themselves after
all their pains no surer of their Salvation than upon such severe conditions.
If the Preacher will needs be preaching this, tell us of disciplining our
bodies, talk to us of being castaways, Quis cum audire potest, who can endure
him, who can bear it?

Well, bear it how we can, think of it what we please, be the doctrine never so
unpleasing, it must be preached, and bear it we must; unless we know what to
preach better than St. Paul, or you what to hear or do better than that great
Apostle.

And it is but time for us to preach, for you to hear it. Men daily fool away
their souls by their tenderness to their bodies, and their salvation by the
certainties they pretend of it. It Is time to warn them of it.

And this Time as fit a time, as any can be, to do it in, the holy time of
Lent. A time set apart by the holy Church to chasten and subdue the body in.
And the opportunity is fallen into my hand, among the rest, and vae mihi si
non, I cannot excuse my self if I do not take it, if I neglect the occasion to
do my utmost to keep my self and you from being castawaies.

I know people do not love to hear on it, and the Preacher shall get little by
it but hard censures, be (...), as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. xiii. 5. be half
a Reprobate, a Castaway himself for preaching it. But seem we what you please,
be it how it will, I venture on it upon St. Paul's account; and both you and I,
as high as we bear our selves upon our assurances that we are the Elect, if we
will be sure indeed not to be Reprobates, must be content to hear of it lest we
be so.

It Is a plain Text, the words very plain, need no Philip to expound them.
Nothing could be said, nothing can be plainer. For he that says, I keep under
my body, and bring it into subjection, lest I should be a Castaway says nor
more nor less, than unless I do so, so I shall be, for all my great flourish
and appearance, for all my other great performances.

And it being an Apostle without exception, ver. 1. 2. one who knew his Office,
and performed it beyond all that was required of him, ver. 14. 18. knew his
Power, and how to stand upon it, ver. 4. 5. understood well his Christian
Liberty, what he might do, or leave undone, ver. 10. who notwithstanding all
his power, and liberty, and privilege, and performances falls here to
discipline his body, lest after all he should prove a castaway, fall short of
his Crown and lose the reward of all his labors. If he can find no other means
to avoid the one but by the doing of the other. (...), says St. Chrysostom,
what can we say for our selves? Say, I hope, it concerns us, and we will look
to it, will set about it. Better Authority we need not than the Churches, as
for the time. Better example we cannot desire than St. Paul's, as to the thing;
and better Motive I know none to persuade either, than (...), that we may save
our selves from being Castaways.

I shall not obscure the business by any nice Division of the words. Two
general Parts shall serve the turn.

I. St. Paul's wholesome Discipline for his body; And, II. His godly fear, for
body and soul. Or
I. His Disciplining and strict ordering of his body; And

II. The Ground and Reason why he does so.

The first is in those words, I keep under my body, and bring it into
subjection. The second in those, Lest by any means when I have preached unto
others I my self should be a Castaway.

In the first we have St. Paul, his Body, and the Work he makes with it, or the
Discipline he uses toward it. Three Points to be considered.

In the second we have three more to make up the Reason, why he does so use it.
Because (1.) he would not be a Castaway, (...), lest I be. Because (2.) there
may be many ways to make us so, lest by any means I be so, supposes by many I
may be so. Because (3.) there is no avoiding being so without it, all our
preaching and doing will not do without it. (1.) Lest I be a Castaway. (2.)
Lest by any means I be a Castaway. (3.) Lest when I have preached to others I
should be a Castaway notwithstanding.

I could give you the Parts (perhaps) in nearer terms applied to the Metaphor
coucht in the words. But the Text is plain, and the Parts I would leave plain,
and I would be plain and understood. Yet under whatever notions I should give
you them; This is, and would be still the sum of all; that the keeping under
the body, and the bringing it into subjection is a business to be mainly looked
to, looked to by the best and greatest, the very St. Paul's among us; and that
under no less penalty and danger than being Castaways if we neglect it; our
highest privileges our greatest services, our most Christian Liberties no plea
at all to exempt us from it.

I go on now with the Parts in order, and begin with the first general* St.
Paul's disciplining and ordering of his body.

Where we have these three particulars to treat on; Him, his body, and his
ordering it. But I begin with Him first; for so I find him set, set here before
his body. I would we would all set our selves so too; set our selves above our
bodies, value and prize our souls (for they chiefly are our selves) before our
bodies; at least our selves, that is, the good of the whole man before the
pleasing of that mortal part, we would not then make our selves such slaves and
drudges to it, as we do; face and brave damnation for a petty lust, for a
little meat or drink, for the satisfaction of the belly.

Indeed, could we pretend to know how to order our selves better than St. Paul,
I might have spared this Note, but all the pretenses we have against the strict
ordering of the body, that St. Paul here takes up, are all answered in his
person, his very doing it, if we well consider it. For all the arguments or
pretenses we have against it, are either (1.) our business we cannot tend it;
or (2.) our weakness, we cannot bear it; or (3.) our holiness, we do not need
it; or (4.) our Christian Liberty, it is against it; or (5.) other things will
do as well, we may well spare it; or (6.) a less matter will serve the turn, we
may be saved without it. But all these shall I show you might St. Paul plead,
yet it seems all would not serve to excuse him from this hard dealing with his
body we read of in the Text.

1. We plead our weakness, we are not able to use this rigor. But I, this I,
St. Paul was as full of weaknesses as any of us, and yet he could: Who is weak,
says he, and I am not weak? 2 Cor. xi. 29. so weak sometimes, that it cast him
into a trembling, much trembling, 1. Cor. ii. 3. And St. Paul took this way
rather to cure it, than to increase it. And indeed, those very weaknesses we
complain of rise from the pampering our bodies, are cured by our strict
ordering them. Nay, those impatiences, and peevishnesses, and nicenesses, and
sinful infirmities, which grow so strong upon us in our sicknesses would not
do so, were the body kept but a little under when we were well.

But (2.) though we could bear it, you will say, we cannot tend it. Not tend it?
Why St. Paul upon whom the care of all the Churches lay, who was in
continual journeyings and labors for it, 2 Cor. xi. 23, 25, 28. full of
vveariness and painfulness about it, was yet in watchings often, in fastings
often, ver. 27. of the same Chapter, keeping under his body, still, for all his
business, notvvithstanding all his other business forgets not this.

Will you say now (3.) you do not need it, you are holy enough without it,
you are Gods Elect, and do not want it, want no such poor beggarly means to
help you out? What, are you holier than St. Paul? What, are you better than he,
that dares avovv he was not inferior to the chiefest Apostles? Have you been
in more Heavens than he? Heard more Revelations than he? Have you more
assurances of your Election or Salvation than he that was arrived at that
height to be persuaded that neither death, nor life, nor principalities, nor
powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any
other creature could separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus? Romans
viii. 38, 39. are you better than he? If you be not, you had best take the
course he did. If you be, you had best yet take his course to keep you so.

Yea, but (4.) our Christian Liberty is entrencht on by it. We must not by this
very same Apostles advice and counsel be subject to those Ordinances of touch
not, taste not, handle not, Col. ii. 20, 21. and yet those things seem to make
much for the neglecting of the body, and the not satisfying of the flesh, ver.
23. but that we must not be brought under the power of any, 1 Cor. vi. 11. No,
but the body must be brought under ours, for all that, says our Apostle. Says
he so? He says no more than he does, he does so too. And yet he knew his power
and Christian Liberty to the full, had power to eat and drink, he tells us, ver.
4. and to do neither; power to work, and not to work, to forbear working, ver.
6. was free, ver. 19. yet from this it seems he is not free, unless he will
fight as one that beats the air in the verse before the Text. He knows no
liberty that can allow the liberty to his body not to be kept under and
subjected unless it please.

Nor (5.) does he (whatever we think of it) think he may spare it upon the
account of other virtues, as if it were enough to be diligent at our prayers,
to be frequent at Sermons, to be orderly in our Families, to be just in our
dealings, to be honest in our Callings, to be charitable to the poor, to be
friendly to our neighbors, or the like; and let this subduing the body go
whither it will. St. Paul cannot be suspected to have been wanting in any of
these, yet he must needs add this grace also it seems to make all sure; keep
the body under, that he may so keep those graces safe.

For a less matter, lastly, will not serve the turn, St. Paul's labors, and
journeys, and perils, and stripes, and prisons, and deaths, as great and as
often as they were, must have this also added to them; the flesh must have some
thorn or other to keep it in subjection; If God send it not, if the devil, by
his permission, buffet not the flesh, we must do it our selves, lest we be
exalted above measure; those very performances which we think we have most
reason to glory in, will but puff us up, and cast us sheer away, if we preserve
not our body in that lowliness and subjection that we should.

So now, if we think good to guide our selves by St. Paul's authority and
example, there is none so weak, none so busily employed, none so holy, that can
exempt himself; no Christian Liberty, no other graces, (though never so many)
nor any other performances that can be pleaded against it. All sorts of persons
are included in St. Paul's, and in this I all objections against it are
sufficiently answered, and we all included and obliged, for if such a one as
the glorious St. Paul could find no exemption, I know not what Christian can
expect it. You Will confess it perhaps, when you have confidered what this body is
you are to deal with, the next Particular we are to handle.

And by the body here may be understood either the flesh it self, or the
fleshliness of it; the body it self, or the sinful passions and affections
rising in it. To be sure, take we both.

And indeed, we can neither be sure nor safe, if (1.) the passions and
affections be not kept within their bounds, if we suffer our appetites to rule
us, our angers to transport us, our desires to harrow us, our fears to distract
us, our hopes to abuse us, or any other of that impetuous crew to over-bear us.
They must all be made underlings, kept within rule and compass, or we are lost.

Nay, and to keep them so, this very bulk of flesh (2.) must be kept so too:
for keep this but high it is impossible to keep them low. Stuff the body with
meat and drink, let it lodge soft, and lie long, let it have the fill of ease
and pleasure, and facile despumat, it froths into lust, it boils into anger, it
swells into pride, it rises into rebellion, it leaks into looseness, it mosses
into idleness, it fills the brain with fogs, the heart with filth, the liver
with wanton heats, the mouth with unsavory language, and all the members with
disorder and confusion. Do but take away the meat, and let it fast a while;
take it from the bed, and let it watch another while; take it from ease and
tenderness, and set it to some hard and unpleasing work; let it feel a little
cold, a little labor, a little course and rough usage for a time, and you
shall see how humble it will grow, how much under you shall have it, how
orderly it will be. It will do any thing you would have it.

But to make all sure, every part must have its share; the eye must be watched,
the heart kept under guard, the tongue bridled, the palate curbed, the ears
fenced, the hands restrained, the knees bowed down, the feet kept in, and all
the members under, for they are all but one body, 1 Cor. xii. 14. this body
that is to be brought into subjection, make up but that Iumentum animae, that
beast that carries the soul, and is therefore to be rid, like a beast, with bit
and bridle, with whip and rod, lest it fall upon us, or fall with us and cast
us.

Be St. Paul's body, (...), never so good, so orderly, so chaste a body, so it
seems it must be used, nay, such it cannot be unless it be so used. Let no man
be so bold to think his body in better order than St. Paul's, and yet here is a
(...), for his, a kind of fear of some miscarriage, a fear some evil may rise
from it.

Yea, even that very body of his (...), which had been at so many posts,
endured so many lashes already, been in so many prisons, so many perils, so
many storms, and colds, and shipwracks, so many necessities and infirmities;
this very (...), this very body, as much as it has suffered, and as much as it
has done, I must yet keep under, says St. Paul, still more and more keep under
for all that. My body, says he, and mine, say I, and mine, must every one say,
though we were all St. Paul's, as holy as he, had done and suffered as much as
he.

But what yet must it suffer more? Yes more; for as near us as it is, it is our
adversary, and the worse the nearer. There are nothing but daily contentions
and jars between us, this I and this body are at continual odds; this I
delights in the Law of God, and would do good, Romans vii. 19, 22. this body,
this flesh, there is no good dwells in it, ver. 18. this is for one thing, and
that is for another; this for good, and that for evil; and the fewd often grows so
high; that this poor I is fain to cry out miserably sometimes: O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death, this body that is
like to kill me? And St. Paul brings in here himself and his own body
(whosoever it was he brought in there) as two combatants a wrestling and the
words here applied to them are Agonistical, drawn from the measure and fashion
of combatants and wrastlers, and now we are coming next to treat of them. But I
keep under my body, and bring it into subjection.

Now the business stands thus. Our Apostle being undervalued by the false
Apostles has been vindicating his privilege, his power, and his labors all
along the Chapter till ver. 24. Yet lest for all his privilege, power, and
pains he should yet lose his reward and himself, his soul, and his Crown,
heaven and glory at the last, by some miscarriage of his body, he betakes
himself to the course of such as strive for other Crowns, orders his body as
they do theirs, denies it the full liberties it would take, the fullest
liberties he might lawfully give it too, deals with it as his adversary, does
what he can to get it under his command, beats and buffets it, and bears hard
upon it till he has brought it fully into subjection.

Shall I show you how he does it? I will not stir out of the Text to do it. The
words in one sense or other, after one reading or other will do it for me. Two
words there are here, (...), or (...), and (...), upon which the business
hangs, keeping under and bringing into subjection.

(...) comes from (...) blew marks under the eyes, and signifies primarily to
give blew eyes, as those do one another who go to cuffs. (...), as others read
it, from (...), or (...) in the Dorick Dialect, is stringendo premo, crucio,
onero, stricta manu teneo, is to suppress, or press and streighten, vex,
torment, or burden, or carry a straight hand over. Both these go to the
keeping under of the body. Some (...) we must give it, some marks by which we
may know it again, by which it may remember us, the marks of the Lord Jesus;
such St. Paul bare about him in his body, Gal. vi. 17. And a straight hand over
it we must keep, give it but hard usage, if we intend to keep it under.

From this various writing and rendering of the word, three several ways we have
pointed to us to keep the body under, Watching, Fasting, and hard usage.
Nothing (1.) commonly makes us look blewer under ^he eyes, sets those (...)
upon us, then watching, that does properly (...). Nothing (2.) more afflicts
and brings down the body, brings us (...), as the combatant strives to do his
adversary, more suppresses the heat and insurrection of it than fasting does.
Nothing (3.) more streightens, vexes, and torments it, does more (...) than the
holding a strict hand over it, and using it to hardships and severities,
crossing and thwarting the rebellious and insolent humors of it. These the
means the Apostle uses to keep his body under. Watching first.

And truly I put it first because I find it so in the Apostles practice, in
watchings, in fastings, 2 Cor. vi. 5. Nay, and in watchings often, in fastings
often, 2. Cor. xi. 27. And in the first and best times, when Christianity was
in its glory, when men were Christians (for I know not what to call us now) it
was much in use. So much in use, that St. Chrysostom tell us, they made their
little Children rise at midnight, set them up in their beds, when they had new
left their Cradles, there upon their knees to say their prayers. The holy
watches were in those times so notable, that the very Heathens took notice of
their Hymnos antelucanos, their night Offices; and not only their early Hymns
before the light broke in, but whilst the night it self was in full course. Nor
was it a piece of superstition, or a Religion of their own inventing. They
thought they had Christ's command to settle it, St. Mat. xxiv. 22. where he
commands his Disciples themselves to watch; and where he complains of them that
they did not, St. Mat. xxvi. 40. Could ye not watch with me one hour? There is
no evasion left to fancy it only a spiritual watchfulness commanded there, for
there it is plainly bodily. And the reason rendered for it being lest they enter
into temptation, must needs suppose it necessary still to be continued so long
as the danger of temptation shall continue, which will be as long as the flesh
continues, or any of us continue in the flesh. Nor did this watching begin with
Christians. We find the Law of Nature had taught it Jacob, ere Law or Gospel
came. He wrestles all night with the Angel until the breaking of the day, Genesis
xxxii. 24. and off he comes not without some marks, though not under the eye,
yet under the thigh, ver. 25. and he halts for it, ver. 31. yet a blessing he
got by it, a new name of honor, the name of Israel, and the glory of
prevailing with God and men, Ver. 28. Go we on, and we shall find a course of
watchers, such as by night stand in the house of the Lord, Psalm. cxxxiv. 2. We
shall find David, himself too, at his night watches, Psalm. cxix. 48. often at
them. Nay, even in his very bed, watching too, it seems, when we find him
washing that, and watering his Couch with tears. St. Paul and Silas we hear
ofter that at their Prayers and Praises, whilst the dull heaviness of the night
had lapt the rest of the World in sleep and silence, Acts xvi. 25. Yea, Christ
himself whose holy body needed no such correctives we have many times at his
mountain-devotion watching in them, St. Mar. i. 35. St. Mat. xiv. 23. St Luke
vi. 12. St. Luke xxi. 37. And all to give us good example, who so much need it,
that we would put a penance upon our wandering eyes, watch this wild beast our
body, (for it is no other) and make it tame (so they do wild beasts when they
intend to tame them) and thereby frame it into a posture fit to entertain the
Master at his coming; who can never come so much to our joy and comfort, as if
he come and find us watching, find us thus marked in the eye with his own mark;
Blessed are those servants whom the Lord when he comes shall find watching,
St. Luke xii. 37.

But is there not (2.) a blessing belongs to fasting too? Sure, they are
blessed that are not Castavvays, and fasting is a way to keep us that we be
not such; if it but keep the body under, the soul will surely soar to heaven
and dvvell among the blessed; and it is the second means we have here pointed
to us to keep that under by. It was one of St. Paul's in the forecited places,
2 Cor. vi. 5. and xi. 27. so proper to the purpose, that it is called an
humbling of it, 1 Kings xxi. 29. an humbling of the very soul too, Hsal. xxxv.
13. a chastening of our selves, Psalm. lxix. 10. well answering to the Vulgar
Latin castigo here. Indeed, turned it was, the Prophet says, to his reproof,
men laughed at him for it (as they do still commonly at those that do so) yea,
and the drunkards made Songs upon him for it. Yet do it he would for all that,
he would not be jeered out of his Religion by any of the Wits, as they call
them, any of the Pot-companions, or Trenchermen of them all. And I know not
why Christians, who are to pass through ill report as well as good, 2 Cor.
vi. 8. should be so sensible of the scoffs of a profane buffoon as to be jeered
out of their devotion by a little scurrilous froathy language any more than he.
We have (1.) our Masters example for our fasting, even for the Fast we are in,
(if we have leave with the Ancients to dravv it thence) for forty days
together, St. Mat. iv. 2. We have (2.) his Precept and Prediction for fasting
too, when he should be gone, St. Mar. ii. 20. We have (3.) his order and
direction how to do it, St. Mat. vi. 18. When you fast do thus and thus. We
have (4.) St. Paul telling us of a giving our selves to it, making a business
of it, 1 Cor. vii. 5. We have (5.) all the Ages of our Christianity severely
using it. We have (6.) here an excellent end of it, the keeping under of the
body, and indeed that I need not prove; it is the fault we find with it, that it
weakens the knees, and dries up the flesh, Psalm. cix. 23. that it agrees not
with our bodies. No more it should, that is the virtue of it. And it being of
that virtue, and we having so good Example, so plain Precept, so sober
direction, so strict practice, so long custom, to commend us to it; I know not
where it sticks, that it is performed no better.

Indeed, were it for the destruction of the flesh, though that the Spirit might
be saved by it, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor. v. 5. we might peradventure
boggle at it; but it being only for the keeping it under rule and order, that
the spirit may be saved, methinks we should not stick at it, at least not
stickle against it. There are but two kinds of Fasts in Scripture, a total, and
a partial; a total from all kind of meat till even, and that was David's, 2 Samuel
iii. 23, a partial from some kinds only, and that was Daniels, Dan. x. 3. from
Flesh, and Wine, and pleasant Meats. For his three weeks mourning there, ver.
2. was his so long fasting, according to tht Hebrew manner of expression,
Lugebam for jejunabam: Neither of these so grievous, especially if but for a
time; the latter of them mild and gentle. And if that will do it, if our
abstinence from Flesh, and Wine, and Delicates will keep under the body, the
Church (it may be) by reason of our weakness, will be content with that.
Somewhat, sure, it will do toward it, and somewhat however should be done in
the point. We should do all of us as much as we can, will do so too, if we
think Saint Paul worth following, the soul worth saving, the being castaways
worth preventing.

But besides this watching, and this fasting, there is a third way to keep our
bodies under, by using them to some hardships and restraints. Will you see St.
Paul's way, how he used his? you may in the forementioned places, 2 Cor. vi. 4,
5, 6, 8. and xi. 26, 27. He brings his up to labor and travel,, to weariness
and painfulness, to hunger and thirst, to cold and nakedness. And when we feel
this beast of ours begin to kick, or lest it do so, we must take his way, keep
it down with labor and employment, lash it hard, tire it out, and weary it
with some busy work, make it sometimes feel cold, and pain (we will the better
understand what the poor man feels, and the easier pity him) keep it sometimes
at least hungry and a dry; clothe it with course geer, break its sleeps, abate
its provision, displease it in the diet, debar it sweet odours and perfumes,
deprive it of the fine dresses, bring it out now and then in a mean garb, and
fashion, and let it not continually please it self, but be forced sometimes to
sad and displeasing objects, and to dwell upon them; to see, or feel, or do
something or other that will afflict, and grieve it; that it may learn to know
it self, and to submit. This is a third way, or rather many ways together, a
part of the business of those ancient (...), those severely Religious men of
old, to bring it under. But when under it is, we must have a care also to keep
it so, in subjection; an eye to (...) as well as to (...), to lead it away as
the conquering combatant does his conquered Enemy for his Servant, or his
Captive; for that is the true meaning of the word, and the second point of St.
Paul's Discipline.

Now two ways there are to bring the body into this full subjection, after that
by fasting, and watching, and some severities we have first got it down, and
kept it under for a while. The one is Temperance, the other is Exercise: both
used by those that strive for masteries, and taken up from them here by St.
Paul in his spiritual combat with his body.

1. They that strive for masteries are temperate in all things, ver. 25. And he
that will have the full mastery of his body, must possess it continually in
temperance and sobriety, must (...), get all into his power, and resolve not to
be mastered either by a straggling eye, or a liquorish palate, or an unruly
tongue, or a fond desire, or a foolish fashion, or an impetuous passion, or any
importunate temptation, but make his body to foot and lackey it after his soul,
and think it glory enough, that it may be allowed to serve it.

But to make it a good servant, we are also (2.) to exercise it; exercise it to
do, and exercise it to suffer. That can neither (...), do like a servant; nor
we (...) use it like one else, that cannot be a servant, or we masters else.

Exercise it then (1.) we must to do what we would have it; accustom it to
obey, inure it to our commands, habituate it to Gods service, set it to good
works, and ply it hard; tie it to order, and bind it to rule; bring it upon the
knees, employ it continually in some acts of virtue, piety, or obedience, and
let it never be idle.

Exercise it (2.) to suffer too. Use it to bear affronts, to put up
indignities, to be crossed in the desires, to be thwarted in the ways, to be
contraried in the sayings, to be disobeyed in the commands, to be diverted from
the bent, to be mortified in the lusts, to be moderated in the passions, to be
straightened in the liberties; to be delayed, put off, contradicted in all the
motions of it: a way St. Paul takes pleasure in, 2 Cor. xii. 10. This is the
way to subject the body thoroughly, another part of the (...) or (...) of the
holy men of the first ages, of the way they took to bring their bodies into
order, and their souls to salvation; a way for us to lead the body captive to
our will, to make an excellent servant of it too, that shall both help us up,
and accompany us to heaven. For it is not to destroy it, it is not to trample on
it, it is not to tyrannize, and triumph over it, but to bring it thither; not to
hasten it to its Grave, but to conduct it into the seats of rest, that we use
it thus; that we preach to you to watch, and fast, and be severe upon your
selves, to be temperate in all things, and keep all this ado, it is only that,
nor that, nor we; neither soul, nor body prove castaways at last. That Is my
second general, the ground and reason of keeping under the body, and bringing
it into subjection. Lest when I have preached, etc.

II. And a good reason too it is. Take the word (...) castaway, how you will,
it is so.

Take it first for such in the sight of men: we would do much, rather than be
cast in their conceits. A good report is worth all the pains we speak of,
necessary too to those that are to be employed in holy business, Acts vi. 3. 1 Timothy iii. 7. they should be men of good report: Certainly, our own doctrines
should not reprove us, or we think it hard to do our selves what we require of
others,; it is a point of honor we may be allowed to stand on, not to be
out-gone and cast by our own Scholars. And I must confess watching and fasting
are two of the ways by which Saint Paul approves himself to be a Minister of
God, 2 Cor. vi. 4. But this falls short of the Apostles meaning.

Take it (2.) for a castaway in the sight of God, for a reprobate, a wicked, an
extremely wicked person: that is a second sense, and nearer his; the sense of
(...), Romans i. 28. Tit. i. 16. 2 Timothy iii. 8. and other places. And it is a
thing we must take heed of: for if the body be not kept under, but let have its
swing, wicked enough we may be quickly, and lest we grow so by it, a good
reason, I think, to deal strictly and severely with it.

To be a castaway (3.) from the sight of God, that is a third acception of the
word, and his fear indeed, to fall short of that incorruptible Crown he strives
for, ver. 25. This best answers to the Metaphor he is in, of running, and
fighting, and wrestling for the mastery, where it is not only reasonable, but
necessary to take care that the body be in order, if we look to gain the prize:
and we may well fear to lose all if it be not.

But what? can this great Saint after he has been caught up into the third
Heaven, fear any thing? Can he be so poor spirited as to doubt of his
salvation, and fear to be a castaway? It seems, here he was, and that after
that time he had been there; as may appear by the time of writing the Epistles.
He did not indeed much fear the (...), 2 Cor. xiii. 7. to be reprobated by men,
to be cast in their opinion, but for the (...) indeed, to be so by God, to be a
castaway in his, lest his body should cast him into sin, and his sin cast him
of his reward, and he be cast so from the face of God, that fear he does. And
if it be possible, after we are once enlightened, and have tasted of the
heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Ghost, and have tasted
of the good word of God, and of the [very] powers of the world to come, after
that to fall away, (and we find it is so, Heb. vi. 4, 5, 6.) It Is time for all
of us to fear, to pass the whole time of our sojourning here in it too, as St.
Peter counsels us, 1 Pet. i. 17. and good reason we have to do all we can
possible to prevent it; not spare our bodies, if we can so save our souls from
being castaways.

2. Especially having (...) next, so much ground to fear it; seeing there are
many ways to be so, for lest by any may suppose many, by some or other of which
we may miscarry. Shall I name you some, and not wholly out of the Text, (1.)
The frailties of our nature. It Is a body here we have to deal with: The
multitude (2.) of temptations; some things there are supposed too here, may
some way or other get the power over it, if we look not to it. The uncertainty
(3.) of the strongest titles that we hold by, this very I in the Text it seems
a very Apostle may be a castaway, else why does he set this lest upon it. The
very manner of the working (4.) of Grace it self, that this I must give its
help, any other way it will not do it. Our bodies we may fear they want keeping
under, temptations we may fear, they may (...), lead them away. This very I, as
great as he is, may be led away too, and overcome. And the grace of God it
seems will not hinder it but by the ordinary way of our working with it. All
which may tell us, St. Paul fears all (2.) upon good ground, fears not being
cast away for nothing, fears these very grounds we are to speak of. And,

The frailty of nature, that (1.) may well be feared: so much flesh there is
about us, and so little spirit; a weak, and yet unruly body; where there are so
many natural weaknesses, so many acquired infirmities, so many necessities hang
upon us, so much dullness, so much perverseness, so match disorder in all our
powers, that I cannot but wonder that any should be so foolhardy as not to
fear, where there are so many in-lets, and out-lets, so many windows and
posterns, so many gaps and breaches, and easy batterings, and easier
underminings, to let in the enemy.

But (2.) bring up now the forces that are laid against it, the strong
enticements and allurements, the hopes, the fears, the desires, the joys, the
sorrows that on this or that side do continually assault it; the innumerable
occasions, the infinite opportunities that are against it: and who is it that
dares think to withstand them all.

Add thirdly the strongest titles, that we hold by, and we have yet a cause to
fear; Saints, and Servants, and Sons, and Heirs, and being sealed to the day of
Redemption, these and all those happy names and interests be^ides we read of,
cannot put us above fear. Servants may be turned away, Saints may turn sinners;
Sons may be cast off; Heirs may be disinherited, Seals may be broken up, Elect
we are no further than good works, created, ordained, predestined no further,
Ephesians. i. 4, 5. and ii. 10* and good works I am sure have uncertainty enough,
Verebar omnia, Job feared the best of them, nothing will more assure us than
this godly fear.

Nay, add we lastly the very way of the working of Gods Graces in us, and yet
we have reason to fear still. We are told indeed by some, his Grace is
irresistible; but God knows we find it otherwise. Why does S. Stephen tell us
else that we resist the Holy Ghost, Acts vii. 51. or St. Paul, wish us not to
quench the Spirit, if we cannot do it, 1 Thessalonians. v. 19. Do it alas? we do too
often. One there was that said he should never be removed; God of his goodness
had made his Hill so strong: Yet removed he quickly was, fell, and fell foully
too; and had he not wept and chastned himself to purpose, had lain low enough
for ever, for all his Hill so strong. Nemo tanta est firmitate suffultus, ut de
stabilitate sua debeat esse securus, says St. Aug. Ser. 72. Who can look upon
Noah's Drunkenness, Lots Drunkenness and Incest, David's Adultery and Murder,
Solomon's Carnality and Idolatry; Adam's fall in Paradise, and the Angels in
Heaven it self, and not fear his own, poor, easy, brittle earth. We may well
fear being castaways upon such grounds as these, and fear the very grounds that
thus sink under us; not only the sad upshot at the last, but the means that
bring us to it, all the way.

3. But besides, if there be no way of keeping from being castaways without
this keeping under of the body, if all our preaching, and our great doings will
not do without it, we have a third reason to fear our selves, and set seriously
about it. For if St. Paul here (3.) not only fear his being a castaway, and
fear that by some means he may come to it, but fear also that all means besides
this harshness toward his body will scarcely hinder it; if after all his
preaching from Jerusalem round about unto Ilyricum, his preaching gratis too,
after all his labors, all his sufferings, all his persecutions upon the Gospel
score, he fears yet that the best he has done else, the best he can do else
will not save him for all his haste: where are our great assurers of themselves
and others of Heaven and Glory? Why? it is not our preaching, it is not our
praying, it is not our prophesying, it is not our doing wonders neither, even to
the casting out of Devils that can save us from being cast out our selves at
last, with a Non novi, the sad sentence of I never knew you depart from me, St.
Mat. vii. 23. Indeed we have so little reason to be confident that we shall not
be castaways, by reason of any of those performances, that our very preaching,
or prophesying, as we call it, nay, and praying too, may bring us to it. We may
preach Rebellion, Heresies, and Schisms, nay, and pray them too (some have done
so long) and so preach away both our selves and others. Nay, though we preach
others into Heaven, we may preach out our selves. We may preach freely, and
preach constantly, and preach long, and preach sound doctrine too; preach with
the tongues of Angels, and yet prove Devils at the last, grow proud upon it;
light others up to Heaven, and yet go down to Hell our selves; shine gloriously
for a blaze, and go out in a stench, have our (...) here, and be (...) for
ever, have our reward and glory here, and be cast away for ever.

And now, if the strongest Cedars shake, what shall the Reeds do? If the first
preachers of the Gospel, the grand Apostles, those Stars and Angels of the
Churches stand so trembling, and must deal so roughly with their bodies, for
fear of being castaways, who is it can dream himself exempt? unless ye mortify
the deeds of the body, ('it is to all of us it is said so, Romans viii. 13.) there
is no living. If we keep not ous bodies low, they will keep us low, if we bring
not them into subjection, they will bring us into slavery; they will cast us
away, if we cast away too much upon them. There Is no way to cure our fears, to
confirm our hopes, to help our weaknesses, to beat back temptations, to
establish our titles, and rights to Heaven, to make Gods Grace effectual upon
us; to sanctify our prayers, and preachings, and all our labors, to the glory
of a reward, but to watch, and fast, and deal severely with our bodies; to
study temperance, and exercise our selves to do and suffer hard things. It Is no
will worship, surely, (as men brand it) that is pressed and practiced here under
so great danger of being castaways if we do it not: it is not sure. Nor is it
so hard a business as men would seem to make it. None of all the ways I told
you of for the subduing of the body, are so at all. We can sit up whole nights
to Game, to Dance, to Revel, to see a Mask or play; make nothing of it. We can
rise up early, and go to bed late for months together, for our gain, and
profit, and be never the worse: We can fast whole days together, and nor eat,
nor drink, when we are eager upon our business, or sport, and never feel it. We
can endure pain, and cold, and tendance, affronts, and injuries, and neglects,
slightings and reproaches too, to compass a little honor and preferment, and
not say a word. We can be temperate too when we please, for some ends and
purposes. Only the souls business is not worth the while; whether castaways or
no is not considerable; all is too much on that account: Molehills are
Mountains, and there is a Lion always in the way: watching will kill us,
fasting will destroy us, any kind of strictness will impair us; temperance it
self will pine us into Skeletons; every good exercise takes up too much time,
every petty thing that crosses but the way is an inconquerable difficulty, a
Lion, when the souls business is to be gone about. Hear but St. Austin chide
you, as once he chid himself, Tu non poteris quod istae, and istae, and istae,
What, says he, can not thou do that which so many weak and tender Women, so
many little Children, so many of all sexes, ages, and conditions, have so often
done before thee, and thought so easy? It Is a shame to say so.

But suppose thou art infirm indeed, and can not do so much as perhaps thou
would do else, can thou do nothing? If thou can not watch, can thou
not fast sometimes? If thou can not fast, can thou not endure a little
hunger, thirst, or cold, or pains for Heaven neither? If all these seem hard,
can thou not be temperate neither? can thou not bring thy self to it by
degrees, by exercise, and practice neither? Or if thou can not watch a night,
can thou not watch an hour, do somewhat toward it? if thou can not fast
from all kind of meat, can thou not abstain at least from some; from dainties
and delicates? If not often, can thou not at such a time as this, when all
Christians ever used to do it? Sure he that cannot fast a meal, may yet feed
upon courser fare: He that cannot do any of these long, may do all of them some
time; may exercise himself in a little time to the hardest of them all. Let Us
then however set a doing somewhat: for God's sake let us be Christians, a little
at the least; let us do somewhat that is a kin to the ancient piety, watch, or
fast, or somewhat, in some degree or other; that the world may believe that we
are Christians. Why should we be castaways from the profession too?

But indeed, he that will do nothing for fear of being a castaway in the Text,
I despair he should do any thing upon any other concernment. He that ualues his
body above his soul, his ease and pleasure above Heaven, his temporal
satisfaction above his eternal salvation; there is no more to be said of him,
if St. Paul say true, he must be a castaway.

I am too long, but I must not end with so sad a word. All that has been said
or preached, is not that any should be, but that not any should be castaway,
only lest they should: It Is in our own hands to hinder it. It Is but a few hours
taken from our sleep, and employedon Heaven. It Is but a little taken from our
full Dishes, and groaning Tables, and gorged Stomachs, taken from our own
bodies, and bestowed upon the poors. It Is but a little strictness to our bodies
that sets all strait. It Is but the keeping the body under, and the soul in awe,
and all is safe. The keeping down the body now, shall raise up both soul and
body at the last; the holy fear of being castaways shall keep you safe from
ever being so; the bringing the body into subjection here, shall bring it
hereafter into a Kingdom, where all our fears shall be turned into joys, our
feasting into fasting, our watching into rest, all our hardships into ease and
pleasure, and these very corruptible bodies here kept under, shall be there
exalted into incorruption, where we shall meet the full reward of all our pains
and labors; we of our preaching, you of your hearing; all of us of all the
good works we have done, all the sufferings that we shall suffer; the
everlasting Crown of Righteousness, the incorruptible and eternal Crown of
Glory.

Which he give us at that day, who expects such things from us in these days,
to approve us at that, God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. To whom be all
glory, etc.

A SERMON ON THE Third Sunday in Lent.
ROMANS viii. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? For the end of those things is death.
THose things were sins and sinful courses: These words an Argument to dissuade
from them. St. Paul's great Argument to dissuade from sin, and the service of
it. An Argument then which there can be no greater: nothing be said more, or
more home against it. Nothing more against it, than that nothing comes of it
but shame and ruin; nothing more home, than that which comes home to our own
bosoms, makes our selves the Judges, our own consciences and experiences the
Umpires of the business. What fruit had ye in those things whereof ye are now
ashamed? says our Apostle, Ye your selves tell me if you can.

What had ye then? says he to the Romans here. What have ye, now say I to you,
ye, who ere you are still, or what had ye ever, any of you, who have at any
time given up your members to uncleanness, or to any iniquity? What have ye
gotten by it? Bring in your Account, set down the Income, reckon up the gains,
sum up the Expenses and Receipts, and tell me truly what it is. Or if you be
ashamed to tell it, give the Apostle leave to do it. Fruit ye had none of it,
that is certain. Shame ye have by it; that is too sure: and death you shall have
if you go on in it, nothing surer; for the end of those things is death. What
reason then to commit or continue in them? That Is St. Paul's meaning by the
question; as if he had said: Ye have no reason in the world at all to pursue a
course so fruitless, so dishonorable, so desperate, as your selves have found,
and will still find your sins to be.

Thus the Text, you see, is a disswasive from sin and all unrighteousness,
drawn here from these four Particulars: (1.) The fruitlesness and
unprofitableness. (2.) The shame and dishonor. (3.) The mischief and damage of
it. And (4.) our own experience of them all. The unprofitableness in the
enjoyment, the shame in the remembrance, the damage in the conclusion of every
sin, and our own experience called in to witness to it.

The unprofitableness (1.) without fruit; What fruit had ye? That is, no fruit
had ye, none at all. There Is the fruitlesness of sin, none for the time past.

None (2.) for the present, nothing but what ye are now ashamed of, there is the
shame and dishonor of sin.

None (3.) for the future neither, unless it be death; there is the damage of
sin, no fruit past, present, or to come but shame and death.

And all this Ye know, says St. Paul, as well as I. I appeal to your selves,
and your own experience, What fruit had ye? I dare stand to your own
confessions. I dare make your selves the judges.

Now sum up the Argument and thus it runs. Were there any profit, O ye Romans,
in your trade of sin, I might perhaps be thought too hard to press so much upon
you to persuade you from it. Or though there were no profit, yet (2.) if there
were some credit in it, something perhaps might be said for your continuance in
it. Or though there were neither profit nor credit for the present, yet if (3.)
there were some good might issue from it for the future, or at least the issue
not so bad as death, somewhat peradventure might be pleaded in the case. Or if
this (4.) were all only in other men's opinions, and ye found it otherwise your
selves, ye might perchance have some excuse at least to go on in sin; but to
sin when there is neither profit, nor credit, nor hope, nothing good at any
time in it, neither when it is past, nor while it is present, nor any yet to
come; but all contrary, and we our selves can witness it by sad experience (for
to our own souls and consciences the Apostle here refers it, that so it is)
when we can show no good of what we have done, are but ashamed of that which
can be shown, and can see nothing but death and destruction at our heels; after
all this to sin still, to sin again, any sin again, we have as little wit one
would think in it as fruit of it, as much senselesness as shame, and are like
to make but a sad end when all is done. It would be otherwise would we sit down
and think upon it. Ye are set already, set but your thoughts and hearts to
ponder and consider what is here set before you, the fruitlesness, the shame,
the damage of sin, and your own experiences of them all, and I shall not doubt
but you will make the Application St. Paul would have you of the Text; no
longer yield your selves servants unto unrighteousness, or commit those things
whereof ye cannot but presently be ashamed, and be next door to be confounded.
Consider we then, first, the fruitlesness or unprofitableness of sin, see what
that will work upon us. What fruit had ye then, etc.

What fruit? That is, no fruit; for so such kind of Questions commonly are
resolved into the strongest Negatives. No fruit, then, St. Paul means, can be
showed of sin: For all fruit is either profitable for use, or pleasurable to
the taste, or ot least delightful to the sight. But sin is none of these;
Nothing so unprofitable, so distasteful, so ugly and unseemly as sin is; so,
nothing so fruitless.

For profitable fruit (1.) there is none in sin. Let Us call those profitable
and advantageous sins, as men imagine them, of fraud, covetousness, and
sacrilege to a reckoning, and see what comes in by them. Our common Proverb
tells us, Covetousness brings nothing home. The poor and the deceitful man meet
together, says the sacred Proverb, Prove. xxix. 13. Even in this sense true,
that the Deceiver cheats himself, and grows poor by his own deceit; they meet
together thus. The Prophet Haggai says, it is but put into a bag with holes,
that is taken, or kept back, or but spared from the House of God, Hag. i. 6.
Says Solomon too, It Is a snare to the man who devoureth that which is holy,
things dedicated to Gods service, Prove. xx. 25. And is all the fruit of it, all
the fruit of Sacrilege come to that, to a snare, or to a halter? Little got by
that. But whether to that or no, to a curse it comes, Mal. iii. 9. Ye are
cursed with a curse, even no less than a whole Nation by it; grown tattered and
poor upon it; so far are they from a blessing or enriching by it, because it is
Gods blessing only that truly makes us rich, Prove. x. 22. and all that is
called riches but a curse without it. But suppose this sin, or any other, got
what it could desire, even the whole World, as wide, and full, and glorious as
it is, yet What shall it profit a man, though, says Christ, St. Mark viii. 36.
What fruit has he of it all? Less far than He, that shall sell all he has or
hopes, for the point of a Pin, or the leg of a Spider. He shall not so much as
roast that which he has got with all his hunting, is as true of him as of the
slothful man, Prove. xii. 27. Of all the fruit that he has gathered he has not,
it seems, so much as to fill his belly. But if he should eat of it till his
guts cracked, he would not thrive upon it; no thriving for body or estate when
the soul is lost, for that thriving is worse than nothing.

Well, yet, if there be no profitable fruit of sin, is there (2.) no
pleasurable neither? Just as little. Examine we the most sensual and delightful
sins; and they it must be, if any; yet not they. Drunkenness, that great
voluptuous sin, will you behold the goodly fruit it brings? (For profit it
brings none) let the Wise man satisfy you, Prove. xxiii. 29. Who has woe? Who
has sorrow? Who has contentions? Who has babbling? Who has wounds without
cause? Who has redness of eyes? They that tarry long (says he) at the Wine,
they that go to seek mixed wine. Woe, and sorrow, and contentions, and reproach,
and wounds, and sad mourning eyes at last are the fair fruits and issues of
this rare pleasurable wickedness; and sure there is no pleasure in any of these.
Nay, even what it pretends to most it misses. The very wine, as sweet as it
relishes at the first, bites at last, says Solomon, like a Serpent, and stings
like an Adder, ver. 32. little pleasure of all its former sweetnesses. And as
little in any other of those sins of sense which claim most to it. The fruit of
Gluttony, what is it, but dullness, and unwieldiness, gripings, vomitings, and
collicks, surfets, aches, and diseases? Of Lust, what but rottenness in the
very bones and marrow? Our very vanities tire and clog us, and make us peevish
at every trifle; Spiritual wickednesses have less pleasure. Envy and malice are
their own tormentors. Pride cannot so much as please it self. Ambition is rackt
with fears, distracted with visits, and crucified daily with its own greatness;
that little-inconsiderable point they entitle pleasure in any of these is no
sooner named than it is gone, and seldom is where the name is given it. But
where at the highest, so intermixed it is with bitterness and sorrow, that you
cannot discern it, or so quickly followed with them, that it is forgotten in a
moment. Nay, that sin which seems now adays to have all the profit, pleasure,
and beauty in it, Schism and Division upon the examination will find none. They
that make Divisions among you, says St. Paul, they do but serve their own
belly, Romans xvi. 18. And God shall destroy both it and them, 1 Cor. vi. 13.
What Is gotten then? Whatever it is, the Kingdom of Heaven is lost by it, Gal.
v. 21. where is then the profit, pleasure, or beauty of it.

But though there be neither profit nor pleasure, no such fruits, is there (3.)
no beauty neither, no fair fruits in sin to look upon? Are there not so much as
the fruits of Sodom (they tell us of) goodly and and fair to see to without,
though dust and ashes all within? No, not so much as such. Look again upon the
Drunkard, see him in his cups and revels, and what see you there but a strange
disfigured countenance, staring eyes, disordered gestures, words, and looks,
and actions, all disguised, ugly, and deformed? Behold next the lascivious
Wanton in but the addresses to his great sin, his antic postures, his affected
follies, his empty discourses, his religious (I should say irreligious)
approaches to his adored Idol, (to say nothing of the sin it self that
darkness covers) and tell me, if you can, what is handsome in any of his
applications. View, thirdly, the passionate, fierce, and angry man, and what is
there lovely in his flaming eyes, his furrowed brows, his distracted looks, his
frantic carriage, in his loud rantings and raving furies? Call ye the pale and
meager look of the envious or malicious comely? Is the high carriage of the
proud or ambitious pleasing? Is the close and sour visage of the covetous
person lovely? Nay, has not the face of every sinner surprised in his sin, or
afterward reflecting on it, a kind of guilt and horror that sensibly
discomposes and disorders it? Then (and that then is in the Text) then to be
sure you will find all things in that disorder, you must be vain to expect any
thing handsome or lovely there. Sin it self is nothing else but a deordination,
or swerving from order and beauty. Bonum and pulchrum are convertible: That
only which is truly good is truly fair, and that again only truly fair which is
truly good. It Is the fault of our eyes if we see otherwise. For if sin were
lovely God would love it: but he hates nothing so much, nothing, indeed, but
it. Sin is that only from whence all ugliness and deformity in things or
actions. Wheresoever is deformity, or whatsoever is deformed, it is sin that
caused it, or sin that is it.

And is not sin now, think you, a lovely piece, that thus disorders the
Universe, and deforms the whole Creation? That brings neither pleasure, nor
profit, nor honor with it to its unhappy servants? It Is an evil and bitter
thing, says the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. ii. 19. There is no pleasure in it. They,
that commit it, do but hatch Cockatrices eggs, and weave the Spiders web, says
the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. lix. 5. There Is no profit in it. For he that eats of
their Eggs dies, and that which is crushed breaks out into a Viper. Their
webbs shall not become garments, neither shall they cover themselves with their
works; they, whose works are works of iniquity, ver. 6. What fruits, I pray,
are these? Or will you call them fruits? If you will, it may be I may help you
to some more such, groping for the wall as if you had no eyes; stumbling at the
noon day as in the night; roaring sore like bears, and mourning like doves, in
the forecited Chapter, Isa. lix. 10. 11. Blindness, and weakness, and sorrow,
and mourning, even to roaring, horrors, and stings of conscience in abundance,
and inability to do good, or help our selves, such fruits as these you may have
enough. Our Apostle tells us besides of a sad slavery it brings us to, ver. 17.
The Psalmist of a rain of snares, fire and brimstone, storm and tempest, that
falls upon the sinner by it, Psalm. xi. 7. Crosses and afflictions, punishments
and judgments we every where read to be the issues of it. In Gods hot
displeasure, and man's scorn, and even, in the very next words, shame also, are
the only fruits (if we will allow them that name) of those unfruitful works of
darkness, as St. Paul justly styles them, Ephesians. v. 11.

Well may we now, with him, ask, What fruits have ye, or ever had ye in such
things as those? What at all, or what worth, if any at all, from those kinds of
courses? Nay, what then had ye? What had you in the very enjoying, in the very
transactions of your sins? Did they either satisfy or content you fully even
then? Were ye not either first tired with the pursuit, or fell much short of
your expectations, or distasted by some circumstances, or unsatisfied presently
when you had accomplished your unhappy and wretched work? But what however have
ye now left of any of them but the shame? Call it what ye will, that ye have
gotten by the most advantageous or pleasing wickedness, say as well of it as
you can, give us but leave to discover and rifle it to your faces, and your
blushing cheeks, and down-cast eyes, and disordered answers, and vain
subterfuges and excuses will witness to your teeth that it is nothing but what
ye are now next, indeed, ashamed of.

II. And shame now (2.) is the next Property of sin we are to speak of, the
true genuine Issue of it. For no sooner had Adam tasted the forbidden fruit and
sinned, but both he and his co-partner are both presently ashamed, and run away
to hide themselves among the Thickets of the Garden. Oh! how they blush to look
upon one another when they had once but eaten, done what they should not! the
die and color of the forbidden fruit had got presently into their faces, they
are ashamed of themselves, though there were none but themselves in the World
to see them. O whither should they run, what should they do to cover their
nakedness and their shame? Nakedness was no shame at first till sin came on it,
but then they are ashamed even of their nature, so strange a confusion had one
single sin brought with it. Nor could all the fig leaves of Paradise, nor all
the shades of the trees and bushes, nor the shadows of the approaching Evening
cover their new-risen blushes, nor the cool of it allay the heat that raised
them in their faces. Shame and sin are inseparable companions; there is no
parting them. Shame (1.) to be seen of God; they run from him; the saddest
effect that can be, that so parts and hurries us from our Maker as far as
possibly we can go. Shame (2.) to be seen of men: We dare not look upon one
another when we have sinned and are discovered. Shame (3.) to look upon our
selves; we presently get what fig leaves we may, make what excuses we can
imagine to cover our own weakness and infirmity. Shame (4.) to be seen by any
Creature, afraid, as it were, of every whisk of wind, every stirring of a bush,
ashamed any creature should come nigh us, for fear it should laugh at our
folly, deride our infirmity, trample upon our weakness, scorn our acquaintance,
and despise our authority, if it should once behold the deformity of our sin.

Thus shame from the very first pressed close upon the heels of sin. And ask the
most impudent sinner still, him whom custom has made insensible, and whose face
continual sinning has braz'd and hardened against the tenderness of a blush,
yet ask him, I say, why he yet seeks corners for the accomplishment of his sin,
or the contrivance of his wicked Plots. Why does he not act it without doors,
and before the Sun? Why, when he has done it with the highest hand, and needs
not fear a contradiction, or a power to control or punish him, why he
varnishes over his wickedness with false colors, and glosses all his actions
either with the name of Piety and Religion, Reformation and Purity, Justice and
Integrity, Conscience, and I know not what. Why he sometimes excuses it with
necessity, sometimes extenuates it with infirmity, sometimes pleads ignorance,
false information or mistake, sometimes makes one pretense, sometimes another.
Does he not evidently and plainly tell you by so doing, he is even ashamed of
the things that he has done, though he bear it out with all the confidence he
can? He cannot utterly cast off shame, though he has done shamefacedness. We
may confidently say to him, Those very things thou even seem to glory in,
thou art really no other than ashamed of.

Now there is a threefold shame, a natural, a virtuous, and a penal shame: a
shame that naturally and even against our wills attends every unhandsome
action. A godly shame (2.) that should always follow upon it. And (3.) a shame
that will else e're long pursue it.

The first, or natural, is that which through the modesty of nature, not yet
habituated to the impudence of wickedness, rises e're we are aware, from the
guilt and foulness of sin, either discovered or feared to be so. That Is the
reason that the eye of the Adulterer waits for the twilight, Job xxiv. 15.
to hide his reproach. That the Drunkard used in former times (though now grown
gallant on it) to be drunk in the night, 1 Thessalonians. v. 7. being ashamed (as
civility went then) to be seen so disguised in the day: That the Heretic and
Schismatic used in the Apostles times though now grown confident) to come
creeping into Widows houses, and hide themselves behind Curtains and Aprons,
ashamed of their Schisms, and new Doctrines at the first, 2 Timothy iii. 6. That
still the Thief by night, and the sly Cheat, and covetous Extortioner by
underhand dealing in the day strive to conceal the designs and practices which
only night and darkness are thought fit to cover, or give a tolerable shadow
too. Even our vanities within a while make us ashamed of them. We are within a
few days in a huge confusion to be seen in our finest Clothes, and newest
Fashions we were the other day so proud of, rather naked than in a fashion that
has another grown upon it. Indeed, when any of our sins, great, or little, take
hold upon us; then as the Prophet David professes we are not able to look up,
Psalm. xl. 15. so ashamed they make us. None but Absalom, none but the wickedest
sons of Rebellion sin upon the house top, at noon day all the people looking
on. Yet even for all that, there must be a Tent, even for such as he, some thin
Veil or other; some Silk, or linen Scarf or Curtain to cover his wickedness in
the upshot, 2 Samuel xvi. 22. So natural a fruit and companion is shame to any
sin or sinner. Sin is more than sin, when shame is gone, when that is lost.

2. Yet if so be this kind of modest shame should be laid asleep a while,
through the custom and habit of a sin, there is a second sort of shame that
must be thought on; the shame that accompanies repentance: Sin must have
repentance, and repentance will have shame. Yea, what shame? what, or how
great, I cannot tell you; but shame it must work, if it be true: Shame of our
ingratitude to God, shame of our unhandsomness to men, shame of the
disparagement we have done our nature, shame of the dishonor we have done our
selves in committing things so foul, so brutish, so unreasonable: this the
properest of the three shames we mentioned to this place, which it seems the
Romans were here come to; and is a business we are obliged to, to repent us,
and be ashamed of our sins, to be ashamed and blush with Ezra to lift up our
faces, because our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespasses
grown up into the Heavens, Ezra ix. 6.

3. And if this we be not, there is another-gates shame will overtake us; shame
(3.) and confusion of face: if we be not ashamed of our sins, we shall e're
long be ashamed for them; come to shame and dishonor by them: such a kind of
shame as the Prophet Isaiah speaks of, Isa. i. 29. Ye shall be ashamed of the
Oaks which ye have desired, and ye shall be confounded for the gardens which ye
have chosen; your very enemies shall laugh you to scorn; the very Oaks and
Trees shake their heads at you in derision, your Gardens bring you forth no
other fruit. All that pass by shall wag their heads, and hiss at you, Ier. xix.
8. Ye shall be a curse, and an astonishment, and an hissing, and a reproach to
all Nations, Ier. xxix. 18. and a shameful spewing shall be on your glory, Hab.
ii. 16. To this our ill courses will bring us at the last; and yet to worse,
even to death too. For the end of those things is death: that is the third
Particular, the third Argument against sin, the mischief and damage of it in
the end, and comes next to be considered.

III. A sad end truly, and but sorry wages for all the pains and drudgry that
sins put us to. St. Paul here thinks it not worth the name of fruit. Yet what
fruit sin brings, if you will call it fruit, it is unto death, Romans vii. 5. But
if there were any other, death so nigh at heels would devour it all. Sin when
it is finished, when it is at the height, complete and perfected, it brings
forth death, says St. James i. 15. that is the end God knows. And a threefold
death it brings; a temporal, a spiritual, and an eternal death.

For the first, Thou shall die the death, was threatened to it before it came
into the world, Genesis ii. 17. And no sooner came it, but death came by it, death
by sin, Romans v. 12. And it past thence upon all men, too. All men ever since
have been subjected to it. All have died, and all must die for that one sin.
Ever after that first sinful morsel all are become like the beasts that perish,
Psalm. xlix. 12. So that the wisest of men had much ado to distinguish between
their ends, Eccles. iii. 19, 20. As the one dies, says he, so dies the other;
yea, they have all one breath, so that a man has no pre-eminence above a
beast. All go unto one place, all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again.
Only indeed, a little after, ver. 21. he perceives a kind of glimmering as it
were of the humane Spirits going upward: yet with this lessening, for all that,
of who knows it? who can certainly demonstrate, and distinguish, and define
the difference? so deeply has sin engaged us unto death, that there is no
escaping; and the shadows of it are so great, that there is no discovering of
differences in the Grave between the ashes of a man, and of a Beast.

2. But there is (2.) a death before this; a death of the soul before the death
of the body; and the much worser of the twain. The teeth of Sin, says the Son
of Syrach, are as the teeth of a Lion, slaying the souls of men, Ecclus. xxi.
2. the very souls. The separation of the body from the soul, which is the
temporal death, is but a trifle to the separation of the soul from God, which
is the spiritual. This sin brings upon the soul in the very act, if it rather
be not it it self: the very act of sin commits the murder, and slays the soul,
whilst it is in doing. (...), says the Apostle of the voluptuous Widow that
lives in sin, or pleasure, she is dead whilst she is alive, 1 Timothy v. 6. A mere
walking carkase a sinner is, a mere motion and engine without life, and spirit,
when Gods Spirit and Grace (as by sin it does) is departed from him. The fall
of the body into the dust of the Grave, is nothing so bad as the fall of the
soul into the dirt of sin. When our souls are but once deprived of Grace, and
Goodness, Gods presence so taken from us, they do but wither, and dwindle, and
die away; and we only walk like so many Ghosts among the Graves, in the shades
of night and darkness. Did we but consider or understand how miserably the soul
crawls along in this condition, when the eternal Spirit is departed from it,
sealed up as it were by her transgressions, in the grave of a customary
wickedness; adding still one iniquity to another, wholly insensible of any
good, as the dead body: we would say the natural death were nothing like it,
the Grave but a bed of rest and sleep, whilst sin were the very torments of
death it self. Nay, the very pangs, and horrors of death that make way to it
but little flea-bitings to the stings and terrors of Conscience, that often
follow upon our sins, upon the loss of Gods favor and presence.

And yet there is a third death worse than both these; eternal Death: from the
two former we may rise again. The dust will one day breath again, and the soul
after the departure of Gods Spirit may again retrive it and recover; but once
within the regions of eternal death, and there for ever. Body lost, and Soul
lost, and God lost for ever. An end indeed, without an end; an end of good, but
no end of evil; where the worm is ever dying, yet ever gnawing; the fire dark
as the most dismal night, yet ever burning; the body eternally separated from
all the comforts of the soul, yet the soul ever in it: the soul for all
eternity cast out of the land of the living, separated irreconcilably from Gods
presence, the only fountain of joy, and life, and being, and yet continually
and everlastingly, feeling the horrors of this intolerable parting from him. Go
ye cursed into everlasting fires, is the sentence long since past upon the
ungodly, and the sinner by our Blessed Savior, St. Matthew. xxv. 41. The very
Heathen, notwithstanding the ignorance they were in, they were not ignorant of
this, that they that commit such things are worthy of death, so says the
Apostle, Romans i. 32. And be the sinner who it will, and be his way never so
plain and easy, never so specious, yet at the end thereof is the pit of Hell,
says the son of Syrach, E^clus. xxi. 10.

He that now promises himself any better end of his sins, or sinful courses, he
that flatters and feeds himself with any other end of his Ambition, or his
Treason, of his Faction or his Sedition, of his Covetousness, or his
Sacrilege, of his uncleanness, or his unjustice, or any other sin (I name no
more, for I leave every one to reckon up his own) he that flatters himself, I
say, with any other end of any of them to make himself forget this, does but
deceive himself, and fool away his soul beyond recovery. Here Is all the fruit
he is like to get, the only end he will certainly find at last, everlasting
Death; an end without an end, without any thing in life to sweeten the
approaches of death, without any thing in death, fruit, or leaves to garnish up
the Chambers of the Grave, or any bud of hope to allay the misery and sadness
of it. And we need no other witness of all this, neither of the little or no
fruit, nor of the great and horrid shame, nor of the vast and miserable ruin
that comes of sin, but our own selves. What had ye? says our Apostle, ye can
show no fruit; ye are now ashamed, and ye cannot be ignorant that death is
coming on. I here refer it to you, say what you can in the behalf of it; I
desire none other witnesses, nor judges, than your selves, What fruit had ye
then in those things whereof you are now ashamed: tell me if you can.

IV. Indeed, there is none can tell so well as the sinner can himself what he
has gotten by his sin; whether we consider him as one reflecting upon his ways,
only as a person of reason should, or else as a Christian will.

For (1.) let any of us, as men of reason, lay together the weary steps; the
hard adventures, the vexatious troubles, the ordinary disappointments, the
impertinent visits, the thoughtful nights, the busy days, the tumultuous
uproars of our fears, our jealousies, our hopes, our despairs; the unworthy
condiscentions, the base disparagements, the dishonorable enterprises, that a
lust, that a humor, that a vanity puts us to, or puts upon us: and then
compare them with the lightness, the shortness, the unprofitableness, the
unsatisfactoriness, the eternal shame and confusion we yet after all purchase,
with all that toil; and we must both needs confess, that we have done brutishly
and unreasonably, and cannot but be ashamed we have so unmanned our selves, and
betrayed the very essence and glory of our nature: not done like men.

But (2.) let us renew the same reflections, and view them over again by the
light of Grace; look upon our selves as Christians thus wretchedly betraying
our God for a Lust, Christ for an Interest, our Religion for a Fancy, our
obedience for a Humor, our Charity for a Ceremony, our Peace for a Punctilio,
our duty to God and man, for a little vain applause of peradventure ungodly
men; our Innocence for Dirt and Pleasure, our eternal Glory and Salvation for
Toys and Trifles; and will we not without more ado confess we are ashamed,
infinitely ashamed of it? Hear but those brave ranting blades, those gallant
sinners, Wisdom v. 8. what they say themselves, What has pride profited us,
say they, or what good have riches with our vaunting brought us? as if in sum
they had said, what have all our sins procured us* Why, all those are passed
away like a shadow, ver. 9. and we are consumed in our own wickedness, ver. 13.
Now indeed, though there too late, they begin to talk like men, to speak reason.

The Christian penitent, after he has run the course of sin, and is now
returning, talks somewhat higher, calls it a Prison, the Stocks, the Dungeon,
the very nethermost Hell; thinks no words bad enough to style it by. We need
not put any such upon the rack for this confession, they go mourning and
sighing it all the day long, they tell you sensibly by their tears and blushes,
by their sad countenances, and down-cast looks, by their voluntary confessions,
their willing restraints now put upon themselves, their pining, punishing,
afflicting of their souls and bodies, their wards and watches now over every
step, lest they should fall again, that never were any poor souls so gulled
into a course, so vain, so unprofitable, so dishonorable, so full of
perplexities, so fruitful of anxieties, so bitter, so unpleasant as sin has
been, nor any thing whereof they are so much ashamed. No fruit of all you see,
even our selves being judges.

And yet I will not send you away without some fruit or other; somewhat after
all this, that may do you good.

For methinks if sin have no better fruits, if wickedness come no better off,
we may first learn to be ashamed, and blush to think of it, be ashamed of sin.

We may (2.) learn to beat it off thus at its first assaults. What, thou sin,
thou lust, what fruit shall I have in thee? what good shall I reap of thee? Do
I not see shame attend thee, and death behind thee? I am ashamed already to
think upon thee: away, away, thou impudent solicitress, I love no such fruit, I
love no such end.

And if (3.) we be so unhappy as to be at any time unawares engaged in any sin,
let us strike off presently upon the arguments of the Text. For why should we
be so simple, to take a course that will not profit, to take pains to weave a
web that will not cover us, to plant trees that will yield no fruit, to range
after fruit that has no pleasure, to court that which has no loveliness? If we
can expect nothing from our sins (as you have heard we cannot) why do we sweat
about them? if they bring home naught but shame, why are we not at first
ashamed to commit them? if they end in death, why will ye die, O foolish people
and unwise?

Lastly, you that have led a course of sin, and are yet perhaps still in it,
sit down and reckon every one of you with himself, what you have gotten.
Imprimis, So much cost and charges, Item, so much pains and labor, so much
care and trouble, so much loss and damage, so much unrest and disquiet, so much
hatred and ill will, so much disparagement and discredit, so many anxieties and
perplexities, so many weary walks, so much waiting and attendance, so many
disappointments and discouragements, so many griefs and aches, so many
infirmities and diseases, so many watches and broken sleeps, so many dangers
and distresses, so many bitter throbs, and sharp stings, and fiery scorchings
of a wounded Conscience; so much, and so much, and so much misery, all for a
few minutes of pleasure, for a little white and yellow dirt, for a feather, or
a fly, a buzze of honor or applause, a fancy, or a humor, for a place of
business, or vexation, sum'd up all in air, and wind, and dust, and nothing.
Learn thus to make a daily reflection upon your selves and sins.

But after all these, remember lastly, it is Death, eternal Death, everlasting
misery, Hell, and damnation without end, that is, the end of sin; that all this
everlasting is for a thing that is never lasting, a thing that vanishes often in
its doing; all this death for that only which is the very shame of life, and
even turns it into death: and surely you will no longer yield your members,
your souls and bodies to iniquity, unto iniquity, but unto righteousness, unto
holiness. So shall ye happily comply with the Apostles argument in the Text,
and draw it as he would have you, to the head, do what he intends and aims at
by it; and by so doing, attain that which he desires you should, make your
selves the greatest gainers can be imagined; gain good out of evil, glory out
of shame, life out of death, all things out of nothing, eternal life,
everlasting glory. Which, etc.

A SERMON ON THE Fourth Sunday in Lent.
I COR. ix. 24. -- So run that you may obtain.
THat Christianity is a Race, and Heaven the Goal, and we, all of us, they that
are to run, is an ordinary Allegory in Scripture and Sermons, which you have
none of you but heard. And that in this Race all that run do not obtain, no
more than they do that run in other Races, every one sees, and every one can
tell you. Not every one, we told you the last day, not they that run only with
their tongues, run they Lord, Lord, never so fast; not many others that run
further than so you will hear anon, and too common experience can inform you.

But how so to run as to obtain is not a piece of so common knowledge. Hic
labor hoc opus est. This is the Apostles business, a business ordinary
Christians are not sufficiently skilled in, it is to be feared; or if
sufficiently skilled in, not so practiced in, but that they want a voice both
behind and before them to tell them, this is the way they are to walk in. This
is the way, walk in it, so, and so run that you may obtain.

Were we to run in those Olympic Games (which St. Paul here seems to allude
to) they who were practiced in those sports and exercises, were fittest to
instruct us how so to run as to be conquerours there. But being now to run the
true Olympic, that is, the heavenly Race, the true Race to heaven that true
Olympus, which that Poetical did but shadow, this our Apostle, that great
wrastler, not against flesh and blood (though in another sense against that
too) but against Principalities, and Powers, against the Rulers of darkness and
spiritual wickedness, whose whole life was nothing else but a continual
exercise of all the hardships in the Christian course, who so gloriously fought
the good fight, and finished his course, can best teach us how to do so too.
With this Prerogative too above the cunningest of those Olympic Masters, that
they cannot so instruct their Scholars that they shall be sure of the prize
they run for, though they run never so accurately to their Rules, many there
running, and but one obtaining; but here by St. Paul's direction we may all
run, and all obtain. For to that purpose only we are invited and directed to
run, that we may obtain.

Yet true it is, as we may all obtain, so we may not; and it will be but a spur
to us to fear it, one spur to hasten and quicken us in our course. St. Paul had
such a one now and then to make him run. He had run much; from Jerusalem round
about unto Illyricum, Romans xv. 19. yet lest he had, or should run in vain, he
gathers up his heels and to Jerusalem he goes again, to see whether he had not
run so, or might not at the last, Gal. ii. 2. and notwithstanding all his great
pains and care in the Gospel of Christ, in preaching it freely too, ver. 18.
without any charge to the Corinthians, applying himself to all ways and means
to gain them, and and becoming any thing to make them Christ's, ver. 22. he yet
tells us what a do he kept with his body, lest when he had done all he should
be a Castaway.

But that such a one he should not be, he had some hope, that he should be a
partaker rather of the Gospel in its Reward as well as in its Work, in the
verse before the Text. This is the other spur to him in his course, must be to
us, that we thus quickened to our Race, and by these two, hope to obtain, and
fear to lose, as by two leaden Plummets, in each hand one, to poise us as we
run, may so run as to obtain.

We may obtain, that is our hope; yet it is but may, that is our fear: Yet no
fear at all, if we run but so as we should, if we observe but the Apostles
(...), his way and mode. To obtain or get to heaven is a work of labor and
business, not of pretense and talk. It was we lately told you, to do somewhat,
now you will find it to do much, to take some pains, and run about it. It Is a
business of order and regularity, so and so, not any how, to be performed. It Is
a work of time and forecast, that considers seriously what it is about; that
casts which way to go, and whither we are going; what it is we aim at, and how
to compass it; what it is we would obtain, and how to obtain it.

Thus whilst I have given you the Sum, I have given you also the Division of
the Text, only I shall point out the parts again in order, and tell you I shall
observe,

I. That Christianity, or the Christians course to heaven is a work of labor
and business, it is to run and go. II. That all pains and labor, every running
will not serve, it must be (...), so and so, after a certain way, rightly
ordered so as to obtain, such as is fit and proportionable to the end we aim
at. III. That this end we are to set before us, and so order all our course and
courses toward it, to propound heaven for the end of all our actions. IV. And
then, lastly, to stir up our souls and bodies to it with this consideration of
this may; this Particle, which may serve both to awe, and to encourage us, that
from the hope that we may, and the fear because it is no more than may, not
shall or must, we may be the more diligent in our course, and the more
successful in our end, that we may be sure so to run as to obtain.
I begin at the Christians course, to show you what it is; then (2.) whether it
tends. It tends to a Crown, it tends to a Reward, it tends to Heaven, it tends
to obtain it, but by pains and labor it is (1.) that it atchieves it. It is a
course of labor and pains that must bring us to heaven whereby only we can
obtain it.

If Christianity be a course or Race, as St. Paul styles it, 2 Timothy iv. it is a
course of labor. Multa tulit fecitque puer, sudavit and alsit. Many a hot and
cold sweat it has in it; much done, and much suffered in it from our childhood.
Thence they begin to inure themselves to hardships and exercise that intend to
bear the Garlands at those Sports and Games. There should we begin too to
minister before the Lord, with Samuel, when we are Children. If we have not,
our Children may serve the Lord, as he did, girded with a Linen Ephod, 1 Samuel
ii. 18. their Loins girt up for the course, even from their Chilhood; girt with
white Linen, pure and harmless innocence; with a Linen Ephod, bound to holy
exercises, to assist Eli the Priest in the service of God, if it be but with
short Responsals and Amens; girt and set betimes to Gods service. The word run
is no idle word, there is pains and labor in it. They much deceive themselves
that think there is a Quis requisivit upon all hardships in Christianity, that
when men tell them of any strictness or rigours there, answer presently, Who
has required it at your hands? Who? Why, he has done it, who they say has not.
Else certainly the Apostle would have spared himself as well as they; would not
have been so often beaten with rods, and laid on with stripes, so often
shipwrackt, in journeyings so often, in perils so often, perils of waters, and
perils of robbers, in perils by his own Countrymen, perils by the heathen,
perils in the wilderness, perils in the sea, perils among false brethren; he
would not have been so often in weariness and painfulness, in watchings so
often, so much in hunger, and thirst, in fastings so frequent, in cold and
nakedness so commonly, in deaths so often as he tells us he was, 2 Cor. xi. 24,
25, 26, 27. had the way to heaven been so easy, as these men, that would not
forgo a jot of ease or pleasure, of meat, or drink, or sleep for heaven, would
have it. Nor would he have proved the course of his Ministry to be Gods, by his
patience, afflictions, necessities, distresses, by stripes, imprisonments,
tossings to and fro, by labors, and watchings, and fastings, as he does, 2
Cor. vi. 4, 5. could he have told how to have proved it better. Nor would he
have taken so much pains to keep under his body, to buffet and humble it as he
does, ver. 27. of this very Chapter; Were not this obtaining Heaven somewhat a
hard and laboursome business. This is the course that brings thither, the
course that, finished, brought him the Crown of righteousness, 2 Timothy iv. 8. It
is violence and force that take heaven, says our only Savior. The way to it is
not strow'd with Roses and Violets, nor spread with Carpets and Cushions, non
jacet in molli, but with Thorns, and Briers, and craggy Rocks.

There are works and duties of Christianity, that cannot be performed without
much trouble. He must not fear his skin that puts himself into Christ's service;
he must venture far, and hazard much sometimes unless he will give out by the
way, and lose his reward. There is nothing so hard in humane affairs but may
fall into the spiritual and heavenly. The pursuit of worldly projects, those
empty, unsatisfying. and troublesome nothings cost us many a weary step, many a
broken sleep, many a tired body: and can we think to obtain the fullness of the
joys above, that fill and never fail, with less? Surely, did we consider the
practice of those first Christian Saints and Martyrs, those daily pains and
cares their days and nights were spent in, we would think our Race to heaven
another-gates business, Christianity another manner of thing than we make it
now a days, or are willing to conceive it.

Were there no other word than this (...) in the Text, this run to express it,
we might understand it to be a work of labor, and if we take it with that
reference it has to the Olympic Races, there are many things in the
performance that will sufficiently show it. What a deal of pains and care did
they take first to fit and prepare themselves? And then with what might and
main did they pursue their course? How often have such Racers been taken up at
the Goal so tired and spent that they have had much ado to recover their life
or spirits? Ah! did we but half so much for heaven there were no doubt of it.

Running, take we it how we will, is a violent exercise, that for the time
imploys all the parts and powers. It Is that the Apostle would have here, that
all the faculties and powers of our souls and bodies should be taken up in the
business of heaven. Our heads study it, our hearts bend wholly to it, our
affections strive violently after it, our hands labor for it, our feet run the
ways of Gods Commandments to come to it, our eyes run down with water for it,
and our bodies with sweat about it. 'Twill cost somewhat more to come to heaven
than a few good words at the last, than a Lord forgive me and have mercy upon
me, when we are going out of the World; or than a hot fit or two of Piety when
we are in it; or a cold and careless walking and straggling up and down in it
throughout even all our lives. Nay, more, it is not running over whole
Breviaries of Prayers. It Is not running over good Books only neither, reading
and studying of good things, but running as we read, that all that run may read
in our running the Characters of heaven. Would men but lay this to heart, that
it is no such easy or perfunctory business to get thither, their courses would
be better, their lives holier, themselves heavenlier than they are, nor would
so many put off the work to the last cast, make a mere deathbed business of
it, as if they then were fit enough to run Gods ways when they cannot stir a
hand or foot; whereby it is more then to be feared they deceive themselves, and
being then in no possibility to run, they go they know not whither.

II. And yet for all the pains and running we talk of, if now secondly it have
not an (...) to rule and steer it, if it be not a so running, such a one as is
right set to obtain, we had as good sit still. This so to run, is (1.) To run
lawfully; (2.) To run carefully; (3.) To run speedily; (4.) To run willingly;
(5.) To run stoutly; (6.) To run patiently; (7.) To run constantly, and to the
end. To run (1.) lawfully, according to the Laws and Rules prescribed to obtain
it; (2.) Carefully, the way to obtain it; (3.) Speedily, with the speed
requisite to obtain it; (4.) Willingly with spirit to obtain it; (5.) Stoutly,
to endure any thing to obtain it; (6.) Patiently, to expect to obtain it; (7.)
Constantly, not giving out till we obtain it.

1. Lawfully, according to the Laws and Rules of the Race we are to run, we are
not crowned else, says our Apostle, 2 Timothy ii 5. Now the Laws of the Christian
Race are Gods Commandments, according to which we are diligently to direct our
steps: Yet three Laws there are more particular and proper to it, the Law of
Faith, the Law of Hope, and the Law of Charity. These the three more peculiar
Rules of it. We must run in a full belief of Gods Promises in Christ, that in
him they are yea, and in him Amen, that God will not let one tittle of them
fall to the ground, Looking unto Jesus the Author and finisher of our faith,
Heb. xii. 2. of our course too. We must, secondly, run in hope, that through
his grace we also, even we though the most unworthy* shall obtain, laying hold
upon the hope so set before us, Heb. vi. 18. And thirdly, in Charity must be
our course, though we strive for the mastery, it must not be in strife or envy,
but in love and charity, in unity and peace, in love unfeigned our selves, 2
Cor. vi. 6. and provoking one another to it, Heb. x. 24. no other strifes or
provocation, but who shall go before one another in love, so keeping the bond
of peace, which once broken, our clothes and garments, which were tied up to us
with it, as with a girdle, fall all down about us, and hinder us both in our
Race, and of our Crown. Those who have broke this bond, and rent the Churches
Robes, and their own souls by their unhappy separations, will, after all their
labor with those in the Psalm, sleep their sleep, and find nothing; nothing
but that they have hindered both others and themselves of the Crown of glory.
Run we lawfully and orderly then, that first.

And (2.) run we carefully too, neither to the right hand, nor to the left;
neither looking after sensual pleasures, or worldly profits, or sinful lusts,
not turning aside after those golden balls, which the Devil, the Flesh, and
world, are always casting in the way to hinder us, but straight on our course,
carefully shunning all temptations, stumbling blocks, and stones of offense,
which are likely to trip up our heels, and throw us in our race, what
carefulness, says St. Paul, 2 Cor. vii. 11. has your godly sorrow wrought? will
earnest desire of a heavenly Crown, say I, work in you, if you would think upon
it?

It would make you (3.) gather up all your strength, set to all your force, put
to all your speed; you would think you could not come soon enough to so
glorious a Goal. Let us go speedily, and pray before the Lord, say they in
Zachary viii. 21. Make haste and come down, says our Savior to Zacheus, St.
Luke xix. 6. as if he that meant to see Christ here at his own house, or
hereafter in his, must make what haste he can. Running is our speediest motion,
and the more haste to Heaven, the better speed; though to earthly things the
proverb says it is not; and the reason may be indeed, because our swiftest
motion is to be toward Heaven, to be reserved for that.

Yet willingly (4.) must it be, we must do it without Whip, or Spur, they are
for unreasonable Beasts, and not for men in running. We are not to look that
God should force and drive us to his work, he loves no such workmen: A ready
mind is Gods Sacrifice, he accepts no other. If I do it willingly, says our
Apostle, ver. 17. I have a reward, no reward else to be expected.

But (5.) we must run stoutly too, bear any thing, do any thing, endure any
thing for the Crown of Heaven; afflictions, persecutions, reproaches, any
losses, any hardships, for the name of Christ. We must not be frighted out of
our course of Piety, and Religion, by the threats of men, nor put out of it by
the scoffs and flouts of standers by, nor driven from it by the fear of danger,
and loss; nor diverted by the hope of earthly honor and preferment, nor
flattered out of it by ease and pleasure, nor fooled out of it by seducers and
false guides; but bear up stoutly in our course, against wind, and weather,
storm and tempest, men and devils.

And though some of these perhaps may somewhat hinder us in our course, and
make it the more difficult, and the way seem longer, yet (6.) if we run with
patience, as our Apostle again would have us, Heb. xii. 1. the race which is
set before us; if we give not over yet, but go on expecting, content however
though it be long, that we shall come at last, willing to suffer any thing, and
stay any time that God would have us, we shall obtain at last; but if we give
out, we are lost for ever.

For (7.) constantly also we are to run, not to run a while, and then make a
stand; now a spurt, and then a spurt, Vbi non currere ibi deficere incipis,
says devout St. Bernard, When we begin to slack our running, we begin to fail
of our reward. If we give over here, if we did run well, and do not, St. Paul
says we are bewitched, Gal. v. 7. and will ask us too, as he did them, who has
bewitched us, that we should no longer obey the truth, that we run no more? we
must run constantly and not give over, nay, and constantly also and not give
out. He that continues to the end, is he only that shall be saved, that shall
obtain the crown of life. Christ himself, who is our Crown, and our Joy, he was
obedient unto the death; and unless we be so too, unless we hold the beginning
of our confidence steadfast unto the end, we shall not be partakers of him; for
they only are, that do so, Heb. iii. 14. So now you have this (...), the manner
of your running, how it must be, lawfully, according to the rule that God has
given, that we swerve not from it; carefully in the way that God has set us,
that we err not from it; speedily, that we come not when the doors are shut;
cheerfully, that we may have a reward; stoutly, that we be not baffled in our
course; patiently, that we faint not by the way; and constantly, that we fail
not of our end, the salvation of our souls. So run that ye may obtain.

Ay, but how may we obtain to run so? why, do as the runners in Races do (1.)
Diet our bodies, (2.) Exercise our selves before, (3.) Consider, and contrive
how we had best to run: And (4.) strip our selves of all encumbrances that may
hinder us in our speed, And indeed, these may well go into the (...), belong at
least to the so running as has annexed to it the obtaining.

1. Diet we our bodies by temperance and abstinence. It Is in the next verse,
that every man that striveth for the mastery, is temperate in all things.
Abstinuit vino and Venere, says the Poet, he abstains from riot and
drunkenness, runs not with the world into the same excess of riot, 1 Pet. iv.
4. from chambering and wantonness, runs not to his neighbors bed; a head full
of drink, a belly full of meat, and a body weakened with lust, are fitter to
lie down than to run. He that intends himself for a Race, for this especially,
must keep under his body, and bring it into subjection, with St. Paul, ver. 27.
keep it empty, and agile, and firm, and sound.

And (2.) he must exercise himself for the Race, that intends so to run as to
obtain; they do so that run Races, try and exercise before, keep themselves
continually doing: and they that are skilful in the word of righteousness, and
successful in the work, have their senses exercised to discern both good and
evil, Heb. vi. 14. must exercise themselves unto godliness, 1 Timothy iv. 7.
exercise themselves day and night, in the law of God, Psalm. i. 2. and with St.
Paul, again, exercise themselves to have always a Conscience void of offense,
toward God, and toward men, Acts xxiv. 16.

3. Consider also and contrive we must, what way we had best to tak^, how we
shall avoid this rock of offense, that stone of stumbling, that hill of pride,
that ditch of lust, those thorns in the flesh, those dangers by the way, those
impediments and hindrances which are likest to interrupt or slacken us in our
course, so to take all advantages* lay hold of all opportunities, catch all
occasions of our advance in goodness, know where to haste, and where to slack,
when to bear up, and when to put forward, when to spare, and when to put to all
our strength. If we can but hit this (...), this sic, this so, this way, this
order; no doubt either of our well running, or our sure obtaining; either so to
run, or so obtain as the Text would have us.

And (4.) after all this dieting, all this exercising of our selves, and all
this contrivance with our selves, as the last preparation, or rather setting
out to our course, we must divest and strip our selves of all our cumbersom
garments, lay aside every weight and the sin that does so easily beset us, as
the Apostle speaks, Heb. xii. 1. lay apart all filthiness and superfluity of
naughtiness, as St. James i. 21. put off all the works of darkness, put off the
old man, and put on the new, the new white robe of righteousness and holiness
(for in thin white vestments only did they use to run races) having our joints
suppled, and our bodies anointed with the sweet oil of holy resolutions, being
first washed with the pure waters of repentance. It was an old Ceremony, in
some Churches yet observed, in Baptism, to anoint the baptized person in the
name of the Lord, in token that he was now to address himself to the course, to
run the race of Christianity, that was then set before him. You have now this
(...) complete, what it is so to run both in its setting out, and in its moving
on, we will now see what it will come to in the end, to obtain.

Yet before I come to that, give me leave a little to sum up the whole manner
of our running, by a kind of allegorizing, some several runnings in Scripture
we may read of.

Leave we then first the oxen and run we with Elisha after Eliah, 2 Kings xix.
20. Leave we all secular and worldly business to tend upon the word of the Lord
in the mouths of his Prophets. Run we next with Laban to the well, Genesis xxiv.
29. to the well-springs of salvation. Rouse we up our selves then out of our
beds, out of our drousie dullness and earthiness, with young Samuel, 1 Samuel iii.
5. and run to Eli, the Priest, to ask counsel of him, when God begins first to
appear to us, that we may be instructed what to do. Run we then with little
Zacheus, S. Luke xix. 4. and climb up into the tree, make our thoughts ascend,
that we may see Christ. Run we then after him, with the people on foot, S. Mark
vi. 35. out of our Cities, refuse no pains, nor think much to leave our houses
a while to overtake him. When we see good thoughts coming to us, run we as
Abraham did, to meet the Angels, Genesis xx. 5. make haste to entertain them, and
bow down our selves before them, and entreat them to stay, and tarry with us;
run then presently to the herd and fetch a calf and haste to slay and dress it
for them, ver. 7. to the unruly herd of our sensual passions, and affections,
and mortify them and dress them better than heretofore. When any evil motions
at any time arise, run we with David, 1 Samuel xvii. 51. and stand upon that
Philistin, and cut off his head, kill it in the cradle, nip it in the bud. When
we fall into sin, run with Rebecca, Genesis xxiv. 20. unto the well again, and
draw thence the waters of Repentance. If any temptation yet pursue us, that we
cannot resist, run we away with Iotham, Judges ix. 21. and flee from it. When
troubles come upon us, run we to the hills, from whence comes our help, to the
name of the Lord, as a strong tower, Prove. xviii. 10. to our prayers. When we
are in any good way of devotion and piety, run we like the Sun out of his
Chamber, and rejoice we like a Giant to run our course, Psalm. xix. 5. Run we
like Ioels horsemen, Joel ii. 4. like Nahums lightning, Nahum ii. 4. in all
good ways. If adversity betide us, run we like the Rivers that the Prophet
David speaks of among the hills, Psalm. civ. 10. hold up our heads still for all
the sorrow. If prosperity engirt us, run we with Ahimaaz, by the way of the
plain, be lowly and humble in it; and when any good befalls us, run we with St.
Peter and John unto the Sepulcher, St. John xx. 4. think we of our lives end,
how little a while we may enjoy it: run we to our friends with Rebecca, and
tell them of it, make them partakers of Gods goodness too, that they may
rejoice and praise God with us. In a word, in all distresses, in all
necessities, run we with those Benjamites, Judges xx. 41. to the Rock Rimmon,
the Rock Christ Jesus, and abide there not for some months or years, but for
ever, so run and so obtain. There will all our running be at an end, and he and
his salvation, he in his Fathers house is the end of all our running, that
which we are to aim at, that which we are to run for.

III. For run for something we must, and we can run for nothing better. All men
and creatures stir not from their place, but for some end, to obtain somewhat.
But men and reasonable creatures propound it to themselves. I cannot tell you
the several ends they do propound; but I can tell you the end they should
propound. Or rather let St. Paul tell you, and you shall go no further for it
then the very next verse, a Crown incorruptible, if you would yet know plainer
what that is, look but to the 2 of Tim. ii. 10. and thus you find it, that ye
may obtain the salvation which is in Christ Jesus, with eternal glory.

Indeed methinks the one only word of the Text, this (...), this obtain single
without any super-addition, is sufficient to express it all: for we obtain
nothing till we obtain that, all that we get, or gain, or purchase till we come
to that, to the salvation in Christ, with eternal glory, is not worth the name
of obtaining, of (...), all Crowns, and glories of the world but dross and
dung, not worth the taking up, not any thing worth obtaining in comparison of
this Crown of Glory.

Vt Comprehendatis it is in Latin; and it is a word that the Schoolmen, whose
business is to speak most accurately and distinctly, have always appropriated
to the other life. There we are first only comprehensores, comprehensours, that
is, obtainers. Nay, St. Paul himself is so punctual too, that after all his
pains in the Gospel of Christ, all his conformity to Christ, and the greatest
height of perfection in Christ, that he was arrived at, (which is a business
and glory worth all the earth besides) says yet (...), I count not my self to
have comprehended, or obtained, so it should be rendered, Phil. iii. 13.
professes himself not to have obtained. Attained perhaps he will grant you, or
apprehended, somewhat toward it; apprehended peradventure, but not
comprehended, (...), but not (...), made way to his Crown, but not come to it,
not obtained it.

So you see what it is you are to run for. Not a Crown of Bays or Laurel, not
the praise and commendations of men, not any earthly honor, interest, or
profit; but the honor of Heaven, the praise of God, the Crown of Glory.

Not fading and decaying pleasures, such as the leaves of the trees, or the
flower of the field, that give a verdant beauty and fragrant smell for a while
and vanish, are we to set before us. Not the praise of men are we to run our
race, or do our works for; to be seen of men, and commended by them. They
indeed that do so, says Christ, have their reward* but they had better be
without it; for it is but (...), not (...); they have it away with them, and
must look for no more, that is all they are like to have; they have beaten the
air, contrary to the Apostle, ver. 26. and with the air they are past away: Air
they sought for, and air they only have, a little foolish and vain breath, for
all their pains; they can show nothing that they have obtained; and the very
praise they sought proves nothing too; for not he that man commends, but whom
the Lord commends, is only truly praised and commended, 2 Cor. x. 18. Not any
earthly ends (3.) are we to run for; that is, but currere in incertum, at the
best, to run as uncertainly, to run for uncertainties, things that it is a
doubt whether we shall get in in Gods Service, (who rewards us better than with
temporal rewards) and it is no doubt but they are most uncertain, and cannot,
comprehendi, be so laid hold on that they will not flee away; things that we
our selves are to deny our selves in Gods Service sometimes, such as it is a
point of our running, to run from, when they will hinder our course; and such
as in such times as these are not to be expected by them that faithfully and
stoutly run the Christian race, that hold out their course in true Religion,
and the obedience of Christ, and the Communion of his Church. Heaven only it is
we are to run to, and Jesus the author and finisher of our Faith, our infinite
and exceeding great reward, and the joy which was set before him it is we are
to look to, to no other recompense of reward, no other recompencer and rewarder.

But to him and to that lastly now we are to look: if he himself set the joy of
the right hand of the Throne of God before his eyes, that he might the better
endure the cross, and despise the shame, and so run the race that his Father
set him, as it is, Heb. xii. 2. if he had an eye to the recompense of reward,
well certainly may we set such a consideration before us, and they talk they
know not what, that deny it. God allures us by rewards, and Christ himself
preaching the Gospel began it, with this encouragement to incite us to listen
to it, because the Kingdom of Heaven was at hand, St. Matthew. iv. 17. Set we
then those joys before us, and fear not: look we in all our tribulations and
sufferings, upon them, to comfort and uphold us, in all our difficulties to
encourage us, in all our devotions to inflame us. Consider we, that all we do,
that all we suffer, is nothing to be compared to the Crown of Glory, that is
laid up for us, that all our pains and labor, going, and running, and
sweating, and blowing for Christ, is not to be mentioned or thought upon; so
that at last we may obtain.

IV. Yet to keep our spirits in awe, and keep down our pride, that is likely to
arise sometimes upon our well running, and to make us diligent and constant in
our course, let us remember, it is but a may obtain the while: we may miss as
well, shall too, if we run not orderly, or give out. It Is no more than we shall
reap if we faint not, Gal. vi. 9. If we fail or faint we shall not; our Kingdom
is removed, our Crown is gone. Work we then our salvation out with fear and
trembling, as the Apostle advises us, Phil. ii. 12. that is the way to make us
so to run as to obtain. There Is no such certainly to obtain, as some imagine,
and delude themselves with; no peremptory decree for their obtaining, though
they run how they will, nor any peremptory order neither that they shall run in
their due time whether they will or no: that God will force them either to the
Race, or to the Crown; either to run, or to obtain. It Is a common, but the
greatest vanity and fallacy in the world to think to get to Heaven without
pains, to go thither with all kind of pomp, and ease, and pleasures to have our
portion here, and hereafter too. It Is no such matter, the way is strait, and
narrow, that leads thither, says he that came to show it, St. Mat. vii. 14. and
a race here we have to run for it, and all the way but a may, a possibility, or
a probability, not a necessity to obtain it. Look we carefully to our feet,
apply we our selves diligently to our course, to run the ways of righteousness,
and peace; of holiness, and salvation. Let us often look up to Heaven, and the
Crown of Glory laid up there, to add wings and spirit to us; and look we also
down sometimes to the dangers by the way, and fear our selves; and ma^^ our
steps, lest we chance to stumble, and fall, to grow faint, or weary; but that
we may run lawfully, carefully, speedily, cheerfully, stoutly, patiently, and
constantly to the end; that so running, we may obtain the end of our hopes, the
crown of of our joy, the salvation of our souls, and the redemption of our
bodies, everlasting life, and eternal glory. Which, etc.

A SERMON ON THE Fifth Sunday in Lent.
1 COR. ix. 25. And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all
things. Now they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible.
THe Text is a comparison between the worldly Combatant and the spiritual,
between the wrastler of this World, and the wrastler with it, between him that
strives for the mastery over others, and him that strives for the mastery over
himself; between the contenders in the Olympic Games, and the contender in the
Christian Race.

And it is an apt and fit comparison. Olympus in the Heathen Poets is commonly
used for heaven, so the Olympic exercises may well be used to resemble those
for heaven, and the heavenly Crown likened to the Olympic Garland, without any
offense, though with all advantage.

And it is as seasonable as fit. This holy time of Lent is a time of striving
for the mastery with our corruptions, with our corruptible for Gods
incorruptible, a time of holy exercises upon the corruptible earth to obtain a
Crown incorruptible in the heavens.

And it is somewhat more accommodate and easy to our natures, as much as
temperance is than fasting, as partial abstinence from inordinacy and excess,
than abstaining altogether.

Which makes me hope it will be as profitable as either fit, or seasonable, or
accommodate; to teach us by comparing our selves with the Wrastlers of the
World: our work with theirs, our reward with theirs, to do as much as they.
Indeed, it should be more, as our work is more honorable than theirs, more
honorable to master our selves than others, our own unruly beastly passions
than any man or beast whatever; and our Crown more worth than theirs,
incorruptible than corruptible, and the obtaining it every way as easy, if we
would but think it so, or set seriously to think of it: what they do, and what
they do it for, how much they do, and how little they do it for; what we do,
and for what we do it; how little we do, and for how much we do it; how little
they get for so much, how much we may get for so little.

This is the Sum of the Text; and the intent is to persuade us to be as
industrious and careful for a Crown of glory as they are for a Crown of grass,
to take as much pains for the praise of God as they did for the applause of
men, to do and suffer as much for heaven as they for less than earth, for a few
leaves that grow out of it. And both the one is the better to be understood,
the other the more likely to be persuaded if I keep the parts of the Comparison
together, and do not sunder them, but compare them as we go.

The two Combatants. The two strivings. The two Dietings or Preparations. The
two Crowns. The two Combatants, the Temporal and Spiritual. The Temporal, he
that striveth for the Mastery, Qui in agone contendit, The Spiritual, We, St.
Paul and we Christians.
The two strivings: Theirs express, ours understood; they strive for masteries,
yet not they only, but we also. The diet or preparing for it much alike, they
are temperate in all things; yet not they alone, but we must too; they do it,
but we do it too, or should so, by the Apostles similitude. The two Crowns, the
one corruptible, that is theirs; the other incorruptible, that is ours; both
expressly mentioned and compared.
And by comparing them together we shall see the great obligation that lies
upon us to be temperate in all things, that is, as you shall see anon, to do
all things whereby we may come at last to obtain this incorruptible Crown of
glory.

I begin with the two Combatants: the one, is any man; the other, any
Christian; the first is a man and no more, the other has a relation to Christ
added to him.

That man, that every man striveth for the mastery, to outgo his fellow some
way or other is from his very nature; there is a kind of natutural contention
thence in every body to be some body more than ordinary. If this contention
were placed upon good things, or things worth the striving for, it were happy
for us. But if we have no better assistance than from nature, we fix it upon
Games and Sports, Vanities and Trifles it is them we only strive about, there
lies our business and our study. (...), every one of us is no better, strive
and study for nothing else; and yet vain men that we are, we trouble and toil
our selves as much about such nothings, as if they were all we could desire,
all we could do.

It being then so natural and necessary a condition to every one of us to be
striving for somewhat or other, to aim at some ex^^^ence or other, to be better
than our neighbors in some way or other. It were to be desired that this
desire, and earnest pursuit were pitched right. It Is so in the other of the two
Combatants, the Christian.

He indeed is the only man that strives for the mastery. All others strive for
that only which is but slavery when all is done; We, We Christians alone strive
for that which is mastery and excellence. The more men strive for earthly
things, the more are they brought under the dominion of them, the greater is
their vassalage, and brings them no better, but to cry out with Paul, in the
person of the unregenerate man, Romans vii. Who shall deliver me from this body
of death? It Is Gods service only that is perfect freedom; we are then only free
when we are free to righteousness, then only masters when we can command our
selves. For an ille mihi liber videatur cui mulier imperat? etc. says the
Heathen Orator. Can you think him to have got the mastery whom vanity commands,
whom his Lusts give Law to, who can neither go nor come, eat nor drink, wake
nor sleep, work nor play, speak nor do, desire nor think, but what they would
have him. Ego vero istum non modo servum sed nequissimum servum, etiamsi in
amplissima familia natus sit, appellandum puto. I truly. says he again, think
he is not only a servant, but a drudge, be he who he will, of never so
honorable a Family. I add, be his victory never so great and notable in mere
vain and corruptible things. They do but press him down the more, and subject
him to vanity, and leave him groaning under the bondage of corruption. The
master over these is the true Christian only, who by his faith and resignation
conquers all his conquests, gets the better both when he overcomes, and is
overcome; both when his enemy oppresses him, as well as when himself subdues
him, who makes all things serve his triumph, every thing enhance his glory,
also things work unto his good, advance his Crown. All else are but the slaves
of their conquests, mere drudges to an empty name, an airy title.

And (2.) if we take (...) for one that strives or fights, none so truly does
it as the Christian. All else do but beat the air, fight with nothing in
comparison; their combats are not only merely vain, vain scufflings with air
and wind, to no purpose in the world, but the very things and enemies they
encounter are, at the best, but men whose breath is in their nostrils, lighter
than the very air, and vanity it self, if we believe the Psalmist, Psalm. lxii.
9. and what great conquest over such? It Is the Christian that fights indeed,
that combats enemies indeed; Principalities, and Powers, and spiritual
wickednesses in high places, enemies strong and mighty, that go invisible, and
strike and wound us when we see them not, that fight with us out of high and
almost inaccessible places of defense, that have all possible advantage over
us. These are enemies, if we talk of enemies, to fight with indeed. The enemies
worldly men so tremble at are but bragadochios to these, all their force and
power but weakness if compared with the powers of hell and darkness. This is
fighting, to fight with these, to fight with devils, and sins, and lusts; and
thus the Christian is the only fighter, the (...), none but he.

And if I may have leave to expound (...) one in an agony, as sometimes it is,
none fight to agonies like Christians; they come even to the fiery trial, even
unto blood, even unto death. They did not so in the Olympic, Pythian, Nemaean,
or Isthmian Games, they were but Games and Spor^ to the Christian Combat, that
fights often to the death, must havtis ways that intention not to give over for
death it self, but continue constant to the end. So here we have in this first
point even the mastery amongst them that strive for mastery, that they strive
for things not worth the striving for; that they strive indeed for slavery, not
Mastery; that they scarce do any thing worth the name of striving or fighting;
that theirs is but play and sport in comparison of the Christian Combatant; and
yet for all that a great deal they do for the victory in these petty trifles;
they wrestle, and cuff, and leap, and throw, and run, and try all their
strength and powers. And it is worth the while to see whether we strive and
contend as much in our real Christian combat; in a case worthy of the while
and labor. That we are now to do, secondly, to compare our strivings, theirs
and ours, the Grecian and the Christian exercises.

Five several exercises, or kinds of striving for the mastery, there was in
those Corinthian-games, Wrestling, Cuffing, Quoiting, Leaping, Running. All
these answered in our Christian course and exercise.

1. Wrestling. Wrestling against Principalities, against Powers, against the
Rulers of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high
places, says St. Paul, Ephesians. vi. 12. Wrestling secondly with God in prayer, as
Jacob did, Genesis xxxii. 24.

2. Cuffing and buffeting there is to; buffeting our selves, keeping under our
bodies, and bringing them into subjection, St. Paul's (...), ver. 27. making our
eyes and bodies, as it were, black and blew by watchings and fastings; cuffing
or buffeting our eyes for looking after, our ears for listening to, our bodies
for doing, punishing all our powers and senses for acting any thing that is
evil; a being buffeted too (2.) by Satan when we forget to buffet our selves, 2
Cor. xii. 7. Cuffing and buffeting sufficient to be found in the Christians
exercise.

3. Quoiting or casting; casting away any weight that hinders us, any sin that
does beset us, Heb. xii. 1. removing every stone of offense, giving no offense
to any in any thing, that our Ministry be not blamed, 2 Cor. vi. 3. that
nothing we do, nothing we omit, neither our doing or our not doing, be a stone
of stumbling, whereby our brother may justly stumble, or is offended, or is
made weak, Romans xiv. 21. Throw all such stones out of the way, and strive who
shall so come nearest that great corner stone Christ Jesus, or the mark of your
high calling of God in Christ Jesus, Phil. iii. 14.

4. Leaping also is to be found among the Christians exercises, skipping and
leaping for joy at the glad tidings of the Gospel, leaping and praising God
with the lame man that was healed, Acts iii. 8. striving who shall leap
farthest in it, leaping, with Abraham, St. Ioh. viii. (for so the word
signifies) to see the day of Christ; Leaping, with holy David, before the Ark,
2 Samuel vi. 16. rejoicing, and leaping for joy in the day of our sufferings for
Christ, St. Luke vi. 23. making it one of our daily exercises and businesses to
praise and magnify God, and rejoice in him, in all his days, and ways, and
dispensations, strive with one another who shall do it most, who shall go
farthest in it.

5. Running we every where meet in the Christians course, running the race
which is set before us, Heb. xii. 1. so running as we may obtain, in the verse
before the Text. Christianity it self is styled a race, the Christian Law the
Law of it, the Christian the runner, his life the course, heaven the goal;
nothing more ordinary.

Besides these five single exercises in the Grecian there was a sixth mixed or
compounded of wrestling and cuffing both, (...) they called it. But in
Christianity all are joined, all are sometimes exercised together; the
Christian must be skilled and well exercised in all; wrestle against the World,
the Flesh, and Devil; wrestle with God, cuff and buffet himself, suffer the
buffettings of Satan too sometimes, cast away all weights and stones of
hinderance and offense, leap and run with joy and eagerness the race which is
set before us, looking unto Jesus, always, in all these, looking unto him that
is both the author and finisher of our faith, Heb. xii. 2.

And being thus wholly to be kept in exercise, it will be convenient, nay,
necessary now to fit and prepare our selves, so to diet and order our selves
that we may so perform them as to obtain the day, to get the victory, to be
temperate in all things as well as any wrestler or runner of them all.

There are four several interpretations of the word (...), which we here render
temperate.

The first is what here we find it, to be temperate: to keep a certain set
diet, whereby their bodies might be best strengthened and enabled, made nimble
and active: so it signifies to the Wrestlers. To observe a spare and moderate
diet, such as may most advantage the souls business, best subdue the body and
quicken the spirit, be it abstinence from some or sometimes from all kinds of
meat and drink: so it signifies to the Christian. This the Christians, as the
other the Wrestlers diet.

Very exact and punctual were they that strove for the masteries in their
observances, kept their rules, and times, and kind of diet. I would the
Christian now were but half so much to his rule and order. Indeed I must
confess theirs was not sometimes a moral temperance, it was sometimes to
fullness; yet still such as was prescribed and most conducible to their end, If
we would observe as much those abstinences which most make to the enabling us
in our spiritual race or combat, I shall desire no more: there indeed fasting
and all temperance will come in, will be the Christians (...), the Christians
being temperate in all things. A thing so necessary, that St. Jerome says no
less, than, Difficile imo impossible est, ut praesentibus quis and futuris
fruatur bonis, ut his ventrem and ibi mentem expleat, ut de deliciis transeat
ad delicias, ut in utroque seculo primus sit, ut in coelo and in terra appareat
gloriosus. It is hard, nay impossible, no less says he, to enjoy both present
and future goods, our good things here and hereafter too, to fill the belly
here, and the soul hereafter, to pass from pleasure into pleasure, from fullness
into fullness, to be first in earth and heaven too, glorious in both. He must
feed spare here that looks to be fed full there, be temperate in all earthly
delights and satisfactions, that looks for heavenly either in the other world
or in this either: for the full body stifles the soul, and we are not more
unwieldy in body when the belly is over full, then the soul is then. Fullness
oppresses even the natural spirits, makes us we cannot even breath freely for
the while, enough to show us our rational spirits are not likely to be freeer
to breath, or evaporate themselves to Heaven or Heavenwards, whilst the very
natural ones themselves are so oppressed. From temperance and moderation we
cannot be excused, neither in meat, nor drink, nor any thing, whatever weakness
may excuse from fasting: so necessary a disposing of us it is to all Christian
piety and goodness, yea, and a Christian virtue too it self, Gal. v. 23.

The word may yet (2.) be rendered continence; so it seems to be taken, Tit. i.
8. where it is distinguished from (...) sober, or temperate, and joined next to
(...), holy, clean, or pure. A point observed by those agonothletae to abstain
from Wine and Women for the time of their providing themselves against those
games: So the Poet. Qui cupit optatam cursu contingere metam abstinuit vino and
Venere. And our Apostle tells us of such a kind of temporary continence, very
convenient for those Christians that more especially addict themselves to the
Christian exercises, particularly of Prayer and Fasting, chap. 7. of this
Epistle, ver. 5. But no time but commands Continence and Chastity to all
Christians whosoever, that no uncleanness be so much as named among them; for
it becomes not Saints, Ephesians. v. 3. it becomes not the Gospel of Christ, which
is a doctrine of all holiness and purity. Nothing more weakens and indisposes
the body for vigorous and noble actions, nothing more unfits the soul for the
race of Christian piety, nothing more blinds it from understanding, nothing
more keeps it from desiring, nothing more disables it from performing it then
inordinate and sensual lusts, and indulging to them. To run, or wrestle, or
combat well we have as much need of continence as any that ever strove for
secular mastery.

A third notion of (...) there is to signify a constancy of mind to abstain
from all things that are hurtful. Suid^s and Hesychius render, it to abstain
from evil. And that not only things that are truly such, but those things also
sometimes that may hinder the greater good. Thus St. Paul in this Chapter a
little before the Text abstains from using his Christian liberty, that he may
so with the greater profit and success fulfill the course of his Ministry: will
not use the power he had to live upon preaching of the Gospel, but voluntarily
preaches to the Corinthians upon free cost, that he might gain the more, ver.
19. becomes again all things to all men, that by all means he might gain some,
ver. 22. He saw the Corinthians were close, and covetous, forsaw it was like to
hinder his preaching much if he put them to much charge; he therefore
supersedes his power and liberty (though he convinces them from the beginning
of the Chapter, that such he had, and just, and natural, and reasonable, and
ordinary it was) lest he should not do so much good upon them as he desired.
But though we must not expect that all men should advance to this height, they
must yet resolve to remove all real and and faulty hindrances out of the way,
abstain from all occasions and appearances of evil, which may at any time
hinder or rob us of our Crown, make us fall short of the Goal of Heaven and
Glory.

Lastly, It may signify his having all things in his power, (...), the getting
the mastery over himself, getting the victory over one desire after another,
denying himself first one liberty, then another, till at last he has mastered
all, (...), got all into his power. Thus strove those Grecian Wrestlers, and
Racers, ordered and tempered their bodies by degrees, first to this exercise,
then another; first to this height, then a higher; first to this, then to a
further, till they had gotten a perfect mastery and command over all their
powers, and members, to use them to the greatest advantage and agility. This is
the Christians business too, to keep our soul and body in continual exercise,
always doing, ever suffering somewhat, now striving against that sin, then a
second; now mortifying that lust, then another; now moderating this passion,
then sweetning that; one while denying himself this liberty, then another;
sometimes attempting this difficulty, then some other; sometimes running after
good, sometimes wrestling with evil, sometimes cuffing and crucifying an
inordinate desire, sometimes throwing off such and such a habit, sometimes
leaping away in fear from an occasion or opportunity of doing ill, sometimes
leaping into a way or occasion of doing good, sometimes leaping for joy when it
is done: whereby at length by continual exercise and custom, we may happily
come to a perfect temper in all our powers and faculties of soul and body,
bring them all to an exact obedience, to the obedience of Christ, to run the
race, to fight the fight that he has set before us.

Delicatus es miles, si putes te posse sine pugna vincere, sine certamine
triumphare, etc. says St. Chrysostom. Thou art too delicate a Soldier for
Christ, if thou think thou can overcome without striving, triumph without
fighting. Exsere vires, etc. put out thy strength, fight valiantly, contend
fiercely in the Christian warfare: Remember thy covenant, think upon thy
condition, consider thy warfare, the covenant that thou made, the condition
thou undertookest, the warfare thou gave thy name too at thy Baptism. The
Christians life is but a continual warfaring against the world, the flesh, and
the Devil; thy Captain calls, and leads thee to it, and thy crown expects thee,
not a Crown of corruptible leaves, or flowers, but an incorruptible Crown of
Glory. Be temperate and sober, be chaste and continent, be vigilant and
constant, be diligent and active in Christ's holy work and business, that thou
may run without falling, wrestle without being thrown, cuff without being
beaten, quoit all thy labors near the mark, out-leap all evil ways, perform
all thy exercises, get happily at last to the end of thy way and labor, snatch
and carry away the Crown prepared for thee. That Is the fourth and last point of
the comparison between Crown and Crown, the one corruptible, the other
incorruptible.

Here indeed first properly comes in the But, the comparisons before have run
somewhat even; combatants, and exercises, and preparations much alike; but here
nothing but the name, no comparison between mortal and immortal, vanity and
reality, finite and infinite: Yet let us a little compare them as we can.

The Crown these Gamesters strove for was but of leaves of Pine, or Apple; of
Oak, or Olive; of Laurel, nay, or even Grass sometimes: Corruptible these
indeed, nay, and vain too, to do so much, Multa tulit fecitque puer sudavit and
alsit, to run, and sweat, and toil, and keep ado for such a toy as the best of
these, how vain and foolish. The very Heathen themselves Anacharsis in Lucian
sufficiently deride it.

Yet as ridiculous as it seems the greatest part even of the Christian world
strive and labor for as little. What is the aim of all the great ones of the
world but leaves and grass? What get they by all their labors and pursuits,
but some such business: Let them all have their desires, and it comes to no
more. Let the one obtain his so much desired honor, another his beloved
Mistress pleasure, a third his darling wealth: (of one of which three kinds of
leaves all their Crowns are made) and what get they but mere fading leaves,
neither fruit nor flower.

The Crown of honor, what is it, but a very leaf that withers presently? the
worm of envy consumes it presently, the blast of jealousy nips it in its
glory, the breath of malice deads it in a trice. The Crown of pleasure has a
woe upon it, Isa. xxviii. 1, 3. a woe that will consume them, Woe to the crown
of pride, to the drunkards of Ephraim, whose glorious beauty is a fading
flower: all that are drunk with any pleasure, their very Crowns wither upon
their heads, the intemperate heat that both produces and rises from their
sensual pleasures, turns the color of their beauty, and will make their
garlands e're long smell rank and stink with their own corruption. The Crown of
Riches has a worm commonly that breeds in the leaf, this Oaken Garland in which
we place so much strength, and stedfastness, has an oaken Apple among the
leaves that nurses a worm to consume it when we least think of it. Nay, though
we had coronam militum, a Crown, an Army of men as thick as the spires of
Grass, to encompass and guard either our honors wealth or pleasures; yet they
would all prove in a little time but as the Grass; all men are nothing else,
Sr. James i. 11. but particularly the rich man, so says that Apostle, ver. 10.
the rich man as the flower of the grass, he shall pass away. He shall not stay
for a storm to blast or blow him away, even the Sun of prosperity shall do it,
Mole ruit sua, his own weight and greatness shall throw him down. For the Sun
is no sooner (mark but that, no sooner) risen with a burning heat, but it
withers the grass, and the flower of it falls, and the grace of the
fashions of it perishes; so also shall the rich man fade away in his ways.
Mark that too in his very ways, his own very ways shall bring him to ruin and
destruction. It Is so with the leaves of honor, it is so with the leaves of
pleasure, the very Sun no sooner rises upon them, but it withers them; the very
Sunshine and favor of the Prince ruins them, the burning heat of their
pleasures waste them away, make their pleasures troublesome and burdensome in
a little while, and a while after vanish and confound them with shame and
reproach, leave them nothing upon their heads, but ill colored and ill seated
leaves, ignominy and dishonor, nothing in their souls but dryness and
discomfort; their estates too oftentimes drained dry, scarce any thing but the
Prodigals Husks to refresh them, or dry leaves to cover them.

But the Christians Crown is nothing such, it is a flourishing Crown, Psalm.
cxxxii. 18. a Crown of pure Gold, Psalm. xxi. 3. a Crown of precious Stones,
Zech. ix. 16. a Crown of Righteousness, 2 Timothy iv. 8. a Crown of Life, St.
James i. 12. a Crown of Honor, Psalm. viii. 5. a Crown of Stars, Rev. xii. 1. a
Crown of Glory, 1 Pet. v. 4. a Crown of Glory that fades not away, in the same
verse, eternal, everlasting. A flourishing, not a withering Crown, a Crown of
Gold, not of Grass; of precious Stones, not of Leaves, of Righteousness not
unjustly gotten, of Life not unto Death, of Honor not to be ashamed of, of
Stars, not Stubble, of Glory, not vanity, that never so much as alters color,
but continues fresh and flourishing, and splendid to all eternity. An
inheritance incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away, reserved in
Heaven for us, says St. Peter, 1. Pet. i. 4.

And having now compared our Crowns, and finding so vast, so infinite a
difference between them. Can we think much to do as much for this incorruptible
Crown of Glory, as the other do for their vain and corruptible one? Shall they
that strive for petty masteries, for toys and trifles, for ribbands and
garlands, be so exact in their observances so strict in their diet, so painful
in their exercises, so vigilant in their advantages, so diligent in providing,
strengthening, and enabling themselves for their several sports and
undertakings, and shall we that are to strive for no less than Heaven it self,
be so loose in our performances, so intemperate in meat and drink, so sluggish
in our business, so careless of advantages, so negligent in all things that
make toward it. Are leaves worth so much, and the fruit of eternal peace so
little? Is a little air, the vain breath of a mortal man to be so sought for,
and is the whole Heaven it self, and the whole Host and God of it, the praise
of God and Saints, and Angels, that stand looking on us, to be so slighted, as
not worth so doing, doing no more than they? Where is that man, Dic mihi musa
virum, show me the man that can, that takes the pains for eternal glory, that
these vain souls do for I know not how little enough to style it.

But if we compare the pains the ambitious man takes for honor, the voluptuous
for his pleasure, the covetous man for wealth; mere leaves of Tantalus his
Tree, that do but gull, not satisfy them, the late nights, the early mornings,
the broken sleeps, the unquiet slumbers, the many watches, the innumerable
steps, the troublesome journeys, the short meals, the strange restraints, the
often checks, the common counterbuffs, the vexatious troubles, the multitude of
affronts, neglects, refusals, denials, the eager pursuits, the dangerous ways,
the costly expenses, the fruitless travels, the tortured minds, the wearied
bodies, the unsatisfied desires when all is done, that these men suffer, and
run through, the one for an honor that sometimes no body thinks so but he that
pursues it; the other for a pleasure base oftentimes and villainous: the third
for an estate not far from ruin, nay, oftentimes to ruin his house and
posterity. If I say, we compare these men's pains and sufferings, with what we
do for Christ, and God, and Heaven, and happiness, true, real, immovable
happiness and glory, Good Lord! how infinitely short do we come of them? shall
not they rise up against us in judgment and condemn us; nay, shall not we our
selves rise up against our selves in judgment, who have done many of these
things, suffered many for a little profit, vainglory, or vain hope, which we
thought much to do for eternal glory? This we do, we strive, and labor, and
take pains for vanity; we are temperate in all things, restrain and keep in our
selves, for the obtaining sometimes a little credit, sometimes a little
affection, or good opinion from some whose love or good opinion is worth
nothing; or if it be, is as easily lost, as soon removed and changed from us,
is commonly both corrupt and corruptible without ground, and to little purpose.
But for Gods Judgment, Christ's Affection, the Holy Spirits good Love to us, for
the praise of good men, of Saints, and Angels, the whole choire of Heaven
rejoicing over us: nay, for Heaven it self, and blessedness, and glory, all
which we might obtain with the same pains, and lesser trouble, and in the same
time, it is so little that we do, so far from all, that I may without injury
style it nothing.

But for Gods sake, for Christ's sake, for our own sake, let it not be so for
ever; let us not always prefer Glass before Diamonds, Barley Conrs before
Pearls, pleasure, or profit, or honor before Heaven, and Happiness, and Glory.
There are in Heaven unspeakable pleasures, whole Rivers of them there. There
are in Heaven infinite and eternal riches, which we can neither fathom nor
number; there is glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life. There
are all these Crowns made incorruptible and everlasting, all running round,
encircling one another like Crowns, encircling our souls and bodies too like
Crowns, without end, without period. If we would have any Crowns, Honor, or
Riches, or Pleasure, let us there seek them where they are advanced to an
incorruptibility, made incorruptible, where the leaves are turned into
everlasting fruit, incorruptible honor, incorruptible pleasure, incorruptible
riches, incorruptible all. Let us but do for them, thus advanced and heightened,
as we do for them when they are but fading and withering, and unsatisfying, and
I say no more, but you will with as much ease obtain this incorruptible and
immortal; as that mortal and corruptible. God grant us grace to do so, to
strive for the mastery over our selves, and lusts, and sins, so to be
temperate, abstemious, vigilant, and industrious in the pursuit of Heaven, as
we are or have been of the earth, that we may at last be crowned not with a
corruptible but an incorruptible crown of glory and everlasting life.

A SERMON ON THE Sixth Sunday in Lent.
DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they
would consider their latter end!
ANd if we be They, who I am afraid we are, we are now in a good time to do it:
Lent is a considering time. A Time set us by holy Church to consider what we
have done all the year before, what we are to do all our years that are behind,
and what we shall do, what will become of us if we do not, when all our years
are at an end. It begins with a day of Ashes, and it goes out with a week we
hear of nothing in but the preparations to a Grave and the Resurrection, so as
it were to mind us of our latter end, make us more serious about it at this
time than ordinary, from the first day of it to the last. So the Text is not
unseasonable, nor the Wish in it unfit any way for the time.

And whether this Wish be Moses his, or Gods, this They his own people, or
their enemies, it is no matter. A good Wish it is from whomsoever to friend or
enemy. Only it intimates, They are none of the wisest for whom it is.

For his own people it might well be. Them he had led out of the waste howling
wilderness, ver. 10. Them he had kept there as the apple of his eye, as in the
same verse; and when he brought them thence, fed them with the fat of Lambs,
and the kidneys of wheat, ver. 14. And upon this, they grew fat and kicked, ver.
15. It Is a good Wish for them, that They were wiser.

For their Adversaries (2.) it might be as well. They had as little sense it
seems, very ready to grow high at any time upon prosperities and successes, as
if they, and not God, had done the business, ver. 27. It Is a good Wish for
them, that they would understand a little better.

There Is another people that we know (but I know not how to call them, his or I
know not whose, they carry themselves so strangely, (I pray God it be not we at
last) whom the Wish may suit as well as any. A people, who, some of them, not
long since, were, as it were, in wastes and deserts like Gods own People, (in a
condition sad enough God knows) born thence no great while ago upon his wings,
since that set high, and fed high with Corn, and Wine, and many good things
else, who, for all that, have not well requited God that did it. Others of
them, who because they came in no misfortune like other folk, nor were plagued
like those other men, stand much, like Isreal's enemies, upon their terms; their
righteousness, or power, or policy, or somewhat did the work. Both are become
too much unmindful of the Rock of their Salvation, as we have it, ver. 15. and
have quite forgot to consider the latter end of things, what may be yet; that
however things stand now, the foundations of the mountains may be set on fire
again, as the Phrase is, ver. 22. if they be no wiser, either of them, than by
continuance in sin to blow up the sparks; and then who can assure his house, or
barns, or shop, or office at the next turn? It Is a good Wish for these too
(both of them) that they would consider a little better on it together, in
novissimo, now at last.

For all these it may be; and to be short and home, for all these it is; As in
Moses's time for Israel and their enemies, so in Ours, for Us, late enemies,
now friends together, that we would all be wiser once, that we men, at least at
last, would understand the loving kindness of the Lord, and consider the
wonders that he has done for the children of men. But above all, that men
would think of this same latter end, think that all things end not here, there
is somewhat to be looked to after these days are done, which wise men would look
to, and provide for. O Si, O that they would. God wishes it, and Moses wishes
it, and you and I, all of us, I hope, may wish what they do without offense.
But do it we must besides, else God will complain of Us, as he does of Them
here in the Text. For a kind of Complaint it is, as well as a Wish; O Si, that
they were, a plain Complaint that they were not.

But be it a Wish, or be it a Complaint, (and both it is) a Wish for some, that
they were wise, or a Complaint of them, that they are not, for three
Particulars it is, I. As a Wish; it is that the men here spoken of (1.) were
wise. That (2.) they would understand this, somewhat or other that we shall see
anon worth understanding. That (3.) they would especially consider their latter
end. II. As a Complaint; it is for three things too that they were none of
these, that they were neither Wise, nor Understood, nor Considered what they
should. For O Si, is but a kind of a sigh that it is no other; a very trouble to
God that men are no better.


Of both, this is the sum; that They who in the midst of mercies, after the
sharp sense of former judgments, and not yet out of the fear of new ones,
forget God, and either by new sins, or retriving old ones, slight so both his
judgments and his mercies, they are neither wise nor understanding, nor
considering men (what ere they go for) but a sort that God will complain of
(who ere they be) for somevvhat else, and vvishes to be vviser, to understand
a little better, and consider now at last, lest the latter end be worse with
them than the beginning.

That it may not, but that the Wish may take effect, and God have no more
reason to complain. Let us now consider the Particulars; where I must first
show you for whom, before I show you for what it is. And yet I know not how
you will take it.

I. Indeed that Isreal's enemies, the Heathen, should be a Nation void of
counsel, that have not any understanding in them, ver. 28. that I believe may
be taken well enough.

But (2.) that Israel, Gods own people, should be of the number, they a foolish
people and unwise as it is, ver. 6.

And that not the meanest of them neither, but they that eat the fat, and drink
the sweet, ver. 14. the best (as we would say) of the Parish, who are always
wise because they are rich, that they should not understand.

Those (3.) who ride upon the high places of the earth, ver. 13. the chiefest
persons, that men in honor should have no understanding. It Is well Moses says
it; I know not whether it be safe to say it after him.

But (4.) that wise men too, not the ignorant only, but they, whose wits God
seems to be afraid of, ver. 27. and dares do nothing for them, for fear they
should misapply it, who (let God do what he can, say what he will) will say and
prove any thing good against him; who are always giving reason upon reason for
every thing, but why they reason him out of all, that They should come into the
tale; that we, or any body, or God himself should wish them wise (as if they
were not as wise as we could wish them) what an affront does this simple Moses
put upon them? Why, Lord, who does understand if they do not? Or who will
believe us if we say it?

And yet all These are They the Wish is for. Gods enemies are fools, and Gods
people not so wise says our blessed Savior, St. Luke xvi 8. The gallantest,
the richest, the wisest of them not so wise always as they should be; not so
wise, I hope, at any time, but God may have leave to wish them wiser.

Yea, every one of them, every mothers child, if they have learnt no more than
they here in the Chapter; learnt nothing by their afflictions, but to forget
them; nothing by their deliverances, but to abuse them; nothing by what is past
but to be discontent with the present, and yet daily power out themselves into
excesses, and never think of what may come. If this be all the wise parts they
play, as they were theirs in the Text (be they who they will) they are they God
means, God make them wiser. The Wish now is like I fear to fit the Persons as
well as it does the Time. And three Points there are in it I told you to be
learnt. Sapere, Intelligere, and Novissima Providere. To call to mind the
things that are past; To understand the things that are; And to provide for
things to come. To remember where we were, To understand where we are, and to
consider and provide for where we may be, the three main Points of Wisdom; So
St. Augustine distinguishes the three words as the three main parts of wisdom,
and so shall I. But (1.) consider them as our duty; and then (2.) as Gods
desire.

Sapere, or to be wise, that is the first. And Sapientia est per quam repetit
animus quae fuerunt: So that learned Father, To be wise is to call to mind the
things that are already past, and the great Roman Orator I may tell you takes
the words so too.

And truly Moses himself seems so to mean it; For no sooner had he called this
people foolish and unwise, ver. 6. but in the next words immediately he bids
them remember the days of old, and consider the years of many Generations, as
if that were the way to make them wise. Indeed, if we be but of yesterday, or
look no further back, Job will quickly tell us we know nothing, Job viii. 9.
State super vias antiquas, that is the Rule God gives us, Ier. vi. 16. On the
old ways there is the standing, no foundation to build on else. New opinions and
devices are but a kind of standing upon our own heads; we cannot stand so long;
a building upon a tottering and boggy ground, which vents it self ordinarily
into vapors, that make a noise and blustering, darken and infect the air and
nothing else. Every wind, too, carries them which way it will, this way, or
that way, or any way; and, observe it when you will, once out of the old way,
and they never know where to fix.

Yet (2.) to be wise, has here a notion more practical, and sends us sadly and
soberly to meditate now and then upon the late condition we were in. And
surely, where God found us, and how he found us, how he led us about, and how
he instructed us, how he kept us all the while as the apple of his eye, how he
fluttered over us with his wings, how he spread them abroad and bore us on
them, (I keep the expressions of the Chapter, for Isreal's case was much our
own) or to speak out, the desolations, and poverties, and distresses, and
reproaches we were in; the prisons, the dangers, the necessities we escapt; the
supplies, the reliefs, the protections we found (we know not how) are not
things would be forgotten; they are such, as (one would think) would make one
wise. They would be written upon our walls, and beams, and posts, and doors;
written with a Pen of Iron, and with the point of a Diamond, graven upon the
Tables of our hearts, and upon the horns of our Altars, or (as Job speaks) upon
the rock for ever. Our Churches, our Halls, our Chambers, all our Rooms hung
round with the sad stories we have seen, to make them live in our memories, and
in our childrens after us, to make them wise by their fathers sufferings.

And yet (3.) to be wise is more still: To make these things live in our lives
as well as memories, to grow good upon it. To be wise, and to do good the
Psalmist joins, Psalm. xxxvi. 3. Indeed, they cannot be asunder. He is not wise
who is not good. To keep my Laws and do them, this is your wisdom, and your
understanding; the way to make the Nations say, This is a wise and
understanding people. So God determines it, Deuteronomy, iv. 6.

Indeed, I come not hither to preach other wisdom, I should make my preaching
foolishness then, indeed, in a truer sense than the Apostle meant it. The
Wisdom of God (if we can keep to it) that is our business. And he (1.) that
hearkens to it, he is wise says the vvisest Solomon, Prove. xii. 15. He (2.)
who exalted from that lovv condition, we were speaking of, to a high one, is
lowly still, he is wise, says he again, Prove. xi. 2. He (3.) who upon the
same account keeps himself under still, keeps under Discipline and Government
as if he felt the former lashes still, he is wise. Apprehendite disciplinam,
is a Point of holy David's Nunc ergo sapite, of the wisdom he commends, Psalm.
ii. 11.

But if you will be wise, indeed, and pardon me that I extend Wisdom a little
further than I first propounded it, There are four things that are exceeding
wise, Prove. xxx. 24. you may learn it of. The Ants, that prepare their meat in
the Summer. The Conies, that make their houses in the Rock. The Locusts, that
go forth all of them by bands. And the Spider, that takes hold with her hands,
and is in Kings Palaces. Were we but as wise as they, as Ants, and Conies,
and Locusts, and Spiders (and it is a shame we should not) we would by the
experience of our former evils: Prepare (1.) in good days with the Ant, for bad
ones. We would (2.) with the Conies build our dwellings in the Rock St. Paul
says was Christ; having felt sufficiently already there is no sure building
else. We would (3.) go forth, as the Locusts do, to gather all by bands, unite
in the bond of peace and charity, not straggle into factions, and divide in
parties, remembering what that lately came to, and may quickly come to again if
we look not to it. We would (4.) with the Spider, catch hold with our hands,
keep our selves employed in our own business, trades, or studies, and not
meddle with things we either understand not, or belong not to us. We would
learn of them besides to be in the palaces of the great King, the houses of God
a little more constantly than we are. This would be to be exceeding wise.

And if to these we add the wisdom of the Serpent, as our blessed Savior
commends it to us, St. Mark x. 16. make it our care above all (as they say the
Serpent does) to save our heads, Caput Christum, and Caput Regem, Christ our
head, and the King our Head, make it our business to keep our Religion and
obedience safe. Be who will else thought never so wise, I am sure there is none
wiser, as God counts wisdom, than they that do so.

Yet lastly, if you had rather take the rule of your wisdom from above, take it
from St. James, That wisdom (says he) is first pure, then peaceable, gentle,
easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality,
without hypocrisy, St. James iii. 17. So to be wise, is to wash our hands of
what is past, to live peaceably and orderly, friendly and kindly together for
the time to come, heartily promoting one another good, without grudging or
dissembling. For in returning and quietness, it seems, is the Apostle wisdom,
as well as the Prophets strength, Isa. xxx. 15. wisdom it seems and strength
both. I would some would understand it, that, or this, nay, that and this, we
are to consider next. The condition we are in, that it is we are now to
understand. For Intelligentia perspicit quae sunt, so St. Augustine defines it,
and this hoc is most naturally the present. So to understand this, (which is
the second particular in the wish) is, to be truly sensible how things now go
with us. Where (1.) what it is we are to understand, and then what it is to
understand it.

What this is we take in two particulars: Gods dealing with us, and our dealing
with him again. These two, the this, the business we are wished to understand.

I. And how God deals with Us, the high places of the earth we ride on, ver.
13. the places and offices we enjoy, the increase of the Fields we eat of, the
plenty we abound with, the Honey we suck out of the rock, and the oil that
issued to us out of the flinty rock, the same verse, those blessings which we
could no more expect than those sweet dews out of stones and flints, the butter
and milk, ver. 14. the smoothness and evenness of our conditions now, the fat
of lambs, and rams, and goats in the next words; the full tables we well nigh
groan at, and the pure blood of the grape, the mirth and jollity we live in
tell us as plain, I say, how he deals with us as they did Israel how he dealt
with them. One day tells another, how the Almighty commands it to dart
blessings on us, and one night certifies another, how he enjoins it to shadow
us with protections, both speak loud enough to have their voices heard among us.

But how (2.) we deal with him again. I would there were no voice abroad, I
would no body heard, I would Gath did not speak it, nor the streets of Askelon
ring of it, that the day might be clouded with darkness to cover it, and that
the night were as the shadow of death to bury it for ever: that thou, O God
however, would not reckon the days of our ingratitude in the number of our
months. We are surrounded with plenty, and we abuse it to excess. We are
encompassed with peace, and we disturb it with petty quarrels. We are loaded
with wealth and riches, and we lash them out in lusts and vanities. We are
clothed with honors, and we dishonor them with meannesses. Our friends are
given into our bosoms, and we envy some of them, and slight the rest. Our Laws
are restored us, and we live as if we had none. Our Religion is returned, and
we laugh it out of countenance. Good discipline reviving, and we are doing what
we can to break the bonds in sunder. Our Churches now stand open to us, and we
pass by them with neglect. Our King God has set upon his holy Hill, and the
people still imagine vain things against him. In a word, we are filled with all
good things, and we do all the evil we can with them. We fill up our days with
iniquities, and our nights with transgressions. We neither consider Gods
dealings, nor mind our own. We understand neither that nor this.

For to understand this (which is the second branch of this particular) is to
understand both whence and whither these mercies are, whence they come, and
whither they tend.

For the first we are too ready to say with the Heathen, ver. 27. Our hand is
high, and God has not done it. God has not done it; why, tell me then (I
pray) what were the counsels that brought things about? where were the Armies
that forced our passage? whence the money that smoothed the way? who confounded
the devices, who fettered the forces? who divided the strengths that were
against us? who turned the hearts of the Fathers to the Children, and the
hearts of the Children to the Fathers? who softened our enemies? who strengthened
our friends? who suppled strangers at last to pity us? who calmed the Seas? who
held the winds? who guided our happiness into our harbors, and even threw it
into our bosoms? This Cloud, that arose like Eliah's out of the Sea, 1 Kings
xviii. 44. out of the vast Sea of Gods endless mercy, and covered Heaven, and
Earth with blessings (till we are grown black, I fear sadly black and sinful
with them) it was not as his servant took it, like a man's hand at all, it was
like Gods all the way, it was merely Gods, Non nobis therefore Domine non
nobis, must be our Psalm, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name
only be the glory. And this the first way to understand his mercies, to confess
from him they come, and so give him thanks.

The second is, to learn also whether they tend. They are in St. Paul's
understanding to lead us to repentance, Romans ii. 4. (and the time is proper for
it.) In the Psalmists, to understand well is to do thereafter, Psalm. cxi. 10.
So to understand Gods blessings right well, is to use them right well. And when
under blessings we live accordingly, take them thankfully, use them soberly,
employ them charitably, then, and not till then we understand them.

Yet lastly, I must add, that till we think we have no understanding, till we
confess we are (what God says we are in the words just before) a Nation that
has none, a Nation that when time was, undid it self with its own wisdom,
whilst we would needs teach God to govern his Church, and rule the world, and
in a manner force him either to make the world anew again out of nothing, or
make the Church into it; till we grow sensible how wisely we reformed all till
we had reformed God out of all, and all into Atheism, and confusion; and that
we are no wiser still then to tread in the same steps that will do it again,
there will be little hope we understand Gods dealings or our own. Yet this
understanding our not understanding God here particularly points them to; for
having immediately before said, this people, they were a Nation that had not
any understanding, he presently adds, O that they were wise and understood it;
even this very thing in particular, that they do not understand, as wise as
they seem, or think themselves. The next point may make them wiser if however
now at last they will consider their latter end. What may be the end both of
their follies, and their wisdoms here, and what is like to be the end of them
hereafter; what in this world, and what in the other; for Novissima reaches
both, the issues of this life and the issues of the next. Et novissima
providerent.

III. Several latter ends there are of both sorts, to be considered; but how
things may notwithstanding the fair face they carry, end yet here e're long,
that consider first. And that I shall tell you without stirring out of the
Chapter, for God tells us it there himself: (1.) He will set on fire the
foundations of the mountains, verse 22. if we be no wiser than we have been
yet. The highest mountains of our honors, the greatest mountains of our
strengths, nay, the sirmest foundations we can build on shall fall all into
ashes, and scatter into smoke and air.

Or (2.) burning heat, and bitter destruction shall devour us, ver. 24. even
our zeal and bitterness against one another shall raise such flames as shall
consume us all together, High and low, rich and poor, one with another.

Or (3.) he will send the teeth of beasts upon us, with the poison of the
Serpents of the dust, ver. 24. again; set the beasts of the people again to
tear and worry us: nay, even the most contemptible persons, the vermin of the
dust, they shall devour us. They shall creep like Serpents into our Families,
poison them with errors, poison with sin, poison them with lusts, multiply too
there like dust, and destroy us e're we dream on it.

Or, if we escape that, the sword (4.) without, and the terror within shall
destroy the young man, and the Virgin, the suckling, and the man of gray hairs,
ver. 25. nor young, nor old escape the second bout.

Or (5.) He will scatter us into corners, ver. 26. but they shall not hide and
shelter us as before; our very remembrance he shall make to cease, we shall
come no more out, ver. 26. Not so much as an ear, or leg, as the Prophet
speaks, Amos iii. 12. taken out of the Lions mouth to remember us by. But a
populus non populus, a people that we count as nothing, shall possess our room,
ver. 21. any thing, every thing that will but serve to root us out.

Some of these, nay, all these lastly, and more shall come upon us, heaps of
mischiefs, ver. 23. and all the arrows of the Almighty, till they be spent, as
in the same verse, if we be no wiser than we have been hitherto, if we
understand no better how to use either our bad days or our good ones. And if
after not only so many fair warnings, but so many fair enjoyments, we carelessly
throw away our selves into our former miseries, we shall also die like fools;
and who can be such to pity us?

That all these have not befallen us before this time, that God has not torn up
our foundations, nor given us over to our own wraths, nor to the peoples, that
he has not scattered us, nor brought some ill end or other upon us long e're
this; it is not for our righteousness, I am sure: but ne hosts dicerent, ver.
27. lest some should justify their own dealings, or ne populus diceret, lest
some others condemn Gods, as if he had delivered them only to destroy them. But
what e're they say, Ego retribuam eis in tempore, their foot shall slide in due
time, says God, and juxta est dies perditionis, the day of their calamity is at
hand, ver. 35.

But if we escape all these, there are four other latter ends that must be
thought on; Death and Judgment, Hell and Heaven: the quatuor novissima, that
everybody can tell, but few consider, yet the two first of them we cannot
avoid, and one of the other we must come to.

And (1.) suppose our prosperity and splendour should go with us to the Grave
(and we can carry them no further) yet after we have lived like Gods to come to
die like men, to be shaken with Agues, or burnt with Fevers, or torn with
Cholicks, or swollen with Gouts, or groan away in pain, or go out in stench,
(every body glad when we are gone) and at our going to be stripped of all our
gallantry with a stulte cujus haec? Thou fool, whose are all these things thou
must leave behind? to be sent away with so scornful a farewell, into rottenness
and putrefaction, and so be blown into dust, and vanish into oblivion, like the
meanest men, or perhaps which is far more terrible to be plucked away in the
heat and violence of a sin, and none to deliver is, is but a sad end of all our
jollities and glories.

Yet hence (2.) to be drawn to the last Tribunal (that is the next stage we come
to) there to have our follies fully laid open to the eyes of all the world, not
a night-folly hid, where we must give an account of every hour and minute
spent, every word and thought as well as work: after all our blustering here to
be dragged thither to a reckoning for every farthing, even to the last mite,
and receive accordingly, how bad so e're it be: This will set us to consider,
sure, what we shall answer at that day, how to give up our accounts with joy,
and come off with glory.

For we end not yet, there is still a latter end beyond both these; two for
fail: and it is yet within your choice, which you will come to. Novissima coeli,
or Novissima inferni. The highest Heaven, or the lowest Hell. This last we
have, ver. 22. and that we will take first. It Is better ending with the to
other.

For this, it is a place whence joy is ever banished, and where no good is;
where nothing but sorrow, and sadness, and horror dwells: where the wicked lie
wrapped in flames, and Sulphur, covered with worms, and stench, and darkness. All
the racks and tortures that the wit of cruelty ever found out here, are beds of
Down and Roses to those horrid lodgings. Here in the bitterest pains there is
some part or other well, or somewhat or other always to be found to give us
ease. The light will cheer us, or the night refresh us, or sleep give us rest.
Company will divert the anguish, or custom lighten it, or hope lessen it, or
time wear it out. But in that place of torment (so Dives called and felt it)
nor soul, nor body, nor faculty, nor member free. The conscience of former
sins, that terrifies them; the memories of former happiness, that distracts
them, the understanding now what they have forfeited and might have had, that
above all infinitely torments them. The tongue burns, and the teeth gnash, and
the heart trembles, and the eyes weep, and the hands wail, and the ears are
filled with continual screeches, and everlasting howlings, and every member is
intolerably tortured with the punishment of its own sins: and yet not so much
there as a drop of water to refresh 'um, not a gleam of light to comfort 'um,
no rest day nor night. The company of Devils, and damned spirits, (the only
company there) and amongst them (perhaps) their dearest friends, or Wives, or
Children, infinitely increase their hell; and all is augmented by continuance:
for no such thing as hope to be heard of there. It Is the Kingdom of despairs
and terrors, The worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched: all the miseries
are everlasting, everlasting. This the latter end of all the people that forget
God, says holy David, that forget him in their prosperities; into Hell they
shall be turned, Psalm. ix. 17.

Nor is this the melancholy man's dream, or the contrivance of the Politician,
or the Priests cheat to keep men in awe. If a cheat it be, it is God has cheated
you, and Christ has cheated you, and the Prophets have cheated you, and the
Apostles have cheated you, for they all say the same thing: And would the
rantingest of those brave fellows that scoff at it, sit down a little and
consider, (which I am sure they never do) or should the tremblings of death
begin to seize them, when their understandings are about them (which are not
always) and open the windows into another world, then these would be the words
of truth and soberness, then, men and brethren, what shall we do (when commonly
it is too late.) How shall we do with these everlasting burnings? we will do any
thing, suffer any thing to avoid them.

Then Heaven too, the end we reserved for our last, that will begin to be
thought on too, and how to get in there. There, where is joy without any sad
look to shadow it; pleasure without any tang to stain it; peace without
disturbance, plenty without fatiety, continual health without infirmity, nor
grief, nor fear, nor hazard to impair our happiness, or fully it. Glorious,
all glorious things are spoken of thee, (Thou City of God.) Gold, and Pearls,
and Diamonds, and all precious Stones; Kingdoms, and Thrones, and Crowns, and
Scepters; torrents of Joy, rivers of Pleasure, vvell-springs of Life,
dvvellings of Glory, seats of blessedness, and blessed company, the Throne of
God, all are said of thee, thou glorious place. And yet when all is said, we
must conclude with the Apostle, that neither eye has seen, nor ear heard,
neither have entered into the heart of man the things prepared there, or if they
had, it seems it is not lavvful for a man to utter them, 2 Cor. xii. 4. So I
must needs leave them to you to consider them.

And truly it is time now to tell you what considering is. (1.) It Is to sit
down and lay your ends together, and think upon them. Consider then seriously
(1.) whether you would have your foundations once more unsettled, your houses
plundered, your estates sequestered (they are scurvy words, pray pardon them)
your glories once again trod to dirt: Whether it is good making ventures, trying
Gods severities the second time. For let them smite you but once more, and as
Abisha said to David, so say I to you, they will not smite you the second time.

Consider again, (2.) whether seeing hovvever you must leave all these
enjoyments, within so short a span of time as death is off us, (and we may be
fetched off the stage e're we are aware, ill provided for it) it be wisdom to
lay up all our treasure and provision here; either so hoard up here as if it
were for ever, or so lavish here as if it were to account for never.

And seeing to that account we must come at last, consider (3.) whether such
Imprimis's and Items as the long impertinent Bills of sins and pleasures will
bring in, will pass current at the last Audit; whether so much in purple and
fine linen, so much in living sumptuously every day, so little time in the
assemblies of devotion, and so much in those of vanity: whether, Soul take thy
ease, eat, drink, and be merry, the living in all liberty and licenciousness;
the being hateful, and the hating one another will pass for a rewarding the
Almighty for his mercies, when, Come ye blessed, go ye cursed, come in to
conclude the day.

And if they will not pass so (as no doubt they will not) consider (4.) what
will be next the end you come to, and remember but half that I have told you of
those eternal fires (and I have told you nothing in comparison) and then tell
me again whether the strictest attendances of piety, the largest expenses of
charity, the trouble now and then of doing well, the beggarliness of honesty,
the restraints of temperance, the niceness of chastity, the very hardships of
repentance, watching, fasting, weeping, even the greatest penances of Religion,
as high as the rigours and austerities of Hermits and Anchorets be not far
easier to be endured, and whether we can be thought wise any way, if we omit
any way to prevent those flames.

Or if you had rather be led with hopes and glory (as all ingenuous and noble
natures had) consider (5.) whether all the glories ye have lived in, all the
satisfaction ye have met with, all the delights ye have ever here enjoyed, or
ever can, be worth one minute of those eternal fulnesses in Gods presence in
the Heavens; when even they that counted the Religious man's life, but madness,
Wisdom v. 4. and laughed piety and honesty out of doors, were so amazed at the
glory and strangeness of the righteous man's salvation, so far beyond all that
they looked for, ver. 2. that they even groaned for anguish of spirit, and
cried out openly, We fools, we fools indeed, how have we cheated our selves of
Heaven, the glorious Kingdom, whilst the poor Lazarus's, these poor
contemptible things crept in, and we with all our pride, and riches, and
vaunting quite shut out, ver. 8.

And now I may read the Text another way, as an assertion, not a wish: and I
find it read so. Thus, Si saperent and intelligerent and providerent. If men
were wise, they would both understand and consider all these things without
this ado. They would presently turn considerarent into providerent too, (and so
the word is rendered by the vulgar) and provide now for their latter end. And
the provision will not stand us in much, nor shall I stand long upon it. Three
ways to do it, and you have all.

The Son of Syrach's (1.) Remember thy end, and let enmity cease, says he,
Ecclus. xxviii. 6. Let us not spend our wits, our courage, our estates any
longer in feuds and enmities, seeing God has now at length so strangely brought
us all altogether.

The (2.) way shall be his too, with a little alteration, Ecclus. vii. 36.
Remember thy latter end, and that thou never henceforward do amiss. I know it is
read, remember and thou shall not, but it is as true if read, remember and thou will not: if you consider it as you should, you will also provide you sin no
more.

To make all sure, make the provision our Blessed Savior would have you for a
third. Provide the bags that wax not old, St. Luke xii. 33. friends that will
not fail you, make them to you out of the Mammon you have gotten, make the poor
your friends with it, That when ye fail they may receive you into everlasting
habitations, S. Luke xvi. 9.

And consider lastly for the close of this part of the Text (and I am almost at
the close of all) that all this is Gods desire. He wishes it here, he wishes it
all the holy Text through, Oh that there were such an heart in them, Deuteronomy. v.
29. O that my people would hearken to it, Psalm. lxxxi. 14. O that men would
therefore, Psalm. cvii. four times in it.

II. And yet the second general of the Text tells you, he does more; wishes it
so heartily, that he complains again: complains they answer not his wishes. And
wished he has so often, that he may well complain. How often have I, says he,
St. Luke xiii. 34. so often nor they nor we can tell it. Only so often
Noluistis, as often as he would, so often they would not. All the day long he
had stretched out his hand unto them, sent to them by his messengers, early and
late, to desire them, visited them with judgments, courted them with mercies,
and yet they would not, disobedient and gainsaying people that they were. And
therefore complain he does, that do what he can, he must give them up, though
with a Quomodo te tradam? Hos. xi. 8. with great regret and sorrow, give them
up for fools, men of neither understanding, nor consideration; men that like
fools throw away Gold for baubles, men that are so far from understanding or
considering, that they live as if they cared not whether they went to Heaven or
Hell.

But I love not to lengthen out complaints,; in this case I should never have
done: and it is time I should. And the Text only insinuating, not enlarging Gods
complaints, gives me an item to do so too. Only give me leave in brief to sum
up all.

Every wise man before at any time he begins a work, sits down and considers
what he has to do, and to what end he does it. O that we would be so wise in
ours; that we would retire our selves some minutes now and then to consider the
ill courses at any time we are in (or entering on.) And when we are got into our
Chambers, and be still thus commune with our selves.

What is this business I am about? to what purpose is this life I lead, this
sin, this waste, this vanity, Am I grown so soon forgetful of my late sad
condition, or so insensible of my late rebellions, and of the pardon God has
given me, as thus impudently to sin again? Is this the reward I make him for
all his mercies, thus one after another to abuse them still? or is it that I am
weary of my happiness, and grown so wanton as to tempt destruction? Is it that
I may go with more dishonor to my Grave, leave a blot upon my name, and stand
upon record for a fool, or worse, to all posterity for ever? Is it that I have
not already sins enough, but I must thus foolishly still burden my accounts?
Is it that I may go the more gloriously to Hell, and damn my self the deeper?
Is it that I may purposely thwart God in all his ways of mercy and judgment,
cross his desires, scorn his entreaties, defy his threats, despise his
complaints, anger him to the heart, that I may be rid of him, and quit my hands
of all my interests in Heaven for ever. Why this is the English of my sins, my
profaneness, and debaucheries, the courses I am in, or now going upon: and will
I still continue them?

This would be considering indeed, and a few hours thus spent sometimes would
make us truly wise. And let us but do so, we shall quickly see the effect of
them, God shall have his wishes, and we shall be wise, and we shall have ours
too, all we can wish or hope, and no complaining in our streets. All our former
follies shall be forgotten, and all ill ends be far off from us; and when these
days shall have an end, we shall then go to our Graves in peace, to our
Accounts with joy, and passing by (some of us perhaps) even the gates of Hell,
come happily to the end of all our hopes, the salvation of our souls, have our
end, glory, and honor, and immortality, and eternal life; where we, as Daniel
tells us the wise do, shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament, and as
the Stars for ever and ever.

Whether he bring us, who is the eternal Wisdom of his Father, Jesus Christ; to
whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, three Persons, and one Eternal,
Immortal, Invisible, and only Wise God, be all Power, and Riches, and Wisdom,
and Strength, and Honor, and Glory, and Blessing for ever and ever.

A SERMON ON THE ANNUNTIATION OF THE Blessed Virgin Mary.
St. LUKE i. 28. And the Angel came in unto her, and said, Hail thou that art
highly favored, The Lord is with thee, Blessed art thou among women.
THe day will tell you who this Blessed among women is, we call it our
Lady Day; And the Text will tell you why she comes into the day, because the
Angel to day came in to her. And the Angel will tell you why he to day came in
to Her; she was highly favored, and the Lord was with her, was to come himself
this day into her, to make her the most blessed among women, sent him only
before to tell her so, to tell her, he would be with her by and by himself.

This makes it Annunciation day, the Annunciation of the Virgin Mary, as the
Church calls it, and the Annunciation to her, as we may call it too: The
Annunciation or announcing and proclaiming of Christ unto her, that he was this
day to be Incarnate of her, to take that flesh to day upon him in the womb,
which he was some nine months hence on Christmassday to bring with him into the
world. And (2.) the Annunciation or announcing, that is proclaiming of her
blessed among, above women by it, by being thus highly favored by her Lords
thus coming to her. A day upon these grounds fit to be remembered and announced
or proclaimed unto the World.

Indeed, Dominus tecum is the chief business, the Lord Christ's being with her,
that which the Church especially commemorates in the day. Her being blessed,
and all our being blessed, highly favored, or favored at all, either men's or
women's being so, all our hail, all our health, and peace, and joy, all the
Angels visits to us, or kind words, all our Conferences with heaven, all our
titles and honors in heaven and earth, that are worth the naming come only
from it. For Dominus tecum cannot come without them; He cannot come to us but
we must be so, must be highly favored in it, and blessed by it. So the
Incarnation of Christ, and the Annunciation of the Blessed Virgin, his being
incarnate of her, and her blessedness by him, and all our blessednesses in him
with her make it as well our Lords as our Ladies day. More his, because his
being Lord made her a Lady, else a poor Carpenters Wife, God knows; all her
worthiness and honor, as all ours, is from him; and we to take heed to day, or
any day, of parting them; or so remembering her as to forget him; or so blessing
her, as to take away any of our blessing him; any of his worship to give to
her; Let her blessedness, the respect we give her, be inter mulieres, among
women still: such as is fit and proportionate to weak creatures, not due and
proper only to the Creator, that Dominus tecum, Christ in her be the business:
that we take pattern by the Angel, to give her no more than is her due, yet to
be sure to give her that though, and that particularly upon the day. And yet
the day being a day of Lent seems somewhat strange, It Is surely no fasting
work, no business or occasion of sadness this; What does it then, or how shall
we do it then in Lent, a time of fast and sorrow? Fast and feast too: how can
we do it? A Feast it is to day, a great one, Christ's Incarnation, a day of joy,
if ever any: and Lent a time of sorrow and repentance: a great one, the
greatest Fast of any; How shall we reconcile them? Why thus, The news of Joy
never comes so seasonable as in the midst of sorrow; news of one coming to save
us from our sins can never come more welcome to us than even then when we are
sighing and groaning under them: never can Angel come more acceptably than at
such time, with such a message, as All Hail, thou art highly favored, blessed
art thou; It Is the time that Angels use to come when we are fasting: So to
Daniel, Dan. ix. 3, 21. So to Cornelius, Acts x. 30. the time when we best hear
a voice from heaven, and best understand it with St. Peter, Acts x. 13, 15, 16,
20. the time when God himself vouchsafes to spread our Table, as he did there
of all kinds of beasts and fowls, to St. Peter, all heavenly food and
mysteries. It Is the very time for gratia plena, to be filled when we are empty;
the only time for Dominus tecum, for our Lords being with us when we have most
room to entertain him. So nor the Church, nor we in following it, are any whit
out of order. Dominus tecum, Christ is the main business, both of our Fasts and
Feasts: and it is the greatest order to attend his business in the day, and way
we meet it, be it what it will.

Though perhaps it seem stranger too to hear of an Angel coming into a Virgins
Chamber, at midnight, (as is conjectured) and there saluting her. But no fear
of those Sons of God if they come in unto the daughters of men. Angels are
Virgins, may be with Virgins, in the privatest Closets, are always with them
there to carry up their Prayers, and to bring down blessings. No strange thing
then to hear of an Angel with any of them whom God highly favors, with whom
himself is too: no wonder to hear of an Angel or Ave to any such. The only
wonder indeed to us will be to hear of an Ave Mary. Indeed I cannot my self but
wonder at it, as they use it now, to see it turned into a Prayer. 'Twas never
made for Prayer, or Praise, a mere Salutation; the Angels here to the blessed
Virgin never intended it, I dare say, for other, either to praise her with, or
pray unto her. And I shall not consider it as such, I am only for the Angels
Ave, not the Popish Ave Marie, I can see no such in the Text.

Nor should I scarce, I confess, have chosen such a Theme to day, though the
Gospel reach it me, but that I see it is time to do it when our Lord is wounded
through our Ladies sides; both our Lord and the mother of our Lord most vilely
spoken of by a new generation of wicked men, who, because the Romanists make
little less of her than a Goddess, they make not so much of her as a good
woman; because they bless her too much, these unbless her quite, at least will
not suffer her to be blessed as she should. To avoid both these extremes we
need no other pattern but the Angels, who here salutes, and blesses her indeed;
yet so only salutes and blesses her, so speaks of and to her as to a woman
here, though much above the best of them; one highly favored, it is true, yet
but favored still; all her grace, and blessedness, and glory still no other,
mere favor and no more, and Dominus tecum, the Lords being with her, the
ground, and source, and sum of all; Virgin and Day both blessed thence. The
better to give all their due, Angel, and Lord, and Lady, and you the better
understanding of the Text, the scope, and matter, and full meaning of it, we
shall consider in the words these two Particulars: The Angels Visitation, and
the Angels Salutation.

I. His Visitation, or coming to her in these words: And the Angel came in unto
her.

II. His Salutation to her, or saluting her, in these, Hail thou that art
highly favored; The Lord is with thee, Blessed, etc.

In the Visitation we have,

(1.) The Visitor. (2.) The Visited. (3.) The Visiting. The Angel, the Visitor,
He. The blessed Virgin, this the Visited, Her: And the Visiting, his coming in
unto her.

In the Salutation there is to be considered both the Form of it, and the
Titles in it.

1. The Form threefold: (1.) Hail. (2.) The Lord is with thee. (3.) Blesed art
thou, or be thou blessed, Sis benedicta, it may be, as well as es.

2. The Titles given her, they three too: Thou that art highly favored, that is
one. Blessed thou, that is another. Blessed among women, that is the third. These
all so evident and so plain, that none can miss them; But to these two Points
two more are to be added, The Grounds and Bounds of these great titles.

1. The Ground of this high blessedness and favor: (1.) Full of grace, so our
old Translation, and the old Latin render it, her fullness of grace and
goodness, that is one. (2.) But the Lord is with thee, that is the main, thence
all her blessedness, thereby it is that she is so highly favored, because the
Lord is with her.

2. The Bounds or Limitation of these titles, they come first with a (...), no
other form then what is and has been given unto men; though great they be, yet
divine they be not. The greatest Title secondly is but (...) from mere grace
and favor. Thirdly, It must still too acknowledge Dominus tecum. She has a
Lord, is a Subject as well as we. And lastly, All her blessedness is but inter
mulieres, among women; how much soever she excels all women, she is but inter
mulieres, among such Creatures, in the rank of Creatures, no Goddess, nor
partner with the Godhead, either in title or worship.

By considering and laying all these Points together we shall both vindicate
the blessed Virgins honor, as well from all superstitious as profane abuses,
and our selves from all neglect of any duty to the mother of our Lord, one so
highly favored, and blessed by him, whilst we give her all that either Lord or
Angel gave her, but yet dare not give her more.

And now Dominus mecum, and Dominus vobiscum too, the Lord be with me whilst I
am speaking it, and with you whilst you are hearing it, and bless us both
whilst we are about it, that we may learn to bless where we should bless, whom,
and when, and how to do it, and rightly both accept and apply God's blessings
and our own.

We are now to learn it from the Angel, his visiting and blessing the blessed
Virgin here. His visit and his Salutation to her. But his visit, or visitation,
that stands first. Where the visiter, the visited, and his visit; the Angel,
the Virgin, and his coming into unto her are all to be considered. And the
Angel came in unto her.

And who so fit as an Angel to come into her, to give this visit, to give this
blessing? It was a bad Angel that brought the curse, upon the woman, 'twas fit
a good one should bring the blessing.

The employment (2.) suits none so well. 'Twas news of joy who could bring it
better, than one of those who were the first sons of eternal joy, the first
enjoyers of it, who could pronounce it better?

Who fitter (3.) to come with a Dominus tecum, before the face of the Lord,
with a message of his coming down to earth, than they who always behold his
face in heaven, St. Mat. xviii. 10.

Who fitter (4.) to come to her, she was an immaculate and unspotted Virgin,
and to whom do Virgins Chambers lie open at midnight but to Angels? God sends no
other thither at that time of night, and that that time it was may be well
conjectured from Wisdom xviii. 14, 15. When all things were in quiet silence,
and that night was in the midst of her swift course; Thine Almighty Word came
down from Heaven, then it seems was the time of her Conception, of Christ's
coming to her, before whom immediately the Angel came to bring the message that
he was a coming, if, as St. Bernard says, he were not come already.

And (5.) with such a message to a Virgin, as that she should conceive, without
a man, who was convenient to bring it but an Angel? Ne quo degenere depravaret
affectu, says St. Ambrose, that there might not be the least ground of a false
suspicion.

But (6.) to such a Virgin, one so highly favored as to be made the mother of
God (for the mother of Christ is no less, he being God) what messenger could
come less than an Angel? Prophets and Patriarchs were too little for so great
an embassage, and Angels never came upon a greater.

Nay, (7.) every Angel neither was not fit for so high an Office: The Angel
Gabriel it was, he is the (...) here. Gabriel is by St. Hierom, and St. Gregory
interpreted Fortitudo Dei, the Power or strength of God, and in this work it
appeared indeed. Gods strength and power never so much shown as in the saving
of us by Christ. It is by others (2.) interpreted Vir Deus, or Deus nobiscum,
God man, or God with us. Could any be thought fitter to bring this news upon
his lips than he that carries it in his name? Especially (3.) being the same
that foretold all this to Daniel, Dan. ix. 21. fit that he should see to the
performance who brought the promise. (4.) Petrus Damiani thinks he was the holy
Virgins Guardian Angel, proper therefore to bring her this good message, or any
else. (5.) God had several times employed him before, to Daniel, Zachary, and
others, and found hm faithful, he therefore now employs him still, that we may
know, he that is faithful in the least God will by degrees trust him with the
most, the greatest matters.

In a word, Angels drove us out of Paradise, and now they come to let us in
again. Then they placed a Sword to keep us out, now they bring the word to let
us in. None now you see more fit for this business than an Angel, than the
Angel Gabriel too, whether we respect the persons, either from whom, or to whom
the message comes, or the message or the time, or the way and order of it. So
we have done with him, come we now to her, a greater than He, if we may speak
with Epiphanius, and some others.

Yet I shall not give her other Titles than the Scripture gives her, I am
afraid to give her such as many do. A Virgin espoused to a man whose name was
Joseph, of the house of David she was, and her name was Mary, in the verse
before the Text. (1.) Of royal descent and lineage. (2.) Espoused to an Husband
of the same Kingly house. (3.) Of a name very answerable to her greatness. Of
David's Seed, for so her Son the Messiah was to be. A Virgin, for of such a one
he was to come: Semen mulieris, not maris, from the beginning the woman's seed,
and not the man's, so necessarily a Virgin then, and so plainly foretold to be
by Isaiah, Isa. vii. 14. A Virgin shall conceive and bear him; yea, a Virgin
espoused; (1.) To conceal the mystery of his Incarnation from the Devil; (2.)
To take away all occasion of obloquy from devilish men; (3.) That the birth of
our Savior might be with all possible honor; and (4.) That his Genealogy
might so be reckoned as all others regularly by the man, as you see them both
by St. Matthew and St. Luke.

Of a high and illustrious name besides; Maria is Maris stella, says Saint Bede.
The star of the Sea, a fit name for the mother of the bright morning star, that
rises out of the vast sea of God's infinite and endless love. Maria (2.) the
Lyriack interprets Domina, a Lady, a name yet retained, and given to her by all
Christians, our Lady, or the Lady mother of our Lord. Marie (3.) rendered by
Petrus Damiani de monte and altitudine Dei, highly exalted, as you would say,
like the Mountain of God, in which he would vouchsafe to dwell, after a more
miraculous manner than in very Sion his own holy Mount. (4.) St. Ambrose
interprets it, Deus ex genere meo, God of my kin, as if by her very name she
was designed to have God born of her, to be Deipara; as the Church against all
Heretics has ever styled her the Mother of God: you may well now fully
conceive no Ambassador so fit to come to such an one as her but some great
Angel at the least.

And his coming to her comes next to be considered, And the Angel came in unto
her. Where we are taught both how he came, and where he found her. By his
coming, or being said to come, we are given to understand, that it was in a
bodily and humane shape; So Angels often used to come in the likeness of men,
and at this time it was of all ways the most convenient that the Angels should
come like men, seeing their Lord was now to come so: and one of them to come
before him with the news. When he himself would vouchsafe to wear the livery of
our flesh, it is most convenient his servants sure that wait upon him, whom he
sends upon his errands, should appear at least in the same Livery. Nor could
his Message easily be delivered in more sweetness, nor the Blessed Maid
entertain it with less terror or diffidence any other way.

For though it could not but trouble her, as we see it did in the follovving
verse, to see a man at that time in her Closet, ere she was aware, yet his
coming in so insensibly when the doors were shut upon her, besides perhaps the
brightness of his countenance and raiment could not but tell her it was an
Angel, and so abate her fear a little.

Yet observe here a difference between the Angels coming now, and heretofore;
we never read of an Angels appearing but abroad, or in the Temple, till now.
Now they begin to grow more familiar with us, come in into our Closets now
Christ is coming; the Kingdom of Heaven it is a sign is come nigh unto us. And
it is a good Item to us to keep much in our Closets seeing Angels are now to be
met with there.

And (2.) it is an Item too for Virgins to keep within; Dinah went out and met
with you know whom, came home ill-favouredly. The blessed Virgin keeps in, and
meets with an holy Angel, and the title of highly favored, and blessed for it.
The straggling, gadding huswife meets no Angel to salute her, whosoever does; if
we look for Angels company, and salutations we must be much within. A Garden
enclosed is my Sister, my Spouse, a Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed, says
Christ, Cant. iv. 12. The Spouse of Christ, the Soul he loves and vouchsafes
his company, much private, often within. Within, and at her Prayers and
Meditation too. So was the blessed Virgin, say the Fathers here, blessedly
employed, watching at her devotions; no way so sure to get an Angels company,
or hear good news from heaven, to obtain a favor or a blessing thence, as
this, as prayer, and watching in our Closets.

This we piously believe of the blessed Virgin, but we are sure she was within,
a true daughter of Sarah in it; who it seems kept commonly within doors in her
Tent, Genesis xviii. 10. whose daughters you are, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. 3. 6. as
long as you do well; must be too in this, as well as other things, if you
would do well.

For lastly, to show the truth of the Angels words, that she was full of
grace, the Scripture tells us, by the Angels coming into her, that she was
within, where, qui habeat abundantiam gratiae, says Hugo, they that are full
of grace, keep in as much as they can, fearing the corrupt discourses and
conversations of the World. None so scrupulous of appearing abroad, none more
fear idle, loose, or vain discourses (which cannot be avoided by such who go
often abroad) than they that are fullest of grace and goodness. Nor do they
care for the salutation, favors, and complements of men, who are highly
favored of the Lord. No matter at all with them to be neglected by men, who
desire only to be saluted by an Angel, as was the Virgin here, which falls
next to be considered. The Angels Salutation.

Two Points we told you there were to be handled in it. The form of it, and
the titles in it: The form in which it runs, the Titles with which it is
given.

The form is in three expressions, Hail, the Lord is with thee, Thou art, or be
thou blessed. Three several salutations, as it were, and that (1.) for the
greater reverence and honor to her, so Kings and Queens are commonly saluted
with three adorations. (2.) To show from whom he came, from Father, Son, and
Holy Ghost, from all three persons in the Trinity. That (3.) she was so intent
and busy at her devotions, that she minded not perhaps his first and second
Salutation, he was fain to add a third; To show lastly the triple blessing
that he came with, Peace, and Grace, and Blessedness; that Heaven was now at
peace with us, Grace was thence coming down apace, Heaven doors set open,
and very blessedness of Heaven clearly now propounded and proffered to us.

The first salutation is an Ave, a salutation never heard from Angels mouth
before. And it speaks joy, and peace, and health, and salvation, both to her,
and us by her. The Greek word is (...), Rejoice, rejoice indeed, at such a
Child as now is to be born of thee, O Virgin Daughter Behold I bring you
tidings of great joy, of a Child, all our joy by him, which is Christ the Lord

2. The Hebrew word speaks, Peace be to thee. A wish for peace, the first news
of Heaven reconciled; the way to reconciliation being now in agitation, and to
be by her. Peace from the Prince of Peace, from the author of our peace, now
coming, as joyful a salutation as we can wish, all our peace from this
Conception, all begun with this message, and the Angel the Herald of it.

3. It intimates health as well as peace, we were all sick till this day came,
the best with the Spouse, sick of love, Cant. v. 8. the worst sick of somewhat
else; none well till this news came, till the next morning after this great
Conception, rose with healing in his wings. Now all hail, and whole, and well
again.

4. It signifies a wish of salvation too. Ave, says one piously, though not
learnedly, a vae, all woe now away, temporal and eternal. Eva spelled
backwards, all Eves ill spun web unravel'd, undone, roul'd backward by the
Conception of this blessed Virgin here foretold, temporal and eternal woes
taken all away, nothing but joy and salvation to us if we will hear it with the
Blessed Virgin, and accept it.

The second salutation is, The Lord is with thee, and it may be either an
apprecation, or wishing that he would be, or an Annunciation, or affirmation, a
declaring and affirming that he is, or a prediction or foretelling that he will
be with her.

It was an apprecation when Boaz gave it to the Reapers, Ruth ii. 4. that God
would be with them.

It was an apprecation and an affirmation both, when the Angel gave it to
Gideon, Judge. vi. 12. The Lord is with thee, thou mighty man of valor.

It is affirmation, apprecation, and prediction, all three here, to our Blessed
Lady, a wish that the Lord would, an assurance that he is, a prediction that he
will be yet more signally, and more particularly with her by and by.

It Is somewhat to be saluted by an Angel, and it is not common; we hear often of
their coming with a message, seldom with a salutation: it is sign of more then
ordinary acquaintance and familiarity with God, and of his respect particular
unto us, when he sends his Angels, not only upon errands, but how-do-yous to us.

With such a salutation too, as the Lord is with thee. The hand of the Lord was
with him, it is said of St. John Baptist, and that was well, his hand and not
himself; and yet the greatest of them that was born of women was not greater
than he, St. Matthew. xi. 11. But here it is he himself with the greatest among
women. It is a great favor to have his hand, but it is an high one to have
himself with us.

Yet the Angel says to Gideon, Judge. vi. 12. The Lord be with thee, (...), but
it is here (...), an Article, an Emphasis put upon it: he is not with her, as he
is with any else, Tecum in mente, tecum in ventre, as the Fathers gloss it,
Tecum in spiritu, tecum in carne, with her he was, or would be presently, as
well in her body, as in her soul, personally, essentially, nay bodily with her,
and take a body from her, a way of being with any never heard before or since,
a being with her beyond any expression or conception whatsoever.

And the Lord thus being with her, all good must needs be with her, all the
gracious ways of his being with us are comprehended in it, so the salutation no
way to be exceeded: And well may he choose to be with her, even make haste and
prevent the Angel, as St. Bernard speaks, to be with her. He is with the pure
in heart, with the humble spirit, and piously retired soul, and she is all. And
though by the Angels words, ver. 31. we cannot conceive that the Lord was yet
conceived in her, he speaking in the future, yet as sure it was, even whilst
the Angel was in his salutation, as if he were already incarnate in her flesh:
upon this may well follow the third salutation, Blessed art thou, or be thou
blessed. Yet,

I shall not here say much of this, I reserve it to be handled amongst the
titles, only tell you it may as well pass for a salutation as the other. We
still sometimes use it in our salutations, use to say God bless you, when we
salute sometimes; so the mowers to Boaz, return his salutation of, the Lord be
with you, with The Lord bless thee, Ruth. ii. 4. And Genesis xlvii. 7. we read
that Jacob blessed Pharaoh when he came before him, that is, saluted him in a
form of blessing.

All the famous salutations, now you see, of all former and latter times are
here rallied up in this, Daniel's Live for ever, for life, and health, and
safety, the Angels to Gideon, The Lord is with thee, Boaz his to Ruth, Blessed
be thou, of the Lord my daughter, Ruth. iii. 10. Tobit's to the Angel, Gaudium
tibi, Tob. v. 11. Joy be unto thee, Christ's to his Disciples, Peace be unto
you: The Apostles grace, and peace, and salvation to their Churches, all in
this of the Angel to the Virgin, now in treaty about Christ's Incarnation. To
show us (1.) all these are in Christ, all now coming to us, by his coming to
us, to be found altogether no where but in him, joy, and peace, and health, and
salvation, and blessedness first rising on us by this days business, his
Incarnation. To teach us (2.) good forms of salutation, blessing, and not
cursing, though there are some so peevish, to say no worse, to tell us they had
as lieve we should say the Devil take them, as God bless them, or God be with
them. It seems they had rather imitate the bad Angel than the good, I hope we
had not: Good words, if it be no more, are fittest sure for Christian mouths,
but yet good wishes too; for he that forbids to say to some, God speed you, 2
John x. intimates we should say so to others: And though the Disciples are bid
to salute no man by the way, St. Luke x. 4. that is, when it will retard or
hinder their holy business, they are yet bid, when they come into a house, say,
Peace be to it, ver. 5. And if the Angel do it, and Christ bid it, and do it
too, as he does, St. Luke xxiv. 35. I hope we may and will do too. Nay, and
give good titles too upon the same account, the Angel does so to the blessed
Virgin, and we hasten to them. Thou that art highly favored, blessed, blessed
among women.

Thou that art highly favored; but why, thou, without a name? why not Mary
here as well as after, ver. 30. Why? there he used her name, so to dispel her
fear as it were, by a kind of friendly familiarity; here he forbears it in his
reverence to her. We use not to salute great persons by their Names, but by
their Titles; and the Mother of God is above the greatest we here meet with
upon the earth. We must not be too familiar with those whom God so highly
favors, that is our lesson hence. We are not to speak of the Blessed Virgin,
the Apostles, and Saints, as if we were speaking to our Servants, Paul, Peter,
Mary, or the like: It Is a new fashion of Religion, neither taken from Saints,
nor Angels, nor any of Heaven, or heavenly spirits, to unsaint the Saints, to
deny them their proper titles, to level them with the meanest of our Servants:
We might learn better manners from the Angel here, manners, I say if it were
nothing else, for we dare not speak so to any here that are above us, and we
think much to be Thou Would without our titles, by that new generation of possessed
men, who yet with more reason may call the best man thou, then we the Apostles,
John or Thomas.

But to descend to a particular survey of these Titles here, Thou that art
highly favored, so our new Translation renders it, Full of grace, so our old
one has it from the Latin, Gratia plena, and both right; for (...) will carry
both. Grace is favor, God's Grace is divine favor, high in grace, high in his
favor, full of his grace, full of his favor, all comes to one.

Now there is Gratia Creata, and Increata, Created grace, and uncreated grace.
Created grace is either sanctifying, or edifying; the gifts of the Holy Spirit
that sanctify and make us holy; or the gifts that make us serviceable to make
others so. The first to serve God in our selves, as Faith, Hope, Charity, and
other graces: The second to serve him in the Church, such as the gift of
Tongues, of Prophecy, of Healing, and the like: of each kind she had her
fullness according to her measure, and the designation that God appointed her.

For sanctifying Graces, none fuller, Solo Deo excepto, God only excepted,
says Epiphanius. And it is fit enough to believe that she who was so highly
honored to have her Womb filled with the body of the Lord, had her soul as
fully filled by the Holy Ghost.

For edifying Graces, as they came not all into her measure, she was not to
preach, to administer, to govern, to play the Apostle; and therefore no
necessity she should be full of all those gifts, being those are not
distributed all to any, but unicuique secundum mensuram, to every one according
to his measure, and employment, and not at all times neither; so neither is she
said to be less full for vvanting them. There is one fullness of the Fountain,
another of the Brook, another of a Vessel; one fulness, of the Sea, another of
the River, another of the Pond, and yet all may be full. Christ himself is said
to be full of the Holy Ghost, and St. Stephen is said to be full, and others
said to be full; yet Christ as the Sea or Fountain, they as the Rivulets or
Rivers, and yet all as they can hold. It Is so in Earth, it is so in Heaven: And
with such a fullness as the Brooks, or Rivers, is our Virgin full, and with no
other. Where any edifying Grace was necessary for her, she had it, as well as
others; more perhaps than others: Where it was not necessary, it was no way
to the impairing of her fullness, though she had it not; as the banks of the
Rivers rose, or the Channel was enlarged, so were those graces: but inter
mulieres, among women at the end, makes me incline to think the fullness of
Apostolic endowments do not any way belong to her; women not being suffered in
the times of the Apostles, but to teach their children or servants at home:
never thought so full of the Spirit as to be sent to blow it all abroad.

And indeed it is not said here, full of the Spirit, but full of Grace, and
that is commonly understood of sanctifying Grace, of which it is very
convenient that we believe none fuller than she: and the original (...) will
not enforce it much higher in the business of created grace.

But in respect of the increated Grace, that is, of Christ, with whom she was
now so highly favored as to be with Child, none ever so filled with Grace
indeed. This was a grace of the highest nature, of which created nature was
never capable; (...) well rendered, highly, highly favored; for it is most
highly can be imagined: and this is her first title, O thou that art highly
favored; high in Gods grace and favor, so high as to be made his Mother, then
sure made a fit receptacle for so great, so holy a guest, by the fullness of all
grace and goodness.

From this follows the second Title, Blessed, blessed of God, blessed of men:
blessed in the City, and blessed in the Field; Cities and Countries call her
blessed. Blessed in the fruit of her body, in her blessed Child Jesus. Blessed
in the fruit of her Ground, her Cattle, her Kine, and her Sheep, in the
inferior faculties of her soul, and body; all fructify to Christ. Blessed her
Basket, and her Store, her Womb, and her Breasts; the Womb that bare him, and
the Paps that gave him suck. Blessed in her going out, and in her coming in;
the Lord still being with her. The good treasure of Heaven still open to her,
showring down upon her, and the Earth filled with the blessings which she
brought into the world, when she brought forth the Son of God. Blessed she
indeed that was the Conduit of so great blessings; though blessed most in the
bearing him in her soul, much more than bearing him in her body. So Christ
intimates to the woman that began to bless the Womb, that is, the Mother that
bear him, St. Luke xi. 27. yea rather, says he, they that hear the word of God
and keep it: As if he had said, she is more blessed in bearing the word in her
soul, than in her body. But blessed she is; Elizabeth by the Holy Spirit fell a
blessing her when she came to see her: And she her self by the same Spirit
tells us, all generations shall call her blessed, ver. 28. So we have
sufficient example and authority to do it. And I hope we will not suffer the
Scripture to speak false, but do it.

And (3.) do it to her above all women, Benedicta tu in mulieribus. That Is her
third Title. Most blessed, none so blessed; none ever had Child so blessed;
none ever bore or brought forth Child as she.

Benedicta in mulieribus, Blessed among women; She indeed only blessed: all
others subject to the curse of in dolor paries, of conceiving and bringing
forth in sorrow. She wholly free from that, she a perpetual Virgin before, and
in, and after Childbirth. Christ came into her Womb insensibly, came forth as
it were insensibly too, without groan or sorrow to her. Blessed (2.) among
women; they all henceforth saved by her Childbearing: notwithstanding she,
that is, woman shall be saved in childbearing, 1 Timothy ii. ie. (...) by her
childbearing, says a learned Commentator, not their own, but hers, by the
Child she bore; and they therefore shall call her blessed.

Blessed (3.) among women, that is, none more blessed then the best, the
highest of them; none above the Mother of God, none sure so good as she which
now brings me to consider the grounds of all this honor, all these Titles.

The first is Grace, Gratia plena, (...) in (...) that always the ground of
Gods favor, and all our blessedness: So she tells us in her Hymn, Respexit
humilitatem. It was the humility of his Handmaid, that God in this high favor
of the Incarnation of his Son respected in her. Humility the ground of all
grace within us, all grace without us, of Gods grace to us, of his graces in
us, the very grace that graces them all too. Humility makes them the most
lovely, pride disgraces them all, be they never so many, though indeed they can
be truly none, that are not founded in and adorned with humility.

The second ground of blessedness is in the Text too, Dominus tecum, the Lords
being with her. From Christ's being with her and with us, it is, that we are
blessed. From his Incarnation begins the date of all our happiness. If God be
not with us, all the world cannot make us happy, much less blessed: From this
grace of his Incarnation first rises all our glory: So that, Not unto us, O
Lord, not unto us, but unto thy Name give the praise, must she sing as well as
we; and they do her wrong as well as God, that give his glory unto her; who
will not give his glory to another, though to his Mother, because she is but
his earthly Mother, a thing infinitely distant from the heavenly Father. Nor
would that humble Handmaid, if she should understand the vain, and fond, and
almost idolatrous styles and honors that are given her some where upon earth,
be pleased with them; she is highly favored enough, that her Lord and Son is
with her, and she with him: she would be no higher sharer. You may see it in
the last particular, the bounds and limitations of her titles and blessedness.

For first, how full soever she be of Grace, it is yet but grace and favor,
it is no more; Gods mere favor so exalted her, respexit only, his respect to
her, his free looking on her, no merit or desert, (...), he has highly
favored her indeed, but he has done, done it in the praeter before she could
conceive or imagine it.

2. The salutation here, except the titles, given her by the Angels, is not
much more than what he gave to Gideon, or what Boaz to his Harvesters: enough
to make the Papists afraid one would think of those extravagant, at least, if
not blasphemous titles they give her, of their closing their Books and Studies
with Laus Deo, and Virgini Maria, joining her in partnership with God; as if
they were as much beholding to her as him. I am sure they learned not this from
the Angel: he brings no divine, but humane titles and salutations to her. And
he knew how to give titles, though not flattering ones, as Elihu speaks in Job.

3. All her honor and blessedness is from Dominus tecum, the Lords being with
her. He is her Lord as well as ours. More indeed he is with her than with us,
or with Angels either, plus tecum, quam mecum as some gloss it: but he is her
Lord still for all that, and she is content so to acknowledge it, and leave us
a penned Hymn in witness of it, to give him the sole honor of her magnifying
and being magnified.

Lastly, Though it be Benedicta, it is but inter mulieris, among women, all this
is; and they are but creatures; a creature-blessedness, a blessedness
competible to the creature. All to show us, that when we exceed this way of
honor to her, or this way of blessing her, we are all out in our Aves, we know
not what we say. And it is well for some, that their ignorance excuses them,
that they understand not what they speak.

Give we her in Gods name, the honor due to her. God has styled her blessed
by the Angel, by Elizabeth; commanded all generations to call her so, and they
hitherto have done it, and let us do it too: Indeed some of late have over-done
it; yet let us not therefore under-do it, but do it as we hear the Angel and
the first Christians did it; account of her, and speak of her as the most
blessed among women, one highly favored, most highly too. But all the while
give Dominus tecum, all the glory, the whole glory of all to him; give her the
honor and blessedness of the chief of Saints, him only the glory, that she is
so, and that by her conceiving and bringing our Savior into the world, we are
made heirs, and shall one day be partakers of the blessedness she enjoys, when
the Lord shall be with us too, and we need no Angel at all to tell us so.

Especially if we now here dispose our selves by chastity, humility, and
devotion, as she did to receive him, and let him be newborn in us. The pure
and Virgin Soul, the humble Spirit, the devout Affection will be also highly
favored; the Lord be with them and bless them above others. Blessed is the
Virgin Soul, more blessed than others in St. Paul's opinion, 1 Cor. vii.
blessed the humble spirit above all. For God has exalted the humble and meek,
the humble Handmaid better than the proudest Lady. Blessed the devout
affection, that is always watching for her Lord in Prayer and Meditations; none
so happy, so blessed as she: the Lord comes to none so soon as such.

Yet not to such at any time, more fully than in the Blessed Sacrament, to
which we are now a going. There he is strangely with us, highly favors us,
exceedingly blesses us: there we are all made blessed Mary's, and become
Mothers, Sisters, and Brothers of our Lord, whilst we hear his word, and
conceive it in us, whilst we believe him who is the word, and receive him too
into us. There Angels come to us on heavenly errands, and there out Lord indeed
is with us; and we are blessed, and the Angels hovering all about to peep into
those holy mysteries, think us so, call us so. There graces pour down in
abundance on us, there grace is in its fullest plenty, there his highest
favors are bestowed upon us, there we are filled with grace, unless we hinder
it, and shall hereafter in the strength of it be exalted into glory; there to
sit down with this Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints and Angels, and sing
praise, and honor, and glory to the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost for ever and
ever.

Thus by being full of grace, and full of those graces, we also become Mary's,
and the Mothers of our Lord; so he tells us himself, he that so does the will
of my Father, he is my Mother. Let us then strive to be so, that the Angels may
come with heavenly errands to us, our Lord himself come to us, and vouchsafe to
be again born in us, and so bless us, fill us with grace, receive, and set us
highly in his favor, and fill and exalt us hereafter with his glory, and with
this Blessed Virgin, and all the Saints and Angels, we may sing praise, and
honor, and glory to him, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, for ever and ever.

A SERMON ON Palm Sunday.
St. MAT. XXi. 8. And a very great multitude spread their Garments in the way,
others cut down branches from the Trees, and strewed them in the way.
THe branches in the Text point you out what day it is, St. John calls some of
them at least Palm branches, St. Ioh. xii. 13. and the Church calls the day
Palm Sunday. Dominica Palmarum, the day wherein our Blessed Lord, riding as
Lord and Bishop of our souls his Visitation to Jerusalem upon an Ass, was met
with a kind of solemn Procession by the people, a very great multitude of them,
says our Evangelist, and had his way strewed with boughts, and bespread with
cloths the best they had, as is usual in Princely Entertainments, and Triumphs,
and Processions.

And it is both a day and business worth remembering, wherein we see the triumph
of humility, whereby we are taught both humility and its reward, Christ's mercy
and man's rejoicing in it, Christ's way of coming to us, and our way of going out
to him to meet and entertain him. Things worthy consideration. All that was
this day done were so, but they are many; and though they all concern us much,
yet our own duty concerns us most, to know with what dispositions, which way,
and how to meet and receive our Lord, come he never so meanly, never so slowly
to us, upon Horse or Ass, by Mountain or Valley, gloriously or humbly to us,
though come he how he will it will be humbly, the greatest imaginable
condescension even to come unto us.

I shall stir out neither of the Text nor time to mind us of our duty in the
way of receiving Christ, nor desire more matter to spend the hour than the
words will give me. Only I must take both the Letter and Spirit of them. If we
look to the History and Letter many remarkables we shall meet with: If to the
Mystery and Spirit more and more punctually to our purposes. By both we shall
be abundantly fitted against Christ's coming to us; and for our due receiving
him, the Sacramental within few days now at hand, not excepted; nay the Spirit
of the words may be as fitly applied to that, to the Sacramental receiving him
as any other, to teach us how to receive and meet him there as well as any
where else.

Consider we the words then under both Notions, what they did as to the Letter,
what we are taught to do by the Mystery and Spirit. In each these three
Particulars: I. The Persons that go out to meet Christ and entertain him; The
multitude, A very great multitude. II. The Ceremony and respect they meet him
and entertain him with, Some spread their Garments in the way, others cut down
branches from the trees, and strewed them in the way. III. The Way and Place
they meet and entertain him in, both the one and the other in the way.


There they met him, so they there entertained him so many hundred years ago,
in the literal sense, in the same way and manner in the spiritual sense are we
to entertain him every year and all our years and days to come. And by thus
canvasing the Text, and taking both senses of it, we shall plainly see we have
good reason to remember a Palm Sunday, the Church so to entitle it so to
prepare us both to the Passion and the Resurrection by spreading still before
us these branches of Palms and Olives, by insinuating this way unto us as the
properest to entertain our Savior in, to usher in the thoughts of both the
Passion and Resurrection both his and ours, and fit us for them both.

I begin with the Persons of the day, and them I find the multitude, A
multitude for their quality; a very great multitude for their number.

The multitude for their quality are the common people. And Interdum vulgus
rectum videt, says the Poet, Sometimes, it seems, the Common People see what is
right. No people of so low or mean understanding but may come to the knowledge
of Christ, and understand the ways of Salvation. The Rabbis had a Proverb,
that Non requiescit Spiritus Domini super pauperem, The Spirit of the Lord
rests not upon the poor. And the Pharisees had taken up somewhat like it, when
they give the people no better style than (...), than of cursed, and such as
know not the Law, St. Ioh. vii. 49. Their blessing then comes by Christ it
seems; so they may well honor him upon that score. (...)* to the poor the
Gospel is preached, is one of the tokens he sends St. John Baptist to evidence
himself the true Messiah, quite contrary to the Pharisees Hic populus qui non
novit, this people that knows not the Law. The Gospel, the Law of Christ, the
far better Law, is preached, it seems, to the poor by him, and spiritus is now
joined with pauperes: The Spirit and poor together we find in his first Sermon
and first beatitude, the poor in Spirit, St. Mat. v. 3. and a while after Quam
difficile, etc. How hardly shall they that have riches enter into the Kindom of
God? St. Mark x. 23. The condition altered, the poor advanced, the rich
deprest, a good reason why the multitude should follow and respect him, and a
great testimony of our Saviors mercy and humility so to honor mean things.

Yet (2.) that the multitude may not forget themselves, as they are too prone
to do, to ride, you know whither, when they are set a horse back; they may
remember. Christ would not commit himself unto them, St. Ioh. ii. 24. He needed
not their honor, he knew what they would do in a few days hence, cry as many
Crucifies as they did to day Hosannahs; as fast to crucify him as now to bless
him. Indeed, they are easy to be seduced and led away by any wind of Doctrine,
new Teachers and Seducers. We have found it so of late, Christ, and his Church,
and his Religion more dishonored by the madness of the multitude than he was
honored here. They have stripped himself and his Church of all the Garments and
Ornaments to cloth themselves, instead of stripping themselves, or spreading
their own Garments to honor him. Yet for all that, of such giddy pieces as
these Christ does not always refuse to be honored, that we may know he does
not deal with us after our sins, nor reject us for our weaknesses, much less
condemn or damn us for them before we have committed them.

Nay, perhaps (3.) he accepts this honor from this multitude, that he might
show us what all worldly honor is, how fickle, how inconstant, how vain it is,
to puff up our selves with the breath of men, to feed our selves with their
empty air. They that are now ready to lick the dust of some great man's feet,
and spread not their Garments only, but their bodies for him to go over; not
only to cut down boughs to strew his way, but to cut down every one that stands
any way in his way if he would have it, will within a few days, upon a little
change, be as ready to trample upon that great one they so much honor, and
even cut his throat if he command any thing that pleases not their humor, or
crosses their private interests and designs. This very multitude, so eager to
day to exalt Christ to the highest in their loud Hosannahs, are as fair on
Friday to exalt him to the Cross by their louder cryings. He yet would suffer
them to give him honor that you might know all earthly honor what it is.

But (4.) he thus receives this honor from the multitude, that he might
provoke great ones by their example. St. Paul tells us, that Salvation was come
unto the Gentiles to provoke the Jews to jealousy, Romans xi. 11. that they
might in a holy strife and indignation endeavor to outgo them. It Is the like
intended here, that we might think much that simple men and women should
outstrip us, the ignorant know more of Piety and Religion, do more at least,
the poor and meanest bestow more, much more on Christ than we with all our wit,
and wealth, and greatness, and honor.

And in this (5.) appears as well his power as providence and wisdom that he
should out of such stones as these raise up children unto Abraham, that he
should thus out of the mouths of babes and sucklings perfect his own praise,
make the Child as eloquent as the Orator, the women as valiant in his service
as the stoutest men, the People understand that which the learned Doctors would
not see. Even so O Father, for so it pleased thee to reveal those things to
babes and sucklings, and hide them from the wise, St. Luke x. 21. his only
doing it was, neither their doing nor deserving, and it is marvelous in our
eyes, an evidence of the freeness of his power, that he can do what he pleases,
that he does what he lists, no man can hinder him, none able to contradict him.

This (6.) shows his Omniscience and his truth, that nothing that he foretells,
not a tittle of it shall fall any time to the ground. He had foretold it by his
Prophet, Zech. ix. 9. that the daughter of Sion should rejoice, and the
daughter of Jerusalem shout for joy; and here we have it to a tittle. even
their Sons and Daughters doing it, a very great multitude it is, and children
and women in it; Children in the Temple, ver. 15. and the whole City moved,
ver. 10. all Sexes then, that the Prophecy might be fulfilled to the last
letter. So punctual is he of his word.

Yet to fulfill it fuller, it is a very great multitude in the Text, that we
might know, that he that was here met by so great a company was the Savior of
all, as many as would come, that would spread their garments to receive him,
make him any kind of entertainment, though butstrew boughs and rushes for him,
that (2.) the World might know that he was going to his Passion, he went freely
too; he could as well have used these multitudes to preserve himself, as thus
strangely to do him honor; made them have bespread him with Arms and Weapons
as well as arms and boughs of trees; strewed the way with their bodies in his
defense, as well as their Garments in his honor; but he would suffer death,
and therefore would not suffer that. To tell us (3.) that he should be served
hereafter by great multitudes, and not by little handfuls of men and women;
this was but a forerunner of the great multitudes of those that should
hereafter believe on him.

Upon such grounds as these it is, that the Eternal Wisdom so uses this great
multitude here to set forth his glory, makes them do that which themselves yet
do not understand; to tell us he is a Savior of the poor and needy, as well as
of the rich and wealthy. That he does not (2.) utterly refuse man's service
though he know it is not to last long, to teach us (3.) all the glory and
honor we receive from men is but transitory and quickly vanishing; to provoke
us (4.) by their doings, to a godly jealousy and contention to outdo them; to
ascertain us (5.) of the exact performance of every (...) of his promises; To
intimate, lastly, to us, that he is the Savior of us, willingly comes to
suffer that he may be so, that he may purchase a Church, great multitude, by it
to himself. Thus you have some kind of glimmering light why this great
multitude are employed in this way of honoring him by the way. And yet there
is a mystery beyond it.

This multitude throngs together to inform us (1.) how Christ would be served
and honored; with full Assemblies and Congregations. The places where he comes
he loves to see crowded with devout Worshippers, to hear them encouraging and
heightning one another with O come let us worship and fall down and kneel
before God our Maker, and by outward reverence, gestures, and expressions,
provoking one another to his service.

It instructs us (2.) that there is neither man nor woman, Master nor Servant,
old man or child, poor or rich, to be out in giving glory to him, all sexes,
ages, and conditions to flow together to do him service, the very children to
lisp it out; they that have not a rag to cover shame may have a leaf to honor
him; they that cannot, are not able to cut down a bough, may strew it yet; that
cannot lift a branch, may hold a twig, do somewhat or other to his
entertainment.

It preaches (3.) to us, that there is nothing readier to serve him than the
poor in spirit; that the spirit which most does him honor, which is ever most
ready to do it to him is the poor and humble Spirit, such as ranks it self
lowest, thinks meanest of it self, none so mean in the meanest multitude. Here Is
the spirit of this very great multitude, the spiritual sense it speaks, a
serving Christ with a poor and humble spirit, and bringing our selves, and all
ours, our very children to speak or point out his praise, to do it too in the
great Congregation, as the Psalmist speaks, to praise him among much people.

And not only so, but with much ceremony too: so we read in the next
particular, some spread their garments in the way, others cut down branches
from the trees, and strewed them in the way.

II. These Ceremonies, neither of them, were strange among the Jews in the days
of joy or triumph, or the inauguration of Kings and Princes. When Iehu was
anointed King, 2 Kings ix. 12. we find every man hasting to take his own
garment, and put it under him, spreading them as carpets for him to walk on,
ver. 13. And in the Feast of Tabernacles it was commanded them to take boughs
of goodly trees, branches of palm trees, and the boughs of thick trees and
willows of the brook, and so rejoice before the Lord, Lev. xxiii. 40. whence
afterward it became usual in all Feasts of solemn Joy to do as much. So we read
Simon entering the tower of Jerusalem, with thanksgivings, and branches of
Palm Trees, St. Matthew. xiii. 51. and when Judas Maccabeus had recovered and
cleansed the Temple, they bare branches, and fair boughs, and palms also,
rejoicing for it, 2 Mac. x. 7. So that the reason's ready why the multitude met
Jesus in this fashion. They would long before have made him King; they believed
he was the Messiah, the King of Israel; and therefore thus go out to meet him
and receive him. They had heard his word, they had seen his miracles. never
man, say the very Pharisees officers spoke like him, with more authority and
power he then all their Jewish Doctors and Rabbi's all together, never man did
such things as he, and therefore no wonder if the people do some strange things
too to express their opinions of him.

But the matter is not so much what they do, as what we learn by Christ's
suffering them to do so. And by it we first gather, that Christ is no enemy to
outward Ceremonies, and respects, to outward civilities and expressions.

That (2.) he dislikes not neither even the Ceremonies of solemn joys, and
triumphs, of respects done to Kings, and Princes, and great Persons, or public
congratulations with them in the days of their joy, or of any public joy, or
particular gladness, as occasion shall present it.

That (3.) he rejects not even the old and ancient Ceremonies, is as much
content with such as any other; these were no other, and yet he sticks not to
receive them, stumbles not at them.

Nay (4.) even in his Service, and for his own honor he accepts them, is not
only content, but pleased also that they should do them to himself. It is the
Pharisees only, and Pharisaical spirits, men of mere pretended Piety and
Religion, whose devotion is only to be seen of men, whose whole business is to
appear holier than others, not to be so, that find fault with the doing it,
that would have them rebuked for it, St. Luke xix, 39. To whom Christ answers,
that if they did not the stones would do more; they, even they would both cry
out against them for their silence, and not doing it, and do what they could to
express that joy of his coming to Jerusalem, of which they seemed so
insensible. The very trees would bow themselves, and every branch shake off its
leaves, and spread the ways, if men should not spread their garments; break off
themselves if they would not cut them down to strew them; the very stones of
the Wall fall themselves into an even pavement to kiss the feet of their Lord
and maker. Insensible and senseless stones are men the while that deny Christ
eternal reverence, outward worship, reverent and ceremonious approches to him,
that make I know not what senseless arguments and excuses, idle scruples and
pretenses against old good significant Ceremonies in his service to his honor.
The very stones confute them, and Christ's telling us they would cry if men
should not, signifies as well they would bow, and worshp, and fall down,
beautify the ways and places where he comes if men should not, rear themselves
into Temples and Altars, if men should be so irreligious not to raise and
employ them to it. I now spare any other confutation.

We learn (5.) by Christ's thus suffering them, and Gods secret moving them thus
to spread the ways with boughs and garments, that he would be acknowledged to
be that great He to whom all creatures owe themselves, to whom all are to be
devoted, who is to be served with all, even to a thread; the trees to pay their
boughs, and men their garments, to strip themselves to the very skin, and
consecrate even their garments to his honor, to lay them at his feet, to
resign all to him, to be content that he, nay the very ass he rides on should
trample on us if it be to his praise and glory, that that may be augmented by
it.

Lastly, This spreading the way with Garments, and Palm-branches was the way of
entertaining conquerors in their triumphs; and by his disposing it at this time
to himself, he gave them to understand, that he was the conqueror over Death
and Hell. In this only differing from other conquerours, that he triumphs
before his conquest, none so but he, because none certain of the victory till
it be perfected but he. This might go for a mystery among the rest, but it
concern those persons peculiarly, and those times. The mystery of this point as
it concerns us we are next to see, how these garments and branches, this
spreading and strowing belong to us, how we are still so to spread our
garments, and straw branches before Christ.

Now Garments (1.) pass in the account for riches, Zech. xiv. 14. and he that
either bestows plentifully upon the poor, that clothes the naked, and feeds the
hungry, and supplies the needy with any thing to cover, comfort, or refresh
him, and spreads Gods holy house and table with offerings, gives or does any
thing to beautify his service, to add honor and solemnity to his Worship,
spreads his Garmtnts before Christ.

2. Garments are reckoned among necessaries, and he that not only out of his
superfluity, but as the Apostle testifies of the Corinthians, 2 Cor. viii. 2.
out of his poverty also abounds unto the riches of liberality that spares
somewhat from his necessities, spreads even his inner garment at the feet of
Christ.

But (3.) the Garments the multitude here spread were honorary, the outward
vestments and more honorable, that we might know our honors also are to be
laid aside; nay, laid down to be trod upon by any Ass for Christ's sake, we to
count nothing of our honor in comparison of his, tread all under foot, and
reckon nothing so honorable as the reproach of Christ.

4. Garments are a shelter from the injury of wind and weather, of heat and
cold. Yet if Christ's business require it of us, we must not think much to lie
open to storm and tempest, to be deprived of house and shelter, of robes and
rags, nothing too much, nothing enough for Christ.

5. To spread our Garments under ones feet, was construed for a profession of
subjection and obedience to him, for whom we spread, or to whom we send them, 2
Kings ix. 13. and 1 Kings x. 25. so to spread our garments in the way of Jesus,
is to profess, and promise, and begin obedience to him, the chief spreading the
way that he desires, the best way of entertaining him.

6. Our righteousness is called our Garment, Rev. iii. 4. and xvi. 15. This
also we are to spread before him, that he may consecrate and hallow it; till he
has set his mark upon it, and sealed it, it will not pass for current; all our
righteousness and obedience must have his stamp to confirm it, his robes to
lengthen it, his righteousness to make it right.

Lastly, to spread our garments to receive him, may have a kind of reflection
upon the preparation we are making for the Blessed Sacrament. We must open our
bosoms, disrobe our selves, spread our garments, stretch out our hands, open
our bosoms by confession, disrobe and dismantle our selves by renouncing all
former vanities, spread all the good thoughts, and affections, and desires we
can, stretch out our souls in all holy vows and resolutions, to receive and
entertain him. Nay, all the former garments and spreadings may again be
repeated and remembered here. We must spread our garments upon the backs of the
poor, spread our selves before the Altar upon the pavement with all humility
and devotion, neglect and trample upon all private respects and interests, lay
aside all vain desires of honor and greatness, despoil our selves of all trust
and confidence in our selves, or in the arm of flesh, faithfully protest and
renew the vow of obedience and subjection, acknowledge our own no righteousness
till he accepts it, thus spread our garments all we can to receive him with joy
and honor.

But if it so fall out, that we either have not some of these kind of garments,
those we have be not worth the spreading, we may yet cut down branches from the
trees, and strew in the way, at least where our garments will not reach. Now
several sorts of branches there were which we may conceive the multitude made
use of. Two more particularly, Palms and Olives, yet from Nehemiah viii. 15. we
may gather more, Olive-branches, and Pine-branches, and Myrtle-branches, and
Palm-branches, and branches of thick trees, he reckons up and bids them fetch
to make them Tents and Tabernacles, the like likely also here; and in
Leviticus, willows are added too: in brief, any such as were at hand, that grew
by the way from Mount Olivet to Jerusalem. These to the letter, shall we see
what spirit we can draw from them?

Branches of Palm Trees by name St. John tells us they came out of Jerusalem to
meet him with, St. John xii. 13. And Palms (1.) are the emblems of patience and
perseverance, they cannot be deprest with any weight; but the more you press
them the more they rise; and so may teach us the patience of the Cross, not to
look sad for any hardship that shall befall us in the way to Christ: but the
more we suffer for him, the more to bear up and lift up our heads that our
redemption draws nigh. Palms thence (2.) are signs of victory, so being here
given as it were to Christ, they intimate to us both, to whom to give the glory
of all the victory we get over our sins, and passions; and so to labor our
selves against them, that we may be thought worthy to overcome them.

2. Branches of Olives could not probably but be here too; the meeting was upon
Mount Olivet, a place full of Olives; and Olives are the emblems of peace and
meekness, of mercy and softness: nothing so smooth, so softning, so suppling as
Oil, to teach us what spirit we are of if we be Christ's: this the offering he
is most pleased with, the disposition he most delights in; his way is spread
with Olive-branches, is a way of sweetness, his yoke an easy yoke, full of
rest and peace to the wearied soul: the Christians way must be so too, a sweet
and quiet temper in us through all our ways.

3. We may have leave to conjecture from that cited place of Leviticus and
Nehemiah, there were other sorts besides. Pine-branches, or as some render the
word, branches of Balsam, and Cedar-trees.

Now the Pine and Cedar are tall, straight, and upright trees, and may mind us
of high heavenly thoughts, pure and upright intentions, straight and regular
affections, to run forth to meet him with.

In particular, the Pine is a Tree, says Pliny, that is, never but bearing
fruit: It has perpetually three years fruit upon it, and ripens month by month.
What a glorious tree is this to present to Christ! a soul always bearing fruit,
fruit after fruit, fruit upon fruit, adding to faith, virtue; to virtue,
knowledge; to knowledge, temperance; to temperance, patience; to patience,
godliness; to godliness, brotherly kindness; to brotherly kindness, charity, as
St. Peter advises us, 2 Pet. i. 5, 6, 7. bearing still one fruit upon earth,
for the great years, the three great ages of our life, youth, manhood, and old
age. till we bring our years to an end.

The Cedar next is a sweet lasting wood, will not take worm, corrupt, or lose
its scent; and the branches of it shadow out thus much to us, that in the
actions we present to Christ, there be no worms, no by intentions, no corrupt
affections, all sweet, and incorrupt, and a continued constancy, and
continuance in them.

The Balsame, or Balm-tree (3.) is a Tree medicinal to heal and cure Wounds;
and is there no Balm in Gilead, no Physician there, says the Prophet Jeremiah?
If there be not, here there is; upon Mount Olivet there is here, upon Mount
Calvary there is, in Christ's Death and Passion to which he here is going: let
us then bring Balm-branches thence, and strew the way; acknowledge our
Physician, in whom our health, he that heals the lame, the blind, the sick, and
all.

4. Nehemiah mentions Myrtle-branches, as usual in such solemnities as these.
It was a Tree, says Pliny, dedicated to love; and the boughs of it may teach us
upon whom all our love is to be bestowed, all upon Christ, all upon Christ.

At the Feast of Tabernacles, from whence this spreading the ways were
borrowed, we read of Willows, the Willows of the Brook; and they may denote
unto us, that we are to sit down with the Willows a little by the waters, look
upon our selves in the streams of repentant tears, and then bring our branches
so watered to strew the way of Christ.

There is yet lignum nemorosum, the branches of thick trees behind, to tell us
that we are to strew the ways not here and there with our piety and good works,
but thick every where, as thick as may be, that so we may even cover the way,
hide the earth, all appearance of earth, or earthly, sensual, worldly desires
and thoughts, when we are coming to receive our Lord.

Thus I have brought you to the Trees, showed you what to spread Christ's way
with: you must now cut down the branches, and strew the way; take others in
your hand and present him with. And with joy, and gladness, and thankful hearts
both accept the infinite favor he does you to come to you, and rejoice in it.
It Is time now I say somewhat of the way he comes, the way you are to meet him
in.

III. Between Mount Olivet and Jerusalem it was, from the Mount into the
Temple. Upon the Mount he preached, and in the Temple he taught, and there in
his word you are to meet him, and that the word pass not away as the wind, and
empty air, you are to come to it with prepared hearts, to open your ears, to
spread your hearts to entertain it, to bring the boughs of Olives, peaceable
and pliant dispositions, boughs of Palms, conquered passions; bows of Cedar,
constant resolutions; boughs of Myrtle, loving affections to it: and from Mount
Olivet to Jerusalem remember it is from the Mount of Peace to the City of
Peace, that you may not forget to come in the unity of the Churches peace,
without Schism, or Faction, or schismatical and factious intentions, if you
look to meet Christ there.

2. In both Olivet and Jerusalem you see there is a mystery; the branches and
garments cover mysteries all the way, are kind of Sacraments; and in the
Blessed Sacraments it is we receive Christ Jesus. Throw we then our garments in
the way, cast all our own from us, that we may have none but Christ; bring
Palms, and Pines, and Olives, Cedars, and Myrtles, and Willows; all thick and
all green verdant pleasing graces, virtues, and affections to them, spread them
all at the foot of the Altar; that is the Ass that Christ rides on; the holy
elements they that carry him, they that convey him to us: There Is our
conqueror, let us bring Palms; there is our peacemaker, let us bring
Olive-branches; there is the Lord our righteousness, let us bring the upright
Pine; there is our sweet smelling savor in the eyes of God our eternal
redemption, let us bring Cedar-boughs; there is the great Physician of our
souls, let us bring him Balm; there is our love, let us bring him Myrtle; there is
the wellspring of our life, let us bring Willows; there is the fullness of our
good and happiness, let us bring him the branches of thick trees.

That we may do it better, remember this way is the way to the Cross, this
procession to his passion. This the way, his Cross and Passion the meditation
we are to receive him in. Let us readily strip our selves of all our garments
for him, who is stripped presently of all his for us. Let us cover him with
Palms, and crown him with Olives; let us make it our business and delight to be
always strewing his way before him, to be doing all our endeavors we can to
entertain him. Let us leave no branch of virtue out, spread them as thick as
possibly upon this earth of ours, cover our selves with them that we may be the
way, our souls and bodies the way for him.

And now you see, I hope, how fit Palm Sunday is to usher in the Passion, to
precede the receiving Christ; the very Trees of the Wood have told you it: I
shall do no more, spread the boughs no further. It Is you now must strew them,
or I have but hitherto strewed in vain.

The work is not to be done singly by the Preacher, it is the multitude that is
to do it too; it is to be done in public, it is to be done in private, it is to
be done by the Apostles, it is to be done by the people, it is to be done by men,
women, and children, old and young, poor and rich, all to bear a part by the
way if they hope to come to the happy end; every one either to spread his
garment, or strew a branch, or bring a sprig; some one thing, some another, but
all something to the honor of Christ; to do it with much solemnity and
respect, outward and inward all of it, as to one that deserves all that we can
do to strew our souls, to strew our bodies, to fill our hands, to spread all
our powers and affections to entertain him; to strew our souls with Palms, and
Olives, Pines, and Cedars, Myrtles, and Willows, patience and meekness,
uprightness and constancy, love and repentance, and all holy virtues, as thick,
as full, as fair as may be; think nothing too much, nothing enough to do or
suffer in his service.

Then shall our garments truly cover us, and keep us warm; then shall our trees
bring forth fruit, when boughs and garments are thus employed; then shall our
ways be strewed with peace, every one sit under his own vine, and drink the
wine of it, then shall our branches cover the hills, and stretch out unto the
River. He that is the Branch in the Prophets style, shall so spread them for
it, give us the tree of life for these liveless boughs, and for the spreading
our garments over him, spread his garment over us, the robe of his
righteousness, the garment of glory, where strewing our garments and branches
with this great multitude in the Text, we shall with that great multitude in
the Revelation, of all Nations, which no man can number, stand before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white garments, and palms in our
hands, singing and saying, Salvation unto our God, which sits upon the
Throne; and to the Lamb, Blessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and
honor, and power, and might be unto our God for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON* UPON Good Friday.
1 COR* ii. 2. For I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus
Christ and him crucified.
ANd this being Passion day, I am determined not to preach any thing among you
to day but Jesus Christ and him crucified. I cannot preach any thing more
seasonable, nor you hear any thing more comfortable, nor any of us know any
thing more profitable. St. Paul himself thought nor he nor his Corinthians
could, determined so here ex Cathreda. And the Holy Church has thought and
determined so too; to send no other Epistles, to preach no other Gospels to us
this week through than of Jesus Christ and him crucified: as if the sum of the
Gospel, the Gospel it self, were nothing else; no other knowledge worth the
knowing, at least at this time, these days to be thought of or intended.

Not but that we may lawfully have other knowledges besides, intend other
knowledges too at other times, in their proper times; not but that we may know
more of Jesus Christ himself than his being crucified; but that all the
knowledges of him tend hither, Jesus and Christ his salvation and Office
clearest seen here, best determined hence; that all other knowledges are to be
directed hither, to Jesus Christ, are but petty and inconsiderable in respect,
and only worth the knowing when Christ is in them, and we with Christ crucified
in them, or affections mortified and humbled by them; that especially at this
time nothing is so fit to take up our thoughts, to employ our meditations,
nothing not of Christ himself, no act or story of him as his crucifixion.

And yet the Text affords us a plainer reason and account of this so determined
knowledge from the two Pronouns, I and You. None so fit for this I, for an
Apostle, a Preacher, a Divine, to be determined to, to determine from, to be
determined by as Christ and him crucified; nothing so fit to fasten his
resolutions against the crosses and thwartings he is like to meet with in the
world, even among them he bestows and spends most upon, and would be bestowed
and spent himself for, as this Apostle for these Corinthians, 2 Cor. xii. 15.
as the consideration of the Cross of Christ. And no knowledge fitter for this
You, for the Corinthians, people now divided into Schisms and Factions, than to
think of Christ crucified, rent and torn in pieces by them, thus crucified
again by them through their Divisions, who was crucified to unite them, to
bring all into one body, under one head, by his body on the Cross, into himself
the head Christ Jesus.

For there were at the time of this Epistle among the Corinthians, as there are
now among us, some that much boasted of their knowledge, as if they alone knew
all was to be known, more than St. Paul, than a hundred St. Paul's; made
themselves heads of Factions and Schisms upon it, and drew parties after them.
In this indeed differing from the heads of ours, that they vaunted of their
Humane Learning, ours have nothing but ignorance to boast of; they would have
Faith reduced to Reason, these ruled by fancy; yet in this agreeing both, in
their ignorance of the Cross of Christ, or sure quite forgetting it, and making
Schisms, and sowing Heresies in the Church of Christ, though perhaps we could
find them some Socinianiz'd wits too, that would fain bring all to natural
reason, and really deny the very effects of the Cross of Christ, his
satisfaction and redemption, the very denying, in effect, Christ crucified, or
any knowledge of it.

To beat down these great boasters, and all vain braggers, St. Paul resolves
upon two Points in the Text, a seeming ignorance, and a real knowledge: A
seeming ignorance to confound their seeming knowledge; a real knowledge to
confound their real ignorance; not to know, and but to know; not to know, that
is, not to seem to know any thing; yet to know, to know every thing that is
worth the knowing, Jesus Christ and him crucified, the whole way of salvation:
So to teach us besides, and all that should come after him, what to determine,
and how to determine both of our ignorances and knowledges; what not to know,
things that have no profit, but only breed strife and debate, Schisms and
Divisions, not to know such things among them, to do others hurt by our
knowledge. What to know, Jesus Christ and him crucified, that to be sure to
know, and nothing but him and it, and in order unto it or him; thus to
determine and be determined the only way to profit and benefit both our selves
and others at any time with our knowing and not knowing; to know what, and how
far to know, and not to know; what to determine of, and where to be determined.

Thus we have brought the Text to its own natural division, to hinder our
unnatural ones; St. Paul's double determination: One, for Ignorance, the other,
for Knowledge; one, not to know, the other, to know. A determination too in a
double sense, as well as a double Object. A double Determination about not
knowing, and a double one about knowing. A determination to both, and a
determination of each.

I. A Determination not to know, to seem ignorant, I am determined not to know.

A Determination of this not knowing, or seeming ignorant, it is but seeming,
only so determined or put on; it is but among you, it is but in comparison of the
following knowledge, which is the only saving knowledge.

II. A Determination to know, not to be really ignorant, though, not any thing
but, is something though not that those false Teachers vaunted of.

A Determination or determining of this knowledge (1.) to Christ, (2.) Christ
Jesus, (3.) Christ Jesus crucified; that, and nothing further, now further,
among them, nothing else to determine himself, or them, or his, or their
knowledges by at any time, nothing save that, nothing saving but that.


Thus the Text determines both our knowledge, and ignorance, and limits both,
shall determine and limit our discourse. God grant we may all so be determined
by it, that both our ignorance and knowledge may hence learn their bounds and
limits, and all end at last in Jesus Christ and him crucified.

I begin with St. Paul's determination, not to know any thing among the
Corinthians; where we have (1.) the things he is determined not to know; (2.)
the not knowing them; (3.) the determination so to do; (4.) the determining how
far, and among whom, how, and where to be ignorant, and not know them.

And first, many things there are not to be known, of which it is good to be
ignorant. Some things that are not worth the knowing, light and trivial things,
which only rob us of those precious minutes which a Christian should spend upon
nobler thoughts.

Some things we are the worse for knowing; which only infect the soul, and
instead of knowledge bring blindness and ignorance upon it, Adam and Eves
unhappy knowledge, when we will needs be knowing more than God will have us,
curious and vain Arts and Sciences, of which it is far better, with those in the
Acts, to burn the books than read them.

Some things we can scarce do worse than know them, whose very knowledge is a
guilt whereby we are perfected in wickedness, grow cunning in contriving,
subtle in conveying, experienced in managing sin or mischief.

Some things again there are which it is best not to know, sins from which the
safest fence is ignorance, whose knowledge would but teach us to do them, or
leave in us a desire and itching after them, nitimur in vetitum; sins which
else perhaps we had never thought of or attempted, the not knowing of which had
kept us safe, because we cannot desire things we know not.

Some things there are again, which though good and commendable, yet of which
we may say, and say truly, it is very pleasant and useful too not to know in
time and place; and such is this any thing of the Apostles; Humane Learning and
Sciences, Natural Reason and Artificial Eloquence, Tongues and Languages,
Disputes and Questions, whereof sometimes a real ignorance, sometimes a seeming
one will do more good than all of them together.

For diversity there is in the not knowing as well as in the things not to be
known; many ways of not knowing. For not to know, is (1.) really to be
ignorant; which in good matters, if it be not voluntary or affected, but either
by reason of a natural dullness or incapacity, or for want of education which we
could not have, or because we had not the means or time to come to the
knowledge of it; or if we were not bound to know it, is no sin, may not only
excuse from punishment, but from fault. Thus the poor simple man, that knows
not a letter, nor understands half what others do, not the tenth part that
others do, may know enough of Christ crucified to bring him into heaven, when
many that are more learned shall stand without. But this ignorance, for the
most part of it, must not be determined by us; we must not, the meanest of us,
resolve and determine with our selves to be ignorant, or remain so in any
spiritual or heavenly business, but to know as far as our condition requires,
or will give us leave. Yet in mere humane knowledges even a resolved ignorance
may do well, when your knowing would take up more time than it is worth, when
it would rob us of better, or hinder us in the more necessary improvements of
our souls, when there is just fear it will but make us insolent or impertinent;
better far not to know a Letter, not to speak a Tongue, but what the Nurse and
Mother taught us, than be the nimblest Orator, or skilfullest Linguist, or
rarest Philosopher, if nothing be like to come of it but the disturbance of the
Church, the seducing others, and vain glory in our selves. In this case we may,
with St. Paul, even determine to be ignorant, more ignorant still, especially
in unprofitable, curious, or impious knowledge, or ways of knowing.

However, even in the best and most necessary of these it may be requisite not
to know in a second sense; that is, not to seem to know them, to bear our
selves sometimes as if we did not. There are some we may have to deal with that
are suspicious of being deceived by too much reason and Philosophy, with whom
it is the only way to work, to renounce, as it were, all Art, and Logic, and
discourse, as if we were wholly ignorant in them, that we may so by St. Paul's
own way, of becoming all things to all men, to the ignorant as ignorant, of
every thing but salvation, by plainness and condescension to their humor win
them to the truth. And indeed, where ever Eloquence, Language, Philosophy, or
natural reason are like more to lose than gain a soul, more to vaunt themselves
than preach Christ; not to know, that is, to seem not to know them, or deal by
them, or build upon them, or make show of them, but conceal them is the best.

Not to know them in a third sense is not to teach them, not to teach them when
we should be teaching Christ, or teach them instead of Christ, Natural Reason
for Divine Faith, Moral Philosophy for the only Divinity.

Not to know them, fourthly, to profess and make our whole business of them, to
make knowledge our whole profession, as if Religion consisted knowing only, and
they the best Christians that knew most. Alas, Nos Doctrinis nostris trudimur
in infernum is too true: Many a learned man is thrust at lest into hell with
all his knowledge. We may speak with the tongues of Angels, and have all
knowledge, all faith too, even to a miracle, and to do miracles, and yet for
all that be but sounding brass and tinckling Cymbals, mere noise and vapor,
not so good as the Prophets reprobate Silver, but mere Brass and Copper, that
will not pass with heaven for current money, nor be received into the
Treasuries of God, better it is not to know at all, than to know only and no
more, to know and not do, we shall only get the more stripes by the bargain;
and hovvever we seem to know God, not to be known of him, or acknowledged
by him, but sent away by Christ with an I know you not.

The things then not to be known, and the not knovving being things of so
difficult or doubtful nature, best it is now that we determine somewhat of
them, that we may know both the things, and knowledge, or rather not
knowledge that is fittest for us.

The any thing the Apostle means, expressly is set down in the former verse
under the terms of excellency of speech or wisdom; and that wisdom, Chap. i.
20. to be the wisdom of the world; of the wise and prudent, Moral Philosophy;
of the Scribe, Law, and History, and Philology; of the disputer of this world,
natural Philosophy, Mathematics, Astronomy, Astrology: all which St. Paul
seems determined not to know.

It Is (...), he has so judged it, so judged and past sentence upon all those
knowledges, as to give a (...) to give a negative to them all. In things of
moment it is good to be determined and resolved. It Is for want of this judgment
and determination that we lose our selves so often e're we are aware, and not
only consume our days in knowledges that do not profit, in searching out
endless Genealogies, and disputations to no benefit of the hearers without the
least edification. Settle we and fix our selves upon this point in all our
knowings, and not knowings, to do all to edification, that whether we know any
thing or not, whether we know every thing or nothing, it be all to the glory of
God; and then even our ignorance will save us as well as our knowledge: only
with this item, that it be a determining by (...) with the Apostle here, a
determination with judgment, to discern and judge what things are fit not to be
known, what to be known, what knowledge, and time, and pains to bestow upon
them; what we are to be wholly ignorant in, what in part, what really not to
know, what to seem only not knowing in, what to conceal, and what to teach,
what to make our profession of, and what to know only by the by; how far, and
where, and when to know them.

And this is the very determining our determination I spoke of for a fourth
consideration. I shall set no other bounds either to our knowledge, or object,
or our determining our selves to it, or in it, than what we have within the
bounds of the Text, because my determination is to hasten to the knowledge of
Jesus Christ and him Crucified.

To determine then this determination of St. Paul's, not to know any thing,
take we the words as they lie, and consider who it is that has thus determined.
I, it is, that St. Paul himself it is, an Apostle, and a great knowing one too.
Yet I have determined not to know. Sciences there are that are below an
Apostle, that become not him whatever they do others. The Apostles were to act
all by the power of the Spirit, were not to study words and humane arguments,
though we sometimes find them disputing too, Acts xix. 8. and quoting Poets and
humane Authors, Acts xvii. 28. were not to pretend to such worldly wisdom, that
the glory might be wholly Gods, and the whole world convinced, that as the
Christian Faith was not stablished by mortal strength, nor settled by worldly
power, so it was not persuaded by humane wit or interests, and was therefore
truly divine and heavenly.

But (2.) even the successors of the Apostles, the Ministers of the Gospel,
(though they have now only this ordinary way of enabling them to their office)
are yet so to use their knowledge, as if they used them not, their chief work
being Christ's, and these only as ways to it, remembering their great business to
be to know Christ Crucified, and to teach him, and not to know any thing but in
order to it, at least not to profess any thing above or equal with it, that may
swallow up the time, which ought to be spent in divine employments. Thus this
not knowing is first determined by the person: Persons wholly interessed in the
business of Heaven, not to turn their studies into a business of the world,
persons designed to an extraordinary office, not to deal in it by extraordinary
means, but guide all according to that rule, and way, and work that God has set
them.

But the not knowing the secular Sciences, is not only limited to spiritual
persons; there are limits within which all must keep as well their ignorance as
knowledge. When at any time they will determine not to know it must be (1.) by
(...), by judgment and discretion, not promiscuously: such things as sound
judgment propounds unnecessary, dangerous or unfruitful.

It must be (2.) by a non judicavi quicquam, whatsoever knowledge we have of
humane Sciences, we must judge and reckon it as nothing, determine it to be no
or her than dross and dung, than building with hay and stuble in respect of the
knowledge of Jesus Christ, not any thing to that.

It must be (3.) too without putting any estimate upon our selves for any such
knowledge; we must still think we know nothing whilst we know no more. Moses a
man, as St. Stephen styles him, Acts vii. 22. mighty in words, and deeds, and
learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians; yet when God would send him of his
errand, considering that, tells God he was not eloquent, neither heretofore nor
since he had spoken to his servant, but slow of speech, and slow of tongue. And
Isaiah that Seraphick Prophet cries out, he is a man of unclean lips, Isa. vi.
5. so little valued they all their knowledge, when they had but a glimpse of
that great knowledge God was now imparting to them. How much soever we think,
we know before, when we once come to the knowledge of Christ, or but our
thoughts to come to know a taste of the riches of the fullness of the knowledge
of Christ, we then know we know nothing, count our selves dolts and idiots,
mere fools and blocks for squandering away so much time, and cost, and pains,
upon those empty notions whereby we are not an inch the nearer Heaven, and it
may be the further from God, after all our labor. Then only we begin truly to
know, when we can pass this sentence upon our selves, that we know not any
thing; when we are so humble that we think so, at least think not any thing of
our selves for all we know.

4. We must determine not to know any thing at all of humane Sciences or
natural reasonings, rather than to determine our selves by it, renounce it
rather, all knowing, and turn all to believing; not fix our faith upon natural
principles, or believe no further than we can know; rather than so, we had far
better know nothing, set it up for a resolution however in the matters of faith
not to know, that is, not to go about to determine them by reason: for the
natural man he understands them not, ver. 14. they are foolishness unto him, a
foolish thing to him to talk of a God Incarnate, of a Crucified Savior, of a
Religion whose glory is the Cross, and reward he knows not where nor when.

Or (5.) he is only not determined to know any thing; so the negative is truly
joined, not to his knowledge, but to his determination, not determined: if he
know it he counts it but by the by, his main business is something else, humane
knowledge is but by the way and obiter, he intends them not for his doctrine,
nor yet to prove or stablish his doctrine upon them, as upon foundations, nor
perch moral and natural Philosophy for Divinity; but to advance both the one
and the other: all Philology, Language and History to the Service of Christ,
and the glory of his Cross, to use our Rhetoric to set forth his sufferings,
the merit, and benefit, and glory of them: our natural Philosophy to find us
out the God of Nature in all his works: moral Philosophy and History to
dissuade Vice, and encourage Virtue, even by the light of nature, the knowledge
of the Heavens and heavenly Spirits to declare his excellent and wondrous
works, our Criticisms to sift out truth, and our Languages to express it: in a
word, not so much to know any of them, as God through them; not them properly,
but Christ Jesus by them. There is no fear of humane Sciences thus determined.

Yet there is one way more to determine our not knowng by, by the persons with
whom we have to do. Our Doctrines, (for so we told you, and for the chief
meaning here we tell you now again, to know here signifies to teach) our
Doctrines are to be proportioned and fitted for the auditory: It was no meaner
a man's practice than St. Paul's, to the weak to become as weak, to gain the
weak; to the weak and simple not to speak mysteries and speculations; to them
that were without Law, as without Law, plain honest dealing, not quirks and
quillets, to gain such; not to know any such thing among such as they. Yet
sometimes upon the same ground to do quite contrary, to confound the wisdom of
the world, by that which that counts foolishness; the strength of the world by
that it reckons weakness; the honorable things of the world by things which
that esteems base and ignominious. The Corinthians gloried in their learning
and eloquence; St. Paul, to confute their vanity, undertakes to do more by
plainness and rudeness of speech and ignorance, than they all of them can by
all their wisdom and rhetoric: among them he will make no use of any thing but
the contemptible knowledge of the Cross of Christ, and yet do more then all
their Philosophers and Orators. Where Learning will serve but to ostentation,
and the ear only tickled by it, or humane applause not edification, Schism not
peace, the issue of it; among them not to know any such thing is best of all;
for let all things be done, says the Apostle, to edification, 1 Cor. xiv. 26.
and if that will be done best by plainness, to use plainness; if by learning,
to use that; as the you are that are to be edified, so the I, the Minister to
deal with them; if they be puffed up with humane knowledge to humble them to the
Abc of the Cross, to exalt and preach up that above all knowledge whatsoever,
if divided into Schisms by the several Sects of Philosophy, or the Masters of
them, to unite all again into one, as so many pieces into one Cross, among them
to cry up no knowledge but thence, or thither.

So then now to sanctify all our secular knowledges and ignorances, thus we
are to determine them, to know our times, and place, and persons for them, to
keep measure and order in them, to profess none that are wicked, or only vain
and curious, and to no profit, to submit our knowledge to faith, and our
determination to the Churches, not to overvalue them, or our selves by them,
but only make them handmaids to guide us to the Cross of Christ, and there
with Mary Magdalen and the good women stand weeping at it; not to know any of
them otherwise, to resolve and determine nothing of Christ by them, and not to
know them where they will know no submission and order. I come now to our
knowledge, and it is indeed the only saving one, Jesus Christ, and him
crucified; nothing save that, nothing to that.

For you may now take notice, that it is not an absolute determination not to
know, a decree for ignorance, but a determination with a But, not any thing
save, then save something, something to be known still. Some have been blamed
for making Ignorance the mother of Devotion, yet themselves that blamed them
have advanced it to be the mother of Religion now whilst they set up mere
ignorants, I might say more, to be the Apostles of it: fit teachers I confess
of their Religion, which so much abhors the Cross of Christ, as to cast it off
their own shoulders upon other men's, and the name of Jesus, as to reckon it
superstition to respect it.

But this great Preacher of the Cross as much as he seems determined not to
know, had yet languages more than all these Corinthians he writes to, tells
them of it too, 1 Cor. xiv. 18. though he will not boast of it, disputes even
in Corinth, in the Synagogue of the Jews, Acts xix. 8. and in the Schools of
the Gentiles, ver. 9. quotes Heathen Poets too to the men of Athens, Acts xvii.
28. and to Titus, Tit. i. 12. that we may know that the preachers of the Gospel
may read other Books besides the Bible, shall never read that to understand it
if they do not. It Is only in some cases, and with some persons we are not to
make profession of them, and merely too upon private determination, as our own
wisdom and prudence shall direct us; not that God or Christ has determined the
least against it. God would have his people to seek his Law at the mouth of the
Priest, Malachy ii. 7. and adds the reasons, because his lips should keep
knowledge. And Christ Jesus though he made poor simple Fishermen his Apostles
to divulge his Gospel, yet he would not have the blind lead the blind, for fear
of falling both into the ditch, St. Matthew. xv. 14. and therefore promises to
give them wisdom, St. Luke xxi. 15. such wisdom as all their adversaries should
not be able to gainsay, and sends down the Holy Ghost, with the gifts of
tongues to sit upon them all; so little is there to be said for the ignorant
and unlearned man's teaching from them, who before they went about that work
were so highly furnished and endued. And though the Apostle here resolve the
Corinthians to make no profession of those great knowledges; yet it is to shame
them only from the great estimate and confidence they set upon them, and reduce
them to humility, and into order, and to edify them, that he chooses and
prefers to speak among them but five words in a known tongue, before all
languages to no purpose.

And indeed all tongues are too little, to speak of that the Apostle is here
about, Jesus Christ, and him crucified; all knowledges not sufficient to make
us know him, and teach him as we should. We had need have all tongues and
knowledges, all words and eloquence to set it forth.

Well then, at least let us about it, to see what it is to know Jesus Christ,
and him crucified. It Is the determination of this determined knowledge, to
Christ, to Christ Jesus, to Christ Jesus crucified, to this only and no other
object among them.

A knowledge this the most profitable, the most happy, the most glorious: even
eternal life it is to know Jesus Christ, St. John xvii. 3. Nor does his
Crucifying abate any thing of the glory of it. St. Paul makes it his only
glory, Gal. vi. 14. with a God forbid that he should glory in any thing, as
here not know any thing else, but in the Cross of the Lord Jesus Christ. Indeed
hence flows all our happiness, the wound in his side is the hole of the rock in
which only the soul can lie secure; the water that issued out thence is the
only laver to cleanse it in; the blood the only drink it lives by; the wood of
the Cross the only tree of life; the title of it better to us than all the
titles of the earth; the reproach of it better than all the honors of the
world; the pains of it sweeter than all the pleasures under heaven; the wounds
better cordials and restoratives to a sick soul, than all the Physic nature or
skill affords. There is not a grain of that holywood, but of more worth than
all the grains of Gold that the Indies can afford. There is not a vain in that
crucified Body of Jesus but it runs full with heavenly comfort to us. There is
nothing in Christ crucified, but man glorified. Who indeed would not be
determined to fix all his knowledge here, to dwell here for ever! but so
immense and vast is this happy subject, that I must limit it; yet I shall give
you notions that you may improve, whilst I tell you to know Christ crucified,
is to know him as we do other things by the four causes of it: the efficient,
the material, the formal, and the final. So to know him is to know who
crucified him, for what he was crucified, how it was he was crucified, and to
what end he was crucified.

It was his own love that moved him to it, it was God that sent him and
delivered him up to it, it was Judas that betrayed him to it, it was both the
Jews and Gentiles that had the hand in doing it: And what know we hence but
this, his infinite goodness, Gods unspeakable mercies, man's base ingratitude,
this mystery in all, how vastly Gods purposes and man's differ in the same
business, how infinitely good and gracious God is, even where men are most
wicked and unthankful.

Know we then the material cause of his sufferings for a second, and the matter
for which he suffered was our iniquities, for the transgressions of my people,
says the Prophet, was he smitten, Isa. liii. 8. And to know this is to deplore
it, to abhor and detest our selves, who were the causes of so vile using the
Son of God.

Know we (3.) and consider the formal cause, the manner of his crucifying a
death most cruel, most lingering, most ignominious, to have his back all
furrowed with whips and rods, to hang naked upon the Cross, by the hands and
feet, and them nailed to it through the most tender parts, where all the organs
of sense are quickest; to be given vinegar and gall to drink when he most
needed comfort, and refreshment; to be mocked and scofft at in his sorrow too,
derided by his enemies, forsaken by his friends as he hung; to have the weight
of all the sins of all mankind upon him; to have God as it were leave him to
struggle under them without the least glimmering of his presence; to see in his
soul all the horrors of all the sins of men; to feel in his body all the
torments that a body so delicate beyond the bodies of the Sons of Adam, by
reason of its perfection, must needs feel beyond all others, and groan and die
under the fury of an angry God, now visiting for all the iniquity that were
before or after, should be committed by the world. To know all this, and by
this, no sorrows like his sorrows, is at least to sit down and weep at it;
however not to pass by regardless of it.

And know we (4.) the end why all this was, even to redeem us from all our
sins, or as it is in the Chapter before this, ver. 30. That he might be made
unto us, wisdom, and righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption; that by
his blood we might have entrance into the holy of holies, into Heaven it self,
Heb. x. 19.

This you all know, as well as I, every one will say he knows it all. Yet I
must tell you, you do not know it as you should, if you sit not down and
sometimes determine your thoughts upon it, unless you sadly meditate, and
thankfully think upon it, unless you value the meditations and discourses of it
above all other thoughts, all other talk, unless you set by other business ever
and anon to contemplate this. To know in Christianity is to do more than fill
the brain with Scripture notions, it is to fill the heart too with devout
affections: therefore we read in Scripture of an understanding heart, and
wisdom is said in the holy phrase to be seated there. And when the heart
evaporates it self into holy affections, and desires Christ, then we are only
said to know him.

But to know Christ Jesus crucified, is more than so; it is in St. Paul's
meaning to be crucified with him, Gal. vi. 14. to take up our cross and follow
him, to make profession of him, though we be sure to come to execution by it,
to go with him as St. Thomas exhorts, though we die with him, to be willing to
suffer any thing for him, to deny our own wisdom and repute, and our selves for
his service, to be content to be counted fools for his sake, our very wisdom
and preaching, foolishness, if we may save any by it, to count all as nothing,
so we may know him, and be known of him.

We cannot think much sure to be crucified with him, who was crucified only for
us, to suffer something for him, who suffered all for us, if we but know and
consider who it was was crucified, and for whom he was so, the Son of God for
the Sons of men, the most innocent for the greatest sinners, the most holy for
the most wicked, for such who even deny him after all he has done for them,

This speak we, this preach we, this profess we, this determine we upon with
St. Paul to know, to think, to speak, to teach, to preach, to profess this, and
nothing else; ever crying out to him with that good old Father, Deus men's and
omnia, Deus meus and omnia, This crucified Jesus is my God and all, this Christ
crucified is my God and all; all my thoughts, all my hearts, all my knowledge,
all my profession; he is all in all, I know nothing else, I value nothing else,
I know him though never so disfigured by his wound, I will acknowledge him
though in the midst of the Thieves, I am not ashamed of him, though full of
spittle and reproach, I will profess him though all run from him: alas, I know
not any thing worth knowing if they take him away.

And yet to know him has one degree more: when our understanding knows any
thing it does, says the Philosopher, become the same with it. So to know Christ
then is to become like him, to know Christ to be anointed, is to be anointed
like him also with holy graces: to know him Jesus a Savior, is to be a Savior
to the poor and needy, to deliver the widow and fatherless from the hand of the
oppressor: to know him to be crucified is to crucify our affections and lusts.
Thus we know him as he is here, and by so knowing him here, we shall at last
come to know him hereafter; where we shall know him perfectly, know him
glorified for here knowing him crucified, and all things then with him, for now
not knowing any thing but him, know God, and happiness, and eternal glory, and
our selves partakers in them all.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON Easter Day.
St. LUKE xxiv. 4, 5, 6. And it came to pass as they were much perplexed
thereabout, behold two men stood by them in shining Garments.

And as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the earth, they said
unto them, Why seek ye the living among the dead?

He is not here, but is risen.


ANd to day the day it came to pass. This the day wherein this great perplexity
both rose and was resolved. It rose from the not-seeing the body of Jesus in
the Grave, ver. 3. It was resolved by the hearing here, he was risen thence.

Thus rise the greatest perplexities still, and thus they are resolved. From
the miss of Christ; which way soever, truly or falsely, conceived by us, they
come, and at the very hearing of him again they vanish. To be sure, they stay
not at all after he is risen, and we hear it; and God will not let it be long
before we hear it; he will not suffer those to be long perplexed that seek
Christ heartily, affectionately, and devoutly, though with some error in their
heads, as here poor souls they had, if they have no wickedness in their hearts,
and Spices and Ointments, good Works and Charity in their hands. Some Angel or
other shall be sent to them ere long, to pacify their troubled thoughts, to
disperse their fears, and raise up their drooping heads.

Mary Magdalen, Ioanna, Mary the mother of James, with other women, found it so
to day, ver. 10. And to day also, and from this day now forward shall we so
find it too, if we seek our Lord but with that affection, that holy fear, that
humility, as they; so humbly bowing down our faces, so afraid to miss of him,
so perplexed when he is from us.

This is a a day when perplexities cannot stay, fears cannot tarry with us, our
heads cannot long hang down; the news of it is so full of gladness of comfort
and of joy. At the rising of this days Sun of righteousness, our perplexities
pass away as the clouds before the Sun, our tears melt as the dew before it,
and we turn up our heads like flowers to the Sun beams. It Is a day the fullest
of all good tidings, as the seal and assurance of all the good news we heard
before it. The Angels fly every where about to day, even into the grave with
comfortable messages. Why Weepest thou? says one, Fear not, says another, St.
Mat. xxviii. 6. Why seek you among the dead? says a third. What do you at the
Grave? He is risen, says the whole Choir, He whose rising is all your risings,
who is your Savior now complete, and the lifter up of all your heads, and go
but into Galilee and you shall see him.

But this only hearing of him must for this time content us, we shall one day
see him as he is; till then if we hear of him with our ears, and feel him in
our hearts, and see him in our conceits; if so hear as to believe him risen,
and our hearts listen to it (for the heart has two ears as well as the head,
nature has given to it such a form as has been observed in the dissections, to
teach us, that our hearts within us, as well as our ears without us, are to
give ear to him that made, to him that saves 'um) if they do, we need not be
the least perplexed for not visibly seeing him. All believers that then were
did not see him so; five hundred indeed we read of all at once, but they were
not all that were then believers; Not to all, says St. Peter expressly, but unto
witnesses chosen before of God, Acts x. 41. There is a blessedness, and it
seems, by the manner of speaking, somewhat greater, for them that have not seen
and yet have believed, St. Ioh. xx. 29.

Be we then content to day to hear that he is risen, with the first news and
tidings of it. From a good mouth it comes, to good souls it comes, in good time
it comes. From the mouths of Angels to good women, and very seasonably, when
they were much perplexed, much afraid, and much cast down for want of such a
message. And though we cannot here see Christ as we desire, yet be we pleased
to see our selves, our own sad condition upon the loss of him in these women's
perplexities, fears, and down-cast looks: our way to seek him, humbly with our
faces down as not worthy to look up, reverently with fear and trembling as
afraid to miss him, solicitously much perplexed to want him, as they were in
the Text. And that we may not give up our hope, be afraid, or cast down for
ever, look we upon the bright shining garments of the two Angels here (for
these men are no less) it is a joyful sight, and rejoice at the good success
that always follows them that so seek him, Angels and good news. The women
found it here, heard the good news from the Angels lips. You must be content to
hear it from mine, yet you know who says it, Angelus Domini exercituum est, the
Priest is the Angel, or Messenger, that is enough, of the Lord of Hosts, too
much for me poor sinful wretch; But look not upon me, but upon them that here
first told the news, and see in the Text these three Particulars: I. The sad
condition for a while of those that either are without, or cannot find their
Savior Christ in three Particulars: They are perplexed, they are afraid, they
bow down their faces to the earth, they go all the while with down-cast looks.
II. The only ready way to find him after a while; by being here perplexed for
his loss and absence, by being afraid to miss him, by looking every where up
and down to find him, or nevvs of him; going poring up and down, looking
where we looked before, and casting down, not our faces, but our selves also
to the earth in all humility to search after him. III. The good success at last
of them that thus diligently, reverently, and humbly seek him in three points
more: to see Angels, to be directed right, and be made partakers of the joyful
news of a Resurrection, of Christ's Resurrection by them, who is both the ground
of ours, and the first fruits of them that rise. The sum of all is this, That
though it sometimes fall out to us that we lose Christ, or cannot find him for
a while, and so fall into perplexities and fears, and go up and down dejected
with down-cast looks, yet if we so seek him with a solicitous love, a reverent
fear, and humble diligence, we shall meet Angels after a while to comfort us
and bring us news of our beloved Lord, and find him risen or rising in us ere
we are aware. And the close of all will be our duty, and the duty of the day,
(1.) to make our selves sensible of the perplexed and sad estate of those that
are without Christ, who have lost him in the Grave, or know not where he is, or
how to find him, and thereupon (2.) so set our selves to seek him that we may
be sure at last to hear of him, and be made partakers of his Rerection.


It Is a glad day, I confess, yet I begin with the gloomy morn that seemed to
usher it in to these poor women, their sadness upon the imagined loss of their
dear Lord, truly representing to us the sad condition of those who are deprived
of Christ, or think they are so. The glory of the day will appear brighter by
this morning cloud; the news of the Resurrection will be the welcomer when we
first see what poor, troubled, frighted, dejected pieces we are without it, we
will have the higher thoughts of him, now risen, when we feel how disconsolate
a thing it is to be without him, even without his body here though dead and
buried.

And it came to pass, says the Text, that they were perplexed thereabout; and
it will quickly come to pass that the best of us all will be perplexed to lose
any thing of our Lords, much more his body, if we love him. They were good
souls, such whose devotion and affection death it self could neither quench nor
alter that were so here, that we might know even devout and pious souls may
both err concerning Christ, and sometimes want him too; seek him sometimes,
with these here, where he is not, where we falsely imagine him to be, and
not find him presently neither when we look him where we left him.

No vvonder, they here, poor women, were so perplexed. Men, the great St.
Peter, knevv not what to say to it, ver. 12. departed wondering. Indeed, it
seems a vvonder at the first, that such who love Christ so dearly, seek him so
early, should yet miss of him; that such too should be in so great an error
about him, as to think the Lord of life could be held in death; but so poor a
thing is man, that, as such, he is perpetually subject to error and mistake,
and may thereupon easily lose the sight and presence of his Lord. The Spouse,
in the Canticles, complains, her Beloved had withdrawn himself, and was gone,
she sought him, but could not find him, she called to him, but he gave her no
answer, Cant. v. 6. and thereupon tells the Daughters of Jerusalem, ver. 8.
that she is sick of love; that is, so perplexed and troubled at his absence that
she is not able to hold up her head any longer, no more than these are here.

Nothing certainly but doubts and perplexities can involve us when we have
either lost our love, or fear it; to be sure, nothing but doubts when we have
lost him who is the only truth that can resolve us; nothing but perplexed ways
when we have lost him who is the Way. Which way can we resolve on when our way
is gone? What can we think can hold him whom the Grave cannot? If in a sealed
Sepulcher under a mighty stone the dead body be not safe, where can we think to
sit down in security?

To lose a token or remembrance of a friends how are we troubled! but to have
his body stoll'n out of the Sepulcher, his Grave rifled, and his ashes
violated, how impatiently would we take it? You cannot blame them for being
much perplexed for so great a loss.

I shall show it greater in the Mystery. The body is the Church, and to have
that taken from us, the Church, that glorious Candlestick, removed, and born
away we know not whither, what good soul is there that must not necessarily be
perplexed at it? What way shall we take when they have taken away that which is
the Pillar of the truth, and should lead us in it? Whither shall we go when we
know not whither that is gone, where they have laid it, or where to find it?
Poor ignorant women, nay, and men too may well now wander in uncertainties (as
they do) full of doubts and perplexities, full of cares and troubled thoughts
which way to take, what Religion to run to, what to leave, and what to follow,
seeing the body to which the Eagles use to flock, the most Eagle-eyed, the most
subtle and learned used to be gathered, is removed away, and we have nothing
to gather to, scarce a place to be gathered together in. Well may we now fear
(2.) what will become of us, and what God means to do to us, how he intends to
deal with us, having thus suffered our Lord to be taken from us.

Afraid they were, that they had lost him quite. I pray God we may have no
cause to fear the same fear. When Christ was but asleep the Apostles were
afraid at a blast of wind that rose, St. Mat. viii. 25. and cry out they perish
whilst he but sleeps. Any thing scares us if Christ watch not over us; not the
visions only of the night, but the very noises of the day, any light air or
report afrights us, and blows us which way it please, to any side, any faction
out of fear. What hold then is there of us, what little thing will not scare us
when he is absent quite? When his body the Church is removed from us, where can
we stay our wavering souls, or fix our trembling feet? Christ was no sooner
dead and gone but away run all his Disciples into a room together, and shut up
themselves for fear of the Jews, St. Ioh. xx. 19. so coward-like and
faint-hearted are we all when the Captain of our Salvation is slain before us;
nor can it be other, all our life being hid in him, and all our spirit only
from his presence.

Part of these women's fear, at least, was at the sight and congress of the
Angels. Even Angels themselves do but scare us if the Lord of the Angels be not
by us. Nay, even God himself is but a terror to us, and a consuming fire
without Christ; it is with him only under the shadow and shelter of his wings
that we dare approach that inaccessible light, that consuming fire. Lose we
Christ and we lose all our confidence in heaven, all the ways of access to
heavenly things, all the pleasure and comfort of them; we are nothing but
agues, and fears, and frights, not courage enough even to look up; we with
these perplexed souls go (3.) bowing down our faces to the earth.

Thou did hide thy face from me, says holy David, and I was troubled; the
very hiding of Gods face sore troubled him; What think you to hide his whole
body would do then? Why; then he goes mourning all the day long, Psalm. xxxviii.
6. So did the two Disciples that went to Emaus, ver. 17. they walked sadly, and
talked sadly, and looked sadly, like men disconsolate and forlorn, such as were
ashamed to show their faces in the City, after this was come to pass; durst not
look any body in the face upon it. Alas! how could it be otherwise with them?
All their hope was gone, he that they looked should have redeemed Israel could
not redeem himself; nay, his body stolen out of the Grave, and conveyed they
knew not whither. Well may they bow down their faces to the earth having now
little hope above in heaven, he being gone and lost by whom they only hoped and
expected it.

Indeed, if he be either so gone from us, that we have no hope to find him, or
he be found in that condition in which there is no hope, (as there is none in a
dead Savior, where ere he be) no wonder if our faces then bend wholly to the
earth, if we look no further. Let us take our portion in this life, for we are
like to have no other: without Christ, and Christ risen too, hither it is we
fall, no looking higher, not an eye to heaven, so much as in a Prayer, if we
have not per Dominum Iesum, Christ Jesus at the end of it; in and thorough whom
only we can with confidence look for a blessing thence, and without whom at the
end, the Prayer is to no end or purpose.

II. Yet in as sad a Condition as this we speak of, we are not utterly without
hope if we again look upon the words at a second view. For now (2.) they as
well decipher to us the condition of those that seek as of those that have lost
their Lord and Master. We may be as much perplexed in our search as at our loss,
as well afraid to miss, as startled at our loss, as well bowdown our faces to
the earth in seeking as in sorrovving. And thus in the second view of the Text
it is.

They had lost their Masters body, and were now not only troubled at the loss,
but how to find it, where to look it. Surely, take but away his body the
Church, and the vvisest of us will scarce know to find him; one will run this
way, another that way after him; one will stand weeping at the Sepulcher,
and think that a sad melancholy posture and business is Religion only; another
will run thence from the Sepulcher as fast as he can, and think the finding
Christ so easy a business that it does not require either a groan or a sigh;
others will be vvalking to Emaus, up and down, now to one Sect, now to
another, and from Jerusalem most commonly, from the City of peace, out of the
bonds of unity, every one by himself, which way pleases him, if Christ's body,
the Church, be once removed out of our sight. Our best way is, with the
Disciples, into our Chambers altogether, till we can get a better place, with
all the company we can make, to our Devotions and our Prayers; or if we will
step out a while to the Sepulcher, let it be but to pay a tear upon it, to
vent out troubled souls, to express how we are troubled at our sins that have
made us lose our Lord; or at our negligence, that he is slipped from us whilst
we were asleep, lulled in soft pleasures; or at our slovvness, that we come
so late to seek him that he is gone before we come. This is so to seek as to
be perplexed thereabout, and there is no true seeking him without it.

But (2.) with fear too we are to seek him; with reverence and godly fear,
Heb. xii. 28. that the only acceptable service and seeking of him with fear and
trembling, Phil. ii. 2. no hope either of Savior or Salvation without it.
Afraid of the two men in shining garments they were here: and if Angels,
habited like men too, and in so cheerful attire be so terrible, what think you
is that excellent Majesty? if we cannot see those our fellovv servants, as
they style themselves, Rev. xxii. 9. without fear (for we seldom read of the
appearing of an Angel, but either coming or going he strikes some terror) how
say some among us, that in the approaches to God we need not be afraid? Alas,
deluded souls! they conceive not God, or Christ, as either of them should be
conceived; they neither seriously consider the Majesty of God or Christ, nor
their own unvvorthiness, nor how hard a thing it is to find Christ, that are
not afraid either to miss him in the search, by their unskilfulness, or lose
him by their sins. He that looks to be comforted by an Angel, must not think
much to be afraid, how great a claim soever he conceives he has in Christ.
Perfect love indeed says the Apostle, casts out fear, but it is servile fear and
no other. Mary Magdalen to whom Christ bears vvitness that she loved much, yet
she also is afraid. The more for that she loved so much, for the more we love
the more we fear to lose the thing we love, the more we love the more we
fear to offend the person whom we love; nay, the more we fear to miss; and
the more earnest we are too seek, the more likely are we to find what or
whosoever we set to seek for. Seek him with filial fear, or love and fear;
that is the second.

Yet if we seek Christ, we must also thirdly seek him with our faces bowed
down to the ground; and that is (1.) the fashion of those that seek earnestly:
and so he must be sought with all the earnestness we can.

And it is (2.) a token of diligence in the search, much like that of the poor
woman that sought her groat, that lighted a candle, swept her house, raked in
the dust, looked into every corner, peer'd into every chink to find it. Do we
so in seeking Christ, light up the candle of Faith kindled from the flame of
love, sweep we the houses of our souls with the besom of repentance, look we
into our dust, consider what we are made of, what poor dusty things we are,
ransack every corner of our hearts, every crany of our thoughts: that so we
may if not find him there, yet make all clean for him against he comes, and we
shall commonly find he will come gliding in when we think not of it, we
shall hear of something rising in our dust after we have so raised it, by the
breaking and contritions of repentance.

And it is (3.) the posture of humility, and of the humble he will be found;
they shall not miss of him whoever do; to them his grace St. James iv. 6. to
them his vvays, Psalm. xxv. to them his dwelling. The lovver we bovv down
before him, the higher will he lift us up.

And lastly, the face bowed down to the earth, is the look of them that mourn,
we must seek him as his Father and Mother did, seek him sorrowing, sorry that
we have been so long without him, that we so carelessly lost him, then after a
day or two we shall be sure to find him: nay, if our sorrow begins, as here in
the morning of the day, if we begin betimes to be exceeding sorrowful, the
morning shall not pass e're we hear at least some tidings of him: nay, we shall
not stir from the Grave but we shall hear it e're we go, some good Angel or
other shall bring us some glad message or other from him, and tell us where he
is. So it follows, as they were perplexed, behold two men stood by them in
shining garments, and as they were afraid, and bowed down their faces to the
earth, this news they tell them, that He is risen.

God never fails them that seek him, says the Psalmist, never them that seek
him as these did, with careful and troubled souls, such he never does refuse,
Psalm. li. with reverence and godly fear, such he never does reject, with
earnestness, with diligence, with humility, with godly sorrow, those he
visits presently either by himself or by his Angel.

And which (2.) is very observable, and as comfortable, as they were perplexed,
and as they were afraid, and bowed down, says the Text, that is, even when they
began to be so, before their perplexities had misled them, or their fears
undone them, or their faces licked the earth; as they began only to hang their
heads, and their spirits began to faint, and their souls to be troubled, two
men on a sudden, whence they cannot tell, and which way they came there they
knew not; but there they stand to disperse both their sorrows and their fears,
by what they have to tell them. Three grand points we observe in this
apparition of the Angels, to make up that great success that those who
faithfully and devoutly seek Christ, may promise themselves upon it.

1. They see a Vision of Angels. It Is their good hap ever to meet blessed
Spirits who seek the Lord of Spirits, to meet them here, to be with them ever
hereafter, to meet one or two of them here at times, to meet ten thousand times
ten thousands of them hereafter.

To meet them here even at the Sepulcher in the midst of sorrow, even then to
receive comfort from them, even in the Grave, in our greatest afflictions.

To meet them (2.) like young men, so says St. Mark, sprightly, and able to
defend us.

To meet them (3.) in shining garments, tokens of some exceeding joy, and
gladness, which we may expect, and shall find from them.

To meet them (4.) standing by us, that is ever ready to comfort and assist us.

To meet (5.) two of them together, not one single comforter alone, but comfort
upon comfort, deliverance upon deliverance, spiritual and temporal, one at the
right hand, and another at our left.

But lastly, hereafter to be sure, we shall meet them in full Choires, when we
rise out of our Sepulchers, then like young men indeed, both they and we, then
to be always so, never die again, never grow old, nor our garments neither, but
have them always shining

The next point of the good success is to receive direction from them. Two
parts of it there are first to recall us from the wrong; and then secondly to
set us right.

Why seek you the living among the dead, he is not here; that is the correction
of our judgments and affections: He is risen, that is the setting them to the
right.

For a Traveller when he is out of the way, to be told he is so, is a thing any
of us would take well; and when we are straggling out of the way to Heaven,
going out of that safe, and fair, and happy way into the bogs of the world, and
mires of lusts and ditches of Hell, to have an Angel, one of a thousand, as Job
speaks, but a messenger of the Lord of Hosts to call out to us, that we are
wrong, is certainly a happiness if we understood it; and such God sends always
to them that seek him truly, if they will but turn their heads at the call, and
look after him. Well but what says he that so calls out to us, Why? why seek
you the living among the dead? what is that?

I. They seek the living among the dead, that seek salvation by the Law of
Moses, long since dead and buried. II. They seek the living among the dead,
that seek it by the works of nature, by the power of them: Nature without Grace
is dead, Verebar omnia opera mea, says holy Job, there is not in us one poor
work to trust to. III. They seek the living among the dead, that seek
salvation, that think to be saved by a mere outward holiness, by the outward
body of Religion without the inward life, by forms of godliness, whether they
be merely ceremonial performances of Religion, or great shows and pretenses of
godliness without the power of it in their lives and conversations.
They lastly seek the living among the dead. that seek Christ upon worldly
interests, that take up their Religion upon by-respects, that do it for carnal
or worldly affections. But say the Angels, He is not here. Christ is not here,
Christ the Savior is not, that is, our salvation is not to be found in the Law
of Moses, or by the Law of Works, or in mere external performances, or great
pretenses, or in worldly and carnal hearts, they are but Graves and Sepulchers
all; which we too much and too often bury our souls in, and stand weeping by,
and are much perplexed at if we cannot find it there, but must be forced from
thence to a new search* as here are the women are to leave these kinds of
seeking, all of them, and betake us now to think of him as risen thence. For so
the Angels say he is, He is risen. And in this he both tells us what to
conceive of him, and at the same time to put off all our perplexities, and
tears, and sorrows to rejoice with him. He is risen.

Risen, and not raised; others indeed have been raised from death, the
Sareptans Child, the Widows Son, one of these, Mary's Brother Lazarus; but none
risen but he: he raised himself, they did not so; he raised them all, must
raise us all too, will raise us by his Resurrection, For,

Risen, that is (2.) his Body risen, that is, we members of it to have part
also in his Resurrection; for if our Head be risen, the Members also will
follow after.

Must (3.) in the interim follow him, so raise our thoughts above the earth, as
to seek him now above, to seek those things which are above; that is it the
Angel directs us to, by telling us he is risen, so pointing us where now to fix
our thoughts to leave the Sepulcher to bemoan it self, to cast off all the ways
and paths of death, to throw off all worldly perplexities, fears, and sorrows,
or in the midst of them to take a ray at least from their shining garments, and
put on the looks of joy and gladness. This both the direction they give us, and
the joy they make us partakers of.

To tell us he is risen whom we seek, he is alive whom we bemoan for dead; he
that is our head, our hope, our love, our life, our joy, our comfort, our
crown of rejoicing, he in whom we trusted, we may trust still, hope still,
joy in him still, for he is risen and alive.

That Is the close we are now to make to day, that the answer we are to give
to the Angels speech, that the application of the Text, to make it full, run
we once more over it.

Grow we then first as sensible as we can of our sad condition without
Christ, how the Grave, the last place of rest from all troubles, has nothing
in it without him, how our souls cannot be at quiet without him, how our
hearts cannot but tremble when he is gone, our spirits faint, our faces look
sad and heavy, dull and earthy when he is from us, Let us upon this ^it down,
and vveep, and be troubled, and tremble at it, that we may not at any time give
him occasion henceforvvard to desert us, or leave us comfortless at the Grave,
but send his Angels thither to direct and to conduct us to his joyful presence.

When we are thus made sensible what we are without him, we then secondly,
certainly will make after him with all care and reverence, all earnestness and
diligence, all humility and devout repentance, troubled at his absence, fearful
of our own unworthiness, and truly humbled for our sins that drove him from us;
perplexed to lose him, fearful to offend him, vigilant to seek him, that so at
last we may recover him; for you see he is recovered from the Grave, and may
again be by us recovered to our souls.

This the duty both our own necessities, and the opportunity of this great day
require of us.

The business we are next to go about exacts as much. We are with these women
come here to seek the Lords body, and I shall anon give you news of greater joy
than here the Angels did the Women. They say he is not here, but he is risen. I
say, but he is risen, and is here, will be here by and by in his very Body.
Your eye cannot see him, but your souls may there see and taste him too.

Lift up then your heads, O ye immortal gates, and be ye lift up ye everlasting
doors, that the King of Glory may come in. Look up and lift up your heads, for
your salvation draws nigh. Bow down your faces no longer to the earth,
neither look here as to an earthly business. Look not sad but cheerful now to
day, (I hope you have looked sadly enough already in your Chambers upon your
sins) you may here put on another face. Yet if you be somewhat perplexed and
troubled at your sins, or afraid of your own unworthiness, or your souls and
bodies bowed down as low as can be in humility, I shall say you are the fitter
to receive your joys, and to be made partakers of the Angels company, which as
the Apostle tells us, are present in holy places; and if ever, there, there
more especially, at so great a mystery as this which they themselves bow down
themselves to look into, and wing about us, say the Fathers, to assist the
celebration all the while. You will be the fitter too to receive the joyful
news, that this day brings us, of Christ's rising; being only so cast down and
prepared in all humility to receive it.

Yet learn we something from the Angels too as well as from the Women; for
behold, says the Text; as if it meant we should look upon them too, and learn
by their standing constancy and resolution, by their clothing in shining
garments, purity, and innocence, and all good works whereby we are so to shine
as to glorify our Father which is in Heaven, by their correcting the good
women's error, to correct our own, and not let our Brother either perish or go
astray for want of good and timely admonition, a prime work of charity which
this business so requires; by their advice no longer to seek the living among
the dead; no more to seek Christ for earthly profits or respects; and by their
so readily publishing the news of Christ's rising to be this day ever telling
it, every day thinking of it, and so living as if we believed a Resurrection.

So shall it come to pass, that however we come, we shall not depart perplexed,
but in peace; not in fear, but in hope; not in sorrow, but in joy; and shall
one day behold him risen whom we now only hear is, and meet him with all his
Angels in shining garments, in the robes of eternal glory.

He who this day rose, raise now our thoughts with these apprehensions, raise
our thoughts to the height of these heavenly mysteries, make us this day
partakers through them of his Resurrection by Grace, and in his due time also
of his Resurrection to Glory.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON Easter Day.
St. MAT. xxvii. 52, 53. And the Graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints
which slept arose.

And came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City
and appeared unto many.


ANd this is the third day since the first of these was done, since the Graves
were opened; and the first day that all the rest, that the bodies of Saints
arose, came forth, went into the holy City and appeared, the blessed day of our
Saviors Resurrection. So we have both Passion and Resurrection in the Text,
and not amiss; the one to usher in the other, the Passion the Resurrection,
both comfortable, when together, to see the Passion end so glorious, the
darkness of so sad an Evening open it self at last, after a little respite,
into so lustrous a Morning, the most lustrous that Sun ever shone in, the most
joyous thus to meet the Grave and the holy City, Christ and his Saints together.

This Day the very stones cry out, and send forth the deceased Saints as so
many Tongues to speak the glory of their Redeemer. And if the graves open their
mouths, can we hold our peace? If the dead bodies of the Saints appear to day
in the holy City to celebrate the Day, shall not we appear with our living
bodies in the holy Mount to do as much? The Grave cannot praise thee, Death
cannot celebrate thee, says Hezekiah, Isa. xxxviii. 18. And the Dead praise not
thee O Lord, says David, Psalm. cxv. 17. Yet here they do. They thought then
they could not, we see now they do; and shall not the living do so to? The
living, the living, he shall praise thee, says Hezekiah, and But we will praise
the Lord, says David; that is agreed on both hands that the living shall; the
Father to the Children make known the truth of this days great wonder, declare
it one to another from Generation to Generation, keep the Day in remembrance
throughout all Generations.

Indeed if we be not more senseless than the Day, more silent than the grave,
the house of silence, we cannot hold to Day, up and arise we will, and into the
holy places to set forth the wonders of the day. They that go down, as the
Psalmist speaks, into the silence, and into the Land where all things are
forgotten, who are either dead in trespasses and sins, or are resolved to
forget all that their Fathers have seen or done, or has been done for them, who
are in the dark, the darkness of ignorance or error, departed from the Church,
out of the marvelous light into the Land of darkness, they show not of these
wonders among the dead in their own Congregations, nor tell of the loving
kindness, faithfulness, and righteousness of this Day, in that great
destruction they have made. But we will, I hope, we that are among the living
stones, in the Communion of holy Church, will praise the Lord, do as much as
the Graves and now risen bodies wherever we appear.

For upon this Day, hang all our hopes. We were hopeless till it came; hopeless
when it was come till we knew it, and no great hope of us if we forget it now
it is. This Day Christ rose out of the Grave. If he had not risen, had had no
Resurrection, there had been no hope of ours. If nor hope nor Resurrection, we
had been of all men most miserable; and if we do not thankfully remember both,
we are but miserable unthankful wretches; no sooner the Day forgotten, and such
days put down, but all our happiness put down with them, we of all the Nations
under heaven presently most miserable, miserable times quickly after this happy
Day, with the rest of its attendants, was unhappily voted to be forgotten. So
much does it concern our happiness with the Saints in the Text to solemnize it
in the City, if the City intend either to be holy or happy, so much to make
much both of all Texts and times that may bring it to our remembrance, all days
and words, Texts and Testimonies either of Christ's Resurrection or our own.

This Text then among the rest. Wherein we have both a Testimony and Evidence
of Christ's Resurrection, and a Pledge and Symbol of our own. Two general Points
which we shall consider in the words. Or more particularly thus. A Testimony of
the truth of Christ's Resurrection, and an Evidence of the power of it. A Pledge
of the certainty of our Resurrection, and a Symbol of the manner of it, both of
our Resurrection to grace, and our Resurrection to glory.

The Testimony of the truth of Christ's Resurrection (1.) in the bodies of the
Saints arising, and coming out of their Graves. (2.) In their coming into the
holy City, and there appearing unto many, telling and declaring it.

The Evidence of the power of his Resurrection to be seen (1.) in opening the
Graves; (2.) In raising the Saints bodies that slept there; (3.) In sending
them into the holy City; (4.) sending them thither to appear to many.

The Pledge of our Resurrection it is, (1.) that they that rise are of those
that slept, Saints and members of the same body with us; that (2.) it is no
phantasm, no fantastic or mere imagined business, for they appeared to many.

The whole business of their Resurrection is a Symbol and signification of
ours, both of that to grace, and that to glory. (1.) Of that to grace; the
grave, and sleep, the Symbols of sin and sleeping in it, the bodies rising
thence, of the souls rising out of sin; their going into the holy City, of the
souls passing from sin to righteousness and holiness; their appearing to many,
of this righteousness manifested and appearing unto all. A Symbol (2.) it is of
the Resurrection unto glory, where the Grave first opens, then the body rises,
then into the holy City, into new Jerusalem it goes, and there appears and
shines for ever.

Thus you have the Text opened as well as the Graves; we must now go on to
raise such bodies of doctrine and comfort out of it, as may bring us all into
the holy City, serve to make us holy here, and happy hereafter, partakers here
of the First Resurrection, and hereafter in the Second. He that here opened the
Graves, and raised the dead bodies out of their sleep, open your ears and
hearts, and raise your understandings and affections, that we may all of us
have our share in both, rise first to righteousness, then to glory; Christ's
Resurrection is the pattern and ground of both, we therefore begin with that,
with those words first that bear witness to the truth of it, that Christ is
risen.

A double Testimony we gather of it in the words, from the rising of the dead
Saints, and from their appearing.

It was a sign indeed that the Resurrection was well toward when the Graves
began to open; we could not but see somewhat of it even in those dark Caverns,
when they once began to let in the light; some hope of rising even when a body
begins to yawn; some hope the body might come ere long to recover its long lost
liberty when the prison doors were wide set open, and the shackles of death
knocked off the legs; some sign and hope, I say, it would be so, that there
would be a resurrection of some, of some one or other by and by.

But the Graves being opened at Christ's Passion, they could be but hopeful
prognostics at most of his Resurrection; a Testimony it could not be; but when
out of these opened Graves the Saints arose out of their sleep, they could tell
us more certain news of it than so. And being but members of that body of which
Christ Jesus was the head, we must needs know the head is risen when the body
is got up; the head first ere any member could, be it never so holy, never so
much Saint. He is the head of the Church, says the Apostle, Ephesians. v. 23. and the
Church the body, and if any part of the body be raised to life, the head you
may be sure is; first too; For if Christ be the first fruits of them that
sleep, 1 Cor. xv. ^0. and the first begotten from the dead, as he is styled,
Rev. ^. 5. If we see others risen, other dead bodies walking and alive, there
is no witness more true than that he is. The first fruits ever before the crop,
Christ the first, fruits, afterward they that are Christ's, says St. Paul, 1
Cor. xv. 23. out of order else; and the first begotten ever before all the
rest; second, and third, and fourth, and all witness the first begotten was
before them, the first begotten from the dead, risen before the other dead.

And it seems it is not a single witness, they were many dead bodies here that
rose, and in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be
established, Deuteronomy. xvii. 6. much more in the mouths of many Witnesses,

And if these be from the dead, surely then the most incredulous will believe,
Nay, Father Abraham, says Dives, but if one come from the dea^ they will
believe, yea, and repent too, Luke xvi. 30. Here Is more than one, here is many,
that not so much as any of Dives his brethren, the most voluptuous, secure,
customary, and obstinate sinner can be incredulous after this, or have reason
to doubt the truth, or have the power to contradict it. To satisfy either
particular curiosity, or infidelity, God does not use to send us messengers
from the dead; he sends us to Moses and the Prophets there, ver. 29. for our
instruction; does not press men from hell or heaven, or raise them out of their
beds of rest to send them on an errand to us (though perhaps little can be
universally, though ordinarily it perhaps may be defined in this particular,
for the ignorance we are under of the condition of the bounds and limits of the
dead) If they will not believe Moses and the Prophets, says Father Abraham,
neither will they believe if one rise from the dead; If they will not believe
the living word, the word of the living God, no likelihood that they should
believe the word of a dead man, especially when they cannot be certain but it
may be the devil, the father of lies and falsehood. But not of one only rising
from the dead, that to be sure; no man so simple to venture his faith upon a
single Testimony, and such a one as that. Or if he would, God does not use to
do extraordinary miracles, where the ordinary means of probation or information
are sufficient.

But in this great business that concerns all mankind he is pleased to step out
of his ordinary course to give us for once some extraordinary satisfaction,
that all Ages afterward might be sufficiently convinced of the truth of Christ's
Resurrection from heaven and earth by the Testimony of the dead and living,
that there might be no occasion hereafter to doubt for ever. He raises
therefore a great company to attend the triumph of his Sons Resurrection, and
to bear witness to it.

2. And as it is not a single witness, so it is not secondly a single
testimony; it is not from their rising only, but from their going into the City,
and there appearing unto many. For sure neither their journey nor appearance
was to tell stories of the dead, what is done either in the grave, or heaven,
or hell, to satisfy the curious soul with a discovery of those Chambers of
silence, or the Land where all things are forgotten; and therefore all
forgotten, that we may know they remember when they come thence to tell us
nothing that is there; their business was to wait upon their Lord, that had now
set them at liberty from the Grave, and divulge the greatness and glory of his
Resurrection. When Moses and Elias appeared upon the holy Mount at Christ's
transfiguration, talking with him, St. Luke tells us, they spoke of his decease
which he should accomplish at Jerusalem, St. Luke ix. 31. And it is highly
credible the discourse of these Saints with those to whom they appeared was of
his Resurrection. Their going into the City was not merely to show themselves,
nor their appearance, merely to appear, but to appear Witnesses and Companions
of their Saviors Resurrection.

Nor is it probable that the Saints, whose business is to sing praise and glory
to their Lord, should be silent at this point of time of any thing that might
make to the advancement of his glory.

Yet you may do well to take notice, that it is not to all, but to many only
that they appeared, to such, as St. Peter tells us of Christ's own appearance
after his Resurrection, as were chosen before of God, witnesses chosen for that
purpose, Acts x. 41. that we may learn indeed to prize Gods favors, yet not
all to look for particular revelations and appearances. It Is sufficient for us
to know so many Saints that slept arose to tell it, that so many Saints that
are now asleep, St. Peter, and the Twelve, St. Paul, and five hundred brethren
at once, all saw him after he was risen, so many millions have fallen asleep in
this holy Faith, so many slept and died for it, that it is thus abundantly
testified both by the dead and living, both by life and death, even standing up
and dying for it; and a Church raised upon this faith through all the corners
of the earth, and to the very ends of the world.

But to know the truth of it is not enough, unless we know the benefits of
Christ's Resurrection: they come next to be considered, and there is in the
words evidence sufficient of four sorts of them, (1.) The victory over sin and
death, both the Graves were opened; (2.) The Resurrection of the soul and body,
the one in this life, the other at the end of it, many dead bodies that slept
arose; (3.) The sanctification and glorification of our souls and bodies, the
dead bodies that arose out of the graves went into the holy City; (4.) The
establishing us both in grace and glory, they appeared unto many. All these,
says the Text, after his Resurrection, by the force and virtue of it.

Indeed, it seems the graves were opened, death almost vanquished, and the
grave near overcome whilst he yet hung upon the Cross, before he was taken
thence; deaths sting taken out by the death of Christ, and all the victories of
the grave now at an end that it could no longer be a perpetual prison, yet for
all that the victory was not complete, all the Regions of the Grave not fully
ransackt, nor the forces of it utterly vanquished and disarmed, nor its
Prisoners set at liberty, and it self taken and led captive, till the
Resurrection; It Is upon this Point St. Paul pitches the victory, and calls in
the Prophets testimony, 1 Cor. xv. 54. upon this it is he proclaims the triumph,
ver. 55. O Death where is thy sting? O Grave where is thy victory? even upon
the Resurrection of Jesus Christ, which he has been proving and proclaiming the
whole Chapter through with all its benefits, and concludes it with his thanks
for this great victory, ver. 57.

So it is likewise for the death and grave of sin; the chains of sin were
loosed, the dominion of it shaken off, the Grave somewhat opened that we might
see some light of grace through the cranies of it by Christ's Passion, but we
are not wholly set at liberty, not quite let out of it, the Gravestone not
perfectly removed from the mouth of it till the Angel at the Resurrection, or
rather the Angel of the Covenant by his Resurrection remove it thence, remove
our sins and iniquities clean from us.

2. Then indeed (2.) the dead soul arises, then appears the second benefit of
his Resurrection; then we rise to righteousness and live, 1 Pet. ii. 24. then
we awake to righteousness and sin no more. So St. Paul infers it, That like as
Christ was raised from the dead, by the glory of the father even so should we
also walk in newness of life, Rom 6. 4. This Resurrection one of the ends of
his; our righteousness attributed to that, as our Redemption to his death.

From it it comes that our dead bodies arise too; Upon that Job grounds it, his
Resurrection upon his Redeemers, Job xix. 25. I know that my Redeemer lives;
well, What then? Why, I know too, therefore, that though after my skin, worms
destroy this body, yet in my flesh I shall see God. The Apostle interweaves our
Resurrection with Christ's, and Christ's with ours, his as the cause of ours,
ours as the effect of his, a good part of 1 Cor. 15. If Christ be risen, then
we; if we, then he; if not he, not we; if not we, not he; And in the Text it is
evident, no rising from the dead, how open soever the graves be, till after his
Resurrection, that we may know to what Article of our faith we owe both our
deliverance from death, and our deliverance into life here in soul, and
hereafter in our bodies, by what with holy Job to uphold our drooping spirits,
our mangled, martyred, crazy bodies, by the faith of the Resurrection; that
day, the day of the Gospel of good tidings to be remembered for ever.

3. So much the rather in that it is a Day yet of greater joy, a messenger of
all fullness of grace and glory to us, of the means of our sanctification (3.)
of our rising Saints, living the lives of Saints, holy lives, and of our
glorification, our rising unto glory: both doors opened to us now, and not till
now, liberty and power given us to go into the holy City, both this below, and
that above now after his Resurrection, and through it. He rose again, says St.
Paul, for our justification, Romans iv. 25. to regenerate us to a lively hope
blessed be God for it, says St. Pet. i. 3. that we might be planted together in
the likeness of his Resurrection, says St. Paul, Romans vi. 5. grow up like him
in righteousness and true holiness; and when the day of the general
Resurrection comes rise then also after his likeness, be conformed to his
Image, bear his Image who is the heavenly, as we have born the Image of the
earthly, our vile body changed and fashioned like his glorious body according
to the working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to himself, Phil. iii.
21. whereby in the day of his Resurrection he subdued death, and grave, and
sin, and all things to him.

4. And to show the power of his Resurrection to the full, there is an
appearing purchased to us by it, an appearing here in the fullness and luster of
grace, such as may appear unto all men to be such, not a few, but many, many
graces, all graces obtained by it; nay, it does not yet appear what we shall be
by it, but when we shall appear we shall be like him, says St. John, 1 Ioh.
iii. 2. our righteousness and glory last for ever; He died once, says the
Apostle, but being raised he dies no more; no more did these in the Text, no
more shall we, but live for ever. Not only grace and glory, but perseverance in
the one, and eternity in the other, apparently no less accruing to us by the
virtue and efficacy of his Resurrection; good news from the grave the while,
and from the late raised Prisoners of it, who are now thirdly as well the
pledges of the certainty of our Resurrection, as the evidences of the power of
Christ's.

A double Pledge we have here of our Resurrection, one from the many dead
bodies of the Saints that slept, arising out of their graves: The other from
their going into the holy City, and their appearng unto many.

In the first then are four particulars to assure us of it:

1. We find dead bodies here arising, to assure us such a thing there may be,
such a thing there is as a Resurrection of the body; that bodies, be they never
so dead, may be quickened, never so corrupted, may rise incorruptible; you may
see them rising here. And,

2. Many of them there are, that we may see it belongs not only to a few, to
some particular persons; this many is but the usher to St. Paul's all, We shall
all arise and stand before the judgment Seat of Christ, Romans xiv. 10.

3. Saints bodies they are said to be, and they are our fellows, members of the
same body, and if one member be honored, all the other members are honored
with it, says St. Paul, 1 Cor. xii. 26. Indeed, the bodies of the Saints only
shall rise with Christ, rise to enter into the holy City, but all shall rise,
for all shall appear, every one to receive the things done in his body,
according to that he has done whether it be good or bad, 2 Cor. v. 10. they
that have done good to the Resurrection of life, and they that have done evil
unto the Resurrection of damnation, says he that rose himself to day, St. Ioh.
v. 29. For all that are in the graves shall hear his voice, and shall come
forth, ver. 28. none be left behind, though the best come first. The Saints
have only the prerogative, not the only privilege of the Resurrection.

For (4.) it is said* the bodies of them that slept, that we may know that all
that sleep, that all that die, shall awake again and rise at last. He that lies
down only to sleep, lies down to rise; and good and bad, how sad soever the
ones dreams be, how full of terror soever be the wicked man's sleep in death,
are both said to sleep, Jeroboam and Rehoboam, Baasha and Omri, and Ahab, and
Ioram are said all of them to sleep with the Fathers as well as David, and
Solomon, and Ioash, and Hezekiah, obdormierunt simul, they all sleep together
the sleep of death, and so shall likewise arise together; though as there is
difference in sleep, some sweet, some horrible; so in rising too, some sad,
some joyful when they awake: but sleep necessarily intimates and supposes some
awaking and rising after it: it is else somewhat more than sleep. Thus by the
rising of the dead bodies of these Saints, so many rising, rising as men out of
their sleep, not as Saints, out of a privilege, we have one strong pledge of
our Resurrection, of which they only lead the van after our great Captain the
Lord Jesus Christ.

A second we have given us from both their going into the holy City, and their
appearing unto many.

It was not in obscuro, this thing was not, as St. Paul speaks, done in a
corner, not in a house or Churchyard, (where are all the apparitious we now
hear of) not in a Country Village, no not an ordinary City neither, but in the
great Metropolis, Jerusalem it self; called holy for what it had been, not what
it was; for it was now the most sinful City: or called holy yet for the Temples
sake, that yet stood firm: an item by the way to tell us how long a City may be
styled holy, so long as the Church stands sacred and inviolate in it, and no
whit longer. But be the City holy or not, that which is done there by many, is
not likely a private business, has witnesses enough to give credit to it.

But to put all out of question, the there appearing unto many will certify it
was no phantasm, no particular fancy, or imagination of some silly, simple, or
timorous persons, but a business of the greatest certainty; whether you take
many for the many, or many people and folk together, or for such who were
before chosen, as the Apostle speaks, to be witnesses, to whom the Resurrection
should be revealed, as to men of credit, repute, and understanding.

Nor does the word appearing any way prejudice but confirm it, the word (...),
is from (...) to make plain and certify; to give us a full knowledge and
manifestation of a thing, so used, St. John xiv. 21. Acts xxiii. 21. and xxiv.
1. when either persons or things really and truly appear before us. So the
publickness of the place, the number and fitness of the persons, and the way
and manner of appearance is evidence enough of their real Resurrection, and a
second pledge to us that it concerns more than themselves, (though themselves
were many, even the many they appeared to, too;) whole Cities, all Cities, holy
and unholy, all the world, of which that City was but an emblem and
signification; a place from whence God did as it were, out of his own house and
palace, dispense his providence through all the earth: and the Saints besides
thus going after the Resurrection into the holy City, an intimation whether the
Saints go when they are risen; the whole action a Symbol of what is done in
both the first and second Resurrection, what we are to do in the one, and
expect in the other, or what is done both in the one and the other: and so
lastly we now consider it.

For the similitude the first Resurrection, or the Resurrection of the soul
from sin to righteousness bears to this of the dead bodies in the Text, we have
it very like both for thing and order.

The Graves in which the souls lie buried are either our corruptible bodies, or
corrupt passions, or stony hearts, or continued ill customs, which so entomb
the spirit, that it lies dead without any spiritual life and operation. The
opening of the Graves is the loosing the chains of those earthly affections,
bodily depressions, wicked habits, and hardened hearts. The souls that are dead
in trespasses and sins, are those dead bodies fuller of stench, and worms, and
rottenness, then any dead body whatsoever, full of infamous and stinking sins,
worms of conscience, and worms of concupiscence, rotten resolutions and
performances: continuance in sin is the sleep of death. Holy purposes and
resolutions are the rising out of it. Walking thenceforward in the ways of
righteousness is going into the holy City, and the letting our righteousness so
shine before men, that God may be glorified is the appearing unto many.

And the order is as like; our justification or spiritual Resurrection well
resembled by it. God first for the merits of Christ's Death and Passion, breaks
open the stony heart, looses the fetters of our sins, and lusts, all worldly
corruptible affections in us; opens the mouth of it to confess its sins; then
the soul rises as it were out of its sleep by the favor of Gods exciting
grace, and comes out of sin by holy purposes and resolutions, resolves
presently to amend its courses: then next it goes into the holy City by holy
action, endeavor, and performance; so goes and manifests its reconcilement to
the Church of God, and at last makes its Resurrection, repentance, and
amendment, evident and apparent to the world to as many as it any where
converses with, that all may bear witness to it that it is truly risen with
Christ, now lives with him. This the order, this the manner of our first
Resurrection from the death of sin to the life of Grace.

Our second Resurrection to the life of Glory is but this very Resurrection in
the Text acted over again. As soon as the consummatum est is pronounced upon
the world, as soon as Christ shall say, as he did upon the Cross, all is
finished, the end is come, the Archangel shall blow his Trumpet, the Graves
open, the earth and Sea give forth their dead, and the dead in Christ shall
rise first; then they that be alive at his coming: For if we believe that Jesus
died and rose again, even so them also that sleep in Jesus shall God bring with
him, 1 Thessalonians, iv. 14. and they shall come out of their Graves, and go into the
Holy City, the new Jerusalem that is above, and there appear and shine like
stars for ever. Indeed the ungodly and the wicked shall arise too, and appear
before the great Tribunal, but not like these Saints, for into the holy City
they shall not come: Rise and come forth they shall, but go away into some
place of horror, some gloomy valley of eternal sorrow, some dark dungeon of
everlasting night, some den of Dragons and Devils, never to appear before God,
but be for ever hid in the arms of confusion and damnation.

As for the godly the holy City is prepared for them, for us if we be like
them. Saints and Angels are the inhabitants of this holy City, no room there
for any other; if our bodies then be the bodies of holy Saints, then into the
holy City with them, and not else: no part in the new Jerusalem, if no part in
the old; no portion above if none below; no place there with Angels, if no
communion here with Saints; no happiness in heaven, if no holiness on earth.
They are the bodies of the Saints you hear that go into the holy City, they
that rise from the sleep of sin, and awake to righteousness, that rise from the
dust of death to the rays of glory.

And this now may hint us of our duty to close with them for the close of all.
It has been showed before what is the first Resurrection, without which there
is no second, namely a life of holiness; a dying to sin, and a living unto God.
And this is a Resurrection we are not merely passive in, as in the other. We
must do somewhat here toward our own Resurrection, at least to finish it. We
must open our mouths, which are too often what David styles the wicked man's
throat, even open Sepulchers, and by confession send out our dead, our dead
works, confessing our iniquities; we must awake out of our sins, and arise and
stand up by holy vows and resolutions, rear up our heads, and eyes, and hearts,
and hands to heaven, seek those things that are above if we be risen with
Christ, get up upon our feet, and be walking the way of Gods commandments,
walking to him, get us into the holy City to the holy place, make our humble
appearance there, express the power of Christ's Resurrection in our life, attend
him through all the parts of it all our life long.

This the great business we are now going to, requires of us more particularly,
to come to it like new raised bodies that had now shaken off all their dust,
all dusty earthly thoughts, laid aside their Grave-cloths, all corrupt
affections that any way involved them, and stood up all new, all fitly composed
for the holy City, dressed up in holiness and newness of life, thus come forth to
meet our new risen Savior and appear before him. This the way to meet the
benefits of his Passion and Resurrection: for coming so with these Saints out
of their Graves, Christ's Grave also shall open and give him to us, the Cup and
Patine wherein his body lies as in a kind of Grave, shall display themselves
and give him to us, the Spirit of Christ shall raise and and advance the holy
Elements into lively Symbols which shall effectually present him to us, and he
will come forth from under those sacred shadows into our Cities, our Souls, and
Bodies, if they be holy; and his grace and sweetness shall appear to many of
us, to all of us that come in the habit of the Resurrection, in white Robes,
with pure and holy hearts.

Here indeed of all places, and this way above all ways, we are likeliest to
meet our Lord now he is risen, and gone before us: this the chief way to be
made partakers of his Resurrection, and the fittest to declare both his Death
and Resurrection, the power of them till his coming again.

And to declare and speak of them is the very duty of the day, the very Grave
this day with open mouth professes Christ is risen, and gives praise for it,
that it is no longer a land of darkness, but has let in light; no longer a bier
of death, but a bed of sleep. But shall thy loving kindness, O Lord, be known
in the dark, or shall the dead rise up again, and praise thee? yes, holy
Prophet, they shall, they did to day: and if his loving kindness shall not be
known in the dark, the dark places shall become light, now the sun of
righteousness has risen upon them.

But shall the dead rise up again and praise him, and shall not we? shall the
graves open, and shall not our hearts be opened to receive him, nor our mouths
to praise him for it. Was it the business of the dead Saints to day to rise to
wait upon their Lord, and shall not the living rise to bear them company? shall
the whole City ring of it, out of dead men's mouths, and shall not our Cities
and Temples resound of it? shall they tell the wonders of the day, and we
neither mind the day, nor wonders of it? surely some evil will befall us, as
said the Lepers at the Gates of Samaria, if we hold our peace. It Is a day of
good, of glorious tidings, and we must not, lest the Grave in indignation shut
her mouth upon us, and the holy City bar us out. Open we then our mouths to
day, and sing praises to him who made the day, made it a joyful day indeed, the
very seal of happiness unto us: Open we our mouths and take the cup of
salvation, as the Prophet calls it, the cup of thanksgiving, the Apostle styles
it, and call upon the name of the Lord. Open our mouths now as the grave, and
he will fill them. Open our mouths as the grave, and be not satisfied, give not
over our prayers until he do. Raise we all our thoughts, and desires, and
endeavors to entertain him, go which way he shall send us, appear what he
would have us, attend him whither soever he shall lead us; and when he himself
shall appear, he will lead our souls out of the death of sin to the life of
righteousness; our bodies out of the dust of death into the land of life, both
souls and bodies into the holy City, the new Jerusalem, where there shall be no
more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor any more pain, but all tears shall
be wiped away, all joys come into our hearts and eyes, and we sing merrily, and
joyfully; all honor and glory, be unto him that has redeemed us from death,
and raised us to life by the power and virtue of his Resurrection. All
blessing, and glory, and praise, and honor, and power be unto him, with the
Father and Holy Spirit for ever and ever.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON Easter Day.
PSALM. CXViii. 24. This is the day which the Lord has made: We will rejoice
and be glad in it.
THis is the day which the Lord has made. And if ever day made to rejoice and
be glad in, this is the day. And the Lord made it, made it to rejoice in.
(...), as holy Ignatius, a day of days, not only a high day, as the Jewish
Easter, St. Ioh. xix. 31. but the highest of high days, highest of them all. A
Day in which the Sun it self rejoiced to shine; came forth like a Bridegroom,
in the robes and face of joy, and rejoiced like a Giant, with the strength and
violence of joy, exultavit, leapt and skipt for joy to run his course, Psalm.
xix. 5. as if he never had seen day before; only a little day spring from on
high, as old Zachary saw and sung, never full and perfect day, the Kingdom and
power of darkness never fully and wholly vanquished till this morning light,
till this day star, or this day's Sun arose, till Christ rose from the grave as
the Sun from his Eastern bed to give us light, the light of grace and the light
of glory, light everlasting.

And this Suns rising, this Resurrection of our Lord and Master, entitles it
peculiarly the Lords making. This day of the week from this day of our Lords
Resurrection, styled Lords Day ever since. And of this day of the Resurrection,
the Fathers, the Church, the Scriptures understand it. Not one of the Fathers,
says that devout and learned Bishop Andrews, that he had read (and he had read
many) but interpret it of Easter day. The Church picks out this Psalm to day as
a piece of service proper to it. This very verse in particular was anciently
used every day in Easter week, evidence enough how she understood it. And for
the Scriptures, The two verses just before; The stone which the builders
refused, the same is become the head of the corner. This is the Lords doing,
and it is marvelous in our eyes, to which this day comes in presently and
refers, applied both of them by Christ himself unto himself in three several
places, St. Mat. xxi. 42. St. Mar. xii. 10. St. Luke xx* 17, rejected by the
builders in his Passion, made (...) head of the corner in his Resurrection; the
first of the verses applied again twice by St. Peter, Acts iv. 10. and 1 Pet.
ii. 7. to the Resurrection. For these doings, these marvelous doings, a day was
made, made to remember it, and rejoice in it, as in the chiefest of his
marvelous works. And being such, let us do it. Let not the Jews outdo us, let
not them here rejoice more in the figure, than we in the substance; they in the
shadow, than we in the Sun. It Is now properly Sunday, this day, ever since, a
day lighted upon on purpose for us, by the Sun himself, to see wonderful things
in, and as wonderfully to rejoice in. Abraham saw this day of Christ's as well
as Christmas, St. Ioh. viii. 56. saw it in Isaacs rising from under his hand,
from death as in a figure, says the Apostle, Heb. xi. 19. saw it and was glad
to see it, exceeding glad, as much at least to see Christ and Isaac delivered
from death, as delivered in to life. Abraham's children, all the faithful, will
be so too to see the day when ere it comes. It now is come by the circle of the
year, let us rejoice and be glad in it.

I require no more of you than is plainly in the Text, to confess the day, and
express the joy. Both are here as clear as day. Dies Gaudii, and Gaudium Diei,
A day of joy, and the joy of the day. Easter day, and Easter joy. A day made,
and joy made on it; A day ordained, and joy appointed; God making the day, we
making the joy upon it. Or if you please, Ordo Diei, and Officium Diei; An
Order for the day, and an Office for the day.

The Order for the day, This is the day which the Lord has made, ordered, and
ordained.

The Office for it, We will, or let us rejoice and be glad in it, Exultemus and
laetemur; An office of thanksgiving and joy ordained and taken up upon it. The
first is Gods doings, the second ours. And ours ordered to follow his, our duty
his day; the Lords day requires sure the Servants duty. Both together, Gods day
and man's duty make up the Text, and must the Sermon. But I take my rise from
the days rising. The Lords order for the day, This is the day which the Lord
has made.

Wherein we have,

(1.) The Day designed; (2.) The Institution made; (3.) the Preeminence given
it; (4.) The Institutor expressed; (5.) The ground intimated; (6.) The End
annexed. This is designs the day. Gods making that institutes it. The (...) the
The gives it the Preeminence; the Lord is the institutor; The ground is
understood in the This, this day when that was done that went before, ver. 22.
and the End by the annexing joy and gladness to it. Of these particularly and
in order; then of the Office Exultemus, laetemur, and in ea, Outward and Inward
joy, and our directing, and spending both upon it. But haec est dies, the day
designed is our first design. This is the day.

This] first is a sign of a particular. God made all days, all in general, but
this in particular. Particular days are of Gods making as well as others. God
made such from the beginning, all days in the week, but the Sabbath in
particular; all days in the month, but the New Mons in particular; all days in
the year, but the Feasts and Fasts, the Easter, the Pentecost, the Feast of
Tabernacles, the great Kipparim in particular, to his service in particular
among the Jews. And among the Christians particular days may be observed too.
He that observes a day may observe it unto the Lord, Romans xiv. 6. And upon
particular order we have such; Pascha nostrum immolatum; our Passover is
slain, and we must keep a Feast, we have an Easter, 1 Cor. v. 7, 8. We have the
Lords day thence, Rev. i. 10. and we may be in the spirit upon it; a first day
of the week, and we may break bread, Act. xx. 7. and make collections upon it,
1 Cor. xvi. 1, 2. Panem frangere, and Collectas facere, make meetings, and
celebrate Sacraments upon it. We have the Apostles at their Pentecost, Acts ii.
1. St. Paul after that, making a journey to be at it, Acts xx. 16. the Spirit
descending on it, to sanctify it particularly to Gods service, to take it, as
it were, away from the Jewish into the Christian Calendar. We have a hodie
natus est, a day for Christ's being born taken up from the examples of an Host
of Angels, St. Luke ii. 10. by all Christian people (for I can scarce call them
Christians any of them that deny it) ever since; a Day of his Incarnation too,
whence the Christian Era, all Christian accounts of the year have since ever
begun and run; a proof sufficient to show Christians have their observations of
days as well as Jews, particular Days and Feasts, nay, and Fasts too upon
Christ's in diebus illis jejunabunt, his particular injunction of them, St. Luke
v. 35. days all particularly made for his own service.

The fault that the Apostle finds with the Galatians, Gal. iv. 10. for
observing Days, and Months, and Times, and Years, was for the observing the
Jewish ones, not the Christian, for falling back to the beggarly rudiments of
the Law, as he there expresses it in the verse before, as if the Gospel-Rites
were not sufficient, or that they being afraid to suffer for the Cross of
Christ, studied such poor compliances to avoid it. Else some particular days
have been always set apart to the more especial and particular remembrances of
Gods benefits and Christ's; many of these days in the devoutest and purest
times, in the ancientest Kalendars. This of Easter in particular among the
rest. So particular that generally all the Fathers and Interpreters pitch upon
it as the day designed and deciphered here.

Other secondary interpretations, I confess, they make some of them, but this
the prime, though to some other upon occasion, or by the by they apply it too.

To the day of the Incarnation first. Then this stone, upon whose exaltation
this day is founded, was cut out of the mountain without hands, Dan. ii. 34.
Christ's body framed without man's help.

2. To the day of his Nativity. Then factus est in angulum, this stone was
made, made more plainly in little Bethlehem, a corner of Iudaea.

3. To the day of his Passion. Then he was rejected by the builders, the
Scribes, and Pharisees, and people of the Jews; Nolumus hunc, take him who
will, we will not have him; disallowed indeed then of men, says S. Peter, 1.
Pet. 2. 4.

4. To the day of the Gospel, the whole time wherein that glorious light
displaies it self to all the corners of the world.

5. To the weekly Lords day, the Christians day of rest and joy, the weekly
Resurrection day, that rose, as St. Hierom speaks, post tristia Sabbata, out of
the sad Jewish Sabbath, after the sad Saturday of Christ's Passion to the
primacy over the other days.

6. To the day of the general Resurrection, when this stone, elect and
precious, as St. Peter styles it, shall appear in its full brightness and glory
to all the corners of the earth, at which day we are bid by our Savior to look
up and lift up our heads, S. Luke xxi. 28. that is, to rejoice and be glad when
we see it coming.

7. To Christ himself it is applied, the day in this verse as well as the stone
in ver. 22. He is both Daniels and David stone, Zacharies and David's dayspring
or day. Ego sum dies, St. Ambrose reads it for Ego lux, I am the day, and he
that walks in the day, in me, he stumbleth not, St. Ioh. xi. 9.

Nay, lastly, we find it sometimes applied to any day of famous and notable
mercies and deliverances, wherein any great blessing has been given. Thus to
the letter it is here applied to David's coming to the Crown after his long being
rejected by Saul's Party. Thus in the Council of Constantinople under Agapetus,
for the blessing or election of Cyriacus, a most learned and pious Bishop there.

But all these though they may be applications, they are not so properly
explications of this day. To this of Easter it most fully points. Then the
stone so lately rejected by the builders became the head stone of the corner,
the head of the Church, to unite both corners of the building, Jews and
Gentiles, into one holy Temple: then were the hearts of the Disciples filled
with joy and gladness, St. Ioh. xx. 20. the Prophecy here fulfilled, the joys
completed in the exaltation of the Son of David, which the Jewish people here
began for the exaltation of David, but prophesied of Christ's, though perhaps
they knew no more than Caiphas what they said.

The Incarnation, the Nativity, the Passion, the time of the Gospel, the Sunday
or Lords day, the day of the Universal Resurrection, the particular days of
Gods mercy to us are all days of Gods making, and to be kept and clebrated with
joy, even the Passion it self with spiritual joy and gladness; and Christ is
the day that gives light to all these days, enlightens all, yet both day and
joy, and the Lords making of them to us, can fit nor one, nor all of them so
properly as this day that now shines on us, Easter day.

2. Thus we have found which this day is, what day it is that is here so
particularly designed, and pointed out, which in the Text is said to be made,
and now to be considered how or what it is made. Of common days it is said only
that they be or are, so the evening and the morning were the first day, Genesis i.
5. and the evening and the morning were the second day, ver. 8. and so of all
the rest. The Evening came, and the Morning came, light and darkness succeeded
one another, so the day came, no making else. But of this it is punctually said
that it was made, something in it, or in the making more than ordinary.

Made (1.) that is, made famous by something done upon it; death, and hell, and
all the terrors of darkness this day put to flight for ever by Christ's only
Resurrection.

Made (2.) that is, appointed and ordained for something. So Deus fecit Dominum
and Christum, God is said to have made our Savior Lord and Christ, Acts ii.
36. and of Christ that fecit nos Reges and Sacerdotes, that he made us, that
is, ordained, us Kings and Priests, as God had him both Lord and Christ, and
upon this day both; so that it is no wonder if the day too be said to be made,
made, or ordained and appointed to be remembered.

Made (3.) to be celebrated too, to be kept aniversary as a solemn day of joy
and gladness, of Praises and Thanksgivings. Thus facere diem Sabbati, Deuteronomy. v.
15. and Pascha facere, St. Mat. xxvi. 18. is to keep the Sabbath and the
Passover; what is there in Latin to make the Sabbath and the Passover, in
our English is to keep them, to make up, or make out the day in Gods Worship
and Service. When God is said to make a day, it is for himself, and we can make
none but to him; mar days we do when we spend them upon any thing, or any else,
they are never made but when on him. The greater sin theirs then that unmake
the days that are thus made, that both unsaint the Saints, and unhallow the
days, and profane both; that make them for all but him, all business but his,
as if the holiness of the Holiday were the only offense of it, that which made
the day, or for which the day was made, the only reason to them to unmake it.

3. But however it pleases some to mar what God has made, yet made days there
have been many, are, and shall be. Themselves are not yet so impudent to deny
us all, not the Lords days yet, which yet are but so many little models of this
great day. But of made days all are not alike; some high days, some not so
high, though the one and the other made and constituted for Gods service. Of
made days this is the highest; (...), The day, so we told you out of Ignatius;
so we now tell you out of St. Augustine, Principatum tenet, it is the prime. As
the blessed Virgin among women, so this blessed day among the days, says he.
The most holy Feast of Easter the good Emperor Constantine calls it four times
in one Epistle to all the Churches, Solenne nostrae religionis festum, a little
after, the solemn Feast of our Religion, by which we hold our hopes of
immortality, the very day of all our Religion and our hope. Illa videtur dies
clarior illuxisse, sings Lactantius. The fairest day that ever shone. The Sun,
which so many hours withdrew its light, and hid its face in sable darkness,
went down sooner into night at our Saviors Passion, and to day rose so much
sooner, restored those hours to lengthen, or increased it beams to enlighten
this glorious Day in the opinion or else Rhetoric of Chrysologus, Eusebius,
and St. Augustine. If so, it was The Day indeed, none like it ever since; but
if not, There were two Suns rose to day to enlighten it, the Sun of Heaven, and
the Son of God; who is also styled the Sun in the strictest spelling, The Sun
of righteousness; needs must it be a glorious day indeed which is gilded with
so much light, so many glorious Rays.

All days were night before, nothing but dark clouds and shadows under the Law
of Moses, nothing but a long unevitable night under the Law of nature, nothing
but a disconsolate night of sorrow under the power of sin and darkness, this
was the first bright day that dispelled all darkness quite. A kind of spring of
day or glimmering twilight there was abroad from the first preaching of the
Gospel, but men could scarce see any thing; not the Disciples themselves; their
eyes were ever and anon held, not fully opened, till the grave it self was this
day opened, and gave forth Christ to open the Scriptures to them by the
evidence of the Resurrection. (...), this is the day when all this was done,
when this marvelous light shone forth, to enlighten all the world. The day of
all the days before or since.

4. And now (4.) it may well be so when the Lord made it. All his works are
wonderful, all perfect and complete, deserve Articles and Notes to be set upon
them. But when he sets the Note himself, and gives the Article, then to be sure
it is somewhat more than ordinary, somewhat he would have us to observe above
the rest. And when he entitles himself to it, or challenges it unto himself,
day it self is not more clear than that such a day must be observed.

Things that are exceeding eminent, and full of greatness, wonder, or
perfection, are commonly attributed unto God. This day is such at least,
because it is said God made it; a peculiar work and Ordinance of his, more than
the common Ordinance of day and night; and if God made it, what is man that he
should mar it, or the son of man that he should unmake it? Or how dares man, or
Son of man make little of that which God made so great?

So great as to call it his; so great as to make it the mother of one and fifty
daughters, of all the Lords days in the year besides. This is the Lords doing
indeed. None could alter the Sabbath into the Lords day but he. None put down
that, and set up another, abolish the Seventh, and set up the First, but the
Lord of all, and may do all, what he pleases in heaven and earth, Lord it every
where how he will. Herein he shows he is the Lord, and this day the Lady of the
year, from whence so many little weekly Easter days take both their rise and
name. All the former days God made, the Lord made this, the Lord Christ the
ground and Author of this day, Christ's rising raising this to that height it is.

Now God or Christ is not only said to do or make that which they do
immediately by themselves, but that also which they do by those to whom they
have committed such authority. So Christ tells us, St. Luke x. 16. He that
hears you hears me; he that hears his Apostles, his Church, his
Ministers, hears him himself; their commands are his, their orders his, so
long as they are not contrary to his word. And thus we may evidently without
much labor deduce the day to be his making.

From the Apostles times it came. Palicarpus, that Angel, as is conceived, of
the Church of Smyrna, Rev. ii. 8. kept Easter, says Ireneaeus, with St. John,
and with the rest of the Apostles, Eusebius. l. 5. c. 26. The great difference
about the time of keeping Easter between the Eastern and the Western Churches
was grounded upon the different keeping of it by the two great Apostles, St.
Peter and St. John: St. John keeping it after one reckoning, St Peter after
another; St. John keeping it, after the Jewish reckoning, upon the fourteenth
of the month Abib: St. Peter much after the account as now it stands, upon the
Sunday following; but all the controversy was about the time, not about the
keeping it; none denied or questioned that but Aerius, none left it at liberty
but the Cathari, both registered for Heretics about it. So confident were they
'twas from the Lord.

And that from him, at least by the Apostles, Constantine in Eusebius is
direct. (...), Which day (says he) ever since the first day of his Passion we
have kept until this present, We have received it of our Savior, says he a
little after. And again, which our Savior delivered to us. Thus Dominus fecit
then indeed. And that so it was either from his own command, or from his
Apostles, the whole practice of the Church is ground enough, in all Ages still
observing it, even in the hottest times of persecution, some in Caves, and some
in Woods, and some on Shipboard, and some in Barns and Stables, and some in
Goales, keeping it as they could, says Eusebius; so scrupulous were they of
omitting that day upon any hand that the Lord had made them: and the great
contentions about the time of keeping it shows as plain they thought it more
than an humane institution; they might else have easily ended all the
Controversy, and laid down the day.

But they had not then so learned Christ, had not learned the trick of lightly
esteeming days and places, and things, and persons, and offices dedicated to
Gods service, which God had made, or were made to him.

5. Especially made upon such an occasion as this day was. This day; What day
is this? The day wherein the Stone that was disallowed by Men was approved of
God, and exalted to the head of the corner. Wherein the chief corner stone of
Sion was laid, and Sion begun to be built upon it, when we had ground given to
build upon, and stones to build with by Christ's Resurrection; that is the ground
and occasion of the day. And a good one too: For had he not risen we had had no
ground to build upon, we had perished in our sins, been swept all away like so
many houses builded upon the sand. We had had neither place for faith, nor
ground for hope; nor room for preaching, our preaching vain, your faith also
vain, all vain, all come to nothing. His being delivered for our offenses had
been nothing if he had not been raised again for our Justification, as it is
Romans iv. 25. It Is to this day we owe our Justification; it is from this day we
are made just, and holy, from this Stones being made the head stone of the
corner we made lively stones, built up into a spiritual house or building, as
St. Peter speaks, 1 Pet. ii. 5. From his becoming this day the chief corner
stone it is in that we now have confidence, as St. John speaks, and creep not
into corners to hide our faces, that we dare boldly look up to heaven, and come
unto him, and that we call not to the Hills to hide us, or to the Mountains to
cover us from the presence of God, or the face of man or devil. Our faith and
hope, our souls and spirits are all raised by this days raising, we are all
made by this days being made, we had else better never have been made, for we
had been marred and undon for ever.

6. But by this day it seems we are not: for this rejoicing and gladness that
now follows close upon it shows what a kind of day it is, for what it is made,
even to be glad and to rejoice in, a Feast, or Festival. God is no enemy to the
Churches Feasts, whoever be; calls to us to blow up the Trumper for Feasts, as
well as bid us to proclaim a Fast. Indeed he more properly makes the Feast, and
we the Fast, for he only gives the occasion of the one, and we of the other; he
benefits, and we sins; Deus nobis haec otia fecit. So no wonder that the day
that he has made, be a good day, a day of good things, such as we may well
rejoice in, a Festival.

Yea, and a set one too. His making, you heard, was an appointing or
instituting it. Though God would sometimes have free will Offerings, he will
not always trust to them. If he leave all to the wills of men, the fires will
often go out upon his Altars, his house stand thin enough of people, and his
Priests grow lean for all the fall of his Sacrifices, if he come once to the
mercy or courtesy of men. They would quickly starve him and his Religion out
of doors. But set Feasts he always had, set Services and offerings, would not
leave himself or his Worship to man's devotion, for he knew what was in man. He
made this day, made it a Feast, a day of joy and gladness; Let us now therefore
to our Office, to rejoice and be glad in it; that is the second General, thither
now are we come.

Three Points we told you we would consider in it, Exultemus, laetemur and in
ea. Three parts in our Office, rejoicing, gladness, and the right ordering
both. Outward expression, inward gladness, and right placing them. Both words,
I confess, (...) and (...), in the Septuagint, and e^ultemus, and laetemur in
the Latin, have something outward in them; yet exultemus, is more for the
outward, laetemur, somewhat more within, a joy of the heart with some
dilatation only of it, Laetitia quasi latitia, a stretching out the heart, and
sending forth the Spirits; exultatio of saltatio, a kind of skipping or leaping
for joy, the Spirits got into all the parts and powers, ready to leap out of
them for joy.

Being thus both involved one in the other, I shall not trouble my self to
distinguish them, but only tell you hence, that first, The joy that God
requires in the things that he has made, or any time makes for us is not only
inward, it must out into outward acts. Out into the mouth to sing forth his
praise, in Psalms, and Hymns, and spiritual Songs, Ephesians. v. 19. Out into the
hands to send portions to the poor for whom nothing is prepared, Nehem. viii.
10. Out into the feet to go up to the House of God with the Posture as well as
the voice of joy and gladness, to go up with haste, to worship with reverence,
to stand up cheerfully at the Hymns and Songs of Praise. Our very bones, as
David speaks, to rejoice too; the very clatter'd bones to clatter together and
rejoice, all the parts and powers of the body to make some expression in their
way and order.

But not the powers of the body alone, but all the powers of the soul too.
Praise the Lord O my soul, and all that is within me praise his holy name,
Psalm. ciii. 1. Our souls magnify the Lord, our Spirits rejoice in God our
Savior, our memory recollect and call to mind his benefits, and what he has
done for us, our hearts evaporate into holy flames, and ardent affections and
desires after him, our wills henceforward to give up themselves wholly to him
as to their only hope and joy. It Is no perfect joy where any of them is
wanting. It Is but dissembled joy where all is outward. It Is but imperfect
gladness where all is within. It must be both. God this day raised the body,
the body therefore must raise it self, and rise up to praise him. He this day
gave us hope he would not leave our souls in hell, fit therefore it is the soul
should leave all to praise him that sits in heaven. He is not worthy of the
day, or the benefit of the day, worthy to be raised again, who will not this
day rise to praise; not worthy to rise at the Resurrection of the just, who
will not rise to day in the Congregation of the righteous to testify his joy
and gladness in the Resurrection of his Savior, and his own. He is worthy to
lie down in darkness, in the Land of darkness, who loves not this day, who
stands not up this day to sing praises to him that made it.

And now I shall give you reason for it out of the last words, In ea, in it. In
it. and for it. As short as they are they contain arguments and occasions, as
well as time and opportunity to rejoice in.

Rejoice first in it, because this day it is, a particular day of gladness and
rejoicing. Let us do what the day requires. It Is a day of joy, designed for it,
let us therefore rejoice in it.

Rejoice (2.) because the Lord made it. All the works of the Lord are matters
of joy to the spiritual man, even sad Days too; much more glad days, such as
this.

Rejoice (3.) because the Lords people have ever made it such. God has always
made them to rejoice in it, to contend and strive who should do it best or
nearest to the point.

Be glad (4.) for the occasion of it, the Resurrection of our Lord and Master,
and the hopes thereby given us of our own; all benefits of Christ were this day
sealed unto us, all his promises made good, all so hang upon this day, that
without it, we of all men, says the Apostle, had been most miserable; none so
fooled, so wretched, so undone, so miserable as we.

Rejoice (5.) because God bids us; it is an easy and pleasant Precept. If we
will not be glad when he commands us, certainly we will do nothing that he
commands us, especially when he gives us so great occasion of joy when he
commands it.

Rejoice (6.) because the very Jewish people do it here. They had but little
cause of joy compared to ours; they saw but a glimmering of this joy at most,
saw the Resurrection but afar off, and yet you hear they cry out, We will
rejoice and be glad in it. And is it not a shame that we Christians, who see it
clearly, and pretend to believe it fully, should not as much exceed them in our
joy, as in our sight, in our gladness as in our faith? Clearly so it is.

Rejoice (7.) because it is a good thing to rejoice; to rejoice in Gods mercies
and favors to us, in Christ's Crown and glory, in his day and way. The very
Angels themselves put on this day the white garments of joy and gladness, we
find them in them, St. Luke xxiv. 4.

Rejoice lastly to day, because this day is the first of all our Lords days
ever since. We count them feasts and days of joy, and we meet together upon
them to rejoice in, to give God praise, and thanks, and glory. It Is a piece of
worse than nonsense to say we are to do it upon these days, and not on this,
from which only and no other they had their rise and being. All that we
commemorate or rejoice in on every Sunday is more eminently and first in this:
this the great yearly anniversary of that weekly Festival, the time as near as
the Paschal circle can bring it to the time that the Resurrection fell upon.

For these, and for this day, so made to mind us of all these, let us now take
up the resolution of these pious souls, We will rejoice and be glad in it, in
the day, and on the day, and for the day; that is the very work and business of
the day, opus diei in die suo, the proper work of the day in the day it self.

And here is now a way particularly before us to rejoice in. Laetari is taken
sometimes for laete epulari. To rejoice is to eat and drink before the Lord in
his House or Temple, so Deuteronomy. xiv. 26. And thou shall eat there before the Lord
thy God, and thou shall rejoice, thou and thy household. Here now we are before
him, the Table spread, and our banquet ready, let us eat, drink, and be merry,
and rejoice before him; only rejoice in fear, and be glad with reverence. This
is the day which the Lord made, and all Christians observed for the celebration
of this holy Banquet and Communion; Never let the day pass without it;
excommunicated them that did, not one day or other of or about Easter receive
the blessed Sacrament; the greatest expression of our Communion with God, and
Christ, and all his Saints, and our rejoicing in it. You may see this people in
the Psalm within one verse, blessing him that comes in the name of the Lord,
blessing the Minister that comes with it, wishing him and all the rest that be
of the House of the Lord good luck with their business, Gods assistance in his
Office and Administration. And in the next verse calling out aloud, God is the
Lord which has showed us light, Bind the Sacrifice with cords even to the
horns of the Altar, God has showed us light, and made us a day, let us now bind
the Sacrifice, the living Sacrifice of our souls and bodies, with all the cords
of holy vows and resolutions, even to the horns of the Altar, and there
sacrifice and offer up our selves, even unto our bloods, if God call to it, all
our fat and entrails, the inwards of our souls, our hearts and all our inward
spirits, the fat of our estates, our good works and best actions, the best we
have, the best we can do, all we have, or are, even at the Altar of our God
with joy and gladness; glad that we have any thing to serve him with, any thing
that he will accept; that we have yet day and time to serve him, that he has
not cut us off in the midst of our days, but let us all live to see this day
again, and have the liberty as well as occasion yet to rejoice in it. Upon this
comes in David now presently with Thou art my God and I will thank thee, Thou
art my God and I will praise thee: O let us do so too. cry out one to another,
as the Psalm concludes, O give thanks unto the Lord for he is gracious, and his
mercy endures for ever. Turn all our rejoycings into thanks and praise, make
it a day of praise, that so rejoicing worthily this day we may be thought
worthy to rejoice in that day, opening and dilating our hearts and mouths with
joy to day, in this day of Christ's particular Resurrection, we may have them
filled with joy and gladness at the day of the general Resurrection, this day
of the Lord convey us over happily to that, these our imperfect joys be
advanced or translated into everlasting ones, into a day where there is no
night, no sorrow, but eternal gladness and rejoicing for evermore.

THE FOURTH SERMON UPON Easter Day.
St. MAT. xxviii. 5, 6. And the Angel answered and said unto the women, Fear
not ye: for I know that ye seek Jesus which was crucified.

He is not here, for he is risen as he said, Come see the place where the Lord
lay.


But is He not here? What do We then here to day? Come see the place where the
Lord lay! Why, it is not worth the seeing now, It Is but a sad place now He is
gone. No place worth the seeing or the being in, if He who is our being be not
there. Old Jacob's descendam lugens in internum, is all that we can look for,
we must go down with sorrow to the grave.

But fear not, though. Our Lord, indeed, is gone, but risen and gone away
himself; they have not stolen him away. He Is past stealing, He Is risen and
alive. Nor is he gone so, neither, but we may find him anon again in some
better place. Had we found him here in the grave to day, it had been sad
indeed. He had been lost, and We had been lost, and both lost for ever. He is
risen, He is not here, are the words that disperse the clouds and clear up the
day, make it so clear, that Videtur mihi hic dies caeteris diebus esse
lucidior, says St. Augustine, Sol mundo clarior illuxisse, astra, quoque omnia
and elementa laetari. Never any day so bright. The Sun, the Stars, and all the
Elements more sprightful and glorious to day than ever, they even dance for
joy. The Angels themselves to day put on their glorious Apparel, bright
shining Robes to celebrate this glorious Festival at the grave, ver. 3. A place
where they this day day strive to sit: sent thither to dispel our fears, and
disperse our sorrows, and raise our hopes, and advance our joys.

And indeed it was no more then needed when this day first arose; no more then
what needs still to those who seek Jesus which was crucified, who go out with
these tender hearts to the grave to weep. They need comfort and encouragement,
direction and other assistance too. They lie open to fears and troubles, to
errors and mistakes often in their seekings. They had need of an Angel to guide
them, and the news and certainty of a Resurrection to support them; and by this
we find here, shall so find it if they truly seek him.

This is the business both of the Text and of the Day. The whole business of
the Angel here, and of his speech to the women that sought Jesus that was
crucified. In which when I have shown you, I. The Persons, the Angel speaking
it, and the women to whom it was spoken. I shall show you then, II. In the
speech: Somewhat (1.) to disperse the fears. Somewhat (2.) to approve and
encourage the endeavors. Somewhat (3.) to correct the search. Somewhat (4.) to
inform the judgments. Somewhat (5.) to confirm the faith of those who here
seek, or shall at any time hereafter set themselves to seek Jesus which was
crucified.



For (1.) Fear not ye says the Angel; there our fears are dispersed. (2.) I know
you seek Jesus which was crucified; there our endeavors are approved of or
encouraged. (3.) He is not here, There Is our search corrected. (4.) He is
risen, as he said; there is our judgment informed. (5.) Come see the place
where the Lord lay; there is our faith confirmed. All you see plain and orderly
in the Text, both the Particulars and the Sum of it.

I shall go on orderly with the Particulars, and so show you first the Persons,
both the speaker, and to whom it is spoken. The Angel is the speaker, and stands
here first. I shall begin with him.

And an excellent speaker he is. The tongues of Angels above all the tongues in
the world besides. You will say so anon, when you have heard his speech
examined. In the mean time a word of Him.

St. Matthew mentions here but one. St. Mark no more. St. Luke two. St.
Matthew's Angel sat upon the stone which was rolled away from the mouth of the
Sepulcher, ver. 2. St. Mark's sat on the right side of the Sepulcher within,
Chap. xvi. ver. 5. St. Luke's Angels stood by the women as they stood perplexed
in the Sepulcher, St. Luke's xxiv. 4. And St. John speaks of two Angels more,
the one sitting at the head, the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had
lain. St John xx. 12. And yet in all these diversities no contradiction. The
story runs smoothly thus.

These pious women mentioned here come early to the Sepulcher to embalm their
Masters Body; whilst they yet stood without for fear, this Angel in the Text
that sat before the door upon the stone he had rolled away, invites them to
come in, where they were no sooner entered, but they saw a second Angel sitting,
who entertained them almost with the same words, and is he remembered by St.
Mark, when they had a while perused the bowels of the grave, and found nothing
there but the desolate linen in which their Lords body had been wrapped, being
somewhat perplexed at the business they were comforted by two other Angels,
which immediately appeared to resolve their doubts, and sent them to the
Disciples to tell the news, and are those spoken of by St. Luke; whereupon away
they have, only Mary Magdalen returns again with St. Peter and St. John, who
having looked and entered into the grave, away they go, but she stands still
without and weeps, till two other Angels, as St. John relates, show forth
themselves to stop her tears and divert her moans, and show her her Lord
standing at her back.

Thus we need no Synechdoche's, no (...) no strein'd figures to make things
agree. But thus you see Angels are all ministering Spirits, sent forth to
minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation, as the Apostle tells us,
Heb i. 14. They stand by us when we think not of them. They speak to us often
when we do not mind them. In the very grave, in our deepest melancholies, in
our saddest conditions; at the head and at the feet of them they take their
places and sit to comfort us. But especially when we descend into the grave to
seek our Lord, when we cannot be satisfied unless we may even die with him,
when we are crucified and dead to the whole world but him; when our only
business is both in life and death to be with him, then to be sure we shall not
want Angels to attend us; at every turn they stand ready for us, upon all
occasions they are still at hand. A strong consolation, this, in all
afflictions. A brave encouragement (2.) in all good undertakings. A good Item
(3.) too for our good behavior, to carry our selves well, soberly, modestly,
piously in all conditions, because of the Angels as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
xi. 10. that thus stand about us, that are every where so near us.

So near us, that they often answer our desires ere we can speak them. We read
not of a word the Women said to the Angel, yet says the Text, He answered.
Thus, many times God answers us by himself, or by his Angels ere we utter our
necessities, or breath out our thoughts. He does not always delay his mercy
till we beg it, he prevents us with his loving kindness, Psalm. ciii.

He did so (to be sure) to day by sending it by such Messengers. Angels have
wings (so they were engraved and painted in the Tabernacle and the Temple,) His
comforts had so too, to day. The message of the Resurrection, the greatest of
our comforts could not upon this account come by a better hand. By an Angel
then (1.) that it might be with the greater speed.

By an Angel (2.) that it might be with the greater honor. Angels are glorious
things, honorable Ambassadors; and such are not sent on petty errands; nor can
that embassy be slight, on which such persons come.

By an Angel (3.) that the benefit might look with more convenience. It was an
Angel that shut the Gates of Paradise against us, and drove us thence into the
Territories of the grave; the more convenient sure that the Angel again should
roll away the stone, and open the gates of Heaven out of those confines of
death into which he drove us. He had (2.) been employed in the news of our
Lords Incarnation and first birth out of the womb; the fitter to be sent with
the tidings of his Resurrection and second birth out of the grave.

By an Angel (4.) that it might be told with all the advantage it could
possibly. Such news is fittest for Angels tongues; men know not how, worthily
enough to speak it. Thus for the greater speed, and so our greater comfort; for
the greater honor, (2.) and so our greater and humbler thanks; for the greater
convenience; (3.) and so the greater confirmation of the Analogy of our faith;
for the greater advantage, (4.) and so our greater and readier acceptance of
it, was this first news of the Resurrection given us by an Angel, though nor
men, nor Angels sufficiently fit for it.

Angels certainly the fittest of the two, they the fittest for the news, and
yet methinks meaner Ambassadors might be fitter for the Persons to whom it is
told. Angels and Women, the Sons of God and the Daughters of men are no good
matches; though I must tell you too, such women as these, such who outrun the
Apostles themselves in affection and duty to their Lord, whose love triumphs
over the power of death, whose early piety prevents the morning watch and
shames the Sun, are company for Angels to make up their Choires.

But it is not without reason that the Angel first appears to women, that they
are honored here with the first news of a Resurrection. There Is a mystery in
it. The woman was first deceived by an Angel of darkness, 'twas therefore most
convenient she should first be undeceived by an Angel of light. The woman (2.)
was the first that fell, somewhat the more requisite that she should hear first
of the hopes to rise again. Thus does the Almighty Wisdom proportion all things
to us: Thus does the Eternal Goodness contrive all things for us with order and
convenience, and respondent ultima primis, and all things answer one another
first and last.

Yet all must not look for Angels to comfort or instruct them. St. Peter and
St. John came to the Sepulcher, but found no such favor, they came too late;
the Angels were gone before they came. The women had been before them and had
gotten the blessing. It Is they that watch and rise up early to find their Lord,
that meet Angels at their Prayers. When the day breaks the Angel must be gone,
Genesis xxxii. 26. to say his Mattens, says the Chaldee, He Will stay no longer. When
we come lagging in with our devotions, God's answers come lagging too:
extraordinary favors are the rewards only of extraordinary attendance.

But what? those two great Apostles not so highly favored as poor silly women?
What Is Mary Magdalene the sinner too among the rest, preferred above them? It Is
so, Women, and sinners, and any above us, above the greatest Apostles, the
greatest Clerks in Gods favor, if above them in their devotion and and piety
to their Lord; It Is so, and we must be content; nay, if God please, to prefer
the weak and meaner things of the world, upon any account, either such as are
so, or such as we conceive so, at any time before us, we have no more to say,
but even so it pleased thee O Father; and learn upon it to be humble, and not
think too highly of our selves; As those weaker things are hereupon also not to
be afraid, or terrified at their weaknesses, but called to here by the Angel
not to fear. Fear not ye: Which is the Proem or first Part of his speech, to
which we are now come.

Four things here there were, that possibly they might fear, (1.) The glorious
presence of the Angel; (2.) The ghastly countenances of the Soldiers, (3.) The
unsettled face of the yet almost quaking Earth, (4.) and the sad sight and
horror of the grave. Yet fear not says the Angel, not any of these.

Not me, not an Angel first. Angels are our fellow servants, and of our
brethren that bear the testimony of Jesus as well as we, Rev. xix. 10. We need
not fear them, they will do us no hurt; nay, they are always ready to do us good.
Somewhat I confess there is in it, that makes them commonly thus Preface all
their speeches, as Fear not Zacharias, St. Luke i. 13. and ver. 30. Fear not
Mary, and fear not to the Shepherds, St. Luke ii. 10. All is not so well
between Heaven and us as should be, all not so wholly well but that we may be
afraid sometimes of a messenger from thence. Yet fear not for all that, they
come not to us thence but with good tidings, especially when they come in
raiment, white garments, as the Angel does, ver. 3. or a long white garment, as
St. Marks Angel, Chap. xvi. 5. That Is neither a fashion nor a color to be
afraid of, for any that seek Jesus which was crucified, or hope to see the face
and enjoy the company of Holy Angels; though some now a days are much scared
with such a garment, when the Angels or Messengers of the Churches appear in
it. But (...), Fear it not, It Is but an innocent Robe, no more hurt in it than
in the Angels that wore it. It Is the Robe of Innocence, and the Resurrection;
No reason to fear it. Fear not ye, not this bright appearance.

No nor (2.) that black one neither, of the ghastly countenances of the amazed
Soldiers. They alas are run and gone. There was no looking for them upon him
they had crucified. They indeed had reason to be afraid, that the earth that
trembled under them should gape and swallow them, that the grave they kept,
being now miraculously opened might presently devour them: that he whom they
had crucified now coming forth with power and splendor, might send them down
immediately into eternal darkness for their villainy. Nay the very innocent
brightness and whites in which the Angel then appeared, might easily strike
into them a sad reflection and terror of their own guilt, and confound them
with it. (and I am afraid when the Angels long white Garment does so still,
it is to such guilty Souls and Consciences as these Soldiers that it does so;
such who either betrayed their Lord to death, or were set to keep him there.)
Such I confess may fear even the Garments of Innocence that others wear. But
they that seek Christ crucified, may be as bold as Lions. Non timent Mauri
jacula nec arcus, nec venenatis gravidas sagittis Christ pharetras. Thy
Discirage ples O B. Jesus, now thou art risen, will fear nothing, nor Darts, nor
Spears, nor Bows, nor Arrows, nor any force, or terror, any face or power of
man whatever. And ye good innocent souls, ye good women, fear not ye, your own
innocence will guard you, these Soldiers shall do you no hurt, their shaking
hands cannot wield their weapons, nor dare they stand by it, they are running
away with all speed to save themselves. So (2.) Fear not them.

Nor fear (3.) the quaking earth, that seems ready either to sink them, or
sinks under them; it is now even settling upon its foundation. The Lord of the
whole earth has now once again set his foot upon it, and it is quiet, and the
meek, such as seek Christ, they shall now inherit it. But though the earth were
moved, and though the hills were carried into the midst of the Sea, yet God is
our hope, the Lord is our strength, and we will not, therefore, fear, says
David, Psalm. xlvi. 1, 2. No, though the waters thereof rage and swell, and
though the mountains shake at the tempest of the same, do earth what it can to
fright us, God is a present help in trouble, Why then should ye be afraid? Fear
not.

No not, lastly, the very grave it self, that King of Terrors, That is now no
longer so, to you. Though Tyrants should now tear your bodies into a thousand
pieces, grind your bones to power, scatter your ashes in the air, and disperse
your dissolved atoms through all the winds, no matter; this Angel and his
company are set to wait upon your dust, and will one day come again and gather
it together into Heaven. Nothing can keep us thence, nothing separate us, nor
life, nor death, says the Apostle, Romans viii. 38. Fear nothing then at all: Not
ye, however; For ye seek Jesus which was crucified; that is an irrefragable
argument why you should not fear. And such, give me leave to make it, before I
handle it, as an encouragement of our endeavors; an encouragement (1.) against
our fears, before I consider it as an encouragement to our work.

And indeed, Ye who dare seek Jesus that was crucified, amidst Swords, and
Spears, and Graves, of what can you be afraid? He that dreads not death needs
fear nothing. He that slights the torments of the Cross, and despises the shame
of it; He that loves his Lord better than his life, that dares own a crucified
Savior, and a profession that is like to produce him nothing but scorn, and
danger, and ruin, He cannot fear; Illum si fractus illabatur orbis, impavidum
ferient ruinae; The World it self, though it should fall upon him, cannot
astonish him. Nothing so undaunted as a good Christian, as he that truly seeks
Jesus that was crucified.

And there is good reason for it. He that does so is about a work that will
justify it self; He needs not fear that. He whom he seeks is Jesus, one who
came to save him from his sins; he needs not fear them. This Jesus being
crucified has by his dying conquered death; O death where is thy sting? He
needs not fear that. And though die we must, yet the Grave will not always hold
us, no more than it did him. He is not here, nor shall we be always here, not
always lie in dust and darkness, no need to fear that. Nay, he is risen again,
and we by that so far from fear that we know we shall one day rise also. For
the Chambers of Death, ever since the time that Christ lay in them, lie open
for a return, are but places of retreat from noise and trouble, places for the
Pilgrims of the earth to visit, only to see where the Lord lay. Thus is every
Comma in the Text an Argument against all fears that shall at any time stop our
course in seeking Jesus that was crucified. And having thus out of the words
vanquished your fears, I am now next to encourage your endeavors: For I know ye
seek Jesus, etc.

I know it, says the Angel: That is, I would not only not have you be afraid of
what you are about, as if you were doing ill, but I commend you for it, for
it is well that you seek Jesus which was crucified, you need not be afraid, you
do well to do it.

Yea, but how do thou know it, Thou fair Son of light that they seek him?
Alas! it is easy to be known by men and women's outward deportment whom they
seek. Let us but examine how these women sought, and we shall see.

1. The come here to his Sepulcher; they not only followed him to his grave a
day or two ago, (the common office we pay to a departed friend) but to day they
come again to renew their duties, and repeat their tears. Nor do they do it
slightly or of course.

They (2.) do it early, very early, St. Mar. xvi. 2. as if they were not, could
not be well till they had done it; So early, that it was scarce light, nay,
while it was yet dark, says St. John; they thought they could not be too soon
with him they loved.

They (3.) came on with courage as well as haste. They knew there was a guard
upon the Sepulcher, ver. 66. of the former Chapter, yet for all that venture
they would, they feared them not. The day they knew, too, would come on apace,
and there would be eyes upon them, so may be presumed not to be ashamed of
their Master, or their work. No, nor were they neither afraid (4.) of cost or
charges, for

They had bought rich Spices, and sweet ointments, and had brought them with
them to anoint him, St. Mar. xvi. 1. They were resolved to be at charges with
him.

That (5.) would not be done without solemnity, and ceremony neither; that they
were resolved on too; resolved to pay their last duty to their Lord with all
funeral solemnities and honors.

And by this time we have more than a guess when men seek Jesus that was
crucified. (1.) If they follow him day after day. (2.) If their devotions be so
eager on him, that they give him their attendance at the earliest hours, suffer
not their eyes to sleep, nor their eyelids to slumber, nor the temples of
their head to take any rest till they have found him. (3.) If neither the fear
or shame of men can keep them from Him. (4.) If the Grave it self be more their
desire than their fear, willing to be dissolved to be with him. (5.) If shame
for his name be (as it was to the Apostles) the matter of their rejoicing. (6.)
If for his sake they spare no cost upon his Altars which represent his Tomb,
and present his body, nor upon the poor who are the members of his body. (7.)
If they think much of no cost, pains, or time; no duty or reverence too much
for him; when we find any thus disposed and doing, we may confidently say of
them, They seek Jesus that was crucified, and we thus know it of a certain.

And indeed we had need of good certain signs to know it by. For many there are
that cry Lord, Lord, and yet Christ himself does not know them he professes;
Many that talk of the Lord Jesus, and pretend to cast out devils too sometimes,
and do miracles in his name, have his name the Lord Jesus commonly in their
mouths, and talk of it at every turn, yet if you mark it, it is one King Jesus;
if any Jesus; it is in his Kingdom, not on his Cross; not Jesus crucified. No,
the Doctrine of the Cross was to the Jew a scandal, and to these men
foolishness. The very sign of the Cross disturbs them. Fools they were thought
(you know) a while ago that would take up the Cross and follow him, when they
might with more ease follow him in his Kingdom, (as was then much talked of when
the Kingdom was in their own hands) and reign with him. But whatever was the
business of those times, the business of this is, Jesus crucified. And if we
had no other proof that they still seek not Jesus which was crucified, but that
they are yet ashamed to give any reverence to his name, so to acknowledge him;
ashamed too of the very badge of Jesus crucified, the sign of the Cross upon
which he was; not only ashamed of it neither, but not ashamed to oppose it, and
write and preach against it, and disturb the peace of the Church and simple*
souls about it; if, I say, we had no other Argument against them that they seek
not Jesus which was crucified, I know not how they would invalidate and less
answer it. He certainly that cannot endure the sign would less endure the thing
it self, nor seek him certainly that hung upon it, if he must succeed him there.

Nay, we our selves who profess right enough, live not, I am afraid, sometimes,
as if we sought or served a crucified Jesus, or indeed a Jesus. Our devotions
to him are dull and heavy, slow and careless; we come to Church as if we cared
not whether we came or no; we are niggardly and sparing in the embalming of
Christ's Body; to the Church, and to the poor; we are afraid of pains and
charges in his service; we are ashamed too often to be found doing well, lest
the Wits and Gallants of the Age should laugh at us; afraid to be too
ceremonious lest we give offense to I know not whom; ashamed of patience or
humility lest we should be thought poor spirited Christians, that is, the
servants of so poor spirited a Lord, that would rather suffer himself to be so
horribly abused and crucified than to head his fathers Legions to ^ight for him.

He that sees how we have kept our Le^t, how we always keep it; how little we
mortify our lusts, how little we restrain our passions, how much we indulge
our appetites, how far we are from crucifying our sins, or subduing our flesh,
or dying to the world; how profuse men and women are in their apparel, how
studious of vanities, how poured out in riots and excesses, how given up to
their sports and pleasures, how continually taken up in some or other of these
when they are even walking to their Tombs, and should be thinking upon their
Graves; how every day they still post off all serious and religious thoughts
and never think of Christ or of his Cross, either what he did, or what he
suffered for them, or what he would have us to do upon it; He cannot but say, I
know ye seek not Jesus that was crucified. I see no Balms in your hand, no
Spices in your laps, no tears in your eyes, no sorrow in your faces, no
funerals by your garments, no solemness or seriousness at all in any of your
demeanor, that carries any semblance of relation to Jesus crucified; All so
loose, so fine, so quite of another fashion, that certainly it were a tyranny
over my faith, to impose upon me to believe that you seek any such as a Jesus
that was crucified, that any such as you do so at all.

I did not think to have made so severe an observation, but that I find men
think commonly that strict devotion is but women's work, they themselves may
live with greater freedom, but so it is not; it is only this seeking Jesus we
have spoke of can really arm us against the Grave, or fit us for the
Resurrection. And great persons do so too; too often think it is for those only
of lesser rank, the simpler and the mean ones: they, forsooth, have enough to
do to dress, and visit, and talk idly, and take a liberty from morn to night
answerable to their greatness, their fortune, or their youth; This story of
Jesus crucified spoils all the sport, and lays all their honor too soon in the
dust. Well, notwithstanding we had better all of us have the Angel here than
they commend us, his testimony rather that we seek Jesus that was crucified,
than their wits that make light of it.

III. And yet methinks they here are but slenderly rewarded for it, for all
their pains. Now they have done all, He is not here. That we called the
correction of their search.

And however we think of it, it is a good reward, to have an Angel set to keep
us right, to tell us when we do amiss. Let me never want one, O Lord, to do so;
Let him smite me friendly, and reprove me. There are even Balms, says the
Psalmist, that will break ones head, Psalm. clxi. 6. and smooth ways we often
stumble in; smoothing and anointing does not always cure us; too often betray
us. To tell us always, O Sir, you are right, you do well, excellently well, is
but a way to ruin us. Thou art the man is better far; you are out, He is not
here; you seek wrong, when we do so, as necessary, as to tell us, we seek
right, when so we do. Indeed, the women were right both for him they sought,
and the way they sought him; but for the place, that they were amiss in. Even
in many things we offend all, says St. James, Jam. iii. 2. For there is no man
that sins not, 2 Chronicles. vi. 36. And it is our happiness when we are timely
told it, that we go not wrong too long.

And it was timely here indeed. The Angel would not have them enter in an
error. It was a good work they came about, but he would not let them do it upon
false Principles. Men do so often, do that which is good upon a wrong ground;
seek Christ too often so.

Sometimes (1.) they seek him in the Grave, that is, in fading dying things, in
earthly comforts, or for such things. But he is not there.

Sometimes (2.) they seek him in the Graves of sins and lusts, whilst they yet
continue in them; whilst they are yet in their Rebellions, Schisms, Pride,
Covetousness, Malice, Envies, and Disorder, they pretend to seek him, even none
but him; but his body fell not, as those Israelites, in the graves of lust. He
is not there.

Sometimes (3.) they seek him in a melancholy fit, in a humor sad as the
grave, in a mood of discontent, all godly on a sudden; they have buried a
Friend, or Son, or Wife, or Brother, are disappointed of a Preferment, have
missed of an Estate, lost an Expectation, and are now forsooth for a fit of
heaven, a seeking Christ, but, He is not here; you will see it quickly if the day
clear up again; the Monk will quit his Cell, the Dog will to his Vomit, he is
presently where he was.

Sometimes (4.) they seek him in outward Elements, in mere Ceremonies and
Formalities, and mind no further; think if we hear a Sermon, or come to
Prayers, make a Formal show of Piety and Religion, all is well; But if we bring
not somewhat also within, some hearty inward devotion with us too, He is not
here neither; A few linen Cloths you may find perhaps that look fair and
handsome, and the External Lineaments of a sad sober Piety, like the dimensions
of the Grave; but dead men's cloths they are; and a Grave, an empty Grave it is
still; if our hearts be taken up with them, stopped and buried there, He is not
here.

Sometimes (5.) we seek him perfectly in a wrong place, where the malice of his
enemies only thrust him for a time amidst dust and rubbish, He is not there; He
will be sought in the beauty of holiness; now he is risen, there shall you find
him: for he does not love to dwell in dust, though amonst us that are so. We
must find him a fitter place to be in; Now he is risen, and we are risen, our
low condition changed into a higher, our Poverties into Plenties, our Rags into
Robes, our Houses almost into Courts; It Is fit his House and Courts should also
rise into luster and glory, and he not be in Badgers skins whilst we dwell in
Cedars, nor lie upon the cold stones or earth, whilst we lie upon Silks and
Velvets.

And now you see why it is when we seek Christ we so often miss him. We seek
him where he is not to be found, amidst Graves and Sepulchers, whilst we are
dead in trespasses and sins; or buried over head and ears in earth and earthly
interests; or only in some sad distemper, when we are so weary of our selves
that we wish for death; or only in dead Elements and Rites without the life or
spirit of devotion; or with that slightness and neglect as if we thought any
thing good enough for him, or that he would be content with any clod of earth
to lay his head on.

But these are the Mysteries of the Grave. He was not to be found, lastly; even
in the Grave, without a Mystery. He could not be held in the Grave they laid
him. It was not possible, says St. Peter, Acts ii. 24. God had promised he
would not leave him there, Psalm. xvi. that his flesh should see no corruption.
Here was the mistake these good women made; they either understood not, or had
forgot this promise; and believed not his own, that he would rise again. This
is that St. Lukes Angels even chide them for, for forgetting: Why seek you, say
they, the living among the dead? Remember what he spoke to you while he was yet
in Galilee, saying, the Son of man must be delivered into the haads of sinful
men, and be crucified, and the third day rise again, St. Luke xxiv. 5, 6, 7. It
was a piece of infidelity, it seems, now to seek him in the Grave, so that well
may the Angels ask them why they do it.

Indeed, our Angel here is not so rough: But you must know this was the first
time of their error. When they had been told it once or twice before, first, by
St. Matthews Angel, and then St. Marks, that he was not there, 'twould make
even an Angel chide to see them still continue in the same mistake. At the
first it is Angels method to be smooth in the business of reproof.

Nay, and some times to pave our way to it, with a Fear not, I do not mean to
hurt you, what I am to tell you is only for your good. This is but with Balaams
Angel to stand only in our way with a Sword drawn to hinder us from a fruitless
journey, or at the worst but to smite us friendly with it, that we may go no
further on upon wrong furmises.

And yet Fear not, He is not here! is not the Inference ill? Are they well
joined? Why, he is not here, and therefore fear seems a better consequence. If
he be not here we have lost all our labor, all our cost. If he be not here,
some body has stolen him hence, and taken away even that little comfort that was
left us of seeing him once again, and doing our last office to him. Thus Mary
Magdalen complains indeed, St. Ioh. xx. 13. Well, but for all that, depose your
fears, if you should find him here you might fear indeed, and despair for ever.
He had deluded you, he had broken his promise with you, that he would come
again; he was no Savior, but his body a mere dead trunk like other men's; your
hopes were all taken away, and all of you undone for ever. But now he is not
here you may hope better, and dread no longer, and I shall quickly put you out
of all fear indeed, for I shall tell you now, He is risen, as he said.

IV. And now indeed, O blessed Angel, thou say something: Away all my fears,
He is risen!

Why then (1.) He is above the malice of his enemies, and of all that hate him.
They, and the Soldiers that crucified him, may be dismayed, and look all like
dead men for fear, but I shall never be dismayed hereafter, seeing death has no
more dominion over him.

For (2.) if he be risen we shall rise one day too. If our head be risen, the
body ere long will rise also. He is the first fruits, 1 Cor. xv. the whole lump
of course will follow after. So certain, that the Apostle tells us, that in him
we are all already made alive, ver. 22. and with indignation asks how some
among them durst be so bold to say there was no resurrection of the dead,
seeing Christ is risen, ver. 12.

But is he not rather raised than risen (3.) that they durst say so? Was it by
his own power or another? By his own sure; for all the Evangelists say
unanimously he is risen. Indeed, it is said, Acts iv. 10. that God raised him
from the dead. It was so; for he was God himself, he and his Father one, St.
Ioh. x. 30. so God raised him, and yet he raised himself; was not raised as the
Widows Son, or Iairus Daughter, or his Friend Lazarus, but so as none other
ever were or shall be raised and risen, and yet so risen as not raised by any
but himself, that is a third note upon He is risen.

And (4.) risen so as to die no more. All they did, but he not. He conversed a
while with his Disciples upon earth, so by degrees to raise them too; but after
forty days he ascended into heaven. Risen surely to purpose, risen above all
heavens, risen into glory.

And if thus risen, we have good cause, (1.) to raise our thoughts up after
him, entertain higher thoughts of him than before; though then we knew him
after the flesh, yet now with the Apostle. henceforth to know him so no more.

Good cause, (2.) If He be risen, to raise up our affections after him; set our
affections, as the Apostle infers it, upon things above, Col. iii. 1, 2. and no
longer upon things beneath; set them wholly upon him.

Nay, and (3.) Raise our selves upon him, build all our thoughts and hopes upon
him; build no longer upon Sand and Earth, but upon that Rock that is now risen
higher than we, in whom we need fear no storms or tempests; we cannot miscarry.

And in the mean time, lastly, Now he is risen, let us rise and meet him; rise
in have with Mary, yet not to go to the grave to weep, (as they thought of her)
but to cast our selves at his feet, and cry, Lord, If thou had been here, if
I had found thee in the grave, my brother and I, and all my brethren had died
indeed, been irrecoverably ruined and undone. And yet for all that, Come now
and see where the Lord lay. Be your own eyes your witnesses that He is risen.

And it is but just, that in so doubtful a condition of affairs, and a change so
unheard of, you should seek an evidence not to be contradicted. Come then and
see it. The place will show it, and your eyes shall behold it.

Indeed, that he is risen, as he said, to a tittle, to a day, as soon as ever it
could be imagined day, is an argument, that not being here, he is truly risen.
Yet it is fit that we should be certain he is not there.

For it is fit that we should be able to give a reason of the faith that is in
us, says St. Peter. We can neither believe unreasonable things our selves, nor
imagine others should believe them. We are not to take our Religion upon trust
from an Angel. Si Angelus de Coelo, says St. Paul. Not from an Angel coming
from Heaven it self. Some Angel it seems thence may (speaking to an absolute
possibility) preach some other doctrine then what we have received, but believe
him not, says the Apostle if he do, Gal. i. 8. But suppose an Angel thence can
speak no other, yet there is an Angel that is from below, from the pit of
darkness, that can transform himself into an Angel of light. We had therefore
need take heed to our own eyes too, as well as to our ears. The best way to fix
them is to look first into the grave of Jesus that was crucified, see what we
can find there to make good what the Angel tells us, be he who he will. Try the
spirits, says St. Ioh. i. 4, 1. Whether they be of God, before we trust them.
See whether things are as they are presented. It Is but dark day yet, we may be
deceived if we look not narrowly into the business, even to the very inmost
corners and cranies of the grave. Come see then what is there.

Nothing but the linen cloths that wrapped him in, says S. Ioh. xx. 6, 7. and
two Angels, says St. Luke xxiv. 4. Well, this was enough indeed to prove he was
not there. But how proves it that he was risen? had not some body stolen him
thence? The grave was closed, the stone was sealed, the guard was set, and who
durst come to do it? His Disciples? why, they were stolen away themselves for
very fear. And it is not probable they would venture for him through a guard of
Soldiers when he was dead, that ran from him when he was alive. The Jews? Why,
they set a watch to keep him there. The Soldiers? why, who should hire them?
or, Why should they take money to deny it, if they were hired to it? Besides,
it was against the Jews interests, to give so fair a ground to the report of
his Resurrection, and his Disciples had so little subtilty to maintain so
forlorn an interest as theirs, that it looks not like a piece of their
contrivance; and so poor a purse, God knows they had, that they could not see
so largely as to reach it. Nay, and the linen cloths left all behind are a
kind of witnesses against it. It Is not probable they would have stolen the dead
body and left them when they came to steal; and the laying them so in order by
themselves, requires more leisure than a theives have. So being clearly gone,
and clearly none to own the theft, and none to prove it, and nothing to evince
it, it is plain, he must be risen, as he said. We have now, then, no more to do,
then see the place where, etc.

And where he lay, we call the grave: A good place sometimes to go into: the
house of mourning better to go into than the house of mirth, says Solomon, who
had tried both: best to recall our wandering thoughts to prepare both for a
comfortable death and joyful Resurrection.

But Christ's grave (2.) or Sepulcher has more in it than any else. There sit
Angels to instruct and comfort us; there lie cloths to bind up our wounds,
there lies a napkin to wrap up our aching heads; there is the fine linen of the
Saints to make us bright white garments for the Resurrection.

You may now descend into the grave with confidence it will not hurt you;
Christ's body lying in it has taken away the stench, and filth and horror of
it. It Is but an easy quiet bed to sleep on now; and they that die in Christ do
but sleep in him, says St. Paul, 1 These. ix. 14. and rest there from their
labors, says St. John, Revel. xiv. 13.

Come then and see the place, and take the dimensions of your own graves
thence. Learn there how to lie down in death, and learn there also how to rise
again, to die with Christ and to rise with him. It Is the principal Moral of the
Text, and the whole business of the day. In other words, to die to sin, and
live to righteousness, that when we must lie down our selves, we may lie down
in peace and rise in glory.

I have thus run through all the Parts of the Text. And now I hope, I may say
with the Angel, I know ye also seek Jesus that was crucified, and are come
hither to that purpose. But I must not say with the Angel, He is not here. He
is here in his Word, Here in his Sacraments, Here in his poor members. Ye see
him go before you, when ye see those poor ghosts walk; you hear him, when you
hear his Word, or read, or preached. You even feel him in the blessed Sacraments
when you receive them worthily. The eyes, and ears, and hands of your bodies do
not, cannot; but your souls may find see and him in them all.

Some of you, I know, are come hither even to seek his body too, to pour out
your souls upon it, and at you holy Sepulcher revive the remembrance of the
crucified Jesus; yet take heed you there seek him as you ought. Not the living
among the dead, I hope. Not the dead elements only, or them, so as if they were
corporally himself. No; He is risen and gone quite off the earth as to his
corporal presence: All now is spirit, though Spirit and Truth too, truly there,
though not corporally. He is risen, and our thoughts must rise up after him,
and think higher of him now then so, and yet believe truly he is there. So that
I may speak the last words of the Text with greater advantage then they are
here; Come see the place where the Lord lies.

And come see the place, too, where he lay; go into the grave, though not seek
him there. Go into the grave and weep there, that our sins they were that
brought him thither. Go into the grave and die there; die with him that died
for us; breath out your souls in love for him, who out of love died so for us.
Go into his grave and bury all our sins and vanities in that holy dust. ^ Go we
into the grave and dwell there for ever rather than come out and sin again, and
be content (if he see it fit) to lie down there for him, who there lay down for
us. Fill your daily meditations (but now especially) with his death and
passion, his agony and bloody sweat, his stripes and wounds, and griefs and
pains.

But dwell not always among the Tombs. You come to seek him; seek him then
(1.) where you may find him; and that is, says the Apostle, at the right hand
of God. He is risen and gone thither. And seek him (2.) so as you may be sure
find him. Not to run out of the story, seek him as these pious women did; (1.)
Get early up about it hence forward, watch and pray a little better; he that
seeks him early shall be sure to find him. Seek him* (2.) courageously, be not
afraid of a guard of Soldiers, be not frighted at a grave, nor fear though the
earth it self shake and totter under you: Go on with courage, do your work, be
not afraid of a crucified Lord, nor of any office, not to be crucified for his
service. Seek him (3.) with your holy balms and spices, the sweet odours of
holy purposes, and the perfume of strong Resolutions, the bitter Aloes of
Repentance, the Myrrh of a patient and constant Faith, the Oil of Charity, the
spicie perfumes of Prayers and Praises; bring not so much as the scent of
earth, or of an unrepented sin about you; seek him so as men may know you seek
him, know by your eyes, and know by your hands, and know by your knees and
feet, and all your postures and demeanors, that you seek Jesus that was
crucified; let there be nothing vain or light, or loose about you; nothing but
what becomes his Faith and Religion whom you seek, nothing but what will adorn
the Gospel of Christ. You that thus seek Jesus which was crucified, shall not
want an Angel at every turn to meet you, to stand by, support and comfort you
in all your fears and sorrows, nor to encourage your endeavors, nor to assist
you in your good works, nor to preserve you from errors, nor to inform you in
truths, nor to advance your hopes, nor to confirm your faiths, nor to do any
thing you would desire: You shall be sure to find him too whom your souls seek;
and He who this day rose from his own Sepulcher, shall also raise up you from
the death of sin first to the life of righteousness, and from the life of
righteousness one day to the life of glory; when the Angel shall no longer
guide us into the grave, but out of it, out of our Graves and Sepulchers into
Heaven, where we shall meet whole Choires of Angels to welcome and conduct us
into the place where the Lord is; where we shall behold even with the eyes of
our bodies Jesus that was crucified sitting at the right hand of God, and sit
down there with him together in the glory of the Father.

To which He bring us, who this day rose again to raise us thither, Jesus which
was crucified: To whom though crucified, to whom for that he was crucified, and
this day rose again to lift us up out of the graves of sins and miseries and
griefs, be all honor and power, praise and glory both by Angels and Men, this
day, henceforward and for ever. Amen.

THE FIFTH SERMON UPON Easter Day.
1 COR. xv. 19. If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable.
ANd if this Day had not been, we had been so Miserable indeed, and without
hope of being other. If Christ had not risen there had been no Resurrection,
and if no Resurrection, no hope but here; then most miserable we Christians to
be sure; who were sure to find nothing but hard usage here, tribulation in this
World, and could expect no other, or no better there.

Happy then this Day to us. Happy we that this Day came, which opens to us a
door of hope, have reason therefore to remember it, and with Joy to keep it, as
the first dawning of a better hope, the dayspring of all our happiness. This
Day our Head is risen, and with him our hope has enlarged its borders, and made
a prospect into the other World, sees some comfort there for our sorrows here.
This Days bright-shining beams have lightened our eyes, that now we shall not
sleep in death; a Sun-day indeed, the first true Sunday that ever shone,
wherein the Sun of righteousness arose out of the Chambers of the Grave, to
guide our feet out of misty darkness into mavelous light, out of the paths of
the dead into the land of the living, out of this miserable into a blessed life
by Christ's Resurrection.

I know the Apostle gathers his Argument somewhat otherwise: If there be no
Resurrection, says He, then is Christ not risen. If Christ had not, be not
risen, say We, there is not, will not be a Resurrection. To the same purpose
both he and we, both of us making Christ's rising the cause, the ground of ours.
If He, then We; if not He, not We neither. Our grounds the same.

And the inferences the same too. For whether we say, If there be no
Resurrection Christ is not risen; or, if Christ be not risen there is no
Resurrection, we affirm both, Christ's rising and our own. And if either be
false, we are found false witnesses, both, nay all. Not St. Paul only, who saw
him last, but those also that saw him first, but Cephas also and the Twelve,
but five hundred brethren at a clap, who saw him all at once. St. James too,
and all the Apostles, who both eat and drank with him after his Resurrection,
who bare witness of it, and preached it to the World, preached our Resurrection
from it. False witnesses, liars all, all the Fathers, all the Preachers ever
since, who preached nothing so much as both the one and the other. So if either
be false, our preaching is vain, (but that perhaps is little in the worlds
account, who could peradventure willingly spare both Preachers, and Preaching
too) nay, but your faith is also vain, your hope is vain, you are yet in your
sins, and when you die, you perish, and miserable you are both alive and dead.
Miserable deceivers, We, to preach; Miserably deceived, You, to trust a Savior
who could not save himself, but is dead and perished. Miserable both You and We
to continue in a Religion so groundless, so unprofitable, so troublesome, so
uncomfortable, so hopeless, whence little good is to be expected here and less
hereafter, as it must needs be, if there be no other hope in Christ, but only
here.

But the comfort is the Text is but a Supposition, What would become of us, if
our hope were only here. Now a mere Supposition, as it infers a necessary
consequence upon the supposal: So being but a mere Supposition, it as evidently
proves a real truth contrary to the Supposal. If in this life only we have hope
supposes, that so it is not truly, though, truly, so it might be. And we were
most miserable, says in effect, that so we are not, though upon the supposal so
it would be.

So that by this we have two general parts to handle in the Text, (1.) What our
Hope might be, and what then might be the Issue. It might be only in this life,
(such hopes there are) and then the Issue would be Misery. Then (2.) what our
Hope is, and what therefore the success. It is not in this life, therefore in
the other; or not in this life only, then in both, a double Hope, a lasting,
and everlasting Hope. And then the Effect sure will be good, if the other end
in misery, happiness must be the close of this. The first of these is true only
upon Supposal, the second true without it. The first the Apostle only supposes,
to prove the absurdity of denying a Resurrection, or our hope in Christ
concerning it. The second he truly means; That the Christians hope in Christ is
not only here, and he is therefore the most happy of the world, because it is
not, though if it were, he of all were the most desperately miserable.

The sum must be to teach us, (1.) Where not to place our Hope; And (2.) where
to place it; (3.) What is the Effect of an ill placed hope; And (4.) what of
that which is rightly set. By both, showing us even the necessity of a
Resurrection, and of a faithful expectation of it.

And two Kinds of Hope, now, with their several Effects shall divide the Text,
a False one, and a True one.

I. A False Hope. In Christ in this life only.

And its Effect. Misery, misery, both in this life and in the other. Most
miserable, of all men most miserable: then in both lives to be sure.

II. A True Hope. Not in this life only.

With its Effect. Happiness, double happiness: here and hereafter both. That,
also, not in this life only; for if the other makes its owners the most
miserable; this then by the Law of contraries makes most happy in this world,
as well as in the other. Though there most, because there is most, yet here
too, because here is some.

The First, Hope and its Effect more plainly expressed: The Second and its Effect
as necessarily implied, both of them together, the full Contents of the Text.


I shall for once begin with the False Hope, because the Apostles purpose here
seems more especially to be, to beat down that. Which once done, a few words,
and a little time will serve for the other; and as the Apostle here does but
only intimate it, so it shall serve us anon but to touch it, lest we too much
transgress the bounds both of Text and time.

To search then thoroughly into the vanity and misery of a Hope that reaches
short of heaven, we shall consider these four Particulars: (1.) That such a
Hope there is, a false hope in Christ. That (2.) that which is in him in this
life only is such a one. That (3.) the Effect of it is misery, all those that
have it miserable; they that have hope in Christ in this life only miserable,
they. Yet (4.) of those, some more miserable than others, some most miserable.
We of all, We Apostles, We the Ministers, We the Preachers of it most miserable
of all, of all the rest. If in this life only we have hope, We of all, etc.

That a False Hope there is even in him, I. General.
who is the hope of all the ends of the earth, ^. That a false hope in Christ
there is.
I would we could not say. But a false belief there is in him, nay, many false
ones, therefore a false hope too, yea, many such. For all hope presupposes a
belief, and such as our belief, such is our hope also.

We could easily, peradventure, bear it, were that hope only false, which is in
things below, in things transitory. Why? They deceive themselves, are
inconstant to themselves, no wonder then if so to us. Health loses it self when
it fails it Master. Riches decrease not more to their owner than to themselves.
Pleasure fades at the same time, wherein it leaves the pursuer. Honor becomes
but air when it is departed from him it honored. All earthly hopes only
therefore fail us, because their own natures fail them. The things we hope for
perish, and we therefore lose them. All this might be endured to be failed by
failing hopes.

But that a Hope in him who cannot fail should fail us, a hope in him that
cannot deceive should delude us, who could think it? Yet too true it is. Such a
hope, many such a one there is.. When though the object be right, or at least
materially so, even Christ our Savior; yet either (1.) the formality, or way
of apprehending him is wrong, or (2.) the ground false, or (3.) the reason
none, or (4.) the order ill, or (5.) the managing of it naught, or (6.) the
nature of it not right, or (7.) the strength of it not competent, or the
continuance too short. We shall best understand what this false hope in Christ
is, by considering what is required to make up that which is the true one. And
to it are required (1.) a right apprehension, (2.) sure grounds, What is
required to a true hope in Christ.
(3.) good reason, (4.) order, (5.) discretion, (6.) purity, (7.) stedfastness
and constancy.

1. True hope should have a right apprehension of its object, The several kinds
of false hope compared with true ones.
as well as an object that is right. It Is not enough to justify our hope that
we say it is in Christ, unless it be in Christ truly apprehended. To conceive
Christ so to be the Savior of sinners, as remaining sinners; to imagine he
will give us heaven because we imagine it; to expect he should violently draw
us thither whether we will or no: to hope that he will save us without doing
any thing our selves is presumption at the easiest I can speak it, but some
part of it is Blasphemy, viz. To make Christ so to receive sinners as even to
approve the sins, by taking the persons into favor, and justifying them, or
declaring them to be just and righteous whilst they wilfully continue in them;
and so far from truth it is, as that himself professes he came not to save them
otherwise than by calling them to repentance, Mat. 9. 13.
St. Mat. ix. 13. Yet as bad a hope as it is, it is too common now, commonly
professed and preached too, as well as practiced, though most injuriously to
Christ, and as dangerously to themselves.

2. Hope, that is, true Hope, should be well grounded, now there is a
groundless one, that must needs be naught. The ground of hope is the Word of
God. Psalm. 119. 81.
In thy Word do I hope, says David, Psalm. cxix. 81. And, that in the Scripture
ye might have hope, Romans 15. 4.
says St. Paul, Romans xv. 4. That which has other foundation is without
foundation. Gods Word, not man's Comment. Christ's Promise, not man's Fancy must
ground our hope. To hope we shall be saved only because we hope so; To hope God
will save us only because he is merciful, infinitely merciful; or that we shall
to heaven because we persuade our selves we are Elected and Predestined, or
conceive our selves the only Saints and darlings of the most High; To make
either our own groundless and sudden hopes, or Gods general mercies only, or
temporal successes and prosperities (which are common also to the most wicked)
or rash and obscure fancies of Predestination and Election, or our own merely
imagined holiness and Saintship: or, yet, some new revelation or inspiration,
or some extraordinary strange light and motion within us, (which may as well
proceed from him, who too often changes himself into an Angel of light, as from
the Father of lights, for ought we know; nay, for we know it does so, if it be
contrary to any parcel of Gods revealed will in Scripture, that from God it is
not, if it be so) upon any of these, I say, nay, upon all of them together
(yea, though the Prophets we have chosen to our selves, add their word to it to
assert it) to found our hope is to build it upon the sand, that when any storm
shall come from heaven, any wind or tempest of Gods displeasure beat upon it,
when temptations, afflictions, or persecutions, sickness, or death shall smite
the corners of this specious building of our hope, down it falls, and in the
dust, there, lies our hope; yea, the fall is great, so much the greater by how
much the higher, the larger built. He that will ground his hope aright. must
not be too sudden. Qui crediderit ne festinet, Isa. 28. 16.
says the Prophet. Let him not be too hasty to believe. He that believes shall
not make haste. To Gods general goodness and Promises he must add some inward
feelings: For his opinion of being Predestined or Elected he must find some
ground from his effectual calling, inward Sanctification and Renovation,
constancy of faith and resolution, as well as from Gods goodness and mercy. His
holiness and Saintship too he must not measure by his own conceit, but by the
square of Gods Commandments; Does he do that which is holy and just? Then a
Saint, not otherwise in the Scripture Phrase. New Revelations beyond the Word
of God he must renounce if he mean not to reject the Word of God as
insufficient; and his new lights and inspirations he must bring to the light of
Gods written Word, his Teachers Doctrines must be tried also by the same
evidence and rule, and answer to it too, or his hope will be as groundless as
his who never heard of Christ or God, only serve to make him miserable. For so
he is, and so will be, who thus fixes not his ground, who has nothing else but
those forsaid imaginations to go upon.

Nay (3.) Reason too is required to our hope. 1 Pet. 3 15.
Be ready, says St. Peter, always to give an answer to every man that asks a
reason of the hope that is in you. 1. Pet. iii. 15. Hope without reason is an
unreasonable hope, fit for beasts not men; unreasonable to be required of
reasonable men. He that requires me to hope contrary to reason, requires of me
either an impossibility, or a folly. I cannot truly hope that which is
impossible to my reason, that which I really conceive impossible; or I am a
fool to go about, desire, or pursue it, whilst I think so. Hope above hope I
must; nay, hope against hope I may too, sometimes, as Abraham is said to have
done, Romans iv. 18. that is, against the ordinary course of Nature, or Affairs;
but then only, though when greater reason persuades me to hope against it, then
to fear with it; when God expressly sends me word, or some other way assures me
he will transcend the ordinary way with me, and not bind himself to Laws of
inferior nature and course, and then indeed it is greater reason that I should
believe God than rely upon natural reason and ability, or ordinary providence
and common course. But then I must have either an Angel from heaven to tell me
so, or an evidence from God, which I can neither resist nor deny; a full
evidence besides that it is God that so assures me, that he it truly is who
requires my belief. Otherwise I am to trust no further than reason will assure
me, nor hope more, nor otherwise from Christ or God, then true reason grounded
upon Gods holy Word, and possibilities, and probabilities, too, will move me
to. To hope other is but to be our own deceivers.

4. True hope in Christ should be rightly ordered. First Faith, then hope, then
rejoicing in hope, then assurance, not assurance at the first dash, nor
rejoicing neither. Hope has a kind of torment with it at the first, when the
thing we hope for is either delayed, or a great way off. The nearer we draw to
it, the lesser is our torment, the nearer are we to our rejoicing. Whatsoever
joy rises before we come somewhat nigh the thing we hope for, is either none,
or very little: and if Faith enter us not into our Hope, if Hope be grounded
upon Opinion only, not on faith, it will scarce hold a shaking fit, See the
Apostles order, Romans v. 3, 4, 5. first Tribulation, then Patience, then
Experience, then Hope, then, and not before, that hope which makes not
ashamed. Till you have been tried and tried again, patiently endured affliction
and temptation, till your Patience be grown into Experience, till you are
become an experienced Christian, have had experience both of Gods favors, and
his frowns, and are become an experienced Soldier in the Christian Warfare,
one well versed in that holy trade, you cannot have the hope which makes not
ashamed. All hope that rises not in this method will but shame you. In a word,
first the hope of righteousness in the order I have told you, then the blessed
hope of glory. All other is preposterous, and no better in the upshot, than
that which is in this life only, for it will not hold, or not hold beyond it,
though it talk never so much of another. No, without the hope of righteousness
here, a hope that expresses it self by righteousness in this life, no hope, no
true hope, I am sure, of glory in the other.

5. There is a fifth Hope that is as vain, which neither knows how to go about,
nor pursue its ends, nor entertain them neither when they come. A kind of
people there are who lay claim to much hope in Christ, yet when good motions
arise within them to beget this hope, they either carelessly neglect, or
wilfully quench them; when God shows them ways to confirm it, they mind it not;
nay, when Salvation it self seems to knock at their very doors, they sit still,
and stir not so much as to open and let it in; or if it fall out that they
entertain it, it is with so much vanity and self-conceit, so much empty prattle
and boasting of it self, so much show and specious profession, that Christ in
whom it is pretended to be all, is least of all seen in it. True hope is never
without humility and discretion, it takes all opportunities to confirm and
raise it self, manages its motions with all carefulness, sobriety, humility and
godly fear, expects nothing but what in prudence it may, slips no time but what
of necessity it must, uses whatsoever means it possibly can, yet without the
least vain ostentation, to attain what it wishes and desires.

6. To this end (sixthly) it endeavors after holiness. The hope that does not
so is no true hope in Christ at all. Every one that has this hope purifies
himself, says St. John, 1 Epist. iii. 3. has his soul purified in obeying the
Truth unto unfeigned love of the Brethren, 1 Pet. 1. 21.
adds St. Peter, 1 Epist. i. 22. St. Gal. 5. 5.
Paul calls it a hope of righteousness, Gal. 5. 5. And the Psalmist joins to it
doing good. Psalm. 42. 5.
Hope, and be doing good, Psalm. xlii. 5. as if there could be no good hope
without doing good, unless it did purify us to all obedience and love. This is
the only hope in Christ we read of for approved and sound; a pure, holy,
obedient, operative, charitable hope. Whatever hope else is said to be in
Christ, does but usurp the name, and is no such, and brings us no whither but
to the end of the verse, to be most miserable.

Yet (7.) Stedfastness and constancy must be added to make hope complete. Upon
Faith it must be grounded (as we told you) and Faith can admit no wavering.
Heb. 6. 19.
Sure and steadfast, the Apostle calls it, Heb. vi. 19. Hope without wavering,
Heb. 10. 23.
Heb. x. 23. Anchor-hope, and Helmet-hope, strong and sure. Heb. 3. 6.
Sure? nay, sure and firm unto the end too, Heb. iii. 6. So sure, as that it
carries rejoicing with it, as if it had already obtained, Heb. Heb. 6. 11.
vi. 11. No doubtful, sad, melancholic, wavering or unconstant piece of
business, as the hopes of the world are, now up, now down, now merry, now sad;
nor as those false hopes in Christ without ground taken up, without discretion
pursued, and with impurities and impieties daily defiled will one day prove.
No, nor yet any impatient expectation, but a hope with patience, 1 These. 1. 3.
as the blessed Apostle, 1 These. i. 3. a quiet and patient waiting for Christ,
2 These. 3. 5.
2 These. iii. 5. to be content to endure any thing though never so hard, any
time, though never so long, and think nothing too much for his sake. There are
so many men's hopes of the contrary nature, so impatient of any service or
hardship, or endurance for Christ, that with most it is come to more then an
If, If they have only a false hope in Christ, so it is without an If too
evident, too common, the more the pity.

I have been somewhat long in discovering the false hopes we have in Christ,
which little differ either from impudence or presumption, (to say the least)
because the religious world (as they would be accounted) is too full of them;
because so many deceive themselves with their false glitterings, and will needs
be (forsooth) the Saints, the only Saints who have hope in Christ, who neither
know the nature nor feel the power of it. More false hopes even in Christ there
are, but such as may well be reduced to these heads; as many false hopes as
false beliefs, and they are more then I can tell you, more then any can, more
however then the day would give us leave to tell you, if we would, or could.

A hope in Christ, (1.) that misconceives him, (2.) a groundless, (3.)
unreasonable, (4.) preposterous, (5.) indiscreet, (6.) unholy, (7.) a wavering,
inconstant and impatient hope are the only false hopes I have informed you of;
you may reduce all others to them, but this one behind, which the Apostle seems
to imply by the rule of contraries, when he tells us of a hope he had, which
made him use great plainness of speech, 2 Cor. iii. 12. whereby he insinuates,
that the hope through Christ to Godward by the ministration of the Spirit, not
the Letter, as he styles it, ver. 4. 6. delights not in a kind of canting
language, which no body understands, but those of the same craft and
occupation, none but themselves; no, nor themselves neither, though by an
uncouth kind of holy language, through spiritual pride, they would fain seem to
speak mysteries. No, the Father of Lights uses no Dark-Lanthorn language. If
they mean good, why may we not understand them? If they fear not the detection
of their falsehoods, why do they cloud themselves and meanings in
unscripture-like phrases? If they hoped like Christians, they would speak like
such, not like Barbarians, and then should we plainly understand them. For St.
Paul's hope in the place forementioned, and the hope of the Fathers ever since
was in plainess of speech (we know what it means) from which these men so
professedly swerving, we may justly suspect they are swerved also from the hope
of the Apostles, and all Christian Fathers, have set up also a new hope
different from theirs, and are become a kind of Christians different from them.
This is a note you shall scarce meet with; but the observation of the hopes of
our times compared with those of the Apostles times, and St. Paul's words
brought it to my hands; and it almost seems the symptom, by thoroughly examining
it, of all false, heretical and groundless hopes through all ages in Sects and
Heresies, as they rose; the changing the Catholic and received phrase into
other terms: a new uncouth language for new and uncouth faiths and hopes.

By what has been said, you may now easily find out, whether your hope in
Christ be as it should be, whether it will make happy or miserable. And by the
same you may as easily perceive how false hopes generally delude the world. Yet
to give you only a short prospect of them altogether now at last, that you may
see them fully and yet briefly too, take it thus:

For men to play the Devils, and yet pretend to hope in God; to study Schism,
Faction, and Contention, and yet pretend hope in the Prince of Peace; to run
all the ways of destruction, and yet hope Salvation; to strive for nothing but
this world, this only in all their carriages, and yet hope for another; to look
for their portion and happiness hereafter, and yet will needs have all that is
here; to hope for another life, and lead this no better; to be so solicitous to
place Christ's Kingdom here, and yet mind none other but their own; to keep a do
to set up King Jesus here (as they love to speak) and yet not suffer him to
reign or rule in any of themselves; to hope for the reward of Peacemakers, to
be called the Saints and Children of God, and yet be the only Peace-breakers,
Peace-disturbers in Church and State, nay, and the great War-makers too; to
hope for the reward of being persecuted for Christ, and yet daily persecute him
in his members, and that even for his sake too, for his Religion and a good
Conscience; to hope for the reward of the meek, the poor in spirit, the pure in
heart, which amounts to as much as Heaven and Earth, and yet be the most impure
and proud and haughty, exalting themselves above all that is called God, proud
of virtues and graces, and proud of sins, enormous sins too, are such riddles
and contradictions, are such groundless, senslless, impudent hopes, that
whatever they pretend of Christ, they are not only such as are in this life
only, fading, vanishing and vain, but so only in Christ, as in the mere sound
and noise and echo of the name, and even the greatest injury that can be done
it, the vilest abuse that ever the name of Christian hope yet suffered.

Yet are we to proceed to another still. A hope in Christ, only for this life,
the Second Particular we propounded, a hope that pretends no further then this
present life: In this so much the more modest than the other, in that it
pretends no further then it acts; in this only different from the other: This
denies the Resurrection, the other the power of it; this more expressly, the
other implicitly; this sometimes both in words and deeds (so much the
honester,) the other in deed only, in words never, so much the proner to
deceive us: But who are they, now, whose hope in Christ is only in this life?
Or, what is it to hope in Christ in this life only? Lets see a little.

1. They plainly have hope in Christ in this life only, who deny his
Resurrection: For if he be not risen, 2. That hope in Christ in this life only
is a false hope also, and what it is.
if he be yet in the Grave, and his body among the atoms of the dust (alas!)
there must needs our hope end too, thither must it go and sleep there for ever.
He was no more then a poor man as we, if he be not risen; and if our hope be in
man whose breath is in his nostrils, then when God takes away his breath he
dies, and our hopes die with him. The point of Christ's Resurrection then is the
hinge of all our hope. Best to keep close to that Article, or we lose all our
Religion quite, and must go seek some other. If he that should save us be not
able save himself; if our hope be hid in him, and he hid for ever in his ashes;
if he that should deliver us, delivered not himself from death, we have no
reason to expect beyond it, and then little comfort to look beside it upon any
good we can here get by it.

2. They who deny our Resurrection, can hope no further in Christ then in this
life only. If we rise no more here is all we look for. And if Christ, in whom we
hope, can do us any good, it must be here, for he has no where else to do it,
if when we die we perish. So to deny a Resurrection, is plainly to confine our
hope within this present world, to the narrow limits of an uncertain life. Yet
such there were in the Apostles times, 1 Cor. 15. 12*
as appears, ver. 12. some among the Corinthians, who said there was no
Resurrection of the dead. Of which sort also were Hymeneus and Philetus, 2 Timothy
2. 18.
who affirmed the Resurrection was past already, 2 Timothy ii. 18. nothing more to
be expected, and thereby says St. Paul, overthrew the faith of some. I cannot
punctually point out to you amidst the confused rout of Errors and Heresies,
which now swarm and reign amongst us, any such who dare yet expressly say so
much. Yet if they who are so hot for Christ's temporal reign upon earth (of
which there are good store) be not such, they look very like them; like men, I
am sure who have hope in Christ in this life only, or at least too much in it,
more than they should; and if we may guess at them by their actions, they and
many other of that pious rabble seem to mean it, and would express it, if it
were time to do it; or it may be, do it already in their Congregations and
private Meetings, if we could come to hear them. I am sure it concerns them
much that there be no Resurrection, and to think so too, if they desire to go
on confidently and quietly, without the throbs of an accusing and condemning
conscience in the courses they are in.

3. Such are they also truly in effect, who deny Christ's satisfaction, who will
acknowledge no other benefit from his Life, or Death, or Resurrection than good
example. If he be risen only for himself, or not risen at all, it is all one to
us; all one, I say, to us, if we have no benefit by his Resurrection: I think
they will not say themselves we can rise out of the grave, only by a pattern.
If there be no power in his Resurrection that extends to us, well may he be
risen, but we shall not rise if he raise not us. We know then quickly where is
all our hope.

4. Such are they again, who only follow Christ for loaves, who only therefore
embrace or follow the Christian faith, and take up Christ's Religion only to
mantain themselves, and such or such a Sect thereof, because it is the only way
they see to live and thrive by. Here at this prospect, now, you see there are
more hopes in Christ in this life only than perhaps before you did imagine;
whilst you behold so many change their Religion, new-form their faith,
new-model their profession, alter and assume opinion after opinion for this
poor thing we call a life, for the poorest things of it, to save the skin or
gain a penny. An act so unworthy of a Christian that it blasphemes the name, and
makes us yet put another If, to the Apostles, If this be faith in Christ, any
is. If this be true, there is none vain. If these be Christi fideles, who are
Infideles? If these be Christ's faithful ones, who are infidels? Who, but those
who look for another World, who believe that Christ is risen, and they shall
one day rise after him, and therefore in the interim rise above this foolish
world and the things of it in all their thoughts?

5. Many other hopes there be which have too much tincture of this life in
them, too much infected with the interests of this present life; which seem so
much to be possessed with it, that upon loss of Friends, or Liberty, or Estate,
or Honor, or the fear of such probable or threatened losses, the men that have
these hopes only, they grieve, and moan, and fear, and are perplexed, and
troubled, and amazed, as men without hope, as the Apostle styles them, without
hope of a recompense of a reward, as if Christ either could not, or else would
not make them a recompense for all their sufferings, all their losses, and
therefore go like men forsaken and forlorn, not weighing how infinite ways
Christ can at any time both return them here, and beyond desire or imagination
reward them all hereafter, but grieve as if there were no other World but this,
nothing to make amends for ever. I say not, that these kind of hopeless hopes
are any thing near so bad as the other, yet bad they are, and have too much
both of distrust and worldly interest in them. Though they deny not a
Resurrection, they seem to fear it; though they reject not quite the thoughts
of another World, yet they seem to doubt it; though they now and then think
well of Christ, they dare not trust him, unless they can feel him and his
reward in present with him. The other indeed bid defiance to him, or else march
impudently against him in his own colors; these only shrink from him, yet do
enough to make us see too much of their hope in Christ is fixed here, enough to
embitter all their lives, and make them miserable, if they settle not their
souls a little better, and rouse up their spirits to eternal hopes.

6. Nay, more than so. Those very spiritual joys and inward comforts which we
feel within us, and which sustain us in all our miseries, are but delusions,
dreams, and fancies if there be no Resurrection, if we or they must end here;
poor slender hopes to uphold us, if they rest only in present complacences. The
Turk (for ought we can say) has as much in the service of his Mahomet. The
Idolater feels the same, if perhaps not more, when he has done his sacrifice to
his Idol; he is pleased no doubt, and much rejoices in it when he has done his
Worship. Every false Sect, no doubt, has some like complacences within, whereby
it is confirmed in its Superstitions; and, it may be, the more to fasten them,
Satan, that metamorphos'd Angel of light, does, by adding somewhat of sensible
pleasure to them, make those inward illusions and delights far sweeter in the
apprehension than the true Christians many times. Nay, and the resolute Sinner
shall find a kind of subtle delight and appearing contentment in the custom of
his sins, (especially of spiritual sins, false Zeal, Heresy, Schism,
Singularity, or the like) does so commonly for a while, till Conscience begin a
little to remember him; would do so for ever but for the tang and touch of
conscience, which ever and anon strikes in on a sudden and thwarts or allayes
them, which yet it could not do if there were no Resurrection to call them to
account. So that those great pledges and forerunners of our eternal happiness
would be either none, or not what they are, or but the fading glances of a
perishing hope, if they had not a relish from those infinite and everlasting
joys we look for. And whoever he is, that shall endure what a Christian must,
only for those slender (and peradventure uncertain) contentations here (which
yet truly are not so much, or it may be, none at all to fully reasonable souls
if they bring not with them the promises of a fuller stream of a
yet-to-be-expected satisfaction) whoever he be, he does but vainly place his
labor. It is the glances of the other World that make any thing look beautiful
in this. It is only those eternal sweetnesses above, which give the taste to
all these below of what kind soever, if they relish truly well. And be our
hopes, though in Christ himself, fed with any thing but them, or with things
that have relation to them, we may put them all into this number, that the
Apostle reckons only to make most miserable.

Be they hopes in Christ without an eye (1.) to his rising out the grave, or
(2.) without our rising thence; (3.) Do they deny the power of Christ's
Resurrection, or (4.) mind him only for worldly things, not regarding other, or
(5.) through infirmity fix too much upon things of this life, or (6.) please
themselves only in some inward complacences and delights without reference to
eternal blessings, they are no other. If any of these ways only we have hope in
Christ, we have hope in him in this life only, and are of all men most
miserable. Which close puts me in mind now of the third Particular. The Effect
of all these If-Hopes, these but supposed, vain hopes, Misery, and the worst
the most misery. We are then of all men most miserable.

Miserable! 3. The Effect of false Hopes, Misery.
But what should make us so? What, but that which makes up misery? Pain and
Loss. Lost joys, deluded hopes, and real pains, troubles, and infelicities. We
shall not need to go out of this very Chapter, which has given us the Text, to
find enough to make up a bulk of Misery.

1. 1. Loss. Los^ of all good.
For Loss.

1. We have lost our head. Christ is not risen if our hope be only here. He is
dead still if there be no Resurrection, and we are at the best but walking
Ghosts, horrors to others, and to our selves. We may well go with the
Disciples to Emaus, a word that signifies forlorn people; go among forlorn
people indeed if he be dead still. We have lost our spirits, our senses, our
life and all, if our head be gone; we are a generation of senseless, liveless,
silly people to be Christians still.

2. We have lost our labors and our sufferings too. What avails it, that we
stand in jeopardy every hour if the dead rise not at all? ver. 30. If after the
manner of men I have fought with beasts at Ephesus, what advantageth it me if
the dead rise not? ver. 32. What are all St. Paul's labors and travels,
watchings and fastings, whippings, and imprisonments, his suffering cold and
nakedness, hunger and thirst, contumelies and reproaches, his journeys and his
shipwracks, his so many perils both by Sea and Land, his chastening his body
and keeping it under, his so often perils of death by treachery, by hostility,
many other ways, his so many persecutions, and after them even death it self?
To what purpose all these if there be no place or opportunity hereafter to
reward them? What mean these foolish Christians so to subject themselves to
cruel mockings and scourgings, to bonds and imprisonments, to stoning, burning,
sawing in sunder, to Swords, and Racks, and Gibbets? What mean they to wander
up and down in Sheepskins and Goat Skins, when they may have better clothing
far cheaper? To wander up and down from house to house, when they may at an
easier rate have houses of their own? To wander up and down in Deserts and
Mountains, in Dens and Caves of the earth, when they may with greater ease have
stately buildings and glorious Palaces to dwell in? Why are they so foolish to
be thus tortured and tormented, and accept of no deliverance, if it were not
that they might obtain a better Resurrection, Heb. 11. 35.
as the Apostle speaks, Heb. xi. 35. and so on. Else if there be no such
business, Let Us eat and drink, says St. Paul, for tomorrow we die. Let Us crown
our heads with rose-buds in the the spring, and take our fill of loves, let us
stretch our selves upon our beds, and drench our selves in pleasures, deny
nothing to our desires, abridge our selves of no delights, care not by what
means we rush into Riches, Pleasures, Lusts, and Honors: If there be no other
World, let us take our portion here, and let us not be such fools and mad men to
lose all here and hereafter too. This is better doctrine then the cold Precepts
of Christianity if there be no other hope than what is here. But be not
deceived for all this, says our Apostle, ver. 33. it is but evil communication
this; though so it were not, but good, wise counsel rather, if there were
nothing beyond this life. But awake, awake to righteousness, for there is a
Resurrection, where both our labors and our sufferings shall be remembered all.

3. We have lost our Faith if our hope in Christ be only here; Your faith is
vain, ver. 14. Our Religion's gone, there is no such thing as that in
Christianity, then. Religion is our business toward God, but if Christ be not
risen (as he is not, if we can hope in him no further than this life only) then
he is no God, so our Religion is but foolery, and we miserable fools to busy
our heads so much about it, about the name, and nature, and worship, and
service, and trusting of a dead Redeemer, that can neither help himself nor us,
no nor hear a Prayer, nor grant a Request, nor reward a Duty, nor punish an
Injury done to him.

Nay, (4.) we have lost our very hope too. If we have no hope but here, we have
none at all, we can hope for nothing that flees not from us. Do we hope for
honors or riches by following Christ? We see daily we are deluded. Do we hope
for happiness by it upon earth? We see nothing but misery about us, and death
before us. Nay, do we hope indeed for any good by Christ yet lying in the
Grave? What is it that a dead Savior can give us more than the dead Idols of
the Heathen? We see and feel our hopes in this life already vain, and for
hereafter we can see nothing at all without a Resurrection.

Yes, say some now adays. If the soul live we may be happy without a
Resurrection, though the body rise not, if the soul be but immortal. Fond men!
who consider not how if the body rise not, then Christ is not risen (the
Apostles own way of arguing, ver. 15.) and then our faith, which was in Christ
being perished, as being no other than in a helpless, hopeless man, the soul
can neither enjoy, nor expect a happiness from, or by him, and has lost all
other by following him already. Not considering again how the greatest misery
that can betide the soul is to wander desolate and disconsolate for ever
without both her body and her Christ, deprived eternally of all kinds of hopes.
Not considering, lastly, that the souls immortality necessarily infers a
Resurrection, it being but a forerunner and a harbinger for the body, to which
it has so natural a reference and inclination, that happiness it could have
none, when separated from the body, if it did not perceive the certainty of its
bodies rising a while after to accompany it. It could not without that
certificate but be incessantly tormented with its own unsatisfied and ever to
be unsatisfied longings, which it could throw off no more, than it could its
own nature and essence, it being essentially created and deputed to the body.

But Loss makes not all our misery. 2. Pain or sense of evil.
Not only loss of good, but sense of evil concurs also to make us miserable.
And here is enough of this, too, for us, if in this life only be our hope. You
are yet in your sins, that first. And what greater evil, I pray, than sin? What
greater misery than to be under the dominion of it? To be torn in pieces with
the distractions of our sins, to be tormented with inordinate desires, to be
hurried up and down with exorbitant lusts, to be enslaved to the drudgeries of
so base commands, to be rackt with the terrors of a wounded conscience, to be
distracted quite with the horrors of inevitable damnation, to be at war
continually within our selves, to be commanded by every petty lust, to be a
drudge to every filthy sin, to have a soul and body full of nothing but
pollution, nothing clean, nothing pure, nothing quiet, nothing peaceable within
it; thus to persist and continue, thus to live and die, neither our own
Masters, nor our own men, no misery more miserable. You talk of slavery and
tyranny, there is none like this of sin and lusts. Ye shall die in your sins,
John 8. 24*
says Christ to the Jews, St. John viii. 24. as the greatest misery he could
leave them under. Sinned we have all, and die in them too we must all of us as
well as they, for all Christ, if we have no hope in him but here. He is not
such a Savior as can deliver us, if he have not delivered himself; or if he
have, and we yet will not hope in him beyond this life, and the things of this
life, we shall also die in our sins and be miserable as well as they.

This is ill enough, yet there is a worse misery behind: We shall perish too.
Then all they also who are fallen asleep in Christ are perished, ver. 18.
perished for ever; whether you take it for annihilation, or for damnation,
whether for being dissolved into nothing, or being damned for ever, either of
them is misery enough.

Let the best befall you that can, it is to perish into nothing, (and yet there
are that say it is the worst, that to be annihilated is worse than to be
damned; perversely, I fear, more to maintain a cruel opinion against Gods
goodness, (which in some men's favor merely they have undertaken obstinately to
defend) by setting up an absolute reprobation, then that either sense or reason
can persuade any unprejudiced judgment, that it is so.) Well, be that kind of
perishing what it will, let that be it, to have our breath vanish into the soft
air, as the Wise man Phrases it, and have our bodies disperse into insensible
Atoms, or rather to become truly nothing, you cannot think it but a misery; if
for nothing else, yet for this, that men of honor and understanding should
become no better than the beasts that perish, to have so fair and glorious a
building as man's moulder into nothing. And if death alone be terrible, to die
into nothing is to nature much more, insomuch as it is further from the
principles of it than any the most horrid corruption or putrefaction. If a man
die, shall he live again? In Jobs worst agony was but a question: but if a man
once fall into nothing, He, the same He, cannot live again is no question at
all. He shall not, cannot. Something may be made of nothing, but the same thing
cannot be re-made out of it. There is not any thing, hell only excepted (for we
however, for our parts, will except that) can be so bad, so far from all the
properties of all kind of good, Metaphysical, Physical, and Moral too, as this
Non ens, this Nothing we must resolve into at the best that can befall us if
there be no Resurrection.

But I may go a strain higher, and tell you but the truth. If there be no
Resurrection, yet they that sleep in Christ, sleep (if I may use so soft a
word) in damnation too. The Soul is immortal (however some in this worst of
Ages are so impudent to give out it is not, because they truly wish it were
not, and it much concerns them that it should not, yet) the Soul, I say, is
immortal and cannot die, must therefore upon necessity be miserable, if it
depart its lodging without hope either of seeing its expected Savior, or her
beloved body ever again; must needs wander, and pine, and fret, and desire, and
despair, and be never satisfied, find no content in any thing, no ease in any
turn of thought, or motion of desire, restless and unsatisfied every way, every
where for ever.

Nay, again, whether there be any Resurrection or no; If Christ be not risen
too, we may yet perish everlastingly, amidst the everlasting fires. For our
Savior will prove none, our Religion none, our recompense no other than those
burnings.

Nay, lastly, if there be a Resurrection, and if Christ be risen too, yet if
our hope be not risen also, if we believe, and hope, and desire no further than
this life only; if our endeavors and labors be only for this life we live, if
our hopes be none other than one or other of those false ones, which I have
told you of, the place of eternal torment and despair is only what we can
expect, even so to perish, there to be miserable for ever.

Sum up now the issue of our hopes, without relation to another life, and tell
me what they are all else but misery. To lose our head, our life, our Savior,
our pains and labor, all our sufferings too; to lose our faith, our Religion,
our hope and all, to live and die without it; to live perpetually under the
tyranny of Sins, and Lusts, and Devils, and in death to depart uncomfortably
into torments, or, at the best, to be no more, to become mere nothing; to live
a miserable, wretched, tedious life, full of rigours and austerities, denying
our selves the freedom and pleasures that all others take, a life full of
afflictions and miseries too, for no better a recompense than mere nothing at
the last, nothing at the best, yea, worse rather than what we can imagine
nothing at the most, and that without any hope for ever, has all the
ingredients of the utmost misery.

And yet in miseries there are degrees, and of miserable persons degrees too;
some more miserable than others, some most miserable. It Is the last of the four
Particulars of the first General. We of all men are most miserable.

We Christians, 4. The persons which are most miserable of all.
that you have heard, we of all Religions the most miserable. But of all
Christians, We the Apostles, We the Ministers of Christ, We the most miserable
of those, who are the most miserable company, We more more miserable than all
the world beside. This is still behind.

Two things the Holy Apostle in this very Chapter, adds to make it so. We are
then found false witnesses of God, ver. 15. What could be said more to our
dishononr? To be nothing else but a company of base, impudent liars, to make a
Trade and Profession of it to gull people into misery, to be the Devils own
Ambassadors and Agents to bring in souls daily into Hell, to add this
dishonor to our misery, not only to be miserable Christians, but both the
ca^sers of their miseries by so dishonorable a baseness as a perpetual course
of lying, and the wilful Authors of our own, is that which adds much height to
our already too great misery.

To this there is an addition, yet, Our Preaching is also v^in and needless,
ver. 14. We are persons of whom there is no use, our Function so far from holy,
that it is but folly; our labor and studies (from the first of those tedious
days and broken nights of studies, of our exhausted spirits and neglected
fortunes and preferments to attend our work) to no purpose at all. Thus besides
those common miseries of a hopeless life with other Christians, We have most
vile dishonor, and a whole lost life, and a whole vain course of labor added
to increase our misery.

A third addition we have by the same Pen in this Epistle, 1 Cor. 4. 9, 10, etc.
Chap. iv. v. 9. and so forward to augment our misery beyond a Parallel. We are
men appointed unto death, made a spectacle unto the World, unto Angels, unto
Men; fools for Christ's sake, weak and despised, hungry and thirsty, and naked,
and buffetted, and without any certain dwelling place, outed at any bodies
pleasure, laboring day and night, reviled, persecuted, defamed by every
tongue, made the filth and offscouring of the world, and of all things even to
this day, ver. 13. hated and envied of all kind of men; the world hates you,
S. Joh. 15. 19.
says our Master, for whose sake it does so, S. John xv. 19. hated of all men
said I; yea, hated of God too, if our preaching be vain, and there be no hope
in Christ but here; Miserable fools sure, no such fools in the world again as
we, to endure all this in vain, to place, or keep our selves in so slavish, so
dishonorable, so troublesome, so afflictive, so contemptible a condition, when
with the same or easier pains, less cost, fewer broken sleeps, more worldly
content, larger liberties, fuller friendships, freer entertainments, greater
hopes we might take many several ways and courses of life more profitable, more
pleasurable, more honorable: Nor can we be so ignorant of our selves and parts
many of us, nor find we, else, any other reason to distrust, but that we might
in any other way promise to our selves as much power to manage other means of
thriving then Books and Papers, as any others, if we would apply our selves to
the same ways and undertakings with them. And had we no other hope but here,
you should quickly find we could do so, were we not confident we serve a Master
the Lord Christ, whose service as it is perfect freedom, so it is perfect
honor, whatever the world imagine it, or please to call it; were it not for
the hope of a Resurrection, when we shall find a sufficient recompense for all
the affronts, contempts and ill usages we suffer here, where these ragged
blacks shall be gilded over with the bright beams of glory, where we, whose
office it is to turn many unto righteousness, (whatever be the success) if we
do our duty, shall shine like Stars for ever and ever, Dan. xii. 3. So now you
see the scene of the Text is altered quite, there is evidence enough by our
willingly and knowingly subjecting our selves to all these forementioned
sufferings, that our hope in Christ is not only here, and we no longer, never
miserable. All before but a Supposition, this the Truth (which I told you
should be the Second General, though only summarily and exceeding briefly)
that, Our hope, the true Christians hope is not in Christ for this life only;
and therefore whoever is, he, to be sure, is not miserable.

That our Hope is not only here, II. General. The Christians hope is not in
Christ for this life only.
is evident by so many signs, that I shall only need but show and name them as
I pass. We willingly suffer hardships, bear restraints, deny our freedoms,
debar our selves many lawful liberties, lay by our hopes of worldly honor,
think not of the most profitable and probable preferments, we contend to
rigours and austerities, we watch our paths, we mark our steps, we make
scruples where the world makes none; we accept restrictions in our lives, that
the worldling and gallant laugh at, the whole business of our life is to be
accepted of Christ our Savior, we remember his benefits, we observe his days,
we believe his Resurrection and keep this Feast upon it; we solemnize the
memory of all his other glorious actions, sufferings, and mercies, with all
holy reverence and godly fear, with thankfulness and love; we hear his Word and
study it, we strive to do his will and fulfill his Commandments, at every point
passing by the satisfactions of our own inclinations and desires; we receive
his Sacraments and believe their power, we by this days solemnity confess his
rising, and profess our own; we leave all worldly interests for his, bid adieu
to all contentations, which stand not with that, which is in him; we suffer any
thing gladly for his sake, to be counted fools and madmen, despised and
trampled on, reviled and persecuted, exiled and tortured, and slain for his
sake, for our hope in him, for that we fear to displease him, to lose his
reward. These are full manifesto's of the true Christians hope, what it is he
looks for, what he means. For who now can think by the very naming of these
doings and sufferings, truly acted and willingly undergone, that our hope is
either not in Christ, or not in him beyond this life, who so easily contemn
this, all the glories and pleasures of it, and choose with deliberation and
full consent that only in it, which the world counts misery, or affliction?
Especially if he but consider that we are not crazed men that do so, but have
our senses perfect, our understanding clear, clearer many of us than the
greatest part even of understanding men, the same passions with other men, as
sensible of any evils or afflictions naturally as any others, and yet
notwithstanding choose all this for our hopes sake in Christ only.

And when all these shall be new heapt, and more imbittered to the Ministers of
the Gospel above others, through the spite of the world, and the malice of the
Devil on purpose to drive them from their hope, and they daily see and know it,
are they such miserable fools and madmen, think you, not only to persuade
others to these courses, but themselves also so readily to undergo them when
they might enjoy all liberties and pleasures at an easier rate as well as
others, did they not verily believe and hope, and even see and feel already by
evident testimonies both within and without, an abundant recompense hovering
over them, laid up for them, superabundant, in a Resurrection.

World now do thy worst against us, That the Ch^istian of all men is not
miserable.
thou can not make us miserable, do all thou can, not miserable at all. We
scorn thy spite, We contemn thy malice: We shall have another world when thou
art none, we shall outlive thy malice, thy self. Whilst t^ou art in thy
greatest pride and glory, (Lo!) we trample on thee, and when thou think thou
have laid both us and all our honor in the dust, we are above thee, thou art
made our footstool; and thou thy self, as scornfully as now thou look upon
us, shall be one day forced to vomit up those morsels of us which thou have
^wallowed, and will it thou, nill't thou, bring all our scatter^d a^^es, and
least atoms of our meanest parts together, and humbly offer them (...) feet of
the meanest Christian soul whom thou at at any time despoiled'st of them, and
either shrink away confounded with our glory, or else be glad of a Resurrection
as well as we. Whilst those miserable wretches, that thou so much courtedst and
delightedst in, and that thy Prince, who ruled and abused thee to all his
lusts, shall down together into eternal misery, when those poor despised
Christians, whom thou so much maligned'st shall reign in glory.

Miserable they were not here, maugre all the world could do against them; they
had that peace, that joy, that contentment still within, which the world could
neither give, nor take away. They found an unspeakable as well pleasure as
glory in their very afflictions and bitterest sufferings, being exceeding glad,
and counting all joy to be made so like their Master, whose Ministers, or whose
Servants they were; with him, despising the shame and trouble of a contemptible
and afflictive life or death, for the joy set before them, for the hope they
saw at the right hand of the Throne of God. Thus feeling nothing that could be
truly or properly called misery, whilst they took pleasure in infirmities, in
reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses for Christ's sake, as
St. Paul professes he did, 2 Cor. 12. 10.
2 Cor. xii. 10. whilst it all served only to their contentment here, and
augment their happiness and glory hereafter, they sure lost nothing then, they
are not miserable now, who are so fallen asleep. And lift up your heads, ye
drooping Christians, still, they shall not be miserable, that so at any time
fall asleep, but rise and live again, and be yet more happy, every one in their
order, every star their glory, every star a different ray, according to their
hope and sufferings here; as no men so little miserable here, if all things be
truly pondered: so no men so happy hereafter as the Christians; they of all
men, above all men, souls and bodies, both Pastor and People, all that live and
die under the glorious hope of a Resurrection by Christ, who place not their
hopes or affections in this life, but in Him and in the other, of all men,
they, most blessed, most eternally blessed.

To which blessed estate after this life ended, He who is our Hope, and who (we
hope) will keep us in it. He in whom we trust, and I trust, shall do so still,
not for this life only, but the other too, but for ever. He of his mercy convey
and bring us all, every one in his due time and order, even our Lord Jesus
Christ. To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be all praise and glory,
not in this life only, but for ever and ever. Amen.

A SERMON UPON Ascension Day.
PSALM. xxiv. 3, 4. Vho shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shall
stand up in his holy place?

Even he that has clean hands, and a pure heart, and has not lift up his soul
unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully to his neighbor.


WHo shall ascend, indeed, if none must ascend but he that is clean and pure,
and without vanity and deceit? The question is quickly answered, None shall,
for there is none so: dust is our matter, so not clean; defiled is our nature,
so not pure; lighter the heaviest of us than vanity, and deceitful upon the
balance the best of us, Psalm. lxii. 9. so no ascending so high for any of us.

Yet there is one we hear of, or might have heard of to day, that rose and
ascended up on high, was thus qualified as the Psalmist speaks of, all clean
and pure, no chaff at all, no guile sound in his mouth, 1 Pet. ii. 22. Yea, but
it was but one that was so; What Is that to all the rest? Yes, somewhat it is. He
was our head, and if the head be once risen and ascended, the members will all
follow after in their time.

Indeed, it is not for every one to hope, any but such as are of his, that
follow him, that belong to him. It Is a high privilege that the Psalmist stands
admiring at, and therefore not for all; yet for all that will, for a who shall
here is a who will, set up for all that will accept of the condition. Quis
ascendet, is who will, as well as who shall. They that will take the pains,
will do what they can to be clean and pure, they shall. His innocence and
purity shall help out for the rest when they have done their best. But if any
man will ascend he must do his best, must be clean and pure with Christ, and
through him, or he shall not ascend and rise up after him. It Is the Lesson we
are to learn, from Ascension day to Whitsunday, how to ascend after Christ into
the hill of the Lord, how to rise up in his holy place, even to have clean
hands and pure hearts, not to lift up our minds to vanity, or swear to deceive
our neighbor, to have our hands ascend, and our hearts ascend, and our minds
ascend, and our words ascend, as into his presence, all ascend after him.

The Psalm is one of them which the Church appoints for Ascension day, and I
see not but it may very well pass for a kind of Prophecy by way of an
extatical admiration at the sight of Christ's Ascension. So it passed with the
Fathers, and with our Fathers too, may so with us; for never was it so
fulfilled to a tittle as by Christ and his Ascension. He the only he of clean
hands, and pure heart, and holy mouth, and holy all, he the first that entered
heaven, that got up the hill, that entered into the holy place not made with
hands, Heb. ix. 24, etc. Not any doors so properly everlasting as those of
heaven, nor they ever opened for any King of glory to come in, as it is ver. 7.
but him. I cannot tell how we should expound it otherwise, without much more
metaphor and figure.

Yet I will allow it too for the Prophets admiration at the foresight of the
happiness of Gods peculiar people, and their condition: that God, whose the
whole earth is and all its fullness, ver. 1. should out of all its places choose
Sion for his place; he whose the World is, and all that dwell therein (as it
follows there) should choose out the Jews, amongst all the dwellers, to dwell
among, them only to serve him upon that hill; that, further, this God, whose
all is, should still of this all so particularly honor some, as to give them
the privilege of his hill and holy place, his solemn Worship and Service, to
go up first into his holy places upon earth, and then afterward ascend into
the holy places the heavens (for the words mean the one as well as the other.)
Who are they? What a sort of people are they that are so happy, so much exalted
upon the earth, and over it? It Is worth the admiring, worth the enquiring, and
we find it presently who they be, even such as have clean hands, and pure
hearts, that lift not up their minds to vanity, not their mouths to wickedness
or deceit.

In Sum, these are the only men that shall ascend those everlasting hills,
those eternal holy places, that are only worthy to enter into Gods houses and
holy places of the earth too, obtain those admirable privileges, that are
innocent, and pure, and just, and true, the only men worth the admiring, as the
Church and heaven, the hill of the Lord and his holy place are the only things
are worth it; Heaven is for none but such, and when we enter into the holy
places we should all be such, as none have right to enter them indeed but such.

Well, now the business of the Text is in brief the way to Sion, and to Heaven,
to the hill of the Lord, and his holy place, both that here, and that
hereafter, where we have,

First, the Condition of being admitted thither.

Then, the Condition of them that are. The first in the former of the two
verses, the second in the latter.

I. The Condition of being admitted or ascending into the hill of the Lord, or
standing up in his holy place, what it is, that is, what, or how great a
business it is to be Gods peculiar people, to be allowed to enter into his
Courts here, and into Heaven at last; what it is; why!

It Is (1.) a privilege; some one, not every one; some few, not all; Who shall?
Is, all shall not.

It Is (2.) a high one. It Is an ascent, a rise; it is to a hill, and the hill of
the Lord; who shall ascend, who shall rise up; Who shall ascend into the hill
of the Lord? Who shall rise up?

It Is (3.) a holy one, it is to the hill of the Lord, to a holy place.

It Is (4.) an admirable one, the Prophet starts aside, as it were, from his
discourse, and wonders at it, who it is should be so honored.

It Is (5.) a glorious one. For the hill of the Lord is not only an earthly
hill, his holy place, not that only made with hands; the words are as appliable
to that of Heaven, and Glory, and so understood.

It Is yet (6.) hard to be come by. It Is an ascent, hard and steep; a high Hill,
no easy Plain; raise and rouse our selves up we must to get it, stand up to
get and keep it.

And lastly (that we may take in all the possible senses of the Text) it is
Christ's proper privilege, his prae aliis, his first and above all others,
therefore delivered in the Singular, Quis, not Qui, who is he, not who are they
that shall? Though they, others also shall, yet they but by him; he first, they
after, he properly rises and ascends, they more properly are raised and drawn
after him.

II. The Condition now (2.) of them that are so thus admitted to all these
privileges, is, 1. That they have clean hands. That (2.) they have pure hearts
too. That (3.) they lift not up their mind to vanity. That (4.) they swear not
deceitfully, or to deceive.

The Privilege we are to speak of is a real one, a high one, a holy one, an
admirable one, a glorious one; and though hard to be come by, yet to be come by
(though) through him. The condition upon which we are to come by it, (1.)
Innocence, (2.) Purity, (3.) Righteousness, (4.) Truth, yet all too little
without him. He ascended to this purpose, that we also might ascend after him,
that is the Lesson we are now to teach you; two parts it has, the Condition of
the Privilege of the hill of the Lord, and the Conditions of our Performance
for it; the one the Condition to be obtained, and the other the Conditions to
be performed; the admission into the hill of the Lord and his holy place, that
the Condition to be obtained; Innocence and Purity, freeness from vanity and
deceit, they the Conditions to obtain it. I now enter upon the first, to show
what is the Condition we may ascend to, what a great and glorious one it is to
ascend into the hill of the Lord, and to rise up in his holy place.

I. Several senses I intimated to you of the words: (1.) Some understanding by
the hill of the Lord and his holy place, the material hill and house of Sion,
and thence our Christian Churches; (2.) Others the spiritual house and
building, the faithful and true members of the Church; (3.) Others the eternal
house of heaven, the hill of Sion which is above. Each of them is called Gods
hill or holy place. Sion Gods hill, Psalm. ii. 6. and lxviii. 15. The Temple his
holy place, Exodus xxvi. 33. The Church the house of God, not to be used like
our own houses, and therefore a holy place, 1 Cor. xi. 22. The Faithful the
Temples, the Dwellings, the Buildings, the House of God, 1 Cor. iii. 17. 2 Timothy
i. 14. 1 Cor. iii. 9. Heb. iii. 6. Heaven, lastly, is called Mount Sion, Heb.
xii. 2. Rev. xiv. 1. The holy place, Heb. ix. 12. The true Tabernacle and
Sanctuary, Heb. viii. 2. Be it which of these it will, or be it all, to ascend
into any of them is a condition worth the considering; to be admitted into Gods
House and Temple, to be admitted into the Family of true Believers, especially
to be exalted so high as into heaven. To be in any of these Conditions, is to
be in good condition, a Condition which is,

1. A Privilege; a peculiar favor, not for every body to arrive at, it is a
question who shall get it; not every one, says Christ. The faithful they are a
little flock, St. Luke xii. 32. A chosen Generation, 1 Pet. ii. 9. Few there
are of such, St. Mat. xx. 16. only a parcel that Christ has given him by his
Father, St. John vi. 39. To you it is given, says he himself, St. Mat. xiii.
11. to some it is given, to some it is not. So a privilege it is to stand thus
upon Mount Sion with the Lamb, Rev. xiv. 1. to be in the number of those that
follow him whithersoever he goes.

And it will prove a Privilege (2.) to be of those that go up to the House of
the Lord, among them that keep holy day, that is, that go up to serve him
there. Now he has not dealt so with any Nation, any but his own, Psalm. cxlvii.
20. If I shall find favor in the eyes of the Lord, then he will bring me
again, and show me his Ark, and his Habitation, says David, 2 Samuel 15. 25. And
if a favor it be, not to be debarred the House of God in Shiloh or Jerusalem,
is it less, think we, to be allowed the liberty of Christian Churches, to
praise God in the great Congregations? St. Paul counts it a mercy, 2 These. ii.
1. this gathering together unto him; much comfort in it, as in the coming of
our Lord Jesus Christ, which is there joined with it. Non omnis, I am sure we
find it, all have not the Privilege: we are out of Gods favor the while, and
he seems to have no delight in us, when he denies us at least to suspend the
showing it, as he did there to David when he fled from Absalom; a Privilege
sure all count it to have a place to serve God in together, there would not
else be such contention for it, who should, and who should not.

But for that hill of hills, (3.) far exalted above all hills, to ascend
thither, to be lift so high, that is a privilege without contradiction. It Is
given to none but for whom it is prepared, St. Mat. xx. 23. few there are that
find it, St. Mat. vii. 14. it is merely at our Fathers good pleasure to give it,
St. Luke xii. 32. neither of him that wills, nor him that runs, but of God that
shows mercy; we have no other claim but mercy to it. Only, fear not for all
that, says Christ, St. Luke xii. 32. he ushers in the privilege so; And (2.)
strive to enter too, says he, for all that; though the gate be straight, it is
not impassable for them that strive and labor for it; And then (3.) too admire
his goodness, say we, who yet leaves open the gate to enter to any penitent
sinner, that will strive and labor for it; who sets up a Si quis in the
Marketplace, sets it upon the doors and skreens of our Churches and Chapels,
sets his Prophets too to proclaim and cry it, Who will ascend, who will come
and stand up in his holy place, come serve him here a while, and reign with him
for ever? This Privilege, though all attain not to, is not such as any are
absolutely excluded from; that no more enjoy it, is because they voluntarily
exclude themselves: they shall not, because they will not take the pains; it is
no Decree against any, though a Privilege for some.

Such a one indeed it is, and a high one too, a high Privilege (2.) to be Sons
and Heirs to the most High can be no less, to be raised so to the tops of the
hills, above all the Nations of the World: You only have I known of all the
Families of the earth, Amos iii. 2. to be the only men that God knows, that he
takes notice of in the World to be a Kingly Priesthood, 1 Pet. ii 9. made Kings
and Priests, Rev. i. 6. this is high. And,

High it is (2.) too to be admitted into his House and holy Temple. Every one
came not there, not all the Levites, not all the Priests. A high favor it was,
allowed to some only to enter there. Why, the Lord loves the gates of Sion
more than all the dwellings of Jacob, says the Psalmist; all the high places
and Palaces of the earth are not in so high esteem with God as the very Gates
and Ports of Sion; to be suffered but to peep in there is a higher honor, to
be a doorkeeper in the House of God a greater happiness than to dwell in the
most magnifique buildings of the World. David, a King himself, had rather be
there than any where. And he that shall consider the Primitive Zeal of
Christians to these hills, how they never thought enough bestowed upon them,
how often they frequented them, how they would not pass without going in and
worshipping; how the pious and devout souls thought it a happiness to look that
way, and a great comfort in the midst of their desolations and captivity;
cannot but confess they all thought high enough of the favor that God allowed
them in receiving them into those hills and holy places.

A higher Privilege yet it is to get up the other hill, to be admitted into
heaven when all is done, so high, that Christ says it is not his to give, St.
Mat. xx. 23. the Father has reserved it to himself; and there is nothing
higher situated than it. The very name of hill the Phrase of the Text
sufficiently shows if it be a privilege it is a high one; Hills are the
highest places of the earth; the Church is a beacon upon a hill, every true
Disciple a light there at least; The Houses of God used to be thought high
places too, and so had in honor. And for Heaven it is styled the everlasting
hills. So to be admitted to the privilege of any of them must needs be a high
one.

3. High and holy too, that is a third addition to the Privilege. Many high
Privileges that are not so. Holy is the highest, most like to the most High.
To be Saints, to be called to holiness, as St. Paul say we are; to be a holy
Nation, as St. Peter says, 1 Pet. ii. 9. to be Priests, as you heard before; to
have holiness engraved upon our foreheads is to be holy persons, every Pot in
Jerusalem to be holiness to the Lord, Zech. xiv. 21. is a privilege, and a
holy one too.

To go up like Saints to the hill of Sion, to keep holy day there, to worship
before the holy Altars of the Lord of Hosts, to drink and eat in holy vessels,
to be part of his holy portion, to be made partakers of his holy Word, and
there praise the God of holiness in his holy Congregation, is a holy honor
that is done us. The highest Privilege that wants this, the highest Palace
that is without this is but the Tents of ungodliness, and they, says David,
will but make us afraid. Let my Privilege, O God, be holy, or I care for none;
that is that must bring me to his holy hill, and to his dwelling; that hill in
which he dwells amidst Cherubims, and Seraphims, and all his Host. Whither
thirdly to ascend is the height of the holy Privilege.

3. His holy heaven, that is the style, the Holy of Holies St. Paul calls it,
the very Seat of the most holy God, and holy Angels, and holy Saints. It cannot
there sure be suspected to be the holy Privilege, and the Privilege of the
holy only to come thither.

4. This holiness must needs make it to be admired too. An admirable Privilege
we told you it was it is our fourth Point now. And David, as if he had been all
this while in a kind of swoon at the contemplation of it, breaks out now upon a
sudden, with a Who is he? and what a thing is this to ascend into the Hill of
the Lord, and to rise up in his holy place.

Indeed, we cannot sufficiently admire it, that God should raise up dust and
ashes to such a height, as to make it a coheir with Christ, as to make a Hill
and holy Place of it for himself to dwell in? (...), says the Apostle, O the
depth! Who can find it out? Who, who can reach it!

That he should pitch his place and dwell among us, give us free access,
liberty to come and go unto him, to approach him when we will, speak to him
what we will, eat and drink with him when we will too; what can be stranger?
Who can wonder at it enough? How terrible is this place! it put poor Jacob into
a cold sweat to think of it before 'twas built, Genesis xxviii. 17. Will the Lord
dwell on earth? Is it true, says Solomon, Can it be so? Lord, What am I, says
Holy David, and my people, that we should but offer to it? Lord, What is it,
that we should be allowed to touch so holy ground with our unhallowed feet,
look upon so holy a sight with our unholy eyes, that such a glo-worm as Man
should be set upon a Hill?

But above all (3.) Lord what is man, Lord what is man that thou should so
regard him as to advance him also into the holy Hill of Heaven too, Lord, what
can we say, what can we say? Shall corruption inherit incorruption, dust,
Heaven; a worm creep so high; What? he that lost it for an Apple, come thither
after all; he in whom dwells no good thing, be let stay there where none but
good, and all good things are? He that is not worth the Earth, worth naught but
Hell, be admitted Heaven? Lord, What is Man, or rather, what art Thou O Lord!
how wonderful in mercies that thus priviledg'st the sons of men! Admirable it
is, worth the whole course of your days to admire it in, and you can never
enough. It will appear yet the more by the glory that accompanies it. It is a
glorious privilege indeed, even admirable for its glory.

Even in all the senses we take the words, it is (5.) a Glorious Privilege.
Glorious to be Sains, they are heirs of Glory. Glorious to be Saints in
Churches; for the Angels that are there 1 Cor. xi. 10. to wait upon us and
carry up our Prayers, for the beauty of holiness that is seated there, for the
God of Glory whose presence is more glorious there. But it is without
comparison to be Saints in Glory. Grace is the portion of Saints, that is one
ray of Glory. The Church, the House of God is the Gate of Heaven, Genesis xxviii.
17. that is the entrance into Glory. What then is Heaven it self? What is it to
enter there into the very Throne of the King of Glory? Lift up your heads O ye
Gates, lift up your heads, and let us poor things in to see the King of Glory;
the Hill of the Lord can be no other then a Hill of Glory. His holy place is no
less than the very place and seat of Glory.

And being such, you cannot imagine it (6.) but hard to come by, the very petty
glories of the World are so. This is a Hill of Glory, hard to climb, difficult
to ascend, craggy to pass up, steep to clamber, no plain campagnia to it, the
broad easy way leads some whether else. St. Mat. vii. 13. the way to this is
narrow, ver. 14. it is rough and troublesome.

To be of the number of Christ's true faithful servants is no slight work: it is
a fight, it is a race, it is a continual warfare; fastings and watchings, and
cold, and nakedness, and hunger, and thirst, bands, imprisonments, dangers and
distresses, ignominy and reproach, afflictions and persecutions, the worlds
hatred and our friends neglect, all that we call hard or difficult is to be
found in the way we are to go. A man cannot leave a lust, shake off bad
company, quit a course of sin, enter upon a way of virtue, profess his
Religion, or stand to it, cannot ascend the spirtual Hill, but he will meet
some or other of these to contest and strive with. But not only to ascend but
to stand there, as the word signifies; to continue at so high a pitch, to be
constant in Truth and Piety, that will be hard indeed, and bring more
difficulties to contrast with. And yet to rise up (to keep to that Translation)
that is, to rise up in the defense of holy ways, of our Religion, is harder
still; to blood it may come at last, but to sweat it comes presently, cold and
hot sweats too, fears and travels, that is the least to be expected.

Nor is it easy, as it often proves, to gain places to serve God in. Temples
are long in building, that of Jerusalem 64 years together. Great preparation
there was by David and Solomon to that before, and no little to the rearing of
the Tabernacle. It was 300 years and upward that Christianity was in the World
before the Christians could get the privileges of Sanctuaries and Churches.
The more ought we sure to value them, that we come so hardly by them. We would
make more of the privilege, if we considered what pains and cost, and time
they cost, how unhandsom Religion looks without them, how hard it is to perform
many of the holy offices where we want them, how hard it would be to keep
Religion in the minds of men, if all our Churches should be made nests of Owls
and Dragons, and beds of Nettles and Thistles. Yet I confess, it is hard too to
enter into those holy places with the reverence that becomes them, to rise up
holy there. Every one that comes into the Church, does not ascend, he leaves
his soul too often below, comes but in part; his body that gets up the Hill, the
mind lies grovelling in the Valley, amongst his Grounds and Cattle. Nor may
every one be said to rise up or stand in his holy place, that stand or sits
there in it, unless his thoughts rise there, unless his attention stands erect
and steadfast up to Heaven when he is there: he is indeed in the place, but he
unhallows it; it is no longer holy in respect of him. He must ascend in heart
and soul, raise up eyes and hands, voice and attention too, that can be
properly said to ascend into the Hill of the Lord, or rise up in his holy
place. Which how hard it is, the very straggling of our own thoughts there will
tell us; we need not go to the Prophet to find a people that sit there as if
they were Gods people, and yet are not; that hear his Word and stand not to it;
that raise up their voices, and yet their hearts are still beneath: We can
furnish our selves with a number too great of such, enough to tell us how hard it
is to ascend into the Hill of the Lord, and rise up in his holy place, so few
do it.

And if these two ascensions be so hard, what is the third? the very righteous
are scarcely saved, 1 Pet. iv. 18. If by any means I may, says St. Paul, 1 Cor.
ix. 27. supposes he may not; he is afraid, at least, after all his Preaching,
he should become a castaway, fall short of the goal, miss the Crown, come
short of the top of the Hill, of the holy Place. So hard a thing is Heaven; so
clogged are the wings of our soul, so heavy and drossie are our spirits, and
our earth so earthy, that it is hard to ascend so high. We feel we find it; and
they but deceive themselves that think it is but a running leap into Heaven, a
business to be done wholly or easily upon our Deathbeds, when we can nor stir,
nor raise up our selves, or our heads. Who shall ascend? Whatever question it
is, it is most certainly an assertion of difficulty. Who shall ascend? no man
can read it, but he will read hardness in the ascending.

And yet it would be harder but for the last consideration of the words, that
it is a kind of admiration of the Prophets at the foresight of Christ's
Ascension, He in his spirit foresaw his Savior climb this Hill, and wondered
^t it. From his ascending some of the difficulty is abated. He has led one way,
^^ac'd a path, opened a door into Heaven unto all Believers; so we used to sing
in the Te Deum* I need not tell you he has ascended in all the senses of the
words, no height of holiness but he has, none frequenter in the Temple than he
was, none in Heaven till he came thither: He the first that made our dull earth
ascend so high. He rose and ascended up on high without the least help of
metaphor or figure, rose from the Grave, ascended into the Hill, a^cended
thence into the Hill of the Lord, stands there at his right hand* St. Stephen
saw him so, Acts ^ii. 53. Never said Prophet any thing that more punctually
fell out than this, he may well admire it, and so may we.

Yea, and praise him too. To him we owe all our Ascensions, all the height and
ascensions of our spirits in grace and goodness, all our privileges to worship
him in holy places, all our assurances and hopes of Heaven, and the possession
of it. His rising raises us, his ascending makes us ascend. He the only prime
singular one, we only as parts and members of him.

What is then left us to do? What for all this privilege? Why? if Christ's
grace, and Gods Worship, and Heaven it self be such privileges, I hope we will
not be so silly to forgo them, or betray them. Seeing they be so high ones, we
cannot be so unworthy now to do any thing beneath them, any base or unworthy
thing. Being holy ones too, we will not be so profane to pollute our selves or
them with lusts and sacriledges. Being so admirable privileges all we cannot
certainly but adore Gods mercy in them. Being glorious ones too, we must
glorify him for them, count all things dross and dung in comparison of them.
Being yet hard to come by, the more need we have to labor for them, set all
our powers, make it all our work to get them, to get grace and worship, and
glory, to ascend the hill and holy place with all holiness as the way to glory.
In a word, seeing all this privilege comes by Christ, it is him we are to thank
and serve, and worship upon his own hill, and in his own holy place, till the
time come till we ascend in glory. And yet there is something more behind, the
way to this hill, the conditions required to obtain this privilege, what we
are to perform, that we may attain it. To have clean hands, and pure hearts,
minds not lift up to vanity, and mouths that will not swear to deceive our
neighbor. For he only shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, he only shall
rise up in his holy place; he only is a true Believer, he only truly worships
God, when he comes to Church to worship, he only shall go to Heaven, that has
clean hands, etc.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON Whitsunday.
St. JOHN iii. 8. The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound
thereof, but can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes. So is every
one that is born of the Spirit.
THe wind blows. And this day it blew to purpose. A mighty rushing wind there
was that this day filled the House where the Disciples were assembled, Acts ii.
2. And it blew truly where it listed when it blew only in that Chamber where
they were. And the sound of it was heard sufficiently when Parthians, and
Medes, and Elamites, the dwellers in Mesopotamia, and in Judea, in Cappadocia,
Pontus, and Asia, Phrygia, and Pamphilia, in Egypt, and in the parts of Lybia,
about Cyrene, and strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselites, Cretes and Arabians,
all of them this day heard it framed into articulate voices, into Tongues as
many and diverse as the Countries they came from. Yet could not any of them tell
whence this wind blew, whence these sounds came, for they were all amazed, and
in doubt, saying one to another, What means this? ver. 12. Nor could the
Disciples themselves but in general, that from heaven it came, nor whither it
went when it retired from them.

This Day then was this Text fulfilled in your ears, O happy Disciples!
Nicodemus might to day by experiment understand what in this Chapter he could
not apprehend, the Wind and Spirit both together; and feel the workings of them
both; there both in one descent together, though here he did not when they were
put in one word together; where whether Spiritus Ventus, or Spiritus Spiritus,
both (...), were understood Expositors have disputed, and it stands yet upon
the question. The Ancients restrained the words to the holy Spirit, and
translate it Spiritus. The Modern Expositors to the Wind, and translate it
Ventus.

To do both right we shall join both senses, understand the words as a
similitude made by our blessed Savior to instruct both Nicodemus and us in the
ways of the Spirit, and in the knowledge of the spiritual Regeneration by the
likeness of the Wind.

So two Simile's there will be in the Text. Sicut Ventus sic Spiritus, and
Sicut spiritus sic spiritualis.

The First Similitude is between the Wind and the Spirit.

The Second between the Spirit and the spiritual man, or him that is born of
the Spirit.

In the similitude betwixt the Wind and the Spirit, we shall observe,

I. The Nature of them both in (...), breath, or Wind, or Spirit, it signifies
them all. II. The Power and Operation both of the one and of the other, they
blow both of them where they list. III. The Plainness of their sounds; Thou
hear the sound thereof; both of them easy enough to be heard. IV. The
Obscurity yet of both their Motions, ye know of neither of them whence they
come, or whither they go.
According to these four points will the second similitude be extended too. He
that is born of the Spirit will be like the Spirit in all four. In his Nature,
in his Operations, in his Plainness in some particulars, and his Obscurity in
others. So is every one that is born of the Spirit.

But to tell you fully the true Condition of him that is born of the Spirit, I
must tell you first the Nature, the Operations, and the Properties of the
Spirit. And to tell you the Nature, the Operations, and the Properties of the
Spirit I must show you also those of the Wind; that so by the more perfect
discovery of them we may the more perfectly admire them, and adore and magnify
him to day who this day gave us both the occasion and means to hear and
understand them.

I begin now to compare the Nature of the Wind and Spirit. (...) the word is
and may be translated both. It is so in the Text. Some are for Ventus, some for
Spiritus: Breath they are both. The one, the breath of heaven; the other, of
the air: The one, Gods; the other, the Worlds.

Indeed, the wind is a kind of breath or spirit, but a spirit in the nicest and
subtilest sense it is not. A body it is, and not a spirit; yet the nighest
thing it is we have to liken the spirit to, as near a simile as we can find for
it; but the Spirit of the Day, is so a spirit as in no sort a body. (...) with
an Article and an Emphasis, a Spirit above all Spirits, the prime Spirit. A
Spirit by Essence, an essential Spirit, or essentially a Spirit. A Spirit by
Procession, the Spirit proceeding: personally that Spirit which proceeds from
the Father, St. John xv. 26. and from the Son, St. John xvi. 7. which was this
Day breathed first of all solemnly into the World to quicken it to a heavenly
life. Spiritus Dei, and Spiritus Deus, the Spirit of God, and the Spirit which
is God, and the only Spirit that can bring us all to God.

But this great Nature is too great to comprehend, too infinite to pursue. Nor
can the Simile reach it. It falls short, and so must I and you when we have
done our utmost. It Is an easier Project for us both to fall upon the Power and
Operations of it, though I foresee we shall often there be at a stand too. Yet,
to help our selves as well as we can, we will consider the Operations; first by
themselves, then by their Effects, and then thirdly by their Course and
Compass. By themselves first.

II. The wind, you hear, blows, and so the Spirit blows. Yet the Spirit is not,
blows not neither like every wind. There are whirlwinds that make a horrid
noise, that whirl every way about, and turn the World up topsie turvy, upside
down; the wind that is but Spiritus, a direct and orderly breathing does not
so. Spiritus vertiginis is but Vertigo Spiritus, the spirit of giddiness that
the Prophet speaks of, Isa. xix. 14. is but the Vertigo, or turning of the
brain, an abuse of the name, not a spirit, but a mere humor that makes us
giddy; has made this Nation so too long.

2. Blustering, and stormy winds there are, (...) rather than (...), Graves
violento flamine venti, but this no such. Spiritus rather than Ventus ours is
here; a calm and peaceable one, a breath rather than a wind, a Spirit
proceeding from the God of peace, bequeathed and sent us by the Prince of
peace; so still and even, that it did not so much as disorder a wreath of that
holy flame, which this day encircled the heads of the Disciples, but let that
heavenly fire sit quietly upon them, Acts ii. 3.

3. Nor is it of this wind to which this Spirit is compared, said flat here,
but spirat, not said to blow by a word that signifies commonly only the
ordinary and natural blowing. All is supernatural here. It Is neither whirling,
we told you first, nor blustering, we said secondly, nor puffing wind we tell
you now; it is a meek, an humble Spirit; from the beginning it moved upon the
waters, Genesis 1. but did not swell them into waves or billows, as natural winds
commonly do, not does it now; but only guides all our waters, passions, and
motions into their proper place with sweetness and order; which is merely a
supernatural work.

4. And yet as soft and smooth as it blows, it is the Spirit of Power, a mighty
wind, Acts ii. 2. and rush in it does often times at first with a little sudden,
and eager violence; yet two syllables, one single fiat, and all is done;
strange things we know are done by a very little wind, and that one word of
this one Spirit made the World out of nothing, and can as easily make a nothing
of the World. He can remove the greatest rocks and mountains not only with the
breath of his displeasure, but of his pleasure too, his easiest breath. He blew
the Gods of the Heathen out of their Thrones, and spoke all their Oracles dumb,
blew all their spirits in a moment thence, and yet the voice of his breathing
was scarce heard. He does so still, throws down all the Holds and Fortresses of
the devil in us sine strepitu without noise. Some rushing mighty wind sometimes
may go before it to rouse our dullness and awake us, but the spirit is not
there. Some Earthquake of servile fear may shake us first, and affright us from
some ill action, but the Spirit is not there. Some fire or fiery trial may
first burn or scorch us, and thereby make us look about us, or some kinder fire
warm us into a better temper than formerly we were in, but the Spirit is not
there neither. But when these outward dispensations have sufficiently disposed
us to attention then comes the still small voice, 1 Kings xix. 12. and there is
the Spirit that silently glides into our souls as the small dew into a fleece
of wool. Such a still, smooth, sweet breath of wind is the true resemblance of
the Spirit, and when this comes it works wonders; that minds me of the next
Particular, the Effects of both the Wind and Spirit.

Two especial effects the Wind has: To purify, and to refresh. These are the
prime Effects of the Spirit too.

1. When the holy Spirit enters into the heart it purifies and cleanses it from
all pollution. This made David pray, Psalm. li. 10. Create in me, O Lord, a
clean heart. Yea, but how? O blessed Prophet; why, as it follows, by renewing a
right spirit within me. That Is the way to make him clean. No way but that, but
that will. For the Spirit is compared to fire, Acts ii. 3. and that purifies.
To water, St. John iv. 10. and that cleanses. And here to wind, and that blows
away all the chaff and dust that is either in us or about us.

(2.) This Spirit refreshes, too. It renews the face of the Earth, Psalm. civ.
30. It gives rest and quiet, Isai. lxiii. 14. It upholds and establishes the
faint and decaying spirit, Psalm. li, 12. It refreshes us in our Bonds, and sets
us free, Romans viii. 15. It comforts us in all distresses, for he is (...), the
Comforter that should come into the world, St. John xiv. 26.

(3.) Nay I may add one thing more. It not only refreshes us when we are faint
and weary, and almost dying, but it revives us even when we are dead, is a
quickening Spirit, St. John vi. 63. Like that wind the Naturalist tells us of,
which in the Spring time quickens the dull dead Earth into Herbs, and Flowers.
Such a wind is this Spirit, that gives life to every one that comes into the
world; for he is the Spirit of Life, Romans viii. 2.

But that which adds somewhat still to the fuller glory of these effects, and
must not be passed without a note, is, that it is Spirit still, this wind blows
still. For however the winds are not always in a noise and bustle, yet some
spirit of air there is that moves in the deepest stillness. Spiritus there is
always, though not ventus; some tender breeze, though no gale of wind, there is
always stirring. And if there were not continually some such sweet breathings
of the Holy Spirit upon us, when those strong and louder blasts seem to be
lulled asleep; we were but dead men, and might sleep for ever, but such there
are, and we live by them.

I might, but I will not add any more to the Effects either of the Wind, or of
the Spirit. I pass on to their Course and Compass, to show you how far their
effects and powers reach. The Wind blows where it lists, and the Spirit
where he wills.

And here I must tell you, (...), Vbi vult is a large circuit. Vbi is where,
and Vbi is when, and Vult is what you will, especially when it is his who
works all things according to the counsel of his will, Ephesians. i. 11. So that
'twill be no stretching to say either of the Wind, or of the Spirit, that it
blows (1.) Where it lists, and (2.) How it lists, and (3.) As much as it
lists, and (4.) On whom it lists, and (5.) When it lists.

(1.) The Wind blows where it lists, on this side, or on that side, or on any
side, any where, and every where. The Spirit does so too, only with more
propriety to Vbi vult, doing out of the liberty of its own will, what the wind
only does out of the subtilty of its nature. No place lies exempted from the
power of his will. Acts 16. 15.
It finds St. Paul and Silas in the prison, and blows up the organs of their
voices into Songs and Hymns. It finds Manasses in the dungeon, 2 Chronicles. 35. 10.
blows there with his wind, and the waters flow out of his eyes. It finds St.
Matthew at the receipt of Custom, and blows him out of a Publican into an
Apostle. St. Mat. ix. 9.
It blows St. Peter and St. Andrew out of their Boat to the stern of the Church
of Christ. S. Mat. 4. 18.
He blows upon some in their journey, Acts 9. 3.
as upon St. Paul, upon others at home, Acts 10. 44.
as upon Cornelius; upon one in the bed, upon another at the Mill, upon Jonas
in the Whales belly. St. Luke 17. 34.
No place beyond his compass, not the Isles of the Gentiles, St. Mat. 24. 41.
not the land of Vz, not the Deserts of Arabia. Here and there even amongst
them, Jon. 2. 1.
he blows some into his Kingdom. In a word, no chamber so secret, but it can
get into; no place so remote, but it can reach; none so private, but it can
find; none so strong, but it can break through; none so deep, but it can
fathom; none so high, but it can scale; no place at all, but it can come into;
and none so bad, but some way or other it will vouchsafe to visit. It makes
Holy David, cry out as in an ecstasy, Psalm. cxxxix. 6. Whither shall I go then
from thy Spirit? or, Whether shall I go then from thy Presence? If I climb up
into Heaven, thou art there; if I go down to Hell, thou art there also. If I
take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the earth,
even there also shall thy hand lead me, and thy right hand shall hold me. No
place, it seems, in Heaven or Earth, or Sea, or Hell it self, can hold him out.

Nor can any hold him to this or that way of working neither? for He blows
(2.) How he lists; sometimes louder, sometimes softer, sometimes after this
manner, sometimes after that. He raises new inclinations, or he cherishes the
old; He changes the tempers of men, or disposes them; He removes opportunities
of doing ill, or he propounds opportunities of doing good; he scares us with
threats, or allures us with promises; he drives us with judgments, or he draws
us with mercies; he inflames us within, or he moves us from without, which way
soever it pleases him. No wind so various in its blowing. Different ways he has
to deal with diverse men: and diversities of gifts he has for them too,
differences of Administrations, diversities of Operations, 1 Cor. xii. 5. To
one he gives the word of wisdom, to another the word of knowledge, to another
faith, to another the gift of healing, to another the working of miracles, to
another prophecy, to another discerning of spirits, to another diverse kinds of
tongues, to another the interpretation of tongues, all from the Spirit, says
the Apostle, in the forecited Chapter. Nor was this only for those times. He
still breaths diversities of gifts and graces, as he pleases. On some
sanctifying graces, on others edifying. On others both. To some he gives a
cheerful, to others a sad spirit: to some a kind of holy lightness; to others a
religious gravity; to one a power wholly to quit the World, to another power to
stand holy in it; to one an ability to rule, to another a readiness to obey; to
one courage, to another patience, to a third temperance, and so to others other
graces, as he thinks fittest.

(3.) Yet of these gifts, to some more, to some less, not to all alike: nay,
not to the same person always alike neither, but (3.) as much only as this
Spirit will. All have not faith alike nor hope alike, nor charity alike, nor
courage alike, nor patience alike; neither all virtues, nor any virtues all
alike. Upon some the abundance of the Spirit dwells, upon others he breaths
only: some have had exstasies, others but only moderate breathings. Eliah had
abundance of the Spirit, yet Elisha has it doubled, 2 Kings ii. 9. And yet this
very same Elisha, that presently upon it divides Jordan with the wind of a
Mantle, and restores waters to their sweetness, and earth to its fruitfulness
by a cruse of Salt, 2 Kings ii. 21. in but the very next Chapter cannot so much
as prophecy without a Minstrel, ver. 15. is not so much as in a disposition to
receive this divine Spirit, without the help of an Instrument of Music to
rally his spirits into harmony and order. St. Paul who was but even now caught
up into the third Heavens, 2 Cor. xii. 1. feels by and by such a thorn in the
flesh, ver. 7. that of all that great extraordinary proportion, he has no more
left him than a poor pittance, a mere sufficiency, ver. 9.

(4.) And the Person is as much in his own power as the measure is. He blows
not only what, but upon whom he will. He is no man's debtor, Romans xi. 35. He
will have mercy upon whom he will have mercy, Romans ix. 18. What? if He to show
his justice, will no longer breath upon some persons who have so long despised
his mercy, and yet to make known the riches of his glory, will yet breath
somewhat longer upon others, that for ought we know, may have deserved as
little, Who can complain? seeing he blows sufficiently upon all, and is not
obliged either in justice or mercy to do more, but justly may do all, where or
upon whom he will.

One Vbi there is behind. He is free also for his own time; for he (5.) blows
when he lists. Upon some in the womb, as upon St. John Baptist; upon others
in the Cradle; upon some in their childhood, upon others in their youth, upon
others not till gray-hairs cover them. In the morning, at the third, the sixth,
the ninth hour, in the evening, in the still of night, in our sleep, and when
we are awake, are all his times as he pleases to make them, or dispose them. In
prosperity, in adversity, in the midst of tears, or in the midst of smiles, in
health, in sickness, whenever it pleases him. He called Samuel in his
childhood, David in his youth, St. Paul in his manhood, Manasses in his age,
and that which without contradiction shows the unlimittedness of his power, the
Thief upon the Cross.

I shall dismiss this Point, if you please, to take home with you these
Corollaries or Lessons hence.

(1.) If the Spirit blows where it lists. W^ are not certainly to exclude
any place, or Nation, from these blessed gales, or with the Donatists to
confine him to any corner of the world, or to the Church or Congregation we are
of, as if he could blow no where else. Learn Charity.

(2.) If the Spirit blows How he lists. We do but show our folly to
prescribe him his way. He knows what best he has to do, how best to manage us
to Salvation. Learn Discretion.

(3.) If it be as much too only as he lists. It Is not sure our merit or desert
if we have more of him than others, nor perhaps their demerit always who have
less. Whatever it is, it is more than we deserve, both they and we. Let that
suffice to humble us, and make us thankful. Learn Humility.

(4.) If it be only upon Whom he pleases, It Is certainly sometimes upon some we
know not. So we have no reason to pass a censure upon any man's soul. Learn to
think well of all.

And so much the rather in that (5.) he blows When he will. If he has not
already, he may hereafter breath, upon him or her thou doubtest most. If thou
perhaps thy self feel'st him not within thee now, thou may ere long. Learn
hence, to despair neither of thy self nor any one else.

In a word, seeing all his actions are so free, all his blessings, and all the
ways of them so wholly in his own breast. Let us all resign up all our wills to
his, and submit them wholly to his pleasure for time and place and manner and
measure, and bid him do with us what he pleases.

Yet for all this, Would we not now willingly know somewhat of these mysterious
and stupendous operations? There is somewhat, I confess, toward it in the next
Point, and I shall show you it, that though you cannot perfectly discern the
motions of the Spirit, you may yet hear the sound thereof; that is the third
General of the Text, the plainess of the sound, both of the Wind and of the
Spirit, easy enough both of them to be heard And thou hear the sound
thereof.

III. For the Wind, I need not tell you it, it speaks loud enough sometimes to
wake the drowsiest sleeper; though we cannot see it, we can hear it. And so we
may the Spirit too, as invisible as he is. Now two sounds there are of the
Spirit, An Outward and an Inward.

They that heard the Patriarchs, the Prophets and Apostles preach, they heard
the outward; so in St. Stevens case the Jews are said to resist the Spirit by
which he spoke, Acts vi. 10. They that now hear them read or preached, they
still hear the sound of the Spirit. For so Christ tells us, It is not they, the
Prophets and the Apostles that speak, but the Spirit that speaks in them, St.
Matthew. x. 20.

The inward sound of the Spirit is to be heard too. When thou perceivest pious
and godly motions rise within thee, when at any time good desires come upon
thee, when holy resolutions spring up within thy bosom, when thou feel thy
soul overspread with heavenly light, and the divine truth preaching to thine
understanding, then thou hear the inward sound, then this Holy Spirit begins
to discourse and converse with thee. And truly though none of these be properly
sounds, but only metaphorical, yet they are plain expressions of the Spirit,
and may well go for the sounds of it to discern it by. Yet that you may not
mistake false sounds for true ones; if you recollect what has been spoken
scatteredly already in the discourse of the Nature, Operations and Effects of
the Spirit, you will easily find the true ones to be these.

If the motion that at any time within us be pure and heavenly, calm and
gentle, if it purify our hearts, if it cleanse our affections, if it penetrate
the bones and marrow, if it cool the fevers of our lusts, if it blow out the
coals of our wrath; if it blow down the fortresses of sin, if it blow up good
resolutions, if it blow away the dust that hangs too often upon our good
actions, the interests and by respects, if it refresh the wounded spirit, if it
warm us with holy flames; if it quicken us to all obedience to God and Man; if
it cause the the fruits of the Spirit, the Apostle speaks of, Gal. v. to bud up
in us, then it is doubtless from this Spirit, and they are all as so many
several kinds of sounds that loudly speak his being and breathing in us.
Whatever motion, sound, or language is not consonant to one or other of these,
let men talk of the Spirit what they will, they are not of the Spirit in the
Text, nor does it make them spiritual men that have it.

Thus far our knowledge of the Spirit extends, these are the sounds it makes
within and without us. But our ignorance of it extends further. More of it
there is that we know not, than that we know; for notwithstanding all this
deciphering of the nature, effects, and sound of the Wind or Spirit. The
Obscurity of the course it takes, and the Motion it moves in is far greater;
for thou can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes. Nor wind nor
spirit.

IV. For the Wind first; They are but general notions we entertain of it. God
brings the winds out of his treasure, says the Psalmist, cxxv. 7. Out of those
hidden chambers they come, but where those chambers are we cannot tell. On a
sudden they arise, ere we are aware, and away they go; and who can follow
them? Who can trace their steps, or track their way, or over-take them in their
lodging at night, or tell us where it is?

Ask Philosophy, and let that answer you. Whence is it that the winds arise? It
answers you, from a thin and airy vapor drawn up out of the earth toward the
middle Region of the Air, but repercust or beaten back by the grossness of some
intervening cloud which drives it down obliquely with that violence we hear and
feel. This, or something as obscure, is all the knowledge we can get of it. For
ask now where that vapor rose? It cannot tell. Which way it went? It know sit
not. In what part of heaven it first became a wind? It cannot point it out.
What is become of it now it is gone? It resolves you not. Into what part of the
world it is retired when all is still? It cannot answer you.

We use to say, from the East, or from the West, from the North, or from the
South, yet so uncertain must we needs confess the first point of their motion,
and so many points do they vary ere they come at us, and so quickly are they
gone by us, that the wisest of us all cannot tell exactly either whence they
were, or whither they will.

But yet again, if it be no more than such a kind of wind as is in the Text,
not Ventus but Spiritus, a mere breath of wind or air; that undoubtedly we know
not whence it comes, or whither it goes.

And yet the ways of the Spirit are more unsearchable: We know not any thing at
all of his eternal Procession, it was before any time we can imagine; We know
nothing of his course or motion all that infinite while before the World began.
We understand nothing distinctly of it ever since. His motions are so
intricate, so various, and so infinite we cannot comprehend them. The
dispositions, the gifts, the graces he works daily in us we know not how they
rise, or how they spread, or how they vanish. Descend we a little to
particulars.

We are sometimes moved, we feel, by the words of the Preacher, by the reading
of a Chapter, by a devout Book, or a godly Story, and yet we know not why more
now than at another time; why at this time by a little touch, and not before by
long persuasions; why sometimes by weak and slender, at other times not by any
means; why to virtue ofttimes contrary to our former natures and dispositions
without any occasion given, all sensible interests and motives clear against
it, whilst to another more easy and kindly to us we cannot be wrought. Nor
know we what becomes of any of those holy motions when they depart, or we
thrust them from us.

But if we should go about to dive into those hidden secrets of his Counsel,
why he should blow upon us, and not upon others as good as we; why upon the
Jews so fully, upon all the world besides so sparingly; why he should take this
woman from the Mill, and not the other that works by her; why of two in the
same bed he should refuse the one, and choose the other; why he should by the
same words and motions to two several men of the same tempers and education,
and at that time, as near as can be conjectured, in the same way and
disposition breath effectually upon the one, and not the other, save this man
presently, and leave the other to himself; we are here wholly at a loss, they
are mysteries of which we can say neither whence it is, nor whither it tends,
but only to the glory of his grace, and because it so pleases thee O blessed
Spirit.

And seeing now we have told you all we can of Sic Spiritus, of the first
similitude, the similitude betwixt the Wind and the Spirit, let us now see what
we can make of Sic Spiritu natus, of the second similitude betwixt the Spirit,
and every one that is born of it. So is every, etc.

II. General. That He that is born of the Spirit should be some way like it, is
no wonder, because he that is begotten may well be like him him that begets, he
that is born like her that bore him. But how he comes either to be so begotten
or born, or be so like, that may easily put us to a stand, yet that too will
come in as one part of the similitude. For four Points of likeness we shall
observe between the Spirit and him that is born of it, as we did before between
the Wind and the Spirit it self. Like they are in their Natures, in their
Operations, in their Sounds, and in their Motions, in the Evidence of those,
and the Obscurity of these.

1. They are like in Nature first. The Spirit spiritual and heavenly, and so is
he that is born of it. He breaths nothing but heaven, speaks nothing else,
lives there, his Conversation wholly there, Phil. iii. 20. his affections all
upon things above, his fashion not according to this World at all; his face,
his eyes, his hands, his feet, his ways look thither all. He is so like him
that he is now perfectly another thing than what he was before, new soul, new
understanding, new will, new affections, new all, body and all; that framed
into new obedience, quickened to a new life, a mere new creature, every way;
nothing of earth or flesh, but all Spirit now. You shall see the likeness of
his nature plainer in the second Resemblance, the likeness of his Actions and
Operations to those of the Spirit.

2. The Operations of the Spirit we told you, (1.) were calm, and peaceable,
and so are His who is born of the Spirit. Love, Joy, Peace, Long-suffering,
Gentleness, Goodness, Faith, Meekness, Temperance, these are the fruits of the
Spirit, Gal. v. 22. and he that has the Spirit, has all these: He that has not,
is none of his.

The Effects (2.) of the Spirit are purifying, refreshing, and quickening. And
he that has this Spirit, as well as he that has this hope the Apostle speaks
of, (1.) purifies himself from all uncleanness both of flesh and Spirit. Then
(2.) refreshes and comforts others, all that need it. And (3.) brings forth
also all good fruits, is fruitful in good works; they mistake sadly that think
themselves or others spiritual men without them.

And yet the strangest Operation is behind. The Spirit blows where it
lists. And can we make the Spirit and spiritual man agree here too? Let Us try
a little. Two things there are in it: A power and a liberty of blowing. It Is
evident there must be power to do any thing every where, and as evident there
must be liberty to do every thing any where. And both in power and liberty we
shall find them like; and first in power.

The Spirit is a Spirit of power, he that is born of it is a man of power. An
host of men cannot so much as make him afraid, Psalm. xxvii. 2. Sin it self
cannot overcome him; He that is born of the Spirit he sins not, 1 John v.
18. He is able, with Simeon, to break all the cords of it, to smite all such
Philistims before him, when this Spirit comes upon him. Nor Death, nor Life,
nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to
come, nor Height, nor Depth, nor any other Creature can overcome him, Romans
viii. 38. Over all these he is more than Conqueror. Those things which before
we were regenerate seemed impossible, when we are once born again are light and
easy; we can do any thing then through his Spirit that dwells in us.
Stablish us once with this free Spirit, and it is not cold or nakedness, hunger
or thirst, wearisome journeys, or dangerous shipwracks, stripes, or
imprisonments, racks, or gibbets, fire or faggot, that can force us from our
hold, or overpower us. This very Spirit upholds us in all our pains, and at
length blows away every thing that troubles or offends us.

Nor is this Spirit only a Spirit of Power, but (2.) of Liberty also, and where
the Spirit is, there there is Liberty, says St. Paul, 2. Cor. 3. 17. that is,
he that has it, is free too. Free he is (1.) from the bondage of Moses Law,
redeemed from under that, Gal. iv. 5, 6. Free (2.) though not from the
Obligations, yet from the Rigours of the Moral Law, Gal. iii. 13. Romans vii. 6.
Free (3.) from Sin, made free from that, Romans vi. 18. from the Dominion of it.
Free (4.) from the Captivity of the Devil, recovered out of his snares, 2 Timothy
ii. 26. Free, lastly, from the Dominion of Death, the sting of it is lost, the
victory of it gone, 1 Cor. xv. 55. So is every one free that is born of the
Spirit. Well may now his fame go out into all the World, and his name into all
the corners of the earth. And indeed, it does so in the next words, in the next
Point of the similitude, Thou hear the sound thereof. Evident it is, and
evident it is to any, heard it may be, and any one may hear it, Thou, and Thou,
and Thou, every Thou that will.

Evident it is first. The Spirit is not a fancy, nor are the Operations of it
so neither. The Spirit though it cannot be seen it self, yet something there is
of it that may be heard, heard, somewhat of it, by the hearing of the ear; the
effects not always in the understanding only; these very ears we carry are often
refresht with the sound of it; our very senses sensible of the strength and
power of it. And he that tells us of grace or Religion all within, of so
serving God in the Spirit, that neither our own, nor other bodies, are the
better for it, or show any signs of it, has turned his Religion and Devotion
into air and imagination, and not to Spirit. By his fruits you shall know as
well the spiritual man, as the Prophet.

Nor has he, secondly, one peculiar ear-mark, one tone and canting Dialect to
discern him by. He that is born of the Spirit is a free, and noble, and
generous Spirit, uses a Language that every body may understand. It Is not the
Mystery of the Spirit, but the Mystery of Iniquity that thus invelops it self
in a private and affected Phrase, which sounds ('it is to be feared) the Spirit
of Schism, Singularity, and Rebellion, and not of Love and Peace. And yet as
plain a sound as the Spirits is, it is not lastly without some obscurity, but
that is not of the sound; that is plain and open; but of the motion and course,
of which we may have leave to be ignorant, and in many things can be no other.
That Is the last point wherein the Spirit and spiritual man are like. Thou can
no more tell whence or whither those great things the regenerate man acts are,
than whence the wind or Spirit comes, or whither it goes.

4. But that so it is, the amazements and doubts that this Day possessed those
who were the witnesses of the wonders of this days work, and their several
judgments and conjectures concerning the Apostles this day filled with this
holy Spirit will make it without question. Some said, What means this? Others
said mocking, these men are full of new wine; All were amazed and in doubt,
Acts ii. 12, 13. The Apostles seemed such strange things to them now, since the
Holy Ghost had fallen upon them, that they knew not new what to make of them, or
of any thing they did. In the progress afterward of their lives and courses,
they were as little understood, as much misconstrued by the world. They were
thought fools and madmen, when most wise and sober, Acts xxvi. 24. condemned
for wicked when they were most innocent, reckoned the scum and offscouring of
the world, 1 Cor. iv. 13. when they were the Treasures and Jewels of it; judged
as dying, when they only truly lived; accounted sorrowful, yet were always
rejoicing; esteemed poor, yet so far from being so, that they made many rich;
thought to have nothing, and yet possessed all things, 2 Cor. vi. 9, 10. So it
was then, so it always was, so it ever will be. The World will never, never can
conceive the nature and way of him that is born of the Spirit, 1 Cor. ii. 14.
We know not what to make even of his (...) in the Text, whether to read it born
or begotten, for it is both; and how he should be both by the same Spirit, or
how the same Spirit should be both Father and Mother to him, we cannot tell.
How he is begotten by the Spirit; how he is new born; the ways of his brith,
the ways of his life, the way of his death; how he is wrought, and formed, and
molded out of his old, stiff, stubborn temper into mildness and softness; how
the old man is mortified in all his members; how the new man rises and grows in
all his parts; how he resists so many strong temptations; how he can so
cheerfully renounce the World, how he can so wholly deny himself, how he can so
merrily pursue a troublesome and despised virtue, why he should do all this
when there appears nothing but trouble, sorrow, and disadvantage by it, are all
mysteries so obscure and dark, that night it self is midday to them. Nor is it
less to see with what calmness and contentedness he passes hence through pains
and tortures, nor can we conceive the glory and happiness that attends him.
Thus is the spiritual Hero's life and death a mystery, so far above the
apprehension of dull-ey'd earth, that it knows no more of its course or motion
than it does of the winds, neither what it is, nor whence it comes, nor whither
it goes.

But after all these mysteries I end in plainness. It Is a Day, indeed, as well
as a Text of mysteries and wonders, but both Day, and Text, and Wind, and
Spirit will be all satisfied if they can leave these plain Lestons upon our
Spirits.

That (1.) we now get us up with Elij^h, 1 King. xix. 11. to the Mount of God,
get us often up to his holy places to expect this holy wind and spirit. (2.)
That there we wrap our faces in our Mantles as he did his in his, v. 13. cover
them with all reverence and humility to receive him. That (3.) we go out with
him too, and stand in the entry of our Caves, every one in his place ready to
worship and adore him when he comes. That (4.) we there listen carfully to the
sound he makes as he passes by, attentively to hear his voice, and know his
will, and do his pleasure. That (5.) we take the wings of the morning, as holy
David speaks, our earliest devotions and prayers to convey us to his presence,
that he may blow and breath upon us, and we daily find and feel him purifying,
quickening, and refreshing us, and every day more and more drawing nearer to us,
or us nearer to himself. And then no matter whether we know whence he comes, or
whither he goes, so he thus take us with him when he comes, and carry us
thither with him when he goes where he eternally with the Father and the Son
resides in glory.

Even so, O blessed and Eternal Spirit, blow upon us, and this day keep thy
Festival among us for Jesus Christ his sake, to whom with the Father and thy
self be all our wonder and admiration, all Worship and Adoratition, all our
praise and glory from this day for ever. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON Whitsunday.
St. JOHN xvi 13. Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide
you into all truth.
AND of such a Spirit never had the world more need than now, never more need
of one to guide us into all truth then at this time, wherein we are pestered
and surrounded all with Error, with all sorts of Error; never more need that
the Spirit of Truth should come, to guide us, than now when there are so many
spirits up and abroad, that men know not which to follow. Come Holy
Ghost-Eternal God never fitter to be sung than now.

For by the face of our Hemisphere, we may seem either to have lost him quite,
or with those in St. Peter, we may ask, Where is the Promise of his coming?
When he is come indeed, he will guide us into all truth, yea, but, when is
that? When comes he?

Why? this day he came; this day was this Scripture fulfilled; this day this
Promise made good, The Spirit of Truth came down from Heaven upon the Apostles
this day; so that from this day forward they spoke all tongues and truths, who
before were both ignorant of the one, and could not bear many of the other.

Well, but the Apostles are dead, and all the Disciples that could pretend to
those gifts and prerogatives are dead, and we neither speak with tongues by the
spirit, nor understand all truths any of us, nor can yet hear of any that do;
Is his Promise then utterly come to an end for evermore? Certainly either come
he is not, or lead us he does not, or into Truth he does not, or into but a
little, and that but very few of us; or we at this end of the world have no
part or portion in his coming: something or other there is, some reason or
other to be given why this Wind, this Spirit does not blow upon us.

That he is come, this day of Pentecost plainly tells us; that he is come not
to go again, Christ's own promise that he should abide with us for ever, St.
John xiv. 16. does assure us; that to us too it is he comes, though not
visibly, as this day, yet invisibly every day, (which is as much for truth,
though not for tongues) St. Peter tells us in his Sermon this day out of the
Prophet Joel, that the Spirit is to be poured upon all flesh, Acts ii* 17. so
upon ours too; and the Spirit for his part is always ready ever and anon
calling us to come, Rev. xxii. 17. So that the fault will lie upon our selves,
not the Spirit, that he guides us not into all truth.

The truth is, men are not disposed as they should be. He that looks into their
ways and pursuits after truth may see it without Spectacles. Other spirits are
set up, new lights advanced, private spirits preferred, all the people are
become leaders, every man thinks himself of age to answer for himself, and to
guide himself, so that there is either no body to be guided, (all the Lords
people being Kings and Priests, and Prophets) or else no body will be, but
according to their own fancies prejudices, interests and humors. This is the
true posture, the very face of Religion now adays, and the true reason that
this Spirit of Truth ceases to guide them into truth: For, He leads none but
those that will be led, and they will not. He is only sent to guide, not to
hale them on, or drive them forward. To you Disciples, such as are willing to
be taught, not to them that will be all Masters. To those that could not bear
all truths then, not to those that would not then, nor to those that will not
now, who make Christ's promise of none effect to themselves by their own
perverseness.

Time was (and this day it was) when He found men better disposed for his
coming, found them together at their Prayers, not, as now, together by the
ears; of one accord, not in Sects and Factions, waiting all for the Promise of
his coming, not preventing it as Saul did Samuels with a foolish Sacrifice,
only as himself confesses, lest the people should forsake him, 1 Samuel xiii. 11.
and as is usual now, not to stay the coming of the Spirit of Truth, but to set
up one of their own, no matter of what, to keep the people from scattering and
forsaking them, any spirit, so it can keep them to them. They were to wait for
the Promise of the Father, Acts i. 4. which was the Spirit of Truth. They did,
and had it. Do we so, and so we shall too. Our case still is the same with
theirs. They could not bear all truths together, no more can we. They stood in
need of daily teaching, we do more. They wanted a guide, we cannot go without
him. Truth is still as necessary to be known as then it was. To this purpose
was the Holy Spirit promised, to this purpose sent, to this purpose served, and
serve he does still, the necessity being the same, like to be the same for
ever; only fit we our selves to receive him when he comes; and howbeit things
look strangely, and this promise seems almost impossible now, the Spirit of
Truth will come, and when the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide them, etc.

The words are Christ's Promise of sending the Holy Spirit, now the fifth time
repeated, to raise up the spirits of the drooping Disciples, now ready to faint
and die away, upon the discourse of their Lords departure. He was now shortly
to bid adieu to the world and them; yet so much he loved them, that he would
not leave them comfortless, though himself, who was their only joy and comfort,
was to go away, yet he would not leave them without another Comforter. Though
he that was the way, must ascend, yet a guide should presently descend to guide
them after him; though he who was the Truth must back to Heaven, yet the Spirit
of Truth should forthwith come down to guide them into all truth to bring them
thither. So that here, even without a guide you may easily find two
Considerables.

1. The Advent, or coming of the Holy Spirit, when He the Spirit of Truth is
come. 2. The Intent or purpose of it, the end and benefit of his Advent or
coming. He will guide you into all Truth; that is the business.

In the First we shall consider, 1. His title, He The Spirit of Truth. 2. His
motion, Is Come. 3. His time, When, indefinite it is here, but a due time it
has, and we will strive to learn when it is. 4. His manner of coming, (1.)
Invisibly as a Spirit; (2.) Effectually as a Spirit of Truth; (3.) Gently and
(4.) Softly: both implied in the word or term of Coming. (5.) Suddenly too
sometimes, when he is come; as if so suddenly, that we should not feel or know
it till he is.

In the Second, the Intent or Benefit of his coming we shall observe,

(1.) The benefit, What it is; To lead. (2.) Whether? into truth. Into Truth,
(3.) How far? Into all Truth. Yea, but (4.) to Whom all these? to you, even to
lead you; You and you, and you, all of us, in our way, in our order, one after
another: Yea, but lastly, lead us, and into truth, and into all truth; but How?
(...) says the Text, show and make and draw us out a way, and conduct and move,
and actuate us in it.





When have thus considered them single and apart, we will join them again
together and so leave them. Tell you how the leading is always proportionate to
his coming, as he comes, so he leads, If he comes miraculously and
extraordinarily, so he leads; if invisibly and ordinarily, so he leads; as much
as he comes into us, so much he leads us; as is his coming, so is his leading
and no other, the one answerable to the other.

And lastly, all this we shall make good from Christ's promise here, (1) That
his Promise we have for it, who will not, cannot fail us, (2.) Promise upon
promise, (3.) a promise with a non obstante, with a Howbeit; that howbeit, all
else should fail, this should not; howbeit to the world this Spirit may prove
something else then a Guide, a Reprover or a Judge, yet to us he shall be a
guide into the way of truth. This will be the sum, these the heads of my
Discourse, which that I may happily pursue; Come thou O Spirit of Truth, and
guide my thoughts and words this day, that I may teach thy ways unto the
people, and declare thy Truth.

We are to begin with the Spirits Advent, or his Coming; for come to us he must
before he guide us; and that his entertainment may be according, enquire we;
first, Who it is? His Titles here will best inform you; He, the Spirit of, etc.

1. He, What Is He? He, is a relative, relates to an Antecedent, refers to some
person mentioned before. Who Is that? (1.) the Comforter, ver. 7. Who Is He? the
Comforter, (2.) which is the Holy Ghost, Chap. xiv. 26. (3.) One that the world
cannot receive, ver. 17. of the same Chapter, so great that the world, as wide
as it is, cannot contain him: so good, that the world, which (as St. John
speaks) lies in wickedness, cannot receive him; (4.) a Comforter that shall
abide for ever, ver. 16. an eternal Comforter, (5.) whom I will send unto you
from my Father, Chap. xv. 26. a heavenly Comforter; which proceeds from the
Father, the same verse, a Comforter who is the very Spirit of God, or God the
Spirit proceeding. This is He we speak of, this is He that is said here to
come, that is said still to come.

2. Well may the Evangelist stand and stop at his (...) here, stand and take
breath here at this He; as if he knew not how to go further, how to call him,
how to express him: He, the Comforter; he, that abides for ever; he, whom the
world cannot receive; he, the Holy Ghost; he that proceeds from the Father and
the Son, all this he had said already, and more he thought he could not say,
and therefore now here makes a halt, as I may say, He and no more, to give us
time to consider of the greatness of the person that is to come, and to prepare
for his coming.

Yet to confirm all that before he has said of him, as he began the promise of
him, Chap. xiv. ver. 16, 17. under the name of the Spirit of Truth, so he
concludes it with the same Title, that we might know, all that he has said is
truth, all that Christ has promised of him is no more than truth; for he is the
Spirit of Truth: The Spirit of Truth.

1. To make good and true all that Christ had promised, the very seal and
signature of our Redemption, Ephesians. iv. 30. to seal the conveyance of our
Inheritance to us, Ephesians. i. 14. to make that good, to bear witness with our
spirit that we are the Children of God, Romans viii. 16. to make all good to us
both in Heaven and in Earth.

2. He is the Spirit of Truth, because the Spirit of God and Christ. God is
Truth, and Christ is the Truth, St. John xiv. 16. and the Spirit of God he is,
1 Cor. ii. 11. and the Spirit of Christ he is, Phil. i. 19. so to be sure, the
Spirit of Truth, if of God and Christ.

3. The Spirit of Truth is the Spirit of Prophecy, Rev. xix. 10. those holy
men spoke as they were moved by the Holy Ghost, 2 Pet. i. 21. who spoke by the
Prophets, says the Nicene Creed, and Prophets they are not, but liars, who
speak not the truth, nor is it Prophecy, if it be not truth.

4. The Spirit of Truth, for that as he inspires grace, so he does truth too,
all supernatural truths to be sure: For truths there are many, and spirits
there are many, but no truth but from him, nor no Spirit of Truth but he
himself; He is the Fountain of Truth, as in him and from him it is we live and
breath; He breaths into us this breath of life, the spirit of life from this
Spirit; so from this Spirit of Truth all the truth that at any time breaths
from us, even natural truths and the truths of reason; but that is not it.
Inspired truths, spiritual truths, they, are the proper effects of this Spirit:
Other truths may be from him, nay, are originally all from him, as all good
from God that eternal source of goodness; but they may sometimes arise and
breath from our own spirits within, or be put into us by other spirits, by the
ministry of Angels from without, but inspired truths from this Spirit alone.

Angels indeed are sometimes the messengers of it, but never called the spirits
of it; they bring it, they do not breath it: When they have brought it and done
their message, be it never so true, never so comfortable, it will not comfort,
but amaze us; it will not sink into us, but ly only at our doors till this
Spirit breath and work it in. He alone Spiritus Veritatis, the Inspirer of
truth.

Hence it is that this Spirit of of all Spirits is only called the Comforter,
for that he only lets in the comfort to the heart whatever Spirit is the
Messenger. Be it the Angels, those Spirits and Messengers of heaven, or be it
the Ministers, those Messengers upon earth, with all the life and spirit they
can give their words, no comfort from either, unless this Spirit of truth blow
open the doors, inspire and breath in with them. Truth it self cannot work upon
our spirits but by the spiration of this Spirit of truth. It Is but a dead
Letter, a vanishing voice, a mere piece of articulate air, the best, the
greatest, the soundest truth no other, it has no spirit, it has no life, but
from this Spirit of truth.

To conclude this Point. It is not, when the Spirit of truth is come, or when
He, that is, the Comforter is come, though both be but one, he shall guide you,
neither title single, but He, the Spirit of truth, both together; to teach us
first, That the truth which this Spirit brings is full of comfort, always
comfortable. Startle us it may a little at the first, but then presently, Fear
not, comes presently to comfort us; trouble us it may a little at the first,
nay, and bring some tribulation with it, as times may be; but ere the verse be
out, ere the words be out almost, Be of good cheer, says Christ, it is but in
the world, and I have overcome the world, and in me ye shall have peace, St.
John xvi. 33. that came before; so that tribulation is encompassed with
comfort. Ye shall be sorrowful indeed, but your sorrow shall be turned into
joy, ver. 20. the first is no sooner mentioned, but the other follows as fast
as the Comma will let it. Christ's truth, and this Spirits truth is the
Comforters truth as well as the Spirits, and have not only spirit to act and
do, but comfort also in the doing, and after it to be sure. Nay,

Joined so (2.) He, the Spirit of truth, to teach us again, that nothing can
comfort us but the truth, no Spirit hold up our Spirits but the Spirit of
truth. Lies and falsehoods may uphold us for a time, and keep up our Spirits,
but long they will not hold; a few days will discover them, and then we are
sadder than at first. To be deluded adds shame to our grief; it is this Spirit
only that is the Spirit of our life, that keeps us breathing and alive; it is
only truth that truly comforts us; which even then when it appears most
troublesome, and at the worst, has this comfort with it, that we see it, that
we see the worst, need fear no more, whilst the joys that rise from false
apprehensions, or lying vanities, indeed from any thing below this Spirit of
truth and heaven, bring so much fear of a change, or close, or too sudden an
end, that I may well say they have no comfort with them. They flow not from
this Comforter, they come not from this Spirit, that is the reason they have no
Comfort, no Spirit in them. It may well occasion us as soon as we can to look
after this He, the Spirit of truth, and for our own sakes enquire where he is,
watch his motion, what, and whence, and whither it is.

2. To understand the motion and coming of the Spirit, what it means, we can
take no better way than to peruse the Phrases of the holy Book, under what
terms it elsewhere does deliver it. The first time we hear of it we read it
moving, Genesis i. 3. The next time striving with man, Genesis vi. 3. Then filling
him, Exodus xxxi. 3. Then resting upon him, Number. xi. 25. Sometimes he is said to
come, Judge. iii. 10. Sometimes to enter into us, Ezekiel. ii. 2. Sometimes to fall
upon us, Ezekiel. xi. 5. Sometimes to be put upon us, Number. xi. 29. Sometimes to be
put into us, Ezekiel. xxxvi. 27. Sometimes to breath, sometimes to blow upon us,
Isa. xl. 7. All these ways is he said to come; whether he move us to good, or
strive with us against evil, or fill us with sundry gifts and graces, or rest
upon us in their continuance; whether he comes upon us in the power of his
Administrations; or whether he enter as it were and possess us wholly as his
own; whether he appear in us, or without us; whether he come upon us so
suddenly, and unusually, that he seems even to fall upon us, or be put upon us
by ordinary ways and means; whether by imposition on, or breathing in; whether
by a softer breath, or a stronger blast; whether he come in the feathers of a
Dove, or on the wings of the wind; whether in Fire, or in Tongues; whether in a
visible shape, or in an invisible power and grace; they are his comings all,
sometimes one way, sometimes another, his comings they are all: Yet but some,
not all of his comings, for all his ways are past finding out, and teach us a
Lesson against curiosity in searching his outgoings.

And yet, this word Come sounds somewhat hard for all this still: Did we not
say he was God? And can God be said to come any whither, who is every where?
Nay, of this very Spirit expressly says the Psalmist, Psalm. cxxxix. 7. Whither
shall I go then from thy Spirit? And if I cannot go from him, what needs his
coming? Coming, here, is a word of grace and favor; and certainly, be we never
so much under his eye, we need that, need his grace, need his favor: Nay, so
much the more because he is so near us, that so we may do nothing unworthy of
his presence. But He speaks to us after the manner of men, who if they be
persons of quality, and come to visit us, we count it both a favor and honor:
So by inversion when God bestows either favors or honors on us, when this
holy Spirit bestows a grace, or a gift, or a truth upon us that we had not
before, then is he said to Come to us.

I need not now trouble my self much to find out whence he comes. Every good
and perfect gift comes from above, says St. James, Iam. i. 17. From heaven it
is he comes, from the Father, he sends him, St. John xiv. 26. From the Son, he
sends him too in this very Chapter, ver. 7. And this is not only the place
whence he comes, but here are the persons too whence he proceeds. So that now
we have gained the knowledge, not only of his temporal, but his eternal coming
to; his eternal Procession, which though it be not the coming promised or
intended here; yet, coming, here upon the Context and Coherence, relating so
evidently to sending, gives us but a just occasion both to remember to whom we
owe this benefit, the Father and the Son, the greatness of it, in that it is no
less than infinite, the Spirit of God, God himself.

And it is but fit here and every where to take notice of it, that as the whence
is above, so the whither is beneath, very much beneath him. But we reserve that
to a fitter place, when we come to the persons that are guided by him. It Is
best now to suspend a while the search of the nature to enquire into the time
and manner of his coming. But the time is next. When he is come.

3. Yea, but when is that? Sane novum supervenisse spiritum nova desideria
demonstrant, says St. Bernard; you may know he is come by the desires he works
in you, when those begin to be spiritual, hearty, sincere, and true to God,
then is the Spirit of truth come into you; if you begin to long, and breath,
and gasp after heaven it is a sign some heavenly breath of the Spirit, at least,
is slipped into you.

2. When this Spirit that pants and beats after God within, breaths out at the
lips too ere it be long in prayers to God, and praises of him, in good
communication; all bitterness, and malice, and evil speaking, and vanity too
being laid aside as becomes Saints. This is a good sign too, a true sign too,
if it be not merely, godly Phrases taken up to make a show, or to deceive; if
it proceed from the heart and inward Spirit.

3. But the surest sign of it is in the hand, in the works, if they be such as
are the genuine fruits of the Spirit, Love, joy, peace, long-suffering,
gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance, Gal. v. 23. These are the
Spirits perpetual attendants when he comes. Boast men may of the Spirit, but if
they have no love, if they be not the Sons of peace, if patience and
long-suffering be no virtue with them, if gentleness appear not in their
carriage, if goodness and bounty to the poor abound not in them as well as
faith, if they be not meek, and humble, and sober, and temperate, temperate in
diet, in apparel, in language, in passion, and affections, and all things else,
boast they while they will of the Spirit, and the Spirit of truth, that they
have it, work and move by it, are guided by it, it will prove but the Spirit of
error, or the Spirit of giddiness, or the Spirit of slumber, (they do but dream
it) or but their own Spirit, at the best, for such a one we read of, and of
Prophets that went according to it, Ezekiel. xiii. 3. foolish Prophets, that
follow their own spirit, and have seen nothing; ignorant Prophets, who know
nothing, yet pretend they know more than all the Learned, all the Fathers that
are gone; crafty Foxes only they are, says the Prophet, ver. 4. cunning to
spoil and ravine; that seduce the people, saying, peace, when there is no
peace, ver. 8. they build and dawb with untempered mortar, ver. 10. build up
Babel the house of confusion, and plaster up all the Scriptures Texts that are
against them with incoherent Comments, wild distinctions and interpretations,
that stick together like untempered mortar; they make the righteous sad, and
strengthen the hands of the wicked, that he should not return from his wicked
way, by promising him life, ver. 22. and yet they there pretended the Spirit;
that he was come to them, and God had sent them, when indeed it was no other
Spirit from the Lord than such a one as came from him upon Saul when the good
Spirit was departed from him. The Spirit of truth wants no such covering, no
such mortar, makes not the righteous sad, makes no body sad by any oppression,
joy is the fruit of it; strengthens not the wicked in his wickedness, it is all
for justice and righteous dealing. And where it comes upon any, it as Samuel
foretold it, 1 Samuel x. 6. and Saul found it, 1 Samuel x. 9. gives him another
heart, turns him into another man. The new man St. Paul calls it, created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. iv. 2.

Indeed, there was another kind of coming of his this Day. He came to day not
only into the hearts, but upon the heads of the Apostles; sat there, and
thence dispersed his heavenly light into rays and flames; came down in wind, and
fire, and tongues; in wind, to show that it was the Holy Spirit, the very
breath of heaven; that came in fire, to signify the light of truth it brought;
and in tongues, to express it to the world. But it was his Inauguration day,
the first solemnity of his appearance, that so both the Disciples and the World
might know that come he was whom Christ had promised, and be convinced by a
visible apparition, who else would not have been convicted by any inward
evidence which had been without it.

But thus he appeared but only once. In the effect of Tongues indeed, but not
in the appearance of them, he twice afterward fell upon some Disciples, upon
the Centurion and his Company the first fruits of the Gentiles, Acts x. 46. and
upon those Disciples at Ephesus, who knew nothing but John's Baptism, that so
they might sensibly find the difference of John's Baptism and Christ's, Acts
xix. 6. They both, as soon as they were baptized, spoke with tongues, says the
Text; the one so honored, to teach this truth, that in all Nations, whoever
does righteousness shall be accepted, the Gentiles now in Christ as well
accepted as the Jews; the other so highly favored, that imperfect Christians
might be encouraged to go on, and not be dismayed to see so many glorious
Professors so exceedingly transcend them.

These comings were miraculous; only to found Christianity, and settle an
Article of Faith, the Article of the Holy Ghost, never distinctly known to the
world till Christianity arose. Christ himself was fain to confirm his Divinity
by signs and miracles; and the Godhead of the Holy Ghost can be persuaded by
no less. But this once done, he was to lead us by an ordinary tract, no longer
now by sight, but faith, that salvation might be through faith, 1 Pet. i. 5.
and the blessing upon them who have not seen, and yet have believed, St. John
xx. 29.

This I must needs say seems the prime and proxime meaning of the words, but
not the full, When he is come, points chiefly and nearest at this his first and
nearest coming, but not only at it. Else are we in an ill case now, if no
spirit to come to us, no guide to lead us, no truth to settle us. It must
extend beyond that his visible coming, to the ways of his coming unto us still,
unseen and unheard; or however expedit vobis, it was expedient for them that
Christ should go away, that the Comforter might come, for us it is not I am
sure, if we have none to come. Settle we therefore this for an Article of our
faith, that he comes still. I told you before how you should know it by his
breathings inwardly in you good thoughts and desires, his breathings outwardly
good words and expressions, by his workings with you, good life and actions, in
a word, by his gifts and graces.

But if this be all, why is it now said, When he is come? Came he not thus
before to the Patriarchs and Prophets? were not they partakers of his gifts,
moved and stirred and actuated by him? why then so much ado about Christ's
sending him now, and of his coming now, as if he was never sent, never came
before?

We read indeed in the Old Testament often of his coming, never of his sending
but by way of promise, that God would send, or of prophecy, that he should be
sent, and that but once neither expressly, Psalm. civ. 30. Emittes spiritum and
creabuntur. So, though come he did, in those days of old, yet voluntarily,
merely we might conceive never sent, never so distinct a notion of his person
then; then only as the Spirit of God, now as the Spirit of the Father and the
Son; then only as the Power of God, now as a Person in the Godhead. This the
first difference between his coming then and now.

2. Then he came as the Spirit of Prophecy, now as the Spirit of Truth, that
is, as the very truth and fulfilling of it, of all the former Prophesies.

3. Then upon Judea, and few else besides, it may be Job in the land of Vz, and
Rahab in Jericho, and Ruth in Moab, here and there, now and then one; now upon
all flesh; upon Jew and Gentile both alike, the partition wall like the walls
of Jericho, blown down by the breath of this Spirit, by the blast of this horn
of the most High.

4. Then most in types and shadows, now clearly and in truth.

5. Then sparingly, they only sprinkled with it, now poured out, Ioel's
Effundam fulfilled, Acts ii. 1. a common phrase become now; full of the Holy
Ghost, Acts vii. 55. and filled with the Spirit, Ephesians. v. 18.

6. Then he came and went, lighted a little, but staid not, motabat, or
volitabat, flew or fluttered about, moved and stirred them at times, as it did
Sampson, Judge. xiii. 25. coming and going; now it is he is come. He sat him
down upon the Apostles, Acts ii. 3. sat him down in the Chair at their Synod,
Acts xv. 28. Visum est Spiritui Sancto and nobis; calls us his Temples now, not
his Tabrnacles, places of a during Habitation, and is to abide with us for ever.

Lastly, Then he came to help them in the observance of the Jewish and Moral
Law, now to plant and settle an obedience to the Christian Faith. For Christ
being to introduce a more perfect and explicate faith in the blessed Trinity,
and a Redeemer, to wean men from the first elements and beggarly rudiments, as
the Apostle calls them, to raise them from earthly to heavenly promises, to
elevate them to higher degrees of love and hope, and charity, and virtue and
knowledge, and being besides to arm them against those contradictions and
oppositions that would be made against them by the world, those persecutions
and horrid ways of martyrdom they were to encounter with in the propagation of
the Christian Faith; for these ends it was necessary that the Spirit of Truth
should come anew, and come with power, as it did at first with wonder, that by
its work and power those great and glorious truths might be readily received
and embraced. For this seems the very end of his coming, to convince the world,
ver. viii. of this Chapter, and to testify of him; Chap. xv. 26. and to
glorify him, in the very next verse to the text, ver. 14. to evince this new
revealed truth to the souls and consciences of men, that Messiah was come, that
Jesus was the Christ, that the Jewish Sacrifices were now to have an end, that
the Prophesies were all fulfilled in him, that his Law was now to succeed in
the place of Moses's, that he justified where the Law could not; that through
him now, in his Name, and in none other Salvation henceforth was to be preached
to Jew and Gentile, and God had opened now that door of hope to all the world.
To bear witness to this, and persuade this truth, so opposite to Natural and
Jewish reason, or so much above the ordinary reach of the one, and the received
customs of the other; thus to enhance Piety and Perfection, thus to set up
Christ above the Natural and Mosaic Law; thus now to glorify God in Christ,
and Christ as Christ; need there was, great need that the Spirit of Truth
himself should come himself, after a new fashion, in a greater manifestation of
his power than in former times, bring greater grace because he required of us a
greater work.

All this while we have given you but general notions of his coming, either
when he first came in his fullness, on the Apostles and first Disciples; or
when, secondly, he comes on any, as the Holy Spirit, in good motions and
affections: We are yet to see when he comes as the Spirit of Truth: to descend
now* thirdly, to a distinct and particular enquiry, When the Spirit of Truth is
in us, or come to us; when we have him in us?

Nor is this way of consideration less necessary than the other; though (it may
be) harder far, for so much as we daily see many a pious Christian Soul seduced
into Error, in whom yet we cannot doubt but the Holy Spirit has a dwelling:
many a good man also err in many opinions; of whose portion of the good Spirit
we make no question: whilst some, many, others of less Piety, it may be none,
more fully know the truth than either of the other.

Understand therefore there is a double way of knowing even divine truth, (1.)
the one by the way of natural reason, by principles and conclusions rationally
and logically deduced out of the evidences of Scripture: (2.) the other by
particular assents and dissents of the Understanding and Will purified and
sanctified to all ready obedience to Christ.

By the first, it comes that the greatest Scholars, the most learned and
rational men know always the most truths both speculative and practick both in
their Principles and Inferences, and are therefore always fittest to determine
doubts, and give counsel and direction both what to believe and what to do, in
all particular controversies and debates which concern either Truth or Error,
or Justice and Injustice, Right or Wrong, the practices and customs of former
times and Churches, or their contraries and disuses; and this may be done
without the Spirit of Sanctification, or the holy sanctifying Spirit, under
that title at least, though indeed under another title it comes from him; as
the gift of Tongues, or Interpretation, or Prophecy, or the Word of Wisdom, or
the Word of Knowledge, are reckoned by the Apostle to come from the same Spirit,
1 Cor. xii. 8. it may be, most properly from him as he is the Spirit of Truth.

By the second way of knowledge it comes to pass, that men of less capacities;
and lower understandings, applying their affections as well as understandings
to embrace the Truth, do know and understand it more effectually, are more
resolute in the defense of it, express it better in their lives, and know more
sometimes of the particular ways of God in his particular Providence and
Direction of the affairs of his Saints, (for of this kind of wisdom the fear of
the Lord always is the beginning) and it often happens of the passages of the
World too, as they relate to Gods disposing order. Yet by reason of the
inabilities of understanding, or want of the course or means of knowledge, it
falls out that they oftener err in the conceits and apprehensions of things
than the other. And more than so, it as often comes to pass, whether to humble
them when they begin to be proud of their holiness and piety, and think
themselves so much above other men, wiser, better, more holy, more righteous
than they; or to punish them for some particular sin, as disobdience, curiosity
of enquiring into depths above them, singularity, discontentedness, self
seeking, or the like; or to stir up their endeavors now beginning to languish;
or to make them yet more circumspect and wary in their ways; for these or some
such causes, I say, it comes to pass that God suffers them to run into grand
and enormous errors, foul and foolish extravagancies of opinion, which if once
they trench on practice, and are deliberate in, or might with easy industry
have been avoided, even grieve and quench that Holy Spirit that was in them,
and expel him too; but if their errors be unvoluntary, not easy for them at
that time to be avoided, or of lesser moment, stand they may with the Spirit of
Grace, and they good men still.

How therefore now shall we know what is from the Spirit of Truth, when he
comes so to us, is but a necessary enquiry; yet the resolution is hard and
difficult I know no better way to resolve you than by searching the nature of
this Spirit of Truth, as Christ has pleased to express him in his last most
holy and comfortable Discourse, of which the Text is but a part, the several
expressions of whose nature and office set together, will I am confident assure
us of a way to discern the Spirit of truth, when it is that He speaks in us.
You may turn your leaves and go along with me.

Chap. xiv. 17. The Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot receive; so then
(1.) if the Article or Opinion which we receive be such an one as the world
cannot, if it be contrary to worldly interests, carnal respects, sensual
pleasures, it is a good sign at first. If it cannot enter into a carnal or
natural man's heart, if man's wisdom teach it not, as the Apostle speaks, 1 Cor.
ii. 13. if it grow not in the garden of nature, that is a good sign it is the
Spirit of truth is come that thus enables us to receive a Doctrine so
disadvantagious and displeasing.

Look into the next verse, ver. 18. I will not leave you comfortless; If then
(2.) it be such an assertion that has good ground in it to rest upon, that will
not fail us in distress, that will stick by us in our deepest agonies, comfort
us in our greatest discomforts, not leave us when all earthly comforts do, then
it is from above, then it is a true comfort, a truth from this He, this Spirit of
truth that is the Comforter too.

See next. v. 26. He shall teach you all things, bring all things to your
remembrance whatsoever I have said unto you. If then (3.) it be an assertion
that carries the analogy of faith along with it, that agrees with all the other
principles of Christian faith, that is, according to the rule of Christ's holy
word, that soberly and truly brings to our remembrance what he has said at any
time, or done for us, that remembers both the words that he spoke, and the
deeds that he has done; his actions and example, if it be according to his
example of humility, obedience, patience, and love, if it bring us heartily to
remember this Christ's pattern in our lives and opinions too, then it comes from
him that should come, and is worth your receiving and remembering it.

In the same verse again, in the words just before, he is called the Comforter
and Holy Ghost, who is also there promised to teach us too. And if the Doctrine
be such, that not only comforts us in the receiving and remembrance, but such
also as becomes Comforters too, that teaches us to comfort others, the poor and
needy, the afflicted and distressed, and to do it holily too as by the Holy
Ghost, that is with good and pure intentions, and do it even to their Ghosts
and Spirits as well as to their bodies if it teach true holy Ghostly spiritual
counsel, and all other convenient comfort to them our Christian brethren: Then
it is (4.) a doctrine from this Spirit of truth, he comes in it.

Turn ye now to Chap. xv. 23. But when the Comforter is come, whom I will send
unto you from the Father, even the Spirit of truth, which proceeds from the
Father, etc. When the Doctrine (5.) is no other than what either establishes
the Doctrine of the holy Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; or contradicts
it not, and in all benefits received refers thanks and acknowledgment to the
one as well as the other; as from the one, through the other, by a third. In
this particular it is no other than the Spirit of truth, for no other Spirit
can reveal it.

Go on now through the verse. He shall testify of me. The Doctrine (6.) that
bears witness of Christ, that he is God, that he is Man, that he is Christ the
Savior of the World, that he came to save sinners, all whosoever would come to
him, not a few particular ones only; that he is a complete and Universal
Savior, such as he professed himself by entertaining all comers, sending his
Spirit and Apostles into all Nations, commanding them to preach to every
creature, which are no other than his own words, this is also from the Spirit
of truth; a Doctrine worthy Him that is the Comforter, that brings so general a
comfort with it.

Step now into the next Chapter, Chap. xvi. to which we owe the Text. When he
is come he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment,
ver. 8. When the Doctrine is (7.) such as it reproves the world of sin; that it
can do no good of it self, that it is full of evil and corruption, convinces
it, and finds fault with it for infidelity and unbelief; sets up Christ's
righteousness, and blames the world for neglecting it, and following its own
vanity, interests, and humors; professes the Prince of the world cast out by
Christ, the devil overcome and brought to to judgment by him, our sins
forgiven, we acquitted, and the World condemned; this cannot be from the Spirit
of the World, nor from the Spirit of the Flesh, nor from the Spirit of darkness
and error, (for this were to bear witness against themselves) but from the
Spirit of light and truth.

Read the Text now over again, When he, etc. he shall guide you into all truth.
If it be the Spirit of truth that informs you, it will (8.) dispose you equally
to all truth, not to this only, or to that, which most agrees with your
education, humor, temper, or disposition, condition, custom, interest, or
estate, but universally to all, to any though never so hard or opposite to
them, so they be truths. He that is thus affected toward truth, is not only
probable to be directed into truth, in all his Doctrines and Assertions, but
may most properly be said to have the Spirit of truth already come, speaking
and residing in him.

Yet go a little further to the next words. He shall not speak of himself, but
whatsoever he shall hear; that Spirit (9.) that does not seek it self, that
opinion which renounces the glory of a Leader, the ambition of a Faction, the
affectation of Singularity, the honor of himself, that speaks not of its own
head, but what he has heard with his ears and his Fathers have declared as done
in the time of old; that makes not new opinions, but takes up the old, such as
Christ delivered to the Apostles, they also to the Fathers, they downward to
their successors, this is most probably, if not most certainly the Spirit of
truth. The Spirit sure of humility it is, that trusts not, relies not on its
self or its own judgment, and the Spirit of humility is the Spirit of truth;
for them that be meek and humble, them shall he guide in judgment, and such as
be gentle, them does he learn his way, Psalm. xxv. 8.

Yet on a little: And he will show you things to come. Those Doctrines (10.)
that refer all to the world to come, which mind nothing seriously but things
above, and things to come, which ever and only teach us to fix there, they are
surely from the Spirit of truth, because no truth like that which is to fulfill
all promises, and that to be sure is yet to come.

One more glance and I have done with this; and it is but a glance to the very
next words: He shall glorify me. Those Doctrines which give God all the glory,
which return the glory of all to Christ, which so exalt man only as the better
thereby to glorify God; so set up Christ, as that they make him both the
healer of our nature, and the preserver of it, the remitter of our sins, and
the conferrer of Grace; the first mover of us to good, the assister of us in
it, the sanctifier of us with it, the justifier of us through it, the rewarder
of us for it, and yet all this while the accepter of us when we have done the
best; which accuses not Christ of false judgment in justifying the sinner
whilst he is no better, and pronouncing him just when he is no other than
wicked and unjust, nor denies the efficacy of his grace to make us clean, to
have a true cleansing, purifying, sanctifying power, as well as that which they
call the justifying: these Doctrines which take not this glory away from
Christ, but give the power as well of making as pronouncing righteous to his
grace, that thus magnify and glorify his Justification and Redemption, they
certainly glorify Christ, are the only Doctrines that glorify Christ truly,
and according to the Spirit of truth.

So now let us sum up the matter. Those Doctrines which are contrary to worldly,
carnal, sensual respects, not conceivable by the natural or carnal man; That
(2.) stick by us when worldly comforts leave us; That (3.) are according to
Christ's Word and his Example, accompanied with Meekness and Obedience; Which
(4.) teach us charity and love to one another; Which (5.) inform us rightly in
the prime Articles of the Faith; Which (6.) witness nothing more than Christ an
universal Savior, as Adam the universal sinner; Which (7.) reprove the sins
and infidelities of the World, and show us the way to be acquitted from them;
Which (8.) have a kind, of conduct and sincere affection with them to all
truths whatsoever, under whatever term or name, though never so odious, so
contrary to interest or honor; Which (9.) seek not their own name, to get a
name, or set up a Faction, but are consonant to the ancient Fathers and
Primitive Antiquity, with humble submission to it; Which (10.) lift up all our
thoughts to heaven; and (11.) by all means possible can give God, and Christ,
and the holy Spirit the glory, deny nothing to them that is theirs, under a
foolish pretense only to abate and vilify man beyond the truth; these
Doctrines are truth, so much of them, at least, as agree with these Rules, are
from the Spirit of truth, and are manifestations, that the Spirit of truth is
come to that soul that embraces them: If all these together, then the Spirit
altogether; if but some of these, but some, so much of that neither. All
Doctrines and Opinions (1.) that savor of worldly or carnal interests; that
(2.) change and wheel about according to the times, and will not hold out to
the last; which (3.) are not regulated by the Word of God, or are any way
contrary to Christ's Example of Patience and Obedience; Which (4.) are not for
peace and charity; Which (5.) deny any Article of the three Creeds we
acknowledge; Which (6.) confine the mercies of our Savior, and bear false
witness of him; Which (7.) advance any sin, or suffer men to live in it; Which
(8.) love not truth because it is truth, but for other ends; Which (9.) seek
any other title to be distinguished by than that of Christian, or glories in
it, which disagree from the stream and current of Antiquity; Which (10.) fixes
our thoughts too much below; Or (11.) rob God, or Christ, or the holy Spirit of
the glory of any good, or the perfection of their work; be they cried up never
so high for truth, and Spirit, the new discovery of Christ, and new light of
truth, and the very dictate of the Spirit, they are not so; it is not when, nor
then that the Spirit of truth is come; there is not that in them by which
Christ has described the Spirit of truth.

One thing there is behind, when all these requisites before are found in any
Doctrine or Opinion; this Doctrine indeed may be such as comes from the Spirit
of truth, yet accepted and entertained it may be through some other Spirit,
upon some sinister end or ground; that therefore it may not only be the truth
of the Spirit, but have the very Spirit of truth with it, that it may be
evident it not only comes from him, but that he also is come with it, it must
be sincerely and intimately embraced with our very hearts and spirits out of
love to truth, not any interest or by-respect, and well habituated and actuated
in us, before we can say directly that the Spirit of truth is come. Some truth
or other may be come, some ray and beam of his light be sent before him, but
himself not yet fully come; for all truth comes along with him, though not
actually altogether, yet a hearty resolute affection to all of it, all truth
altogether, as God shall let it come.

I have been somewhat long in this particular, about the Spirits coming, because
I see the World so much mistaken in it, so often crying, Lo! here he is, lo!
there he is, lo! here he comes, lo! there he comes, when indeed he is nor here,
nor there, with neither of them, nor coming to them. A word now of the manner
of his coming.

4. And that is (1.) Invisibly, for so comes a Spirit. This is the coming we
hold by, and had he not come, when he came, as well invisibly into the hearts
as visibly upon the heads of the Disciples, their Tongues, though all the
tongues of men and Angels would have profited them nothing; the fire then, had
it not enflamed their hearts and affections with a holy flame, as well as
encompassed their heads; would have only lighted them with more glory into
eternal fires. Had not this wind blown as well within as that did without them,
it would have blowed them little good. Tongues, and Prophecy, Interpretations,
Miracles, and the rest, are but dona gratis data, gifts more for others good
than for our own; they do not make us better in his sight, it is the invisible
grace that makes us accepted. Nay, yet those very gifts and administrations,
however the appearance was without, were wrought within by his invisible
operation. So that to the Apostles as much as to our selves, his invisible
coming is the only, truly, comfortable coming.

That (2.) is Effectual too. To come truly is to come effectually; and in that
he is called the Spirit of truth, it is plain he must effect what it is he comes
for, or it is not true and real. It was a mighty rushing wind, he this day came
in; so mighty, so effectual, that it at once converted three thousand souls;
the Spirit of power is one of his names, and the pulling down of strong holds,
casting down every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge of God, and
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ is one of his
works, 2 Cor. x. 4, 5.

3. He comes gently, (that is the common pace of one that is only said to come.)
Gently, step by step, grace after grace, gift after gift, truth after truth,
leads by steps, comes by degrees; not all grace at a clap, all gifts in a
trice. Nay, as hastily as it seemed to come this day, St. Peter, the chief of
them, was a while after at a loss for a truth, had not, it seems, all truths
together: Of a truth now I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, Acts
x. 34. before it seems he perceived it not; no more did the other Apostles
neither, who were all in the same error, and convented him about this new
truth, and contended with him about it. Acts xi. 2.

4. Nay, softly too; as dew into a fleece of Wool, without noise, without
clamor, no way like the Spirits now adays; I will put my Spirit upon him, and
he shall not cry, nor lift up, nor cause his voice to be heard in the streets,
Isa. xlii. 1, 2. He is the Spirit of meekness who is the Spirit of truth, and
truth is never taught so soon, so effectually as by softness and meekness; the
meek the best to teach, the best to be taught.

5. Yet as gently and softly as he comes, he is often upon us on a sudden, ere
we are aware. God uses to prevent us with the blessings of goodness, as the
Psalmist speaks, Psalm. xxi. 3. He is come, sometimes, before we think of it.
Our hearts are in his hand, and he suddenly turns them whither he will. Saul
does but turn him about from Samuel and God gives him presently another heart,
1 Samuel x. 9. Samuel no sooner anoints David, but from thence-forward the Spirit
came upon him, 1 Samuel xvi. 13. And this note is made, not that you should
always look for miraculous changes, and expect the Spirit without so much as
setting your selves to seek him, but to make you watch continually, and wait
for him, that though he come suddenly, he may not find you unprepared, the
doors shut upon him, that he may not go as he comes for want of entertainment.

Yet the Phrase will bear another expression of the manner of his coming. When
he is come, that is, when he is grounded and well settled in us, the Tense is
the Aorist, a Preterperfect signification; signifies not coming, but perfectly
come. This is not actually always to every one* he comes to, yet his intent it
is in all his coming, to stay and abide with us, and so he does till we drive
him thence. But if we do not, if we let him stay, and dwell, and remove him
not, then will he guide us into all truth; that is the End and Intention of his
coming the next Point. But I am beyond my intent and time already; I shall only
sum up this last particular of the manner of his coming and let you go.

You will peradventure understand it best by considering how the Spirit moved
in the Creation, the order the same in creating the new man in the soul that he
there observed in creating of the World.

Now in the first Creation of the World,

He first moved upon the waters, then created light, and divided it from
darkness; he next divides the Waters, and places a Firmament between them; then
(3.) gathers the Waters together, and makes dry land appear, and bring forth
grass, and herbs, and trees, bearing seed; then (4.) makes two glorious Lights
to rule the day, and night, and times, and years; then (5.) creates fowl, and
fish, and beasts; and lastly makes man after his own Image.

Thus does he in this new Creation, or Regeneration. He first moves and stirs
us up to good, then darts in some glimmerings of light to show us our own
darkness, sins, and wretchedness; Then next (2.) divides the passions and
powers of the soul, and sets them their bounds, employs some in things above,
whilst some other are left beneath; Then (3.) presently makes the dry and
barren soul sprout out, bring herbs, and leaves, and seeds, into green
flourishing desires, holy resolutions and endeavors which carry with them
seed, much hope of increase; (4.) To cherish these green and tender sprouts, to
direct and rule these resolutions, desires, and endeavors, two Lights he
makes, true rectified reason, and supernatural grace, to guide them what to do
at all seasons, days, and years, and many little Stars, many glimmerings of
truth begin then to discover themselves, which before did not. After all this
(5.) the sensitive faculties in their course and order bring forth their living
creature according to their kind, submit themselves to the command of the
superior reason; And then lastly, when the Spirit has thus totally renewed the
face of the earth, of our mind and affections is the new man created after the
likeness and image of God in righteousness and true holiness. This the course,
this the order of the Spirits coming, He comes moving upon the waters of
repentance, and first enlightens the darkness of our souls, he orders all our
faculties and powers, he makes us fruitful to good works, he daily increases
divine light and heat within us; he reforms our sense, subdues our passions,
regulates our reason, sanctifies them all, comes in light, comes in grace,
comes in truth, comes in strength, comes in power, that we might in his
strength and power come one day all in glory.

And now, he that thus created the old World, and still creates the new, new
create and make us new, and pray we all, with holy David, Psalm. li. 10. Create,
O Lord, in us new hearts, and renew right spirits within us. Cast us not, O
Lord, for ever, though we are now full of errors, from thy presence, and keep
not thy holy Spirit from us, but let thy Spirit of truth come down and guide us
out of our wanderings, give us the comfort of his help again, guide us again
into the ways of truth, and stablish us there with thy free Spirit, and that
for the merits and mercies of thine only Son, who here promised to send him,
and this day accordingly sent him to guide us to himself, from grace to grace,
from truth to truth, from truth below to true happiness above, Jesus Christ our
Savior. To whom, etc.

THE THIRD SERMON UPON Whitsunday.
St. JOHN xvi 13. Howbeit when He the Spirit of Truth is come] He will guide
you into all truth.
AND He this day began to guide; has continued guiding ever since, will go on
guiding to the end, began it with the Apostles, continued it to the Church, and
will continue it to it to the end of the World.

Indeed he that looks upon the face of the Christian Churches now, would be
easily tempted to think, that either the time was not yet come, that it should
be fulfilled, or that it had been long ago, and his promise come utterly to an
end for evermore. For so far are we from a guide into all truth, that we have
much ado to find a guide in truth, false guides and false spirits are so rise;
so far from being guided into all truth, that it is nearer truth to say into all
error; as if this guide had quite forsaken us, or this promise belonged not at
all to us. Yet for all that, to us it is.

For the truth is; it is not this Guides, this Spirits fault, but ours, that
this all truth is so nigh none at all. He will guide still, but we will not be
guided. And into all truth too he will, but we will not; we will have no more
than will serve our turn, stand with our own humor, ease and interest; that is
the reason why he guides not now as in the days of the Apostles, the first
times, the times of old. We will not let him; we cannot bear it, as it is in
the verse before; or worse, we will not bear, we will not endure it, every one
will be his own guide, go his own way, make what truth he pleases, or rather
what him pleases the only truth, every one follow his own spirit, that is the
reason why we have so little of the Spirit of Truth among us. There are so many
private spirits that there is no room for this.

Yet if into all, or indeed any truth that is worth the name of saving, we would
be guided; to this One we must return, to one spirit, or to no truth. There is
but one Trurth and one Spirit, all other are but fancies. He that breaks the
unity of the Spirit, that sets up many spirits, sets up many guides, but never
a true one; chance he may perhaps into a truth, but not be guided to it, and as
little good come of it where the analogy of Scripture and Truth must needs be
broken by so many differing and divided spirits. It Is time we think of holding
to one Spirit, that we may all hold the same Truth, and in time be led into it
all. The only question is, Whether we will be led or no? If we will not, the
business is at an end. If we will, we must submit to this Spirit, and his
guidance, his manner and way of guiding: By so doing we shall not fail in any
necessary saving truth; He will guide us into all truth.

Which that he may, as I have heretofore out of the former words told you of
his coming* so shall I now by his assistance out of these latter tell you of
his guiding; for to that intent and purpose he came to day, and comes every
day, came at first, and comes still, comes (1.) to guide, to guide (2.) into
truth, (3.) into all truth, (4.) even you and all into it, yet (5.) to guide
only, not to drive or force us; to guide after his own way and fashion, not our
fancy; of which, lastly, we need not doubt or make a question, he will do it.

So that now the Parts of the Text will plainly rise into these Propositions*
1. That though Christ be gone, he has not left us without a guide, but has sent
Him that shall guide us still. 2. That He that shall do it is He, that very He,
that is, the Spirit of Truth, just before. No other can. 3. That guide
therefore into truth, he will, no other will. 4. That he will guide not into
this truth, or that truth only, but into all. 5. That he will guide even us
too. You, and you, and you, us as well as those that were before us; all is but
You. 6. That he will do it yet but after his own way and fashion, (...), after
the way he comes; after as he comes, so will he guide, set us a way to find the
truth, and guide us after that way and no other. 7. That for certain so it is.
He will, Howbeit he will, though yet he has not, though yet we peradventure
will not or cannot endure to be guided, yet when we will set our selves to it,
He will guide us into etc. it shall be no fault or failure of his, for he for
his part will, is always willing.


The sum of all is this, to assure us (1.) that notwithstanding all the errors
and false spirits now abroad, there is a Spirit of Truth still ready and
willing to guide us into all truth yet; and (2.) to show us how he will do it,
that we may learn how to be guided by him. This the sum. And the Use of all
will be, that we submit our selves to him and to his guidance, to be taught and
led and guided by him; to his guiding and to his truth, and to all of it,
without exception. To guide and to be guided are relatives, infer one another.
If we will have him guide us he will have us be guided by him, and give up our
selves to his way of guiding. Oh that we would, that there were but a heart in
us to do so! we should not then have so many spirits, but more truth, one
Spirit would be all, and all truth would be one, this one single Spirit would
be sufficient to guide us into all truth: He would guide us into all truth. But
I must from my wishes to my words, where we see first we have a guide; that
though Christ be ascended from us into Heaven, yet we are not without a guide
upon the Earth.

I. I will not leave you comfortless, said he, when he was going hence, St.
Ioh. xiv. 18. Had he left us without a guide he had so, comfortless indeed in a
vast and howling wilderness, this earth is little else. But a Comforter he
sends, ver. 7. such a one as shall teach us all things, St. John xiv. 26.
that is a comfort indeed, none like it, to have one to guide us in a dangerous
and uncertain way, to teach us that our ignorance requires, to do all the
offices of a guide unto us, to teach us our way, to lead us, if need be, in it,
to protect and defend us through it, to answer for us if we be questioned about
it, and to cheer us up, encourage and sustain us all the way.

II. Such a guide as this, is (2.) this He we are next to speak of. He, the
Spirit of Truth, so it is interpreted but immediately before. He shall teach
you, teach you the way, reveal Christ to you, for unless he do you cannot know
him, teach you how to pray, Romans viii. 26. teach you what to say, how to
answer, by the way, if you be called to question in it, St. Luke xii. give you
a mouth and wisdom too, St. Luke xxi. 15. teach you not only to speak, but to
speak to purpose. He (2.) shall lead you too, deducet, lead you on, be a prop
and stay and help to you in your journey. He (3.) shall protect and defend you
in it as a guide, free you from danger, set you at full liberty, 2 Cor. iii.
17. be a cover to you by day, and a shelter to you in the night; the breath of
the Holy Spirit, will both refresh us and blow away all our enemies like the
dust. He (4) if we be charged with any thing will answer for us like a guide
and governor. It Is not you says Christ, but the Spirit of your Father, that
speaks in you, St. Matthew. x. 20. He, lastly, it is that quicken our spirit
with his Spirit, that encourages and upholds us like a guide and leader, for
without him our spirits are but soft air, and vanish at the least pressure. He
guides our feet, and guides our heads, and guides our tongues, and guides our
hands, and guides our hearts, and guides our spirits; we have neither spirit
nor motion, nor action, nor life without him.

III. But here particularly he comes to guides us into the Truth. And God knows
we need it; for surely men of low degree are vanity, says the Psalmist, and men
of high degree are a lie, Psalm. lxii, 9. not liars only, but a very lie, as far
from truth as a lie it self, things so distant from that conformity with God,
which is truth (for truth is nothing else) that no lie is further off it. Nor
soul, nor body, nor heart, nor mind, nor upper nor lower powers conformed to
him, neither our understandings to his understanding, nor our wills to his
will, nor any thing of us really to him, our actions and words and thoughts all
lie to him, to his face; we think too low, we speak too mean, we deal too
falsely with him, pretend all his, yet give most of it to our lusts and to our
selves, and we are so used to it, we can do no other, we are all either verbal
or real lies, need we had of one to guide us into the truth.

God is Truth, to guide us to him. Christ is the Truth, St. John xiv. 6. to
guide us to him. His Word is Truth to guide us into that, into the true
understanding and practice of it. His Promises are Truth, very Yea and Amen, to
guide us to them, to rest and hold upon them. His way is the way of Truth, to
guide us into that, into a Religion pure, holy and undefiled; that only is the
true one. Into none of these can any guide but this guide here. He shows us
of the Father, He reveals to us the Son, He interprets the Word and writes it
in our hearts, He leads and upholds us by his Promises, seals them unto us,
seals us again to the day of Redemption, the day of truth, the day when all
things shall appear truly as they are. He sets our Religion right, he only
leads us into that. Man cannot, he can speak but to the ear, there his words
dye and end. Angels cannot, they are but ministering spirits at the best to this
Spirit. Nature cannot; these truths are all above it, are supernatural, and no
other truth is worth the knowing. Nay, into any truth, this Spirit only can; we
only flatter and keep ado about this truth and that truth, and the other, but
into them we cannot get, make nothing of any truth without him; unless he
sanctify it, better else we had not known it: Knowledge puffs up, all
knowledge that comes not from this Spirit: so the very truth of any truth, that
which truly confirms it to the divine will and understanding, that makes truth
the same with goodness, is from this Spirit, from his guiding and directing,
his breathing it, or breathing into it, or upon it.

IV. Thus we are fallen upon the fourth particular, that he will guide us into
all truth.

Gods mercies and Christ's are ever perfect, and of the largest size, and the
conducts of the Spirit are so too, into all goodness, Gal. v. 9. into all
fullness, Ephesians. iii. 19. into all truth here, into all things. That we are not
full is from our selves; that we are not led into all truth, is for that all
truth does not please us, and we are loath to believe it such if it make not for
us: he for his part is as ready to guide us into all as into one.

For take we truth either for speculative or practical, either for the
substance against types and shadows, or the discerning the substance through
those shadows; or take we it in opposition to obscurity and doubting,
understand we it for what is truly to be believed, or loved, or hoped, or
feared, or done, (as under these is contained all that is saving truth,) so
they are all taught us by this Spirit. The signification of all old types and
shadows, sacrifices and ceremonies, the things, which whilst Christ was with us
we were not able to bear, ver. 12. the things, which when they were done we did
not understand, all that we are to believe and do, what to hope, and what to
fear, what to desire and what to love this Spirit teaches. And that first,

Not as other spirits teach, which teach by halves, so much only as may serve
to nurse up their faction and their side, but nothing more, but all, whatever
is commanded, keeps back nothing, as St. Paul professes for himself, Acts xx.
20. nothing that is profitable unto you, that is, nothing profitable to
Salvation.

Not secondly, as other spirits, which teach impertinent or idle truths, or
mere natural ones; indeed for such truths as have neither spiritual profit or
command, he is neither bound nor binds himself; is neither sent nor comes to
teach them; such truths as appertain not unto holiness, the Holy Spirit is not
promised for. Yet all that is necessary to be known, hoped, feared, expected,
desired, or done, in reference to the Kingdom of grace and glory he never fails
us in.

Not, thirdly, as other spirits that never teach all truth and nothing else,
whose truths are commonly mixed with error, but what he teaches is truth all. By
this you know that it is his Spirit, it is he that teaches every part, when the
doctrine is all truth. The doctrines of the world are like those bastard
children in Nehemiah, xiii. 24. that spoke half Ashdod, and half Israel; one
part of them is truth, the other falsehood; one part Scripture, the other a
Romance; one part spirit, the other flesh; one part Heaven, the other Earth,
earthly humors and respects, and nothing else. There is not an Error or Heresy
so gross or impudent, but has Jacob's voice though Esau's hands, speaks well
what ere it does, speaks fair and smooth though its deeds be rough and cruel;
with Napthali gives good words, though with D^n it be as a Serpent by the way,
and ^n Adder in the path that biteth the Horse heels, so that the Rider does
fall backward, speaks well though it mean ill, and overthrow all that embrace
it. Thus the Anabaptist says true, when he says the Apostles baptized men and
women, but he says false, when he says none else, or that they baptized any
twice with Christ's baptism. The Antinomian and Solifidian say no more than
truth, when they say faith justifies without the works of the Law, for they say
with St. Paul; but they say a lie when they separate the works of the Gospel
from that faith that justifies, if St. James say true, Iam. ii. 26. Innumerable
multitudes of such half-fac'd truths there are abroad, vented and vaunted by
private spirits, such as this spirit has no hand in. Every truth of his is
truth in all its parts; all truth, though it be but one, keeps the analogy of
faith inviolable, perfect correspondence with all the rest. So that now every
truth of his is all truth, truth all of it; but that is not all, for (4.) there
is not a truth necessary or convenient for us to know but in due time he
reveals it to us, unless we hinder him, all things says Christ in another
place, St. John xiv. 26.

V. But all this while, to whom is all this promised, this guiding Spirit into
all truth; to whom is it? To whom but you; You, says the Text, What you
Apostles only? no such matter; you Disciples present then? no such matter
neither: It Is but a little word this you, yet of large extent, few letters in
it, but much spirit: You Believers, all of you, as well as you Apostles. For
for all he prays in the next Chapter, ver. 20. for all that should believe on
him through their Word. And it is promised St. John xiv. 16. that he shall abide
with them for ever; and if ever, sure then beyond their persons and their
times; So that to ours too, is the promise made, or it cannot be for ever.

To the Apostles indeed in greater measure, after a more eminent way, with
miracles and wonders to confirm the truth he taught, yet to us also after our
measure.

To them to bring to their remembrance all things whatsoever he had said unto
them, St. John xiv. 26. Whence we read so often, they remembered his words, St.
Luke xxiv. 8. Acts i. 16. remembered what he said, St. John ii. 22. remembered
what was done unto him, St. John xii. 16.

To them (2.) to guide them into the understanding of old Types and Prophesies,
what was any where said or written, or meant of him, St. John xii. 16.

To them (3.) to explain and manifest what they before either did not
understand, or made a question of.

To them (4.) to teach them those things which till he (this Spirit) came they
could not bear, as it is just before the Text.

To them (5.) to settle the Rites and Ceremonies, the Discipline and Government
of the Church, to take order about things indifferent, Acts xv. 28. It seemed
good unto the Holy Ghost and to us, to define things not before commanded: Of
these Christ had given no commandment, we read of none, St. Paul professes he
had received none about them, 1 Cor. vii. 25. yet he determines them, and tells
us, he thought also he had the Spirit of God, ver. 40. even to those truths as
well as others does the Spirits guiding reach.

To them the Spirit came to guide them into all these kinds of truths; to us to
guide us in them, or guide us after them, in a larger sense into them too.
However to one effect it comes, we and they have the same truth from the same
Spirit; the way only, that, is different, they immediately from the Spirit, we
mediately by their Writings dictated to them by the Spirit. This now guides me
to the way and manner of his guiding, which comes next to be considered, and
must be fetched both from the nature of the word, and the manner of his coming,
for after that manner is his guiding, as after he comes so he will guide too.

VI. From the word first. And the word here for guiding is (...). Now in (...)
there is first, (...), and then (...), first way, then motion in it. He first
sets us down a way that will bring us into the truth, then acts or moves us in
it.

The first way or means is the Word of God. Thy Word is a light unto my feet,
and a lanthorn to my paths, says holy David, Psalm. cxix. 105. All Scripture is
given by inspiration, says St. Paul, and is profitable for Doctrine, for
reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God
may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17.
Inspired purposely by this Spirit to be a way to guide us into all truth and
goodness. But this may all pretend to, and every one turns it how he lists. We
must add a second.

And the second is the Church, for we must know this, says St. Peter, know it
first too, 2 Pet. i. 20. That no Scripture is of any private interpretation.
There are some things so hard to be understood both in St. Paul's Epistles, and
also other Scriptures, says he, that they that are unlearned and unstable wrest
them unto their own destruction, 2 Timothy iii. 16. and therefore presently his
advice follows, to beware least we be led away with that error, the error, as
he calls it, of the wicked, and so fall from our own stedfastness, ver. 17.
When men unlearned or ungrounded, presume to be interpreters, or even learned
men to prefer their private senses before the received ones of the Church, it is
never like to produce better. The pillar and ground upon which truth stands and
stays is the Church, if St. Paul may be allowed the judge, 1 Timothy iii. 16. The
pillar and ground of truth. In matters of discipline when a brother has done
disorderly, tell it to the Church, says Christ, St. Mat. 18. 17. and if he
neglect to hear that, let him be unto thee as a heathen man, and as a Publican.
He is no Christian. In matters (2.) of doubt and controversy, send to the
Church, to Jerusalem, to the Apostles and Elders there convened in Counsel,
and let them determine it, so we find it done, Acts xv. 2, 28. In a lawful and
full assembly of the learned Fathers of the Church such shall be determined,
that is the was to settle truth. In matters (3.) of Rites and Ceremonies the
Spirit guides us also by the Church. If any man seem to be contentious about
them, St. Paul's appeal is presently to the Churches Customs We have no such
custom neither the Churches of God, that is answer enough full and sufficient
thinks the Apostle, 1 Cor. xi. 16. If the Churches custom be for us, then it is
good and true we think, or speak, or do. If against us, it is all naught and
wrong, whatever purity or piety be pretended in it. Nay, so careful was the
Apostle to preserve the public Authority of the Church, and beat down all
private ways and fancies (by which ways only Schism and Heresy creep in) that
he tells Timothy, though a Bishop, and one well read and exercised in the
Scriptures from a child, 2 Timothy iii. 14. of a form of sound words he would have
even him hold fast to, 2 Timothy i. 13. and the Romans he tells of a form of
Doctrine to be obeyed, Romans 6. 17. so far was that great and eloquent Apostle
from being against forms, any forms of the Church, (though he could have prayed
and preached ex tempore with the best, had tongues and eloquence, and the gift
of interpretation to do it too) so far from leaving truth to any private
interpretation, or sudden motion whatsoever. Nor is this appeal to the Fathers
any whit strange or in Christian Religion only first to be heard of, it was
Gods direction from the first. For ask now, says Moses, of the days that are
past, that were before thee, Deuteronomy. iv. 32. Stand you in the ways, and see, and
ask for the old paths, where is the good way, says God, Ier. vi. 16. As if he
had said, Look about, and see, and examine all the ways you can, yet the old
way that is the good one. For enquire, I pray thee, of the former Age, and
prepare thy self to the search of their Fathers, for we are but of yesterday,
and know nothing, Job viii. 8. See how slightly things of yesterday, new
interpretations, new devices, new guides are accounted of. And indeed in it
self it is most ridiculous to think the custom, and practice, and order, and
interpretation of all times and Churches should be false, and those of
yesterday only true, unless we can think the Spirit of truth has been fifteen
or sixteen hundred years asleep, and never waked till now of late, or can
imagine that Christ should found a Church, and promise to be with it to the end
of the World, and then leave it presently to Antichrist to be guided by him for
above fifteen hundred years together. Nor can I see why the Spirit of truth
should now of late only begin to move and stir, except I should think he were
awaked, or delighted with noise and fury. Nor is it reasonable to conceive a
few private Spirits, neither holier nor wiser than others, (for ought appears)
nor armed with Miracles to confirm their Doctrines, should be more guided by
the Spirit of truth, than the whole Church and succession of Christians, and
Christian Fathers, especially wherein at any time they agree.

Yet (3.) not always to go so high. Thou leadest thy people like sheep, says
the Psalmist, by the hand of Moses and Aaron, Psalm. lxxvii. 20. Moses and Aaron
were the Governors of the Church, the one a Priest, the other a Prophet; by
such God leads his People, by their lawful Pastors and Teachers. The one, the
Civil Governor, is the cloud to cover them from the heat: The other, the
Spiritual, is the light to lead them in the way. The first protects, the other
guides us; and we are bid to obey them, those especially that watch for our
souls, Heb. xiii. 17. Such as labor in the Word and Doctrine, 1 Timothy v. 17. By
such as God sets over us in the Church, to teach and guide us into truth, we
must be guided if we will come into it. In things unlawful nor one nor other is
to be obeyed: In things indifferent they always are; In things doubtful it is
our safest course to have recourse to them, provided that they be not of Corahs
company, that they exalt not themselves against Moses and Aaron, nor draw us to
it. If they do, we may say to them as Moses did to those, Ye take too much upon
you you Sons of Levi. God leads his People like a flock in peace and unity, and
by the hands of Moses and Aaron. Thus (3.) the Spirit guides into all truth,
because the Spirit is God, and God so guides.

You have heard the way and means, the first part of (...), or the Spirits
guiding. The Second follows, his act and motion.

1. He leads or guides us only, he does not drive us, that is not the way to
plant truth, by force and violence, fire and fagots, not the Spirits sure,
which is the Spirit of love.

2. Yet (...) there is we told you in it. Some Act of the Spirit, He moves and
stirs up to it, enlightens our understandings, actuates our wills, disposes
ways and times, occasions and opportunities to it, that is the reason we hear
the truth more willingly at some time than other. Paul may plant, Apollo water,
but the increase is this Spirit of Gods; when all is done, that man can do, he
must have his act, or it will not be done.

3. He leads on fair and easily, for diducet, it is no Iehu's pace, that pace
is only for an earthly kingdom, not an heavenly. The Spirit leads softly on,
like Jacob, Genesis xxxiv. 14. according as the Cattle and Children are able to
endure, according as our inferior powers signified by the Cattle, and our new
begun piety and capacities intimated by the Children are able to follow. It Is
danger, else, we lose them by the way. He that presses even truth and piety too
fast upon us, is liker to tire us, and make us give out by the way, than to
lead us out to our journeys end. By degrees it is that even the greatest
perfection must be come to. Truths are to be scattered as men are able to bear
them. Christ's own method in the verse before. The way into all truth is by some
and some.

4. This guiding is by teaching; one Translation has docebit, shall teach, and
Chap. xiv. 26. it is so too; he shall teach you, teach us the necessity of a
Teacher. How shall they hear without a Preacher? Romans x. 14. To this purpose
the Spirit set Teachers in the Church, 1 Cor. xii. 28. Pastors and Teachers,
Ephesians. iv. 11. Pastors to rule, Teachers to teach, both to guide us into the
truth. Yea, but Teachers we now have store, that to be sure guide not into the
truth, for they teach contraries and contradictions. What Teachers then are
they that teach the truth? Such as be sent, says St. Paul, Romans x. 15. sent by
them that have authority to send them, if they come without authority, or from
a false one, from them that never receive'd power themselves to send others,
though they were sent themselves, they are not sent by the Spirit, and though
they may guide now and then into a truth, teach something that is true, into
all they cannot, their very Function is a lie, and their preaching of it.

5. Leading or guiding into all truth as one, omnem veritatem in the Singular,
will tell us that unity is his way of guiding. No truth in division; we cannot
so much as see our faces true in the clearest water if it be troubled; cast but
a stone in, and divide its surface, and you spoil your seeing true; cast but a
stone of division into the Church, and no seeing truth. It Is the spiritual man
that only truly discerns and sees the truth, the natural and carnal man he
cannot, 1 Cor. ii. 14, 15. And if there be Divisions or Schisms among you are
you not carnal? says St. Paul in the next Chapter, 1 Cor. iii. 3. Yes, you are;
so the Schismatic, or he that causes rents and divisions in the Church is but
a carnal man, for all his brags, and cannot see the truth how much soever he
pretend it. 'Twere well if men would think of this, we were likely then the
sooner to see truth, to be guided into all truth if we could once keep all
together, peace and truth go both together.

Thus far one word has led you: The Connection of that and the other with the
former, of his guiding with his coming, will lead you further. When He, the
Spirit of truth, is come, then he will guide you, When he is come, is, when he
is so grounded and settled in us that we can say he is come indeed, he is in us
of a truth, then all truth will follow presently. When the holy Spirit has once
taken up his lodging in us, that we also begin to be holy Spirits too, then
truth comes on a main. If any man will do his will, he shall know of the
Doctrine whether it be of God, St. Ioh. vii. 17. till our hearts be well framed
to the obedience of Gods Commandments no truly knowing truth. Divine knowledge
is contrary to other knowledges, they begin in speculation and end in action;
this begins with action, and ends in speculation, seeing and knowing God, What
man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the way that he shall
choose, Psalm. xxv. 11. When the Spirits holiness is come into us, his truth
will follow as fast as we can bear it, till we come to the fullness of the
measure of the stature of Christ, to Christ himself that is the Truth; the way
now to come to the knowledge of truth is by holiness and true obedience. Nor
yet so to be understood, as if the good man only knew the truth, or that every
one that has Christ, or the Spirit dwelling in them were the only knowing men,
and therefore fit only to teach others. Indeed if you take knowledge for
practical and saving knowledge so it is, no man knows God but he that loves
him, no man so knows truth but he that loves and follows it, and no man is
saved by knowing, but by doing it. But that which may serve to save a man's self
will not serve to save others, to bring them to salvation. 'Twas one of Corah
Dathan and Abirams Doctrines indeed, Numb. xvi. 3. All the Congregation is holy
every one of them, wherefore then do you Moses and Aaron lift up your selves
above the Congregation of the Lord? Why do you Priests lift up your selves so
much to think you only are fit to teach and rule the people? But the earth
opened her mouth, ver. 30. and confuted the madness of these men. Be the person
never so holy, if he have no Function to it he must not presume to teach others
though he must teach himself. Holiness is one gift, the power of teaching is
another, though both from the same Spirit; and no venturing upon Aarons, St.
Paul's, or St. Peter's Office, unless the Spirit has set us apart to that end and
purpose. It Is enough for any other that he has truth enough to save himself:
and it is but Ambition, Presumption, and Sacrilege, and by that a lessening of
his goodness, to pretend to that which God has not called him to, but his own
preposterous zeal, or too high conceit of his own holiness and abilities, and
so far from being like to guide into all truth, that our own days are
sufficient witnesses all Errors and Heresies have sprung from it.

The way that the Spirit guides into all his truth is by the Scripture
interpreted by the Church, by the decrees, and determinations, and customs of
it; by the hand of our lawful Pastors and Teachers, himself inwardly acting and
moving in us, inwardly working and persuading us, outwardly ministering
opportunities and occasions to us, leading us by degrees, preserving us in
peace, keeping us in obedience, and holiness, and charity. Thus he guides into
all truth, ordinarily, and no way else.

VII. And to be sure, lastly, thus he will. Christ here promises for him him
that he shall, for so we may render it, He shall. And he is the Spirit of
truth, says the Text. So he will make good what Christ has promised, and what
he comes to be, the guide into the way of truth. We need not either mistrust or
fear it. For though Christ himself must go away and leave us, because it is
expedient that he should, yet this Spirit will stand by us howsoever. Howbeit
he will. He is a mighty wind, and will quickly disperse and blow away the mists
of ignorance and error; He is a fire, and will easily purge the dross, and burn
up the chaff that mixes with the truth, and hides or sullies it; nothing can
stand before him, nothing shall. He comes to us with a Howbeit, a non obstante,
be it how it will, though we be blind, and ignorant, and foolish, and full of
infirmities and sins, so we be willing, he will come and guide us.

Yet if now we will so be guided, to close up all, We must, lastly, submit our
selves wholly to his way and guiding, to the truth, and to all of it.

To his way and order, (1.) no teaching him how he should teach us. Them that
be meek shall he guide in judgment, and such as be gentle them shall he learn
his way, Psalm. xxv. 8. No teaching without humility, we must be willing to be
guided or he will not guide us. Men will not now, thence come so many errors
and mistakes.

To truth too (2.) we must submit. If it be truth no quarrelling against it. No
seeking shelters and distinctions to defend us from it: though we have been
long in error, and count it a dishonor to revoke it, revoke it we must, be it
what it will, or we endanger the loss of the whole truth, the Spirit will not
lead us.

And to all (3.) too. We must not plead our interest, or any thing against it,
be it never so troublesome, never so disadvantageous, never so displeasing, we
must resolve to embrace it, because it is truth.

With this submission too we are now to come to the holy mysteries, submit our
hearts, and judgments, and affections here, not to presume to pry too much into
the way and manner of Christ's and the Spirits being there, but to submit our
reasons to our faith; and open our hearts to Christ as well as our mouths to
the outward elements, and keep under our affections by holy and godly doing,
that so the Spirit of truth may come into them all. And so doing, the Spirit
will come, and he will guide us, guide us into all necessary and saving truths,
guide us to Christ, guide us to God, guide us here, and guide us hence, guide
us in earth, and guide us to heaven.

THE FOURTH SERMON UPON Whitsunday.
ACTS ii. 1, 2, 3, 4. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were
all with one accord in one place.

And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting.

And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon
each of them.

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.


THE words are the History for the day. The day the anniversary for the words.
This day the Text fulfilled in the ears of some of every Nation under Heaven,
ver. 5. remembered and celebrated by the tongues and voices of the Christian
Church throughout the Earth. The things done here the reason of the day, and
the day the memorial of them. Here you may see why we keep this Feast, why it is
so solemn; why it is one of the dies albi, why so white a day, a Sunday white
with the light of that holy fire that this day came down from Heaven, and sat
like rays of light upon the Apostles, those whitest and purest sons of light,
the Holy Ghost the third Person of the blessed Trinity descending miraculously
in it upon the Disciples, as it were a sudden rushing mighty wind filling all
the corners both of the place and of their souls, and so seating himself in the
form of fiery cloven tongues upon each of that holy company, and thereby giving
them new hearts and words to speak the wonders of the most High.

A business we are this day to be their Disciples in, to use our tongues to the
same purpose, that we may testify our selves to be led by the same Spirit,
breath by the same breath, move by the same wind, our hearts warmed by the same
fire, our words framed by the same tongues that this day appeared so
miraculously upon them.

We have done so in the unity of the Church several times before in the year
for Christ the second Person of the Godhead, do we so now also for the third,
the benefits and glory which this day came from him, which they this day did
after a strange miraculous way receive, we may this day also receive in an
efficacious way, though not externally and visibly, yet internally and
invisibly from the same Spirit. For this Feast is his, and our ^^eech this day
principally of him, and our praises for him.

Now the best way to keep the Feast, so as to be partakers of the honor and
benefits of it, is to place our selves in the same fashion, set our selves in
the same posture, dispose our selves after the same order with them here, both
for the receiving of him, and after we have received him. For it is part of the
Epistle, not the Gospel that I have read you, and the business of the Epistle
is commonly Doctrine and Instruction, as the matter of the Gospel is usually
history. So we then to be instructed by it, how to demean our selves for the
receiving of the Holy Spirit, how to know how and where, and when it is he
comes, how to distinguish him and his coming from other spirits, what to do
also when we have received him, and when more especially to do the one or
expect the other by the pattern and example in the Text. This will prove the
best, the only celebration of the Feast, the most glorious manifestation this
day on our parts for the more glorious manifestation this day on Gods; the
manifestation of our thankfulness for the manifestation of Gods goodness.

Thus without either nicety or much Art; I shall divide you the Text into these
Particulars: 1. The Disposition of them, that the Spirit comes and lights upon,
them that are all with one accord in one place, that are there quietly sitting
and expecting Christ there, especially upon the solemn days, upon the day of
Pentecost, a solemn Festival. 2. The way and manner and order of the Holy
Spirits coming, suddenly, from Heaven, like a sound thence, like the sound of a
rushing mighty wind filling all the house, in the appearance of cloven fiery
tongues sitting upon each on whom he comes. 3. The effect and issue immediately
upon it. They are filled, all filled, filled with Ghost and Spirit, the Holy
Ghost or Spirit, begin to speak, speak strangely, strange tongues too, yet in
measure and order too no other then the Spirit gives them utterance. 4. And
lastly, though first it be in the Text, yet because it is but the circumstance
and time of the story, and not the main business or second of it, and fittest
to close up all in good time and order, The Time when all this was done, when
these things came to pass, when the Apostles were so disposed, when the Holy
Ghost thus descended, when this strange issue fell out, When the day of
Pentecost was fully come, in very good time, the promised time, Christ's time,
Gods own time, such as he had prefigur'd them in in the Law too, at the fifty
days Feast after the Passover, a solemn day and somewhat more, as you shall
hear anon. Thus we best join the History and the Moral, the Doctrine and Use of
Pentecost or Whitsunday; nay, the very Holy Spirit of the day, and our souls to
day together, that we may not be like men that only come to hear news, a story
and away, but such as hear the Word and profit by it.
Which that we may, Come O mighty wind and blow upon us, Descend O holy Fire
and warm our hearts, give me a tongue, O blessed Spirit, out of this days
number and utterance, give thy servants capacious spirits and remembrance, that
thy Word may rush in upon them as a sound from Heaven, and fill the houses of
all our souls with joy and gladness with holy fire of Piety and Devotion, that
we may with one accord, one heart and mind speak forth thy praise and glory.

The first Point in the order I have set you, is the disposition of them that
the Holy Spirit will come and light upon. (1.) They are of one accord, (2.) in
one place, (3.) sitting quietly and expecting there, and that (4.) also upon
the solemn day, when the day of Pentecost, any solemn day or occasion is
presented them.

They are first of one accord whom this Spirit vouchsafes to descend into. This
unity draws the Spirit to them, that keeps it with them, the house of unity is
the only Temple of the Spirit of Unity. That soul which breaks the bond of
unity, and divides it self from the Church of Christ, from the company of the
Apostles and their Successors, the still Fathers of it, cannot hold this holy
wind, cannot enclose this holy fire, they are broken and cracked, crack only of
the Spirit, but are really broken from that body in which only the Spirit
moves. Take and divide a member from the body, be it the principal, that in
which most spirit was, the heart or the head, and once divided, the Spirit
vanishes from it, will not sit nor dwell in it: just so is it it in Christ's
Body the Church. If one of the chiefest members of it, one erst while of the
devoutest and most religious in it, once grow so proud of his own wisdom or
gifts, so singular in his conceits as to separate himself from his fellows,
from that body whereof Christ is the head, he goes away like a member from the
natural body, and leaves the Spirit behind him, that retires from him, for it
is one Spirit, and cannot be divided from the body, though it work diversely in
it.

If, this being of one accord, of one mind, be the temper for the receipt of
the Holy Spirit, as here you see it is, and in reason it can be no otherwise,
it being the Spirit of love and unity: What spirit are they of, Whose Religion
is Faction, whose chief pretended Piety is Schism, whose business is to differ
from all the World? Nothing can be more evident, than that men are now adays
much at a loss for the Spirit, however every one claim to it, seeing there is
no accord, but discord, not diversities only but contrarieties, but
contradictions amongst them that most pretend the Spirit.

Indeed were this they any less a They than the Apostles themselves, and the
whole number of the then Disciples, or had there been but the least division
among them either about the manner of staying or expecting Christ's Promise, or
which is less about the place to stay in; It may be these men might have had a
shadow for their separations: but Apostles they were, and in one place they
were too altogether, agreed in all, were all in unity, were all in uniformity;
not their minds only, but their bodies too together. Men thought it nothing a
while since to withdraw themselves from the Houses of God, as if no matter at
all for the place, they could for all that be of the same faith, but too woeful
experience has proved it now, that with the one place the one faith is vanished,
with the ceremony the substance gone too, with the uniformity of Worship, the
unanimity of our minds and the uniformity of our faith too blown into the air.
How shall we do, O blessed Spirit, in so many cracked vessels to retain thee?
Needs must the Spirit expire out of that body which has so many breaches and
divisions in it, so many divided houses, so many broken Churches, so many
rotten Congregations.

I know if it be only necessity divides us, and drives us into several dens and
caves, as it did the Primitive Christians in the days of those fiery
persecutions, that the Holy Spirit will ransack all the cranies and search out
all the privatest corners be they above ground or under it, but it is because
the mind of all those several places is but one, and in that respect they are
no more than so many several cells of the one Catholic Church; but where
choice and not necessity, wilfulness and not force, singularity and not purity
of Truth or Conscience makes the division, and draws Disciples into Chambers,
Parlors, Barns, or Mills, Woods or Deserts, go not says Christ out after them,
say they what they will of Christ or Spirit there, believe it not, St. Matthew.
xxix. 26. Two in a field, and yet one taken and the other left, two at the
mill, and one taken and the other left, ver. 40. So at the most, I fear, great
hazard that any, if they be no better, no more orderly gathered when the Master
comes.

Or were they yet perhaps in several places sitting as they are here, that is
quietly, and in true peace and faith, expecting the promise of their Lord,
something might be said to excuse their separations, but not only actually to
break the unity of the Spirit and the bond of Peace, but to breath out nothing
but war, contention and dispute, to be so far from sitting down and either
suffering for Christ, or humbly expecting his time of assistance and
deliverance out of their perplexities and discomforts, as to take the matter
into their own hands, and prevent the coming of the Spirit of Peace, by rising
and raising spirits of war and confusion, they must give me leave to tell them,
they know not what spirit they are of, a heady, guiddy, furious spirit, zeal I
bear them witness with St. Paul, Romans x. 2. without knowledge, and spirit
without holiness, for the Spirit of the Prophets is subject to the Prophets, 1
Cor. xiv. 32. much more to the God of the Prophets, to his time and order.

And yet there is another disposition to be observed in those upon whom the
good Spirit lights, to make either instruments of glory to the Church, or Piety
to God. It Is sitting and expecting, if you mark it, till the day or days of
Pentecost be fully come and accomplished; souls willing to keep a holy day or
holy days to the Lord; neither to be scared from the attendance of their Master
and their Devotions, nor to be shortened and interrupted in their pious course
of faith and piety by the now so terrible scare-crows of set Feasts, as Jewish,
legal and superstitious observances, as the new zelots, are so wise to term
them, because they understand not terms or times. The spiritual man (if they be
what they boast) discerns the things of God, though hidden in darker mysteries,
knows better to distinguish Judaism from Christianity, Piety from Superstition,
and is not only content, but studies to wait upon his Lord upon any day, glad
to get it too, Passover or Pentecost, makes use of them all, and turns them
fairly from their old Judaism, and consecrates them anew to his Masters
service: and this doing, the very Spirit himself authorizes and abets, whilst
he thus seems to pick out the time for his own coming at the Jewish Pentecost,
so to sanctify a new Christian Pentecost, the Christian Whitsuntide, to all
Christian Generations by this solemn glory of his benefits to day to be
remembered for ever.

Thus we have the disposition he vouchsafes to descend upon, unanimous,
uniform, peaceable, orderly expecting souls. Such as set apart and keep days to
God with faith and patience, and in obedience and order; the contrary tempers
are too rough lodgings for the Spirit of meekness, order and peace; be we so
prepared and he will come.

II. Now see we how he comes, the manner of the Holy Spirits coming. Double it
is, to the ear and to the eye. To the ear first; and that (1.) suddenly, from
Heaven secondly; (3.) like a sound thence, (4.) the sound of a rushing mighty
wind; that (5.) filled all the house, yet (6.) the house only where they sat;
thus to the ear: Then (2.) to the eye in the appearance of tongues, cloven
tongues, tongues of fire, tongues sitting; and lastly, sitting upon each of
them.

We take first what came first, the sound; and that first was sudden, suddenly
says the Text, yet as sudden as it came, go it shall not so, not without a note
or two.

Suddenly then it came, to show the freeness of Gods grace, so far above
desert, that it is also above apprehension, it out-runs that, and is upon us
ere we are aware; so little probability have we to deserve it, that we commonly
have not time to do it: and when we have, yet so sudden does it fall, that we
may well see it comes not from our selves, so dull a piece as earth and sin has
made us.

To show (2.) the readiness of his goodness, beyond expectation, readier far to
give than we to take, comes commonly upon us sooner then we expect or wish,
prevents us with his goodness, as the Psalmist observes to us, Psalm. xxi. 3.
and runs very swiftly, Psalm. cxlvii. 15. flying upon the wings of the wind,
Psalm. civ.

To show us (3.) the vanity of men who think it comes with observation. It does
not says Christ, St. Luke xvii. 20. It Is not at our command. The Prophets
themselves could not Prophecy when they listed, 'twas cecidit Spiritus, the
Spirit fell upon them, the common phrase in Scripture, and then they
prophesied, till that fell (and fall it did but at times, what times it
pleased) the motions of the Prophet were but as other men's. Indeed I remember
Elisha willing to prophecy to Iehoshaphat the King of Judah, 2 King. iii. 14,
15. calls for a Minstrel, and it came to pass that while the Minstrel played
the hand of the Lord came upon him. Not that either the Spirit was at the will
and under the power of the Minstrel or the Prophet, but to show the disposition
that the holy Spirit vouchsafes soonest and suddenest to come to, a sweet and
tunable soul disposed to accord, to love and peace, and unity. And by the way
you may take notice Music and the Spirit are at no discord, as the late
spiritual men (forsooth) would have us to believe; the Prophet you see thought
it the only way and medium to raise his spirits into heavenly raptures, to make
himself capable of new Inspirations to call for an Instrument of Music, and as
it were to persuade the heavenly Spirit down by some grave and sober Music;
which may make us wonder how these great pretenders to the Spirt, and gapers
for it, should be so furious enemies against the Church Music, so ever
employed and approved both by God and his Prophets and Apostles, (for singing
with melody, says St. Paul too, Ephesians. v. 19.) to fit and sweeten, and raise
our dull and rougher spirits to the service of Heaven and the entertainment of
the heavenly and gentle motions of the Spirit in those holy performances. But
all this while this is but to dispose our selves, the Spirit it self is at its
own disposal for all this, and when he comes comes on a sudden.

Even to awake (4.) and rouse us up. We are drowsy souls to Heavenward, and
want some sudden change to startleus; things that come leisurely will not do
it. It must be a sudden turn that will turn us out of our selves, or from our
follies, or so much upward.

And sudden (5.) it is again to show the activity of the Spirit of God, how
wonderful he is among the Children of men; that he cannot only turn the world
upside down when ere he please, but as soon as he pleases, does but blow with
his wind and the waters flow, casts but a sudden glance of an eye at St. Peter
and out run the waters out of his; he that was but just now afraid of the voice
of a silly girl, fears not presently the lightnings and thunders of the
greatest Tyrants. Nox ut tetigerit mentem docet, solumque tetigisse docuisse
est, Mam humanum subito ut illustrat immutat affectum, abnegat hoc repent quod
erat, exhibet repent quod non erat, S. Greg. He does but touch the mind and
teaches it, shines into it and changes it together, forgets immediately what it
was, and is what it was not. All the quickest ways of men must have time and
leisure, be it but to cast an eye; but O qualis est artifex iste Spiritus! But
how wonderful an Artist is thy Spirit O Lord, that knows not the least
hinderance or delay, (...), it comes so suddenly, there is no appearance often
of its coming, not so much as a whiff or shadow before it to give us warning of
its approach, for this reason among the rest, least we should attribute any
thing to our own preparations, yea, though they be such as God requires.

Sudden, last of all, to show us our duties not to neglect the light and sudden
motions of the Holy Spirit, though we know not how or when, or whence they
rise, so we know but whether they go and lead us; if to good catch at them, let
them not go as they came, but leap we into the water while it stirrs; fan we
our selves with this wind while it moves; for how long it will stay, or whether
ever come again we know not; take it in the present while we may, omit no good
motion, no opportunity or occasion of any doing well; suddenly it comes, and
suddenly it may be gone if we lay not hold upon it and make use of it. Thus
from the quickness and suddenness of this Spirits motion, Gods grace and
goodness, his incomprehensible power and operation, and our readiness to lay
hold upon it, are preached to us.

But from Heaven what next is preached to us? but that thence it is all holy
winds and breaths, and spirits come; from Heaven, not of men; no humane wit can
teach what this Spirit does, the spirit of man but the things of a man, 1 Cor.
ii. 11. it knows no further; the things of Heaven from the Spirit of Heaven; de
Caelo, from the very Heaven of Heavens, not any lower Heavens, or any other
spirits of Heaven, but that which has no plural number, is but one, and is an
Heaven it self; not only a Spirit of Heaven, but Heaven that is the Spirit, the
Heaven in whom all of us live and move, and have our being as in our Heaven of
Glory.

Yet again, from Heaven, that we may at any time know what wind blows in us; if
our affections, intentions and endeavors are only totwards Heaven, set upon
Heaven and heavenly things, if what moves us be only heavenly and not earthly
interests, then it is the good Spirit that reigns and rules in us, then it is the
Wind and Spirit, and Fire and Tongue, a wind out of Gods own treasury, a Spirit
out of Gods own bosom, a fire from that Eternal Light, a tongue from that
Eternal Wisdom, but if our actions come but so much as collaterally and
glancing at other respects than God and Heaven, it is no Spirit, no motion, no
work of his Spirit, but some others; this comes directly straight from Heaven.

3. Now from Heaven, what is it that comes here? there came suddenly a sound
from Heaven: a sound! yes a sound, and it is a good hearing, the best news we
ever heard since Christ's departure; a sound that is gone out into all Lands,
and into the end of the World. Sonus coelorum, the sound of the Heavens, the
very true Pythagorical harmony of the Spheres, the sweetest sound was ever
heard, the sound of the Gospel, of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the knowledge of
it.

We perhaps looked when we heard of something coming down from Heaven, for some
glorious Host of Angels, Cherubims or Seraphims, some or other of them at
least, or for the new Jerusalem we read of, Rev. xxi. 2. coming from above,
down from God out of Heaven; and we think much to be put off with a sound: yet
I must tell you this sound sounds better in our ears, the sound of an Eternal
Comforter that should abide with us for ever, and bring us in due time to that
new Jerusalem and those blessed Spirits in Heaven.

And with a fitter convoy he could not come than with a sound, who was now to
send and constitute such as should sound out the Gospel over all the World, so
many Apostles, Evangelists, Pastors and Teachers.

Nor yet of all sounds with any so correspondent to him could he come as that
of the wind; nothing more to express his Glory and Godhead, that this Spirit
he, is that very he that comes riding upon the wings of the wind; a fit blast
to stop the idle breath of those saucy enquirers of our age, who dispute this
blessed Spirit out of his Deity.

Need had he appear it seems (4.) as a rushing mighty wind to rush down these
enemies of his and overthrow them. Indeed he came to day with so mighty and
powerful a blast, that we might see both his Power and Godhead, as well as his
Mercy and Goodness to us; his goodness in coming like a wind, his power in
coming like a rushing mighty one.

The benefits we receive from the wind represent the benefits we receive from
the Spirit, and so (1.) present his goodness.

The Wind, first, purges and clears the Air from noisome and infectious vapors;
the Spirit clenses and purifies our souls and bodies from the stinking and
unwholsom steams of sins and lusts.

(2.) The Wind sometimes gathers up clouds and rains, and sometimes scatters
them again. The Holy Spirit one whiles gathers clouds into the countenance, and
brings showers into the eyes of the penitent sinner; and other while it blows
away all blackness from our faces and makes the soul look up, and the Spirits
smile and dance in our hearts and eyes.

(3.) The Wind cheers and refreshes the Plants and Trees; the blessed Spirit
cheers the Plants of Grace within us, and makes them fructify and prosper,
puts life and spirit into the root, verdure and freshness into the leaf,
fineness and subtilty into the relish of the fruit of all holy actions and
virtues.

4. The Wind cools the heat, and revives the fainting spirit; the Holy Spirit
does so too, allays the inordinate heat of concupiscence within us, cools the
over-hotness and ardors of our Passions, revives us and recovers us when we are
almost choakt with the fumes and flames of our own corruption, affections and
lusts.

(5.) The Wind, again, kindles the fire, and blows the spark into a flame; and
the Holy Spirit it is that kindles all heavenly warmth and flames within us,
without his breath we are all but dead coals.

(6.) The Wind scatters the chaff and skreens the dust out of the corn; the
Holy Spirit blows away all our chaff, and dust, all our dross and rubbish, our
vanities and follies, and makes us fit corn for Gods own Garners.

(7.) The Wind it is that drives home the Ship into the Haven, and the Holy
Spirit it is that drives our poor torn and tattered Vessels into the Haven
where we would be, as the Psalmist speaks; drives us up and down over the
troublesome Sea of this tempestuous World, into the Port of everlasting bliss,
into the Haven of Heaven it self.

You see the goodness and graces of the Holy Spirit not unfitly expressed by
the resemblance of the Wind. See we now his Power as well resembled by it, by
the rushing mighty wind.

The Wind is but a thin and airy puff, so subtle that we cannot see it, yet
what a rattling does it make? rattles the Ships of Tharsis together, tears up
Trees by the roots, throws down Houses and Buildings; nay rends the Mountains
and breaks in pieces the Rocks before it, 1 Kings xix. 11. But never did Wind
so tear up Foundations by the roots, never did so strong Buildings fall before
that tumultuous vapor, as this rushing mighty Wind that this day came down
from Heaven has cast down before it. All the high things of the earth, Wisdom
and Learning, and Might and Majesty have fallen as easily as so many Paper
Turrets at its breath, all have given up themselves and thrown all prostrate at
the Word of this Spirit, so that the whole World stood wondering and amazed to
see it self so turned about by the mere words of a few simple Fishermen,
without force, or eloquence, or craft, to see it self so tamely submit its
glory to the humility of Christ, its greatness to his littleness, its majesty
to his baseness, its wisdom to the foolishness of his Cross, its ease,
pleasure, to the pains and patience of it. But manus excelsi fecit hoc; it is
the hand of the most Highest that has done it, such a wind could come from none
but God, such a Spirit can be none but his, none but he could do it, and it is
mavelous in our eyes, his power as mavelous as his mercy, both of them
above any created ones whatsoever.

Well may such a Wind as this now fill the house, as it follows in the fifth
Consideration. And yet commonly the wind fills the open air and not the houses.
Common winds do so indeed, but this peculiar Wind fills the house and every
corner, comes in even when the doors are shut, or else opens and shuts them as
it pleases; a sign it is more than air or airy spirit; it is he only that
searches the hearts and reins, that can glide so into these close rooms of
ours; and it is our happiness it is so, that he thus blows into the house of his
own accord and power: For give me a Ship, says St. Chrysostom, with all its
tackling, sails and anchors, spread all in order too, and let the wind lie
still, let there be no gale stirring, and all its furniture and men are
nothing; no more is the soul with all its preparations without the blowing of
the Spirit; nay, no more is all our eloquence, all our arguments and
persuasions, the subtilty of our understanding, the richness of our conceit
and notion, the sweetness of the voice, the rhetoric of words, the strength of
reason, the whole tackling and furniture of the Orator or Preacher, unless the
Spirit come and fill the sail, and stretch the canvas, and so drive on the
Vessel. It Is this implevit we must hold by, it is his filling our empty house,
our lank and lither sails that blows comfort to us.

And it is the enhancing of the benefit, which is the last considerable in this
similitude of the wind, that it fills the house only where they are sitting. It
is no ordinary or common favor that God vouchsafes in filling our houses with
the Spirit; he has not dealt so with any other Nation, with any other people
than the Christian people. It is the Church only, and the souls of Christians
in it, that this mighty wind as rushing and mighty as it is does content and
contain it self in. All other houses and places stand empty, cannot get this
Tenant. It Is the property of this Wind, and no other, to blow where it lists,
in this house and no other, within doors all, within the Church, none without
at all; or the sound of it only passes out to call others in, that they may see
and wonder at the things that are come to pass this day, that Jews and
Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians, Parthians and Medes, and all Nations under
Heaven may bea^ witness of the wonder; and if they come in, in some sort
partake of it too, of the wind, though not of the tongues, of some graces of
the Spirit, though not of the other. Only come in they must, into the Church of
Christ, which is his body, before their veins be filled with this Spirit,
before they feel any motion of it.

Of the Wind I say, such a portion of the Spirit as may breath into them the
breath of life; but tongues of fire are for those only who were sitting there
before, fitting as Governors of the Church, to whom that baptism of fire was
promised, who were bid to tarry and expect it, and when so enabled; to go
abroad then and use their tongues, and blow the flames of divine love and
charity through the World.

I should now proceed to these miraculous tongues, the second representment of
the Holy Spirit. And me thinks I am unwilling to leave them unspoken of, to
which we ow our speech. But your ears are already filled with the wind, yet I
hope it is the proper wind of the day, and the sound of it shall not vanish as
the wind, as ordinary winds and sounds, nor my words as the soft air.

So much the rather in that this Point of the wind comes more home to us than
that other of the tongues. Tongues were for them that believe not says the
Apostle, but the Wind, the rushing mighty Wind from Heaven to cast down all the
strong holds of Sin and Satan, for them that believe, even for us all. The
fiery tongues concern the Apostles as a miraculous enabling of them to the work
of the Apostleship, to the preaching and divulging the Gospel of Christ: but
the breath and blowing of the Spirit concerns all Christians whatsoever, under
every notion. To that, our proper tenure is from this Wind, nay so much the
more, because it is the breath of the Spirit, not the tongue that makes us
Christian; the wind like that in Ezekiel, quickens our dead bones into the life
of Christ, and by it we live to our own Salvation; by the tongues only to
another. So having gotten our share already in this Wind from Heaven, we may
the easier bear the deferring of the discourse of the tongues thence.

And truly if we can now get the Spirit to blow upon these dead elements, and
quicken them to us into the body and blood of Christ, we shall quickly by the
virtue of that blood of the Vine speak with new tongues, the Spirit will give
utterance, and we shall sing the praises of the Lord.

That should be indeed the whole business of our tongues to day, to be as loud
as the loudest wind in our Thanksgivings; O ye winds of God, bless ye the Lord,
say the three Children in the fire; O ye Children of the Lord, bless ye the
Lord in the Wind say I, in this mighty rushing Wind, acknowledge his goodness,
admire his power, confess his praise, who thus blows the sparks of grace up in
us, who clenses our souls from all impure airs and vapors, who scatters the
clouds of sorrow, shows us the fairest face of Heaven, who cools and refreshes,
and revives and purges us, and wafts us to our heavenly Country by this holy
wind, who daily does wondrous things in us, and for us, and by us, through the
mighty rushings of it, and fills and replenishes us, with all the benefits and
comforts of it, whilst he passes by others without so much as a breathing on
them.

Yet the business would be how to catch this wind, and serve our uses of it.
Why! in the Word and in the Sacraments, and by Prayers we may have it, and be
filled with it. Come then and fill your souls; you have heard the Word already,
treasure it up, (for there are treasures for the winds) and you shall feel it
blow, move and stir in you. The blessed Sacrament is a second way to be filled
with this Spirit, it is reached out and proffered to us there; we may there take
it into our mouths as before into our ears, and it will rush down all before it
that stands against it, down it will into our bowels and fill us with all
heavenly fullness: And then draw it in and breath it out we may by devout and
holy Prayers; only remember always the disposition of that soul this Spirit
only will abide with, peace and unity. Thus disposed you must be to receive the
Spirit, thus disposed to receive the Sacrament; and then the Spirit will
descend upon our Sacrifice, and the wind of Gods benediction upon our offering,
and we shall return hence with mighty rushings in us, the rushing down of sin,
the raising up of grace, mighty mighty things will be done in us by the power
of this Spirit, and this Wind, and as it came from Heaven, so thither will it
back again and carry us upon its wings to keep a perpetal Feast, an Eternal
Whitsunday, all in the white Robes of everlasting Glory.

Blow O blessed Wind upon us this day; blow away our chaff and dross, and dust
out of our performances, breath into thy holy mysteries the breath of a
life-giving life, rush down all our sins before thee; purify and cleanse and
refresh, and revive and comfort us by thy saving breath, that this wind may
bring us good, all the good of Heaven and Earth, fill both our ears and hearts
here with sounds and songs of joy, and hereafter with Hallelujahs for evermore.

THE FIFTH SERMON UPON Whitsunday.
ACTS ii. 1, 2, 3, 4. And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were
all with one accord in one place.

And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and
it filled all the house where they were sitting.

And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon
each of them.

And they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other
tongues as the Spirit gave them utterance.


WHen the day of Pentecost here was fully come, ver. 1. they were all filled,
says the Text, ver. 4. and began to speak. Now the day is fully come again, we
also are full of matter (as Elihu told Job, Job xxxii. 18.) and we must speak.
For it is a day of Tongues, a day to speak in, and a day to speak of too, to
speak magnalia in it, and of it, of the great things of God, and the great
things of the day, the wonderful works of God, ver. 11. which were this day
wrought by the descent of the holy Spirit. To this end the Spirit descended, to
this end the Tongues came, to this end both appeared, that we might learn to
use our Tongues and Spirits to set forth his praise, every one according as the
Spirit gives him utterance according to the gift and place that God has given
him; We, as the Apostles and Ministers of the Spirit; you, as Disciples to be
taught by us; you, to ask with those hearers, ver. 37. Men and brethren what
shall we do? We, as St. Peter, ver. 38. to tell you what to do; We, faithfully
to preach the Word, the remission of sins, and the gifts of the holy Ghost,
ver. 38. you, gladly to receive it, ver. 41. We, to begin the Anthem, you, to
make the Chorus for the service of this days solemnity; both of us to bear our
parts to day in praises and thanksgivings, for the benefits we receive from
this days business.

We have the last year begun to speak of it out of this Text, we begin again to
speak of it hence this year, shall do as the Spirit shall give us utterance. To
hold our peace to day were to sin against the Spirit, who this day gave us all
our tongues to speak. And I hope nor we nor you will be silent of his glory, no
such evil shall befall us.

For a day of good tidings it is, was so when it came first, will be so now
it is come again, and when ever it comes about, was so to the Disciples, will be
so I hope to us to hear the voice of a Comforter, to see his appearance, or out
hear of it. The Text is the Story of it* the Relation of the coming of the
Comforter, the descent of the Holy Ghost. In it, when time was, we observed
these four Particulars: I. The disposition of them the Spirit comes upon. II.
The way, and manner, and order he comes after. III. The Effect and Issue that
comes upon it. And IV. The Time when it came to pass.


I. The disposition of those the Spirit comes upon is such as makes men to be
of one accord, that brings them all to one place, upon such days as Pentecost,
on the solemn feasts, makes them then and there sit quietly, and orderly
expecting Christ, a unanimous, Church-like, orderly, devout, and religious
disposition. Upon such, and such only, is it that the holy Spirit comes.

II. The way, manner, and order of his coming is as a mighty wind, and like as
fire. Suddenly he came, came as a sound, as a sound from heaven, as a sound of
a rushing mighty wind, and such a one too as filled all the house. O^me (2.) as
fire, as tongues of fire, as cloven tongues of fire, such fire yet as sace upon
them and did no hurt, heavenly and celestial fire. Thus he came to day.

III. The Effect and Issue is filling, the filling of all that then were
present with ghost and spirit, Holy Ghost and spirit, then with words, and
tongues, and speech, even according to the measure or pleasure of the Spirit.
This the issue of the holy Spirits coming, fullness, and spirit, and ability,
and utterance, new hearts, and new spirits, new languages, and sobriety to use
them.

IV. The time, the Time of Pentecost, when it was fully come, when all was
ready, persons, and place, and time fully disposed and fit, then comes the holy
Spirit, then came all these things to pass. I put this last, though it stands
first, that I might close up all at least in good time and order.

There wants nothing now, O blessed Spirit, to go on and finish, but that thou
should come and order all our thoughts and spirits, that we may humbly
receive the sound of thy holy Word; that I thy servant may have utterance, this
thy people give thee audience, all of us obedience, and all our hearts and
tongues be so thoroughly heated with thy holy fire, that they may be filled with
thy praise and honor all the day long.

That we may do so, here are tongues given in the Text, ver. 3. Cloven tongues,
as it were, of fire; there we left, there we begin again, at the second Way and
Manner of the holy Spirits coming down to day. And there appeared unto them
cloven tongues, like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. Where (1.) of
the Order; (2.) Of the Appearance; (3.) Of the Manner it self; And lastly, of
the Continuance of it.

For the Order, it is the second way of the Spirits coming here, first in the
wind, then in the fire. The holy fire within us is not kindled but with a
mighty wind. The divine spark or soul cannot be blown up into a fire till some
mighty wind has shaken all our powers, blown off the dust and ashes, those
earthly, worldly affections that choked and covered it, till it has raised a
tumult in all the corners of us, dispersed the vanities and irregularities of
all our motions, and scattered every thing that hindered it from the obedience
to the Spirit; then, and not till then, the fire bursts forth, and, as the
Psalmist, we speak with our tongues.

For the Order (2.) is the same between the sound and the tongues. The Sound
first, the tongues second. We are first to hear before we speak, so the Spirits
order tells us here. Not turn Teachers at the first dash; not presume to teach
others before we are thoroughly taught our selves, that is none of the Spirits way
of teaching, how spiritual soever they think themselves that do so, that speak
what they have neither seen nor heard, their own fancies and imaginations, the
divisings of their own hearts, such as the Christian world never heard before,
whereof there is not so much as the sound, or any thing sounding like it in all
the Writings of the Church.

The sound too (3.) before the fire. The Spirit manifests it self by degrees,
first, more obscurely to the ear, then more evidently to the eye. I have heard
of thee by the hearing of the ear, says Job, Chap. xlii. 5. that was a favor:
but now mine eye sees thee, that is a greater. The Spirit comes by degrees.
Gods favors rise upon us in order. There comes first a great and strong wind
that rends the mountains, and breaks in pieces the rocks before him, that
throws down our mountainous thought and projects, breaks them all in pieces,
crosses our designs, thwarts them with some great affliction, or some strange
thing or other, breaks our very hearts, our stony hearts; then follows an
earthquake in all our faculties, we begin to shake and tremble with the fear of
the Almighty; then comes the fire and burns up all the chaff, scorches our very
bones, and warms us even at the heart; whereupon presently there issues out a
still small voice out of our lips, the tongues follow upon the fire, or are
even with it. This was signified to us thus by Gods appearing to Elijah, 1
Kings xix. 11, 12. and the same order the holy Spirit of God uses here to the
Apostles; the same method still he keeps with us. For he thrusts not in upon us
unprepared, he makes himself a way into us, gives us not so clear an evidence
as seeing him at the first, not till the sound has well awakened us, and the
wind well brushed and cleans'd our houses for him. Yet then appear he does.

For we now presently hear of his appearance. There appeared tongues. The
manifestation of the Spirit, says St. Paul, is given to every man to profit
withal, 1 Cor. xii. 7. Not the Spirit only, but the manifestation too. No
Spirit without some manifestation. If the Spirit be an extraordinary Spirit,
the manifestation will be so too: If it be but ordinary, the manifestation will
be no more.

1. If God sends any with an extraordinary commission to preach or teach, he
enables them with an extraordinary Spirit, appears with them after some
extraordinary fashion, tongues, or miracles, or some high heavenly fires come
with them. They but blaspheme the Spirit, and usurp upon the Office who take it
upon them without such a warrant; they run without sending, says God, Ier.
xxiii. 21. their tongues are but their own, and (however those perverse fellows
in the Psalm infer, they are they that ought to speak, who is Lord over them?
Psalm. xii. 4.) they ought not to speak, there is a Lord over them, what ere
they think, that will one day call them to account, and make them know it;
their fire they bring is but Nadabs and Abihu's, their zeal without knowledge,
they have no tongue but what their mother taught them, the holy Spirit has
taught them none, made no appearance to them either by fire or by tongues, they
are filled with some other Spirit, the Spirit of Pride, of Division, or
Rebellion, or somewhat worse; where the Spirit sends with an extraordinary
commission, it will appear by some gift extraordinary and miraculous, somewhat
will appear.

But (2.) if our mission be but ordinary, the ordinary way that the Spirit has
now left in the power and authority of the Church will be sufficient; yet that
must appear too, our authority appear thence; our tongues serve to it too, to
the edifying of the Church, 1 Cor. xiv. 12. to the building of it up, not to
the pulling of it down. Every gift of the holy Spirit is to have its
manifestation, tongues, and interpretation, and prayer, and Prophecy, and all
the rest, yet all in order. Every one to employ, not hide his talent; he who
has a ministry to wait on that, he that is to exhort to attend to that, he
that is to teach to busy himself in that, though all according to proportion,
Romans xii. 6, 7, 8. all to appear to the glory of God.

Yea, even those saving graces of the Spirit are not always to be kept within,
they are to appear in tongues or fire, so shine that others may glorify, so
speak and act that others seeing our good conversation may be affected with it,
and persuaded to grace and virtue by it. The Spirit is not given to be hid
under a bushel; the wind cannot, the fire will not, the tongue is not usual to
be kept in so. They all appeared here after their way, the wind after its way,
the tongues and fire after theirs; in this verse to the fight, the most certain
of the senses that we might not be deceived by pretended Spirits, might have
somewhat manifest to judge by, to tell us that the graces of the Spirit,
whether those for edification of others, or sanctification of our selves, are
for manifestation, to appear to others as well as to our selves, we receive
them to that purpose, to profit others, and to approve our selves.

These may serve for reasons why the Spirit appears, but why the Spirit appears
now, now first, and not before; now first visibly to the world, is worth
enquiry. And it is to show the pre-eminence of the Gospel above the Law: That
stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings and carnal ordinances, says
the Apostle, Heb. ix. 10. was but the Law of a carnal Commandment, Heb. vii.
16. The Gospel is a Law of spirit and life; the Law of Moses a dead a killing
Letter, but the Gospel of Christ a quickening Spirit, 2 Cor. iii. 6. the Law a
course of shadows, the Gospel only the true light. It will appear so by the
next Particular we are to handle, the manner of his appearing. In tongues, in
cloven tongues, in tongues as it were of fire: I shall invert the order, for
the fire it is that gives light unto the tongues to make them for to appear; of
the fire then first, to show them the better.

For the Spirit to appear as wind or breath is nothing strange. It carries them
in its name. Spiritus a spirando every one can tell you. But that this breath
should not only blow up a fire, but be it self also blown into it, the Spirit
here appear as fire, that is somewhat hard at first perhaps to understand: Yet
you shall see many good reasons for it. Four great ones I shall give you, which
comprehend more under them: (1.) To show the Analogy and correspondence of Gods
dealings and dispensations, how they agree both with themselves, and with one
another. (2.) To insinuate to us the nature and condition of the holy Spirit.
(3.) To signify the several gifts and graces of it. (4.) To declare its
operations also and effects.

1. The Holy Ghost here appeared like fire, that we might see it is the same
God that gave both Law and Gospel, the same Spirit in both Testaments. The Law
was promulgated by fire, Exodus xix. 18. the Lord descended on Mount Sinai then
in fire. The Gospel also here is first divulged by tongues as it were of fire
in Mount Sion. The difference only is that there were here no lightnings,
thunders, clouds, or smoke, as there were there; nothing terrible, nothing dark
or gloomy here, all light, and peace, and glory.

2. Under the Old Testament, the Prophets often were Commissionated by fire to
their Offices; the Angel takes a live coal from off the Altar and lays it upon
Isaiah's mouth, Isa. vi. 7. Elijah the Prophet stood up as fire, Ecclus.
xlviii. 1. Ezekiels first Vision was of appearances of fire, Ezekiel. i. 4, 13.
The Commissions therefore of the Apostles were drawn here also, as it were,
with pens of fire, that they might the more lively answer, and the better
express the Spirit of the Prophets.

3. That the nature of the Law they were to preach might be expressed too. It was
the Law of love, and the holy fire of Charity was it they were sent to kindle
in the World.

4. It was to teach them what they were to expect in the World themselves, fire
and faggot, affliction, and tribulation, the lot and portion both of them, and
of their followers ever since.

5. It was to teach them what they were to be, burning and shining lights to
lead others into heaven.

Lastly, That so all righteousness, Law and Prophets, might be fulfilled, the
types of the one, and the promises of the other, from the first of them to the
last, to St. John Baptists, that they should be baptized with the Holy Ghost
and with fire, that the fire that Christ came to send into the earth, and was
then already kindled, might now burn out into the World. And all this to show
the Almighty Wisdom, who thus agreeably orders all his doings from the first
unto the last, that we might with the greater confidence embrace the Doctrine
of the Gospel which so evenly consented with the Law, and was added only to
bring it to perfection, to raise up the fire of devotion and charity to the
height.

2. But not only to manifest the wisdom of the Father, and perform the promise
of the Son, but secondly to intimate the nature of the holy Spirit.

Fire is the purest Element. The holy Spirit is pure, and incorruptible, thine
incorruptible Spirit, says the Wise man, Wisd. xii. 1. No evil can dwell with
it. It will not mingle with humane interests; By this you may know it from all
other Spirits. They intermix with private humors, and self-respects, and great
ones fancies: The holy Spirit is a fire, and will not mix, it must dwell alone;
has not a tongue now for this, and then for that, to please men, and ease it
self, but is always pure and incorrupt.

Fire (2.) is the subtilest Element, it pierces into every part; And whither
can I go then from thy Spirit, says holy David, Psalm. cxxxix. 6. If I climb up
into heaven, thou art there; If I go down to hell thou art there also. If I
take the wings of the morning, and remain in the uttermost parts of the Sea,
even there also will it find me out. Darkness cannot cover me, thick darkness
cannot hide me, night it self cannot conceal me from thee, O thou divine
Spirit. O keep me therefore that I may do nothing that may make me ashamed and
hide my self, seeing thy eyes will quickly pierce into me.

3. Fire is an active nature, always stirring, always moving. Nothing can be
found better to express the nature of the holy Spirit. It moved from the
beginning, actuated the first matter into all the shapes we see, breathed an
active principle into them all; renewed again the face of the Earth when the
waters had defaced it; blows, and the waters flow; blows again, and dries them
up; guides the Patriarchs, inspires the Prophets, rests upon the Governors of
the People, from Moses to the seventy Elders; gives spirit and courage to the
Martyrs; Non permanebit spiritus meus in vagina, says God, Genesis vi. My Spirit
will not endure to be always as in a rusty sheath; it will be lightning the
understanding, it will be warming the affections, it will be stirring of the
passions, it will be working in the heart, it will be acting in the hand, it
will be moving in the feet, it will be quickening all the powers to the service
of the Almighty; nothing so busy as this holy fire, nothing so active as this
Spirit. Though the nature and essence of it cannot be full expressed, it is thus
very powerfully resembled.

3. The gifts of it more easily by this fire. Seven there are numbered of them
out of Isa. xi. 2. The Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of
counsel and ghostly strength, the Spirit of knowledge and true godliness, and
the Spirit of holy fear, all very naturally represented to us by so many
properties I shall observe to you of the fire. Fire, it ascends, it penetrates,
it tries, it hardens, it enlightens, it warms, it melts. You have all these
again in the seven gifts of the Spirit. For (1.) the holy Spirit elevates our
souls by the Spirit of Wisdom, coelestia sapere, as it is Col. iii. 2. to those
things that are above. Sapientia est rerum altissimarum, says the divine
Philosopher, Wisdom is of things of the higest nature, of a high ascending
strain. (2.) It penetrates and pierces like the fire by the Spirit of
understanding, understands that which the Spirit of man cannot understand, 1
Cor. ii. 11. the very things of God, pierces into them all. (3.) It tries like
fire, by the Spirit of counsel, and advice, teaches us to prove all things, and
choose the best. (4.) It hardens us against all the evils that can befall us,
as fire does the brick against all weather by the spirit of fortitude and
ghostly strength. (5.) It enlightens the darkness of our souls by the spirit of
knowledge, teaches us to know the things that belong unto our peace, the ways
and methods of salvation. (6.) It heats the coldness of our affections by the
Spirit of piety and true godliness, inflames us with devotion and zeal to Gods
service. And (7.) it softens our obdurate hearts by the Spirit of holy fear
that we melt into tears and sighs at the apprehension of Gods displeasure, even
as Wax melts before the fire: the highest, hardest, rockiest mountains melt
and flow down at his presence, when once his Spirit does but cast a ray upon
them. These are the seven gifts of the Spirit, represented to us by so many
properties of the fire.

4. There are seven other operations and effects of the same Spirit, as lively
also expressed by it, and make the fourth reason why the holy Ghost appears under
the semblance of fire.

1. Fire it burns; and the Prophet Isaiah calls this Spirit a Spirit of
burning, Isa. iv. 4. It makes our hearts burn within us, as it did the
Disciples going to Emaus, St. Luke xxiv. 32. puts us to a kind of pain, raises
sorrow and contrition in us, makes the scalding water gush out of our eyes, you
may even feel it burn you.

2. With this burning it purifies and purges too; As things are purified by the
fire, so are our spirits and souls, and bodies purified by the Spirit.

3. For purify it must needs, for it devours all the dross, the chaff, the hay
and stubble that is in us; purges out our sins, burns up every thing before it
that offends, is a consuming fire, Heb. xii. 29. so is God, so is his Spirit.

4. Yet, as it is a consuming, so it is a renewing fire. Fire makes things new
again. And do but send out thy Spirit, O Lord, and they are made, Psalm. civ.
30. We are all made, for so it is that thou renewest the face of the earth, the
face of this dull earth of ours, by putting into it the Holy Spirit.

5. To this purpose it makes, that like as fire it separates (5.) things of
diverse natures, silver from tin, metals from dross. Separare heterogenea is one
of the effects of fire, says the Philosopher, to distinguish and divide between
things of different kinds. And Spiritus judicii and discretionis, the Prophet
styles the Spirit, a Spirit of judgment it is, Isai. 4. 4. a discerning Spirit,
teaches us to discern between Dross and Gold, Truth and Error, between Good and
Evil, and without it we discern nothing. This the Apostle reckons as a peculiar
donation of it, the discerning of spirits, 1 Cor. xii. 10.

6. Yet as it separates things of different natures, so (6.) it unites things
of the same kind, just as the fire does several pieces of the same metal into
one body. This holy Spirit is a Spirit of unity. They that separate, they have
not the Spirit, St. Jude 19. Schisms and Divisions, Strife, Heresies and
Seditions are the works of the flesh, not of the spirit, Gal. v. 20. The fruit
of the Spirit is love and peace, says St. Paul there, ver. 22. And the unity of
the Spirit in the bond of peace we hear of too, Ephesians. iv. 3. Into one Spirit
we are baptized all, for there is but one; one Spirit, one Body, one Hope, one
Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, one all that are of God, ver. 5, 6.
nothing so contrary to the Holy Spirit, as divisions of the members from the
head, or from one another; a shrewd witness this against the spirits of our
age, and an evidence that to what spirit soever they lay claim, they lay false
claim to this, they belong not to this Spirit, which is so much for uniting all
the parts of the body of Christ together,

7. And this it can do when its sees its time, for lastly, it is an invincible
Spirit, it bears down all before it, turns all into it, like the fire, of all
the Elements the most victorious and triumphant. There is no standing out
against this Spirit, it is an Almighty Spirit that can do what it will. It
inflames the air into a fire, vain airy spirits into celestial flames of love
and charity. It dries up the water, the raw waterish humors of our souls, and
fixes all waverings and inconstancies. It burns up our earth, and all the grass
and hay, and sprouts what ever that stand against it. It sets whole houses all
a fire, sets us all a fire for Heaven and heavenly business. Thus it burns, it
purifies, it consumes and renews again, it separates and it gathers, and it
caries all before it, dees what it will in Heaven and Earth, subdues Scepters,
vanquishes Kingdoms, converts Nations, throws down Infernal Powers, and turns
all into the obedience of Christ. To this purpose it is, that it now also here
comes in Tongues. The second manner we noted of his appearance; and that for
three reasons; (1.) nothing more convenient to express either our business, or
him whose it is.

The Tongue is the instrument of speech, the Word is express by it; Christ is
the Word, the Holy Spirit, as it were, the Tongue to express him, comes to day
with an Host of tongues to send this Word abroad into all the World.

Nothing more necessary, for the Apostles were to be the Preachers of it, had
received a Commission to go and preach, St. Matthew. xvi. 15. wanted yet their
tongues, some new enablements, went not therefore till they were this day
brought them; and a more necessary thing the Holy Ghost could not bring them
for that purpose.

Yet they had need (2.) be of fire, sharp piercing tongues, like the little
flames of fire, such as would pierce into the soul, reveal the inmost secrets
of the heart and spirits, and, it seems, so they proved, 1 Cor. xiv. 25.
piercing even to the dividing asunder of the soul and spirit, of the joints and
marrow, Heb. iv. 12.

Tongues of fire (3.) to warm the cold affections of men into a love of Christ;
every tongue is not able to do that, it must be a tongue set on fire from
Heaven that can do that. Tongues, and tongues of fire, sharp piercing tongues,
warm with heavenly heat are the only tongues for the business of Christ.

3. Yet cloven they must be too. It Is not a single tongue will do it. The
Apostles were to preach to the world, and in the world there were a world of
tongues; that they might therefore so preach as to be understood; as many
tongues were necessary to be given them, as there were people with whom they
were to deal.

Behold the greatness of Gods goodness here. Tongues were divided for a curse
at first; lo, he turns them into a blessing; then they were sent to divide the
world, now they are given to unite it; then they wrought confusion, now they
are given to unite it. Thus God can turn our curses into blessings when he
pleases. And fit it is, that we then should turn our tongues to his praise and
glory.

This we may do with one tongue alone. But they who would be Preachers, and
teach others, had need of more. Tongues though they come not now suddenly like
the wind, yet come they must as they can come, by our industry and Gods
blessing. God would not have sent so many tongues, if more then one had not
been necessary for his work; though not now perhaps to preach, yet to
understand surely what we preach. It Is a bold adventure to presume to the
office of a Teacher with a single tongue. He is not able to teach children to
spell true that knows no more, much less to spell the mysteries of the Gospel
to men, who understands not so much as that one tongue he speaks if he
understand no more. Unless we be wiser than Christ and his Holy Spirit, we
cannot think any sufficiently endued to preach them, but such as have received
the gift of tongues, more then one or two; the gift I say, for though to speak
with tongues be not given now miraculously, as it was here, yet given it is to
us, it is the gift still of the Holy Spirit as a blessing upon our labors.

But there are other tongues besides which come from this days mercy. The
tongue that speaks right things, the tongue that comforts the afflicted soul,
the tongue that recals the wandering step, the tongue that defends the
fatherless and widow, the tongue that pours it self out in prayers and praises,
the tongue that speaks continually of holy things, the tongue that speaks no
evil, nor does no hurt, the tongue that speaks nothing but a meek and humble
and obedient spirit; these are the tongues of the Holy Spirit, and even from
this day they have their rise, these are for all orders and sorts of men, and
if those men who now take to themselves to be Teachers, had but learnt to speak
with these tongues, they would have spoke to far better purpose, and more to
Gods acceptance than now they do in speaking as they do, they had not thus
blasphemed the Holy Spirit to entitle him to the extravagancy of their tongues.

Yet fire and tongues, and tongues of fire, are not all the wonders that this
day produced. These fell not only like a flash of Lightning upon the Apostles,
but they sat upon them, or rather, It sat upon them says the Text.

All these tongues, as divided and cloven as they were, like so many flames or
tongues of fire at top, they were all united in one root below, with one mouth,
Romans xv. 6. with one voice, Chap. iv. 24. they spoke all but the same thing.
They are not the tongues of the Spirit, that speak now one thing, now another,
that agree not in the foundation at the least.

Nor is that fire of the Holy Ghosts enkindling, that cannot sit, for to the
fire we may (2.) refer this It. The holy flame is not like the fire of thorns,
that are always crackling and making a noise, it can sit quietly in the heart
and on the lips, and on the head, sometimes in the one, and sometimes on the
other; it sits upon the heads and singes not a hair, it sits in the heart and
scalds it not at all, it sits upon the lips, yet makes them not burst out into
a heat; the fiery zeal that is so much cried up for spirit in the world is too
unquiet, too hot, too raging to be of this days fire.

Yet (3.) we may refer this It to the Holy Spirit it self. That sat upon each
of them too.

It sat first upon each of them as a crown of glory, so St. Cyril. The
Apostles were the Crowns and Glory of the Churches, and so this installed them.

It sat (2.) upon them as in a Chair of State, to fix authority upon them, to
set them in their Chairs, to give them power to govern and guide the Church.

It sat (3.) upon them so, to call into their mind the promise of their
Master, that he would send one to sit in counsel with them, and be with them
always to the end of the world, for sitting is a posture to denote constancy,
establishment, and continuance.

It sat (4.) as it were, to teach us to be settled and constant too, to be
established and grounded in our faith, not to be wavering and carried about with
every wind of doctrine. There is no greater evidence against error, then that
it is not constant to it self, no greater argument against these great
pretended spirits, then that they cannot sit, know not where to fix, are always
moving, as if the Psalmists curse had taken hold upon them (as it does, and
will do without doubt, upon all that take the houses of God in possession,
Psalm. lxxxiii. 12. that usurp upon the office or portion of the Church) as if
God had made them like a wheel and as stubble before the wind, that can sit no
where, rest at nothing, but turn about from one uncertainty to another. The
Holy Spirit is a Spirit that will sit still, and be at peace, continue and
abide.

It sat (5.) upon each, to teach each of us peace and quiet in all our
passions, constancy and continuance in truth and goodness, and a settled and
composed behavior in all conditions, blow the winds never so high, burn the
fires of persecution never so hot against us.

It were well now if we could say, as it follows next, concerning the Apostles,
that we were filled with this Spirit, that we were filled with the Holy Ghost,
that we might arrive at that point within our selves, though we cannot now
arrive at that particular in the Text.

The only filling now that I have time to tell you of, is that before us, and
it is a good one, the filling us with the body and blood of Christ, which is a
signal filling us with the Spirit. Go we will then about it, so to fill our our
souls. The tongues and fire in the Text, we may well apply to it, we may have
use of there.

For tongues are not to speak with only, but taste with two: O taste we then how
good and gracious the Lord is there, that vouchsafes so graciously to come
under our roofs, to come upon tongues. And

Tongues (2.) are to help to digest as well as taste, there in the mouth is a
kind of first digestion made. Ruminate we then, and meditate upon Christ when
we have tasted him. Let it be our business to spend much of our time and days
henceforth in meditation of him, that is the way indeed to be filled with his
Spirit, while we thus digest him and chew upon him in our spirits.

Nor is (3.) fire improper any way to bring to that holy Table. The fire of
charity is to kindle our devotion there, to warm our affections and desires to
it.

There (4.) our tongues are to be warmed into praises, that they may run a
nimble descant upon his benefits, and move apace to the glory of his Name. Thus
are our tongues to be employed, and thus is the fire to be kindled in us that
we may speak with our tongues. This is the way to be filled with the Holy
Spirit, this blessed Sacrament the means to it.

Come thou therefore O blessed Spirit into our hearts and tongues, lighten our
understanding with thy heavenly light, warm our affections with thy holy fire,
purge away all our dross, burn up all our chaff, renew our spirits, separate
our sins and evils from us; unite us in thy love, subdue us to thy self, teach
our hearts to think, our tongues to speak, our hands to act, our feet to move
only to thy will; settle thy self in us hence forward, and dwell with us; so
teach us with all our tongues and powers to praise thee here upon earth, that
we may one day praise thee with them in Heaven for evermore.

A SERMON UPON Trinity Sunday.
REV. IV. 8. -- And they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy,
Lord, God, Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
I Need not stretch the Text to reach the Time. The (...), Holy, Holy, Holy in
it, is plain enough to teach the Trinity. An Anthem sung here by the Angels and
Saints in heaven; done so here also by four of the chief Apostles, and the
Bishops of Judea, signified by the four beasts and twenty four Elders; taken up
after generally by the Saints on earth, commended to us by the Church to day as
our Epistle sent from heaven with a pattern in it for our Hymns and Praises to
the blessed Trinity, Lord God Almighty.

For it is a part, I must tell you, of one of St. John's Visions, presenting to
us what is done in heaven, what Good would have done on earth, and what should
there be done ere long throughout it, beginning at Jerusalem. Glory, and
honor, and thanks should be given unto God for the wonders he was doing for
his servants, for the deliverance he was working for his Church, for the
judgments he was bringing on their enemies; as glory had been of old given him
by his Saints and Prophets, was now given him by his Apostles and Bishops, so
it should be given still by the whole Christian Church for ever; as he himself
was, and is, and is to come* so was his praise, and is, and is to come; we
therefore all to learn to bear our parts in that heavenly Anthem against the
time we come thither to bear them company. Example you see we have here set
before us to do it by, and a form to do it in; better we cannot wish: the four
Beasts or Cherubims, Angels, Saints, and the Apostles, there is our Pattern; for
they rest not day and night saying it: and Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts,
which was, and is, and is to come, there is the form we best do it in.

In each Part we shall observe a kind of Trinity, or three Parts in each.

In the Pattern, (1.) the Persons; (2.) their earnestness, and (3.) their
continuance. (1.) The persons praising God, and saying it, They, the four
beasts or living creatures, as the words tell us just before. (2.) Their
earnestness in it, They rest not saying, they cannot rest for saying it; cannot
rest without the saying it, unless they say it, say it over and over, Holy,
Holy, Holy; cannot rest but doing it, that is their rest they take, their
praising God. (^.) Their continuance at it, day and night it is, and without
rest and pause is it, they are continually doing it, saying and doing all to
his honor and glory.

In the Form of Praise we have a sort of Trinity too, three things observable:
(1.) The glory or honor given, Holy, Holy, Holy. (2.) The Persons to whom it
is, Lord, God Almighty, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, yet all three in one; one
single Lord, one only God, one alone Almighty, and no more; so there is the
Unity in Trinity into the bargain. And (3.) here are the benefits intimated we
praise him for, He was our Creator, He is our Redeemer, He will be our
Glorifier. So you see Trinities enough in the Text to make it Trinity Sunday in
it, to fill all the Trinity Sundays after it.

The sum is, that we are all to bear our parts in this holy Doxology, to give
glory, and honor, and power to the blessed Trinity, with the four beasts, and
four and twenty Elders from time to time for evermore; and that which may here
serve well to persuade us to it is the Company, and with them we will begin.
And they, etc.

But who are they? The beginning of the verse tells us the four beasts, or, as
it may more genuinely and handsomely be translated, the four living creatures,
(...), but what, or who are they? That Is the question, and a hard one, too, it
seems by the variety of opinions, probably to be answered rather by conjecture
than resolution. We shall take the likeliest of them, and pass the rest.

1. Some by the four living Creatures, this they, would have the four Cardinal
virtues understood, by the Lion fortitude, by the Calf or Ox justice, by the
Eagle temperance, and by the Man prudence. And then the sense will be that God
is most signally praised and glorified by a virtuous life, no way like that to
praise him. To do righteousness, to walk wisely, to live soberly, to stand
stoutly to God and goodness, that is the true way to give glory to the whole
Trinity.

2. Others by the four living Creatures apprehend the four chief faculties of
our souls to be insinuated, with which we are to praise him. The irascible
intimated by the Lion, the concupiscible by the Ox, the rational by the face
of man, and the Spirit by the Eagle. And here the Lesson is, that we are to do
it, to praise God with all our powers, set our affections and desires upon it,
be moved and angry at every thing that comes in to hinder it, search all the
means our reason can find out to perfect praise, and raise up our Spirits upon
Eagles wings to perform it to the highest pitch.

3. Some by these four conceive the whole world, consisting of the four
Elements, represented to us as praising God. The fire by the Lion, whose nature
is hot and fiery; the earth by the Ox that tills it; the air by man that
breaths it; the water by the Eagle, which as other fowl was made out of it,
Genesis i. 20. All these indeed we find called in by the holy Psalmist to make up
the song of praise, Psalm. cxlviii. and by the three Children in the fiery
furnace to make up theirs, that we may know the Fire and all the Elements,
Beasts and all Creatures praise him as well as man; nay, better, are readier
commonly to do it than he; that he is fain, even the devoutest he of all of us
to cry out to them to come in with their notes to help him out, and fill up the
Choir.

4. Some think Gods title of slow to anger, and swift to mercy, is by these
four here expressed by way of Hieroglyphick: by the Ox slowness, by the Lion
anger, by the Eagle swiftness, and by the Man mercy represented to us. And
without doubt or question in this slowness to wrath, and swiftness to have
mercy is Gods greatest glory, and for them we most willingly give him glory,
must not cease at any time to give him glory.

5. Others suppose it an Hieroglyphick of Christ himself, who in his
Incarnation appeared in the form or face of a man; in his Passion like a Calf
or Ox for sacrifice; in his Resurrection like a Lion, the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah; in his Ascension like an Eagle; and if this pass, the meaning is, that
by Christ Gods glory is most advanced, by his Incarnation, Passion,
Resurrection, and Ascension, heaven and earth is filled with his glory, and for
this above all the rest, for him and his benefits we are to give God the
greatest glory; there, as it were, begins all our praise, thence the twenty
four Elders first throw down their Crowns, and fall down and worship, as it
were acknowledging him the beginning of all the good we receive both of grace
and glory, Christ the Author and Original of them all.

But (6.) to come a little near. These four living Creatures, say others,
represent the four Evangelists, that preach Christ's Life and Death,
Resurrection and Ascension into glory. The Lion St. Mark, for he begins his
Gospel, as it were, with the voice of a Lion roaring in the Wilderness. The
Calf or Ox St. Luke, who begins his with the story of a Levitical Priest,
whose Ministry was about the Sacrifice of Calves and Oxen. The Man St. Matthew,
who takes his rise from the Genealogy of men. The Eagle St. John, who at the
very first soars up on high, that we had need of Eagles wings and eyes to
follow and discern him. By these four indeed Gods grace and mercy, Christ's name
and glory is spread over the face of all the earth, and by this we learn, that
to preach, and teach, and publish the things of Christ, is to give God praise
and glory, a singular and notable way to do so.

7. Some that suppose they yet hit it nearer, conceive God here brought in in
the Vision sitting as the Bishop of Jerusalem, with all the Bishops of Judea in
council all about him, as Acts xv. it seems they did; and these four living
Creatures about the Throne to be those four chief Apostles, St. Peter, St.
John, St. Barnabas, and St. Paul there present, ranked here higher than the
rest. St. Peter for his primacy set first, and resembled by the Lion for his
fiery zeal and fervor. St. Paul deciphered by the Ox, in respect of his
labors more abundantly than they all. St. Barnabas intimated by the Man, as
being a Son of consolation, humanity, and mercy by the interpretation of his
name. St. John pointed at by the Eagle for those sublime and high speculations
of the Divinity of Christ above all the rest. These were the four great
Standard-bearers of the Christian Israel, (for these four living Creatures were
born in the standard of old Israel, and here alluded to) these the four great
Champions, and Defenders, the Planters and Propagators of the Christian Faith,
of the blessed Trinity, of the glory of God and Christ throughout the world.
And thus we see to undertake the business of the Gospel, to take pains and
labor to defend and propagate it with all our might and main is an actual and
real glorifying of God and Christ.

Yet, lastly, whatever these may be imagined to represent to us, or whomsoever
to point out, or what council, or persons, or judicature soever to resemble,
Angels to be sure they were that thus represented the Vision to St. John, and
as such if we consider them, we may conclude all the business with this Lesson,
that the business of heaven as well as earth, of Angels as well as men, is to
be employed in Praises and thanksgivings to the Almighty; an employment
therefore well worth our time, and pains, and study.

Now put all these together, and I cannot give you a fuller description of the
way to praise and glorify him than these have given you. For to do it as we
should, is (1.) to live virtuously; (2.) To employ all the powers and faculties
of soul and body to his service; (3.) To call in all the Creatures to help us
to do it, and to use them to it; (4.) To reflect often upon both his mercies
and his judgments, and acknowledge his goodness in them both; (5.) To meditate
upon the Life, the Death, the Resurrection, the Ascension of Christ with all
devotion and humility; (6.) To preach and publish it what we can; (7.) To
defend and maintain it to our utmost power; (8.) To reckon it, lastly, an
Angels work, a heavenly piece of business thus to spend our days and years in
giving glory to the most highest.

And if heaven, and earth, and all the creatures else besides sinful man become
thus the Trumpets of their Creators glory, and in all their several ways and
orders ambitiously contrive themselves into the instruments of it, what strange
creatures must we needs be that either neglect it, or forget it? Heaven and
earth, says our morning Hymn, are full of the Majesty of thy glory, we can be
no other than hell, then, that are empty of it, that do not resound it. Dragons
and all deeps, says the Psalmist, Psalm. cxlviii. 7. all but the old Dragon, and
the bottomless deep, the deep of hell, all praise him else. You see what we
bring our selves to by our unthankfulness, what a sad condition they are in who
give not glory unto God, who delight not in magnifying and praising him, who
are against the Hymns and Anthems to that purpose. Thus you see it done in the
Text, by Saints and Angels in the Heavens, by Apostles and Evangelists on the
Earth. Thus de facto, so it was then. But it is as well a Prediction of what
should be after: that not only the present Age of the Apostles and holy Bishops
then, but the succeeding Ages also of the Church should acknowledge the glory
of the undivided Trinity. And it fell out accordingly. Not only that meek and
merciful man St. Gregory, that valiant Lion St. Ambrose, that laborious Ox St.
Jerome, that sublime Eagle St. Augustine (as some please to fancy these four
beasts) or the four first Patriarchates as others have interpreted them, but
all the four corners of the earth have since professed it, and, with the twenty
four Elders, fallen down and worshipped it; The luster and glory of that glorious
mystery has shone through all the quarters of the World, and all his famous
mercies to his people, and his judgments against their enemies are still daily
celebrated and magnified in all the Congregations of the Saints. This St. John
foresaw, and here foretells the poor persecuted Christians then, that how hard
soever things went with them then, they should ere long turn all their sighs
and lamentations into Songs of praise for their deliverance and salvation.

This they should, and (3.) we should as much: It was foretold of them they
should, it is commanded us we should. Therefore glorify him, says the Apostle,
1 Cor. vi. 20. glorify him in your bodies, and glorify him in your spirits,
glorify him with the bodies that glorify him, and glorify him with the
Spirits that glorify him, bear them all company in so doing; do it all the
ways you can, you can neither do it too many, nor too much. Put on the faces of
Eagles in the Temple, and raise your souls up there and praise him. Put on the
faces of men at home, and let the holiness of your conversation praise him
there. Put on the appearance of Oxen in your Callings, and let the diligence of
your Actions and Vocations praise him. Put on the appearance of Lions abroad in
all places of temptations, and let your courage in the resisting and repelling
them praise him there. Thus we truly copy out our pattern.

Yet to transcribe it perfectly well, we must now secondly also transcribe
their earnestness: For here they not only give praise and glory unto God, but
they do it earnestly, they rest not doing it, they rest not saying: that is,

1. They cannot rest unless they say it. And, I will not suffer mine eyes to
sleep, nor mine eyelids to slumber, neither the temples of my head to take any
rest till I have found out a way to praise my God, till I have offered up the
service of my thanks, and added something to his glory, must be the Christians
resolution.

2. They rest not saying, is, they say it, and say it again, say it over and
over, Holy, Holy, Holy, (...) is in some Copies nine times read; Holy nine
times repeated; they think they can never say it enough: No more it seems did
David, when he so often repeated, For his mercy endures for ever in one single
Psalm, Psalm. cxxxvi. And hence it is the Church, to imitate this holy fervor,
so often reiterates the Doxologie, and inserts so many several Hymns, and even
either begins almost all its Prayers and Collects with an acknowledgment either
of his Mercy, Goodness, and Providence, or ends them with acknowledgment of his
Majesty, Power, and Glory; this both to imitate the glorious Saints, and to
obey the Apostles injunction of being fervent in Prayers and Praises.

3. They rest not saying, is, they rest not but in so doing. That Is their rest,
their joy, their happiness to do so, thus to be always praising God. It would
be ours too, had we the same affections to it, or the same senses of it. We
could not go to rest, nor lie down to sleep, could not sit down and take our
rest till we had first lift up our eyes and hearts, nay, and voices, too,
sometimes, till we had first paid our thanks, and given him praise for his
protections in our ways and labors until then.

3. But to be thus eager and earnest at it is not all. So we might be for a
start and give over presently; but it is day and night that Angels and good men
do it. There is no night indeed properly with the Angels; It Is with them
eternal day: yet all that time which we call day and night they are still a
saying it. The Morning comes and they are at it: the Night comes and they are
at it still. Let me go for the day breaks, says the Angel that strove with
Jacob, Genesis xxxii. 26. And I must sing my Mattens, adds the Chaldee Paraphrase;
as if he had said, I can stay no longer, I must go take my Morning course in
the heavenly Choirs. And in the depth of night we find them by whole hosts and
multitudes at their Gloria in Excelsis, Glory be to God in the highest, St.
Luke ii. 13.

The first fervours of Christian Piety were somewhat like this of the Angels.
You might have seen their Churches full at midnight, all the Watches of the
night you might have heard them chanting out the praises of their God, and all
the several hours of the day you might have found some or other continually
praising God in his holy Temples, as well as in their Closets. Nay, in the
Jewish Temple they ceased not to do so. Ye that by night stand in the House of
the Lord, Psalm. cxiv. 2. Praise him ye, says holy David; for indeed ye stand
there to praise him; and the Temple it self stood open all the day for all
comers, to that purpose, when they would. Therefore shall every good man sing
of thy praise without ceasing, says the Psalmist, Psalm. xxx. 13. It Is a good
thing to do so, Psalm. xcii. 1, 2. To tell of thy loving kindness early in the
morning, and of thy Truth in the night season; so good, that David himself
resolves upon it, Psalm. cxlv. 2. Every day will I give thanks unto thee, and
praise thy Name for ever and ever, prays also that his mouth may be filled with
Gods praise, that he may sing of his glory and honor all the day long, Psalm.
lxxi. 7. from morning to night, and from night again to morning, he would
willingly do nothing else.

Nay, be the night and day taken either in their natural or moral sense, either
properly for the spaces and intervals of light and darkness, or morally for the
sad hours of affliction and adversity, and those bright ones of jollity and
prosperity; good men praise God in them both, do not cease to do it; if sorrows
curtain up their eyes with tears, and put out all their light of joy and
comfort, yet blessed be the Name of the Lord, cry they out with patient Job,
Chap. i. 21. Again, if their paths be strow'd with light, and the Sun gild all
their actions with lustrous beams; if Heaven shine full upon them, they are not
yet so dazell'd but they see and adore Gods mercy in them, and in the midst of
all their glories and successes they are still upon his praise, and render all
to him. Neither the one night, nor this other day make them at any time forget
him. A good item to us hence, (1.) not to suffer our pleasures and vagaries,
our mirths and vanities, our successes and prosperities to steal away the time
we are to spend in giving God thanks and glory for them. Nor (2.) to permit our
selves so much time to the reflection upon our griefs and troubles, as to omit
the praising God, that they are no worse, and that he thus fatherly chastises
us to our bettering and amendment, does all to us for the best. Yet not to
cease praising him day and night, seems still to have some difficulty to
understand it. The Angels perhaps, that neither eat nor drink, nor sleep, nor
labor, they may do it; but how shall poor man compass it?

Why! first, Imprint in thy soul a fixed and solid resolution to direct all thy
words and actions to his glory. Renew it (2.) every day thou risest, and every
night thou lie down. Renounce (3) all by-ends and purposes that shall at any
time creep in upon thee to take the praise and honor to thy self. Design (4.)
thy actions, as often as thou can, particularly to Gods service, with some
short offering them up to Gods will and pleasure, either to cross or prosper
them, and when they be done, say, Gods Name be praised for them. And lastly,
omit not the times of Prayer and Praise either in public or in private, but
use thy best diligence to observe them, to be constant and attentive at them.
Thus with the Spouse in the Canticles, when we sleep our hearts awake; and
whether we eat or drink, or walk, or talk, or whatsoever we do, we do all to
the glory of God, and may be said to praise him day and night, and not cease,
saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
And so I come to the second General. The form here set us to praise him in. In
which first we have to consider the glory it self that is expressly given him;
Holy, Holy, Holy.

To speak right indeed, the whole sentence is nothing else; yet this evidently
referring to that of Isai. vi. 3. where the Seraphims use this first part in
their Hymn of praise, I conceive this the chief and most remarkable part of of
it, which may therefore bear the name before the rest.

Now this saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, is attributing all purity; perfection and
glory to God as to the subject of it himself, and the original of it to others,
thereby acknowledging him only to be worshipped and adored. So that saying thus,
we say all good of him, and all good from him to our selves.

Thrice it is repeated, which, according to the Hebrew custom, is so done to
imprint it the deeper in our thoughts, and may serve us as a threefold cord,
which is not easily broken, to draw us to it.

But another reason the Fathers give. And it is, (1.) they say, to teach us the
knowledge of the holy and blessed Trinity. Indeed, why else thrice and no less
or more? Why follows, Lord, God, Almighty; three more words? why: (...), three
yet again, and yet but three, who was, who is, who is to come? Why do the
Seraphims in Isaiah say no more? yet say so too? Why have we in the following
verses, Glory and Honor and Thanks, ver. 9. and Glory, and Honor, and Power,
so punctually thrice, and thrice only offered to them? How came it to be so
universally celebrated throughout the World, and put into all the Catholic
Liturgies every where? words fall not from Angels and Angelical Spirits by
chance or casually, The holy Penmen write not words hap hazard. Nor is it easy
to conceive so hard a doctrine, so uneasy to reason, should be so generally
and humbly entertained, but by some powerful working of Gods Spirit. This may
be enough to satisfy us, that the blessed Trinity is more then obscurely
pointed out to us here.

And (2.) to be sure, the Fountain of all Holiness is here pointed to us, that
we may learn to whom to go for grace; that we may see we our selves are but
unholy things; that nothing is in it self pure or holy, none but God.

And (3.) it points us out what we should be; Be ye holy as I am holy, says
God. No way otherwise to come near him; no way else to come so near him, as to
give him thanks; for out of polluted lips he will not take them* For in the
second place the Lord God Almighty it is we are to give this glory to.

The three Persons here, me thinks are evident however; God the Father, the
Lord the Son, and the Almighty Spirit, that made all things, that does but
blow, and the waters flow; that does but breath, and man lives; that with the
least blast does what he will.

Yet these three, it seems, are still but one, one Lord, and one God, and one
Spirit, Ephesians. iv. 4, 5, 6. all singulars here; nounes, verbs, articles, and
participles, all in the singular number here, (...), that we might see, though
a Trinity there be to be believed, yet it is in unity, though three
Personalities, but one Nature, though three Persons, but one God.

All the scruple here can but arise from the setting Lord the Son, before God
the Father; but that is quickly answered, when they tell you, there is none here
before or after other, none greater and lesser than another, and therefore no
matter at all for the order here, where all is one, and one is all, Lord God
Almighty.

Yet now to encourage us the better to our Praises and Thanksgivings, see we in
the last place the benefits they here praise him for, and they are intimated to
us in the close of all, Who was, and is, and is to come.

In the first, we understand the benefit of our creation. God it was that
created us.

In the second, we read the benefit of our Redemption, the Lord it is that
redeems us daily, pardons and delivers us.

In the third, we have the benefit of our Glorification still to come, the Holy
Spirit here sealing us, and hereafter enstating us in glory.

In them all together, we may in brief see, as in a Prospect, that all the
benefits we have received heretofore, he was the Author of them; that all the
mercies we enjoy, he is the Fountain of them; that all the joys or good we hope
for, he is the donour of them; he was, he is, he must be the bestower of them
all; without him nothing; he was, and is, and will be to us all in all.

And now sure, though I have not the time to specify all the mercies we enjoy
from this blessed Lord God Almighty, and indeed, had I all time, I could not,
and all tongues, Si mihi sint linguae centum, sint oraque centum, I could not,
yet we cannot but in gross at least take up a Song of Praise for altogether;
say somewhat toward it.

Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God Almighty, holy in our Creation, Holy in our
Redemption, holy in our Sanctification. Holy in Heaven, holy in Earth, holy
under the Earth too. Holy in glorifying of his Angels, holy in justifying his
Saints, holy in punishing the Devils; Holy in his Glory, and holy in his Mercy,
and holy in his Justice; holy in his Seraphims, and holy in his Cherubims, and
holy in his Thrones; holy in his Power, and holy in his Wisdom, and holy in his
Providence; Holy in his Ways, and holy in his Laws, and Holy in his Promises;
holy in the Womb, and holy in Manger, and holy on the Cross; holy in his
Miracles, and holy in his Doctrines, and holy in his Examples; holy in his
Saints, and holy in his Sacraments, and holy in his Temples; holy in Himself,
holy in his Son, holy in his Spirit, Holy Father, holy Son, and Holy Spirit.

Therefore with Angels and Archangels, and with all the company of Heaven, and
all the Saints in Heaven and Earth, we laud and magnify thy glorious Name,
evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts, Heaven
and Earth are full of the Majesty of thy Glory, Glory be to thee O Lord most
High, Lord God Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come, Glory and Honor,
and Thanks be unto Thee for ever and ever, Amen, Amen, Amen.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON THE Calling of St. Peter.
St. LUKE v. 8. -- Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.
A Strange Speech for him that speaks, to him it is spoken, from St. Peter to
his Savior. One would think it were one of the Gadarens, who thus entreated
him to depart the Coasts. Strange indeed, to desire him to depart, without whom
we cannot be; stranger to give such a reason for it, a reason that should
rather induce us to entreat him to tarry than to go; for being sinful men, we
have most need of him to stay with us: but strangest of all it is, for St.
Peter to desire it, and upon his knees to beseech it. To desire Christ to go
away from us, to go from us, because we have need of his being with us, and for
such a one as St. Peter, and that so earnestly to inintreat it, is a business
we well skill not at the first dash.

Yet if we consider what St. Peter was when he so cried out, or what made him
to do it, or how unfit he, being a sinful son of man, thought himself for the
company of the Son of God, we shall cease to wonder, and know it is the sinners
case for ever so to do, to be astonished at miracles, not to bear suddenly the
presence of our Lord, and when we first apprehend it, to cry out to him, with
St. Peter here, to withdraw from us for a while, for that we are not able to
endure the brightness and terror of his Splendor and Majesty.

It was a miraculous and stupendous draught of Fish (after they had given up
all hopes of the least) suddenly came to Net, which thus amazed St. Peter and
his Fellows. They had drudged and toiled all night, and not a Fish appeared:
but when Christ came to them, then came whole showles, and thrust so fast into
the Net, that they brake it to get in, as if the mute and unreasonable
creatures themselves had such a mind to see him, by whose Word they were
created, that they valued not their lives, so they might see or serve his
pleasure. And yet St. Peter makes as much means that he might see him no
longer, whom if he had not seen, and seen again, notwithstanding his desires to
the contrary, it had been better he had never seen, nor been at all.

But such is our mortal condition, that we can neither bear our unhappiness,
nor our happiness; unreasonable Creatures go beyond us in the entertainment of
them both, according to their kinds; though it may be, here, St. Peter's
humility speaks as loud as his unworthiness, or inability to endure the
presence of his Lord.

St. Peter, we must needs say, was not thoroughly called as yet to be a Disciple;
this humble acknowledgment of his own unworthiness to be so was a good
beginning. Here it is we begin our Christianity; which though it seems to be a
kind of refusal of our Master is but a trick to get into his service, who
himself is humble and lowly, and receives none so soon as they that are such,
none at all but such, whom by the posture of their knees, and the tenours of
hearty and humble words, you may discern for such.

And to sum up the whole meaning of the words to a brief Head, they are no
other, nor no more than St. Peter's profession of his own humble condition, that
he is not worthy that his God and his Redeemer should come so near him, and
therefore (in an Ecstasy, as it were, at the sight of so glorious a Guest)
desires him to forbear to oppress his unworthy servant with an honor he was
not yet able to bear.

Yet we cannot but confess, the words may have a harder sense upon them, as the
voice of a stupid apprehension, or an insensibleness of such heavenly favors,
as our Saviors company brings with it. We shall have time to hint at that
anon. It shall suffice now at first, to trouble you only with two evident and
general parts.

Christ's absence desired; And

The Reason alleged for it.

I. Christ desired to be gone, Depart from me; And, II. Why he is so, For I am
a sinful man, O Lord.
The Desire seems to be the voice of a threefold person, and such is St. Peter's
now: 1. Of a man. 2. Of a sinful man, and yet, 3. Of an humble man, Me, that me
here, confessing my self a sinful man.


The Reasons equal the variety of the desires, or Desirers. Three they are too.

1. For I am a man. 2. For I am a sinful man. 3. For thou, O Lord, thou art
God, and I a man.
It Is a Text to teach us what we are, to whom we speak, and how to speak to
him. And if you go hence home without learning this, you may say, perhaps, you
have heard a Sermon, but you have learnt nothing by it. It shall be your faults
if you do not.

And unless we cry in a sense contrary to St. Peter's meaning, Depart from us, O
Lord, out of a kind of contempt and weariness of his Word, and not out of the
conscience of our own unworthiness of so great a blessing; then though our
words be somewhat indiscreet, though we sometimes speak words not fitting for
our Savior to hear, though they seem to show a kind of refusal of him, yet
being no other than the mere expression of the apprehension of his glorious
presence, and our own unworthiness. Christ will comfort us, and call out to us
presently as he does to St. Peter, ver. 10. not to fear: we shall not lose by
his Word or Presence, nor by our so sensible apprehension of his glory, though
we be but a generation of sinful men.

That our desires, first may be set right, though peradventure not always speak
so, the desires being the hinge upon which good and evil move on their courses,
I begin to examine St. Peter's desire under a threefold consideration: Of a man,
of a sinful, of an humble man. For all these St. Peter at this time was capable
of, and in which of these he speaks most feelingly, will be perhaps anon the
quere, and how far they may pertain to us, be used, or not used by us, will be
the business we are to speak of. If we take all, we are sure to be right.

Then first of the desire, as it is that of man or humane nature, considered
simply in its own imperfection, unable to bear the presence of a supernatural
honor.

Nature sometimes desires God to depart from it. It loves not to be forced out
of its course, to be screwed up beyond it self. Miracles are burdens to
Nature: and however it be ready to serve the will of the Supreme Mover, yet
when it is diverted from its own way, and strained to a service or quickness,
with which its innate slowness is unacquainted, it does even by its hasting
back to its old wont, in a manner, desire to be freed from the present command
of its great Controuler.

It Is so with man, who being of a corruptible make, cannot endure the presence
of an incorruptible Essence. Angels and Spirits bring affrightment to it when
they come; we are terrified at the presence of an Angel, though he bring us
nothing but tidings of the greatest joy. Nay, if we do but think we see a
Spirit, (as the Disciples did, when it was was no other than their beloved
Master) we are wholly frighted and amazed. There is so great a distance between
our corrupt Mortality, and their immortal conditions, that we desire not to see
them.

Yea, the body it self is so little delighted with the presence of its own best
companion, the incorruptible soul, (though it enjoy all its beauty and vigor
by it) that by continual reluctances against it, and perpetually throwing off
the commands of it, and so daily withdrawing its imaginations from the thoughts
of, or converse with that nobler part, it seems to wish it gone, rather than to
be bound to that observance which the presence of that divine parcel requires
at our hands.

And if it fare no better with these natures of Angels and our own Spirits,
which are nearer mortality and imperfection, and have more affinity to us, and
full natural engagements upon us, because their excellencies breed either a
kind of envy, or terror to us, that we in a manner say to those that we cannot
sunder from us, our very souls, go away, trouble us not with these spiritual
businesses, how is it otherwise likely than that we should be ready to avoid
the presence of that eternal Purity, in whose sight our best purities cannot
stand at all?

We love not to see our own imperfections; that makes us unwilling to endure
the presence of any thing that shows us them. Now the divine excellencies above
all the rest being that which by its exactness discovers the most insensible
blemishes we labor with, you cannot wonder, that a creature so much in love
with it self, should desire the removal of that whose neerness of much debases
it.

Nor is this all, there is terror besides at the approach of the Almighty.
When God drew near to his People upon the Mount, and the People saw the
thundrings and lightnings, and the noise of the Trumpet, and the mountain
smoking, conceiving him to be at hand, whose voice is terrible as the thunder,
at whose presence the mountains smoke, they removed and stood afar off, Exodus
xx. 18. And ver. 19. they said unto Moses, speak thou with us, and we will
hear, but let not God speak with us lest we die. Thus at least entreating God
to withdraw somewhat farther from them, even lest they should die for fear if
he should come nearer them.

We cannot always say such desires are orderly and good, yet such there are, we
may say in the best created nature. Indeed we commonly desire what is worst for
us; as if we knew not our own good, or did not study it.

Certainly, Gods company can do us no harm. In his presence is life, says the
Psalmist, yet say we, we die if we see him. In him we live, and move, and have
our being, says the Apostle, Acts xvii. 28. yet say we, if He come to nigh us,
or depart not from us, we shall be no more. Thus our thoughts and desires run
counter to him.

Nay, there is a Generation that the Prophet complains of, that say plainly
unto the Lord, depart from us, Isa. xxx. 11. We will have none of thy Laws, we
desire not thy Precepts, thy Word is a burden to us, thy solemn Worship we
cannot away with, we are weary of thy Sacraments, we are sick of thy Truth, thy
Priests are a trouble to us, thy Holy Days take too much time from us, thy Holy
Service and thy Holy Things they are too chargeable for us, take them away and
depart from us, we will have none of them any longer. This is more than the
voice of Natures imperfection, it is the voice of sin and rebellion added to it;
but take we heed, lest while we thus thrust God from us, he go indeed and come
no more, go away, and leave us in perpetual sin, darkness, and discomfort. It
may please God, peradventure, to construe what we have done hitherto as the
rash hasty words only of affrighted or disturbed Nature, not knowing which way
to turn it self upon a sudden, being amazed at the things that (we know not
how) are come to pass in these days; but if we shall persist to desire him to
depart (which of all sins has most unthankfulness and impiety, I may add
Atheism also, in it) he will go, and he will not return, then shall we seek him
early, but we shall not find him: We shall seek him sighing, and weeping, and
mourning as we go, but we shall not find him; we shall eat of the fruit of our
own way, Prove. 1. 3.
and be filled with our own devices; but we shall see him no more for ever;
then shall we beg for what we have rejected, but he will not hear us, he is
departed from us, and will not come again.

Thus it was not St. Peter's desire. He was not tired with Christ's company, nor
glutted with it, as the Israelites with their despised Manna; only Christ, by
showing a Miracle, had so amazed his wits, that he knew not how, on a sudden,
to recollect his Spirits to entertain so great and holy a Guest, does
therefore, not well considering what to say, desire him to divert a little some
whither else, where he might be more honorably entertained, or to stand off a
while, and give him breath, that he might recover his Spirits, and be able more
worthily to entertain him.

But there was somewhat else which made St. Peter so express himself. He was
not only sensible of his mortal lot, but of his sinful condition tion too. Thus
we are (2.) to consider it, as the voice of a sinful man, of humane nature
corrupted with sin.

Though all created Substances contract a kind of trembling, or drawing back at
the approach of God, Isa. 6. 2.
the very Seraphims covering their faces with their wings, yet did not sin and
folly cover them with a new confusion, the weakest and poorest of them would
draw a kind of solace and happiness from the beams of that Majesty that so
afrighted them. It Is sin that speaks the Text in a louder key, that more
actually cries to him, not softly and weakly out of weakness, but aloud and
strongly out of wilfulness, to depart.

It does more then so. It drives God from us; not only bids him go, but forces
him. It is not so mannerly as to entreat him, it discourteosly and unthankfully
thrusts him out of doors. Exi a me, Get you out, says the sinful soul to God;
no obsecro, no entreaty added, not go out I pray thee, or depart I beseech
thee. We should do well to think how uncivilly we deal with God; we are not
content to put him out of his own house and dwelling, the temples of our
bodies, the altars of our souls, by our sins; nay, and his holy Temples by
sacriledges and profaneness, but sometimes in ruder terms, we bid him be gone,
and thrust him out by wilful and deliberate transgressions, by solemn and legal
sacriledges and profanenesses, which we commit and reiterate in contempt of
him, as if expressly we said to him, Go from us, we will have nothing to do with
thee any longer: thou shall not only not dwell, but not stand, or be amongst
us. The people of Gennesaret besought Christ to depart out of their Coasts.
These sinners will out with him whether he will or no; and though he come
again, and knock to be let in, and continue knocking till his head be wet with
the dew, and his locks with the drops of the night, yet can he hear no other
welcome from us, then depart from us, we are in bed, well at ease in our
accustomed sins, and we will not rise to let thee in; we will not be troubled
with thy company, with a course so chargeable or dangerous as is thy wonted
service.

Strange it is, that we should thus deal with God, but thus we do; yet no man
lays this unkind usage to his heart, never considers how he thus daily uses
God. If good motions arise within us, we bid them be gone, they trouble us,
they hinder our sports or projects, our quiet or interest. If good
opportunities present themselves without, we bid them go, we are not at leisure
to make use of them, they come unseasonably. If the Word preached desire to
enter in, if it touch our Consciences and strike home, we bid that depart too,
it is not for our turn, it crosses our interests, or our profits, or our
pleasures, we will not therefore have it stay any longer with us. If God by any
other way, as of afflictions or of deliverances, by blessings or curses, or any
other way come to us, they are no sooner over, nor these any sooner tasted, but
we send them gone to purpose, and think of them again no more; our sins return
and send them going, make us forget both his justice and his mercies.

This is the course the sinner treads to Godward. From whence it is, that the
soul thus ill apparelled with its own sins, dares not look God in the face
without the mediation of a Redeemer. She has driven God from her by her sins,
and having thus incensed him, flees away when he draws toward her. Thus Adam
and Eve, having by sin disrobed themselves of their original righteousness,
when they hear the voice of God, though but gently walking toward them, and
calling to them, they run away and hide themselves from the presence of the
Lord amongst the trees of the Garden, Genesis iii. 8. They felt it seems, they
wanted something to shelter them from the presence of God, into the thickets
therefore they hie themselves, as if they then foresaw they had need of the
Rod out of the stem of Iesse, the branch out of his roots, as the Prophet calls
Christ, Isa. xi. 1. to bear off the heat of Gods anger from them.

Under the leaves of this branch alone it is that we are covered, sheltered
from the wrath to come. His leaves, his righteousness it is that clothes our
nakedness; the very garments which our first Parents were fain to get to
themselves, before they durst venture again into his presence. There is no
enduring Gods presence still, no coming nere him, unless we look upon him
through these leaves from under the shelter of this branch of Iesse.

Tell the sinner, who keeps not under this shelter, that lies not at this
guard, of Gods coming to him, of his looking toward him, of his approach to
judgment, and with Felix he trembles at it, puts off the discourse to another
time, refuses to hear so terrible news, as Gods coming is, if Christ came not
with him. Such a one has sin made him, that he desires not to see him, whose
eyes will not behold sin, Depart from me, O Lord, in stead of Thy Kingdom come,
is his daily Prayer.

Yet, as hardly or unadvisedly as nature or corruption may deliver this speech
of St. Peter's, it may be delivered in a softer, sweeter tone, and so it was by
him. It may (3.) be the voice of the humble spirit, casting himself down at the
feet of Jesus, and confessing himself altogether unworthy of so great a favor
as his presence.

If we peruse the speeches of humble souls in Scripture, by which they accosted
their God, or their Superiors, we shall see variety of expression indeed, but
little difference in the upshot of the words; I am but dust and ashes, says
father Abraham, Genesis xviii. 27. Now how can dust and ashes with their light
scattering atoms endure the least breath of the Almighty. The Prophet Isaiah
saw the Lord in a Vision, sitting upon a Throne, and presently he cries out, Woe
is me, for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell in the
midst of a people of unclean lips; for mine eyes have seen the King, the Lord
of Hosts, Isai. vi. 5. What? undone Isaiah? Yes, Woe is me, I am undone; for
mine eyes have seen the Lord of Hosts, who certainly cannot but consume me, for
so boldly beholding him. I am not worthy says the Centurion to Christ, St.
Matthew. viii. 8. that thou should come under the roof of my house, speak the
word only; as if his presence were so great he might not bear it. And St. Paul
as soon as he had told us, that he had seen Christ, 1 Cor. xv. 8, tells us he
was one born out of due time: was the least of the Apostles, and not meet to be
called an Apostle; as if the very seeing of Christ had made him worth nothing.
Indeed it makes us think our selves so, of whom we ever think too much, till we
look up to God. Then it befalls us, as it fell out to Job, xlii. 5, 6. I have
heard thee by the hearing of the ear, [but that was nothing] now mine eye sees
thee, Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes. Hither it is
always, that the sight of God depresses us, to think humbly of our selves, that
we profess our just deserts to be no other then to be deprived of his presence.

There are like expressions of humble minds toward our Superiors too, in holy
Writ. When Rebeccah saw Isaac coming toward her, she lighted down from her
Camel, and covered her self with her vail; as if either her humility or her
modesty would not suffer her suddenly to look upon his face, who was presently
to be her Lord, Genesis xxiv. 65. But Abigail's complemental humility surpasses, 1 Samuel xxv. 41. When David sent to take her to him to wife, she arose and bowed
her self to the ^arth, and said, behold* let thine handmaid be a servant to
wash the feet of the servants of my Lord* And Mephibosheth, though not so
courtly, yet as deeply undervalues himself in the sight of his Lord and King,
when he thus answer's David's profer'd kindness, 2 Samuel ix. 8. What is thy
servant that thou should look upon such a dead Dog as I am?

Now if Rebeccah descend from her Camel, and veil her face at the sight of her
designed husband; if Abigail term her self the servant of the servants of
David, even to the meanest office, to wash their feet: if Mephibosheth count
himself a Dog in the presence of King David, each of these thus expressing
their humility, it is no wonder if St. Peter at the presence of his Savior, it
is but just that we in the presence of our God and Savior, descend from our
Camels, from our Chairs of State, from our seats of ease, from the stools
whereon we sit, and bow down our eyes, our hearts and bodies in all humility,
as unworthy to look up to Heaven, to look him in the face, whom we have so
offended, willing to wash the feet of his poorest servants, to serve him in any
thing, in the poorest, meanest way or office, ready to profess our selves
amongst the vilest of his creatures, who cannot so much as expect a good look
from him.

You may surely guess by the frame of speech (though nature and sin may
sometimes use some of the same words) that the tenor of them altogether, is no
other then the expression of St. Peter's humble acknowledgment of his own
vileness.

He confesses plainly he is a sinful man; how could he more depress himself,
(...), a man that was nothing but a sinner, a very sinner.

Thence it is, that he thinks himself unworthy, that he should stay with him;
therefore desires him, to quit his ship, but much more his company, as far
unfit to receive him, or be near about him.

And (3.) whilst he thus confesses himself to be a sinful man, he speaks
somewhat doubtfully (at least) to him, as if he conceived him to be the Lord
his God; thus much however: he acknowledges so great a disproportion between
himself and Christ, that whilst he knows what to call himself, he knows not
well what to style him: to be sure, knows not how to speak, speaks indeed, but
knows not what he says, whilst humbly desiring him to depart, he unwittingly
parts with his own happiness, not knowing what he desires or does, in this
distraction.

These three, an acknowledgment of our own wretchedness, a sensible
apprehension of our our own unworthiness, and Christ's greatness: And (3.) a
kind of troubled expression of them, without art or study, are the signs and
effects of true humility, and are here caused by the consideration of Gods
miraculous dealing with us; which commonly shows us Gods Goodness and Grace,
his Glory and Majesty, our own weakness, sinfulness, and misery, and by so
setting them so suddenly together, render us unable to express either.

In some perverse natures, there arises, we must confess, sometimes a pride
upon the receipt of divine favors; so that we may say St. Peter's behavior
after so great a miracle showed toward him, makes his humility the more
commendable. A great and wonderful draught of fish he had taken, and he had
labored hard for it: some body would have given at least part of the glory of
so good success to his own labor, or at least triumphed and gloried highly in
it, as if he had been the only favorite of Heaven, the only Saint for his good
success: but St. Peter saw by his lost labor all the bypast night, an the
uncouth multitude of fishes now against hope taken up, that his labor did but
little here: there was one with him in the boat he saw, at whose command the
fish came to it in such number. So that now he sees little by himself, or his
own endeavor, but that he was not fit company for the Lord that was with him,
neither worthy of that miracle, nor of that Master.

Thus good men are humbled, even in their prosperous successes, whilst nothing
but miraculous miscarriages can humble the ungodly; and not then neither, to
think ere a whit the worse of themselves, or the better of others, or
understand, but that God himself is notwithstanding bound still to tarry with
them before all the World besides. He is truly humble whom prosperity humbles,
who in the midst of his accomplished desires, casts himself below all,
acknowledging he is less than the least of Gods mercies, or gracious looks
toward him any ways.

There is yet a way that perfect souls, souls elevated above the height of
ordinary goodness, have spoke these words. There is sometimes a rapture in
heroic souls, overborn, as it were, with the torrent of the contemplations of
the divine beauty, and the delights flowing in abundance from it, that some
glorious Saints in their several times, have been heard to say sometimes,
Depart from us, O Lord, We have enough, We have enough, oppress us not with
pleasure which our earthen Vessels are not able to bear.

There have been those that have died with excess of joy: but it was temporal
joy, spiritual joy is not so violent to rent the body: yet it even sometimes
oppresses the soul into a kind of death, and wraps it beyond it self into an
ecstasy, and after that, it is in danger to be strein'd into another excess of
pride or vainglory; St. Paul was near it, least I should be exalted above
measure, (it seems there was great fear of it) there was given him something to
humble him, to bring him down from so dangerous a height. It is necessary, it
seems, sometimes, if not such a desire, yet such a condition to the most
perfect souls, that Christ should depart from them now and then, least they
should be puffed up with the multitude of those Revelations by which Christ
reveals his presence in them, and his favor toward them.

There are delights in heavenly joys, which these old bottles are not yet able
to hold: and here it is, that some have desired God to depart a while, to hold
a while, least they should overflow at least, and lose so precious a liquor,
if not break in pieces and lose themselves in so vast a depth, or at so
forciblee a pouring in of heavenly pleasures upon them.

But I am too high now for that lean, meagre, creeping goodness, which is only
to be found among the sons of men, in these latter days, where we meet with
this desire in a lower key, if at all. Our souls, you know, are the vessels of
divine grace, old crazie ones, God wot, and there is a danger, least the new
liquor of celestial grace, should cause them to crack, and break at its
approach. There is something which we are not able to bear away at first.
Christian Profession must come in to us by degrees. Christ must come a little,
and go a little, or come a little, and hold a little; line upon line, precept
upon precept, here a little, and there a little, not all at once; no, go away a
little, turn aside a little, O Lord, and require not of us all at once, but by
degrees visit us, and bear with us* With this kind of entreaty we may desire
him to withhold now and then in mercy from us, for we are sinful men, and not
able to endure other fuller dealings with us.

And lastly, in humility we may desire God to depart from us, when he
approaches to us in thunder and lightning, when he comes armed like a man of
war, then we may cry, and not without cause, O come not to us, or, go from us,
for we are sinful men; O Lord, have thou therefore mercy upupon us, and forbear
us.

We have seen by this time, how we may use St. Peter's words, and how we must
not use them. We may in humility desire God to withdraw his Judgments, to
proportion his Mercies, and to distill them by degrees; to forbear to overthrow
our nature, or overwhelm our souls with a happiness above our mortal capacity.
We may, lastly, by such a kind of speech, declare the sense of our own
unworthiness to receive so glorious a Guest home to us, so even wishing him to
choose a better house to be in, or make ours such. But we must not through
natural imperfection, or impatience, draw back our selves from the service of
God, or desire him to draw back from us; nor must we at any time by sin cause
him to depart, or by perverseness and iniquity thrust him out of doors; nor
yet, lastly, grow weary of the gracious effects, and tenders of his Presence,
in his Sacraments, Word, and Worship: For so we do not so much confess, as
profess, and make our selves to be sinful men; in humility you may sometimes
use the words, in impatience never.

We cannot, now you see, say always he does well, that, with St. Peter, says to
Christ, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord; yet there is something
to make the desire, at least, seem reasonable, and often be so, when he says it
as St. Peter did.

And the first Reason why St. Peter desires Christ to depart here, is for that
he is a man, and the first Reason why we are all so willing to have God gone
from us, is because we are men (1.) mutable and inconstant pieces, which are
neither well when God is with us, nor when he is from us. If he be with us,
then presently, Fac cessare sanctum Israel a nobis, Cause the Holy One of
Israel to cease from before us, Isa. xxx. 11. We cannot away with that
strictness and exactness he requires of us, his ways are not pleasing to us. As
soon as he is departed, then we are at another cue Thou turnedst away thy face,
and I was troubled, Psalm. xxx. 7. Why art thou absent from us so long? Why
hidest thou thy face from me? And the like.

Secondly, Man is a mortal nature, a piece of clay. Now earth cannot contain
heaven. We cannot endure the thunder, as it roars, or lightnings as they
glister, much less him, whose Presence is more terrible, whose Voice more
dreadful, who even shakes the Wilderness with his breath, at whose Presence the
Earth removes, and hailstones and coals of fire tumble down.

Thirdly, Flesh is grass, we are but hay and stubble, and God is a consuming
fire, well may mortality then desire him to depart, lest it should consume it
in a moment.

Fourthly, It was the opinion of the Jew, that man could not see God, and live,
as apears by Manoah's speech, Judge. xiii. 22. and several other places. St.
Peter, it may be, had such an imagination, whence it is, he desires Christ to
depart from him, being no other than God himself, after whose sight he was
perhaps afraid he had seen his last.

Thus man, as man, thinks he can spare the Presence of his Lord, as feeling his
earthly Cottage altogether unable in it self to entertain him. But (2.)
reflecting upon his sin, whereby he is yet made far more unfitting and
undeserving such an honor, he desires the absence of God by reason of his sin.

He loves his sin, and is loath to forgo it, and knows God will not be content
to dwell with it, so he wretchedly chooses rather the company of sin than of his
God, this is the way that men of the World only speak the Text. (2.) Sin even
bids defiance to the Almighty, and turns him out of doors, that is the reason
men so readily bid God depart from them. (3.) Sin so dis-enables the powers of
soul and body to any handsome attendance upon heaven, that neither of them know
how to receive him if he should come; and besides such a stench and filth there
is from it in all the soul, that the Divine Purity cannot endure them. Thus
sinful man bids God go from him, because he is a sinful man.

Now comes the last reason why God is entreated to depart, because he is the
Lord our God. A reason not readily conceived, yet this it is. Thou art the
Lord, a God of pure eyes, a strickt Master over thy servants; a person far
above the reach and quality of thy Vassals under thee. They are therefore no
fit company for thee. Thou so infinitely transcendest them. These are the
Reasons, which St. Peter seems to allege, to persuade Christ from his poor
wretched company, because both his natural imperfections, and his sinful
weaknesses, made him unfit for the company, and unworthy the favor of his
Savionrs glorious Presence.

If we consider the same Reasons, they will serve to humble us as low as St.
Peter did himself, to think our selves unworthy of the least glance of our
Saviors eye; we will confess, if we remember that we are but men, that our
frail, inconstant, corruptible nature is not answerable to the glory of so
great a blessing; we will acknowledge, if we recollect we are sinful men, that
we are not worthy that those eyes should look upon us, that infinite beauty
come near our polluted ugliness. We will in a word profess (if we believe he is
our Lord) we can no less than even desire him to depart, lest he should see too
many errors and miscarriages in his servants. Indeed, the whole sum of all is,
but to teach us humbly to confess our selves unworthy of such a Lord and
Master, not worthy of his Miracles, not worthy of his Mercies, not worthy of
his Presence, and ways or methods of his Presence, being no better than sinful
men. This if you carry home, and lay it up, and practice it, you carry enough
for once; and this well done, will be a sure foundation for all Christian
virtues.

Yet I will not bid you say, with St. Peter, expressly, Depart O Lord, or at
least when you have said so in humility, say presently again with faith, rather
tarry with us O Lord, for we are sinful men. Say to God, as Jacob did to the
Angel that wrestled with him, I will not let thee go unless thou bless me: Or
else, Lord, if thou will depart, yet come again and take me with thee, though I
be a sinful man; or depart O Lord, as thou art angry with us, let thine anger
go, but turn thy self again in mercy, and be pleased to stay. What though we be
sinful men O Lord? Yet we are men, thy Creatures, the work of thine own hands,
the price of thine own blood. Spare us therefore good Lord, and though thou
have departed from us, for a long, too long a season, return again and save us,
for we are sinful men, people that have need of thy Presence; never so much as
now, who cannot be without it, who though we are not worthy to be with thee,
yet we cannot but desire to be with thee for ever and ever. Turn thee then, O
Lord, and be gracious unto thy Servants, cleanse us from our sins, free us from
our iniquities, fit us for thy Presence, compass us with thy mercy, and visit
us with thy salvation, salvation here, and salvation hereafter, where we may
enjoy thy blessed and glorious Presence for evermore.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON THE Calling of St. Peter.
St. LUKE v. 5. -- Master we have toyled all the night, and have taken nothing:
nevertheless, at thy word I will let down the net.
THe words are a complaint for labor spent in vain, yet not quite without hope
of better success. And they are St. Peter's to Christ, at whose word
notwithstanding so much pains already lost he fears not to fall to his work
again.

And the words have both their History, their Moral, and their Allegory, they
tell us what was, and what will be; what was St. Peter's and his Fellows lot,
and what will be ours, both in moral and spiritual employments; to lose all our
labor if Christ, if God be not by us, if our Master look not over us, if his
Word be not with us, both to direct us what to do, and to bless us in the
doing. They, here, toiled all the night, and took nothing; that is the History.
Men often toil and labor day and night, and catch as little; that is the Moral.
Nay, Gods own Laborers, his Fishermen, fish and fish, labor and take pains,
and catch nothing; that is the Allegory. Now what is the reason, but because God
is absent all the while? For that as man lives not, so he thrives not but by
every word that proceeds out of the mouth of God. All we prosper or profit is
by the power and virtue of his Almighty Word; and in the power of that Word we
must let down our Nets if we look for a draught; and though we have labored
all this while and caught nothing, or but little, or though it must be still
our Lot to labor still and get nothing, yet in confidence of that Word we must
let down again (and now we do) yea, though it be his pleasure that our Net
return again both empty and broken.

I will not meddle now with St. Peter's Story as he was a Fisherman; what he
sometimes was it matters not, God respects no man's person. I shall consider
him only under these two notions: As a man, one of the same common fortune with
the Sons of men; and as a Fisher of men, one selected by the great Master of
the World to ensnare the souls of men, to bring them to his own table; and in
this sense I divide the words into generals: 1. St. Peter's and his Partners ill
success, that they toiled all night, and took nothing. 2. His conclusion yet to
go to his work again upon Christ's command, and confidence of better issues,
Nevertheless at thy word I will let down the net.


In the First, whether consider St. Peter under the common condition of men, as
a man, or under the nature of an Apostle, as a man separate to a holy Function,
to deal with bringing other men to the Kingdom of heaven through his Ministry
and Office, we have these particulars: 1. That all our labor by it self is but
toil and misery if Christ be not in it to lighten those words, We have toiled.
2. That it is uncomfortable, as being in the night, a sad dolesom time if Christ
be not by to enlighten it. 3. That it is vain and unprofitable, we get nothing
by it all if he be not with us to direct and bless us; We have toiled all
night, and taken nothing. 4. That be it whose it will, how seasonable soever,
be we as wise and politic in it as we can, be we never so industrious in our
trades or Works, so it will be. We, we men that well enough know our Trade, we
who have toiled, and omitted no pains, we who have toiled all night, failed in
no point of art or time, we yet, even we have taken nothing all the while that
Christ was not with us. 5. That of this we may and must sometimes complain,
with St. Peter, to our Master. Master, we have toiled, etc. Complain we may,
yet not be discouraged for all that, or lay down our Work, for in the second
general we have several particulars against it.


II. Not to leave off work, but to resolve to set to our work again, and
hereafter to direct it better, to guide and set it by his Will and Word, that
so it may thrive and prosper.

1. To do it at his Word, that is, readily, whenever, or as soon soever as he
commands. 2. At his Word, that is, obediently, for his Word sake, upon his
Command and Word. 3. Nevertheless at his Word, that is, confidently,
notwithstanding all that Flesh or Reason can say against it. 4. And lastly,
resolutely, to resolve, come what will upon it, we will do it. Nevertheless at
thy Word I will let down the Net.
I begin with St. Peter's ill success, and that is no comfortable beginning; but
it is the beginning of the Text, and I love order every where, though it cost
never sodear to keep that.

Well then, We have toiled all the night, says St. Peter for himself and his
Partners, and have caught nothing. So say I first for me and my Partners, my
Partners and Fellows in nature, for all, or most of the Sons of men, and my
Partners and Fellows in Office and Ministry, the Ministers of Christ. We have
toiled, etc. I am to speak of all our labors, that all of them, even the best
of them, are first but toil and misery.

For the labors of the Sons of men that have nothing else to sweeten them but
earth, that they are toils you need ask no body but your selves. Your very
pleasures are toils and weariness; tell me, the sweetest and easiest of your
delights and recreations, if they do not quickly weary you, and grow toilsom to
you. Let it be hunting, or hawking, or running, or walking, let it be any other
exercise of the body, let it be your more quiet and sedentary recreations, let
it be but talk and discourse you are weary often before the day runs out, and
out of wearisomness change your seats, and stations, and postures, and
discourses too.

And if your Pleasures prove in effect but toils, what, think you, do your
labors do? To rise up early, and go to bed late, and eat the bread of
carefulness? To break your rests, to wear out your bodies, to consume your
Spirits, is it not a toil somewhat more than labor? Yet thus is all our labor
under the Sun, when Christ is absent from us; for what is there to sweeten any
of our labors when God is gone? Call up the choicest of those aims you
propound as ends to your pains, and rewards to your labors, and tell us, if
you can, whether they be able to take off the sorrow and trouble from your
work, or make amends for them at all. Riches they are some men's aim, and are
not they as troublesome as the ways you got them by? Do they not afflict as
much in the keeping, and disposing, as they did in the getting? Pleasures are
others aims, and I have told you already what they are, whose very pursuit or
enjoyment is as wearisom as your work. Honors are other men's aims; and what
has honor in it that is not burthensom but a name? Nay, even that too, sets a
man upon the rack to behave and demean himself with a kind of niceness and
scrupulous observance of a respect due to such a title or place, in which he is
as much pained sometimes as in little-ease, or a narrow prison. These ends then
not being able to take off the nature of toil from the means and endeavors by
which they are pursued, there can be nothing said to quit our labors from the
true titles of toils and miseries.

Miseries, indeed, as well as toils, if God be not with them, for without him
we cannot but be miserable, we, and all we do; we, and all we have. Samson
grinding at his Mills is in more ease and happiness than we without Christ. All
our works are like Spiders Webs, good for nothing but to catch flies, that is,
impudent and importunate desires, which are the daily issues of our ill-spent
hours; for our desires and lusts increase with our labors, and add to their
toil; they suffer us to take no rest neither day nor night; even upon our beds
they trouble us, and make our downy feathers as hard as rocks and marble; the
covetous man cannot sleep for the importunate buzzings of his desires, nor the
ambitious man for his, nor the luxurious man for his, their eyelids cannot
sleep, nor can the temples of their head take any rest for the swarms and
hummings of their inordinate passions.

The case is somewhat better with him whose labor is for God, but it is
somewhat alike when it finds no success, a mere toiling of the Spirits; Our
studies, and pains, and preachings do but wear out our bodies, and afflict our
souls, when we only go round, as in a circle, without fastening any where, when
we effect nothing with all our pains. Men think the Ministers have an easy
life of it; but if they knew their down-sittings, and their up-risings, the
travel of their pains, even to a sickness, the labor of their minds even to
distraction, the perplexity of Opinions that molest them, the hard task of
reconciling differences that daily lies sore upon them, the diversity of
Judgments that distracts them, the care of their Pastoral Charge that night and
day tortures them, their toilings whole nights, even without a figure, that
wear them out, the little esteem, after all this, of all their pains and
persons that dejects their spirits; the less success of their endeavors that
grieves them to the souls and heart; if men would but understand the sad toil
of these laboring thoughts as well as labors, together with those
indispositions of body, that usually grow upon them, and those forced
retirements, or debarments from those just pleasures and recreations that men
of other conditions lawfully enough indulge themselves, they would confess
freely that our labor too, if we abstract it from the relation it has to God
is but toil and misery.

And (2.) as uncomfortable too as yours, as any else can be; for what more
uncomfortable then to see so many years of preaching and praying, reading and
studying return back upon us without success? and yet it is common; to have
employed all our time and means, and industry many years, and to come at last
to our Master with this heavy account, Master we have fished all night, all
fishing time, and have caught nothing? and yet it is usual.

Yet thus uncomfortable is all our work, when God pleases to withdraw from us.
Hence it is that Moses draws back so fast, and would fain avoid Gods embassy.
He foresaw it would prove but an uncomfortable piece of work, Exodus iii. 11.
and Chap. iv. 10, 13. Hence Isaiah cries out so complainingly, Who has believed
our report? Isai. liii. 1. Hence Jeremiah grows sad, and out of heart, and
bemoans himself, Ier. xv. 10. Woe is me my mother, that thou have born me a man
of strife, and a man of contention to the whole earth. I have neither lent on
usury, nor have men lent to me on usury; yet every one of them does curse me.
Here Is something indeed to make our case less comfortable than any others, that
do we never so well, live we never so justly; if, with Christ, we live like
other men after the ordinary fashion, then behold friends of Publicans and
Sinners: if somewhat strictly, with St. John Baptist, in fastings and rigours,
then behold, they have a Devil, we are Superstitious and Popish, nothing
pleases them; use we people never so fairly, we are always sure to be opposed,
to be contradicted, to be evil spoken of, even in those things wherein we
deserve not; and which is sadder yet, to have those which are committed to our
care seduced from us easily, and by troops, and seduced from God, even by those
who care not for their souls, but for their fleece, and for the glory of making
Proselytes, and by that children of Hell (at least) as much as themselves; all
this notwithstanding the painfullest of our endeavors.

Thus, of all kind of labors the Ministers, if Gods Word be not by to comfort
them, is in natural reason the most uncomfortable. Yet (2.) there is no comfort
in any, where he is not. All men's labors have something of night and sad
darkness with them, where that eternal Sunshine does not come and clear up the
coasts. The wicked man, he toils and moils, but finds no comfort, the blackness
and horror of his own sins continually afright him. The natural man he works
and labors, but he finds no comfort; none of his works can open him so much as
a window into Heaven, either to be received in, or even to see into it: without
faith it is impossible to see comfort thence. The Jew he labors and sees no
comfort of his work, it is high night with him; Moses veil is upon his eyes, the
shaddows are still upon him, and he sits down in darkness. The ignorant man he
sees no comfort in his endeavors, for he goes on and toils and moils, and sees
not, minds not Heaven at all; nor is there any labourer in the world, but he
that works upon Christ's Word, in his presence, and by his assistance, that
meets any comfort in any thing he does. The strong man has no comfort in his
strength, nor the rich man in his riches, nor the great man in his honors, (all
of them but a discontented crew) if this Sun of Righteousness make it not day
unto them. All these men's labors are in the night, the night of ignorance,
where there is no light at all, or the night of Nature, where it is but
starlight, or the night of the Law, where it is but Moonlight; or the night
of sin, where all these little lights are dimmed, and the great one of grace
put out quite. There is no light in any of these to comfort us, wherein to
rejoice; nay, all the goods of the world, all that we daily strive and strein,
and spend our selves for, cannot afford the least true comfort or refreshment
to an afflicted soul; for get we what we can, catch what catch we may, we do
but toil all night and catch nothing, if Christ or his grace be absent from us.
Our labors also are, thirdly, unprofitable, where the darkness either drives
out, or admits not the bright Sun of Glory; where our toil and labor is in the
night.

3. He that works in any of the aforesaid nights, his labors profit not, he
shall take nothing. To run through them particularly; The Gentile he is the
first night-worker, he toils and labors and works indeed, but can neither find
out the knowledge of the truth, nor attain the practice of true virtue, finds no
benefit of all his labor. He walks on, says St. Paul, in the vanity of his
mind, his understanding being darkened, Ephe. iv. 17, 18. their imaginations
vain, and their foolish hearts hardened, Romans i. 21. They neither know wherein
consists happiness, nor how to come by it. Their wise men are divided in their
opinions about it, and themselves wholly estranged from it; alienated from the
life of God, says the Apostle, Ephesians. iv. 18. They can catch nothing with all
their busy Inquisition, but a mere profession to be wise, and professing, Romans
i. 22. they became fools; a pretty catch of it.

2. The Jew he labors much to as little purpose, and indeed he labors in the
night too, for his day is none, his time is past, Jewish Religion dead and
gone, and nothing now to be gained by that. When it was at the best with them
they received not the Promise, Heb. xi. 39. they labored indeed, but caught
little in hand; the full promise, that, was kept for us, that they without us
should not be made perfect, ver. 40. their burnt-offerings and Sacrifices for
sin could not truly purify them one whit, all were but figures, their whole
Religion but one great Type of ours, their brightest day but night to ours. At
the descending of this eternal Word was all to be perfected, nothing to be
obtained but from him and by him, at whose arriving only first appeared the
day, and with him the only draught worth drawing up.

3. When any man is involved in the night of his own sins, all his works also
will prove unprofitable whilst he is so. God will not hear him; his sins they
cannot profit him, (whatever they pretend, how fair soever they promise him)
for what fruit had you then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed, Romans
vi, 23. no fruit, but much shame. Nay, his good works in that estate, how fair
so ere they seem, will do him as little service; Though I bestow all my goods
to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not charity,
it profits me nothing. 1 Cor. xiii. 3. His prayer shall be turned into sin,
Psalm. cix. 7. His fastings shall not be accepted, Isai. lviii. 5. His very
tears shall be neglected, as Esau's were, Heb. xiii. 17. He shall get nothing
by all his works, all his labor but grief and sorrow; for without this
heavenly flame of divine Charity (which is put out by sin) to enlighten that
night, even good works themselves will gain us nothing; all of them together,
will do us no good, but as done in the faith of his Word, whose Word is in the
Text; in the efficacy of his command, at whose command Peter again lets down
his net. Without his Word and presence too to quicken us out of our sins, it is
but toiling all night, all our labors nothing else.

4. No man's labors or endeavors at all can avail any thing as from
themselves; not only as to the gaining of an eternal reward, (to which they
carry no proportion) but not of a temporal happiness neither. Except the Lord
build the house, their labor is but lost that built it, Psalm. cxxvii. 1. A
man's trade cannot help him: Except the Lord keep the City, the watchman waketh
but in vain, ver. 2. A man's vigilance will not keep him. It is but lost labor
that thou have to rise up early and go to bed late, and eat the bread of
carefulness; no care or pains can gain that man any thing, whom God does not
vouchsafe to prosper. The race is not to the swift, nor the battle to the
strong; neither yet bread to the wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding,
nor yet favor to men of skill, but time and chance happens to them all; that
is, Gods Providence that by changes of times, and intermixing of accidents and
contingencies disposes all, says the Wise man, Eccles. ix. 11. and it is the
blessing of the Lord that makes rich, says the same good man, Prove. x. 22.
it is uncomfortable being rich without that blessing.

5. But above all, the blessing upon our labors, the Ministers labors is from
God. We may be instant in season and out of season, reprove, rebuke, exhort,
with all long suffering and patience, though we should speak with the tongue of
Men and Angels, words of life and spirit; though we should every day preach
with St. Paul, even to midnight, and call out to you to hear and obey, till we
were hoarse with speaking, and can speak no more; yea, though we should speak
with that passion, as if our own souls were melted into it, and were distilling
with our words, and so continue from day to day, till our day were over-clouded
in everlasting night; yet it might be with all this pains we might catch
nothing. It Is what I need not stand to prove; Moses and Eliah, and Jeremiah,
and all the Prophets are sufficient witnesses some time or other of vast
labors spent in vain. And the times our own eyes have seen, and do yet behold
are too unhappy an evidence of many men's whole lives and ministeries thus spent
in vain, where Christ pleases to withdraw himself either from the Minister, or
from the People.

And indeed, this is the least wonder of all the rest: the gaining of souls
being Gods proper business; and therefore never like to be done without him. We
fish but in the night, as if we knew not what we did, nor saw how to cast our
nets to any advantage without him. At his Word only, the net is rightly spread;
at his Word only the waters flow and bring in apace; he calls and the fishes
come amain, and till he himself either calls or come, we catch nothing.

4. Nay, to come to the fourth Particular, though we omit no pains, but even
toil and labor what we can, nor slip no time, but even break our sleep, and
take in the nights; nor fail of any opportunity, but take every hour of the
night, ready all the night long, upon the least occasion; nor neglect any
policy or art to help us, but make it our whole labor and business every way
to gain our intentions, though we be never so great, or good, so wise or
subtle, so many or so powerful, we shall gain nothing but labor and sorrow by
the hand, unless God be with us.

1. Toil it self, and labor, catches nothing; We have toiled all night and
caught nothing; all our labor is but as the running round of a mill, or the
turning of a door upon the hinges, never the further for all its motion.
Consider your ways, says the Prophet, you have sown much and bring in little;
he that earneth wages earns it to put into a bag with holes, Hagg. i. 6. he
gains somewhat, as he thinks, and lays it up, but when he looks again for it,
it is come to nothing. He that gave his mind to seek out the nature and profit
of every labor under the Sun, returns home empty, only with this experimental
saying in his mouth, Eccles. ii. 22. What has a man of all his labor, and of
the vexation of his heart, wherein he has labored under the Sun? for all his
days are sorrows, and his travel grief: a goodly catch for all his pains.

2. All the attendance upon times and seasons will effect no more, if you
separate from Gods special benediction, We have toiled all night and yet caught
nothing. Let a man serve seven years for a fortune or preferment, as Jacob did
for Rachel, and in the morning his fair and longed for Rachel, will prove but
bleer-eyed Leah at the best. Whatever it is he gets, 'twill be but misery to
him, or a false happiness. Or let him lie waiting with the bedridden man at the
Pool of Bethesda, eight and thirty years for the moving of the waters, he will
always be prevented, be never able to get in, till Christ come to him; yea, let
him wait out all his years, and draw out his days in perpetual expectations and
attendances for some happy Planet, some propitious hour, he will never see it,
unless God speak the word and command it to him. These fishers in the Text had
even chose their time and spent it out to the last minute; the best time to
fish, when the eye of the sporting fish could not see the net that was spread
to entangle them, nor perceive the hand or shadow of him who subtly laid
wait to take them, the time of night; and they pursued their labor till the
day came on, all the night, says the Text, yet nothing they could catch, they
lost their labor and their hope. Just thus it is, when men having, as they
think, diligently made use of the opportunity, and expected it out, having
never thought of God all the while, find themselves at last no nearer the end
of their desires, then they were at the beginning. Your own eyes see it by many
daily experiences that is thus often falls out.

3. Policy comes ever and anon as short of its aims where God is set aside.
Though men be often so cunning in all the arts of thriving, that nothing seems to
escape their reach; though the net seem full with fish, their fields stand
thick with corn, and their garners full and plenteous with all manner of store,
yet draw up the net when the night is gone, when the clear day appears to show
all things as they are, and behold, in all these they have taken nothing; their
souls, the best fish, are lost and gone by their unjust and wicked gains, the
true fish is slipped away, and there is nothing but the scales and slime, a
little glittering earth, or slimy pleasure left behind. Thus mere policy, I
mean, such as God is not remembered in, proves ever at the last. But it is
oft-times seen, that such policies even deceive them of their own intentions
too, and they fall commonly by what they had determined as steps to rise by.
Laban thinking to enrich himself by his covetous bargain, changes Jacob's wages
ten times, but still changes for the worst: If Laban says to Jacob, the
speckled shall be thy wages, then all the Cattle bare speckled; if he say, the
ring-straked shall be thy hire, then all the Cattle bear ring-straked, Genesis
xxxi. 1. because God was with Jacob and not with Laban. These men here, cunning
sure enough at their Trade in which they were bred up, having picked out their
time, and cast on every side of the Ship, tried all their Art, all their
tricks, and sleights, (for we cannot but think, that being so often
disappointed, they used all their skill) yet for all that they caught nothing,
for Christ was not there. Thy wisdom and thy knowledge, says the Prophet, it
has perverted thee, Isa. xlvii. 10. And thou art wearied in the multitude of
thy counsels, ver. 13. These are of no power if once God leave us. Nay, they
serve all to nothing but to pervert us if Christ be not in them; all our wisdom
and counsels but ignorance and folly without the presence of this eternal
Wisdom, this great Counselor.

4. We, be we never so great, never so good, never so many, never so wise, may
toil and trouble our selves, and all for nothing. All the men whose hands are
mighty have found nothing, Psalm. lxxvi. 5. great men may fail as well as
others. Nay more, Peter here and his Partners were good and honest men, yet
success does not always answer such men's Labors neither; here they fish, and
after Christ's Resurrection again, St. John xxi. 3, 6. They fish all night, but
catch nothing till Christ came to them; there is good men laboring and catching
nothing. And many they were together, they join hands, and heads, and all their
implements, yet it is all to no purpose. Though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not be unpunished, Psalm. xi. 21. And though hand join in hand to bring
matters to pass, the issue and event comes from above. A multitude is nothing
against the Lord of Hosts, no, nor without him. There Is many joined together
and effecting nothing. And then again, there is Solomon, a wise man, the wisest
of the earth, after all his search and labor coming back with nothing but
Vanity of vanity, all is vanity and vexation of spirit. He found it not
scientifically only, but experimentally, not only by happy knowledge, but
unhappy experience also, too sad a truth. And all this to inform us in this one
truth, that there is neither skill, nor labor, nor strength, nor policy, nor
time, nor opportunity of any prevalence, not only against the Lord, but without
him too.

We must not, after all these men, think much, nor must you, that men of our
Order should toil and labor day and night and catch nothing. The Text says We;
it is a common misery, that is some comfort, that it is not a personal lot, but a
common condition to others with us: And in this We there is a better We than we
our selves, St. Peter and his Fellows must be reckoned. It Is St. Peter's the
greatest Fishers fortune to be sometimes disappointed of the end of his
labors. It may be so much the rather his, and such as he, Christ's skilfullest,
greatest fishers, such as with him, here, fish in the deep, even because they
do so, whilst a company of petty Fishermen, that stand by the shore, and fish
in the shallows, catch fish enough. Will you know the reason?

St. Peter and his followers lay deep, in the depth of heaven, and catch few
fish, because the fish are of the world, and therefore savor not heavenly
baits, care not to leap so high, they are for watery, fading, transitory
pleasures. But others that fish upon the shore, that stir not from the earth,
that stand up and preach nothing but earthly interests and respects, who fish
with flies, vanities, and follies, or earthworms, earthly Arguments, or cast
into the Shallows of vain fancies and inventions, who make Religions of their
own, every day new. These catch fish enough, because perhaps the silly fish, the
fry at least, are most delighted with such baits.

We might have thought it had been these men's faults, that having fished all
night they took nothing; but that they were fishermen by their Trade, expert in
the Art, such as were brought up to it, and lived by it: There Is therefore
something more in it than so. The great Governor of Sea and Land would not
suffer those Inhabitants of the water to come at that time, as at others, into
the Net. It Is Gods disposing hand that thus deceives the Net of its expected
prey, and we must be content. Noah was a good man, and Lot was a good man, and
great men both, yet Noah preaches repentance to the Old World, and Lot
afterward to the men of Sodom without any success; the one preached one hundred
and twenty years, the other all the time he staid in Sodom, yet not one soul
gained by all their labor. Many wise men and Prophets have had as sorrowful
success. Miserable is the case the while that the devil thus out-fishes us. Yet
so it is; take we what pains we can, though we were more thoroughly read in St.
Paul's practice than we are, in fastings often, in watchings often, in hunger and
thirst, in fears and anxities, in cares and painfulness; watch we our times
never so punctually, and fish we never so studiously in the night, when the
passions are at rest, and the deep silence of the night upon them, no noise or
distractions, as we would think, to hinder the distinct hearing of the Word of
Christ; use we never so much Art and Policy, so much Rhetoric and Argument to
persuade, so that one would think we could not possibly but take; yet even thus
our hopes may be deluded, because nothing comes to Gods Net, but what he brings.

We may then first comfort our selves, if we have done our utmost, if we have
discharged our duty, that however this unhappiness betide us, yet we are not
alone, nor is it our fault though our misfortune. Paul may plant, and Apollos
water, yet both be in the same lot with us, if God give not the increase. Nay,
God himself seems to be in the same case, whilst he complains, All the day long
have I stretched out my hand to a disobedient and gainsaying people. And you
all also may cheer up your souls in your honest and painful labors, though
peradventure they succeed not; however that you have done your duty, and rest
now only upon the hand of God to second you and give success; which if it do,
you presently grow up and prosper; if not, Gods overruling Providence, and
wiser disposing goodness, well thought upon, will easily teach you to be
content.

And (2.) remember this taking nothing may prove at last more profitable than
the greatest draught you ever did or could expect. St. Peter and his
fellow-fishers by catching nothing caught every thing, because him, who is all
in all, who thus called them to himself by the occasion of their ill success.
And when the worst of casualties betide us let us think, that though all our
hopes and expectations fail us, all our labors languish away in utter despair,
and we be left confounded with the miscarriages of all our pains, yet God can
so order it, that out of nothing all things, all good things may one day after
happen to us; and though he will give us nothing else, yet he will give himself
at last, and upon this not only be comforted, but rejoice in our miscarriages.

And (3.) that we may descend to the last particular of St. Peter's ill success.
Though we may comfort our selves a little in the frustration of our hopes, that
it so pleases God to order them, and must therefore well be pleased because it
is his pleasure, and rejoice sometimes too that we are by such means drawn to
God ere we are aware: Yet we may complain to him also, lastly, of the same
business, and cry out, with St. Peter, Master we have toiled all the night and
taken nothing.

It Is an usual thing to complain of a misery, or miscarriage, and it is as usual
to complain to those whom it either does not concern to know it, or who cannot
help us. But this complaint here is set right, to Christ it is, and he is our
Master to whom we are to account for the works of our calling, for the works
both of day and night.

And therefore to thee, first, Master, we complain that we are no better
servants, that we are not worthy to call thee Master, that we are unprofitable
servants.

Next we complain that we have wearied our selves in the ways of vanity, in the
works of darkness, and have loved the night too well, and the works of darness
more than light.

Then we complain that all our labors are but toils and sorrows.

Then again we bemoan our sad condition, that we, even the best of us, that we,
even all of us, can say no better for our selves.

Yet lastly we complain again, that notwithstanding all our toil and labor,
notwithstanding thou art our Master, and we thy servants, for all our hours and
pains spent upon our work we have caught nothing. Were it never so little gain,
it would not grieve us; were it but a few little Fishes (they might serve for
thousands) yea, but one, something, any thing, it would not so afflict us: But
this [nothing] is of hard digesture, this [nothing] in every thing troubles us,
every way perplexes us. So much the more in that it comes often from our own
fault, or we may justly fear it, that we thus miscarry. However, it is a thing we
may well complain of, as by such complaints even desiring him to give us better
success in the rest of our labors.

But whether he will do that or no, if he command us to go on, we must do so
still; all other businesses notwithstanding, whatever success past or to come,
nevertheless, at his word we must let down the Net; which is our Second general
to resolve notwithstanding all former lost pains and labors to fall yet, upon
his word, to our work again.

The Net in moral businesses, is all those several ways and means by by which
our actions catch their several ends and take effect; and to let down these
nets is to apply our selves to the pursuits of our desires and and intentions
by ways and means probable to effect them.

In spiritual employments: The Net to fish for men is commonly the Word truly
preached; the threads are the words of persuasion, the knots the Arguments of
Reason, the Plummets are the Articles and grounds of the Faith. This Net is to
be wove by study and pains, to be let down and loosed by Preaching, to be
gathered up by calling men to account of what was heard, what they have done
upon it; it is washed and cleans'd by our tears and prayers, and spread and dried
by our charity and mortified affections. And this is the Net that we must let
down, though we catch nothing. And at his word it is to be let down, his word
to be the length and breadth, the whole rule and measure of all our Sermons, all
your Actions. Leave off our work we must not, because it does not answer us
with success, but to our work again, and see where we erred, and mend it, find
what was the occasion of our ill success, our taking naught, and avoid it. If
we prided our selves too much in our own skill or wisdom, or trusted too much
upon the goodness of our own works and labors, or, through the darkness of
ignorance could not well see what to do, or through the thick night of sins
miscarried in it, or for want of Gods implored assistance missed of our
success, let us now mend all, by ruling our selves, and all our actions,
according to his Word. His Word will teach us that Art which shall not fail us;
his Word shall give us humility to cast deep enough; his Word will be a Lantern
to enlighten our night, that we may see our way, and what to do; his Word will
bring us near himself, that we may the better hear his counsel, and obey his
voice, and bring him nearer us that he may bless us. And so certainly he will,
if, with St. Peter here, whatever has befell us, or is like to do, we
nevertheless at his Word again let down the Net, (1.) readily, without
delaying; (2.) obediently, without murmuring; (3.) confidently, without
disputing; (4.) resolutely, without wavering.

And indeed, at his Word to do it, is to do it (1.) readily for a word
speaking, not to expect command upon command, with St. Peter, even to be
grieved to be bidden again and again, to have our love or duty called so much
in question as to hear a second or third injunction to it. Our former hard hap
must not make us to demur, but rather hasten us to our work again to make
amends for our former losses. Abraham leaves his Country, and his Fathers house
for a word speaking: God did but speak, and away presently goes the Father of
the Faithful, Genesis xii. 1, 5. What ever thy hand finds to do, do it
instantly, says the Wiseman, Eccle. ix. 10. but if God speak to thee once to do
it, let the Word be no sooner heard than thy hand in action. Do what thou art
to do readily, do it cheerfully. That First.

2. At his word to do it, is to do it obediently; to do it for his Word, for
his speaking, because he commands it, at thy word. Actions are then only done
in obedience when they are done for his sake who commands, and because he
commands them. He that here pleads his own respects, that preaches for his own
ends, or does any thing only to satisfy or content himself, that frames his
actions for gain or pleasure, he aims at nothing but himself, and does not
those labors at Christ's word, or in the power of it. He does it properly at
Christ's word, that looks for no other reason of his actions but his Command and
Will; nor propounds any other intention to himself but a full submission to
Gods will and pleasure, that is reason enough to the truly obedient soul, that
God commands it.

3. And upon this it is that we expound, Nevertheless at thy Word, to be in
confidence of the truth and virtue of that Word above all words besides, above
all reason besides. St. Peter with his Company had fished and toiled in fishing
all the night, the fittest time to fill their Nets, and yet nothing would be
caught. It was against all reason and experience to expect any thing now, they
themselves, too, being overwearied with their toil; yet he disputes not with
his Lord: but, as if he confessed he could teach him better, he (1.) calls him
Master; and (2.) as if his Word were of more power than all their skill and
experience far, he rests himself wholly upon that. And yet more; as if the very
loosing or letting down now of the Net upon his bare word alone were enough to
bring up a full draught of fish, he makes mention no longer of his own pains or
labors, as if they could any thing avail, but professes only to let down the
Net, confident now by the power of his Word only to obtain what neither his Art
nor labor could procure before, nor reason persuade him to at any time, nay,
what all they persuade him now against. This is the right rule of faith and
obedience, even against hope to believe in hope, to believe his Word above our
Reason, to neglect all petty, under-scruples, to rely wholly upon his
authority. It was Abraham's glory that he considered not his own body now dead,
nor the deadness of Sarahs Womb, considered not the strength of nature when
Gods Promise came above it, Romans iv. 19. that he was so ready to offer up
Isaac, in whom God had promised him to call his Seed; as if he believed God
could raise him up again being dead, or else some way or other make good his
Promise, which was made in Isaac, and that he would do it to though Isaac were
made a Sacrifice, and so no natural or reasonable possibility left him for any
such hope: Yet nevertheless do he would as God commanded, offer up Isaac at his
word as readily here as St. Peter let down his Net.

Nevertheless, lastly, at thy Word we will; whether, that is, he please to
bless us according to our wish or not, whether we shall bring up fish or no,
whether he will have us take or not, we will let down the Net because he bids
us. To the former confidence is to be added resolution. As we know and are
confident he can by his Word do what he will, so whether he will do it, yea, or
no, yet for his Word, because it is his will that we should still continue on
our labors and work, we will do so, we will let down the Net, come what will
come of it. Whether they will hear, or whether they will forbear, Preach we
must; for Woe is me, says the Apostle, if I preach not the Gospel; the command
is hard upon us. And whether your works be like to prosper in your hands as you
desire, or whether not, labor still you must, and not be idle. To toil all
night and catch nothing is uncomfortable, yet to toil all night and catch
nothing, and yet to toil again, is constancy and resolution, and may challenge
the reward of no petty virtue at his hands who so esteems and accepts it. You
show as much daily in temporal affairs: Ye work, and toil, and lose your
labor, yet you try again; you plow and sow, and sometimes bring home little,
yet you plow and sow again. Be we but as resolute in our spiritual affairs, and
work, and they will succeed at last to pupose, to make a recompense for all
former misfortunes. If your Prayers after a whole night return empty, if your
endeavors to repentance and amendment, if your wrestling with temptations, or
struggling for mastery with your passions and sins, be not presently answered
with success, but you yet groan under the dominion of them, not yet fully able
to resist temptations, nor to leave off your sins, or break off your
transgressions, if you cannot by some nights and days of exercise and endeavor
obtain yet those graces and virtues you desire; endeavor yet again, strive,
and pray, and labor yet again, and in his name and word pursue your work. In
his name you cannot miscarry at the last, your Net will come at length full
fraught with grace and glory.

You see the very Apostles of Christ are in the like condition, many nights and
days toil and labor brings them nothing home, yet they still fish again, and
so must we, if at last we may gain but one poor soul into the Net of the
Kingdom; nay though but save our own. And if none but that, yet we most let
down the Net for more, not despair of more; there may come more at length: We
must preach, and you must hear, again and again, line upon line, line upon
line, here a little, and there a little, cast on this side, cast on that, in
season and out, night and day with all patience and long suffering, as the
Apostle speaks, if so be at last that Jesus will deign to come unto us, that he
will vouchsafe to speak effectually to his servants, and make them hear, that
he will please to stand by and call the fish into the Net.

Master, we have now at thy word let down the Net, O speak the word only and
thy Servants shall hear thee, and hasten to thee, and obey thee, and be wholly
taken by thee. Our labors are vain without thy blessing, nothing in them but
weariness and toil, have mercy upon this our sad and uncomfortable condition,
and relieve us, both the Fishers and the Fish, and lift us up out of this Sea
of misery, this depth of iniquity, catch us all together in thy Net, and us
unto thy self into thy Kingdom where there is no more toil or labor, no more
^ight at all, no more tempestuous Seas or weather, where we are sure to catch
that which is above all our labors, all our toil; a full and sufficient
recompense for them all, the over-ful, infinite and unspeakable rewards of
eternal glory.

A SERMON UPON THE Transfiguration.
St. LUKE ix. 33. And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said
unto Jesus, Master, it is good for us to be here: and let us make three
Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses, and one for Elias; not knowing
what he said.
AND St. Peter, when he thus said he knew not what, was in the Mount with
Jesus, Moses and Elias, and saw their glory. One cannot blame him for crying
out, 'twas good being, good building there; though somewhat there was in it
that was amiss, it seems, when St. Luke tells us, he knew not what he said. But
methinks, the words would sound nothing amiss at all, if they had been taken up
by us upon our late being with Christ in the holy Mount at the holy Table, or
if used still in reference to that good meeting, Master it is good for us to be
here in thy holy presence, let us build Tabernacles, tarry here, go down no
more henceforward in our affections to earth, or earthly things; Let us build
here Tabernacles for thee, for Moses and Elias, that neither thy Gospel, Law,
nor Prophets may go from us, never henceforth depart out of our hearts and
mouths. Sure there is no error in such a speech of ours, whatever was in St,
Peter's.

Indeed somewhat there was faulty in St. Peter's, as there is commonly in the
most of our best words and actions, somewhat more or less (at least) then
should be in rigor, if God should enter into judgment with them. The sudden
apprehension of unexpected or extraordinary joy or happiness, be it spiritual
or be it temporal, makes many affections and expressions arise in the best of
us somewhat irregular sometimes. Our business at this time, and upon these
words is to rectify them, by considering what was here short or over in St.
Peter's, what to be left, and what followed in them, that we may learn how to
bear our happiness, the great favors of the Almighty, the extraordinary
dignations and discoveries of Christ, and besides also, all temporal
felicities; how to proportion them to others benefit as well as our own, how so
to regulate our judgments, counsels, expressions and affections, upon any such
occasions, come they when they will upon us, that we may safely say with St.
Peter here in any of them, Master, it is good for us to be here, let us now
build Tabernacles, this condition is good we now are in, let us still be here,
and yet not incur St. Luke's censure, that we know not what we say.

The Sum then both of the Text and Sermon will be but this; St. Peter's and our
common judgments, advice, affections and expressions in any kind of
extraordinary content and happiness, spiritual or temporal, what they are;
usually they are we know not what; and are therefore so branded here, by the
Evangelist, that we may henceforth consider and know what judgments, counsels,
affections and expressions pass from us in any such conditions, before we pass
them. So that our work is to be this, to examine all these in St. Peter's
speech, and show you how far it may be said by any of us, and how it must not,
and that in these Particulars:

1. How far his judgment may pass, that good it is to be here, how we may say,
It is good for us to be here, think and say so, and how we may not. 2. How far
his advice is good to build Tabernacles, how we may say, Let us build three
Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Mose, and one for Elias, and how far it
is not good to say so, wherein we may not say so. 3. How far his affections to
his own, or his Masters ease and safety and present glory may be allowed; how
we are to relish Moses and Elias their departing, or desire their staying, and
how we may not; as they departed, Peter said unto Jesus; as if he would needs
be staying them, that he might stay where now he was. 4. How far expressions
sudden and unwary, such as for have or passion and amazement, slip sometimes
from us, as this did here from St. Peter, may be born with, how far we may be
tolerated to say sometimes we know not what, and when we may not be allowed it,
Not etc.
By this limiting and dividing the particulars of the speech and Text, and
giving the several ways and senses it may be spoken in; we shall neither wrong
St. Peter, nor St. Luke; but give both their due, St. Peter's saying, and St.
Luke's censure: his saying, Master it is good for us to be here, Let us build,
etc. and that St. Peter's speech was not altogether to be disapproved; and that
yet notwithstanding some fault there was in it, and that therefore St. Luke's
censure just, and St. Luke's saying upon it, that he knew not what he said. Say
with St. Peter, and say with St. Luke both, and yet say well with both, when we
know what they both said, and in what sense to say it. St. Peter's authority
will not in this point bear us out against St. Luke's; but if we say it as St.
Peter did, with all the circumstances, St. Luke will say of us what he said of
him, that we know not what we say. But if we say the words as they may be said,
he will not say so. Begin we then to sift the saying, and the first part first;
Master, It is good for us to be here. St. Peter's judgment of the condition he
was in, and how we may judge and say so.

And it may be good to be so, and good to say so: good really in several
senses; a right judgment, and a right saying.

For first, This here was in the Mount, a place of solitude and retirement, a
part by themselves, says St. Mark ix. 2. And it is good sometimes times to
retire our selves from the World and worldly business, to think and meditate
upon Heaven, and heavenly things, especially having lately tasted of those
dainties, that we may chew and relish them; nothing so good and convenient
then presently as some retirement, to sit down a little and bethink our selves
of the sweetness we have so lately tasted, the Covenant we have so lately
renewed, the resolutions we have so lately taken up, and the ways to perform
them.

2. It was a high Mountain too, says St. Matthew, xvii. 1. Nothing henceforth
should serve our turn but high thoughts and resolutions; we must do nothing
mean after so high favors and dignations; fix our thoughts, set our affections
now henceforward upon things above, good to be here.

3. It was the Holy Mountain too, so styled ever since from the authority of
St. Peter, 2 Epist. i. 18. And it is good to be holy, better then to be high.
High contemplations of God and Heaven are not so good as holy conversations.
It Is good indeed, very good to be also in the holy Mount, in holy places, at
holy work, where Christ is to be seen or heard in beauty and glory, in the
Church, at his Word and Sacraments.

4. For into a Mountain to pray, says our Evangelist, ver. 28. So, To be here,
is, to be here praying; Christ went up to that purpose, as he tells us there,
often went up to that purpose, as we find it, so it must needs be good; nothing
does us so much good at heart as praying. It fills it with joy and gladness,
fills our mouths with good things, fills our hands and our barns, and our
coffers, all our filling comes from thus opening of our mouths. Be we in
sickness, or be we in health; be we in prosperity, or be we in adversity; be we
full, or be we empty, nothing does us so much good in any of those conditions
as our prayers. Prayer, Why? in sickness it cheers us, in health it strengthens
us, in prosperity it fastens us, in adversity it comforts us, in our fullness it
keeps us from oppression, in emptiness from fainting, in all it does us some
good or other. It Is good indeed to be here, that is, to be praying, especially
to give our selves to it, to go aside on purpose for it, to ascend the Mountain
in it, to go to it with raised thoughts, and elevated attentions; take good how
you will, for honest, profitable, or pleasant, Prayer is all of them. To be
with Abraham in the Mount, entitles us to be called with him for it, The
friends of God, and there is honestum, honest even in the honorable sense. To
be with Moses in the Mount is profitable against Am^lek, to beat down our
Enemies. To be here with St. Peter in the Mount, gives us the most pleasant
prospect that mortal eyes ever beheld or saw, gives us a prospect of heavenly
glory. Bonum est esse hic, it is every way good thus being here.

5. To be here is to be with Christ, and Moses, and Eliah, with the Gospel, Law
and Prophets in our hands, reading and comparing them, meditating as well as
praying. And it is good being so, good spending our time in such employments;
Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think (and ye think right too,) to have
eternal life, St. John v. 39. profitable they are, says St. Paul, (and that is
good) for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all
good works, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. thoroughly good, that serves to make a man so
thoroughly good: good to be thus in the Mountain here, upon the tops of our
houses, in our close^s and highest rooms, where we have most leisure, less
avocations, that we may the better attend so holy a work, especially since our
late holy work, good to keep the scent and relish of those heavenly dainties in
our souls.

6. To be here, is to be with Christ, and Moses, and Elias, St. James, and St.
John and St. Peter, to be in good company. Nothing better to make or keep us
good. O how good, yea, and joyful or pleasant a thing it is to be together with
such! Nothing drives away sad and heavy thoughts like such good company, where
the discourse is Heaven, where the entertainment is heavenly, where we eat and
drink with Christ, where there is nothing but sweetness and meekness, and
goodness to be learnt; where there is nothing harsh or horrid, or unseemly;
where the news we talk of is what is done in Heaven, where our meat and drink
is to do the will of our Father which is in Heaven, where our talk is not the
vain talk of the new fashions of men and women of the World, but the fashions
of Angels and Saints, and Martyrs of all ages; where we talk not of other men's
lives, but mend our own; where our music is the praises of our God, and our
whole business Salvation; where we shall hear no idle words, see no unseemly
gestures, meet no distempers or distasts, but those things only which become
law and order, Prophets and Apostles, or Scholars and Disciples of so good a
Master; Good it is to be here, to be with such.

7. But above all, It Is good being with Christ, St. Paul would fain be
dissolved and gone to be with him, Phil. i. 23. would die when you would, to be
with him. Far better, says he, it is; far better then to be any where, or with
any body else. Nothing comparable to it. Be it in life or death. Be it upon the
Mount with him, (1.) In a place of safety. It Is, no doubt, good being there with
him. Or, Be it with him (2.) talking with Moses and Elias about his Passion,
about his decease, that he should accomplish at Jerusalem, as St. Luke relates
him, ver. 31. in the saddest discourse of his sufferings, or the saddest
sufferings themselves: It Is good being with him still. Or, Be it with him (3.)
in shining and glistering garments in a condition of glory; either when his
face shines, the heav^nly light of his countenance shines out upon us, when
eternal Glory encompasses him and us; or (4.) when only the fashion of his
countenance is only altered toward us, when spiritual contentments flow upon
us; or (5.) when his rayments only are white and glister, when outward
blessings glister about us, It Is at every turn good being with him. Yet more
particularly.

It Is good for us to be with Christ in safety and security, if we may so as St.
Peter thought he now was here, that we may serve the Lord without distraction.
Good to lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty, says St.
Paul, 1 Timothy ii. 2.

It Is good (2.) again for us to be with him also in his Passion; to suffer with
him; good to be with Moses and Elias ever and anon, thinking and speaking of
the Death and Passion of our Master, all his bitter sufferings, affronts,
reproaches, whips and scourges, sweats and faintings, nails and thorns, and
spear and scoffs, and tears and sighs, and exclamations, and giving up the
ghost; good to be made partakers too of his sufferings with him, to fill up
what is behind of the afflictions of Christ in our flesh, as the Apostle
speaks, Col. i. 24. It is good for me says Holy David, that I have been in
trouble, Psalm. cxix. 71. good above what David thought, to be with Christ in
trouble, to be troubled for him, to suffer persecution for his Name. Blessed
are they that do so, St. Matthew. v. 10. and that is good, to be blessed; and they
that are not yet arrived to that, to suffer and be troubled for him, it is good
they in the mean time be troubled with him, troubled that he should be so
troubled and afflicted for them, It Is good to be with Christ in either of these
conditions.

It Is good (3.) to be with him in his glory, that to be sure needs no proving,
the only good, the only true and perfect happiness to see his face in glory;
all good is concentred here, no good beyond it.

And yet (4.) It Is good too, to be with him so as to enjoy some glimmerings of
that eternal light in the mean time whilst we are here, to enjoy the happiness
of his gracious Presence in our souls, to have him shine comfortably into our
hearts, this is eternal life, one ray of it, to know Jesus Christ whom thou
have sent, St. John xvii. 3. to be sensible of those inexpressible comforts
which he oftentimes vouchsafes to give us; to be partakers of those sensible
delights of piety which he sometimes allows us. It Is good, the sweetest good
this life can yield us, to feel the sense and sweetness of his presence, and
walk in it; good to be in grace, and good sometimes to see the glory of this
grace, to feel the joy and comfort of it; so good to be here, that it is not
good to be any where else, if we may be so.

Nay, and (5.) It Is good sometimes to have our Rayments white and glistering
with him, to enjoy outward satisfaction and prosperities from him. They are not
always the portion of the wicked. They are often happy instruments of grace and
glory; and when they are so, it is good to have them. It Is good so also to be
here, to be under some of the fringes of these shining garments, when God
pleases that we shall.

But last of all, It Is good to be here, be that here where it will, so it be
where God would have us. It Is good to be here, because God would have us here.
So this here is any where with God and Christ; good for David to be in trouble;
good for St. Paul to be under the thorn and buffeted; good for Manasses to be
in fetters; good for some to be in clouds and sorrows, as good as for others to
be in safety and ease, plenty and prosperity, continual light or gladness. But
above all in all these, It is good to hold me fast by God, says David, to cling
close to Christ, good so to be here, to be, to hold so here, and every where,
in all conditions, not to stir from him, to keep always by him, in his ways,
under his protection. And yet as good as it is, and as we may say it is, we had
best know what we say. For we must know sometimes for all this, It is not good
to be here, nor good to say so. Not knowing what he said, says St. Luke of St.
Peter for saying thus. Let Us therefore now know why he said so; when it is we
say amiss, when we say, with St. Peter, even upon the Mount, in Christ's
company, and the presence of his glory too, that it is good to be here.

1. We know not what we say when we say, It Is good to be here, that is, in the
Mount only and and no more, in honor and high places. They may prove the worst
places we can be in. Summos feriunt fulmina montes, when the lightnings are
flashing, and the thunders roaring, they are nearer the storm and danger than
the low valleys.

2. Nay, even the Mountain of righteousness, high speculations are not always
good to be in, we must be sometimes in the plains of action as well as in the
Mount of contemplation. Nay, and even our own righteousness proves too often an
offense; when it is at the height, we are in continual fear of falling, fear of
being proud of our graces and goodness; as good as it is to be highly righteous
it is not always safe; it is good at least to come down a little out of the
Mountain to humble our selves a little to the practice of ordinary and common
virtue now and then, lest we grow proud of some extraordinary performances.

3. And more than so. It Is not good always, in all senses, that Christ be with
us, or that we know it. It is expedient for you, says he himself, that I go
away, St. John. xvi. 7. and expedient is always good, and both it is that he
should sometimes withdraw his Presence, the heavenly gusts and ravishments,
lest we should grow proud, and slack, and negligent. It Is not good always to be
here in perpetual and uninterrupted sensible heavenly comforts. It Is good that
Christ, and Moses, and Elias, all should draw sometimes behind the cloud, good
the sweetness of Law, and Prophets, and Gospel too, should be curtain'd up from
us for a while, that we might see our wants, increase our longings, advance our
endeavors, and grow more earnest to seek, more careful to pursue after them.

4. But it is not always good to be in continually bright shining garments, in
the region of joy and glory, in daily and hourly happiness. It will make us
forget Christ when we are just by him, and not know what we say though the
eternal Word stand by us, scarce know how to look or speak. Such things too
often do so.

5. But especially it is not good, because it is not fitting whilst others are
all in sadness, others all in the Vale of tears, for us to be then in the Mount
of joy, all afloat in mirth and pleasure. Fit it is, and therefore good, to
have some fellow-feeling of Joseph's Irons, of others miseries, infirmities, and
calamities, not good to be here without such compassions.

6. It Is not good however to cry out Bonum est, though we be in such a
condition, either of goodness or greatness, grace or happiness, above our
fellows, it is not good to hug and please our selves in either of them, but
especially not in temporal successes; no good crying it up, or our selves for
it.

7. Not good, to be sure, to cry it up as the only good, to be in any worldly
glory, or security. The Transfiguration will not always last. Christ's face will
not always shine like the Sun upon us, nor his garments glister beyond what any
Fuller of the earth can give them; he himself will back again ere long to lower
ground, and have less splendid clothing. Yet should this continue, it were not
yet the only good, that we should cry out nothing but Bon^m est esse hic; this
very being here is enough to allay the goodness, to tell you it is not all, nor
will be so for ever.

It Is good (1.) neither to be in honor, nor prosperity, nor alone, (2.) nor
with others; neither in high contemplations, (3.) nor sensible consolations,
neither in high mountains, (4.) nor high company, swallowed up in any of them,
or so taken with any of them, to conceit any one of them is the only good,
nothing good but that, no good being but being there. To say so of any of
these, is merely to say we know not what; an ignorant judgment and sentence
upon it.

II. And secondly to advise to make Tabernacles for Christ, and Moses, and
Elias here is to advise we know not what. Yet to give the great Apostle but his
due, see we first in our propounded method how we may be allowed to say it or
go about it.

1. It Is no ill advice to take or give, to raise us such Tabernacles, as our
Savior tells us, are to be raised with the unrighteous Mammon, St. Luke xvi.
10. Habitations or Tabernacles (for the word is the same, (...) both here and
there) that will not fail us when all others do; it is good making everlasting
habitations, eternal Tabernacles with temporal goods, with good works and
Alms deeds, rearing Tabernacles by building Almshouses, or endowing them.

2. It Is no ill counsel neither to make Tabernacles here, so they be but
Tabernacles, so we place not our minds and dwellings here, if we make them but
Tabernacles, not houses, Tabernacles to lodge in for a night, or stay in for a
shift by the way, have our abiding City some where else, have that above, look
for that to come, if we only build us Inns or shelters as for strangers, make
all our buildings, all our contrivements only to help and shelter us in our
way. Then it is good.

Especially (3.) if we make them here, that is, upon the Mount, not in the low
and dirty Valleys; If in the mids of all our projects, building and making
fortunes, fortresses, and securities, we place them not in humane confidences,
in worldly strength and riches, in that thick muddy soil, if our refuges be in
the Mount, as near heaven as we can come, upon Christ, according to Moses and
Elias, as the Law allows us, and the true Prophets teach us, we may make
Tabernacles here, and do well in doing it.

If (4.) we build them here, here where there is such good company to live
with, Christ, and Moses, and Elias, good Rulers, and good Priests and Prophets,
good Government, and true Religion, upon such grounds we may have leave to fix
our habitations, and desire to stay and dwell among them. So we pitch not our
Tabernacles among the Tents of Kedar, nor choose to dwell in Mesech, if we can
keep out of the streets of Gath and Askelon, our stay a while upon earth may be
desirable.

And (5.) three Tabernacles we may make also in particular: One for Christ,
make all the provision we can for Christ to stay with us, use all the ways and
means we can imagine to keep him among us, his Presence, his grace, his Gospel,
his Sacraments, his Administrations, his Ministers, his Religion, his Worship
still among us; Good advice it is, and a good thing it is to build Tabernacles
and Houses, Churches and Chapels, that Christ and his may tarry with us.

Nay, and (6.) one for Moses too; some room we must make for Works as well as
Faith; the obedience of Faith is the only faith of the Gospel, to live
according to Gods Precepts and Commandments; this part of Moses Law, Christ
came not to destroy, or dissolve, but to fulfill himself, and to give a new
command and grace to us also to fulfill it.

So lastly, one for Elias too. The Prophets must not be shut out of doors, a
Chamber, a bed, and a Candlestick for them as the noble woman of Shunem
provided for Elisha, 2 Kings iv. 8. that as they pass by they may enter in and
bless us. A place for the old Prophets, that we may confirm our faith out of
their writings, a place for the Prophets of the Gospel that we may increase it
by their preachings; a place too in all our houses for Elias zeal for Gods
Worship and Service, that that may be restored and advanced in all our families
and dwellings, in all our habitations, a Tabernacle at least in our hearts for
the zeal for Gods glory to reside in, provided that it be not so heady that it
speak it knows not what.

Thus it is no ill but good counsel to say, Let us build here three Tabernacles,
if (1.) they be only prepared for here, but raised in heaven, if (2.) they be
only for Inns and shelters here, and not for mansion houses; if (3.) they be
set upon high ground; if (4.) among good neighbors; if (5.) made for Christ
and (6.) Moses, and (7.) Elias, for to keep Christ and his Religion, Faith,
good Works, Zeal and Piety among us. Let us make such Tabernacles as fast and
as much as we will or can, we need not fear St. Lukes censuring them for the
sacrifices of fools, or the actions of men that know not what they do.

Yet now, secondly, there is a making Tabernacles, and a counselling to do so
that will deserve that censure, several such making Tabernacles.

1. When we would make the everlasting Tabernacles to be here, when we raise
them no higher than Mount Tabor, seek heaven upon the earth, living as if there
were no other World, building our hopes and fortunes here as if we were to
continue here for ever, then we know not what we do.

2. When we will have nothing here but Tabernacles to shelter us, when we think
much to descend out of the Mount to suffer with our Savior, would not
willingly part with any point of honor, safety, or advantage for him, would
have Christ glorified before he is crucified, contrary to his Fathers Decree
upon him and us, that we should both first suffer, and then enter into glory;
when we thus shun the Cross, and will have nothing but the comfort; all for
Mount Taber, or Mount Olivet, peace, and quiet, and glory, and triumph, nothing
for Mount Calvary, any kind of suffering; all for being clothed upon, not being
unclothed or disrobed at all, 2 Cor. v. 2. would avoid even death it self
which we cannot avoid; when we can brook no Article of the Faith but the
Ascension into glory, then you know not what you ask, as Christ said to the
Sons of Zebedee at another time, you know not what you would have, ye know not
what you say.

3. When we speak of making Tabernacles only for our own interests, that we may
be in them, and consider not our brethren, when we will be engrossing Christ
only to our selves shut all others out, or pass by them, or at least never
think of them, or care what becomes of them, so we be safe, we then also speak
we know not what. Christ came to redeem the World, and not that little pittance
of it in the Mount, Moses, Elias, St. Peter and his two Fellows, not any only
pittance in any Mount, a few particular elected mountaineers, and leave all the
rest in Adams dirty mass. He was to be an universal Savior, and pay a general
ransom, to preach not only in the Mountains of Judea, but in the Cabul, the
dirty Vale of Galilee, to be the God of the Valleys as well as of the hills, of
those that sat in the vale of the shadow of death, Gentiles and sinners as
well as those that dwelt in the hill Countries, in the Land of light, the Jews,
and other righteous. St. Peter knew not what he said, nor know they that say
thus after him, that would be keeping him always in the Mount, make
Tabernacles, bars and fences to keep him from doing his Office to all the World
besides, To talk of such Tabernacles, so cooping up Christ to our own Sect and
Company, is to talk we know not what.

4. When we speak of making Tabernacles to retire our selves from doing our own
Office too, from performing those duties we owe our brethren, which God has
designed us to, and requires of us, we talk not wisely. Quid dic^^ Sancte Petre
(says St. Augustine) Mundus perit and tu secretum quaeris? What say thou
blessed Peter? The World is ready to perish, and do thou withdraw from
helping to uphold it? Do thou, that art to feed Christ's Sheep upon the
Plains, and defend them from the Wolves, seek only to keep thy self secure in
the Mountains? Nor Pastor nor People must so retreat into any Tabernacles to
desert the charge that lies upon them of their brothers souls. Shall your
brethren go to war, says Moses to the Children of G^d and Reuben, Numb. xxxii.
6. and shall ye sit here? No surely, we must down among them, and not think of
Tabernacles for our selves till we have also made some for them. If our
retirements hinder us not in our Christian duty we may retreat into our Tents;
if they do, we say and do we know not what, to pitch upon any Tabernacles,
Solitudes or Retreats.

5. If we think of making Tabernacles several for Christ, and Moses, and Elias,
one for Christ, one for Moses, and another for Elias, think of severing the
Gospel, Law and Prophets, it is we know not what, they all dwell in one
together, all say the same thing, will not be severed. Vnum est tabernaculum
Evangelii in quo lex and Prophetae recapitulanda sunt, says St. Hierom; There
is but one Tabernacle for all those, all agree in one together, all preach
Jesus Christ the Savior of the World, though each in his proper way and
fashion.

6. No talking of three Tabernacles at any hand. There is but one Sheepfold,
and one Shepherd. The Sheep that were led by the hands of Moses and Aaron, The
Sheep that were seen in a Vision by Micaiah scattered upon the Mountains; The
Sheep which the Prophets led, or fed, in any of their times, as Pastors sent by
God; The Sheep and Lambs that St. Peter and all the Pastors of the Church are
to feed from time to time, are all to make up but one fold under one Shepherd,
St. John x. 16. all to come into one Catholic Church, to be gathered all into
one Mountain, into the same everlasting Tabernacles at the last. No Tabernacle
against Tabernacle, no Altar against Altar, no Church against Church, no schism
to be made in the Mount of God.

7. To place the beatifical Vision in Christ's corporal presence, or think that
the blessed want Tabernacles and Tents to dwell in with St. Peter; or which is
the same in fine, to place Christ's Kingdom upon earth, and dream of the
Millenaries happiness, Christ's reigning with his Saints in all temporal
pleasures and satisfactions upon the earth for a thousand years, is mere
talking in our dreams. Let us make no such Tabernacles in our brains, they are
mere Castles in the Air, raised in the Mount of our own fancies and vain
imaginations; if we say so, we know not what we say.

No building our thoughts then upon worldly confidences, (2.) no making
Tabernacles to shelter us from all storms, even from suffering for our Master,
(3.) no building them only for our selves, (4.) No raising them to keep us from
our Christan duty. (5.) No making them to separate between Law and Gospel, (6.)
No making them to divide the Sheepfold to set up Schism in the Church of
Christ; (7.) No making them to anticipate heavenly happiness, to keep Christ
upon the Mountains of the Earth, as if our business were wholly here, or wholly
for our selves, or our affections carnal and earthly still. Let us make no such
Tabernacles, preach no such fancies, believe no such imaginations, for if we
do, St. Luke will tell us were we as good as St. Peter, we say and believe, and
advise we know not what.

IV. Now that we may know whence it is that the same words have thus different
senses, why they may be spoken well or ill, we are in the next place to examine
the diverse affections with which they may or might be spoken. Either out of
fear or out of joy; out of fear for his Master and himself, of future
sufferings, which he heard them talking of, v. 31. and a desire to avoid them,
or out of joy in the contemplation of his present enjoyment, and a desire to
continue it.

Consider the words spoken, as proceeding out of fear of death and suffering,
and a desire to avoid it, to disturb the method of Redemption by a new kind of
Propitius esto tibi, a subtle new device to persuade Christ to favor himself
and his followers, Non ita fiet tibi, to turn off the Cross, to keep with Moses
and Elias in the Mount; or at least, if he would go down, keep them from
departing, keep them however with him, Moses with his wonder-working Rod, Elias
with his commanding Fire to defend him: Consider them thus, and he and his
fellows may well be answered with a nescitis cujus spiritus, Ye know not what
spirit ye are are of, What you are to look for in the service of your Master,
Christ Cross the chief lesson they were to learn.

Consider them, secondly, as words issuing out of excess of delight and joy,
either in the present glory as the all he wished for, in Christ's corporal
presence as the whole he expected, in temporal felicities as the sum of his
desires, or in sensible consolations as the only pieces of devotion; so also he
is but nesciens quid diceret, he says he knows not what.

But consider them now again (1.) as arising out of a moderate delight in
spiritual or temporal contentments, with St. Mathew's Si vis, submitting all to
his will and pleasure, It is good to be here, Master, if thou will, and let us
make Tabernacles here; Master, if thou will, if thou think it good, if thou
know it fit (for so St. Matthew relates St. Peter's words, and) then they
may pass without reproof, they are the words of knowledge of truth and
soberness.

Or (2.) consider them as spoken in the very rapture of joy and high delight in
the contemplation of heavenly glory, of Gods glory and his Masters, and great
hopes of his own desiring what he can to promote and advance it, the words are
the expressions of much love and piety, not the speech of a mad fellow, as
Iehu's Captains styled the Prophet, he knows what he says, and what he desires;
or, if through the excess of joy he said he knew not what, more then he could
well express, there was no fault, but that which such heavenly joys necessarily
cause in humane language by their inexpressible greatness, that if we say any
thing, we must needs say more then we are able to express, they are so great
that we know not what to say, and so St. Mark St. Peter's Disciple tells the
story, Chap. ix. v. 6. For he wist not what to say, for they were sore afraid,
almost stupefied and amazed.

And if now, lastly, that be the passion too to be added to the other two, and
St. Matthew says the same Chap. 17. 6. There will be at least an excuse for any
indiscretion in St. Peter's speech; though withal a caution to us for ours,
that we speak no more then we understand; that we meddle not to settle
conditions, to pitch places, to erect buildings, to give counsels, or pass our
judgments in things we have no knowledge of, lest St. Luke tell us we are to
blame, we say we know not what.

IV. Yet now in the last place, we are to see how far sudden and hasty
expressions may be born with, and when they may not without rebuke.

1. If they rise out of any sinful passion, sinful they are, and have no
allowance.

2. If they rise out of any wilful heedlesness and indiscretion they are sins
of indiscretion, and the words of folly, foolish words.

3. If they proceed out of natural infirmity and shortness of wit, they are at
the best but to be excused; faulty they are, for why do they venture on what
they do not understand.

But (4.) if they proceed merely out of the excess of holy joy, or any passion
unblameable, they are no sins, we may well bear with them, seeing we know not
how to better them. There is a kind of spiritual and heavenly drunkenness, when
ravished and over-gone with the sweetness of some inward spiritual and heavenly
joy, made drunk with the Spouses Flagons of Wine in the holy Canticles, with
the drink of thy pleasures, says the Psalmist, as out of the Rivers, Psalm.
xxxvi. 8. over-bore with the strength of this celestial liquor, we say we know
not what, do things beyond the ordinary course of action, seem mad though we be
sober, as the Prophets did sometimes when the Spirit came upon them, lay down
naked, use strange gesture, or speak words, with Caiphas, which at the time we
understand not, run like madmen with some Martyrs into flames and fires, to
blocks and halters upon the sudden, powerful, and miraculous motion of Gods
Spirit or Grace within us. These, for all that, not to be looks for now.

Yet it is ever to be noted here, that how strange soever the expressions of
some holy Saints have been in such excesses, though they have not understood
themselves, yet others have; they never spoke nonsense by the Spirit, never
blasphemy, never contradictions to holy Scripture, never any thing against
Christian Patience and Obedience. We have heard of late of the Pattern in the
Mount, a Church talked of to be formed according to that Pattern. Indeed it
seems to have somewhat of St. Peter's Bonnm est, of his desire to be with
Christ without the Cross, to build Tabernacles here for him, a new Kingdom upon
earth, to set up King Jesus, a phrase much canted; but to this St. Luke gives
his dash, It Is a Nesciens quid diceret, that neither he, nor they know what
they say, what they would have. It Is mere fear of I know not what, a fear where
no fear is, a mere stupor, as St. Mark, and a desiring what is not to be
desired, an expectation of what is not to be expected, of nothing but ease and
pleasure, and glory in Christ's service. Their present condition and successes
make them say and wish they know not what.

For, if we truly examine it, we shall find this saying what comes next, we
heed not what, comes from present contentments and successes; when all things
succeed to our mind, then we begin to forget our selves, or not to know our
selves. Worldly felicities commonly so transport us, that we know not, care not
what we say or do, our greatness we think shall bear us out. We say in our have
too with David, we shall never be removed, so care not what we say, how we
behave our selves to God and Man, only Bonum est esse hic, we set our selves to
enjoy our pleasures, and build houses for them that shall come after.

Yet it is worth the noting, that whilst we are thus speaking, we speak often
against our selves when we do not intend it. We call all our great buildings,
all our great hopes but Tabernacles with St. Peter, so, as it were, presaging
their remove, that they are of no long continuance and abiding. How many have
we heard of in their times, who have by some sudden word, some unexpected
expression been the presages of their own ruin, and by the slip of some
unlucky syllable or two, doomed the period, and foretold the shortness of this
Mountain of Glory? Of so unhappy speech are we, when we begin to talk of any
glory or continuance upon the high places of the earth, we pitch a word instead
of a Tabernacle, that takes away all our bonum est esse hic on a sudden, even
whilst we mean no such matter, whilst we know not what we say. And as no holy
company, Moses, nor Elias, nor Christ's own can keep us from all indiscretion in
our speech no more then they did St. Peter, so neither do they keep us from
undoing our selves often with our own language. We in a passion say we know not
what, enough to throw down all our Tabernacles; remove all our Bonum est, all
our goods. The more need then with the Psalmist of setting a watch before our
lips, and a guard before our mouths, that we offend not in our tongues; that we
consider what we say before we say it, that we learn to speak before we speak
it; that we keep our mouths even from good words, as the same holy Prophet has
it; that we do not take up every word that seems good and godly, but weigh and
ponder it in the balance of the Sanctuary, by Christ's Rule and Precept, before
we utter it.

And so doing, and so speaking, we may in all conditions, high and low, in
glory and ignominy, in prosperity and adversity, in all companies, in all
places, say merrily and cheerfully, without danger, Master it is good for us to
be here and make Tabernacles here for Christ, and Moses, and Elias, to keep
them with us, we may build in the Mountain, or in the Valley without fear of
this censure, not knowing what we do. All will be good unto us, all will work
for good, if we temper our words and speak them soberly, and place them
rightly, and direct them every one to his hic and nunc, to his proper object
and circumstances; and Christ will tarry with us, and Moses not forsake us, and
Elias not depart away out of the Mountain from us, till we come to the
everlasting Hills, to eternal Mansions, houses not made with hands eternal in
the Heavens, to dwell with Christ, and Moses, and Elias, and all the Patriarchs
and Prophets, see them face to face, be transfigured and clothed in bright
shining garments, and shine like Stars for ever and ever.

THE FIRST SERMON UPON All Saints.
PSALM. cxlix. 9. -- This.
Such honor have all his Saints.
SO the Text; So the day; a day dedicated to God in honor of all his Saints.
Such honor has God allowed them, such honor has the holy Church bestowed upon
them. Because they are his, and as his here they are had in honor, because his
holy ones, Sancti ejus, as his Saints or holy ones honored with a holy day,
or, if you will, God honored in them on the day. For this honor also have all
the Saints, that all the honor done to them, all the honor done by them, by
the Saints in earth to the Saints in heaven, all the virtues of the one, all
the praises of the other are to the honor and praise and glory of God in all
the Congregations of the Saints, whether in heaven or earth.

It Is not fit therefore any of them should be forgotten, from whose memories
God receives so much; not reasonable to deny them any honor that so redounds
to Gods. The Psalm gives them it, and the Day gives them it; God says they
shall have this honor, and the Church this day pays it, and we must pay it, if
we honor either him or her, God or the Church, or Father, or mother; pay it to
them all, to all to whom it is due, all honor that is due. This is a day for us
to meet all together to pay it in, for them altogether to receive it in. We
cannot do it to all severally, they are too many, we may do it to all together.
We profess a great Article of our faith, the Communion of Saints, by doing it;
are therefore surely not too blame for doing it, having so good authority, so
good a ground, so good a profession for it.

For say our new Saints what they will, unsaint they whom they please,
dishonor they all the old Saints how they list, (1.) God has his Saints, says
our Text, and ver. 5. Saints in glory, Saints in their beds, or in their
graves; his they are, and Saints they are though there. His Saints (2.) have
and shall have honor. A signal special honor (3.) it is they have; This
honor, such honor as the former verses spoke of. All of them (4.) have it.
All his Saints have it (5.) from him, are to have it from us, gloria sit, so
some read, Let this honor be given to all his Saints, that is the last, and all
five so many parts of the Text. I go on with them in their order.

I. God has his Saints. Saints in heaven, St. Mat. xxvii. 52. Saints upon
earth, Psalm. xvi. 3. Saints in glory, ver. 5. and Saints of grace. Saints at
rest in their beds of honor, and Saints in the bustle of noise and trouble.
The stranger men they, that engross the title to themselves, strike all the
Saints out of the Calendar, and will not call them so whom God has called so.
Yet if to be Saints be to be holy, the title is their due that are in heaven,
they are the holiest: If to be Saints be to be called effectually, they are
called to purpose that are already there. If to be Saints be to be separate to
God from the drossie multitude, they are of the highest separation. If to be
Saints be to be established, if Sancti be Sanciti, there are none so sure, so
established, as they who are in heavenly glory. And dare men be so bold to rob
them of this honor so proper and peculiar to them, that it is but a kind of an
impropriety to give it to any here below, which yet both Scripture and their
own tongues give to some below, yet to none but such as are in Communion with
those above, and as far only as they are in it. God has a chosen Generation, a
royal Priesthood, a holy Nation, a separate or peculiar people, a people to
show forth his praise, called out of darkness into his marvelous light to do
it, says St. Peter, 1 Pet. ii. 9. St. Paul, and the rest of the holy Epistlers,
say as much, call Believers Saints ever and anon, and these have
fellow-Citizens, Ephesians. ii. 19. Saints in an inheritance of glory, Ephesians. i. 18.
worth the knowledge, says St. Paul, and now (2.) worthy honor too.

II. For his Saints have honor, are persons of honor. Kings and Priests, Rev.
i. 6. Heirs of a Kingdom, St. Iam. ii. 5. Sons of God, St. John i. 12. Children
of the most Highest, Psalm. lxxxii. 6. So that if the Sons of Kings, or Kings
themselves, if men in highest Office, or the nearest relation to the highest
Princes be men of honor, the Saints are they, who are so honorably related
to, and so highly employed by the King of Kings. Who are first honored by him
with such titles, as his friends, St. Ioh. xv. 15. as his anointed, Psalm. cv.
15. as his Sons and Daughters. Who (2.) are so his that he reckons what is done
to them is done to him; receive them and receive him, despise them and despise
him, St. Luke x. 16. the very least of them not excepted, St. Mat. xxv. 40.
Who, lastly, are so entrusted by him that he admits them into his secrets,
Psalm. xxv. 13. makes them of his Privy Counsel, Prove. ii. 32. an honor without
question, of the first and highest rank.

Enough however to teach us (1.) not to despise them whom God thus honors
though they here walk in rags, and are fed with crumbs, and look desolate, and
though they are covered with poverty, and encompassed with afflictions, and had
in derision, and a Proverb of reproach whilst they are here, and when they
depart hence seem to die, and their departure is taken for misery, they are
honorable for all that, such as the Great King delights to honor, and must
not be despised.

Sufficient (2.) it is to teach us not to dishonor our selves with any
unworthy action or behavior. It Is not for persons of honor to do things base
and vile, indeed to live or act like men of ordinary and mean condition. Nor is
it for any of them that are called to be Saints to employ themselves in the
drudgeries and nastinesses of sins, in the low poor businesses of the earth, to
work in Mines and Metals, or make that our business here.

For (3.) this honor is to teach us to do honorable things, higher thoughts,
and higher works, to live like Saints, like such as are to inherit the earth,
Mat. v. 5. to reign and rule in it, not to serve it, like such as are to
inherit heaven too, and are therefore to have our conversation there, to do all
things worthy of it, nothing but what becomes the Kingdom of Christ, especially
seeing it is not only mere honor, ordinary honor but a signal special honor
that is here given to the Saints. Gloria haec est, or Gloria hic est omnibus
sanctis ejus; This honor have all his Saints, or He is the honor of all his
Saints. What it is we shall best gather by the Context, out of the foregoing
verses.

III. (1.) The Lord takes pleasure in his people, ver. 4. There Is the honor
of a Favorite. (2.) He will beautify them with salvation, in the same verse,
there is the honor of his salvation, as David speaks in another place, there is
a second honor. (3.) Let the praises of God be in their mouth, and a two edged
sword in their hands to be avenged of the heathen, etc. ver. 6, 7. there is the
honor of Conquerours, that is a third. (4.) To execute upon them the judgment
written, ver. 9. There Is the honor of judges, that is a fourth. (5.) Look back
again, Let the Saints be joyful in glory, ver. 5. there is the honor of glory
of eternal glory, that is a fifth. (6.) Let them rejoice in their beds, or sing
aloud upon their bed, there is the honor of eternal peace and security, or the
security of their honor. (7.) Lastly, Gloria hic est, for the Pronoune is
Masculine in the Hebrew. He is the honor of his Saints, God is their honor,
so the Text may well be rendered, there is the infinity of their honor, Honor
infinitatis, or honor infinitus, their infinite honor, that is the last. So
here is the Saints honor, like Wisdom with her seven Pillars, strongly built,
firmly seated, magnificently set forth upon them. They have the honor of being
favorites, the honor of being ever and anon honorably saved and delivered,
the honor of being Victors, the honor of being judges, a glorious, secure,
infinite honor the Saints have.

1. This honor that they have is the honor of grand Favorites. God is well
pleased in them, takes pleasure in the prosperity of his servants; his delight
is placed in them, the Lords delight is in them that fear him, Psalm. cxlvii.
11. He deals with them as Pharaoh did with Joseph, Genesis xli. 42. Puts his Ring
upon their hands, and espouses them to himself, makes them the keepers of his
Signet, and grants Petitions by them; He arrays them (2.) in vestures of fine
linen, that is, the righteousness of the Saints, says St. John, Rev. xix. 8.
cloths them with the best Robe too, the royal apparel of his Son. (3.) He puts
a gold chain about their necks, obliges them with the richest blessings. (4.)
he makes them to ride in his second Chariot, carries them in the clouds, and
sets them all at his right hand. (5.) Cries before them bow the knee, such
honor have all his Saints. (6.) He makes them Rulers over all the Land of
Egypt, makes them to have dominion over the works of his hands, Psalm. viii. 6.
gives them all the blessings of the Land, gives them their hearts desire, and
fulfils all their mind, all at their disposal. (7.) He does more than Pharaoh,
he entertains them at his Table, feeds them with the bread of Heaven, embraces
them in his arms, receives them into his bosom, counts them as the very apple
of his eye, reckons them as his Jewels, compasses them continually with his
loving kindness, prevents them always with the blessings of his goodness, Psalm.
xxi. 3. and crowns them with glory and worship, Psalm. viii. 5. Puts Crowns upon
their heads as well as Robes upon their backs; crowns them with this favor
above the rest, as to unbosom himself unto them, to grant them secret
conferences and discourses with him, as to his only favorites in the world.

That this may appear the better, their honor, secondly, is great in his
salvation; they do but cry to him and they are saved, they do but go to him and
they are delivered, Psalm. xxxiv. 16. He preserves the souls of his Saints,
says holy David, Psalm. xcvii. 10. He preserves the ways of his Saints, says
David's Son, Prove. ii. 8. Nay, says the Father again, he gives his very Angels
charge over them, Psalm. xci. 11. makes them tarry all about them, Psalm. xxxiv.
7. that they hurt not so much as their feet, Psalm. xci. 12. that they break not
a bone, Psalm. xxxiv. 20. that they lack nothing, ver. 9. This is an honor to
some purpose, and a huge one for God to descend to do it for us; not like the
honors of the earth, that lay us open to wind and weather, that cannot shelter
us from danger and ruin, but raise us up commonly to throw us down with the
greater violence. No, he lifts up his meek ones to salvation; lifts up his Son
upon the Cross to save them, a high honor this; we would count it so if a King
should venture himself to save us, an honor we knew not how to value, and such
a one this is, you will see it clearly by the next, honor and salvation both
exalted, which is the honor of Victors and Conquerours granted also to his
Saints.

For (3.) though the heathen rage, the Saints shall be avenged, though the
people imagine a vain thing against them, they shall rebuke them; if the Kings
of the earth stand up, and the Rulers and Nobles take counsel together, the
Saints shall bind them all in chains and links of Iron, all together; the gates
of hell shall not prevail against his Saints; against his Church all the
counsels and devices, all the strength and power, all the subtilty and malice
of earth or hell shall do no good. Come life, come death, come Angels, come
Principalities, come Powers, come things present, come things to come, come
height, come depth, come any other creature; come tribulation, come distress,
come persecution, come famine, come nakedness, come peril, come sword, come all
the Kings and Princes of the earth, all the Heathen and In^idels under Heaven,
all the violence and cunning of hell and all the Inhabitants of that dismal
dwelling, come what can come, come how they can, come all that can, as good
come nothing, nothing will come of it, of all their fury, in all these, says
St. Paul, we are more than conquerours, Romans viii. 35, 36, 37, 38, 39. through
him that loved us. Thanks be to God (says he) he always causes us to triumph in
Christ, 2 Cor. ii. 14. We may erect our Trophies, we may hang up our spoils,
the spoils of these our enemies and dance about them, praise his Name in the
dance as we are called to do, ver. 3. as certain of our victory through Jesus
Christ, for through him this honor have all his Saints.

4. Yet not the honor only of the triumph, but of the judgment seat besides,
to pass sentence and execute judgment upon the conquered enemies. Know you not,
says St. Paul, that the Saints shall judge the World, 1 Cor. vi. 2. Are you
ignorant of the honor God has promised them? Know you not that we shall judge
Angels too? ver. 3. Much more then the Potentates of the earth, who have
oppressed the Church, gainsaid the Truth, stood up against Christ, and for a
while trampled down the Saints. The time will be, the day will come when those
great Princes, such as Antiochus, Herod, Nero, Dioclesian, and the rest of
those persecuting Furies shall be brought before the great Tribunal, and
receive their Sentence from the mouths of those poor Saints whom they so
tyrannically raged against, to be bound hand and foot and cast into utter
darkness. And how great an honor, think you, must this needs be to fit judges
over those great men who made the earth tremble still before them, and even
hell at their coming thither to be moved at them as the Prophet speaks, Isa.
xiv. 9. How great an honor (I say) for such poor Scrubs as we, for the very
poorest Saints to be made judges of such men? yea, and judges too not here, not
in earth but below, but in heaven above; yet such also is the honor of the
Saints.

And greater yet; for it is not honor, but gloria here; and Sancti in gloria,
ver. 5. a glorious honor that the Saints are honored with. All earthly honor
reaches not to this title; glory that we may be joyful in is more than earth
affords. The honors here are so full of fears, so farc'd with troubles, so
stuffed with cares; so amongst thorns and briars, so blasted with envies, so
justled at by rivals, so assaulted by enemies, so undermined by neighbors, so
suspected by friends that there is little true mirth or joy to be had in them,
it is only the honor of the Saints in glory that is troubled with none of
these, but surrounded with uninterrupted joys and songs of joy. And were the
Saints lives here but so many days and years of affliction and vexation,
ignominy and dishonor, this crown of honor at the last were a sufficient,
abundant, superabundant recompense for them all. And this is so properly the
Saints, that none else have the dream of a title to it; it is their inheritance,
Col. i. 12. Ephesians. i. 18. it is their reward, St. Luke vi. 23. the reward of their
Inheritance both together. The greater honor to be so honored as to have
glory it self called their reward, strange honor to them, to have honor
entitled to them as their due.

But honor, joy, and glory given to them in their beds, to have joy and glory
conferred upon them in their beds, to have it, as it were, with ease, with
lying still, and to enjoy it with security, without fear of rousing from it,
and in the very beds of dust, the dark Chambers of the grave, the Mansions of
death it self to have this light and glory shine upon them, to have security
and peace, ease and pleasure established on their glory, and those melancholy
rooms that are hanged with worms and rottenness enlightened with the beams of
perpetual joy and comfort is a vast addition to their glory. Yet this they
have, not only an immarcessible and incorruptible crown of glory, 1 Pet. v. 4.
laid up for them, 2 Timothy iv. 8. but their very bones flourish out of the grave,
Eccl. xlvi. 12. and even the lodgings of their very ashes seem to exult with a
kind of joy to be made the receptacles and cabinets of those Jewels of the
Almighty, and their Sepulchers and Memorials are blessed for evermore, Ecclus.
xlix. 10. The very places where they come are joyful at their shadows as they
pass by, Miracles have been done by their shadows whilst they passed by, Acts
v. 15. and when their bones have lain a while silent in the grave, the dead
have yet been raised by them to life again, 2 Kings xiii. 21. Thus his Saints
have honor in life, and death, and after death, then when they seem to have
been some while, nay, a long while raked up in dust and quite forgotten.

Nay, lastly, Gloria hic est, their honor is infinite too, it is a masculine
glory. All other glories and honors are but Feminine, weak, poor things to it.
God is their glory, honored they are with his blessed Presence, honored with
his sight, with his embraces; they see him and enjoy him. This is the very
glory of their honor, the height and pitch of all, for in thy presence is joy,
and at thy right hand there is pleasure for evermore; honor advanced into
eternal glory; And this honor also have all his Saints, some in spe, and some
in re, some in hope, and some in deed; all either in promise or in possession.
All his Saints, some way or other, more or less are partakers of it; that is
their honor at the full extent, an honor wherewith this day is great, which
is a great considerable also in the Text, that this honor of the Saints, as
special a one as it is, is yet also universal some way or other belonging to
all the Saints.

IV. Some way or other I say; for, this honor it is to be confessed at first is
not equal to them all. One star differs from another star in glory, 1 Cor. xv.
41. One Saint differs from another in his honor. There is a Sun, and Moon,
greater and lesser stars in the firmament of Saints. There are Celestial and
Terrestrial Saints, Saints wholly busied in the work of heaven, and Saints who
intermeddle also with the works of earth. Contemplative Saints, and active
Saints. There were Saints before the Law, there were Saints under the Law, and
Saints still after it. Patriarchs and Prophets, Martyrs and Apostles, all were
Saints; Jews, and Christians, and Gentiles too have Saints among them.

And all have their honor. The Jews literally to the very words, the
Christians mystically to the higher sense and meaning; greater honor these,
because more abundant grace than they. The Gentiles Prosely^es they come in
also for their share. Beloved and favored by him all, delivered by him some
way or other all, Conquerours, at least over their ghostly enemies, all of
them; to be judges all at last, and prepared to glory and honor, and Gods
Presence after all. There are false Saints many, as there are false Gods many;
and false honor there is too, that is by some men given to both the false and
true ones; yet this no reason to scrape the true ones out of the Calendar, nor
deny the true honor that is due to them. If God say the Saints have honor,
est and erit, for (...) the Complutensian Bibles read it, as others, (...),
that they have, and shall have. I cannot but think that man too bold that dares
contradict it, that dares annul the Festival or memorial of All Saints, of any
Saints together or asunder, or rob them of the honor that God has given them.
Holy they are, Saints is nothing else; and the Scripture so often calls them
holy that it is Infidelity to doubt it, Impudence to question it, and Atheism to
deny it, and therefore Sacrilege it must needs be too to violate their
honors, or plunder them of that which God has given them; for this honor,
says he here himself, or his Spirit for him, have all his Saints.

V. Have it from God first, are therefore (2.) to have it from us too. Have it
from God, for he has promised it. Those that honor me I will honor, says he,
1 Samuel ii. 30. and honor them he does; (1.) He speaks of them with honor
throughout the holy Page, and tells forth their praise, builds there, as it
were, a lasting Monument to their memories. (2.) He gives them titles of
honor, calls Abraham his Friend; Enoch, in a manner, his Companion, one that
continually walked with him; Job his Servant with an Emphasis, with a Quis
similis in all the earth; David his dear heart, as one would say, a man after
his own heart; The true Israelites, the precious Sons of Sion, Lam. iv. 2. and
all his Saints his Jewels, Mal. iii. 17. Jewels made up, and laid up in
Cabinets, in the Cabinets of the highest Heaven. (3.) He gives them high and
honorable employment; to Moses to be faithful in all his house, his High
Steward there; to Joshua, and Ieptha, and Gideon, and David to be Generals of
his Wars, and fight his Battles; to Solomon to be his Master Builder, and the
Overseer of his Works; to all his Saints to be his Courtiers, and tread his
Courts; honorable all. Nay, (4.) he makes them all, as it were, Masters of his
Requests, grants Petitions often upon their score. Thus for Abraham my Servant,
for the oath I swear unto Isaac, for my Servant David's sake, 1 Kings xv. 4. at
the Petition of my Servant Job, Job xlii. and the like, says God, I will do
this or that. Many, many things God did for Israel for their sakes, many times
withheld^his his Judgments, and bestowed his Mercies for their only sakes; and
with us he deals so too, grants us many favors and blessings for some of our
holy forefathers sakes which he would not give us for our own. (5.) He so
honors them that he seldom discovers any of their faults, or but easily
glances at them, or but favorably speaks of them, as in that remarkable
expression, 1 Kings xv. 5. where he calls David's Murder and Adultery the
matter only of Vriah the Hittite; yet recounting of their virtues he is always
full and large. Lastly, He sometimes honors them with miracles even at their
Sepulchers, as he did Elisha, 2 Kings xiii. 21. makes Napkins and Handkerchiefs
from their bodies, Acts xix. 12. Nay, their very shadows, Acts v. 15. cure
diseases, and (unless we will believe nothing but what we see done before us in
our own days) many great miracles have been done at the Sepulchers of the
Martyrs, God so honoring the memory of their faith and patience to the glory
of Christianity, and the glorious propagation of it through the world; and
there have been thousands of Witnesses to attest it.

And now if God so honor them, as if he delighted to honor them, it cannot
seem strange if I now go on to tell you, we are to honor them too. It cannot
be a sin in us to do that which God does before us, that we may do it the
better.

I must confess there has been a fault, and still there is some in giving more
honor to Saints and Martyrs than their due, not robbing Peter, as we say, to
pay Paul, but robbing God to give to St. Paul, St. Peter, St. Mary, and other
Saints. Yet there is a fault in others too, to rob the Saints under pretense to
give to God. But is there not a mean between them? Sure, sure there is. We may
give each their due, God his, and the Saints theirs, and all will be well.

For Praise God in his Saints (the beginning of the next Psalm, as we may read
it, and some understand it, and may so without offense, it coming especially so
close to this honor of the Saints) may seem to call upon us to give this
honor to them. And Psalm. lxviii. 35. may be as well, God is wonderful in his
Saints, as God is wonderful in his holy Places, for ought that I can guess by
the Sense or Context, and a good reason to praise him for them, and in them
too, as well as in his Sanctuary; we may praise him, I hope, for all the
wonders that he does for the Children of men, be they in heaven above, or in
the earth beneath. And, indeed, there is an honor due in both, to the Saints
that dwell on earth, as it is Psalm. xvi. 3. and to the Saints that dwell in
heaven. Distinguish we but the honor as the Scripture does, and find out the
several senses of it there, and we may know to give each their own. We shall
begin below, see how we are to honor the Saints that are in the earth.

To honor is (1.) to esteem and value one; Good men are to be valued, be their
condition never so mean or poor, that is one duty we owe the Saints whilst they
live here; and there is good reason, for they are very Pillars of the earth,
and bear it up, Psalm. lxxv. 3. Ten righteous men, you know, would have saved
even Sodom and its four neighbor Cities. It Is good we should prize them high
that are more worth one of them than half a City.

To honor one (2.) is to perform the offices of Charity unto him, thus we are
bid to honor all men, 1 Pet. ii. 17. to go one before another in giving
honor, Romans xii. 10. especially then to do it to the household of faith, men of
Piety and Religion.

3. To honor is not only to value, or to love, but to delight to be with, to
seek their company; Honorare timentes Dei, Psalm. xv. 4. to make much of them
that fear the Lord, never to think our selves so well as in their company. All
my delight, says the same Psalmist, is upon the Saints that are in the earth,
and upon such as excel in virtue, Psalm. xvi. 3. he was never pleased but when
he was with them. Nay, even Saul, as bad as he was, yet honor me, says he, I
pray thee, to Samuel, 1 Samuel xiv. 30. before the Elders of my People, and turn
again with me; his company he must needs have, and an honor he acknowledges it
to have the company of such a man, a holy Priest or Prophet. The world now is
of another opinion, no company so contemptible; men are never well till such a
one is gone; never merry till these holy men are out of doors, so far are men
from thinking themselves honored with their Society, or willing to honor them
with theirs; any company rather than such as they; they make us melancholy, say
they, they make us sad and dull; they trouble us with discourse we do not like,
with God, and Heaven, and Virtue, and Religion, such hard businesses, and we
know not what. But for all that it is a duty we owe both to our selves and them,
to give them this honor, be they never so poor or despicable, and David, you
hear, made it his delight, as well as Saul his honor, to receive this honor
from, or give this honor to such men as they.

4. To honor is to maintain them too when they have need. Honor Widows, says
St. Paul, 1 Timothy v. 3. that is, maintain them out of the Churches Stock; and
they that labor in the Ministry are to be honored with double honor, 1 Timothy
v. 17. maintenance and respect out of the Churches Stock, and out of ours.
Honor is thus taken too in the fifth Commandment, and we sin against the
Commandment both of God and men, when we deny this honor where it is due, or
whenever the poor Saints stand in need of it. Thus you see what it is to
honor, or how you are to honor the Saints below, to set a high value and
esteem upon them, to perform all offices of Love and Charity unto them; to seek
their company, and take pleasure to be in it, and as occasion serves, to
express the honor and respect we bear them by some outward real Testimonies
and Effects. We will see now how we are to honor the Saints above.

To Honor then, as it may relate to them, is to give them a respect above
other men, to look upon them as the Courtiers of Heaven, as persons in highest
place, as the Inhabitants of glory, as such as are always praying for us, Rev.
vi. 9. such as are following the Lamb whithersoever he goes, Rev. vii. 14, 15.
Nebuchadnezzar himself at the hearing of the interpretation of his Dream, could
not refrain himself but he must even worship Daniel in whom he saw the wisdom
of God so eminent, Dan. ii. 46. We cannot hold our selves sometimes but that we
must needs express some especial respect or other to some who either amaze us
with their stupendous abilities of nature, or works of grace. And is it only
strange and irregular to give honor to those glorious Saints whose
excellencies are so great, whose virtues have been so full of wonder? I cannot
see why their memories may not live in honor, why being departed hence they
should be forgotten, when their virtues and good works, as St. Paul says of
Abels faith, Heb. xi. 4. though they be dead, yet speak unto us.

And if they yet speak, we may speak too, speak of them to their praise, for to
honor them is to commend them: so God is said to be honored, Psalm. xxii. 24.
So Christ to receive honor from his Father, 2 Pet. i. 17. So men are said to
be honored, Prove. xiii. 18. and xxvii. 18. that is, praised or commended. To
this purpose it is that the holy Scripture relates their Histories. To this
intent St. Paul reckons up a whole Catalogue of them, Heb. xi. and would do
more but that the day would fail him. After the same sort he honors Lois and
Eunice the Grandmother and Mother of the blessed Timothy, 2 Timothy i. 5. And an
ancient custom it was among the Saints of God, it seems by the Son of Syrach,
Ecclus. xliv. 1. to praise famous men, and the Fathers that begat us, to make a
solemn commemoration of them. The Primitive Church was not behind in this duty
neither, but in the Prayer for the holy Catholic Church recited the names of
the most famous Saints and Martyrs, and gave God thanks for their good examples
even at the Altar it self; nay, brought in the command of the Apostle, 1 Timothy
ii. 1. for intercessions and giving thanks for all men for the Preface of it,
as a Text to authorize their so doing. Evidences these sufficient to honor the
Saints with all our praises.

With our Praises, I say, but not our Prayers; our Praises of them, not our
Prayers unto them; that is a piece of honor God has no where in Scripture any
way allowed them. Prayers I find not that they are to have, Praises I find they
may.

And which yet makes more to their honor than such Prayers could do, that they
should be the Conduits of Gods honor to convey it to him; God is now (3.) to
be praised for them. He praised in his Saints; he honored in their honor;
honor servorum redundet ad Dominum, so St. Hierom. God to have the honor of
their honor; He who bestowed so excellent graces upon them, so excellent
examples in them unto us, he to be blessed for them. Blessed too for the honor
he has done to take them hence, out of this vale of misery to himself to glory
and honor; this is to season the Saints honor right, to give it as we should
when the Author of it is thus honored by it.

But there is an honor still behind that makes up all. We are said to honor
those whom we follow with our attendance. He that is highest in honor has the
most followers, the greatest attendance. If we will therefore honor the Saints
indeed, we must honor them by following their virtues and examples. This is
that the Church principally intends by all the Saints it sets before us, by all
its Festivals and Holidays, to put us in mind of the Patience of St. Stephen,
of the Repentance of St. Paul, of the Faith of St. Peter, of the Purity of St.
John, of the holy Chastity and Humility of the Virgin Mary, of the ready
following of our Savior in St. Andrew, of the leaving and forsaking all for
Christ in St. Matthew, of a holy boldness to profess the truth in St. John
Baptist, and so of the rest; and of the love, and charity, and communion the
Saints ought to hold together in this days Feast; where they are all, as it
were, joined together, that we might learn never to make a separation from this
communion, never to break off from the doctrine once delivered to the Saints,
nor leave one single virtue unpractised which we find in any of them. This is
truly honor to them to have a multitude of followers, the honor of all his
Saints.

And it will be our honor too to follow them, and do like them; to make our
selves honorable by these virtues, patience, obedience, chastity, holiness,
great piety, which have rendered them so renowned through the world; so famous
in this, and so glorious in the other.

And all these together are all the honor, lastly, the Saints expect or
require from us; besides that of our Prayers for their consummation, that they
with us, and we with them, may in due time obtain the fullness of this honor,
the completion of this glory at the Resurrection of the Saints.

By this honor, this reverent esteem of them, by this honorable mention of
them, by the devout praises of God for them, by our diligent imitation of their
virtues, and our Prayers for their perfection and consummation, and our own
(for they without us shall not be made perfect) by thus giving honor where
honor is due, as the Apostle speaks, we shall give God his honor, the Church
her honor, our selves honor, and one day be made partakers of that honor and
glory which all his Saints that are departed hence in his faith and fear enjoy
already, and reign with him and them in honor and glory for evermore. Amen.

THE SECOND SERMON UPON All Saints.
HEB. xii. 1. Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the sin which does so
easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race which is set before us.
Seeing we also? What, we also under the cloud? Indeed, our Fathers were, 1 Cor.
x. 1. yea, and were baptized in the cloud. Christianity then in clouds, in
shadows. But when the Sun displays his midday glories the clouds vanish out of
sight, what then means this Nubem tantam? How comes this cloud? Is it because
that Majesty is yet too glorious for our weak eyes to look upon without a veil?
1 Cor. 13.
Is it still videmus tanquam in speculo? See we nothing here but through this
watery glass? It Is so, Viatores, they, and we; and the Sun in a cloud fittest
for travelers. Thus distinguished from the Saints in bliss, we for nubem, they
for lumen, we compassed about with clouds, they with light.

And as nubem makes the difference between Viator and Comprehensor, so
circumpositam, (for so is (...)) between Viatores Legis and Evangelii, those
Pilgrims of old, and our travelers. They were (...), the cloud above, they
under it; so under it that they could not look up to the end of that which was
to come. This (...), about us, we in it, and so see the easier through it. The
Apostles by a figure first entering it at the transfiguration, when Moses, and
Elias, Law and Prophets were departed, not before.

Yet should we grant them circumpositam, to be in it too, 'twould prove but
(...) a little cloud to this (...), or but a dark one to (...), a cloud of
Martyrs whose flames outshine the brightness of the Sun.

The truth is, our cloud and theirs are not alike. Ours but Analogical at the
most. The Apostle had to speak to Hebrews to persuade them to the Race of
Christian faith, and to them he was to fit his speech. They would not so soon
from their beggarly rudiments. A cloud they always had in all their journeys,
and a cloud they would have now, or they would not stir a foot. St. Paul raises
up a cloud in the preceding Chapter, yet a little to wean them from sense,
though a cloud he calls it, it will prove no such cloud as their dull eye gazed
after, but a cloud of Saints.

Indeed, need he had to tell them of a guide from heaven, that a few verses
before had told them of so ill entertainment upon earth; stoning, sawing in
sunder, deserts, dens, and caves, nothing but torment and affliction. Ideoque
had been a poor inference, could expect but cold welcome without a nubem tantam.

And yet what avails a guide, though sent from heaven, if this same (...), some
weight about us overwhelm us, or the way be so bespread with (...), such snares
that every step we stumble and fall into inextricable dangers. Were it not for
(...), that he shows us how to quit our selves of all, the cloud might walk
alone for all the Hebrews, (...), and for all us too.

For as they, so we pretend often we would run but that we have no guide,
here is a cloud to conduct us; then we have no company, here are Saints to go
with us. No body to encourage us, here are Witnesses to behold us. Then we are
too pursie and unweildy for the course, why, off with that superfluous weight;
yea, but the way is full beset with briers and thorns, down with them too;
well, but the way is tedious, let us run with patience, no more than so; but we
have nothing to run for, yes, there is something set before us that is worth the
running for; we shall easily find that too in Propositum. So then here is I. The
Guide of our way, a Cloud of Witnesses. II. The Companions of our Course, a
Cloud of Witnesses that compass us, habentes nobis, having it with us, or being
compassed with it. III. The Spectators of our Course, a Cloud of Witnesses
about us habentes circum positam. IV. The impediments of our speed, (1.) One
that hinders us from setting forth, Every weight. (2.) The other that entangles
us by the way, The sin that does so easily beset us. V. The removal of them
both, by laying aside or casting away. VI. The running of our course, Let us
run with patience. VII. The Race to be run. The Race set. VIII. The crown of
our labors, Set before us. IX. The influence of the Cloud upon all, or the
inference from it, Ideoque curramus. Seeing a cloud we have, and such an one, a
cloud of Witnesses, that will not lead us about as that cloud did Israel in the
Wilderness, but breve per exempla, the shortest cut without staying now by the
way at lugens in infernum, or Sinus Abrahae, but hence immediately into Canaan,
seeing the Cloud so great, the Guide so good, the Company so full, the
Spectators of so high account, the Hindrances so easily put by, the Course so
facile, the Race so short, the Prize so glorious, how can we but run like
lightning after them? You see the parts.


It Is fit the Guide should lead the way; the Cloud first. 1. The Cloud.


When time was, there was Columna Nubis; Moses his cloud, Isreal's guide to
Canaan. Canaan is gone, and Nubem non habentes, we have no such cloud, we.

There is another, ^t nubem iniquitates, Isaiahs cloud, Isa. 44. 22,
a thick cloud of transgressions, a winter cloud that sticks by us, a morning
cloud that rises with us, at the first dawning of our days, and God make it too
as a morning cloud to pass away. I would I could not say here habentes n^bem,
that we had not this neither, but this I can, Ideoque habentes, it is not no
good conclusion thence, we have it not to follow, it sets in darkness.

What cloud then? Why, Nubem testium, St. Paul's new cloud, a cloud of
Witnesses, of holy Saints, who by the glory of example lead us more happily to
heaven, than theirs did them to the Land of Promise. A cloud, for their
multitude; but that we let alone till we come to tantam. A cloud, for the
likeness of their Production, their Seat, their Nature, and Effects.

Their Production first. Clouds, though heavens near acquaintance now, are but
refined earth, or water divested of its grosser body; and were not the departed
Saints, a while since prisoners in these clay houses, now bereft of their happy
tenants? One of the best of them, in his own esteem no better than dust and
ashes.

2. Why, then, how got they up so high? The clouds they get not up themselves,
it is the Sun that draws them upward. And trahe me and curram post te is the
voice of the Spouse. Some celestial influence we must have, the best of us,
something without us, from above to lift us up to heaven, nature cannot reach
so high.

II. Like they are in their Seat and situation: (1.) Clouds are above the tops
of the mountains; and the highest Pinacles of the earth are too low for an
habitation for these sublime Spirits. Nor earth, nor all the mountains, the
high places and preferments of the earth could content them, nothing under
heaven, nothing but heaven. You know the desire, Bring me into thy holy hill,
into thy dwelling.

2. But if we look upon the Saints of Judah, they were clouds indeed, and Types
of Christ, who in them appeared as the Sun under a cloud, the cloud between the
eye and him. His birth in Issac, his name in Ioshuah, his death in Samson, his
reign in Solomon. Omnia haec illis contigerunt in nube, still a cloud between.

III. There is a third Analogy between their Natures and Effects: 1. Clouds
they do not move themselves, It Is Spiritus spirat, the wind that drives them:
And the Saints they do not move themselves neither, it is Spiritus spirat, the
Holy Ghost.

2. But which is more to us. Clouds, they keep off the Sun from too much
sweltring, too much parching us. This we get, at least, by the examples of the
Martyrs, that however the heat of Persecutions and Afflictions scorch us, we
are refreshed in this, that no temptation takes us, but what is and has been
incident to the most beloved Darlings of the Almighty. As comfortable this to
an oppressed Soul as a cloud of rain in the time of drought, as a cloud of dew
in the heat of harvest.

3. And as they comfort, so they teach us too. The clouds drop down and distill
upon man abundantly, says Elihu, Job xxxvi. 28. and the doctrines of holy lives
drop as the rain, their speeches even yet distill as the dew, whose blessed
Spirits now inhabit those everlasting hills.

To put all together. Thither they ascended up like clouds by the secret and
spiritual operation of divine grace; there they dwell like clouds, their souls
like the upper part of the cloud, light and glorious, though their bodies, like
the lower, darkened in the grave. There they move like clouds in heavenly order.
Thence they descend, like clouds, in the still showers of their happy examples,
that in them, as in a glass, we may see the power of faith, the glory of their
Lord, who has made earth ascend beyond its nature, and dwell above it.

And yet for all this, is it but Nubem still, a Cloud, not a Star? The Saints
shall shine as stars, Dan. xii. 3. and methinks it being Nubem Martyrum, the
Martyrs flames should rise better into stars than clouds. Should and shall in
the Resurrection, till then Nubem still, some degree of darkness, at least a
less degree of light. And whatsoever to themselves, for us perhaps it is
necessary it be a cloud.

For had we not need of this dark word? When did not God on purpose cloud their
glories from our eyes, were it not for this nubem, this cloud that covers them,
man, as subject to superstition as profaneness, would quickly find out some
excellencies for (...) and (...) to fall down and worship.

Or if not necessary, yet more convenient far: For (1.) a Star Why not a Star.
would only guide us, a Cloud both guide and refresh us.

And (2.) guide us better. For Stars only appear in the night. Clouds night and
day we can see them, so best follow them. The Sunbeams put out starlight.
Prosperity cannot see a Star, so small a glimmering ray. A Cloud, come it night
or day, in prosperity, or adversity, we perceive that presently; so a cloud to
teach us in all estates how to demean our selves like devotion in its ancient
innocence. Abraham's cloud, when the days are calm and clear. Jobs, when the day
is swallowed up in a tempestuous night. So never destitute of a cloud.

3. Clouds, not Stars: They are none but the Magi, wise learned men can follow
the Stars and their courses, but every Peasant sees which way the Clouds move.
So if Stars, they had been for none but wise learned men to follow, now the
poor Country man has a cloud to run by.

And yet how easily soever we perceive the track of the Clouds, Why Nubem in
the Singular.
yet if there be a scattered multitude, we are as easily distracted. 'Twere
best to have but Nubem in the singular, but one cloud, it is so. Many drops, but
one cloud, though the materials fetched from several quarters. The Martyrs all
one Cloud to show their unity, all and each confessing, witnessing one and the
same truth, for truth is but one. So not St. Iudes clouds, they not only empty,
no stillicidium Doctrinae in them, no good to be learnt from them, but clouds
too in the Plural, some moving this way, some that way, no constant course; in
division too, one coursing against the other, at such enmity is evil with it
self. It Is only good, and good men that keep together in nubem, in peace and
unity, and by that you shall know them.

Be it a Cloud, Nubem not Nubeculam.
and but one Cloud, the more probable still too small it may be to command the
eye, and then what are we the nearer? Nubem, not Nubeculam, no diminutive; will
that do it? If that will not, tantam will. So great a cloud. Why, how great? So
great that St. Paul, ver. 32. of the former Chapter, tells them, the day would
fail him to show them it all, as if so great a cloud could not but shut up the
day in darkness.

Our first Fathers of the World had no cloud to guide them, Ta^tam.
nothing but natures dusky twilight. This cloud begain to rise in the time of
the Patriarchs, but to appear in the time of Moses like Eliahs cloud at the red
Sea, went before him thence into Canaan, covered the whole Land of Iudaea in
the time of the Prophets. So these Hebrews had cloud enough; yea, but (...), we
have more.

Even those Hebrews, to whom this Epistle was sent, they are in the Cloud.
About that time this cloud, rising in the East, spread its wings presently into
the West, and had almost in an instant filled up the corners of the World; so
that if you now ask again, how great, so great I cannot tell you.

Primitive Christians they in the number, (...).
you will not wonder at (...), if it become a cloud of Martyrs. Indeed the Law
of Moses had its Martyrs too: Witness Isaiahs Saw, the three Childrens fiery
Furnace, the emptied skins of the tortured Maccabees. But since the time of
Christ his servants have engrossed the name (as if they only were the Martyrs)
and filled up tantam to the brim; Their multitudes tireing the wit of cruelty,
and their patience overcoming it: as if from the streams and rivers of their
blood heaven might now enskarfe it self in a scarlet cloud.

Well, talk we may of Martyrum Nubem martyrum.
what we will, yet if Nubem be not first, they will be but Stultae
Philosophiae, all this while, no better. It Is the order in the Text, Nubem
first, then Martyrum. First, clouds lifted up to heaven in their thoughts and
conversations, and all in one, the Sons of peace and unity, if you can see
Christ in the cloud, then Martyrs if you will. Schism, and faction, or
discontented passion yield no Martyrs. You shall know a Martyr by Nubem if that
go first.

But taking Martyrs thus, Testium.
all are not Martyrs. All died not for their faith, How Testium.
but all are Testes, Witnesses. Witnesses of the Power, Witnesses of the Mercy,
Witnesses of the Justice of God. Of his Power in delivering them from sin, of
his Mercy in saving them from punishment, of his Justice in rewarding them with
glory.

Witnesses to this curramus, Why Testium.
(1.) to witness the possibility that this Race we are to speak of by and by
may be run, this Propositum, the prize won, for, ab esse ad posse, run the one
they have, and won the other long ago. (2.) To testify the easiness, that even
the weaker Sex, Sarah and Rahab, the weakest age, the three Children, the army
of Innocents have run it. (3.) To testify the dignity, that both King, and
Priest, and Prophet, David, and Samuel, and Daniel thought it worth the pains.
(4.) To testify the universal necessity, all ages, young and old; all Sexes,
men and women; all degrees, high and low, to run this race, none excused.

And that you may not mistrust their testimony, what is required to the best
witness you have in them. What required to Testium.
(1.) That he knows what he speaks, and what knowledge like theirs that speak
by experience, that now feel the reward of truth. (2.) That he will and dare
speak it, and these have feared no torments for it, they are Martyrs of it.
(3.) Witnesses should be men of rank and quality, their worth has placed them
above the clouds. (4.) They are authentical, habentes circumpositam, the Spirit
has set them round about us to that intent, and he is the Spirit of Truth. So
far now from doubting of our guide, that we wave Nubem and pass to habentes the
second relation they have to us, not only to direct us, but to bear us company.

And indeed, what is Nubem, Habentes our Company.
and Nubem tantam, and Nubem Martyrum, and Nubem testium to us without
Habentes, Habentes nobis
except it be ours, yea, and habentes nobis if we have it not along with us.
What are the glorious Angels themselves to us but flames and two-edged Swords
without this Habentes, if we have them not for ministering Spirits? What are the
Triumphant Saints to us, however dazzled with their own glories, without
Habentes, if they be none of ours, if they be not members of the same Church,
of the same Religion with us? Cast off your Religion quite if you can claim no
portion in the Saints, if you have no Martyrs.

What is it then that some so often ask what have we to do with Saints? It Is
well besides the Habentes that we have an Impositam from the Vulgar Latin,
Nubem impositam.
that it is imposed upon us, some necessity of it sure; and that we have a
Circumpositam from the Greek (...)* Circumpositam a (...)
that not only we have this Cloud, but that we have it put about us, not of our
own putting on. Habentes it might be, we might have it of our own choosing or
fancying (we know who have so, Clouds of their own making, Saints of their own
canonizing) but impositam or circumpositam it cannot be except some body put it
on us, and who is it that makes the clouds a garment for this earth, but he
that makes the Clouds his Chariot? Who can dispose of the Saints, but the King
of Saints? So then a sufficient excuse we have for Habentes, God it is that
compasses us with this Cloud of Witnesses.

And if they compass us, they will be near about us by and by, The spectators.
that they may behold our doing, to be spectators of our course, and Witnesses
to that too, to rejoice at our speed, to congratulate our success, to receive
us with the triumphs of glory.

And yet methinks the Apostle mentions Saints that are gone before, how come
they now to be round about us? Angels indeed are ministering Spirits perhaps
some of them may pitched about us. Angelus Domini in circuitu timentium, Psalm.
xxxiv. 8. The Angel of the Lord tarrieth round about them that fear him, but
how can the Saints be said to compass us about?

May it not be a Metaphor to show their multitude, because there are so many,
that we cannot turn our eyes any where about us but we see them? The Phrase is
David's in another case, The sorrows of death compassed me, Psalm. xviii. 4. at
every hand, on every side, at every turn. I cannot avoid them.

Or is it, that they guard us round with their Quousque Domine quousque? their
earnest prayers for their afflicted Brethren?

Or is it that being there is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents, St.
Luke xv. and they with the Angels make up the Choir, and heaven it self
encompass us, they therefore are said to compass us?

Or is it that their Graves and Sepulchers are round about us, and we as it
were still encompassed with their bodies, and they as it were did still
encompass us in their bodies? The word may seem on purpose as it were. (...) is
jaceo, and (...) is circumjacentem, lying round about us. The Sepulchers of the
Saints do so this day. As if St. Paul had meant, that from the sight and
nearness of the resting places of their sacred ashes we should every day be put
in mind with thankfulness to acknowledge the riches of Gods goodness in our
deceased brethren, and learn those virtues whereby their bones now flourish out
of their Graves, and their memorials live for evermore. Least, as Abels blood
from the earth, so their dust from their silent dormitories should cry out
against us.

Not Suppositam now, Not Suppositam
no supposed cloud, it is true, it is real, if it encompass us. Such Saints there
are without a supposition, they die not all when they go hence, something there
is still to make the God of Abraham the God of the living.

(...) it is, and circumpositam it should be, not sub, nor super, not
superpositam, Not Superpositam
not set over us they as Lords and Masters of our faith, to make what Articles
they lift, but circum, about us, as fellow Witnesses and Companions.

One more, not Praepositam, Not Praepositam
not set before us to run to either for mediation or intercession. He that
regards the clouds thus shall not reap, no thanks I am sure. The Prayer of the
humble pierces the clouds, Ecclus. xxxv. 17. flies higher. It Is the Prayer of
the self conceited, however it seem a voluntary dejection and humility, that is
stifled in the middle Region, and if you mark it there is no Aspicientes here;
no looking of up to them, habentes is all that is here, aspicientes is kept till
the next verse for IESVM. For if this cloud dim our eye sight, and we instead
of being compassed about with them, compass them about by Pilgrimages,
Adoration, or Invocation, our best way is to the next words Deponentes pondus,
to cast off that heavy mist that sits upon our eye lids, or to the next verse,
(...), turn our eyes from them, and look to JESUS the Author and finisher of
our faith.

I hope by this time we know what to do with Nubem, Application
what use to make of this Cloud of Martyrs, for habentes it is, and we have it
not for nothing.

Are they Clouds, Ha^bentes
why habentes first. Let Us have them in account for such, for something more
than earth. Habentes in honor, let us think and speak reverently of those
happy spirits, have their virtues in remembrance, their remembrances in honor,
them in our thanksgivings, their monuments and ashes in so much respect; to
keep them from the profane scattering hand, to put us in mind of their
exemplary Piety and a Resurrection.

Habentes nobis next, Heabentes nobis.
to have them to our selves, to apply them home for imitation, to ascend up in
our thoughts like clouds to heaven, in our affections to inhabit there, to
live and move there in all our actions, that Christ may be seen in all our
doings. To learn from habentes nubem good company, from Nubem something
heavenly, from Nubem in the Singular, peace and unity; to learn the degree from
Tantam, from Testium the open profession of our faith, and from (...) courage
and constancy.

To do all this habentes circumpositam is the way, Habentes circumpositam.
to place them round about our thoughts, to fix our eyes upon their piety and
reward. You know what the imagining a Heathen Cato present has done with some,
to fright them into honesty, and shall not the presence of those blessed Souls
shame our dullness into Piety, if we would but suppose those stupendous patterns
of unconquerable goodness, always cheerfully busied in beholding us,
encouraging us, and rejoicing with us?

But we must not stand too long gazing into heaven. Impediments of running.
There are blocks and traps in the way, and we may chance to stumble, we must
look about us. There are two impediments sufficient to hinder any man from
running, when he cannot go for weight, nor go on for snares. We'll handle each
with his removal, first apart, then together, and begin with the weight.

And yet peradventure Pondus were little, 1 Pondus.
were it not for Omne, were it not a collective, a collection of all, of
infinite weights. Infinite in weight, infinite in number, above the Sand of the
Sea, and that you know can be nothing else but Sin.

Sin, 1 Quid P^c^a. tum.
Sedet in talentum plumbi, Zech. v. As heavy as lead. A weight right, 2 Quare.
pondus
for it (1.) burdens as a weight. How does the repentant soul groan and break,
Conteritur, is ground to ponder under it ^ (2.) It wearies as a weight. How
tired is St. Paul with it! Who, O who shall deliver me from this body of death!
Romans vii. (3.) It presses down as a weight, down from the joys of heaven, down
from the throne of grace, down to the Chambers of the grave, down to the bar of
judgment, down to the depth of hell. David found it by his deliverance. Thou
have delivered my soul from the nethermost hell.

Every Sin is a weight, 3 Quotuples.
but there are some heavier than other. Some (1.) Gravamina Spiritus, weights
with a powder, such as even weary the holy Spirit, and grieve it, and make him
leave his dwelling with us. Mortal sins. (2.) Some heavier yet, that so oppress
our own spirits too, that with a sad heavy eye they cannot see any thing but
those dismal dungeons, Hell and Desperation. Sins of Despair. (3.) Some on the
other side, that look too high, weigh up, ut lapsu graviore, to fetch down with
a vengeance. Sins of Pride and Presumption, it is one signification of (...) a
weight that hoisting up the rebel Angels above their pitch, as speedily pulled
them down from the highest Palaces of their new created glories to the lowest
Prisons of damnation. (4.) And yet some sins there are of a lesser bulk, such
as some call venial, yet heavy enough to lay us low enough. Sins of infirmity
and ignorance. Dispose they do at least to the more grievous, Peccatum quod mox
per poenitentiam non deletur suo pondere ad aliud trahit. St. Gregory. The
least, the pettiest sin, if it remain a while unrepented of is a weight to draw
us to another, that to a third, so downward till we can go no lower.

And think you now we had not need of an (...) to remove it? The removal.
Can we know it to be a weight, and not deal with it as with a weight? Either
cast it away, Abjecto pondere, Beza translatest, or lay it aside, Deponentes.
So the Vulgar.

Cast it away, Both together.
nay, first cast it out, for it is a weight within us. Out of the heart, (1.) By
the mouth in confession; (2.) By the eyes in the tears of contrition; (3.)
(...) from us, far from us by the hand of satisfaction.

Abjecto, A^ jecto ponder^.
there is some violence and passion in the word. We use not to cast away things
from us but out of some sudden (1.) Fear, (2.) Shame, (3.) Anger, (4.) Joy, or
the like. They are the Passions that enliven a repentance. (1.) Fear of
judgment, (2.) Shame of sin, (3.) Anger at our selves, (4.) Joy and delight in
God and goodness. (1.) The tremblings of Fear (to begin with) will shake sin
off; (2.) Shame lay it down; (3.) Anger cast it from us; (4.) Joy and Love, the
love of God, put it quite out, lay it aside out of the way, for if that holy
fire once enter, the house will be too hot for sin to dwell in.

But violent motions are but short, and passions momentany. Abjecto does well
at first, but it must be backed with a Deponentes, Deponentes pondus.
a resolved and deliberate laying down of sin. It Is to be feared Abjecto cannot
do it alone, sin has too deep a root to be cast off utterly on a sudden. That Is
Deponente's office to lay it down, down by degrees. First those Gravamina
Spiritus, then that (...), that pride in sin, or as the word may bear it, that
dominion of it, lay it aside as a tiresome burden, grow weary of it, (2.) Or
as we do our clothes when we go to bed, not sleep in it. (3.) At least the
weight of sin, that is the guilt of sin by confession and absolution, the spots
and habits by contrary resolutions and endeavors, the great weights, the
little ones, all. Omne Pondus, every one, omne and pondus, both in the
singular, to tell us every weight to be cast off, not one single weight to be
left hanging on.

No not the weight that is no sin, 2 Pondus Div^liarum.
not that, for such an one there is. Pondus terrenarum possessionum, says St.
Bernard. What say you by riches? Pluto, the God of riches, feign the Poets,
dwell's below; Hell's his kingdom. And riches from the caverns of the earth
they come, and, like waters to the Sea, thither they naturally return, down
they carry us. Not but that if you look up your eyes may behold a rich Abraham
above in heaven. Riches are as they meet with Owners. The pious hand makes
himself wings of these golden feathers to fly to heaven, the wings of the
Psalmists Dove, that is covered with silver wings, and her feathers like gold.
And if I must needs have riches, Quis mihi dabit pennas columbae? O that they
may prove the wings of this Dove, that I may flee away and be at rest! The
churlish fingers frame themselves fetters, to chain them faster to the lowest
Pit. Indeed, nothing more knits us to the earth than our wealth, we are loath to
use it in our life, loath to leave it at our death, though for a Kingdom. Sell
all, you know he startled at it, that thought he had kept all the Commandments
from his youth.

I love not impossible tasks to persuade any amongst us now a days to that,
Abjecto (...). The first remove.
yet Emperors, and Kings, and Saints have done it, and Qui capere potest, etc.
for I would not have you think but honorably of those magnanimous Heroes, such
as we read of, Acts iv. those prime constant heirs of grace and glory.

It Is but a counsel this, Abjecto pondere
and counsels it seems are out of date. Well, all of us to cast off riches,
when they come to Pondus, no necessity till then, keep them you may till Pondus
come. (...) first, then (...), that is the order, then it is a Precept. If the
weight be ready to hurry you headlong into sin, then off with them. Better lose
(...), them all, every farthing, the world and all, than your souls.

Or yet better that they come not thither so far; Abjecto pondere div^^ta^um.
cast off the weight of riches, that is, the superfluity of them, cast that
away upon the poor. Cast away said I? Pardon me; Deponentes, lay it down, lay
it aside for them, Deposito R^po sit^.
or Recondentes, Reponentes, it is no straining of (...)) lay it up in the
bosoms of the poor, lay it down at the feet of Christ, lay it out upon God, lay
it up in heaven.

And say we not as much for honor too? 3 Depositis nonoribus.
(...) is a word peculiar for Majesty and honor. Lay them down too, in
Deponite, there is a De, that is down; lay them down upon the ground, descend
even thither by humility, if your honors puff you up, overpoise you. Sins,
Riches, Honors, every weight, away with all.

And though every weight, Omni pondere non ^nere.
not every burden yet. Bear you one another burdens, says St. Paul, and
Christ's burden is no weight. Leve Meum, that is light and easy, and tollite
meum, take up that. Besides, every thing in this world is a burden, this body
we carry about us, Corpus mortale degravat, we are a burden to our selves; our
necessities, our pleasures, our meat, our apparel, our life are burdens, and
all we cannot cast away, he must go out of the world that can do that. But take
heed they come not, any of them, to (...), Pondus, if they do (...) every
weight, be it what it will, that keeps our spirits from rising to those eternal
dwellings, pleasures, profits, preferments, cares, desires, off with all if
they begin to solicit us to sin.

Before I was aware I have told you what is peccatum circumstans too, II.
Impediment Peccatum circumstans.
what is this Sin that does so easily beset us, the occasions and temptations
to sin. So the golden Calf is called peccatum vestrum, Deuteronomy. ix. 21. The
Israelites sin, that is the occasion of it. So St. Paul, Romans vii. Is the Law
sin? That is, the occasion or cause of sin. So here by peccatum circumstans,
the sin that does so easily beset us, I see not to the contrary but may well be
understood all things about us whose only presence become temptations, which
are Tentationes objective, or materialiter, the objects of temptation, and of
these already. Or, more properly, the temptations themselves, which rising from
those things about us do besiege the soul, and are formaliter Tentationes,
formally temptations. And if you please to mark either the mutual opposition,
or the correspondence of the words, 'twill be no great mistake however to think
this sense most native and genuine.

There Is a double cloud in the Text, St. Paul's and Isaiahs, his of Saints, this
of sins, the one opposite to the other. (...) to (...), in opposition right;
and a cloud of temptations that are without us, (...) too, Gal. 4.
in the Apostles Phrase, fitly answering to the cloud of Witnesses about us.
Opposed (1.) in pondus that is heavy, to nubem for its lightness. (2.) In
Peccatum, Sin, that is black and ugly, to Testium, Saints beautiful and
glorious. (3.) In habentes, that to deponentes, the one to be put on, the other
put away. And that it might be fitly opposed, fitly answering it is in omne to
tantam for the quantity, in circumstans to circumpositam, circum and circum,
extrinsecum extrinseco for the same external relation that is in both alike.

Circumpositam passive, that belongs to Nubem; circumstans active, that to
peccatum. God puts the one about us, not the other. Not the sin, nor the
temptation. Nemo dicat. God tempts not any man. Habentes indeed properly the
one, the sin we have of our own; and circumstans the temptation, that rises of
it self and besets us round, but no circumpositam to either, God no Author of
the one or the other.

facile, to show how ready the temptation is to entangle us. We had a cloud of
Saints, and that had a (...) but no (...) no facile there. Sin and its
occasions are a great deal more welcome to us, do more easily wind about us,
and work upon us, than any examples of the Saints can do.

I know there are, that would have (...) be understood that fruitful soil of
sin within us, our innate corruptions and propensions. But (...) here, circum
is without, that within us. (...), Sin that that dwells in us, says St. Paul,
Romans vii. 17. not that dwells about us as temptations do; (...) not (...)* and
then (...) must be no Participle for (...); Deponentes concupiscentiam? It
cannot be, we are not commanded impossibilities. I would it came within a
Precept. The sin that came with it into the world is gone in Baptism, Acts 22.
16.
we have washed off that, concupiscence stays still, wash off that we could not,
and yet we cannot lay it away. The thoughts that thence arise, arise they will,
we cannot hinder, the sins we may.

For between that inordinate proneness to sensual good, and the motions that
take rise thence there is a difference. That cannot well be said to be without
us, which is the bent of nature. But these, though they are within, yet
produced by the presence of external objects, and being acts really distinct
from that natural disorder of inferior powers, do as it were environ and
ensnare our souls no less than the suggestions of the devil do. That we can nor
hinder, nor lay off these, though sometimes we cannot hinder from rising up,
yet we can cast them down again; and these now we style temptations.

The devil, or our own corruption (1.) Suggests them. (2.) Then they are
delighted in by the flesh. (3.) Forthwith consented to by the Spirit. (4.)
After that approved by both, and with the first unhappy opportunity put into
execution.

Answerable to these four degrees of temptation I find four several
significations of (...) (besides those you heard) (...)
four ways to remove them, to each his way, as if the Apostle had meant in one
word to furnish us for all.

The first is Rejicere, to reject or refuse. The second exponere, to expose, as
they do infants, when they cast them out to the mercies of the wilderness. The
third Differ, to defer or delay. The fourth is the Syriac interpreters,
Solvamus a nobis, to unty our selves, for that we use to do when we are
entangled, as (...) intimates we are, or if you please to take the Verb to the
Participle, Deponentes curramus, to lay it aside and run away.

So then, (...).
when a temptation at first presents it self clad in adulterate beauties,
reject it, bar it out. (2.) But if it have got in before thou be aware, give it
no entertainment, fix not thy thought upon it with curiosity or delight, but
presently cast it out of doors. (3.) If thine unhappy negligence have won thee
to a delectation, delay at least thy consent, withdraw thy self awhile and
divert thy thoughts to some other object; Death, Judgment, Hell, or Heaven. But
if thou be fallen to consent too, the only remedy left thee is to unty thy
resolutions, to unravel thy thoughts, thy admitting, thy delighting, thy
consenting, to undo all and fly away.

In brief thus: Temptations thus to be avoided. (1.) The suggestion by
repelling. (2.) The delight by casting out the thought. (3.) The Consent by
withdrawing. (4.) The defense by flying.

(1.) The surest way, when all is done, is to take these untimely brats, and
dash them against the stones, against that corner stone Christ Jesus. (2.) The
safest way, to hide thee in the holes of that rock, the wounds of his side:
(...) reponentes, laying your souls up there, and recondentes, burying your
sins in the meditation of his passion and sufferings. (3.) The securest way,
exponere, to lay them open to thy Ghostly Counselor, thou shall find them
vanish in the air. (4.) The wariest way to flee all opportunities whatsoever.
Indeed, if the devil fight against thee by troublesome and piercing thoughts
stand to him and resist him, (...) thrust him from thee; if he besiege thee
with delights, deponentes curramus, run away from him. It is not cowardice, but
wisdom; He that fights against pleasures may overcome, he that runs from them,
is sure he does.

Take this, lastly, for a general rule. If temptations rise so many that they
swarm about thee like Bees; (...).
fight not against all at once, they are too many, but (...). The principal,
that single, hand to hand.

Nor is this all. This (...), this Article seems to point at some special
(...), something yet more adequately opposed to (...). The Cloud, a cloud of
Martyrs, good company, what more answers to it than a dark thick mist of ill
Companions? What more opposed than good and bad examples? What temptation more
deserves an (...), the name of sin, or sooner brings us thither? Or a (...),
the title of easily besetting us? What hangs more fast upon us? What clings
more near us? What more ensnares us? And what more needs a (...), an Article
against it?

We'll sum up all in the advice of that mighty Counselor: If thy right hand,
thy Counselor o^ whom thou leanest, or thy right eye, thy friend by whom thou
see, offend thee, (give me leave to make a Parenthesis to go on with the
interpretation) if thy right eye offend thee, if thou can not look upon a
woman (though with no ill intention) but lust will arise; if the eye of thy
reason dim thy faith; if thy right eye of contemplation become an offense, and
puff thee up, ^r^e and projice, out with it, cast it from thee. Better it is to
go into heaven lame, and blind, and ignorant, and poor, and friendless, and
alone, than to go down to hell with company. Remember (...) here, and then as I
have now done with peccatum circumstans, so shall you; that you may answer your
Lord in St. Peter's phrase, Ecce nos reliquimus omnia, Behold, we have left all,
our sins, possessions, honors, pleasures, occasions, our dearest friends, our
very thoughts, and sequuti sumus, to follow thee, to run after thee. Curramus
per patientiam, that is next to Deponentes, to cast off sins, then run from them.

And can we less? Curramus.
I will run the way of thy commandments, cries holy David, when thou have set
my heart at liberty. Set him but at liberty from these weights and snares, and
you cannot stay him.

Yet why so fast? No less than running? Give me but a man once thoroughly freed
from these heavy chains, he will tell you so. No have enough from these miseries,
says he that felt them.

And it is but just, Certamen.
for run we did before, the wicked his feet are swift; but that is down hill;
ours is a Race, upon even ground that.

Well, but the World has its certamina, its Races too, and such as are abjecto
pondere, cast away all, Riches and Possessions. That Is for Gallants, ours
(...), a race for Christians.

How Is that? Please but to join it to several words within the verge of the
Text, and you shall see.

Join (...) to the words before (...), such a race that is a running from sin,
Cereamen justitiae.
certantes contra peccatum, ver. 4. and it will prove certamen justitiae, the
race of righteousness; St. Paul's (...), the keeping under of his body by
fasting and abstinence, (...), so ran he, 1 Cor. 9. 26.

Match it with the words that follow (...), that it be such a one that looks to
Jesus, Fidei.
then you have certamen fidei. St. Paul call's it the the good fight, where he
tells us he has finished his course; he has kept the Faith, 2 Timothy iv. 7. and
it seems the very intent of St. Paul here, who had reckoned up so many Per
fidems in the Chapter next before, to which this seems but a concusion.

Yet you may lay it to (...), and then it will be the Race of Martyrdom.
Martyrii.
Certamen fidei often times proves so. Ver. 4. Nondum certastis, sometimes turned
to Certastis usque ad sanguinem. Per patientiam so close shows some affliction
toward; and (...) together cannot well be less than to an agony. A Race, this,
that crowns the Victor with a Diadem, the brightest of all created glories,
brighter than the Sun.

And yet even this, if propositum be wanting, Certamen propositum.
will be thankless. If it be taken up of our own heads, and not proposed. Nay,
if it be proposed in general to be good, if it be not propositum nobis so to
us; Propositum nobis.
if God propound it not to us, as most convenient for the time, the cause, the
persons. Else when they persecute you in one City, flee to another; 'twas his
counsel whose the Martyrs are, St. Mat. x. 23. But if be at any time Propositum
nobis set before us, so propounded, then good luck have you with your honor,
ye blessed of the Lord run on, and your right hand shall teach you terrible
things.

But yet, if you would fain be Martyrs, you may be Martyrs without dying. I die
daily, says St. Paul a living Martyr. Would you know how that is? There is a
spiritual Martyrdom, that sometimes equals the others torments with its own
difficulties. (1.) Abstinence in the midst of swelling plenty. (2.) Humility in
the pride of rising glory. (3.) Meekness in the confluence of domineering
injury. (4.) Chastity in the flower of blooming youth of sparkling blood. (5.)
Bounty in the depth of poverty. (6.) Joy in the abyss of misery. (7.) Charity
to our enemies in the height of their insulting cruelty. (8.) Obedience in the
hardest Precepts, that most cross our own opinions and desires. This the race,
without which the other is but a naked title, an airy name. This is always
Propositum nobis, the race of them that seek thy face O Jacob.

And now I speak of Martyrdom, I should not forget Per Patientiam, Per
Pa^ientiam
Patience the proper virtue of a Martyr.

Patience has Pain for her object. Quid.
So then to run with patience is to fear no pains so we may finish our course,
to undergo all for faith and righteousness sake. It Is no small thing to cast
off all delights and pleasures, we have been at that in Deponentes; it is much
more to endure evils too, that is in Curramus per patientiam. The Christians
life is a very race of patience. He suffers all.

And patience is cheerful. He does not only suffer evil, but welcome it. It Is
more, it is (...), not (...) to tarry, stay, abide under it, not to be weary of
it presently. 'Twas but a desperate speech of the Son of a Murderer, so Elisha
styles him, Why should I wait for the Lord any longer?

More. (...) is under, then keep thy self under still; let us have no pride in
patience; under afflictions; then think they come from above, and take them so,
with all submission, as not worthy, but below the mercy of punishment.

Not tarry under only, but tarry till the end too. (...) is as well
perseverance as patience; and Per Patientiam, per is through, so run through
not part of the way. Patience runs the Race, but perseverance keeps the Goal.

Neither is this enough. Patience has been long mistaken for a heady daring and
braving of deserved punishment. 'Twere well we would remember Patientia comes
from Pati. Passive we must be only here; suffer evil when it comes, not thrust
our selves upon it.

Running indeed is agere not Pati, Per patientiam curramus.
and the Primitive Christians upon some secret inspirations (who knows)
perchance to dant the fury of their Persecutors, by their cheerfulness have run
to torments. Vos autem non sic, we have not that warrant; and yet we may be
active too. Curramus per patentiam, let them be companions, never without Per,
or Cum between them, never severed. Patience is a dull, heavy virtue without
curramus, without faith and righteousness, without life.

Active enough we may be, but not in seeking crosses. They Will come fast enough
themselves. There Is time and place for curramus, when in the midst of injuries
we run to heaven for succor. Thus also Curramus per patientiam, both joined do
well together, Patience and Prayer.

That Patience may have her perfect work, Qu^modo cur^endum.
and we all with joy finish our course, it will not be amiss to tell you, how
the very words would have you run, what the very words would have you observe
in running.

1. Running is our swiftest course: Such must your speed be here.

2. Running is a motion that actuates every part. Our running must be so;
total, universal, soul and body, not a member idle.

3. It Is the liker so to be if we do certamen currere, that is, Currendo
certare, strive to do it. It Is a Race, and in a Race there run many; strive who
shall run fastest. Do it emulously.

4. Strive, yet not so strive as the Sons of strife, to provoke, but to love,
says St. Paul, H^b. 10. 2^.
Heb. x. One curramus joins us all together, and let us keep so; in Us, not I
and you, but let us run unanimously.

5. That it may appear so. Remember (...) comes from (...) and (...), without
corners. Such let your course be, open to the world. Run not, separate not your
selves into corners. Veritas non quaerit. Let the Donatists to their
Conventicles; for by the way I cannot pass but tell you, that (...) in profane
Writers signifies Templum, a Church sometimes, as if our course could not be
right if it bent not thither.

6. To run into corners, as it separates from others, so it breaks the bond of
charity, as it entombs our works in darkness, so it eclipses the Divine glory.
It Is but to hide the Talent in a Napkin, or a sign we are ashamed of our
Religion, when we closet up all our piety and devotion.

7. Not into corners, not aside, neither on the right hand, nor on the left, no
way of your own finding out, but (...). The way that lies before you. The Kings
high way you cannot miss it.

Yea, Propositum nobis.
but if we miss of a happy end, 'twere all one as if we mist of the way. Yes,
but set before us it is; Who set it? He that is our crown and glory, The Crown.
It Is before us, we then to look forward; Whether? Unto Jesus, ver. 2. to the
joy that was set before him, the same verse, unto the throne of God, the last
words of that verse, and the last of our desires. He that proposed the Race,
proposes the Prize, and sets on the Crown, ye cannot now fear lest you should
run in vain.

Now therefore so run with patience, cheerfulness, humility, courage,
constancy, with all your speed and powers, emulously, and yet altogether,
openly, yet not to be seen, straight on, yet upward, and all the way your eye
thither, so run that you may obtain.

I have now almost run my self out of breath, and you out of patience. Ideoque.
Give me leave to run out my Text too, for I am come to the conclusion.
Therefore run.

It Is a Cloud of Saints, therefore away with sins, that other Cloud. It Is a
cloud about us, then off temptations too. It Is a Cloud, Et qui sunt illi qui ut
nubes volitant, the quick flying cloud, therefore run at least. It Is a cloud of
Martyrs, therefore run with patience. It Is a Cloud that God has set about us,
and it is the race he has set before us; both set, that this may be run.

Had we not a guide it might seem unreasonable to force us to an uncertain
journey; or were it not a guide from heaven, we might as easily fear
misguiding; or were it a star, our eyes might dazzle into blindness, and we lose
our guide; could we fear the sad melancholy of a solitary way, we might pretend
it uncomfortable. Should we want the quickening eyes of beholders, we might fear
to faulter by the way for want of encouragement; were we to run through the
furies of flames we might startle at the hardness of the employment, or should
we be commanded to disavow the pleasures of a convenient life, for all the
austerities of a poenitential rigor, we might stand confounded at the task;
were the way full of circling Labyrinths we might fear our erring inevitable,
or were the Race voluntary, not set before us, we might then use the freedom of
our choice; or were it of an uncertain length, not set out, to run in
infinitum, we might account it vain; or were there no Crown to run for, despair
might kill the life of our affections. But having a guide, and that from
heaven, a cloud to compass and defend us that nothing harm us, not the Sun look
too hot upon us and discolor us, so great that the wandering eye cannot lose
it, so near encircling us, that the weary step may almost rest upon it; a cloud
that cleaves it self into an ample theater, where you find both company and
spectators, where by the examples of a world of Saints surrounded, where by the
steps of tender Virgins and little Children taught the easiness of the way,
where by the Crowns, and Robes, and Palms of Martyrs too transcendently
glorious assured of our reward, seeing we are to bid adieu to nothing but our
misery and our sin, to leave only the courting of our own damnation, when it is
no more than an easy run to heaven, no studied torments in the way, no tedious
or eternal journey, a plain certain way, directed by him who will as well help
us forward as command us, what color of excuse for the least remissness?

Say no more but that we had a guide; a guide is not given to go alone, and a
guide from heaven deserves not so to be disrespected; but guide and company
both thence to be neglected, what name shall I style it by? Run while you have
the Cloud. The time may come, when we shall have no Habentes, when we shall not
dare to look upon this Cloud for shame, when our sins shall stand so thick
about us, that we cannot look through them, nor up for them, when we shall
strive to run and this weight and snares so hinder us we cannot stir, when
these Witnesses shall turn to be Witnesses against us, when we shall desire
this Cloud to cover us and it will not be, when we shall not have so much as
cum patientia left to help us, but weary of our selves run from hill to dale to
hide us, and cannot run out of sight; and were it not better now to run for
something, than then to run in vain?

Great certainly is the force of example, will that do it? It Is here to the
full. Did the Jewish Saints who had not so clear a light to run by, nor so
clear or full promises to run for, nor so skilful guides to run after, nor so
full a glory to run into, cheerfully fulfill their course? And shall we, whose
knowledge as much excels theirs, as theirs did ignorance, who do not so much
see as enjoy the Promises, after so fair a Troop, into so perfect glory, move
on heavily? How often have Royal Virgins met the terrors of a long and subtle
death with the same countenance they would have met their Wedding joys, and
Children run to torments as to play? How often have Kings and Princes (fifty of
our own within the space of two hundred years) changed their Kingdoms for the
house and bread of poverty? O blessed Spirits, how lamely do we halt after you!
How do we dishonor your aged glories by us so often boasted of, and scatter,
as it were, your sleeping ashes in the wind by our degenerate Christianity! How
do ye even hide your selves in clouds, and blush to see us call that Religion,
which ye would not have called by so honorable a title as profaneness!

What if without example? Is it not enough that God propounds it? Had it been
some greater matter ought we not have done it? Will reward? But why stand I
upon any when we have all? And may I not then well add therefore run?

We have set the Ideoque upon Nubem, upon Tantam, upon Habentes, upon Martyrum,
upon Circumpositam, upon Pondus, upon Peccatum, upon Circumstans, upon
Curramus, upon Certamen, upon all; and being now at the end, I shall leave it
upon the last, Propositum nobis, the reward of our pains.

That when this Pondus mortale, this body be laid aside, and we have done our
Race, we may sit down with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, where for this Cloud, we
may dwell in light, for this sin put off, be clothed upon with long white
Robes, for that sin which did beset us, be circled with Cherubims and Seraphims
about us, for this Deponeutes find a Depositum, for laying off, a Crown laid
up, and for this weight, an eternal weight of glory. And in that last great
Day, when for this casting away, this earth also now about us shall then cast
off its heaviness into lightness and agility, shall we our selves be caught up
together with these Saints in the Clouds to run and meet the Lord in the air,
where though to others it be a day of clouds and thick darkness, yet shall this
Cloud, and we in it shine like the Sun in the Kingdom of the Father.

To which he bring us who going hence ascended up in clouds with triumph, and
shall one day come again in clouds with power and glory, to dispel all clouds
and darkness into an everlasting day, Jesus Christ. To whom with the Father and
the Holy Ghost be all Power, and Praise, and Honor, and Thanksgiving, and
Worship, now and for ever. Amen.

A SERMON UPON St. Andrews Day.
St. MAT. iv. 20. And they straightway left their Nets and followed him.
It Is well, say I, that Sundays and Holy days sometimes meet, that it is as well
Sunday as Holy Day to day, that so the Lord may be sometimes hallowed in his
Saints, as here followed by them. David's Praise God in his Saints (for so it is
to be rendered, Psalm. cl. 1.) may by this means be sung still, and preached yet
sometimes in spite of that peevishness and malice that has so impudently and
ungraciously un-sainted all the Saints. Not so much as an Apostle allowed that
Name. Not a Saint left in the whole Christian Calendar, if I may call it
Christian that so uses the Saints of Christ.

Well, though the course of the times has thus robbed God of his glory in his
Saints, and the Saints of their honor, and of (if it could be) their very
rejoicing in their beds; yet the course of the years, as it were to confute
that frowardness, will bring it about ever and anon that the Master and the
Disciple, the Lord and his Saints shall rejoice together upon a day; and if
they may not be allowed their several Feasts will yet sometimes feast together,
be remembered together, as St. Andrew and his Lord to day, do what they can to
hinder it.

For this day, as it now falls out, is solemn both for Lord and Saint.

And amongst the Saints St. Andrew is the first in order, for here the
Christian Church begins her Festivals (I know not what or whose Church to call
it that has none) and fitly too does she begin with him, who was the first that
followed Christ from Galilee, says St. John, Chap. i. 41. Fit sure that he
should lead the rank that there begun it; that brought the great St. Peter as
his second, ver. 42. though afterward for that excellent. Confession of his,
St. Mat. xvi. 16. made the first. Yet just certainly it is that St. Andrew too
should have his Primacy, and so the Church has given it him, to begin the Army
of Saints and Martyrs in her Calendar, that we may see no man shall lose any
thing by his speed to Christ; the more haste to him, the more honor for it.

I shall not yet this day, though it be the first of Advent, much meddle with
that, or primarily or very particularly set my self to speak of Christ's Advent
or coming. I shall be content (because we are not like to meet many such
opportunities as this day in conjunction brings us) to speak this day of the
Disciple, and only glance at his Lord. We shall have many occasions to speak of
the Master, few now a days to take notice of the Disciples. Yet for all that
cannot we well speak of the one without the other. The honor of the Servant
will redound always to the glory of the Master. It is for that that we
commemorate the Saints, that we may so magnify the King of Saints, both by
acknowledging his greatness and goodness in them, and by doing gloriously to
the honor of our Master by their examples.

And indeed we cannot separate them; and as the Text falls out it ends as all
the praises and commendations of his Saints should end in him, (...). And it
begins with a conjunctive Particle which will refer us to him. And with an
also, or an (...), which to make the Text to be understood will make us look
back to an (...), ver. 18. This (...) to that (...) this (...) to that (...),
this And to another And, this their following to Jesus walking, this And they
left and followed, to And Jesus walking and calling them to follow, in the two
immediately foregoing verses.

We shall then, for the full sense of the Text, and the honor of the day, not
quite separate the Lord and his Saints, but join the (...) and the (...)
together, speak somewhat of Christ's co^^^ing as well as of their following;
though more fully of this, it being ^xpresly in the words, the other but
implicitly or implied, yet referring this wholly to the glory of that, their
following here to Christ's coming before, St. Andrews exite to Christ's Advent,
join them both as the day does for us.

For in the words are both, though just as in the day; the one swallowed up by
the other, the Holy Day in the Sunday; only with this difference, St. Andrew's
Feast in the Advent, in the day, the Advent in St. Andrew's, in the Text. The
day more evidently for the Lords day, the Text for St. Andrews.

We will forget neither, but must follow the Text, where we are to consider two
Particulars: The one expressed, the other implied. (1.) St. Andrews Festival; and
(2.) the Feast of Advent, or the grounds of each; the ground of St. Andrews
Festival expressly, his leaving his Nets and following Christ. The ground of
Christ's Advent implicitly, that it was straightway done, that is, presently
upon Christ's coming and calling to him. You see Sundays and Holy Days are at no
such variance but they can stand together; their grounds too, both Scripture
grounds; both from the same Text too. Our new Reformers may as well deny the
one as the other, and no doubt if they stand but in their way a little, they
will too. Only some day must be kept up a while to preach the cause: when that
is done, Ye observe days, and months, and years, will be as good a Text against
the Lords day as his Saints.

But not to trouble you with the Division of days, we will afford you another
Division of the Text.

I. St. Andrews and together with him his brothers obedience express, They
straightway left their nets and followed him. II. The ground of it in (...) and
(...)* in the first words and the last, intimated and implied. Jesus came
first, and walked by the Sea, and looked upon them, and spoke to them; And, and
what then? And they straightway followed. Followed? Whom? Him, says the Text.
Who Is that? One that was worth all their nets, one that would make them fishers
indeed, Jesus, ver. 18. for him it is they leave their nets, and him they
follow.
In their obedience there are three particulars: (1.) The readiness; (2.) The
sincerity; (3.) The rightness of it.

1. It was straightway, there is the readiness. 2. It was to the leaving of
their nets, their very life and living, all the poor living they had, there is
their sincerity. 3. It was to follow him, there is the right placing and
bestowing their obedience.
In the ground of it, we shall see their obedience was not groundless, for that
it was,

1. Not without a just and lawful call; Jesus called them first, and then they
followed, and not till then. 2. Not without a powerful, effectual, and enabling
call, which so soon and suddenly could make and enable them to leave their
whole course and means of life, and very straightway follow him. 3. That it was
not any but Christ, not any thing, or hope, or interest, but only Jesus, the
true Messiah, him they followed, whom you shall see anon they had good reason
to conceive was worth all they could leave or do. The ground of their obedience
was neither rash, nor light, nor sinister. It was discreet, and wise, upon just
call; it was powerful upon, a strange, sudden, powerful change of their
affection^^, and it was right and due to him they paid it, Jesus the Christ.
I begin with the express parts of the Text, with St. Andrews and his Brothers
great and ready obedience to Christ's Command and Call, which is the Lesson you
are to learn upon St. Andrews day, that which you are to learn now particularly
from him, as upon the days of other Saints, their particular virtues and
graces, which is or should be our Holy Day business; and if it had been but so
taught and learnt, we had never seen profane Kalendars for Christian, these
unhallowed days, or our holy days unhallowed, God deprived of the glory, or we
of the examples, as much as lies in these men's power, of his Saints.

Two there are in the Text, St. Andrew and St. Simon, though but one in the
day. Christ calls by couples, that the one might help the other, if the one
should fall the other might help him up; that St. Andrews fortitude, for that is
the interpretation of his name, might strengthen St. Simons obedience, which is
the English of his, and a courageous obedidience, the meaning of both together
the proper Lesson for the Text and day.

Three Points we promised you to consider in their obedience, readiness,
sincerity, and rightness, we now prosecute them in order, and their readiness
first. And they straightway followed him.

Verus obediens nescit moras. True obedience, says St. Hierom, knows no delays.
He that stands disputing with his Lord, or bargaining and conditioning with his
Master, or long consulting with flesh and blood, will scarce deserve the name
of obedient, even when he after so long does what he is bidden. The temper of
the obedient soul is far other. St. Paul tells us, when it pleased God to call
him, and reveal his Son in him, that he might preach him among the heathen, he
did not immediately confer with flesh and blood, nor go up to Jerusalem to the
Apostles to be resolved, but into Arabia, and so again to Damascus, about the
work that God did send him, Gal. i. 16, 17. When God sets us about his
business, our own fleshly interests, or carnal friends are not to be consulted
with, lest they hang upon us, and hold us back; nor are we to stay the calling
of a council, even of spiritual friends, before we set to our obedience in
things so evident as Gods Commands, but into Arabia the Desert rather, that is,
to throw off all delays, to desert those petty demurs that rise always upon a
change. After that indeed, after we have first broken the threads that held us,
and made worldly affairs and relations stand off a little, we may return to
Damascus, with St. Paul, to that succus sanguinis, as it is interpreted, to the
juice of our blood, to consider and weigh our strength to particular points of
our obedience, but we must thence to Jerusalem to the Apostles, and such as
have been before us, and such as are set over us to confer about the ways and
means to correct and purify our blood, to refine our flesh, to get strength of
counsel and direction how to break through all lets and obstacles, and obtain
strength against our weakness, and so return again to Damascus after the other
interpretation of the words, incendii similitudo, to burn up, as it were, the
stubble of our affections, to purify and inflame them with the divine love,
with holy charity, which with its active flame will enliven and quicken us,
that we shall straightway follow our Lord whithersoever he will, without delay,
demur, or disputation.

The young man that proffered fair to follow Ch^^st, but first desired to go
and bury his Father, was forbidden it, St. Mat. viii. 22. Even an act of
charity, such as is the burial of the dead, must not be preferred before
obedience. Indeed, with Elisha peradventure, 1 Kings xix. 20. we may have leave
to go kiss our Father and Mother at our parting, to use civilities to our
friends, and with some little solemnity leave the World and them: Gods work
does not make us unnatural or uncivil, it is none of his, whatsoever is
pretended, that makes us unnatural, that makes us disrespective of our friends,
or uncivil to them, or utterly renounce the bonds of nature and relation. It
only requires that they should not hinder us, that they should not stay or let
us from our Masters business. Kiss them we may, but kiss and part, not stay
long upon Ceremonies when we are about our Masters business, much less defer
our following him till they are dead and buried, till they forsake us first. We
must first be of the parting hand, and let nothing keep us from him any longer
than necessities and just civilities do exact.

Nay, for these too, we are to ask his leave. And if he answer us, as Elijah
did him, ver. xxi. Go back again, what have I done unto thee? Go, but consider
what I have done. Go, but consider, quod meum erat feci tibi, I have done my
do, thou must make have if thou will find me, or overtake me, thou must not
look for a second call; then go back we may, and slay our Oxen, and boil their
flesh with their Instruments, and give unto the people that they may eat,
dispose of our affairs, but with what have we can, not stay the resting or
fetching so much wood to boil it, but with their own instruments at hand, boil
them all in haste, take the quickest course we can imagine to dispatch, to give
away much of our substance also to the poor and needy to make more haste, and
then arise and go after him, and administer to him of the rest.

But if he answer us, as Christ did the young man, Follow me, and let the dead
bury their dead, there is no striving then. If (as sometimes he does) he call
us in a nick of time, where the opportunity of doing good is now in prime, and
if we stay but a little it will be gone. Then let the dead bury their dead, let
even that natural charity be performed by some body else, go we whether we are
sent, do we what we are bidden, and think we that Christ says to us what he
said to St. Peter upon some such like dilatory quere, What is that to us?
Follow we him.

Let us always think when we hear him calling us to his service, whether the
Call be inward or outward, within us by his Spirit, or without us by his
Minister, that we cannot make too much haste to follow him. It may be he has
called his last, and will call no more; or he will be gone if we make not
haste, and we shall then at least have much ado to find or overtake him. It Is no
easy overtaking him that rides upon the wings of the wind, if he be once gone
out before us. It Is not safe to loyter by the way, for fear of temptations that
may prevent our good purposes, and quite overthrow all holy resolutions. It Is
an unworthy usage and unmannerly to stand talking to any thing else when God is
speaking to ^s to come to him. It Is dangerous to play away our precious time in
excuses and follies, in other business, nay, even in good business of our own,
even in an act of private charity or devotion when God calls us to his public
service and obedience. Christ calls even Judas to do his business quickly, you
may well think he would have St. Simon and Andrew be as quick in theirs; Nay,
they were, for in the midst of their work he called them, ver. 18. and in the
midst they leave; away with Nets, come Christ, fish who will for them, they will
follow Christ, not so much as stay to draw up their Nets, be what will in them
they care not; let all go so they may catch him. Nay, more, and if the Spirit
of Christ be in us, we will, with him, be pained and straightened till his
business be accomplished, though it be such a Baptism as he was then to be
baptized with, even suffering and dying for his name. There can be no excuse
from our attendance upon him with the first, who will not at all stay with us
if he be not the first in all our thoughts, if we prefer any thing before him,
or any business before his. Nay, if we leave not secondly our nets too, all our
own business for his.

Regnum Dei tantum valet quantum habes, says St. Gregory. The kingdom of heaven
is worth all we have, must cost us so, be it what it will. And alas! what have
we the best, the richest of us, as highly as we think of our selves, and ours,
more than St. Andrew and his brother, a few old broken Nets?

What are all our honors but old Nets, to catch the breath of the world, where
the oldest is the best, and that which has most knots, most alliances and
genealogies, the most honorable?

What are our Estates but Nets to entangle us? It Is more evident now than ever;
to entangle us in strange knots and obligations, in vexations and disquiets, in
fears and dangers, to entangle silly souls beside in vanities and follies?

What are all our ways and devices of thriving, but so many several nets to
catch a little yellow sand and mud, and if you will have it in somewhat a finer
Phrase, a few silver scaled sishes, in which yet, God knows, there are so many
knots and difficulties, so many rents and holes for the sish to slip out of,
that we may justly say they are but broken nets, and old ones too, the best of
them, that will scarce hold a pull, all our new projects being but old ones new
rubbed over, and no new thing under the Sun.

What are all those fine catching ways of eloquence, knowledge, good parts of
mind and body, but so many nets and snares to take men with? It may be finely
spun, neately woven, curiously knotted, but so full of holes, vanity, and
emptiness, that no net is fuller than these things we take so much pride in, so
much delight in. Nay, this very body it self is but a net that entangles the
soul, and the rational soul it self too we too often make but a net to catch
flies, petty buzzing knowledges only, few solid sober thoughts; at the best but
a net for fishes of that watery and inconstant element, watery, washy, slimy
notions of I know not what, of flitting worldly things; so full of holes too,
that all good things slip out of them.

Our very life, lastly, what is it but a few rotten threads knit together into
veins and ^inews: The strings and powers of a thin and immaterial soul knit to
the threads of a feeble body, so slender and full of holes, and the knots so
loose, that the least stick or stone can unloose it, or break it all to pieces.

And are not these pretty pieces think you now to stand so much upon the
leaving? That we will rather leave our Masters service than these broken nets
that will bring us up nothing but slime and mud, a few fins and scales, a few
sticks and weeds, a few stones and gravel, things only that will dirty us, or
delude us, or run into our hands and pierce them, or into our feet, like
gravel, and race them; or at the utmost but a few fish, slippery or watery
comforts that will either quickly leave us, or but slenderly comfort us whilst
they stay. Are not these fine things to quit heaven for? Oh blessed Saint of
the day, that we could but leave these nets as thou did thine, that nothing
might any longer entangle us, or keep us from our Masters service!

Not that we must presently quit all honors, estate, and ways of gain, bodies,
and souls, and life, and throw our selves into dishonor, poverty, and death,
in that instant we propose to follow Christ, but that we must know we cannot
follow him if we cast not off our inordinate affections to all of these, use
them as if we used them not, enjoy them as if we had them not; so humbly bear
our honor as if we sought none else but Gods; so manage our estates as to give
an account to him for every farthing; so use our trades, as if our whole
business were to trade for heaven; so feed our bodies, as if their chief food
were the bread of heaven; so employ our understandings as if they were to mind
nothing but heavenly things, and so live as if we had nothing else to do but
die; so cast away our nets as if we had nothing now to do with them, now we had
caught Christ, or but to catch and hold him.

Worldly honor may consist with Christ's, our greatest estates with the true
riches, our lawful busiest Vocations with his service, our secular learning
with heavenly knowledge, the care of our bodies with the salvation of our
souls, our lives with his death; only they must not stand in competition for
time and place, but be all left to his disposing; and when at any time they
cannot either stand with his service, or will hinder it, then leave them all we
must to follow him, as occasions and opportunities shall require the forsaking
any of them, be it life it self. Alas! he loves not Christ at all, that loves
any thing above him, any thing equal with him, that prefers any thing to him,
or will not readily leave it for him.

We have read of many who have left their Thrones, and cast away their
Scepters; many who have thrown away their riches, and deserted their estates;
many who have given over all their thriving ways; many who have bid adieu to
all secular studies; many who have in strange austerities and mortifications
neglected, nay, crucified their bodies, and others that have run to death as to
a wedding, that so they might the easier follow, or the more happily attain to
their Masters steps; but these are singular and particular heights; the
ordinary course of Christianity is by a lower way. Yet is the way good too. Et
omnia deserit qui voluntatem habendi deserit, says St. Hierom; he also verily
forsakes all, that desires none, nothing but Jesus Christ, who has crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts, as the Apostle speaks, Gal. v. 24. the
world with all the desires thereof, who though he has all he can desire, yet
desires nothing but what God will have him.

Sometimes it may fall out that we must leave our callings to go after him,
when they be either truly sinful, or evidently dangerous, and our wealth, when
it is unjustly gotten, or unrighteously held, we must restore and leave to the
right owners of it. Sometimes again it may be lawful for us to leave both
Estates and Callings, though we be not bound to it, as when we plainly see we
can thereby serve our Master better, and he seems to point us to it; when we
perceive we cannot else perform the Task or Calling he has designed us to, or
the business he has already set us upon. Otherwise, let every man, says the
Apostle, abide in the Calling wherein he is called, and stir not from his
station but when he may lawfully and orderly be made free from it. It Is not
presently from the Counter to the Desk, from the Loom into the Pulpit, from the
Shop into the Church, from our Nets to our Books, from secular Trades to the
holy Function that we are to run, there is something more than so when the
Apostle bids men stay and continue in their Callings. And to follow Christ is
not only to be Apostles and Teachers, for who then shall there be to be taught?
And to satisfy all from the example in the Text, this is the third time of St.
Andrews being called. To the knowledge of Christ he was called, St. John i. 38.
To his familiar acquaintance, St. Luke v. 10. and here, thirdly, and St. Mark
i. 17. to the Apostleship; so many steps even these here made ere they came to
be Apostles, and not till now threw they quite away their nets to return no
more unto them. It Is no such hasty business to become Apostles, or succeed them
in any point of their office. Yet truly, when Christ shall give any of these
hasty heads power to do wonderfully, to show miracles, to manifest their
calling, and to do extraordinarily, as he did to these, then we were much to
blame if we would not allow them that, God has extraordinarily called them to
it, and what were we that we should oppose against it? But in the mean time
lets see them leave their nets, their private interests and hopes of gain, and
repute, and fame, that we may have reason to think they follow Christ, and not
their own bellies, fancies, and humors.

Yet we can tell them too of those who have done more than the most they dare
pretend, have left all, expressly all, and yet no followers of Christ. Heathens
have done it, Socrates, and Bias, and Thales, and Crates the Theban, and
Fabricius the Roman, yet Christ not followed by it. And I know they will say as
much of the Hermits of the Desert, and the Brethren of the Cloister, that
(though they have done what they dare not think for Christ) yet they have not
followed him. And could these great Confidents show what they have done or
suffered, or lost or left for Christ, yet by the same Argument their own they
cannot prove they follow him the while. But alas, they have left nothing but
what they should not, their proper Callings wherein St. Paul would have them
abide with God. And it is not Christ but the loaves they follow, not Gods
glory, but their own. For if we but examine what was their following in the
Text, and the grounds of their so doing, (as we shall anon) it will appear
quickly whom they seek, what they follow too, who pretend only, or rather only
pretend so much now adays to follow Christ. Let Us next see whom St. Andrew
followed when he left his nets, and how he followed.

Christ it was he followed, for this Him is He. (1.) Not his own profit sure,
he could hope for little from him who had not where to lay his own head. (2.)
Not his ease and pleasure in his company, who was always hungring and
thirsting; and yet had scarce bread to eat, or water to drink, or time to do
either, watching, and walking up and down about his Fathers business till he
was faint and weary, and yet nor place nor time to rest in, not to sleep but he
must be awaked as soon almost as he is laid down. (3.) Not his own honor
certainly under a Master who was the most rejected and despised of men, as the
Prophet styles him, called Wine-bibber, and a friend of sinners, and deceiver
of the people, and a worker by the devil. Not his own humor or fancy, but
Christ's powerful Call that so straight transformed his mind, and raised him to
a faith that could so suddenly part with all without murmuring, reasoning, or
taking care for a future living. In a word, not any thing but Him. But him then
how did he follow?

1. He followed him with his body, gives himself to be one of his menial
Servants and continual Attendants, content with such course fare and clothing,
as his poverty would allow him, partaker of his fastings, and watchings, and
journeyings, and hard lodgings, and painfulness, and weariness, and reproaches,
to teach what our bodies must be content to endure for his service, and in
following him.

2. He followed him with his mind, gave up his understanding to be informed,
his will to be directed, his affections to be ordered by his Doctrine and
Precepts; for to follow Christ is to resign up our understandings to the
obedience of faith.

3. He followed him in his life in patience, and meekness, in humility, in
poverty of spirit, in mercifulness, and doing good in the life and practice of
Christian virtues, lived an admirable holy life; went up and down from Country
to Country, into Macedonia, and Achaia, into Scythia, and Ethiopia, preaching
Christ, and following Christ whithersoever he called him, and this is properly
to follow Christ, to imitate him. And

4. He followed him in his death too, was also crucified for him; followed him
so cheerfully to that, that says St. Bernard and the Story of him, He seeing
the Cross afar off thus joyfully saluted it, Salve crux diu desiderata and jam
concupiscenti animo praparata, ecce gaudens and exultans ad te venio. Welcome
sweet Cross so long desired and wished and longed for, and now come at last, I
come rejoicing, I come leaping to thee; I come, I come.

Thus I have showed you how St. Andrew followed Christ, how we also are to
follow him; to throw away our Nets, not only all unlawful ways of gain and
preferment; nor all things that stay and hinder us from the service of our
Master; but any thing, every thing that may entangle us, or keep us from the
readiness and exactness of our attendance; and having so prepared our selves,
to conform our selves presently, after his example, to humility, to patience,
to meekness, to doing good, to obedience, to acts of mercy, to fastings, to
watchings, to praying, to any hardship or affliction; no more now to seek our
selves, but him; not our own praise, but his glory; not our own profit, but the
profit of our Brethren; not our own private fancies, but Christ's Precepts, and
the Saints examples, so to follow in their track, in the ways, and orders, and
obediences that they have traced us, and to be content to part with any thing,
with all our own magnified imaginations, all our own desires, our goods, and
estates, and repute, and ease, and quiet, and life, and all, whenever he
pleases to call for it. This is truly following Christ. And whatsoever else we
have in St. Andrew, following him as an Apostle, is particular, and concerns
not any at all but those, who by some signal outward visible Call are commanded
to a more immediate attendance on their Master. To thrust our selves into that
without that ground is both impudence and presumption; to follow our own proud
hearts and giddy heads, and not him that they here followed, who followed him
not, either as Disciples, or Apostles without good ground. Let Us else examine
it.

He came himself and publicly and professedly called them to him. In secret he
tells Pilate he had said nothing, St. John xviii. 20. All the people could bear
witness to his doings, that his Followers might know for ever he would have
none to enter into such offices without a solemn and public calling. To his
Doctrine, to be his Scholars and Disciples, perhaps he will admit us in
private, or by night, as he did Nicodemus, or in the crowd and multitude
together, but to be Apostles, and Preachers of that Doctrine, not without a
public and particular ordination and authority, that shall equivalently say as
he did to these Brothers in the verse before the Text, Follow me and I will
make you fishers of men. Nay, more, St. Mark iii. 13, 14. he picks them out
that he calls Apostles; does it with great solemnity. Goes up into a mountain]
that was then, as it were, his Church; and calls unto him whom he would] not
who would themselves; And they came unto him] they, and none else. And them he
ordained] (the very word the Church uses still.) He ordained twelve, that they
should be with him, and that he might send them forth to preach.] Lo here, what
a solemnity Christ makes of it, of making Ministers, who certainly, had he
intended any should make themselves, or any Ministers but those Teachers and
Preachers who from him and his Apostles derive their power, the Bishops and
Fathers of his Church, would not with so much solemnity, so ceremoniously, so
publicly, so punctually have thus ordained those whom he intended should be in
nearer attendance to him than others, to whom he would commit the preaching of
his Gospel, and the dispensation of his Ordinances to the world.

This is not all: They had another ground of their calling, a second reason of
their following. They were enabled to it by a strange and sudden change within
them, whereby they found they could now already do what he called them to. They
were now become quite other men, merely spiritual, no longer Seculars; away
with temporal business, they minded worldly things no more, but straightway to
him without delay. This inward Call, though alone it be not sufficient, yet
joined together with the outward is good ground indeed to follow Christ any
whither soever. And unless thus God either on a sudden, or by time, by
extraordinary or ordinary means shall enable any man for his service and
Ministry, and by the outward power also call him to it, he shall bear his sin
that undertakes it, whoever he be, that he did not send; he is one of those
that God complains of, that runs when he is not sent; and though the pretense
be to stay the falling Ark, the Church from perishing for want of teaching, his
sin is Uzzahs, that touches holy things without this double Commission, Perez
Vzzah is his place; a breach he makes in the Church, and God will one day break
out upon him that thus breaks into the Church, not by the door, but some other
way; that neither being enabled within, nor from without, or within and not
from without, or without only and not from within, whom God has not given both
inward abilities and outward calling to the handling of his holy mysteries and
dispensations.

They have a third ground yet why they leave their nets, and it is to follow
Christ. They know and are assured who it is they do it for, and why they do it.
It is the Messiah, it is the Christ, says St. Andrew to his Brother Simon, St.
John i. 41. And so stands the case, they can no longer tend his business and
their nets together. This is the third time they were called we told you. To
the mere knowledge of him they were called first in that place of St. John; to
a nearer familiarity, St. Luke v. where though they leave their nets, yet it is
only for a while; but here being called to follow him to the Apostleship, they
wholly leave them altogether. They saw his power before in the miraculous
draught of fishes, which made them leave their work for a time to follow him,
but now they feel it warm within them they cannot stay, shall I say, to draw up
their nets, or to cast them in, though they were now casting and about it, but
straightway, the word no sooner out of his mouth, but they at his heels. When
we are sure it is Christ that calls, that him we follow, no have too much, no
leaving too much, no following too much for him. For him if it be, we may leave
all without danger, but if we be not sure it is, it would do well to have a net
to take to. I speak this for that too many leave their nets, their business,
their work, and bestow themselves and theirs upon things that are not him, nor
his; upon false Christ's, upon deceivers, upon such as, what ever show they
make, will be found upon examination to seek their own, and not Jesus Christ.
It Is fit we should look it be Christ indeed, not our own ends, not leave
catching fishes to go lead silly women captive laden more with sins than ever
St. Andrews Net with Fishes. If it be for some new device of late, which our
Fathers have not known, which Christ's Church has not received, some new sprung
pattern in the Mount, it is some New Christ's, not the old ones, some false
ones, not the only true ones, who being God blessed for ever is always like
himself. He that leaves any thing to follow those new calls or callers, either
to be a Teacher or a follower of them, had better keep his nets though broken
ones.

The Sum is, we are to have good ground for what we do, an And to begin with,
and a him to end in, good authority to go upon, and the right end to go to;
sufficient abilities, and lawful authority to send us if it be as laborers
into the Vineyard, and a true Christ to serve with them; good reason too (2.)
we must show for all our actions in Christ's Religion and Worship, though we be
but to follow only as Disciples, just power to commend it, and the infallible
glory of Christ and his Church to design it to. So our obedience to be ready,
sincere, and upright when we can perform and are required it by Christ and
those that under him have the commission to call us to it, or command it for
his service, or his Churches, and we not to undertake it till we find our
selves truly enabled, rightly called, and uprightly intending in it.

To join now the two Points of the Text together, to know our right grounds,
and settle our obedience right upon them, that we may know what we undertake
when we undertake to follow Christ, and do accordingly, not pretend above our
strength, but keep Advent, and St. Andrew both. We are (1.) to provide by St.
Andrews obedience for Christ's Advent, that he when he at any times comes to us
either in his Spirit, or in his Word, in humility or glory, in our lives, or at
our deaths, may find us ready straight to follow him. No so acceptable
entertainment for him, no so fit preparation for him as a ready, entire, well
guided obedience, none so fit to receive him as St. Andrew, the Soul so fitted
and resolved to all obedience. Thus we are to make our way for Advent by St.
Andrew.

And to keep St. Andrews Feast, to give our selves up to this obedience, we
must remember Christ's Advent to us, that we cannot follow till he first come to
us, acknowledge all our motion is from his. Look he first upon us, and speak to
us, and we straightway run; but if he come not, there is no following to be
expected, much less have to do it. All is from him, to him therefore be all the
praise if at any time, or wherein at any time we follow him, it is his grace
that does it, that comes first before we follow.

And then thirdly to keep time, to join both Feasts together in our hearts all
the days of our life as well as in this day of the year; Magnify we him in his
Saints, follow we St. Andrew as he did Christ, follow him to Christ, cheerfully
without delay, to day, whilst it is day, begin our course; let us not think
much to part with any thing for him. Lay our honors, riches, souls and bodies
at his feet, and with pure and unmixt intentions study we wholly his service,
not our own.

Let not any be discouraged, that perhaps he has nothing worth the leaving,
nothing but a few old broken nets. Be it never so little we have left, if we
have left our selves nothing, but given our selves and all to Christ, we have
given much; he that, with these Saints here, leaves nothing but a few knotty
threads, if he has no more to leave, has left as much as he that leaves most,
for he has left all, and he that leaves most can do no more. It is the mind,
not the much that God values. Remember the poor Widows mites, accepted by
Christ above far greater gifts, for they were all she had, and who could give
more? The poor man's all is as much to him, and as much all to God as the rich
man's all; his tattered Nets as much all his living as the others Lands and Seas
are his; and the poor man can as hardly part with his rags and clouts, his
leather bottle, his moldy bread, and clouted shoes, as the rich man with his
silks, and state and dainties; so much perhaps the hardlier in that they are
more necessary.

Yet that I may not seem to leave you upon too hard a task to scare you from
following Christ, I shall now tell you, you may keep all, and yet leave your
nets. You may keep your honors, you may preserve your estates, you may enjoy
your worldly blessings, only so keep a hand upon them, or upon your selves that
they be not nets and snares unto you; let them not take your hearts, or ensnare
your affections, or entangle your souls in vanities and sins; let them not hold
you from following Christ, and keep them while you will. Cast but off the
Networks, the catching desires of the flesh and world, and so you also may be
said to have left your nets. And having so weaned your souls from inordinate
affections to things below; Let Christ be your Business, his Life your Pattern,
his Commands your Law. Be ye followers of Christ, and let St. Andrew this day
lead you after him into all universal obedience, ready, pure, and sincere,
think not much to leave your Nets for him that left heaven for you; you will
gain more by following him than all the nets and draughts of the world are
worth. You may well throw away your Nets, having caught him in whom you have
caught glory, and immortality, and eternal life, and by following him shall
undoubtedly come at last out of this Sea of toil and misery, where there is
nothing but broken nets, and fruitless labors, or but wearisom and slippery
fruits of them, into the Port and Haven of everlasting rest, and joys, and
happiness.

And that it may be so, let us pray with the holy Church in the two Collects
for Advent and St. Andrew.

Almighty God which did give such grace to thy holy Apostle St. Andrew that
he readily obeyed the calling of thy Son Jesus Christ, and followed him without
delay, grant unto us all, that we being called by thy holy Word may forthwith
give ^ver our selves obediently to fulfill thy holy Commandments; that we may
cast away the works of darkness, and put upon us the armor of light now in the
time of this mortal life (in the which thy Son Jesus Christ came to visit us
with great humility) that in the last day when he shall come again in his
glorious Majesty to judge both the quick and the dead, we may rise to the life
immortal through him who lives and reigns with thee and the Holy Ghost now
and ever.

A SERMON Preached At St. Paul's.
COL. iii. 15. And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also
ye are called in one body, and be ye thankful.
HOw little or much soever the Colossians needed this advice, I am sure we do
more than a little, and much need there is to press it close. For I know not,
but methinks as much as we talk of peace, and write it in the front of our
Petitions and Projects I am afraid our hearts are not right to it, it rules not
there. And as much as we pretend our thankfulness to God for bringing us again
into one body, we see but slender expressions of it. And yet we have the same
Arguments both for thankfulness and peace, to be thankful for our late
recovered peace, and to be at peace if we would be thought to be thankful, as
the Colossians had or could be imagined to have here: our being called again
into one body who were not long since in several ones, united now under one
head, who were of late under many; Gods Call, and our own Callings, Gods
present mercies, and our late miseries calling to us, to persuade both.

There wants indeed some St. Paul to mind us of it, to preach it home; that we
would be what we pretend, that men would be honest once, and either say no more
than they mean, or do what they say; be content at least to be at peace, and
not disturb it, but let it rule, (so the Apostle would have it, and so it
should) rule in our hearts, and rule in our lives; rule in our hearts, and make
them unanimous; rule in our tongues, and make them thankful; rule in our hands,
and keep them quiet; rule in our actions, and make them peaceable; rule us all
into one as we are called into one, rule us all into one mind, and one heart,
and one soul as we are in one body, rule us as a rule sent from God to rule us;
For it is the peace of God we speak of, and we ought every way we can to be
ruled by it, and be thankful for it.

It Is St. Paul's request here in the Text, or his command rather to the
Colossianss, yet the better to commend it home to you, I shall divide it into
two parts: The Motion for peace and thankfulness; And The Arguments to persuade
them.


If you will draw the Motion into smaller parcels, for six things the Motion
is: (1.) For peace; (2.) For the peace of God; (3.) For the Rule and Dominion
of it; (4.) For a place for it to rule in, our hearts. (5.) For the
manifestation and expression of it in (...)* by being gracious and compliant,
as (...) sometimes signifies in Scripture, and may do here, and does, so say
St. Ierom, and St. Chrysostom. (6.) And lastly, for our being (...) again in
the common sense, that we would be thankful for it. Let the peace of God rule
in your hearts, and be ye mild and gracious, or be ye thankful.

And the Arguments for these are full as many in number as the Motions.

(1.) You are called; you are Christians, that is, the sons of peace, let peace
therefore rule among you. (2.) It Is that also which ye are called to, and let
it therefore rule. (3.) In one body ye are too, let it therefore rule your
hearts into one also. (4.) Into this body ye came not by chance, came not of
your selves, (...), ye were called into it, God brought you, brought you lately
to it. For this goodness sake of his be ruled a little, now ye are once again
called together be at peace one with another. For (5.) Unthankful ye will be
else, the proof of your thankfulness lies upon it, and therefore let this peace
of God be in your hearts that ye may show your selves to be thankful. Nay, (6.)
and lastly, gracious ye cannot be, but graceless and perverse creatures you
will seem if ye stand out now, and therefore whatever has been hitherto, let
the peace of God now really rule your hearts at last.

Thus I have given you the Text in Parts, which all together give you this in
the sum, that it lies as a duty upon us all to let peace rule among us, to
endeavor by all means that it may, to use all arguments for it that we can
both to our selves and others, and be thankful that it does so much as it does,
that it does in part, and let our thanfulness more and more increase as that
increases.

But I pursue the Parts, and make my first Motion for peace it self.

I. And truly it is worth the Motion, worth the moving for. Pacem to, thee O
peace, say the Poet with an Apostrophe, who would be without thee? Te Poscimus
omnes, Every body would have peace; all but the ungodly, no peace to the
wicked, indeed they have, they would have none. They have none among
themselves, would have none among us. They fish best in troubled waters. All
else are for peace and quiet. God is for it, he is the God of peace, Romans xv.
33. Christ is for it, he both commanded and bequeathed it, St. John xiv. 27.
St. Mark ix. 50. The Apostles are for it one after another, St. Paul, St.
James, St. John, St. Peter, St. Jude, they all commend it, 1 These. v. 13. St.
Iam. iii. 18. 1 Pet. iii. 11. 2 John 3. Jude 4. The Prophets before them were
for it, they proclaimed it, Isa. ix. 7. Ier. xiv. 13. Ezekiel. xxxvii. 26. Hag.
ii. 9. Zech. ix. 10. Mal. ii. 5. The Angels are for it, they bring and sing it,
St. Luke ii. 14. All good men are for it: Their daily Prayer is, Give peace, O
Lord, though it be but in our time only. So, rather than not at all. Nay,
though, with Hezekiah, in other things it go hard with them, yet that is good
for all that, Isa. xxxix. 8. 2 Kings xx. 19. Good and pleasant also, Psalm.
cxxxi. 1. Many good things are not so, fasting, and watching, mortification,
repentance, and many other virtues, good they are, but they are not pleasant;
peace is both, to dwell together in unity pleasant as well as good, very
pleasant, and very good. O quam! so good and pleasant, that he is fain to leave
it upon the question, he cannot answer it; or leave it with an exclamation, O
quam! leaves us only to admire it, at the goodness and sweetness of it. The
messengers that bring but the tidings of it too, how beautiful are their very
feet? Romans x. 15. Yea, even afar off, upon the tops of the mountains, says the
Prophet, Isa. lii. 7. before they come near us. As far as we can see them we
adore them; they are the only Evangelists that preach peace, they bring the
Gospel, their words no less whose words are peace.

And no wonder; for Peace is a word of that vast Latitude, that all Gods
blessings are folded up in the very name. It signifies all the temporal, and
all the spiritual, yea, and all the eternal goods we can expect; Glory, and
honor, grace, and mercy, and truth, life, and plenty, and joy are in their
several turns joined with it, you may so read them ever and anon, Romans ii. 10.
Tit. i. 4. Ier. xxxiii. 6. Zach. viii. 16. To wish us peace, is to wish us all;
to pray for peace, is to pray for all; to give peace, is to give all.

But the Notion being so large and general, we must distinguish it to
understand it the better here. There is an outward, and there is an inward
peace. There is a Spiritual, a Temporal, and an Eternal peace; or if you will,
there is peace the Blessing, and peace the Grace, and peace the Reward. Our
hearts, I hope, are for them all; but that which is here to rule them is peace
the grace or virtue, the study and pursuit of peace: the other are our
happiness, this our duty.

And of this, two kinds we have in the Text, the Particular, and the Public
Peace, both to be endeavored. The particular, among our selves, of one member
with another: The General, of the members with the body. The first is with our
Brethren and Neighbors; the second is with the Church it self. Peace among our
selves, that must be had, says St. Paul, 1 These. v. 13. And Peace with the
Church, as the whole body, there must be too; for there should be no Schism
there, says the same Apostle, 1 Cor. xii. 25. And, here, to speak of Peace, and
make the being called into one body the motive to it, must needs mean the union
and agreement both of the members with one another, and with the body it self.

II. Yet, for all that, there may be a body with which there is no joining, and
men to whose Assemblies our honors may not be united; the Motion therefore
now, secondly, for Peace, is no farther for it than it is the Peace of God, or
as some Copies read it, the Peace of Christ; that is, such a one (1.) as God
commands; Such a one (2.) as Christ wrought; Such a one (3.) as Christ
practiced.

1. Such a one as God commands. Now what is that? A Peace it is, (1.) that is
joined with righteousness, Romans xiv. 17. in which the fruit of righteousness is
sown, Isa. iii. 18. Not such a Peace, or Combination rather, as that we read
of, Prove. i. 11, 12, 14. where they all agree so far as even to have but one
Purse, and one Lot among them, but the business is to lay wait for blood, and
lurk privily for the Innocent without cause, that they may find their precious
substance, and fill their houses with spoil; we have had enough of that. The
Peace of God is Peace that will do righteousness, not that Peace that devours
the righteous and all.

A Peace (2.) it is that is joined with holiness, if it be Gods. So we find
them together, Heb. xii. 14. No Sacrilegious Peace, then, where the Churches
Patrimony must be shared among them, or they will not be quiet: that were to
sell God to buy Peace; or indeed to sell them both; to sell God out of doors,
and Peace out of doors, and all out of doors, our selves at last, we know it
well enough; but I know not how to call it, whether worldly peace, peace only
upon worldly interests; or the Devils peace, that is only for, thou Christ, or
thou Anointed of the Lord, why did thou come to disease us, to disquiet us,
to turn us out? We were well enough at peace before thou came; let us alone in
our usurpt Possessions, and then perhaps we will be content with peace; but for
this peace of God and Christ, this holy peace, it is not for our turn, we skill
not of it; our Spirits are not made for it.

Nor are they for the third sort of Gods peace neither, that which is in the
unity of the Spirit; and yet it is not the peace of God that is not so, Ephesians. iv.
3. When we Pray, and Preach, and Prophecy, and say Amen with one heart, and
mouth, and spirit, when we do all things with decency and order, after one
fashion, with uniformity, unite and agree so, then our peace looks like the
peace of God, who is not the Author of Confusion, but of Peace, even such a
peace, 1 Cor. xii. 33. the peace of God is the peace of Order and Uniformity.

And his Peace (4.) is peace in believing too, Romans xv. 13. where we all agree
in the unity of the Faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, Ephesians. iv. 13.
Diversities of Faiths and of Opinions, however they may seem to knit sometimes
in an outward Community, cannot yet challenge to that external agreement the
title of the peace of God. There must be among us an unity of Faith as well as
an uniformity of Order to make up this peace. Men are not left to believe as
they list, nor take up what Opinions they please; as there is but one Lord, so
there is but one Faith, says our Apostle, Ephesians. iv. 5. where there is more, the
unity of the Spirit will not be kept, the bond of peace (whatever is pretended
for the Prophesying liberty) will not hold them together, when opportunity is
presented to break it with advantage.

But I remember I told you some Copies read Christ here instead of God. The
matter is not much, the business but the same. The peace of God is the peace of
Christ. For between God and us Christ wrought that peace, which is the ground
of all the rest; and such a one also now (2.) as he wrought between God and us,
would he have us see what we can do to work one with another. That was between
persons at the greatest distance, the greatest enemies, so must ours be too, if
it be Christ's peace. Peace between friends, if they jar a little, is soon made
up; no greater a business than the Religion of a Publican will reach to; the
Christians peace takes in enemies too; sends us from the very Altar even to
seek a reconcilement with them; then also when, for ought we know, we have
given them no offense, though they have taken it, St. Mat. v. 24. Sends us the
world throughout to make peace, even with all men, says St. Paul, Heb. xii. 14.
this is Christ's peace; such a one he wrought, and such a one it is that we must
follow.

One Point yet higher, from his practice: Such a one it must be (3.) as he
practiced, not only to love our enemies, and be at peace with them, if
possible, but to hold our peace if they reject it, and revile us for it. There
are Spirits in the World (and they would fain set up for Christ's more than any)
that pretend they are for peace as much as any, but they cannot hold but they
must open their mouths, and extend their lungs, and let loose their Pens to
enlarge the breaches. Micah's Prophets, such as God complains of, Micah iii. 5.
that make the people err, that bite with their teeth, and cry peace; that bite,
and backbite both King and Church, and all that truly endeavor peace; that,
with him in the Proverbs, throw abroad their fire brands, where ere they come,
among the people, and yet cry, Is it not for peace? But let these men remember
there was one both the Author and Example of our peace, that being reviled,
reviled not again, that could hold his peace before the Sheerers, and
Murderers, though they fly daily in the faces of them that seek their
prosperity and peace, and by the bowels of Christ beseech them now at last to
be reconciled to Christ and the Church, to unite with us in the bonds of peace.
It Is but a righteous, a holy peace, a unity of faith and order, a general
reconcilement, and peaceable language and deportment that we desire of them.
The peace of God you have heard is such, and our request is but the Apostles,
that this peace now may rule among us. That Is our third Motion, the third
Particular of the Text for the Rule of peace.

3. The word that is here translated Rule has much more in it, several senses.
And peace it self being of so large a notion, and so general a concernment, I
may, I hope, take the liberty to use as many of them as will serve my turn.

Let Us take our own Translation first: (...), moderetur, let it Rule. Wars and
dissensions have ruled long enough, let peace rule now. Many passions there are
that bustle in us for supremacy when there rises any contest between us and our
Superiors, or between us and our Equals. Envy would carry it, Anger would
over-bear it, Discontent would order it, Pride would decide it, Honor would
dispose it, Interest would drive the trade, Lust would sway it, Covetousness
would have all, Peevishness would have more; but let peace for all that, and
none of them rule the business, says the Apostle. What we do let it not be to
gratify our envies, nor to satisfy our spleens, nor to humor our
discontents, nor to court our prides, nor to exalt our repute, nor to drive on
our interests, nor to fill our purses, nor to fulfill our lusts, nor to sooth
our peevishnesses, but to promote Peace and Unity among all we have to do with.
The unruliness of these passions are the things that hinder it; whilst we give
way to them, to any of them, we are nothing but combustion. These are to be
laid down at the foot of peace, nothing done by us upon their account, and then
we shall be quiet.

Nay, not only over the passions let peace bear rule, but even among the
virtues, There (...) in the second sense, palmam ferat, let her wear the Crown,
bear away the Prize. (...) ver. 14. this above them all. Bowels of mercy,
kindness, humbleness of mind, meekness, long-suffering, put them on all; but
this above them as a robe of honor. Excellent graces all; but the bond of all
that ties them all together; the bond of perfectness, which perfects all; why!
it is this; for (...) there is but (...) here; Love in that verse is the peace
of God in this. [For (...) is from (...), to knit together, and so fits (...)
the bond there as well as does (...) and (...) here fits (...) as well as love
does there also: God being all perfection, and his peace a knitting or binding
God to man, and man to man, and man to God, so perfecting all.] Where this is
wanting we are but imperfect; nor is our virtue nor our felicity complete. He
is the perfectest Christian that is most for peace, and he only conquers (what
side soever at any time prevails) who makes peace, or does most for it.

But as peace must rule our passions, and crown our virtues, so it would do
well to decide our controversies, the third sense of (...), dijudicet, or
determinet. If controversies or differences arise among us (as rise they will)
let us first consider calmly on them, weigh them without passion, discuss them
without noise, treat of them without heat; and if they chance to be so
troublesome that they cannot easily be decided either by reason of the
eagerness of the Disputers, or the interests of the Parties, or the
abstruseness of the question, the Spirit of peace will quickly do it. Keep thy
Faith and Opinion to thy self, Romans xiv. 22. trouble neither thy weak nor thy
strong Brother with them, disturb not the peace of the Church about them, but
sit down, and rest thy self in the decision of the Church; be content with
general terms of agreement, and draw not out Controversies into nice
expressions; the peace of the Church is commonly (I may say always) more
considerable than the question, and he determines best, that either determines,
or is determined for peace.

To do this the better I shall give a fourth signification of (...) Hesych.
Medius sit vel arbiter, let there be a Moderator or Mediator made to moderate
the contention. This does well we find in all particular Contests, cannot but
do so surely in the Churches. We must not always be our own Judges. Best refer
it, and then either our Superiors or our Laws will be the fittest for it. But
what ever may be perhaps objected against Superiors in particular, the Law and
Canon they stand always impartial judges; they cannot be accused to lean either
to the one or the other, they are akin to neither, and not capable of flattery
or a bribe; let them then be Umpires between us, and decide the matter.

Yet to be sure to keep the peace, let there be order kept: So (...) (5.)
signifies, ordinet, let peace set some order now among us. The Apostle St. Paul
was very careful of it when he spent two several Chapters to the Corinthians,
the xii. and xiv. of his first Epistle to prescribe it. Indeed, peace cannot
consist without it, where there is no order there can be no peace; where there
is confusion there can be no quiet; that body must needs be torn in pieces
where the members draw several ways; that Church into more, where the members
of it do what they list, go which way they please. No keeping rule for peace
without keeping order.

After all these readings the Vulgar comes in with an Exultet. And though I can
scarce guess how it came to be the interpretntion of (...), yet it comes not
amiss to tell us that Gods peace does not make dull and heavy hearts. It makes
us merry, it makes us glad, stills all the grudges that rise within us, all the
quarrels that rise without us, every thing that would disturb our quiet.
Nothing so glad, so merry as the soul that dwells in peace, where peace keeps
Court, which is reconciled to God, at odds with no man, in amity with all: Thus
all the Triumphs of the world are much below the Garlands of Peace; and the
Apostle may not only well say Moderetur, let it rule; but Exultet, let it
triumph, and let us triumph when it does.

And now to sum up the severals, that you may know at once what it is to have
peace rule. If the peace of God rule truly in us, it must overruled our
passions, it must advance our virtues, it must decide our differences, it must
compose our quarrels, it must work us into order, and it must make us cheerful
under its commands, in our obedience under it. So it will infallibly if it once
be seated where it should be, in our hearts. That Is the place the Apostle would
have it exercise its rule and dominion in, the fourth Motion he makes here to
us in the behalf of peace. Let the peace of God rule in your hearts.

4. And were it once but sincerely there, it would rule our words into a milder
key, our actions into a smoother dress; we should hear no whispers against the
Government of Church or State, no feigned jealousies of Superstition coming in,
no talk of, I know not what, Persecution coming on, no canting of sad times at
hand, no suggesting of vain fears, no fomenting all distates, no reviving those
wretched Principles and pretenses that first ruined all our peace and quiet, no
scattering Libels and wonders up and down to amuse the people, so to hinder
them from reunion with the Church, and keep them in perpetual discontent for
they know not what. These are not the words of such as seek the peace of Sion,
or heartily pray for the peace of Jerusalem. They are not the words of peace
(my Brethren) not the ways of it, nor do they become the Messengers or Servants
of the God of peace. To raise needless scruples, to canvase every word and
tittle, to make a noise and puther about every trifle, to flutter and keep a
stir as if we had much to say, to make it out in number where it wants in
weight, to write and scrible over old objections answered over and over a
thousand times, to talk of peace, and thus make ready for the battle if it must
pass for peace, it is a peace that passes all understanding in another sense
than the Apostle meant; we cannot conceive it, we cannot understand it.

Would we but lay down our interests, our envies, our animosities, our
prejudices, our pride, our humors, the justifying our selves and doings, the
glory we take in a false constancy, that Magisterial conceit we have of our own
judgment, and that Popularity that undoes all, were these out of the heart,
peace would be quickly in. But if we stand upon punctilio's, and will not pray
but in our own words, will not worship God unless we may do it in what Form we
list our selves, will no^ appear in the Congregation unless it be in one of our
own gathering or choosing, will quit the Church rather than an humor; if the
Church music and harmony must drive all concord and agreement out of doors, if
the garments and emblems of peace and purity affright us, if order scare us, if
Uniformity drive us out of the Church, if kneeling at the Altar and Feast of
Peace must go for a reason to keep us from it, if the very sign of the Cross of
Christ, by which we were reconciled, for by his Cross it was, says the Apostle,
must needs be made an Argument against all reconcilement, it is a sign we have
no hearts for peace, our hearts are not at all for it, who may have it at so
easy a rate, upon so handsome terms, and yet thus rudely thrust it from us, as
if we had sworn and covenanted against it, and all the ways that can lead to
it. Fain would we see some better expressions of it, if it be otherwise. Let Us
try the Apostles in the next particular, examine it by our ordinary deportment
and behavior, whether that be (...) mild and gracious as it should.

5. What our common Translation here renders grati, thankful, St. Chrysostom,
and St. Ierom, I told you, and from them Erasmus, turns gratiosi, gracious. In
this sense we find (...), Ephesians. v. 4. and (...), Prove. xi. 16. Both senses the
word may bear, and the Connection will bear them too. And to do both right we
will balk neither, we will take both, Gratiosi first. Be we mild and gracious,
kind and amiable.

The Apostle says it fuller in ver. 12, 13. beseeches us to be tender and
compassionate, meek and humble, patient and long-suffering, forbearing and
forgiving. These are the best symptoms and expressions of peaces ruling. The
words of peace are smooth and sweet, they are no swords; the looks of peace are
mild and cheerful, they are not sower or dogged; the hands of peace are soft
and open, they are not rugged or close, they are easy and stretched out to all
that come in to them. These are the ways of peace, and the best means to draw
it on. To look always austere and muddy, to carry scorn and superciliousness in
the countenance, to be unsociable and untractable, to run as far contrary as is
possible, to receive or join with none but upon our own conditions, and reject
all that look, and speak, and understand not just as we do our selves, is so
far from the paths of peace, that I shall not stick to call it an open defiance
of all the World. Yet such men there are; and some that add to all, a
renunciation of all the forms, and words, and signs of civility, and make it
Religion to be unmannerly, and sullen. I know not what sense these men can have
of peace, who come not so near as the salutation of it, addresses to it.

And truly, I have but little to say for them neither, who after so many
condescensions from their Sovereign, so great compliances, so long
forbearances, so much forgiveness, so fair a time given them to consider and
come in, and resolve all petty scruples (for there are no other) are not yet
composed for peace; who the more is yielded, the less they are satisfied, the
more graciously they are dealt with, the more averse and froward they are to a
reconcilement; the nearer we come, the further they fly from us. Only I know I
am bound by St. Paul here to be (...), to think and speak as mildly and gently
of them as the thing will bear. I would they would do so too.

Yet methinks if they like not Gratiosi, they might do Grati, if they like not
to be gracious, they might however to be thankful, thank God, and thank the
King, and thank the Church for their graciousness and forbearance, be (...) in
the second sense, in that of thankfulness. It Is the last Motion I have to make
out of the Apostles, that ye would be thankful.

6. It Is a duty Ill assure you that lies upon us. For it becomes well the just
to be thankful, Psalm. xxxiii. 1. I cannot tell you any thing more becoming. No
not more becoming us in regard of the mercies mentioned in the Text, the Peace
of God, and the calling us to it in one body. Each of them so ample subjects
for our thankfulness, that we cannot show thankfulness enough for either.

Peace so great a blessing, that Nil dulcius audiri, nil delectabilius
concupisci, nil utilius possideri, as one under St. Augustines name expresses
it; a blessing than which there is none more pleasant to be heard, none more
delightful to be desired, none more profitable to be possessed.

And Gods calling us to it in one day, calling us into one Church, calling us
then, when we were almost out of call, some of us in very remote parts of the
earth, some of us in dark corners at home, some of us in dungeons, some in dust
almost, ready to go down into it, and be covered with it, calling us all
together out of our several graves, as it were, into a new life, restoring us
our head, and uniting it to the members, is so transcendent a mercy to us, that
we can never be sufficiently thankful.

Yet that we may be somewhat thankful though, what is it to be thankful? I
shall give you it in brief, (for I cannot be long) and leave you to enlarge it.

To be thankful then, is (1.) Humbly and heartily to acknowledge Gods infinite
goodness to us, and our own infinite unworthiness of it. He that thinks light
of peace and unity, that undervalues Gods calling us into one body, or thinks
he did any thing toward it to deserve it, either understands not Gods
goodness, or is not thankful for it.

2. To be thankful, is openly and publicly to confess Gods mercies, and our
own engagements; to be telling of them all the day long, to make Hymns, and
Praises, and Panegyricks daily for them. I need not be so impertinent to tell
you 'twas David's business commonly to do so for mercies that were not like
these, or quote the Psalms wherein he does. But words are not all.

3. To be thankful indeed, is by our deeds to show it, to present our selves,
and all that is ours henceforward daily to his service; to offer up our souls
and bodies, and what else is ours, as peace offerings, and sacrifices of
thanksgivings; never to fear we can do too much, never to hope we can do enough
for what God has done for us in thus reinstating us in our Church and our
Religion; thus bringing home our Prince and our Peace, and that not with
thunder and lightning to punish or upbraid us for our former sins, not in a
storm and tempest to fright us with a mercy, not with fire and sword to
embitter the blessing, but in a calm, with a still voice, with joy and melody,
with no other noise than that of Hosannahs and Alleluiahs. Be we therefore
thankful unto him, and bless his name for ever and ever; for ever I say again,
for we have no time here limited to do it in; only be thankful, still be
thankful. For a good thing it is to give thanks unto the Lord, Psalm. xcii. 1.
Yea, a joyful and pleasant thing it is to be thankful, Psalm. cxlvii. 1.

II. Methinks I should need no arguments to you to persuade you to it, either
to thankfulness, or to peace. Yet so many being in the Text I must not be so
injurious to you or it to pass them by. Six I find in it to persuade to peace.
Ye are (1.) called, called (2.) to it, ye (3.) are one body, called (4) into
that too, can neither be (5.) Grati, nor (6.) Gratiosi, can neither be
thankful, nor appear gracious if ye be not for it, for the Rule of peace. And
to be thankful and gracious you have good reason too; for your being called,
for your peace, for the body you are of, and your calling into that, to be
members of it, are all motives to persuade it.

The first Argument is your being called, and it is a good one. To be called is
to be Christians in effect. (...) the Adjective from (...) is so taken, 1 Cor.
i. 2. Romans i. 6. and the Verb it self in several places may bear it too, Ephesians.
iv. 1. and 4. Gal. i. 6. Now to be Christians is to be the Sons and Servants of
the God of peace, a very good reason, that, that the Son should be like the
Father, the Servant be as his Master is. It was Abraham's argument to Lot to end
all differences. Let there be no strife I pray thee between me and thee, or
between my heardsmen and thy heardsmen, for we be brethren, Genesis xiii 8. It is
the same for us but with some advantage. Let there be no strife between thee
and me, for we be Brethren, for we be Christians. For if the Servants should
not disagree when their Masters are brethren, because they are so, much less
should they when they all have but one Master, and themselves are brethren. The
meanest heardsmen should not by this reason; none of the People; but the chief
Shepherds, the great Pastors (however) they should think upon their Callings
better than to fall out one with another. As the Elect of God, dearly beloved,
says St. Paul, ver. 12. you must not, you must forbear, you must forgive, ver.
14. It Is the best way to make your Calling and Election sure, to assure your
selves and the world (after all this) that ye are Christians. All are not that
pretend to it. The Servant that fell a beating his fellow servants was but an
Hypocrite. I am sure he had his portion given him among them, St. Mat. xxiv.
49. was cut asunder because he would join no better. For peace and true
holiness go together, no holy men (however so called) who are not peaceable;
false and hypocritical only is that holiness that is not joined with peace, and
those Christians no better; called so perhaps, but not in the Apostles sense,
true Christians indeed. The truly called ones are all for peace.

But (2.) they are particularly called to that. So the Apostle, Ye are called
unto peace, 1 Cor. vii. 15. Why? Then let every man wherein he is called
therein abide, ver. 20. even in this sense too, every man stick to his Calling,
for it is a holy one, 1 Timothy i. 9. we told you so just now, it is a heavenly one,
Heb. iii. 1. peace dwells for ever there, no jars, no discords among the Saints
or Angels. And seeing God has thought us worthy to call us to it, I hope we
will bethink our selves and walk worthy of it. Called I know we are to liberty,
Gal. v. 13. but not to use it for an occasion to the flesh, but by love to
serve one another. Mark the end of it, else, says the Apostle, for if ye bite
and devour one another, take heed ye be not consumed one of another, ver. 15.
Indeed, ye will; a strong Argument to persuade to peace.

Yet (3.) we have not only our general Calling, the being Christians, and our
particular designment to it after that, but our Interests public and private,
both to persuade us to it, We are in one body. Now it is neither for the
interest of the body, nor of the members to be at difference one with another.
If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, 1 Cor. xii. 26. And the
body cannot be torn or rent but every Member is concerned; the least scratch
with a nail, or the prick of a pin, or the touch of a thorn may by the
ignorance or cunning, neglect or ill managing of a heady Surgeon be improved
into a Gangrene, or a wound that may make the heart ache, and all the members
rue it. We lose our health ere we are aware, and the very neglect of a little
air at a Cranny, or the slighting the pettiest stirring of an humor sometimes
endangers life and all. There is nothing to keep us safe but order and peace,
to keep the humors quiet, and the several members in due order. How has the
body of Christ, the Church of God (of which we all are members) by the ill
managing of a petty Controversy, through the negligence or ignorance sometimes
of the Managers, or the sly cunning of an undiscerned or unminded Adversary,
or the peevishness of a Party been often thrown into a confusion, and almost
brought to desolation? If we love the Church (and we pretend it) nay, if we
love our selves (and that we commonly do too much) we must agree together. We
cannot hope our houses shall escape if the City be all on fire at every corner.
Or it is but a poor comfort when we see Polyphemus devour our fellows to think
only we shall be the last. And a vain confidence it is to suppose when a mutiny
is once begun, that we can stop it when we please. Diseases and ill humors
once let loose run insensibly through all the parts, we cannot retrive them as
we list, or fix them when we will. Our very hopes of a recovery are lost in a
moment, we have betrayed our selves by opening the way to confusion by our own
contests, and the whole body drops into a carcass, and all is gone. If we would
but consider our own bodies, and learn thence from our own senses (as the
Apostle would have us in the forecited Chapter) we could not be so stupid, so
senseless to draw on our own ruins by our Divisions. Methinks I cannot speak
more sensibly to all the purposes of Peace, nor you understand them more
feelingly, than by this Metaphor of the body and the members. Yet the Argument
is much advanced by (...), by our being called into it, by the favor that God
has done us in bringing us into it.

4. That God has brought us into the Church, made us to be a body of Christians
is a blessing we too seldom think of, yet it is a great one, and a great motive
too to be at peace with our own happiness, and not disturb it. No man would
divide his happiness who may enjoy it whole, much less divide it when he must
lose it whole, divide from it and divide it from himself, least as for the
divisions of Reuben, Judge. v. 15. so for this there should come nothing of it
but grief of heart.

Again, (2.) we are called into one body, says the Text, certainly not to make
it two, or tear it asunder into more; we are called into one, to keep in one,
to love, and live, and die together; this one is an argument to hold unity.

I may raise a third Argument if I read the words exactly as they are, without
the indulgence of construing (...) into (...), read it as we do, in one body ye
are called, called all at a lump, all in a body at once. However it was with
the Colossians, whether called altogether, or by parcels, I am sure with us it
was lately in uno corpore, the whole body of the Nation were called into one at
once; Our happiness came all at a clap, and shot from East to West, from North
to South, like lightning in a moment. The Land came not in by pieces, was not
won in, as Lands are, by Conquest, one Town or Country after another. And will
we then now tear off our selves by pieces into our late Confusions? Who has
bewitched us that we should think to do it?

If we add for a fourth, as we may do well in a reflection upon our selves, that
we were called, who a little before seemed cast away, called into a body who
durst not for many years before appear in any, called into one, who were then
scattered into many, called into one Church, into one Government, under one
head; then, too, when we scarce had any name but bynames to be called by, and
had made our selves unworthy of any by our sins; to be then called, and so
called as we were, was even a calling us out of worms and dust, out of nothing
to an anticipated Resurrection: And can we so far forget our selves as to undo
our happiness, and divide again? Have the miseries of our late Dissensions so
clearly slipped out of our memories, or are the squadrons and divisions of armed
troops so blessed a sight within our Quarters? If so, God has done us an injury
to call us into one, to cease our wars, and bring home peace and safety to our
doors, and we do as good as tell him so whilst we either run our selves into
divisions, raise them, or continue them. For unthankful, (5.) miserably
unthankful, too, as well as foolish and inconsiderate we must needs be thus to
contemn, to throw away our peace.

5. And shall we add unthankfulness to the bulk of our transgressions? I trow
not. And yet we shall if we oppose the rule of Peace. To be thankful is to
return somewhat answerable to the favor that is received. Now what more
answerable to peace than peace it self, to the peace of God than peace with our
brethren. And he that returns not this, returns nothing. He can no more have
peace with God than love to him whom he has not seen, if he have not peace with
his brother whom he has seen. To be sure he cannot be thankful that kicks Gods
favors back again into his face, and unmannerly bids him take them again, he
cares no for them. And yet we do no less when we despise and cast away the
peace to which he has called us; we say plainly enough it is not worth the
having whilst we do not think it worth the keeping. Nay, and all the blessings
of peace, all Gods calling, and recalling us first and last out of sin, out of
misery, out of confusions and destructions; the very name of Christians, and
the uniting us again under one King and Church, are certainly no blessings in
our judgments and opinions if we thus wilfully and contemptuously tear all in
pieces rather than peaceably submit to their determinations for unity and
order, where we have nothing to object, but that they are in in things
indifferent, which is in all men's reason else the greatest reason we should
comply with them. And no man that truly thanks God for them can do otherwise.

I am loath to say what I must needs say now in the last place too, that they
must needs be churlish and sullen as well as unthankful, no (...) at all in
them in the other sense neither, no mildness or softness, who aft^^ all St.
Paul's Arguments for peace and union will not be persuaded unto it: For when
God, that here calls us unto peace, shall one day call us to an account how
gracious and thankful we have been for his calling us to it, what we have done
or not done toward it; consider, I beseech you, whether you think seriously in
your hearts that it will there pass for true endeavors for peace to answer
thus: Lord, we have been all for peace, and we petitioned for it, but we could
not have it upon our own conditions; We would have agreed for a Public
Service, but we could not have it of our own making; We could well enough have
condescended to an Uniformity, but they would not let us, that were the
inferiors, set the Rule; We yet agree in the Articles of the faith, only for
indifferencies we kept still off; We are all saved too, we confess, by the
Cross of Christ, but the very sign of it we thought enough to keep us still
asunder; We were zealous for thy Worship, but we would not be confined to it by
any imposed rule of reverence and order. We could indeed have yet submitted to
it our selves, but we, some of us, had taught the people otherwise, and were
ashamed to unteach them; We might perhaps have easily come in at first, but now
we have so long stood out, that it is not for our honor to retreat, they will
call us Turn-coats and Apostates, and we shall lose the people quite. Gracious
and kind notwithstanding we have been in our deportments, but 'twas only to our
own Party; Thankful besides to God, though we kept not indeed any solemn days
of thanksgivings, or as perfunctorily as we could, we would go no further. In
the sum, we have done all we could to have peace upon our own terms, but we
could not obtain it, unless we would submit to Decency and Order; and so it
stands.

And when our Governors and Superiors, called to the same account, shall be
content to stand to our own confessions, that they imposed nothing but things
Indifferent for Unity and Order. Think soberly, I beseech you, on which hand
lies the true plea for the endeavor of Peace, where lies the perverseness,
where the compliance. And if this be the business, as I fear it is too near it,
I shall leave the whole World to judge whether peace truly rule in the hearts
of those, who upon their own terms only seek it; whether they answer their
callings, or are thankful.

I say no more, I have said too much perhaps, yet I wish I had said enough to
make up the peace: I shall only rally up the Apostles Arguments and dismiss you
hence however in peace.

You have heard the Apostles and our motions and motives to peace. And now if
we have any respect to our Christianity, any thoughts of our Vocation, any love
to Unity, any consideration of Gods goodness, any kind of gratitude for his
mercies, or would be gracious in his eyes; let the meekness of Christians, the
remembrance of our Vocation, the Obligations to Unity, the endearments of Gods
kindness, the reasonableness of gratitude, the hope of Gods favor, and our
endeavor for the common happiness of the World engage us to peace, to Gods
peace, to the Churches. To this we are called. And God that calls us to it,
work us to it, work it in our hearts, and in our practices, by the same power
by which we are called into one body make us of one mind, through him who, etc.

A SERMON Preached at St. Paul's Cross.
Sir Richard Gurney being then Lord Mayor.
JER. XXXV. 18, 19. Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Because
you have obeyed the commandment of Ionadab your Father, and kept all his
Precepts, and done according unto all that he has commanded you.

Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Ionadab the Son of
Rechab shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.


THe Text, you hear, is the Word of God; Thus says the Lord, what ere the
Sermon be like to be: And, if the Preacher stir no further from the Text, than
the Rechabites in it from the command of their Father, the Sermon is like to be
no less; and to be heard accordingly. I know whose work I am about, Sic dicit
Dominus; I shall keep to that. Thus says the Lord, begins the Text; and it
shall run through and end my Sermon.

And I could wish I could begin it, as Christ did his at Nazareth, [St. Luke
iv. 21.] This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears. But then, I fear, I
must leave out Dicit Dominus: Nor God, nor his Prophet can say so for that they
call the greatest part of City or Country; or for the success we expect upon it.

I cannot therefore say, the Text is fit for the time, but, I am sure, it is
needful. A Text of Obedience never more. A little of that well practiced would
make us understand one another, set all together again. It Is needful for That:
and that is as much as Peace, Plenty, and Religion is worth.

Yet as needful as it is, it is well we have a Dicit Dominus for it: One above
that dares commend it. Non dicit homo; No body beneath had best to do it. Or,
if he do, this too will be Popery and Innovation, the Doctrine of the Popish
Clergy: Words as common in the peoples mouths for all they dislike, as ever
Dicit Dominus was in the Prophets.

Well; be it what they will; say man what he please, Thus says the Lord, and
so by Gods blessing will we. Say it, and say it as he says it, by way of
Commendation. Eo quod. Make Obedience the cause of our speech, of a set
Commendation.

Yet we had best take heed what we do. Sic dicit Dominus. His for the
Rechabites, that shall guide us: And what is it he commends them for?

Because they Obeyed; for their Obedience. But to whom that? Obeyed your
Father; Obedience to man. What was he? Your Father Ionadab, says the Text.
What power had he? All. Natural, Civil, Eccl^siastical. Ionadab was the Father
of their Family; had (1.) Ius Patrium, the power of a Father over them. He
disposed of their kind of living, their Estates, and Civil affairs; had (2.)
Ius Regium, the Civil Power over them. Contrived all to a religious course of
life, to the freer service of heaven, had (3.) Ius Ecclesiasticum, the
spiritual power over them.

He has not more of Authority than They of Obedience. Obedience Formal, to his
command. Universal, to all. Punctual, according to all that he commanded them.
This then is the Obedience that God here commends; a Formal, an universal, a
Punctual obedience to Natural, Civil, and Spiritual Parents.

Commends them for, commends to us. Rewards to them, will reward to us. Likes
them so well upon it, that he loves to look upon them for it; will not
therefore endure them out of his sight; promises to keep them there for ever;
Will do as much for us upon the same performances; passes his word upon it,
Thus says the Lord: Engages his honor, as he is Lord; his power, as he is
Lord of Hosts; his mercy, as the God of Israel, to make it good.

You see the Text in its full dimensions. It will now fall easily into Parts.
Evidently into two: I. Gods approbation of the Rechabites Obedience. II. And
his Reward upon it.


I. In the Approbation you have, (1.) the Form and style of it, Thus says the
Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel. (2.) The Grounds of it, Because you have
obeyed, etc. Obedience commended upon some grounds: Commended (1.) from their
Persons, Ye, Rechabites, ye, your wives and your children. Because ye have
obeyed. (2.) From the expression of it, by a Threefold Act, Obedistis,
Custodistis, Fecistis. You have obeyed, kept, and done. (3.) From a Threefold
Object: The Commandment of their Father, all his Precepts, and according to
them all. (4.) From the Power or Person whom they obeyed; Ionadab their Father.

II. In the Reward, First, for their Triple Obedience we shall find a triple
blessing: (1.) The blessing of a Posterity still to succeed them. Ionadab the
son of Rechab shall not want a man. Non deficiet vir de stirpe Ionadab. (2.) Of
an honorable and pious Posterity. Not want a man to stand before me: such upon
whom God will always cast an eye of favor and honor. (3.) Of a lasting,
everlasting Posterity. Not want a man for ever.

Then, secondly, the Certainty and Assurance of it. Thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, and you may take his word, He will perform it.

And because we come not hither only to commend others, but to learn our
selves; and God therefore sets the Rechabites obedience upon record, that we
may know what he likes, have a president to follow and do accordingly, we will,
in the close of every several point of their obedience, examine our own; see
how near or short we come; where if I chance to say, you have not done so much,
pardon me that person all the way; It Is the person in the Text, and I therefore
use it. I mean not you, nor you, none of you, unless your actions apply it. I
know not; If they do, you must forgive me if I strike home. I come not so far
to flatter you: and the times require a sharper Physic.

Yet if I may persuade you by the Approbation, Example, or Reward of Obedience
in the Text; or the Punishment of disobedience, by the rule of contraries,
implied there, I shall so conclude in full desires, that, what God here says of
the Rechabites, he may hereafter say of you, Because you have obeyed the
Commandment of your Father, and kept his Precepts, and done according to all
that he commands; Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel,
you shall not want a man to stand before me for ever.

1. You see my Method. I begin with the Approbation. The style of it. Thus
says the Lord. And that is a good beginning.

And is it God indeed that speaks for Obedience, who is it then that speaks
against it? What Spirit are they of? They pretend St. Paul's, Be ye not the
servants of men, [1 Cor. vii. 13.] It Is true, that: not so theirs, as to forget
to be Christ's. But to remember withal, you are the children of men; some of
whom you must obey as Fathers, if you mean to be Christ's servants. He tells you
so, [St. Mat. xxii. 21.] Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, as well
as to God the things which are Gods. He puts Caesar first too; to show they
talk vainly, who say they serve God, when they leave out the King. First, thy
Father whom thou have seen, then God whom thou have not seen, is the Apostles
rule for us to judge by; and his is Gods.

Well then we have God on our side, whoever be against us: Him speaking for it,
and speaking of it: and they are words of Commendation, while he so well likes
obedience, that he cannot forbear to speak of it.

It Is no small matter, that, that can command the eye or tongue of the Princes
of the earth: It must be more that even forces a Panegyric from the Lord
Almighty; something sure worth Commendation.

Man indeed makes great matters of little or nothing. God sees not as man sees.
Man may be deceived, God cannot. He says the Rechabites have obeyed; commends
them for it, say who dare against it. And I am afraid we shall find too many in
the upshot, that neither like their obedience, nor Gods commending them; say
all they can against it.

It Is no matter what they say: God does more than say it; says it with delight;
goes with it over and over again; Obedistis, Custodistis, Fecistis; thrice in a
breath; takes notice of every tittle, fills the whole Chapter, almost every
verse with it; loves to speak of it, it so much contents him.

Says it incircled with his glories; talks of it amidst his Hosts; tells them,
as it were, of it. For he had told his Prophet and his People of it before. Now
he even tells it his Angels; would have them take notice of it.

He goes further; almost forsakes his Israel to look on them: is now become the
God of the Rechabites: They are they that shall now stand before him for ever.

He goes on still: is so well pleased, that he tells it to themselves; commends
them to their faces: a thing not usual with God, but to the very chiefest of
his Saints and Children. At least then only when he is most highly pleased with
any. Ye have obeyed.

Lastly, Says it not in the form his other speeches go: not dixit, but dicit,
in the present. Is still saying it; said it then, and says it still: said it to
them, says it to us, that we also might say it after him: Say it in our
actions; that he might have some ground to say of us what he does of them, Ye
have obeyed. Which brings me the Parties into sight, whose Obedience is the
ground of all this Approbation. And the first is from their Persons.

Ye Rechabites. Every verse almost tells you it. They, Kenites, some say,
descended from Iethro: Midianites by original, strangers from the Covenant; yet
even they obedient to their father, taught to be so by the Law of nature;
commended for that.

Abulensis is loath to derive them from so poor beginnings. He makes them of the
Family of Caleb, of the Tribe of Judah, the royal Tribe; That even Princes too,
as well as people, might know obedience to their Father sometimes in those
commands that seem to divest them of that honor; But that Obedience is the
greatest honor; greatest in such persons.

Whether they were such or no, they were the Sons of Ionadab: He was a devout
man. Spontaneus Domini, says St. Augustine: One that would serve God, though it
were for nothing. Some of our age would have told them, they might have excused
them being the seed of the Godly. It Is a part of their Commendation that they
thought not so.

It Is another, that they excused neither Age, nor Sex. You: Who? We, our Wives,
our Sons and our Daughters, ver. 8. Oh happy Family, where Obedience is thus
taught by Authority, learned from Example, sucked from the breasts; where the
Wife learns it from the Husband; hers to him, from him to the Magistrate; the
Children from both.

Time, yet, lifts their virtue higher: Three hundred years had Ionadab been
gathered to his Fathers, while yet his Sons persist in his Commands, with as
much constancy as integrity, that we might prescribe no time against Obedience.

This then is the sum of that part of Gods commendation from their Persons,
that Rechabites, Princes by their Tribe; Holy by descent; women and children,
after so many ages past over Ionadab, neither pleaded their Descent, nor their
honor, nor their claim to the Covenant, nor their Age, nor their Sex, nor the
Abrogation of Laws for Antiquity, but without any contrary Plea whatsoever
generally submitted to all Obedience.

Thus says God for them.

What say we for our selves?

In Civil Affairs, Laws, they say, are Cobwebs. Great men great flies that
easily break through them; mean men little enough to slip out at any hole;
women do what they please; children are not old enough for any thing, but sin
and disobedience.

In Ecclesiasticals it is worse. Though it be a matter of Reverence enjoined to
God himself, Great ones are too good, Others too perverse, Women too tender,
Children not of age, All too weakly to bend the knee, or bare the head in Gods
service: so that what was said of Moses, that God talked with him as man does
with his friend, I may invert, and say, Man now talks with God, as man does
with his friend; so fellow-like, that, though our Fathers had not commanded the
contrary, all the world would say, There is nothing like Reverence or Obedience
in this.

Let me ask now, Had the Rechabites the Law of Nature to guide them, and have
not we? Were not they a righteous offspring as well as we? Had not they the
tenderness of Wives and Children to plead for weakness of constitution and
complexion (greater hindrances to their strict kind of life) as well as we?
Could not they have pleaded antiquated Laws, as truly we? Yet says God, You
have done all that was commanded you:: done it, when others have not; not mine
own people; he may add now, not my Christian people. Thus our negligence
commends their Obedience. We that have no more to excuse our selves than they;
not so much, our task being easier, our helps greater, yet we have not, They
have. Let that be an addition to their first Commendation, raised a little by
comparison with us. You Rechabites; I may almost say now, You only have obeyed.

I pass now to the second ground of the Approbation: The Expression of their
Obedience.

Three Acts there are of it: (1.) Obedistis. (2.) Custodistis. (3.) Fecistis.
you have obeyed, kept, and done what was commanded you. The first belongs to
the Inward, the two other to the outward man.

I begin with the Inward. For without that, Outward Obedience is of short
service, no continuance. Four Acts flow from it. To (1.) Hear; to (2.) Hearken;
to (3.) Submit to; to (4.) Acquiesce in the Commands of our Superiors. All
point blank against those Four grounds of Disobedience, (1.) Vntractableness,
(2.) Impatience, (3.) Pride, and (4.) Murmuring. To hear, that against
Untractableness, that will not so much as endure the hearing. To hearken, that
against Impatience, that will not take pains to hear it out. To subm^t, that
against Pride, that will veil to none. To acquiesce or rest in, that against
murmuring, that is never content with any thing imposed upon it.

Let me but ponder the word as I go, I shall find all those, and not go from
the word.

In all three Languages, the word, whence comes Obedience, comes from Hearing.
In auditu auris obedivit is King David's, Psalm. xviii. 43. The first duty God
ever requires, Hear O my people. The Rechabites stumble not here. They hear
their Father speaking even out of his dust. They are far enough from
Untractableness, that hear so easily. Promptitudo Obedientiae, that is the first
commendation of their Obedience, the Readiness of it.

Yet he will give you little that will not give you the hearing. The Son in the
Gospel that did not mean to go, and the Son that meant not to go, both went
thus far, heard their Father: (...) signifies more, to attend and listen with a
desire to it. How this is, you may understand out of Psalm. xlv. 11. Hearken, O
daughter, and consider: Hearken first, then consider, weigh and ponder the
words; then forget thine own people and thy Fathers house, thy kindred and
companions, that alliance that uses by a kind of faction to draw too often from
obedience; those private and mutual interests, that, under a pretense of
obedience, beguile us of it. To hearken then is to assent to, in Gods own
phrase, [1 Samuel viii. 9.] to leave all private relations and intentions, out of
the mere desire of Obedience. Thus the Rechabites hearkened neither to the
tenderness of their Wives, nor the cries of their Children, nor their own
commodities and conveniences, to hearken to their Father. This is Obedientiae
Patientia, the Approbation of their Obedience by their Patience.

This is a ready passage to the next, To submit their judgments, affections,
persons, and estates to the will of their Father. It Is a hard Theme; and I had
best prove it to be Obedience, before I venture to approve them for it.

The Latin and Greek words [ to obey] sound nothing more than sub, and (...)
all under; (...), subditi estote, subjicimini; the soul it self under; that
submitted. Let every soul be subject, Romans xiii. 1. As if St. Paul had foreseen
the distinction, the Body, not the Soul. The Soul, says he, not the Body alone,
and therefore put them in mind of it, Tit. iii. 1. As if every body knew it
well enough; no, no body were, no body could be ignorant of it, only want one
to remember them. Put them in mind therefore. Wherefore? We may gather
something from the Reason he adds; For we our selves also were sometimes
foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts, Tit. iii. 3. First,
foolish, then disobedient; none else are so, how wise soever they think
themselves. Yea, and deceived; for just it is that he that will not trust his
Superiors judgment (especially, where his own is as well inferior as himself)
should be deceived by himself, or those who have no power over him, but to
deceive him. And he that will not obey their will, just it is he should be
given up to serve his own lusts. And so they are, mark it when you will,
nataral brute beasts, says St. Peter. None more sensual, proud, devilish, so
St. James finds them, [ Iam. iii. 15.] than those that thus proudly cast off
the yoke of submission and obedience. Their bodies then and passions scorn to
obey them, who by their own disobedience have taught their inferior powers to
rebel. It Is no wonder then if that follow in the verse, Living in malice,
envy, hateful, and hating one another. I need call nothing else but the dismal
experience of these last tumultuous, rebellious times to witness it, wherein
Tongues, and Pens, and Actions too have so horribly expressed it.

And give me leave a little to reason with you. Authority used to be a Logical
Argument to guide our reason: and have we lost our Logic too, as well as our
Obedience? The consent of wise, grave, learned Fathers (till you know where to
find better) with any man not too high in his own conceit, is certainly of a
value somewhat above his private imagination. For, who tells you they are
deceived? Your private Minister? And are you sure he is not; and are they
deceived? And is it not as likely that you and he should be? Were they not as
wise as you? As just as you? As devout as you? Have you reason, and had not
they? Do you use Scripture, and did not they? Had they interests, and have not
you? That all should be deceived, till you, and your new Ministers came into
the World, is morally impossible. That they should purposely deceive you, you
have nor ground, nor charity to imagine. To think then that you may not as
easily be deceived, does it not look like pride? And is not Pride enough to
blind you from seeing truth? It Is true, your Governors are not infallible, no
more are you. Yet certainly there is more certainty in their united judgments,
than your simple fancies. And I am sure many might with less hazard have erred
with them (suppose they erred) than sometimes gone right. That they might at
any time in simplicity of heart; This seldom without Faction, Schism, or Pride.

You mistake me all this while, if you suppose I require a blind Obedience. No,
I know God would not be served with a blind sacrifice. His service is a
reasonable service. Clear sighted as you will, but no curious, inquisitive
observance. Know you must, if possibly you can, that it is not ill you go
about, and the Power just that commands it; But to enquire into every
circumstance, as it is beyond the power of most, so it is more than the duty of
any. It Is this creates you so many difficulties, suspicions, controversies,
till you have lost your reward, your Church and Country the profit of your
virtue.

Were the judgment thus once submitted, our affections would the sooner follow:
though they indeed are the cause commonly that we submit not our judgments. Our
affections set so strongly upon honors, profits, liberty, pleasure, make us
take up opinions to keep them. Yet Nature will tell you thus much, Partem
Patria, partem Parents. Your King and Country, and Church too claim a portion
in your affections, persons, and estates.

I leave now de Iure for de Facto, the Justice for the Practice of it: to show
you all this done by the Rechabites. How easily else might they have vied
reason with their Father? What, drink no Wine? All Creatures are good; nothing
to be refused with thanksgiving? No Houses neither? Must we thus be made the
talk of the world? Turn heirs to Cain's malediction? Vagabonds upon the face of
the earth? Must our Wives and Children too suffer all the hardships of a kind
of perpetual banishment? No mercy to be had of our selves, none of them? What,
no Lands neither? No earing, nor harvest? Must we leave our Children beggars,
our Wives unprovided for, purchase nothing for them? Thus, and more they might
have argued; but all these notwithstanding, how harsh soever they conceived it,
they rather trusted their Fathers judgment than their own.

But is their Reason only submitted, are not their Affections too? They neither
contend for honor, nor stickle for riches, nor grudge at any inconvenience;
but submit their desires to their Fathers; tread under their own natural
propensions to obey him. Would he have them drink no Wine? They will not drink,
though the Prophet bid them, ver. 5. Would he have them poor? They have no
Lands. Would he forbid them houses? They will have no abiding place; be
everlasting Pilgrims. What would he have them do, that they will not do?

They submit judgments, affections, estates, persons, their own and their
Posterities, as much as in them lies, that they may satisfy their Fathers.
This, if any thing, is Obedientis summa humilitas, the exceeding Humility of
their Obedience, with so much approbation so often reiterated through the Chapter.

They go one step higher. Not only submit to his Authority, but resolve into
it. Make no further Queres upon it, nor murmur at it, but, as the Hebrew root
sometimes signifies, Acquievistis, rest fully contented with it. You may call
this Obedientiae hilaritas; Their cheerful delight in their Obedience.

Thus far the Rechabites, now again to our selves.

And, first, have we heard the King, our Father? Have we not rather, with the
deaf Adder, stopped our ears? One with the earth, that is our profit; the other
with our tail, that is our pleasures: That we might not hear him, charmed he
never so wisely.

The Fathers of the Church have had less at our hands.

Next, how have you hearkened? Much that way given. Hearkened to find fault, to
cavil at, to plot against, to undermine. This has been the peoples course of
late, so to destroy those by whom God would save them. The Civil Magistrate
has not been in much better case.

Your Judgments, they have been submitted too. But to whom? To the factious and
discontented decisions (shall I call them, or ravenings rather) of ignorant and
malicious Teachers; who have exercised more tyranny upon your consciences, than
the most clamorous can prove ever Bishop did; durst ever accuse him to do:
while they thus both belie God, and abuse you, by exacting an infallible assent
to their unreasonable, seditious, unchristian frenzies, under the name of the
Word of God. Thus while you refuse to submit your judgments, where you are
bound, you captivate your reason to them who have lost their own; and are
therefore angry that others should have any.

How in the interim you have believed the sincere Declarations of your
Sovereign; how submitted to what he thought best or fittest for you: How to the
entire intentions of your right Spiritual Fathers, let the general slighting
and undervaluing their judgment we hear in every Shop, as we pass along,
testify for both.

In a word, how you delight in the Laws and Statutes of State and Church, and
rest contented with them, I would the general practice and countenance of
Disobedience and Profaneness did not even tell it in Gath, and publish it in
the streets of Askalon.

Thus we serve again to exalt the Rechabites, while our sins condemn our
selves. For while our untractableness, Impatience, Pride, and Murmurs banish
Obedience, they have heard their Father readily, hearkened to him carefully,
submitted humbly, and rested contentedly in his sole Authority, without the
least reluctance or contradiction.

And by the way I may point out the reason: They lived temperate, mean, and
humble lives; had no thoughts of raising houses, but in heaven. Now, the riots,
riches, pride, and a desire of raising Families have made many of you forget
(...) in (...), to keep under. Yet let these men take heed, lest, while, with
Corah and his company, they cry out to Moses and Aaron, You take too much upon
you, keep us under, keep us down too much, they go down with that cursed Crew
into the Pit. He that will not bear this (...), keep under here, must go under
there; and better (...) here, down here, than down for ever.

We have now done with the Inward virtue of Obedience. Now for the Exercise of
it Outward. You have obeyed. How shall we know it? As St. James of Faith, so we
of Obedience. Show me that by thy works. You have obeyed. Have you kept
Statutes then? God is the Rechabites witness, and the Prophet Jeremy is their
witness, and the Land of Israel is witness that they have.

1. Kept them diligently; obeyed them carefully; even watched to keep them: it
is the very word that God gives them.

2. Kept them without intermission, kept them all their days, ver. 3.

3. Kept them from violence and misconstruction; added no new senses of their
own: Kept them, that is, broke them not by subtle distinctions, but Observantes
fecistis, says Tremellius; did it with all observance, and due honor to them;
never seemed to entrench the least upon them by any seeming breach, till
fleeing from the Chaldaeans they entered Jerusalem, staid a little till the
storm was over, and likely rather pitched their Tents there, any where in the
streets, or upon the house tops, as the Israelites themselves did at the Feast
of Tabernacles, then dwelt in houses.

This kind of keeping Statutes was a doing of them. Custodistis, Fecistis. Not
that keeping Statutes which some talk of, when they tell us they keep Laws,
while they are willing to undergo the penalty it demands of them. St. Paul
certainly was of another mind; Not only for wrath, says he, but Conscience
sake, Romans xiii. 4. Makes Obedience a matter of Conscience, not of Punishment.
Not the Punishment, but Conscience makes up that. And, I believe, these men
themselves would think it greater Tyranny to exact the Penalties, than the Law.
That the true Obedience then that does not keep Laws with the Tongue, but with
the Hand. The doing, not the Talking of Obedience is the Rechabites
commendation.

Yet, had they lived by our later distinctions (for now we are to compare them
with our times) they would have told us they obeyed their Fathers, and kept no
Precepts; been obedient Sons of the Church, and kept no Canons; Loyal Subjects,
and denied Caesar's due when they list. All might have been done in spirit; the
body and estate saved quite; done enough, to say they were humble and obedient
Subjects. Laws too interpreted how we would, to our own ends and purposes. Now
this meaning affixed, now that; turned and wrung which way we please. This, you
know, the ordinary practice of the people of the Age.

But, if this be keeping and doing the commands of our Fathers, it is beyond
the wisdom of man to make such Laws which some senseless distinction cannot
elude; and then what becomes of all Obedience? Whatever we see among our own
people, we see no such matter among the Rechabites. Here again God reproves us,
while he approves them, and the sincere simplicity of their obedience.

We are now next door to see it fully by what they did; what they kept; what
they obeyed. Obeyed the commandment of Ionadab their Father; kept his Precepts;
did according to all that he commanded them.

The first object of their Obedience is the Commandment of their Father. His
commandment, not their own wills. It is a usual thing now adays to direct their
Governors, what to do, what to teach, what to command; then, forsooth, they
will obey them. This is not to obey the Fathers command, but their own wills.
And you know how the world went when every one did his own will, what seemed
good in his own eyes, Judge. xvii, xviii, and xix. Chapt. Parents then could not
keep their goods from the fingers of their own children. Micah will steal his
mothers money. Men could not keep themselves from violence, nor their Wives
from ravishment, nor the Levite his. Men could not keep their own Priest; He is
taken away by force. The Priest could not tend his cure; He Is fain to wander
about, to seek a place to live in, to play the Idols Chaplain in stead of Gods.
Pray God it prove not so with us. The King cannot keep the Prerogative of his
Crown; there was no King in Israel. God cannot keep his own; they lived as if
there were no God in Israel. This the case where every one neglects commands,
to do what is good in his own eyes; either has or acknowledges no Father to
obey but his own arbitrary power. Happy Rechabites that obey command, prescribe
not; petition not for commands to their Father, but obey theirs, for it is
Mandato in the Singular; as if that singly were the rule of their Obedience,
the command of their Father.

Thence it is an easy passage to all his precepts. Resign once themselves to
his command, they stick at nothing of his Precepts. Interests prevail no
longer. Omnia is good doctrine then: Obedience universal. Active in all just
commands; Passive, where they are not such. These were just; God would not else
reward them for doing them. Will you see what they were?

1. You shall drink no Wine, neither you, nor your Sons for ever, ver. 6. And
it is not likely their fare was dainty. A hard task, you will say. Measure it by
what our days would think of it, wherein we so much study our Palats. How does
a little restraint in diet afflict us? What a burden is it now to be denied
excess?

Were it to be denied us for ever, how would we rather die than admit it? A few
fish-days trouble us above measure: and it shall go for superstition, rather
than not be cried down. How far are we from the sweet temper of their Obedience?

2. Their keeping this first command shows that, the next will show their
courage. Neither shall ye build houses. The Foxes have holes, and the birds of
the air have nests; but the Sons of Ionadab have not where to lay their heads,
but in a tattered Tent. Many conveniences they must needs want there; suffer
many inconveniences, both in their abode, and in their removal. This especially
be exceeding troublesome to their Wives and Children; subject in the interim
ever and anon to storms and tempests; to be burnt by the heat of the day, and
the frost of the night; full every way of trouble, uncertainty, and hazard: yet
this they are content with too, to show the courage of their obedience.

3. Yet to have neither field, nor vineyard, nor seed, nor harvest, nothing to
delight in; a kind of common want; nothing to leave their Children, but an
hereditary poverty: Thus to give back at no inconveniences; so cheerfully to
cast off any superfluities, so continually to trench upon necessities, to
renounce all the glories which we place in earthly accommodations, only to obey
their Father; I now call you to witness who want nothing of wordly things,
whose greatest care it is to digest your pleasures into order, to enjoy your
honors and estates, and to dispose them; to keep your selves from being
oppressed with too many enjoyments, whether these valiant Rechabites may not
yet deserve a third commendation, for the Constancy of their Obedience.

This Omnia, these all you see expressly kept. If there were more, some lighter
Precepts, as certainly there were, All of them too; it is not Omnia h^c, but
Omnia indefinitely; All whatsoever were commanded them.

Their Obedience is yet compleater; not only All the Precepts, but Omnino
prout, just according to them. Not all for Substance only, but all for
Circumstance too. Omitted not a Ceremony. God, as he loves not blind, so, loves
not lame Sacrifices, nor blemished. And if it once be arbitrary for any one to
neglect a Ceremony, to dispute an inconvenience, perit obedientia; farewell
Obedience. According to all was the Rechabites; was good doctrine then; has
been ever since, till these unhappy days. And they gained by the hand Gods
Approbation of the Punctuality of their Obedience. They failed not in a tittle;
no more must we, if we look either to Dicit Dominus, what he says, or what he
commends, And he truly is commended, not whom men, but whom the Lord commends.

But though God said it, and commended them for it, now we draw it home, we had
best prove it good.

1. It Is that, then, which God requires of your Children to you: Children obey
your Parents in all things, Col. iii. 20. Of your Servants: Servants obey your
Masters in all things, ver. 22. Of all Subjects: to every ordinance of man, 1
Pet. ii. 13.

Indeed, so it may be, that the Ordinances are not just. If so, then, if the
power be, you have a Passive obedience to supply you. Submit willingly to the
Punishment, but do you must not. All other must be done.

Yet, I must confess, while we dispute how far our Governors are to be obeyed,
in what, whether God or man, it often comes to pass we obey neither. That God
must be obeyed, not man when he commands an evil, is too plain to make a
question.

But this is a true Rule too: Unless you are certain it is truly evil you are
commanded, you ought to obey. If you be only doubtful, I should think in
reason, as you would answer God for doing your uttermost, you should more rely
upon his wisdom, under whose command you are, than on your own, or any private
engaged judgment. Especially, if it seem to carry any thing that contradicts
your private liberty or interests; in which case we are seldom competent judges.

If indeed you are fully certain of his ignorance, or general indisposition to
all honesty and goodness whom you are to obey, you are not debarred from better
counsel: but the surest (and that you ought to look to) is men of the like
authority and condition, (at least of no known contrary resolve, no private,
discontented, engaged affections of whose wisdom, and honesty, and care too of
your souls you are as justly confident, as of the others malice and
indiscretion.

Else I cannot tell you but any other may as well misguide your private
respects, as much mislead both them and you, and you be left with less excuse.
Whereas the condition that God has set you in, the authority under which [and
in that the gift of Government (for certainly such a thing there is) which may
be excellent sometimes in the worst men] may plead something for you at your
last Account.

You may pretend liberty, but they that promise you it by Disobedience are
themselves the servants of corruption, 1 Pet. ii. 19. You may pretend
Conscience, but it will prove Pride. And does it not appear so? For while you
determine that in something you must, in other you may choose, is it not as if
you thought you only knew what were best? Your Fathers, they, old doting fools.
You pretend wisdom; but every Ordinance, says S Peter, is, for no other cause,
for that he gives, ver. 11. to put to silence the ignorance of foolish men:
They only are against it. And there are, too, that pretend the Spirit; These
are they that go so far upon their own heads, that at last they separate
themselves: and what are they for it? Sensual, having not the Spirit, says St.
Jude, ver. 19. Where Is now the Spirit you so much boast of?

All Precepts therefore must be our Rule to walk by. All, though harsh and hard
ones. All; and more than All sometimes, more than Law will give them. Ne
offendamus, is Christ's Rule; lest we should offend them. Them and others, too,
by teaching them by our example at other times to disobey.

St. Paul stretches it further, Dicto obedire, Tit. iii. 1. To obey at a word
speaking: a command by word of mouth, when it is not express Law. For, when all
is done, something will still be left to the interpretation of the Lawgiver, in
the breast of the Judge, to which we must submit.

We are not yet at the uttermost: All is not enough, unless our Obedience be
according to all; Omnino prout, says Tremellius: just as they would have it to
a tittle; in every circumstance.

You find this requisite in your several Corporations: where the omission of a
punctilio draws after it intolerable defaults. The hedge is easily passed
through, where but one bush is wound aside; and the breach of one Circumstance
is but the disposition to another. Things that in themselves seem of no
considerable moment within a while appear considerable by the neglect: As the
error that appears not at the first declining Line of the workman a while after
manifests an irrecoverable deformity. According to all, that is the surest Rule
to go by. You know it your selves in your own Corporations: You know it in your
own Families, if you know any thing. Give an inch, they will take an ell, is your
own Proverb. And cannot you judge as equally for the Church?

I am sure not there; where had this Rule been kept, we had never met these
distracted times. But so long have some omitted this, some that, that all at
last is thought Innovation. One likes not this, another not that, another not
something else; so it is come at last they like nothing. Rubricks and Canons
have been so long played with to please the people, or I know not who, that
nothing but the ruin of the whole will now content them. I would we saw it not
by the misery of these (however some call them) truly sad, distressed times.

Yet take this Caution with you; Quae praecepit: Not according to every humor,
what this or that man fancies decent, but according to all that is commanded.

Now Two things there are which have the force of Precepts; Laws and Customs.

1. Laws; and they according to the Letter, not the equity; that is for no
private power to go by. A Privilege indeed sometimes for the Supreme Lawgiver
and the Judge.

2. Customs; that they bind like Laws and Precepts, you all tell us in your
Tenures, in your Lands, in your Corporations. How comes it about they do not in
the Church? I am sure you plead them on all sides strong enough against it.

And has the Church none; Or has it none to plead? Yes, both. It was St.
Paul's Plea; no meaner man's: We have no such Custom, nor the Churches of God, 1
Cor. xi. 16. Many indecencies were then crept into the Church of Corinth; about
Prayers, about Preaching, about Sacraments, about Gestures and Ceremonies. The
Rule that he confutes them by is, They had no such, nor the Churches of God;
The contrary then they had: and that he thought conviction enough for
Christians; yea, for the contentious too. If* any man be contentious, will hear
no reason, this the way to answer him.

'Twas so then; it is so still: They, the Apostles, and the Churches of God,
Customs they had, and made this use of them; so may we; Customs we have, and we
may plead them.

Some derived from them; so high: others later, yet of age enough to speak for
themselves. Such as, only directing all into order and beauty, stood still
unquestioned, till of late a subtle profaneness creeping in, under a pretense
of Law, though obeying none, would fain accuse for illegal Tyrannies.

But let me argue it with this kind of man. May not I as lawfully serve my God
in a reverent posture, as thou in a saucy and irreverent garb? Is it
Superstition in me to stand, because thou sit or leanest on thy elbow? Is
it Idolatry in me to kneel, because thou will not foul thy clothes, or vex thy
knees? Strange must it needs be, that sitting, leaning, lolling must be Law and
Canon, where no set behavior is expressed, and my reverence only be against
it; made Innovation which Law never forbad, Custom has retained. When you can
bring me Law against my standing, bowing, kneeling, which your selves know
Custom has observed, where uniform order has been kept, I shall either submit,
or answer. Else I must ask by what Law I am bound to sit or lean, and not to
stand, or kneel, or bow? though I urge thee only to Charity and Reverence.

This for some reverent Customs, which had thou any equal to, for age or
reason in thy Civil Affairs, thou would plead against the Law. I here only
wish it, where there is naught against them, that they may stand still, if not
under the notion of obedience, yet far enough from Innovation or Disobedience.
And, I believe, in cold blood it would be found so,

Well now: All, for the matter, though never so hard. According to all, for the
manner, though never so troublesome and inconvenient; if commanded by good Law
or Custom must be the compass of your Obedience. If any man teach otherwise,
says St. Paul; Otherwise? Than what? Than all honor, that is, obedience in all
things: What then? He is proud, knowing nothing, how much soever he seems to
know, doting about questions and strife of words, whence comes envy, strife,
railings, evil surmises, perverse disputings of men of corrupt minds, destitute
of the truth, supposing that gain is godliness. You see the times, and you may
see the place, 1 Timothy vi. 3, 4, 5.

How these rules have been kept amongst you toward the command of your King
and Church, I leave to the scrutiny of your own bosoms: If you find it
otherwise, as surely you will, let it be mended, or get St. Paul and St. Peter
made Apocrypha, and scrape out Dicit Dominus here, Gods Approbation of the
Rechabites for observing all, for doing all.

I have been so long about our selves, I had almost forgotten them. But I
return, and now enquire upon their last Commendation; Whom they obeyed; Ionadab
their Father. Their Father by nature; He from whose loins they descended. Their
Civil Father and Prince; He that had power over their estates; so it appears by
his ordering their temporal affairs, their new kind of Commonwealth. Their
Spiritual Father by his Decrees disposing all for the freer exercise of their
Piety and Religion. By commanding abstinence from wine, and the delights of
sense, to refine their understandings for heavenly thoughts; by forbidding them
houses, putting them in mind of better dwellings; by the often removal of their
Tents to keep them in continual thoughts they had here no abiding City; by a
voluntary resignment of all earthly accommodations to teach them the contempt
of worldly things; a total vacancy to their Religion and Order.

So you have them here, lastly, commended for three kinds of Obedience to three
kinds of Fathers; their Natural, Civil, Ecclesiastical Father, which is the
right directing their Obedience.

Yet I meet here Three other Commendations from the words, Your Father.

1. That they obeyed their right Father; Your Father. Sought them out no new
ones, neither in Church nor State. Kept, as you would say, to their own King,
to their own Bishop, their own Priest; wandered not out of their Diocese, gadded
not out of their own Parish, to find one of their own choosing.

2. That they acknowledged him for a Father, and so used him, with all honor
and respect; not a word against him for all the difficulties of his Injunctions.

3. That they obeyed him, under that name, because a Father, upon no other
ground, though he was but one man. This indeed is that which formally
constitutes Obedience, when we do any thing for no other reason, but because
commanded by our Father. To do it for other ends, for the justice, equity, or
goodness of it may bring it under the title of some other virtue; This only,
because commanded by our Father, makes it Obedience.

You have seen the last part of the Rechabites Obedience. Shall we see whether
you have any better luck in this than in the rest? Whether you can here say any
thing for your selves, that you have obeyed the command of your Father?

Yet we must see, first, what Fathers we acknowledge: take heed we are right,
lest God answer us as he answered those by the Prophet, Ye have set up Kings,
but not by me. Ye have made Princes, but I knew it not, Hos. viii. 4.

To begin then righ^. Kings, they are our Fathers, (...) Nursing Fathers. God
has set them over us, Prove. viii. 15. Per me Reges. Made them Supreme too;
it is St. Peter's, 1 Pet. ii. 13. To the King, as Supreme. Mark that: No earthly
Power above him; nor Pope, nor People. Be not we fallen into strange times, in
the interim, that God must be driven to recant, and we learn a new Supermacy?
The Kings Preeminence is expressly a part of your Oath of Allegiance. And for
the Oath of God, says Solomon, Eccles. viii. 2. so think of him, so obey him.

Next to him those that are sent by him, says St. Peter: of no bodies sending
else, of whose soevers choosing: not so properly Fathers, as hands and fingers
of that great Father, Pater Patriae. Those to govern under him, not above him,
so we pray in our Common Service.

Every Magistrate, that is, every Governor of a Country; every Mayor of a
City; every Master of a Company; every Father of a Family: Some of these have
their Statutes to be kept; all of them their commands to be obeyed.

These are Secular Powers, you have besides Spiritual; such as take order for
your Souls, as the other for your Bodies, and Estates, your Bishops and Clergy.

Bishops are Fathers by their Title, the Fathers of the Church; so the first
Christians, so all since, till this new unchristian Christianity started up.
Fathers in God, it is their style; however some of late, Sons of Belial, would
make them Fathers in the Devil, Antichrists: perhaps, that they might make them
like themselves. Strange Antichrists to whom Christ has left the Governing of
his Church these 1500 years!

1. If you value them by their Antiquity, they are Fathers for that; their
enemies being judges; who would fain distinguish between their Offices and
their Names, that they might have some pretense to disobey them; though more
commonly they fill their mouth with scoffs and calumnies, the language of the
Devil, than their books with the language of Antiquity truly understood.

2. Fathers, secondly, for their Authority. Time was when their Commands, their
Councils, and Canons were Laws to Christians; none of the least neither, when
their breach inferred the greatest punishment, spiritual malediction.

3. Fathers, lastly, for their tenderest Care over the tenderest part, your
Consciences. Such who would quickly set all in order, would you not listen too
engagedly to by-respects. Such whose commands you cannot complain of, when you
have examined them. A hat, a knee, a reverent posture of the body, are no such
tyrannies, as some please to fancy them. You would do more in a great man's
presence, more for a small temporal encouragement. A habit, a Hood, a Cap, a
Surplice, a Name, are wonderful things to trouble a devout Conscience. You have
more Ceremonies in your Companies and Corporations, and you observe them
strictly. You will find it, if you compare them.

If thus Fathers now, their Precepts then certainly are to be obeyed. Yet with
this Rule ever both for them and all other inferior Magistrates beside; So far
as they contradict not the Supreme Authority. It Is a rule in natural reason, In
two contrary commands the Superiors is to be obeyed. Now, to the King as
Supreme, we told you out of St. Peter, to Rulers as sent by him; that is, as
far as they are sent by him; no further; no further than their Commission from
him. Else Obedience can find no bounds; nor Consciences no rest, if the Supreme
be not enough to terminate and guide all obedience into Your Father.

There is an argument in that word may make you obey him above all the world
besides. The tenderness of a Father. Never could any challenge this name with
greater justice; never any so far condescended to his children: to part with
his own privileges, maintenance, conveniences, provision, attendance: He has
done as much for his Sons, as the Rechabites for their Father; left all, even
his houses for them, lest, by the insolence of some tumultuous spirits, he
should be forced to punish them. What natural Father like this Father?

But whether he has been used like a Father (indeed you used him lately in
your entertainment like a Conqueror, and are justly honored for it, but
whether by others like a Father) let the affronts at his own Palace gate, the
saucy Language in every rascal mouth, the rebellious Sermons, the seditious
Libels cast abroad, his own words, where he is fain to proclaim to the world He
is driven from you, let these speak; I say nothing.

Your Inferior Magistrates have almost every where found disrespect. And
whether your Bishops and Clergy have been used like Fathers, if the usage they
have had of late, the tumults about their houses, the riots upon their Persons,
the daily insolences the whole Clergy have met with in your streets, never
seen till now in a Civil Commonwealth, in any ordered City upon the most
contemptible men, if the injuries done their Persons in the Churches, at the
very Altars, once Sanctuaries against violence, now thought the fittest places
for it, in the very administration of the Sacraments, in their Pulpits, both
among you and abroad the Kingdom: in a word, so many slanderous, malicious
accusations without ground, entertained with pleasure, besides the blasphemies
upon the whole Order, if these cannot tell you, after-ages will determine, and
in the interim let the world judge.

Our Fathers imperfections are not to be divulged, though true; much less false
ones to be imposed upon them. This is a reverence but due to Fathers. 'Twas
cursedly done of Cham, and he paid for it, he and his with an everlasting
curse, to uncover his Fathers nakedness. 'Twas wretchedly done of Absalom to
tell the people there was no man deputed of the King to hear them, no justice
in the Land; and he thrived accordingly. And let all the enemies of my Lord the
King be as that young man is, says Cushi.

Yet say we, 'twere well it were no worse. How is all this made Religion too?
Oaths and Protestations (intended certainly to better purposes) abused to
maintain rebellion and profaneness. Construed so in Pulpits, and professed by
their Scholars in the face of God and man; pray God it go no higher: and dare
you after all this look for a blessing?

Alas! you must lay by those thoughts till you have learned the Rechabites
Lesson. They used their Ionadab like a Father; so reverenced his memory, so
preserved his name, so obeyed him in all his several authorities, so
punctually, so constantly, so courageously, so sweetly, so universally, so
sincerely, so really, so carefully, with that contentedness without grumbling,
that humility without disputing, that patience, that readiness, that full
content of every Age, Sex, and Condition, no weakness, tenderness, or
privileges pretended against it, that God himself presently upon it promises
a full reward. Therefore thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, etc.

I am now at the Reward; and it is a full one; full of (1.) honor, full of (2.)
proportions, full of (3.) blessings.

Full of (1.) honor at the first; Therefore, thus -- as if their Obedience
deserved it, or God at least would seem so far to honor it. He had promised
length of life, in the Commandment, for it: and God is not unjust. It deserves
therefore by the Covenant of his Promise, yet by the interpretation of his
mercy.

And (2.) full of proportions it is. Proportionable to the three Acts and
Objects of Obedience. You have obeyed your Father; therefore you shall want no
Sons; there is one. You have kept his commandments; therefore shall your Sons
stand in them, and by standing in them, stand before God; there is a second. You
have kept all, and done according to all, that has been commanded you, failed
in nothing; therefore shall you have a reward, all of you; not a man of you
fail for ever. This last, indeed, is beyond proportion; eternity for time; all
blessings for a few Precepts; the wine of Angels, for abstinence from the blood
of the Vine; for want of houses upon earth, eternal dwellings in the heavens.

You see the Reward is full of blessings. I shall observe their triple
proportion in running over them.

1. Such then, first, is the Reward of their Obedience, that it lengthens days.
The world thinks it shortens them, if by it you take away any thing from your
flesh, bate any thing of your diet, either in quantity or quality, when the
King or Church commands to do so. 'Twas not so here; and without doubt it is
not. Obedience has the promise of length of days, in the Commandment. 'Twas
the reason that Ionadab gave his Sons to obey him, ver. 7. That you may live
many days. It was a blessing of long days upon themselves. That Is the First.

But it ends not so. Upon their children too; reaches to them, is a blessing of
succession. This is to live beyond our selves, to sprout afresh out of the
dust, to have posterity.

And a Posterity that shall not fail, wither, or crumble away, that is more.

If it be a male succession, it is more still. Non deficiet vir; not a man fail
you. Female generations lose the name; and so the succession fails even while
it lasts.

It does almost so, when it passes into a collateral line. This fails not that
way neither. Not vir de stirpe; it continues in a direct line from the root.

Tremellius's Translation sets it higher. Non exscindetur vir. Of all this
Progeny there shall not so much as a man be cut off. Die they must by the
necessity of nature: but not a man cut off by violence: that, however it fared
with the captive Jews in Babylon, not any of these should fail there, but
return to their Tents in peace; that a fair and even succession it should be,
that after many days pass on calmly and quietly to their Fathers tombs; in
peace gathered to their Fathers.

It Is well this; such a blessing upon Posterity. But when not only succeeding
generations participate the blessing, but Ionadab and his Father Rechab too,
passed Ancestors receive a new accession of glory by it, this is a blessing not
upon the Sons only, but upon deceased Fathers too. And all this you may look
for upon the like obedience. A long life, a lasting, a continued, a male, a
lineal, an unblemished Posterity; all redounding back again to your own glory.
This the first proportion; that which is given for your Obedience to your
Father.

2. The second is greater, stans in conspectu; a Posterity high enough to be
seen, placed in the eye of the world: men famous and renowned in their
Generations. This is but to stand on high before the Kings and Princes of the
earth. In conspectu meo is higher: that stands before God; a Posterity as
virtuous as honorable.

Stand before him; and in place near him: near his Sanctuary, the place of his
presence; placed there, so it seems, 1 Chronicles. ii. 5.

Placed on high, and near him; as near as the title of Gods can make them: made
Judges of the earth; so stare in conspectu is sometimes interpreted. This is a
second proportion answering to their obedience to commands: They shall be
Commanders. Under command they kept, now they are above it; above the people,
equal with the Princes of the earth. A famous, a pious, an honorable
Posterity, the second reward of Obedience.

3. All this is much, exceeding much. Yet honor and virtue are created things;
and therefore mutable, may fail at last: Theirs shall not. Stans in conspectu.
In honor they shall be, and in honor they shall stand. In virtue they shall
be, and in virtue they shall stand; standing is a posture of continuance.

Stand; and stand in his sight, dear as the apple of his eye. That must not be
touched; no more must they: and then nothing can change them to be sure.

Cunctis diebus puts all out of question. They shall stand so all their days,
says the Text. What speak I of days? Stand so for ever; continue ever;
Christians succeed into their order and obedience; they survive into
Christians; live in them for ever.

When succession shall have done, successive motions have their periods, and
all days shall have an end, yet then Ionadab shall not want a man to stand then
before him, and see his face for ever. This is indeed the last Reward, a firm,
a perpetual, an eternal succession.

And now we are come up to the tops of the Mountains, the everlasting hills.
Eternity is a Circle; and there we wind about in everlasting rounds. There we
turn about to the beginning of the verse, the Lord speaking and confirming all;
that so the certainty may embrace with the eternity. That you may see I tell
you no more than God himself will make good, Thus says the Lords of Hosts, the
God of Israel.

He has promised it, and shall he not bring it to pass? He has said it, and
shall it not be done? Said it by his Prophet: and Prophecy, though it sometime
wants light, yet never certainty. He engages his honor, Thus says the Lord:
Kings will not fail upon the word of their honor.

He engages his power, Thus says the Lord of Hosts; he that does what he will
in heaven and earth.

He engages his goodness, his tried, experienced goodness. Thus says the God
of Israel; their God, who can witness he never broke his promise, nor failed
his word.

But does God take care only for the Rechabites? Or says he it for your sake
too? For yours also, doubtless; it is the Reward of Obedience, where ere it is
found, as it is in the Text. Will you give me leave to enquire?

Has the King at any time commanded some of your superfluities, and has he
obtained them? have you been content to part with any of your delights, in
diet, apparel, in your houses, to endure some abridgments to obey him, to
supply him?

Have the Inferior Magistrates demanded the execution of the Laws, and have
you assisted them?

Has the Church required your presence, your order and assistance (for I speak
not now of your private Fathers) and can you say with these Rechabites, we have
obeyed and kept all their Precepts, and done according to all that has been
commanded us? Then, and not till then, dare I warrant you, You and your seed
shall stand before him for ever.

For it is not a Reward only to private and personal obedience, but the
obedience of Cities, of Nations, too. Obedient Cities and Kingdoms as well as
Families shall not want men to stand before him for ever; but disobedient and
rebellious shall.

For Kingdoms, Cities, and Countries have their fates; and, when they have rent
this bond of union, that kept them to their head, they must expect their
Funerals. You then to look to it. Remember that of the Prophet, How is the
faithful City become a harlot? Isa. i. 21. Et quam facta est desolata? How is
she become desolate? Remember that; What becomes of her for it?

I have done with the Rechabites obedience, and Gods dicit to it. I come nearer
home! and I cannot tell you but I must change my phrase into dicit homo; Men
talk abroad there is no such matter here.

If it be otherwise, you have the better on it. And I shall say no more than
what Iotham, Judge. ix. 19, 20. to the men of Shechem, when they had made
Abimelech King. If you have then dealt truly and sincerly with Jerubbaal, and
with his house this day; then rejoice you in Abimelech, and let him rejoice in
you: But if not, let fire come out from Abimelech, and devour the men of
Shechem, and the house of Millo; and let fire come out from the men of Shechem,
and the house of Millo, and devour Abimelech. I will not say so much with an
imprecation; but thus, If you have now dealt truly and sincerely with King and
Church, in setting up your own profits, privileges, and humors to reign over
you, by preferring them before their Precepts, then rejoice you in them, and
may they prosper with you. But, if not, fire will come out of them, those very
Privileges and profits, and devour you; and fire will come out from you to
devour and ruin them, as sure as you thought once to be happy by them.

It Is true, and I think I may justly quit some of you before God and man; say
for you, You have obeyed: but as it is enough for the whole man to be thought
guilty, when only one part sins, so it is enough for a punishment upon a
Kingdom, that there be among us those, though hands and feet, that disobey.

Though make no doubt of it you who have obeyed, but however the world look on
you (as certainly it looks but scurvily upon such) God from above will one day
see it and reward it, give you the blessing of the Text. His word is past; go
on and believe there shall not want a man of your seed to stand before him for
ever.

You are not all then of the same practices. I shall but mind you therefore of
my Text in a double sense; as it implies the punishment of Disobedience; as it
expresses the reward of obedience; and I have done.

The Rechabites that obeyed shall want no length of days, no posterity, nor
they no heavenly grace or honor: You will thence infer, They that do not shall
want all.

And have they not so in all generations? What got Iannes and Iambres by
withstanding Moses, but non precedent ultra; they should proceed no further,
neither in their Projects, nor in their Posterity? 1 Timothy iii. 8. What got
Korah and his company by rising up against Moses and Aaron, but a death that
amazes us to read of? They, and their wives, and their children went down quick
into hell. The grave was not low enough, nor could they die soon enough to
receive their punishment. What got Absalom by his rebellion, but an ignominious
cruel death in the heat and fervor of his sin, and no Posterity to survive him?
What got the Ten Tribes by their discession in matter of Taxes, but the loss of
their Religion and their God; a perpetual successive Idolatry, and a thousand
calamities? No in conspectu meo left them, that, Gods presence taken from them
for ever. Lastly, What got Judas that rose in the days of the Tribute (all upon
fair pretenses, you see, with the people) but Ipse periit, and omnes dispersi;
he perished, the rest made rogues and runnagates upon the face of the earth?

And can we after all this look for better success either in Church or State,
when we rise up against them both? Any thing but an utter desolation? Lay it
home: Non deficiet in the Text will prove deficiet here; nor Posterity, nor
Honor, nor Government, nor Religion continue with you.

The very setting light by our Superiors has brought a doom somewhat like it.
Michol scoffing at King David had no child for ever, lost vir de stirpe. The
little Children, that did but taunt the Prophet as he passed by, were at
deficiet straight in their childhood, could go no farther. The very savage
Bears out of the wilderness rebuked the incivility of the children. If children
found so sharp a punishment, what may men expect? In a word, God, the God of
mercies, who holds out beyond our hopes or thoughts, could hold out no longer,
when they came once to despise his Ministers, 2 Chronicles. xxxvi. 16.

And let me tell you too: You shall find it home in your own bosoms, be paid in
kind, in your children and servants. For with what face can you expect
obedience from your children, who disobey by your example? How can you but
expect rebellion from them, who see you in all your actions resolute to
disobey? Where should they learn it? From your example? Alas! they cannot: You
obey nor spiritual nor temporal Fathers. From your words? They will not;
because your actions contradict them. From Gods commandments? Why do not you?
Thus while you study by disobedient practices to stand, you and yours fall down
for ever.

But I dwell too long upon so harsh a Theme. I shall lead you to Obedience by
sweeter thoughts, by Example, by Reward.

By Example: shall these Rechabites, their wives and children give aside at no
inconvenience, and must we Christians startle at every thing, that is not just
as we would have it? Shall they hear, and hearken, and submit, and rest upon
their Fathers will, and must we always prefer our own, scarce read or mind a
command which we first prescribe not? Shall they fail in nothing, not a
circumstance, do according unto all? And are not we ashamed to question all so
long till we do nothing? I appeal to your selves. Would you be so used in your
own houses? Have your commands disputed, questioned, denied, done by parts and
pieces, by your children and servants? With what conscience then can you deal
so with your Superiors? Do as you would be done by, is the Law of Nature. Out
of this only Principle it is probable the Rechabites at first obeyed, in one
man, the Carnal, Spiritual, Temporal Authority: and does our Christianity serve
us to no better use than to contemn them?

If Example will not, will Reward prevail? It Is a Reward to be approved by God.
But he rewards us not with words. What would you have?

Your City, your Companies, your own Families cannot subsist without obedience;
and can you desire it of others, when you will not pay it your selves? This the
way to keep your City from destruction. You labor for succession; this is Gods
way to obtain it. You travel for Lands and riches; this is his means to gain
and keep them. You desire honors; thus you may have for you and your
Posterities. You strive for Privileges; they are surest obtained and held by
Obedience. You endeavor all for perpetuities; here you may find all for ever.
You study to make all as sure as you can; Gods Promise is the best assurance:
and here it is: Do what he here commands, and you shall not fear what man can
do unto you: The Lord of Hosts is on your side.

Else I cannot but tell you, All may fail you. The wine and delicates you eat
and drink; the houses and stately Palaces you Lord it in; the Lands and
Possessions, the Riches, State and Pomp you have to this day triumphed in; your
Wives and Children; all, you think so everlastingly to enjoy by rising up so
much to defend them, may in a moment vanish, and your high flown thoughts die
before you. You have no assurance from heaven so to settle your estates and
fortunes; no Dicit Dominus for that. This is only Gods way for thriving, by
Obedience.

Nay, and the Religion, you so much seem to contend for, against Innovations,
by the greatest Innovations in Church and State, tumults, riots, and prophanest
usages, that also will for ever fail you. You want men to stand before God for
ever; and instead of them find men to stand before you; Micah's Levites; do
what seems good in your sight not in Gods; so stand before you, as to hinder
you from standing before God; stand in your sight, and blind you from seeing
the right way to heaven. Thus you will want your old honors profits,
liberties, Religion, all.

But, if you will return, and hear, and hearken, and submit to your ancient
Fathers, your King and Church, your Magistrates, and Clergy, observe, and keep,
and do your ancient Laws and Customs, I dare warrant you, what God promises to
the Rechabites, he shall perform to you.

Your City shall flourish, your places be renowned, your Liberties increase,
your persons rise up in honor, your estates prosper, your affairs succeed,
your children be famous, your Posterity happy, your Religion display the
glories of her first primitive purity, and all go on successfully for ever.

And when this Ever shall have swallowed up the days of time, you shall stand
still, immovable, immortal, glorious before him, in whose sight is the fullness
of joy, where you shall one day meet your Children, and stand all together:
Kings and Subjects, Priests and People, Fathers and Children, before your
heavenly Father; see him face to face in the beatifical vision for ever and
ever.

To which He bring us through his eternal Son, who was obedient unto death to
teach us obedience of life unto life, Jesus Christ, to which Two Persons, with
the Holy Ghost, be all Praise, and Glory, Obedience, and Worship for evermore.
Amen.

FINIS.
A Table of the Texts of Scripture handled in the foregoing SERMONS.
A Sermon on the First Sunday in Advent, Folio 1 St. MAT. xxi. 9.
And the multitudes that went before, and that followed, cried, saying Hosannah
to the Son of David; Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord, Hosanna
in the highest.
A Sermon on the Second Sunday in Advent, 13 St. MARK i. 3.
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, make his paths straight.
A Sermon on the Third Sunday in Advent, 23 St. LUKE xxi. 27, 28.
And then shall they see the Son of man coming in a Cloud, with Power and great
glory, And when these things begin to come to pass, then look up and lift up
your heads, for your redemption draws nigh.
A Sermon on the Fourth Sunday in Advent, 33 PHIL. iv. 5.
Let your moderation be known unto all men. The Lord is at hand.
The First Sermon on Christmas Day, 45 ISA. xi. 10.
And in that day there shall be a root of Iesse, which shall stand for an
Ensign of the People, to it shall the Gentiles seek, and his rest shall be
glorious.
The Second Sermon on Christmas Day, 53 St. LUKE xi. 7.
And she brought forth her Firstborn Son, and wrapped him in Swadling-clothes,
and laid him in a Manger; because there was no room for them in the Inn.
The Third Sermon on Christmas Day, 63 St. JOHN i. 16.
And of his fullness have all we received, and grace for grace.
The Fourth Sermon on Christmas Day. 73 1 TIMOTHY i. 15.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save Sinners, of whom I am chief.
The Fifth Sermon on Christmas Day, 85 PSALM. xlv. 3.
Thou art fairer then the Children of men, full of grace are thy lips: because
God has blessed thee for ever.
The Sixth Sermon on Christmas Day. Folio 97 St. LUKE i. 68, 69.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his
people. And has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his
servant David.
The Seventh Sermon on Christmas Day, 109 2 COR. viii. 9.
For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet
for your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich.
The Eighth Sermon on Christmas Day. 119 PSALM. viii. 4, 5.
What is man that thou art mindful of him? And the Son of man that thou
visitest him? Thou made him lower than the Angels to crown him with glory and
worship.
The Ninth Sermon on Christmas Day, 129 St. LUKE ii. 30, 31, 32.
For mine eyes have seen thy salvation. Which thou have prepared before the
face of all people. A light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy
people Israel.
A Sermon on St. Stephens Day, 143 ACTS vii. 55, 56.
But he being full of the Holy Ghost, looked up steadfastly into Heaven, and saw
the Glory of God, and Jesus standing on the right hand of God. And said, Behold
I see the Heavens opened, and the Son of man standing on the right hand of God.
A Sermon on Innocents Day, 151 St. MAT. ii. 16.
Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked of the Wise men, was exceeding
wroth, and sent forth and slew all the Children that were in Bethlehem, and in
all the Coasts thereof, from two years old and under, according to the time
which he had diligently enquired of the Wise men.
The First Sermon on the Circumcision, 163 2 COR. v. 17.
Old things are past away, behold all things are become new.
The Second Sermon on the Circumcision, 172 St. LUKE ii. 21.
-- His Name was called Jesus. --
The First Sermon on the Epiphany, 182 St. MAT. ii. 11.
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary his
Mother, and fell down and worshipped him; and when they had opened their
Treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh.
The Second Sermon on the Epiphany, 192 St. MAT. ii. 10.
When they saw the Star, they rejoiced with exceeding great joy.
The Third Sermon on the Epiphany, Folio 202 St. MAT. ii. 11.
And when they were come into the house, they saw the young Child with Mary his
Mother, and fell down and worshipped him; and when they had opened their
Treasures, they presented unto him gifts, Gold, and Frankincense, and Myrrh.
A Sermon upon St. Paul's Day: Preached at St. Paul's, 213 NEHEM. xiii. 14.
Remember me, O my God, concerning this, and wipe not out my good deeds that I
have done for the house of my God, and for the Offices thereof.
The First Sermon on the Day of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, 226 St.
LUKE ii. 27, 28.
-- And when the Parents brought in the Child Jesus, to do for him after the
custom of the Law. Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God.
The Second Sermon on the Day of the Purification of the Blessed Virgin, 239
St. LUKE ii. 28.
Then took he him up in his arms, and blessed God.
A Sermon on the First Sunday in Lent, 250 2 COR. vi. 2.
-- Behold, now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of Salvation.
A Sermon on the Second Sunday in Lent, 263 1 COR. ix. 27.
But I keep under my body, and bring it into subjection: lest that by any means
when I have preached to others, I my self should be a castaway.
A Sermon on the Third Sunday in Lent, 276 ROMANS viii. 21.
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? For the end
of those things is death.
A Sermon on the Fourth Sunday in Lent, 286 1 COR. ix. 24.
-- So run that you may obtain.
A Sermon on the Fifth Sunday in Lent, 296 1 COR. ix. 25.
And every man that striveth for the mastery is temperate in all things. Now
they do it to obtain a corruptible Crown, but we an incorruptible.
A Sermon on the Sixth Sunday in Lent, 305 DEUTERONOMY. xxxii. 29.
O that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter end!
A Sermon on the Annunciation of the blessed Virgin Mary, 317 St. LUKE i. 28.
And the Angel came in unto her, and said, Hail thou that art highly favored,
The Lord is with thee, Blessed art th^^ among women.
A Sermon on Palm Sunday. Folio 329 S. MAT. xxi. 8.
And a very great multitude spread their Garments in the way, others cut down
branches from the Trees, and strewed them in the way.
A Sermon upon Good Friday. 339 1 COR. ii. 2.
For I determined not to know any thing among you save Jesus Christ and him
crucified.
The First Sermon upon Easter Day. 349 St. LUKE xxiv. 4, 5, 6.
And it came to pass as they were much perplexed thereabout, behold two men
stood by them in shining Garments. And as they were afraid, and bowed down
their faces to the earth, they said unto them, Why seek ye the living among the
dead? He is not here, but is risen.
The Second Sermon upon Easter Day, 359 St. MAT. xxvii. 52, 53.
And the Graves were opened, and many bodies of Saints which slept arose. And
came out of the Graves after his Resurrection, and went into the holy City, and
appeared unto many.
The Third Sermon upon Easter Day, 369 PSALM. cxviii. 24.
This is the Day which the Lord has made: We will rejoice and be glad in it.
The Fourth Sermon upon Easter Day, 379 St. MAT. xxviii. 5, 6.
And the Angel answered and said unto the women, Fear not ye, for I know that
ye seek Jesus which was crucified. He is not here, for he is risen as he said,
Come see the place where the Lord lay.
The Fifth Sermon upon Easter Day, 392 1 COR. xv. 19.
If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable.
A Sermon upon Ascension Day. 408 PSALM. xxiv. 3, 4.
Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord, or who shall stand up in his holy
place? Even he that has clean hands, and a pure heart, and has not lift up
his soul unto vanity, nor sworn deceitfully to his neighbor.
The First Sermon upon Whitsunday, 416 St JOHN iii. 8.
The wind blows where it lists, and thou hear the sound thereof, but
can not tell whence it comes, nor whither it goes. So is every one that is
born of the Spirit.
The Second Sermon upon Whitsunday, 427 St. JOHN xvi. 13.
Howbeit when He, the Spirit of Truth is come, he will guide you into all truth.
The Third Sermon upon Whitsunday, Folio 443 St. JOHN xvi. 13.
Howbeit when He the Spirit of Truth is come] He will guide you into all truth.
The Fourth Sermon upon Whitsunday, 453 ACTS ii. 1, 2, 3, 4.
And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in
one place. And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared
unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. And
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues
as the Spirit gave them utterance.
The Fifth Sermon upon Whitsunday, 463 ACTS ii. 1, 2, 3, 4.
And when the day of Pentecost was fully come, they were all with one accord in
one place. And suddenly there came a sound from Heaven as of a rushing mighty
wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared
unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them, And
they were all filled with the Holy Ghost, and began to speak with other tongues
as the Spirit gave them utterance.
A Sermon upon Trinity Sunday, 473 REV. iv. 8.
-- And they rest not day and night, saying, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord, God,
Almighty, which was, and is, and is to come.
The First Sermon upon the Calling of St. Peter, 481 St. LUKE v. 8.
-- Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord.
The Second Sermon upon the Calling of St. Peter. 491 St. LUKE v. 5.
-- Master, we have toyled all the night, and have taken nothing: nevertheless,
at thy word I will let down the net.
A Sermon upon the Transfiguration, 504 St. LUKE ix. 33.
And it came to pass, as they departed from him, Peter said unto Jesus, Master,
it is good for us to be here: and let us make three Tabernacles, one for thee,
and one for Moses, and one for Elias; not knowing what he said.
The First Sermon upon All Saints, 516 PSALM. cxlix. 9.
-- Such honor have all his Saints.
The Second Sermon upon All Saints, Folio 526 HEB. xii. 1.
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a cloud of
witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the sin which does so easily beset
us, and let us run with patience the race which is set before us.
A Sermon upon St. Andrews Day, 542 St. MAT. iv. 20.
And they straightway left their Nets and followed him.
A Sermon Preached at St. Paul's, 554 COL. iii. 15.
And let the peace of God rule in your hearts, to the which also ye are called
in one body, and be ye thankful.
A Sermon Preached at St. Paul's Cross. Sir Richard Gurney being then Lord
Mayor, 566 JER. xxxv. 18, 19.
Thus says the Lord of Hosts, the God of Israel, Because you have obeyed the
commandment of Ionadab your Father, and kept all his Precepts, and done
according unto all that he has commanded you. Therefore thus says the Lord of
Hosts, the God of Israel, Ionadab the Son of Rechab shall not want a man to
stand before me for ever.

FINIS.

