AN ACCOUNT OF MUSCOVY, As it was in the Year 1689.

In which the TROUBLES that happened in that Empire from the Present Czar
PETER'S Election to the Throne, to his being firmly settled in it, are
particularly related.

With a Character of Him, and his People.

By Monsieur DE LA NEUVILLE, Then Residing at Moscow.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Castle, next Scotland-Yard-Gate, by Whitehall. 1699.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
THE Marquess of Bethune being informed in July, 1689. that the Swedish and
Brandenbourg Envoys were gone to Moscow; he judged it necessary for Your
Majesty's Service to send some Person thither to discover the purport of the
Negotiation of those Envoys; he was pleased to Honor me with this Trust, at
which I was startled, having been there formerly, and been apprehensive more
than once of being ill used by those Barbarians; but considering 'twas for Your
Majesty's Service, I readily obeyed, only reminding the Marquess that no Person
was suffered to enter that Kingdom, unless as an Envoy, or a Merchant. He
undertook to engage the King of Poland in the business; but that Prince told
him 'twas hardly possible but I should be known at Moscow, and either be
discovered by the Czar's Minister, or others, that had seen me at his Court,
and then I should be treated as a Spy, and sent to end my days in Ziberia; but
since His Majesty's Service required my going thither, he would send me in a
Post that should secure me, and give me a means of succeeding in my Commission.
Accordingly he gave me Letters of Recommendation to the Czars, and Passports,
and I set forward with an Equipage suitable to my Character. For by the last
Treaty betwixt the Poles, and the Muscovites, it is agreed not to defray the
Envoys Charges, nor furnish them with Carriages. In fourteen Days I reached the
Frontiers, though the distance from Warsaw to Casime, the last Town in Poland,
is One hundred and sixty German Leagues. I gave notice of my Arrival, and my
Commission, to the Palatin of the Duchy of Smolensko, whither I went next day,
and was received as I have related in the Account of my Journey; and having
tarried ten Days till the Courier came back, whom the Palatin sent to the Court
for Orders concerning me; I went thence to Moscow, and was lodged in a House
appointed for me by the Prime Minister, One hundred and fifty Paces distant
from the City, whither the Pristave Spatarus, a Walachian, came to Complement
me in his Name, and keep me Company. A Week after, he conducted me to the
Pretache or Council; after which I had leave to visit the Ministers of Poland,
Sweden, Denmark, and Brandenbourg, and some German Officers; and was so happy
as to discover, that all the business which the Envoys of Sweden and
Brandenbourgh came about, was to render the King of Poland's Conduct suspected
to the Muscovites, who they alleged was in Your Majesty's Interest, and would
make a separate Peace with the Turk, to the prejudice of the League; after
which he would make a Diversion into the Ducal Prussia in Your Favor. And the
Dutch Envoy to enforce what they said, assured the Muscovites that I was a
Frenchman, and was come to Moscow to pry into their Secrets. These Informations
made them resolve to confine me within my House for eight Days together; but
the Polish Envoy made such loud Complaints of it, as an Injury done to his
Master in my Person; that the Council discharged me, and said they had no other
design in taking away my Liberty, than to save me from the Insults of the
People, who were incensed against me. Upon which I took occasion to declare,
That I knew France very well, and that that King with all his Millions would
not give a hundred Crowns to discover the Designs of the Czar; and that being
the King of Poland's Minister, I did not fear the People. In short, the
Ministers of Sweeden being sent back without any success, I gave notice of it
to the Marquess of Bethune, desiring him to recall me, well foreseeing the
Troubles that were coming on. In the beginning of the Commotions, I was forced,
for my Security, to keep within Doors, not daring to stir abroad; where all the
Diversion I had, was the Conversation of my Pristave, who had been sent to
China, and was come back two Months. The Information I got from him, being
pretty curious, and likely to be of use of Your Majesty, showing the easiness
of establishing a Commerce with that Country by Land, I have thought fit to
relate the Particulars of what I learnt. Sometime after my return from Poland,
the Marquess de Bethune understanding that the Elector of Saxony, and the Duke
of Hanover, were to meet together at Carelstad in Bohemia, he desired the King
of Poland to send me to Complement the Duke of Hanover upon the Death of his
Son, which he had just given him advice of, in hopes I might find out the
Design of the Interview between these two Princes. I went thither, and gave an
Account to the Marquess of Bethune of all that I discovered, which was no more
than that some Propositions had past on both sides about the Duchy of
Lavembourg, but they could not come to an Accommodation.

To conclude, Sir, Your Majesty having acquainted the King of Poland with the
Death of Madam the Dauphine, he named Prince Rzarstoeki, now at the Academy at
Paris, to pay his Complement of Condolance to* Your Majesty. But the Marquess
of Bethune desiring me to accept of that Office, in hopes that under that
Character I might with more safety carry the Dispatches which he gave me for
Your Majesty, and for Your Minister at Hamburg, as I did, and that passing
through some Courts where I was very well known, and had been always well
received, I might inform my self what Condition their Affairs were in; I found
them all out of Order, and except the Duke of Hanover and his House, all in
great need of a Peace with Your Majesty. I have been honored with the
Character of Your Majesty's Envoy; and beseech You, Sir, to accept favorably
all that my Zeal for Your Service has made me undertake; and the Account I
render, which contains such Particulars as Your Majesty may be Curious to know,
when You are at leisure from Your Application to decide the Fate of Europe,
which Your Victories, and the Justice of Heaven have put into Your Hands.

I am, Your Majesty's Most Humble and Faithful Subject and Servant, De la
Neuville.

AN ACCOUNT OF MUSCOVY, As it was in the Year 1689.
THE King of Poland having honored me with the Character of his Envoy
Extraordinary to Muscovy the first of July 1689. I departed from Warsaw on the
19 th. of the same Month, and took my way by Smolensko, because the way of
Kiovia, which is the shortest, was at that time infested by the Tartars. As
soon as the Palatine or Governor of the Province (who is a more polite Man
than the Muscovites generally are) heard that I had left Cazine, and was coming
to Smolensko, he sent a Pristave, or Gentleman, with an Interpreter to meet me,
which they did within half a League of the City, and conducted me into the
Suburbs on the other side of the Nieper, carrying me to a House till they knew
where the Palatine would appoint me a fit Lodging: Immediately one of them went
to him with the news of my arrival; whereupon he sent me his Compliments, and
some refreshments, viz. a small Cask of Brandy, another of Sack, and a third of
Honey, together with some Fowls, two Sheep, and one Calf, a Cart-load of Fish,
and another of Oats. He also offered me a House, either within the Town or the
Suburbs; I chose to be in the latter, because there is no Gate to it, but the
City-Gate is shut up betimes. Next day I made him a Visit at his Castle, where
he expected me with the Metropolitan, and some Persons of Quality.

I shall say nothing of this City, the Buildings being all of Wood here, as
well as all the Country over; surrounded with a slight Stone-wall to secure
them from the Inroads of the Poles. To do the greater honor to me, or rather
to himself, 6000 of the Militia were drawn out, being Peasants of those parts,
which are formed into Regiments upon such occasions, and have pretty handsome
Coats given them; they are paid by the Czars four Crowns a year, and three
Bushels of Salt. All the Boys at six years old are Listed, and receive Pay, so
that these Forces are made up of Old Men and Children, for no body is excused
from serving till they die. I past through this noble Body of Soldiers, who
stood ranked in two Lines from my House to the Governor's, being in my Coach
followed by the Poststarosta, or the King's Lieutenant of Mohilova, and twelve
Officers belonging to that Garrison, who were ordered by the King of Poland to
accompany me hither; as soon as the Palatine saw me alight before the Castle,
he came and received me at the top of the Steps, from whence he led me to his
Apartment; where we did not sit down, but after some Compliments on both sides,
which were interpreted by Major General Menesius, a Scotchman, who speaks all
the European Languages, the Palatine ordered some large Cups of Brandy to be
brought in, which were drank off to the King of Poland's and Czars Health.
After which I took my leave of him, and he waited on me back again half way
down the Steps, and stood to see me take Coach. I returned in the same order I
came, and found General Menesius attending my coming, being ordered by the
Palatine to keep me Company, while I continued here. I was very agreeably
surpised to find a Man of his merit in so Barbarous a Country; for besides his
skill in Languages, which he speaks perfectly well, he is very knowing in the
Affairs of the World, and has something in his Story worth relating.

After having seen most parts of Europe, he went into Poland, designing to
return from thence to Scotland; but having an Intriegue with a Lithuanian
Colonel's Lady, the Husband grew jealous of his frequent Visits, and laid some
Servants in wait to kill him; but his Mistress giving him timely notice of it,
he found a way to draw the Colonel to a Duel, and killed him; upon which he was
forced to fly, but for want of a Guide fell in with a party of Muscovites, who
at that time were at War with the Poles; at first they treated him as a
Prisoner of War; but upon telling them the cause of his flight, they gave him
his choice, either to serve the Czar, or else to go into Ziberia: He took up
with the latter, out of an inclination to see those parts. But the Father of
the present Czars desiring to see him, and finding him a comely Man, took him
into Court, and gave him sixty Peasants, (each Peasant brings in to his Master
about Eight Crowns a year.) Besides, he made up a Match between him and the
Widow of one Marcellus, who was the first that made Iron in Muscovy, which now
brings in to the Czars a Revenue of 100000 Crowns per Annum.

The same Prince sent him to Rome in the year 1672, to offer Pope Clement a
Reunion of the Russian to the Romish Church upon certain conditions; but
returning without success, he was made Major General, and sometime after, the
Czar Alexis Samuel Errick, a little before his death, declared him Governor to
his Son the young Prince Peter, with whom he continued all along till the
beginning of the Reign of the Czar John, when the Princess Sophia and Prince
Galischin, not being able to make him abandon the Interest of Prince Peter,
obliged him to retire to Smolensko, and make the last Campaign, in hopes to be
rid of him. But this Disgrace was the occasion of his present fortune; for
having an opportunity to get acquainted with Prince Peter's Uncle on the
Mother's side, a Colonel in that Garrison, he took him with him to Moscow, as
soon as his Nephew became Master of that City, where he has often treated me
very friendly at his House, with the Naraskins Father and Son: The Prime
Minister understanding that I was at Smolensko, the Capital of the Duchy of
that name, which the King of Poland yielded to the Czars by the Treaty in 1686,
sent order to the Palatine that I should be conducted in the usual manner to
Lastolistz, which signifies the Court, and is improperly called by us Moscow,
which is the name of a River that runs through it. I began my Journey upon the
20 th. of August, attended by a Pristave, a Captain, and six Soldiers: The
first proof of their courage that these Gentlemen gave me, was in our passage
through a Wood of twenty Leagues long, having never a House in it. So we made
our Lodging as commodious as we could in our Wagons, our Horses Grazing by us.
In the Night we had a violent storm, and the Horses broke out of the Tabor, (or
Enclosure made by our Wagons) and ran into the Woods for shelter; I bid the
Officer send some of his Men for them, and others to cut down Wood for Firing;
but the Officer and Soldiers answered unanimously, that they would not stir out
of the Tabor for a hundred Ducats a Man, because that seven years before some
of their Comrades that were sent on such an Errand, were murdered in this very
place; so that we staid till Morning, and then all the Horses at one Whistle
came back to the Tabor.

From thence I continued my Journey till I arrived in the Suburbs of
Lastolistz, which is divided from the City by the River Moscow, which is
fordable in that part; the Officer that came with me carried me to a House, and
desired me to tarry till he returned from the Prime Minister, whom he went to
acquaint with my Arrival. In two hours he came back with Orders to bring me
over the River, and conduct me to a House that was appointed for me, where the
Pristave Spatarus quickly came to Compliment me in the name of the Prime
Minister, who commanded him to continue with me; and likewise according to
custom an Officer and six Soldiers were appointed for my Guard, who were
strictly charged to admit no person into my House for eight days; at length
Prince Galischin sent for me to the Prerarche, which is a spacious Building in
form of a square; there are several Halls in it, in each of which particular
Councils are held, which before Galischin came into the Ministry, used to meet
in Barns; I found him seated at the upper end of a great Table with many Boyars
on each side; he caused a Chair to be set for me, and then an Interpreter asked
me in Latin for my Letters: I presented him those which the Grand Chancellor of
Lithuania directed to him, wherein he informed him, that the King had sent me
into Muscovy about his Majesty's Business, and had given me a Letter to the
Czars; he answered that he would acquaint the Czar John, who was then at Moscow
with it, and that he hoped I should have Audience very speedily; after which he
inquired, as the custom is, whether the Chancellor was in good health?
forbearing out of respect to ask how the King did. Then I rise up to retire; he
rose up too, and wished me the happiness of seeing the Czar in a short time.
Some days after, I sent in Civility to desire Audience of him at his House,
where I was received as handsomely as if I had been at the Court of some Prince
of Italy. During the conversation in Latin, upon the Affairs of Europe, and my
thoughts of the War betwixt France and the Confederates, and especially
concerning the Revolution in England, He presented me with all sorts of Strong
waters and Wine; advising me at the same time with a great deal of Complaisance
not to taste of them. He promised to get me my Audience in a few days, which he
certainly would have done, had he not fallen into disgrace, which produced such
a great change of Affairs, that every moment there was an outcry of Fire and
Murder; and if the Czar Peter had not had the courage to seize the leading men
of the Princesse's Party, his Life and Crown had been lost.

Such was the face of Affairs for six Weeks together, that one could not tell
who to address one's self to; which made me resolve to write a Letter to the
Young Galischin, the Czar Peter's Favorite, signifying my surprise, that no
Answer was given me in relation to my Audience, and the Letters which I had to
deliver; he excused the matter to me on account of the late Troubles, and
assured me, that the Czar would soon come to Lastolitz, as indeed he did the
first day of November. As soon as I heard of his arrival, I went to see his
Favorite, and demanded Audience; he did not carry himself like his Kinsman,
but treated me with Brandy, and all the Conversation passed in drinking; all
that I could gather from this Drunkard, was, that I should have Audience in
three days, after which I might depart when I thought fit; but before that time
came about, he fell into disgrace, and I was obliged to take other measures.
The Office of Dommith Diak, or Secretary of State for Foreign Affairs, was at
that juncture given to one Emilian; this Name, which in the Sclavonian Tongue
signifies a Claw or Talon, befits him well; for he is very covetous, and lets
nothing slip that comes within the reach of his Talons. Though this man was one
of the great Galischin's Creatures, and owed his Fortune to him, being
originally but a mean Notary, yet he was one of the first to traduce the memory
of his Benefactor; and taking a pique against me for not addressing my self to
him for leave to depart, but always to Galischin, the Czar Peter's Favorite,
as soon as he saw him in disgrace, he refused to execute the Command which
Galischin had persuaded the Czar to give him, concerning me; viz. to tell me,
That either I must stay for my Audience till Twelfth-day, or (following the
King of Poland's Orders, who apprehended the consequence of these Troubles)
might be gone when I pleased. Nay, he took occasion to excuse himself to the
Czar Peter, by persuading him that I ought to be detained for a while;
insinuating that the King of Poland had sent me to Moscow only to negotiate
with the Prime Minister, and to assure the Princess and Galischin of his
Protection; and as a ground for such a Suspicion, he urged, that contrary to
the usual custom in this Country, and the honor of my Character, I had made
several private Visits to that Prince. Being informed of all that passed, I
bethought my self of an Expedient, viz. To offer some Money underhand to
Emilian for leave to depart, which he having promised to give me for 100
Ducats, instead of sending them to him, as had been agreed betwixt him and the
Person I had employed, I went under pretense of paying him a visit to carry the
Money my self; now my Friend Harthemonerrich, to whom I disclosed the matter,
popp'd in upon him just at the time this Secretary had appointed me to come,
and I had the pleasure to tell him my mind very roundly in this young Lord's
presence; for I knew what mettle the Moscovites are made of; that they
understand nothing of Civility or Honesty, and therefore it is in vain to deal
with 'em upon those Terms, much less to beg a favor of 'em, because that makes
'em despise one; but they must be handled roughly when a man designs to bring
'em to reason. I told him the Law of Nations was violated in my Person; that I
perceived the King of Poland was misinformed, when upon giving me my
Commission, he assured me that the Muscovites were no longer Barbarians: That I
was so weary of living among 'em, that I could wish I were allowed to buy a
permission to return; but forasmuch as I had the honor to be the Minister of a
great King, a Neighbor and Ally to the Czars, I could do no otherwise than
give him advice, that I was hindered from obeying the Orders he had sent me, No
longer to solicit an Audience, but with all expedition to leave the Country.

After I had delivered my self to this purpose in Latin, which my Friend
Harthemonerrick interpreted to him, and had taken off several Cups of Brandy
and Sack to the Czar's Health, I took my leave of him, ordering a Polish
Gentleman to give him the 100 Ducats, which I intimated were for his under
Secretary, but he never durst touch 'em. Upon which I reported abroad how
generous he was, being given to understand there was no other means of
obtaining my Conge. Mean time the Czar Peter having recalled his Favorite
Galischin to Court, I went to visit him, and congratulate his return. He told
me, he was much surpised to hear that Emilian had not dispatched my Business
according to the directions he had caused to be given him before he left the
Court; that he would complain of it to the Czar, who thought I was gone
already; and that since I had waited so long to no purpose to kiss His
Majesty's Hand, he would take care I should have that honor.

Two days after, I was well pleased to see two Gentlemen of the Czar's
Bedchamber come to my House; the truth on it is, these same Gentlemen have
nothing but the Name, they are very inconsiderable People, and have nothing to
live upon but a Pension from the Czar of 200 Livres per Ann. After their
customary Ceremonies, which are making many Signs of the Cross, and bowing
their Heads to some Picture of the Virgin, which is always placed in a Corner,
they saluted me, and inquired in the Czar's Name how I did; to which I having
answered by Cups of Brandy in abundance, they told me the Czar had a mind to
see me, to make me some Present, and defray my Charges since my coming to
Moscow, to the day I should leave it; that in the mean time he had sent me his
Dinner. I replied, I would not fail to acquaint the King of all the marks of
distinction the Czar should honor me with, which was punctually performed.
This Dinner consisted of a piece of smoked Beef of 40 pound weight, several
Dishes of Fish dressed with Oil of Nuts; half a Pig, a dozen of Pies half
baked, made of Meat, Garlic and Saffron, and three great Flaggons of Brandy,
Sack, and Honey. It Is easy to guess from this Bill of Fare, that the best part
of the Treat was the honor that was done me in so extraordinary an
Entertainment.

Next day came another Gentleman to give me notice to get ready for my Audience
the next day; but instead of the Audience, I was told, the Czars being then
going a Pilgrimage together, I could not have the honor of seeing them till
they came back. Upon which I went presently to Galischin's House, where I found
Harthemonerrick. They both questioned me how I liked the Dinner which the Czar
sent me, I made answer, that to my misfortune, the French Cooks had so
debauched my Palate, that I could not relish the Russian Dainties. Now they
having formerly expressed a desire of tasting a French Ragoust, I invited them to
an Entertainment of mine next day, which they accepted of, upon condition none
should be there but their Friends, whom I desired 'em to invite themselves;
they were the Danish Commissary, and some other Merchants, at whose Houses they
now and then go to drink to save their own Wine. They both seemed so well
pleased with this Repast, that they sent several Dishes home to their Wives,
and carried away with them, without any Ceremony, all the dried Sweetmeats,
assuring me they had never fared so well in their lives, and that erelong they
would make me amends at their Houses. Three days after, Harthemonerrick invited
me to dine with him, and treated me very nobly. 'Twas in their time of Lent,
which began the day before; so the Treat was of Fish caught in the Caspian Sea,
and the Wolga. To show me the more honor, he brought in his Lady, and
presented her to me; I saluted her after the French Fashion, and she drank to
me in a Cup of Brandy, and then gave it me to pledge her. She Is the only Woman
in the Country that never uses any Paint, and indeed she is pretty handsome.

Prince Galischin was to have been with us; but the young Czar having sent for
him in the Morning, we contented our selves with drinking his and some other
Healths till Midnight. The Guests were the same that were at my House. This
young Lord has a great deal of Wit, speaks Latin well, loves Reading, is
mightily pleased to hear* talk of what is doing in Europe, and has a particular
inclination for Foreigners. I persuaded him to learn French, assuring him that
being but two and twenty years old, he would easily be Master of it, and then
might satisfy with ease his Passion for Books; all good Authors Ancient and
Modorn being turned into that Language. He is Son of Athemon, a Lithuanian, and
had a Scotch Woman to his Mother. He learnt Latin of a Pole, whom his Father
was allowed to carry with him in his Exile. He was disgraced by Theodore, whose
Prime Minister he was; after the Death of that Prince, being both recalled, he
had the grief just after their return from Banishment to see his Father
assassinated in the Rebellion raised by Couvanki. The Czars had now been
returned from their Pilgrimage three days, and hearing nothing farther, I sent
to young Galischin to know what I was to expect; he answered that the Council
not judging fit to grant me an Audience before Twelfth-day, I was at my liberty
either to go or stay, and that every thing was ready, go when I would. I was
not a little surprised at this alteration; but understanding by the Danish
Commissary, that the Naraskins taking it ill that I had never paid them a
Visit, and being jealous of the Entertainment I gave to Galischin, who began to
decline in the Czar's favor, had taken such measures with Emilian, that the
Czar had changed his Resotions which that Favorite had inclined him to in my
favor. I gladly accepted of an offer to be dismissed, and the more willingly,
for that I had done the business I came into the Country about; little valuing
the Audience that was promised me, and even less the Honor they pretended I
should receive in seeing the Czars. Besides, I was perfectly tired of the
behavior of these Barbarians, and heartily dissatisfied with having beheld in
spite of me so much disorder and mischief as happened while I staid there, not
daring to stir abroad, and having no other Company than my Pristave, who was a
man of Sense, it is true, and very agreeable in Conversation, and would have
diverted me more, and lessened the uneasiness I underwent, had he been more
open and free, and had not been restrained through fear, as one may easily
judge, from discovering to me many curious Passages which he knew very well,
and particularly concerning the Court, which have escaped my knowledge; and I
am not a little vexed at it, for they would have been worth inserting into
these Memoirs. I declared my Resolution by him to the Ministers, and two days
after, being the 16th of December, set out for Poland with the same Attendance
that came with me. The 20th, betimes in the Morning I reached Smolensko, and
without delay presently went to pay my Respects to the Palatin, from whom I
received a thousand Civilities; thence I continued my Journey with the same
Pristave, Interpreter and Soldiers, as far as Kasime, from thence to Vilna, and
so to Warsaw, where I arrived Jan. 3. 1690. The reason of my making so much
expedition, was, because the most convenient Season for traveling in Muscovy
is the Winter; for that Country lying the lowest in Europe, and consequently
being Marshy, in the Summer one cannot go above four or five Leagues a day, and
often one must cut Wood to make Bridges to pass over the Marshes and Little
Streams; for their Causeys, of which some are laid with Wood for 10 or 12
Leagues in length, are very ill kept, and frequently unserviceable; whereas in
Winter they travel in Sleds, where a man lies as in a Bed, drawn by a single
Horse over the Snow at a good rate; thus one may go Night and Day for 15 or 16
hours, and make a German League an hour with ease.

The State of Muscovy from 1682. to 1687.
THE Czar Theodore Alexerwich, Son of the Czar Alexis Sancuelimich died in the
22d year of his Age, leaving no Issue behind him. His Brother John and the
Princess Sophia were of the same Venture; Peter, though the Younger, and by
another Mother, succeeded him at first, his Elder Brother being incapable of
governing; but soon after, John was Elected, Proclaimed and Crowned likewise,
by the management of the Princess Sophia his Sister, though he was in the
Falling Sickness, and was afflicted with it every Moon; his Brother Theodore
died of it. This Princess being ambitious of the Government, and well foreseeng
that she might make her self Absolute Mistress of so great an Empire, because
of the Weakness of John, and the Minority of Peter, who would only have the
Name and Title of Czars, and She all the Authority; and that She had nothing to
fear but the Officers of the Crown, and the Grandees, who might oppose her
Designs, each out of their particular Ambition, or all out of general
discontent to see themselves governed by a Woman, she prevailed upon Couvanski
to be of her Party, and raised the Estreles, a kind of Militia, like the
Janisaries of the Port, who under color of revenging the Death of the Czar
Theodore, who they gave out was poisoned, made so cruel a slaughter among the
great Lords, that if to appease the Tumult, the Princess Sophia, perceiving
they went farther than she intended, had not come out of the Imperial Palace
and showed her self, they would have gone on to cut off the Innocent with the
Guilty, and increased the number of the Dead for the sake of plundring them;
The Boyars, or Senators, and the Patriarch interposed likewise to stop the
effusion of more Blood; and the heat of their fury being allayed, the Czarvuich
Peter Alexerwich was crowned Czar, to the general joy of Russia.

This Prince is graceful and well made, and the acuteness of his Wit gives
great hopes of a glorious Reign if he be guided by able Counselors.

The Princess Sophia did not express much satisfaction upon this Occasion; she
would rather have had the Crown upon the Head of John Alexerwich her Brother by
the same Father and Mother, single without a Consort, who was rightful
Successor; and her Ambition did not suffer her to conceal her uneasiness long,
for she publicly withstood the Crowning of Peter, pretending 'twas doing wrong
to his Elder Brother; 'twas to no purpose for the Boyars and the Patriarch to
represent to her the incapacity of John, that he was an infirm Prince, blind,
and impotent of Body: to gain her Point, she was resolved to make use of the
Estreles, of which betwixt 18 and 28000 Regiments usually quarter in Moseow for
the Czar's Guard; the Boyar Couvanski, President of the Chamber of these
Soldiers, was her Creature, and so by open force she raised this great Body of
Troops, Crowned and proclaimed John Chief Czar to reign jointly with Peter, and
in conclusion by these means, both the Princes being very young, she got the
Administration of the Government into her own hands. 'Twas hoped that now all
Troubles were at an end, and that every thing would rest in a perfect Calm; but
there were Factions formed in the Militia, which is composed partly of
Estreles, and partly of the Citizens, who are most of them rich Merchants, and
are fond of listing themselves, and being counted Soldiers; when they mount the
Guard they have Coats given them, which they return again, with this
Circumstance, that they receive so many Blows with a Stick over the Buttocks as
they have made Spots upon their Clothes, when they give them in, for these
Coats never go out of Moscow except those given to the Estreles, who follow the
Czar on Horseback into the Country; the Citizens are allowed, when it is their
turn to mount the Guard, to send a Servant in their rooms, they ordinarily buy
off the Blows, by presenting a new Coat, whereby this Livery is always renewed
and kept neat.

The Court upon advice of some Design being on foot, for what reason is not
known, but suspecting the Czarian House was in some danger, withdrew from
Moscow, and retired into Trinity Convent, 12 German Leagues off; a few days
after the Militia rose again, and the absence of the Court increasing the
Tumult and Disorder, the Boyar Convanski let loose his Estreles to plunder and
murder all that were not of his Party, upon pretense of their being concerned
in the death of the late Czar; the Chief Physician to the Deceased Theodore,
accused of poisoning his Master, was cut in pieces; the Grand Chancellor
Vrrenimik Delgorouka, and his Son, were assassinated. In a word, so exorbitant
was their Licentiousness and Cruelty, that I find no pleasure in relating it.
The Princess Sophia hearing what passed at Moscow, sent to compliment the Boyar
Couvanski for the Zeal he had shown in revenging the death of her Brother,
assuring him that she was obliged to him for it; this she did out of policy to
wheedle a Madman, who was to be feared with his Sword in his hand; at the same
time these. Cajolements were of very ill consequence in the end, and produced
other Effects than she imagined: The Boyar believed, that after what he had
done for her, and these Expressions of her Friendship and Acknowledgments, he
might venture to do any thing, even to take the Crown; the thing appeared to
him very easy and feasible, he saw that the Massacres he had caused to be
committed of all the most Considerable Noblemen, who had Interest and Power,
and consequently might have stood in his way, were approved, nay that he was
thanked for his pains; he concluded, not without reason, that the Militia were
entirely at his devotion, after having indulged them in their Plundering; he
persuaded himself that not a man of them but would blindly undertake any thing
he should put them upon, some out of gratitude, and others in hopes of gain,
and of making their Fortunes in a Revolution: Moreover he had insinuated into
them a great contempt of the Czars; of John upon the account of his Infirmities
and Incapacity, and of Peter for his want of Years, and that it was to be
expected in all likelihood he would be subject to the same Distemper his
Brother had, and so there was no hopes of seeing a Prince upon the Throne that
would value Courage and Merit, and know how to recompense them: In fine, he
determined to push his Fortune, but he considered, that to accomplish his Ends
with greater decency, 'twas expedient for him to make an Alliance with the
Czarian Family, which would better disguise his Designs, and give some color
to the execution of them, when he should attempt it. He proposed then a
Marriage between his Son and the Princess Catherine, younger Sister to the
Princess Sophia; but his boldness had not that success he expected, the Court
was displeased at the insolence of the Offer, and reflecting that such an
Alliance could not but be prejudicial to the safety of the young Czars, the
Princess Sophia her self found a way to prevent an Inconvenience so dangerous
to the Empire of the Russians; judging wisely that her Authority was in greater
hazard from the Ambition of Couvanski, than from all those whom she had caused
to be murdered, and was first persuaded that he ought to be dispatched and
punished for all those Crimes, the greatest part of which she had consented to.
It Is a Custom in Muscovy to celebrate the Birth-days of the Royal Family with
great solemnity; the Prince or Princess, whose Birthday it is, makes a Feast,
and receives the Compliments of the Nobility; the Court resolved to celebrate
in Trinity Convent the Feast of St. Catherine, whose name that Princess bore,
which the Boyar Couvanski designed for his Son: The Princess Sophia gave notice
of it to all the Boyars, and in particular invited Couvanski, who continued his
Cruelties at Moscow, which the Princess seemingly approved of; mean time 'twas
contrived how to rid themselves of this Aspirer to the Throne, the Prince Boyar
Bazile Basilervick Galischin, of whom we shall have occasion to speak further
in the Sequel of our Story, advised not to delay the matter; and accordingly
there was no time lost, for he was waylaid by 200 Horsemen in the Road to
Trinity. Convent, was seized and carried into a House, where his Sentence was
read to him, and both he and his Son beheaded. The Estrels were astonished when
they first heard of it, it stunned 'em like a Clap of Thunder, but they soon
recovered out of their Surprise, and grew furious and enraged, they ran up and
down, and exclaimed they had lost their Father, and protested solemnly and
unanimously they would take Vengeance upon his Murderers and all their
Adherents of what Quality soever. They possessed themselves instantly of the
Arsenals and Ammunition, and seemed to threaten a general Destruction. The
Court perceiving the danger the State was in, raised the other Forces, who have
ever born an implacable hatred to the Estreles, and commanded the German
Officers, who are very numerous among 'em, to render themselves without delay
at Trinity-Convent. Every one of 'em obeyed their order, left their Wives and
Children, to serve their Prince; nor was any man withheld from his duty,
through fear of their Families being ill used by the Estreles for their Loyalty
to the Czars. At the same time they had reason to be jealous of them; for the
Germans dwelt in the Suburbs of Moscow, in that part called Kakouvi, and the
Estreles really went thither in their first Fury, with design to butcher all
they met with; but they were restrained by some of their old Comrades, who
represented to 'em very prudently, That if they put to the Sword the Germans
Wives, their Husbands as soon as they had drawn together their Troops, would
think of nothing but Revenge: That they would never rest till they had cut 'em
off to the last man with an irreconcilable Enmity; and that there was no hopes
of Peace or Pardon, after so bloody an Action. The Estreles considering on it
were persuaded to spare them; and now their hearts sinking, and seeing
themselves without a Leader, they sought to make their Peace, which they found
the Court readily disposed to grant, for in truth they had no great Stomach to
new Broils. So the Militia first killed their Colonels and other Officers, and
then sent Messengers to Court to ask Pardon; they obtained it without much
difficulty, and immediately the Czars came to Moscow, accompanied by the
Nobility and the German Officers. The Estreles met them, prostrated themselves
upon the ground, and cried for Mercy: The Czars having made a sign that they
forgave them, the Penitent Soldiers raised themselves up, conducted the Czars
to the Palace, and poured out Tears of Joy to see their Princes returned into
their Capital City in so mild a Disposition.

The same day Prince Bazile Basilervick was created Grand Chancellor, and
Wrenimienk, or Temporary Minister of the State, that is, Administrator of the
Empire during a limited time. This Prince Galischin is, without dispute, one of
the Ablest, most Ingenious, and Polite Persons that ever was in this Country,
which he nobly designed should make as good a Figure as the rest of Europe. He
speaks Latin very correctly, and is mightily pleased with the Conversation of
Foreigners, and treats 'em without forcing them to drink to excess; he drinks
no Brandy himself, for he delights in Discourse altogether.

Having little value for the great Lords because of their insufficiency, he
regarded nothing but merit, and preferred none but such as he judged worthy,
and would be faithful to him.

This Chancellor began his Administration with an exact Scrutiny after those
Estreles that were culpable, he executed the Ringleaders, and banished others.
Four Regiments were formed of these Exils, one was sent away to Bialogrod
situate upon the Frontiers of Tartary, another to Seberka, upon the Wolga in
the Kingdom of Cazan, the third to Kourskay, in the Vkrain, and the fourth to
Sueska in the same Province. This Affair being settled, Prince Galischin seized
upon the Offices that were vacant by the Death of those that fell in the
Massacre, and among others of the Precasinoy Zemeske, or War-Office, in which
are kept the Accounts of the Forces that are upon the Foreign Establishment,
Foot, Horse, and Dragoons.

This Employment had been formerly managed by a Boyar Senator of the Prekaz
Bialtouski, or Office of the White Roupee, in which the Affairs of the Cosaques
and of the Vkrain, are commonly decided. The Chancellor pitched upon
Telickelavitau, a Wealthy man, and one of the under Secretaries of State, to be
Supreme Judge over the Estreles, which is the next Post to the Boyar Senator.
He likewise gave to his Cousin German, the Precaz Casanskir, or Office in which
the Affairs of Casan, Dastrakan, and Circassia are treated. To Dominiak Emilian
Verenxau, the Morafeuski Precaz or Office for the Towns situated upon the
Tanais. The (...) or Great Treasury was conferred upon the Alkalnik Talakorou
of the Duvoski Precaz; that is, the Chamber of the Revenues of the Crown. In
short all these Offices formerly held by the Boyar Senators, who were all able
to perplex the Chancellor in his undertakings, were filled up with Persons who
would be willing to be his Creatures, and not his Colleagues. This procedure
drew upon Prince Galischin, the hatred of all the Noble Families, to see
themselves excluded from their Prerogatives, and obliged to make their Court to
him more obsequiously than they had done to his Predecessors. But this did not
hinder him from exerting his Authority, and ordering every thing as he judged
most for his advantage. He advised the making of a General Peace with the
Swedes, whose Ambassadors being then at Moscow, had all their demands granted.
Some years after the Conclusion of this Treaty* the Imperialists and Poles were
engaged in a War with the Turks. The first would engage the Muscovites to make
a League with them, but their Embassy came to nothing; the Poles took this
occasion to propose a General Peace, and to get the Muscovites to be on their
side (...) which end they sent an Em^ to Moscow, composed of three Lords of the
Crown, and three of Lithuania; the Palatine of Posnania Grzemontarvick, and the
Counts Ptzyemski and Potourski, were those on the part of the Crown; the Grand
Chancellor, his Nephew Oquenoki, and Count Sapiha, where those for Lithuania,
the last was detained in Poland by the Death of his Brother; but the other five
arrived safe at Moscow. After diverse Conferences, and even after their Audience
of Conge they came to an Accommodation, the Poles gave up their Pretensions to
the Vkrain, or Country of the Cossacks, to the Duchy of Smolensko, and other
Territories conquered by the Muscovites; and the Czars obliged themselves to
make War upon the Precops, and oppose their Incursions into Poland. This
Agreement was solemnly ratified, the Ambassadors were treated, and the Czars
themselves drank to them by a great Lord, after having laid their hands upon
the Cup; an Honor which had never before been conferred upon Persons of their
Character.

Upon this the Muscovites sent Ambassadors to all the Courts in Christendom, to
anim^^^ them to a General League against the Turks. The Boyar Borice
Pietreuvick Cheremitau was sent to Poland, and thence to Vienna: The Kenas
Jacob Seudrewick Dolgoroka, Espalenick or Gentleman of the Czars Bedchamber
was sent into France and Spain; he is of the most Ancient Family in the
Country; he mightily admired the most Christian King, and has declared, that
tho his Master was affronted in France, he likes that Court better than that of
Spain, where the Czar was better treated. His Nephew, whom he left in France to
learn the Language, is the only Muscovite that speaks French. There are but
Four throughout this vast Country that can talk Latin, and they are beholden
for it to their Polish Tutors. In short, every Prince in Europe had an Envoy
from the Czars upon this occasion. They prepared to take the Field in 1687, and
enter the Crim: The Choice of their General took up some time; Prince Galischin
nominated several Lords fit for that Command; but he was told on all hands,
that since he had made up the Peace with Poland, he ought to give himself the
trouble of trying whether the Conquest of Precop was so easy as he imagined* He
did all he could to excuse himself fr^^ this Employ; rightly conjecturing he
should find great difficulties, and all the ill success would be laid at his
door, notwithstanding his utmost Precaution and Prudence. That tho the Army he
commanded was formidable for Numbers, yet they were but a multitude of raw
undisciplined Peasants, with whom he could never undertake any vigorous Action,
and come off with Honor. Being a greater Statesman than Soldier, he foresaw
that his Absence might do him more Prejudice than the Conquest of the Crim
bring him Glory; and especially seeing he could not raise himself higher by it,
nor have a greater Sway in the Government by commanding the Army: He saw
besides, that those who insisted most upon his taking this Charge, did it only
out of the Jealousy they had of him, and with design to ruin him, under a
specious show of honoring him with the Title of Generalissimo.

It Is true, the Lords that pressed it most, were those that did not consent to
the Agreement with the Poles; besides, they understood very well, how difficult
such an Invasion of the Crim would prove, and were glad to remove Galischin
from Moscow, that his too great Authority might be lessened by his Absence. The
Majority voted Galischin General, to his great discontent, and so he was bound
in Honor to take upon him the Conduct of the Expedition. The Particulars of
which take as follows.

The Expedition of the Muscovites into the Crim, from 1687 to 1689.
AFter mature Debates in Council, the Muscovites being determined to send a
Numerous Army into the Lesser Tartary, chose Prince Galischin Woivode;
Bolschoy, or Generalissimo: The Boyar Alexis Simonewich Chein, Woyevode of
Novogrodiski, General of the Forces of Cazan: The Domini of Vvoranin Irran
Georharrich Lerrenteteau Woivode Dartaolski, General of a small Body of
Cossacks, and other light-armed Troops, who always march before the Army, and
may properly be called the Forlorn Hope. The Akalnick Levanti Romanorrick
Pleuvan, Woivode of Serene, General of the Forces of Serene: And Kencas, or
Prince Michael Andrumich Galischin, Vaivode of Bialogrod, General of the Forces
of Bialogrod; he was Cousin German to the great Galischin; he had so great a
Love for Foreigners, that when he set out to his Government, he carried with
him as many as were willing to accompany him, and among the rest a Frenchman,
who taught (...) Language.

All the Forces of the White Russia being thus provided with Leaders, and the
Cossacks with their Hettman, 'twas consulted how to raise Ammunition and
Provisions for them. All the Subjects of the great Empire of the Czars were
immediately taxed at a Rouble a House; and the Value of a Rouble being Five
French Livres, we leave the Reader to judge what an immense Sum it amounted to.

Prince Galischin obtained surther, that his Son should be made his Colleague in
the Chancellorship; which was a new Mark of the Princess's Esteem for him.

The General Rendezvous was appointed in the Vkrain, in the Country of those
Cossacks who are independent of the Hettman, and are commanded by Polkowniks or
Colonels. The Forces of Moscow were quartered at Arteek; those of Novogrod at
Auski; those of Cazan at Rouplauski; those of Serene at Krastenakoust; and
those of Bialogrod, who were to remain upon the Frontiers, were posted at
Bialogrod. The Hettman drew together his Troops at Calitch; and all the Army
being ordered to be at their Stations by the first of March, the Soldiers
marched all the Winter of 1686; and the first of May they mustered, and took
the Field 300000 Foot, and 100000 Horse, and encamped beyond the River Marle:
In a few days they began their March by the way of Poltaw, a Town belonging to
the Hettman; and advanced as far as Scarsin, upon the River Avit, where they
made a halt for some days, to stay for a certain Image of the Virgin, which was
reputed to worlk Miracles, by the credulous Muscovites. A Monk assured the
Generals that he had been blessed with a Vision, in which the Virgin told him,
That without her their Attempt upon the Crim should be unsuccessful, and
therefore they must take her Image with them. The Commanders out of
Complaisance, and the Soldiers out of Superstition, to which the Muscovites are
addicted the most of any people in the world, tarried here 15 days, and did not
set forward till they had received the miraculous Image with all the Ceremonies
requisite. June the 15th, they reached Samare-Rzeka, which as well as the other
Rivers beforementioned, falls into the Boristhenes; they made Bridges, and the
Army passed over it with all Expedition. The 20th they left Samare, keeping the
Boristhenes upon their right, and encamped next at Tartarska-Rzeka, or River of
the Tartars; from Tartarska-Rzeka they marched to Mouscau-Rzeka; thence to
Kaminka, thence to Kouskiorda, and thence to Kerachekesa; whence the Army could
pass no further, because of the Drought, which was so great, that for 50
Leagues round they were informed the Sun had burnt up the Grass, so that there
was no stirring further for want of Forage. The General greatly surpised at
this News, was forced to alter his Measures; he changed the design of ruining
the Cham with his 500000 men, to a speedy Retreat; and so he broke up from
Kerachekesa, and came and pitched upon the Banks of the Boristhenes, both for
the convenience of Foraging where the River had overflowed, and likewise to
facilitate hi^ Return: For 'twas reasonable to suppose that the Tartars would
come and fall upon the Army, which indeed was strong enough, but extremely
embarass'd with so prodigious a Train to carry their Baggage, that I have heard
the German Officers affirm there were above a Million of Horses; which seems
incredible, but yet may be true; for in an Army of 24000 men that the King of
Poland led to the Black Sea in 1686, there were 45000 Wagons. It Is evident,
abundance of Men and Horses must needs perish by the excessive Heats, and want
of Forage; the Bloody Flux, and want of Victuals fit to be eaten, swept away
great numbers, and rendered more unfit for Service; for the Soldiers were forced
to feed upon Salt-fish half putrifi'd, to keep Lent, which the Russians hold in
August. Nevertheless a Detachment of 30000 men, headed by Levanti Romanorrick,
Commander of the Forces of Serene, was ordered to advance as far as Zarparogny,
with intent to make the Tartars believe that the Muscovites had none of their
Army left. The Hettman Juan Samuelerrick's Son was sent out likewise with a
Body of Cossacks. The rest of the Army marched back to the River Samare, where
the Prince observing the Situation of the Place, projected to build a City
there, to bridle the Cossacks, and even the Tartars, tho the last can enter
Russia on several sides. The next year this City was actually begun, as shall
be told in the Sequel. From the River of Samare they removed to the River
Marle, where they waited for Orders from Moscow to disband the Army. And in the
mean time the Prince, to excuse himself at Court for the ill success of his
Campaign, left no Stone unturned to lay the blame of his Miscarriage upon the
Hettman Juan Samuelerrich; and notwithstanding that he was powerful, and
commanded all the Vkrain, which revolted from the Poles in the Reign of
Ladislaus the last of that Name, tho he has 100000 of the Militia always ready
to take the Field; yet Galischin, having the Princess on his side, contrived to
ruin him. He wrote to Court, charged the Hettman with being the cause of all
that had happened, and solicited an Order to depose him, and choose another
into his Place. This Order being come, Galischin caused the Hettman to be
seized at midnight by those very Estreles which he had desired for his Guard,
because he mistrusted the Cossacks: He was carried bound in Cords to a place
within the Main Body of the Army, called Chatra, that is to say, the Tent of
Justice, which in all the Russian Armies is constantly pitched in the General's
Quarter: In the Morning Galischin summoned all the Officers and Noblemen to
attend him in a Body: The Boyar Generals took their Seats, and the Hettman was
brought before them; the Emperor's Order was first read to him; then they
confronted him with the principal Cossacks, who were taught their Lesson, and
accused him of holding Intelligence with the Cham, and directing him privately
to burn up the Forage. The poor General found his Fortune quickly changed;
instead of Vielmozny, or Most Puissant, they saluted him with Scourwecin, or
Son of a Whore; nay, his own Servants lost all Respect to him, and one of his
Colonels, named Dimitrouki, drew out his Sabre to kill him; but Galischin
prevented the Blow, and told him, the Hettman was there to be Tried Judicially,
and not to be Butchered. This Council of War being broke up, and the Hettman
put under a sure Guard, a Courier was dispatched to Levanti Romanorrick with
Orders for him to secure the Hettman's Son, who was detached at the same time
with Romanorrick; but some faithful Cossacks were got thither before him, and
warned him to save himself. Romanorrick could not easily come at him, for he
kept with his Troops perpetually as far off as he could; but the principal
Cossacks being acquainted with the Order to seize their Leader, the Compachiks,
or the Cavalry, agreed to deliver him up; the Sardouchiks or Infantry
encompassed his Tent, and would not permit him to be taken; but at length they
suffered themselves to be prevailed upon, and so with a general Consent the
Hettman's Son was put into Romanorrick's Hands, who being proud of his Prey,
and overjoyed that he had now an opportunity of repairing his Credit, which he
had lost in a Skirmish with Sultan Naradin, near Kamiston upon the Nieper,
returned with his Prisoner to the Army.

While they were seizing the Son, the Boyar Generals consulted how to punish
the Father, and set up another Hettman. Samuelerrich was sent into Ziberia, and
the Cossacks chose one Mazepa, Pistazy or Secretary of State, and proclaimed
him Hettman. This Prince is not comely in his Person, but a very knowing Man,
and speaks Latin in perfection. He is a Cossack born, and was one of King
Cazimir's Pages, and afterward an Officer in his Guards. He is a very good
Friend to the Poles.

Thus Prince Galischin succeeded in his Design; but a great Party of Cossacks,
who were not called to the Election, expressed their dislike of it; some Towns
revolted, and some of the Colonel's Houses were pillaged in their absence: The
new Hettman being minded to quell these Disorders, desired some Troops of
Galischin, who gave him three thousand Foot of the Forces of Smolensko, and a
thousand Horse to attend him to Baturin, where the Hettmans usually reside.

The Order to disband the Army arrived soon after with a Letter from their
Czarish Majesty's, which was read in the presence of all the Officers, and very
well pleased they were to hear themselves thanked for their good Services.
Every General had a Golden Medal given him, having the two Emperors Effigies on
one side, and the Princess's on the other, fastened to a Chain of Gold, the
whole worth ten Ducats; every Colonel had a Medal without a Chain, worth a
Ducat; each Lieutenant*Colonel and Major, one of half a Ducat; and every
Soldier and Estrelle had a Copique of Gold, of about twenty five Pence in
value, a Silver Copique is worth no more than one. Prince Galischin by means of
these Presents, which he obtained of the Czars, or rather of the Princess, to
be given to the Army, appeased the Murmurs that were raised through the Army
against him. He likewise gained the Chief Noblemen by bestowing Employments
upon them that reimburs'd their Expenses; insomuch that at his arrival at
Moscow he found no body against him; he was received by the Princess with all
the Marks of Favor he could wish, and took the Management of the State upon
him with as much Authority as ever.

The first thing that Galischin proposed to the Council, was the Advantages
that would arise from building a City upon the River Samare, in which might be
stored up Ammunitions of all sorts: The matter being approved, the Akalnik
Levanti Romanorrick was ordered to put himself at the Head of 30000 Men, and go
and build the City. The Hettman with his Troops had the same Commands, and the
place being marked out by a Dutch Colonel and Ingineer, named Wausale, these
Forces met at Niski, and marched to Samare by the last day of May. In a Months
time the City was finished, for 'twas little better than an Entrenchment to
stop the Incursions of the Tartars and Cossacks, and named Nowobogrodilla, or
Town of our Lady the Widow: A Garrison was left in it, and the rest returned;
the Akalnik, as a reward for his good Services was made a Boyar; and 'twas
found by experience in the Campaign of 1689. that this City was of great use in
supplying the Army with all Necessaries out of its Magazines.

The Expedition of the Muscovites into the Crim, in 1689.
PRince Galischin perceiving that the Czar Peter's Party grew stronger every
day, and fearing their Power would increase in his Absence, endeavored
underhand by all means to get the Command of the Army given to somebody else
this Campaign; but finding it very difficult to compass his Design, he frankly
offered himself, judging rightly that 'twas more honorable for him to propose
it voluntarily, than stay to see himself compelled to accept of it; and he took
such measures as he thought proper to make this Campaign more prosperous than
the first; for this Prince was a better Politician than a Captain, and having
easily obtained what he thought fit to demand, 'twas resolved the Army should
take the Field sooner than they did in the former Campaign; the ill Success of
which was owing to the slowness of their Motions; wherefore all the Forces were
appointed to be at the Rendezvous on the first of February. Which Order was
punctually observed; the Troops began to march from all Parts in December,
except those of Ziberia, who because of the War which they maintain against the
Inhabitants of Great Tartary, their Neighbors, are excused from sending any
Soldiers. The Preparations were more formidable than those of the preceding
Campaign. But the People were not taxed higher than before, for they paid but
one Rouble per House. The Forces of Moscow had their Quarters at Sont; those of
Novogrod at Riski; those of Cazan at Bagodouka; those of Bialogrod at
Kamminski; those of Serene at Kalentar; all which Armies were commanded by the
same Lords that served in the first Expedition, except that of Bialogrod, which
was given to Borice Pitrowick Cherimetau, upon the Death of Michael Andrewich
Galischin; they did not lie long in their Quarters, for the General ordered all
to march before the Frost was broke, beyond the River Marle, which was
prudently ordered, because several Rivers that were to be crossed in that
March, make great Inundations when the Thaw comes. The Foot were encamped on
the other side of the River at the entrance of a Wood; the Cavalry was posted
in the Towns that are situated on the Banks. After he had staid for the Thaw,
the Prince arrived and pitched his Tent on the further side of the River, April
the 1st; the Generals did so likewise; and on the 6th they marched toward the
Samare, where all the Forces joined.

The Hettman Mezepa came thither likewise; on the 13th they all passed the
River without delay, and advanced as far as Precop in a Month's time: The
Baggage hindered 'em from making long Marches in a day, every Soldier carried
with him Provision for four Months, besides what was distributed to them at
Samare, and in the Deserts which they passed through; such a quantity of
Provision very much encumbered 'em in their March; the Artillery consisting of
700 pieces of Cannon, and many Mortars, helped to delay them the more; at
length they arrived at Keratchekesa, and there encamped. The Horses were put to
graze, for the Grass was too short to be mowed, and the Troops reposed
themselves till Midnight, at which time they were alarmed by a great Noise
without the Camp, which the Neighing of Horses, and the Cries of Men, made very
terrible. They believed they were surpised by the Tartars; but 'twas
discovered that some Horses which had broke loose, and ran up and down, had
caused this Disorder; next day they found that 6000 belonging to the Army of
Moscow were run away into the Desert, though their Legs had been tied;
whereupon they were obliged to halt to give every Man time to look for his
Horse, and most of them were brought back to the Camp. Next day they decamped,
and after some days arrived at Kairka upon the Boristhenes, where a Party took
some Muscovite Tartars, of whom they learned that the Cham was not at Precop,
but at Budziac, and that they had not the least Suspicion of so formidable an
Army coming upon them; that indeed they had heard the Troops were upon the
March, but thought 'twas only to Build some Place as they had done last Year,
and that they themselves were sent by Sultan Kalga, to get Intelligence of the
Muscovites designs. From Kairka they marched to Kairka Meschensa, where Prince
Galischin ordered every Wagon to carry some Fascines, Palisades, and some
Water, because there was no Wood any further. From thence they left the
Boristhenes, and marched toward Precop, and the Army was two days without
Water. May the 13th, they had word brought by their Scouts that the Enemy was
at hand; they put themselves in Order to receive them; the Baggage guarded by
the Foot, and Artillery marched on the right, the Horse were posted on the left
of every Division. The Forces of Moscow headed by Prince Galischin kept in the
middle, the Forces of Novogrod moved on the right, the Hettman on the left; on
the Hettman's left was Cherremitau and Dolga Kourka; and Romanorrick made up
the Rear. The Tartars charged the Vanguard of Schein, from thence, after some
Skirmishes they wheeled on a sudden from right to left, and fell upon
Cherremitau's Forces, who being overpowered, were quickly put to the rout: The
Horse took to their Heels, the Enemy ran to the Baggage, which had like to have
been carried off; but Prince Galischin presently sending Succors to
Cherremitau, the Tartars were forced to retire, and leave the Russians a free
passage till they got to Thorna d'Oliva, where they encamped for the
convenience of Water, the place being Marshy, and five Leagues distant from
Precop. A small Body of Tartars, under Sultan Garka, advanced to discover their
Enemies march; and being desirous to know wherein the Weakness and Strength of
the Army lay, took several Prisoners, from whom they drew such Information as
they wanted. Then they carried them to the Cham, who lay but three Leagues off
encamped at Kalantechek, a little River two Leagues from Precop, which rising
in the Desert, runs into the Palus Meotides, or Black-Sea. For the Cham hearing
the Muscovites had invaded the Crim, was come from Budziac with 4000 Horse to
defend his Territories; he got to Katanschek two days before the Muscovites,
and passed the Boristhenes at Assenan Kirman, a Town seated on that River
belonging to the Turks. The 16th the Army decamped and moved to Zelona Dolina,
a League from Tharn; here the Cham came to meet the Muscovites with all his
Forces, which by what we are able to conjecture, might amount to thirty or
forty thousand Horse, marching in several little Divisions. The Russians found
themselves insensibly surrounded by the Tartars, and were obliged to halt.

They star'd upon one another, without attempting any thing, though one would
have thought the Muscovites should have begun the fight, but they were glad to
keep themselves out of harm, fenced in with strong Palisades, which were
brought in the Wagons. The Foot and Artillery defended the Camp so
strenuously, that the Tartars could not break into it. The Horse were not
entrenched, which invited three or four Detachments of Tartars, of 1000 Horse
each, to Charge them; they were no sooner attacked but they fell into disorder,
and the Baggage was very serviceable to them, for from thence the Cannon and
small Shot galled the Tartars, and laid three or four hundred of them upon the
Ground, and with them several of the Muscovites. Mean time, on the other side,
Sultan Naradin with his Troops charged the Cossacks of Sont and Akrerko, who
were commanded by Emilian, Everecunau Dominidiak, or Secretary of State; he
knew little what belonged to War, and like a true Muscovite, was so frighted,
that he could not stand before the Tartars, who broke in among the Baggage, and
killing the Horses, prevented the Muscovites from drawing off their Wagons;
the Enemy pierced as far as the Center of those Wagons, and carried off twenty
Pieces of Cannon, which they found mounted upon Carriages, and Horses harnessed
to them. In short, if the Boyar Rouka had not advanced with his Troops, the
Cossacks had been entirely cut off. Cherremitau was attacked at the same time
by another Body of Tartars, who broke in as far as his Baggage, but it must be
owned he defended himself much better than Emilian, and forced the Tartars to
retire. He behaved himself very handsomely on this occasion, having a stock of
personal Courage, and being a Man of Merit, but a mortal Enemy to Galischin,
who would gladly have been rid of him, and he had certainly been lost, but that
he was seasonably succored. In these Skirmishes the Tartars being repulsed,
though the Advantage and some Plunder fell to them, the Muscovites moved
forwards to get to some fresh Water; so the next day they marched to
Kalentchek, and forasmuch as they had found it inconvenient for the Cavalry to
keep at a distance from the Baggage, they were ordered to mingle with the
Wagons and Carriages, and all the Army, which till then had been divided,
joined into one Body with 200000 Wagons, and made a square Figure, the Baggage
as we said before was surrounded with the Cannon and Infantry, who carried
their Pallisades upon their Shoulders to be the readier in planting them. As
they marched in this order, the Tartars appeared again, and having viewed the
Army on all sides, and found the Horse had secured themselves, they forbore
Action, and were content to keep the Muscovites in fear of them; but they soon
withdrew, and went to defend Precop, which they thought would be attempted by
the numerous Army of the Muscovites. The same day the last encamped at
Kalansehck, and next day passed the River, and saw no Tartars, which encouraged
several Muscovites to leave the Baggage, and ascend the Hills to discover
Precop, which appeared in Flames; for the Tartars had set Fire to the Suburbs
lest the Muscovites should have possessed themselves thereof. The 16th they
marched strait on to Prerop, and sat down within Cannon-shot of the Town,
having the Black-Sea on their right, and the Desert on the left: They made no
Shot from the Town, because 'twas too far to do Execution, but they fired
incessantly from a Tower that stands on the Shore of the Black-Sea. 'Twas about
Ten or Eleven a Clock when the Muscovites arrived here, and they thought of
attacking Precop in the Night; but in the Evening, when the Officers came for
Orders, they wondered to hear that they were to return next day. This retreat
being somewhat extraordinary, it is worth while to give the Causes of it. The
Army being encamped pretty near the Town, the Nogays and Kalmouchs Tartars,
Subjects to the Muscovites, skirmishing often with the Precopians, a Nogay, who
served the Cham, saw by chance a Muscovite of his Acquaintance, and called out
to him: What do we contend for, said he? What occasion is there for us to fight
together? Why don't you advise your Boyar to make Peace with our Cham? The
Muscovite replied, That if the Boyar believed the Cham was that way inclined,
he might be disposed to it likewise; but if the Cham had an earnest. desire for
Peace, he should send and treat about it. Very well, says the Precopian Nogay,
do you break it to your Boyar or General, and assure him the Cham is willing to
come to terms. The Muscovite Nogay goes presently to Galischin, and acquaints
him with what the Tartar had said, and found the General liked the motion, and
was very ready to return without coming to blows. Accordingly Galischin caused
a Letter to be written in the Name of this Muscovite to the Tartar Nogay, to
this purpose, I have related to the Boyar Galischin what passed between us; he
is content to come to an Accommodation; it lies upon you to get some Person to
be sent to him with the Cham 's Proposals. This Letter being delivered to the
first Tartar that appeared, was carried to the Cham, who was consulting with
his Mulzaz how to rid himself of so formidable an Enemy. The Cham having read
it, sent to ask Galischin, whether 'twas written by his order; and being
answered, Yes; he sent Suilech Murza; and the Muscovites a Lord, named Esmeyan,
in exchange for Hostages. The Treaty was set on foot. The Muscovites proposed
the five following Conditions: That all the Russian Slaves should be restored.
That the Tartars should make no more Inroads into the Czar's Dominions. That
they should quit their Claim to 80000 Crowns, annually due to them from the
Muscovites; That they should not molest the Poles, nor assist the Turks. The
Murza gave some hopes of an agreement, and spun out the Conference to keep 'em
in suspense till next day, well knowing so great a multitude could not long
subsist there without Forage and Water: but the next day he answered, That the
Cham would accept of a Peace upon no other Terms than those he was already
engaged in with the Czar: That he insisted upon the Payment of the yearly
Tribute, and expected to be paid 240000 Crowns in Arrears for the three last
Years. Prince Galischin did not at all like this Answer; and judging it very
incommodious to lie longer encamped upon the Sandy Plain, resolved to retreat.
For fear of being pursued, he took the Murza along with him as far as
Kalantzek; and from thence sent him back, and received his own Hostage. This is
a short Account of all this Campaign in the Crim.

After this they marched for three weeks together to reach Samare; where
leaving all the heavy Luggage behind them, they passed the River, and in six
days more got to the River Marle. But in the mean time Prince Galischin
dispatched Couriers to the Czars, and to the King of Poland, boasting that he
had beaten the Tartars, and driven them into their own Country. The Princess
upon this News ordered public Rejoycings throughout the Kingdom, and according
to Custom sent an Akalnik with a Letter of Thanks and Commendations to all the
Army, and Golden Ducats for Rewards: In conclusion, Orders for Disbanding the
Army being come, the Boyar Valenski was left at the River Samare with about 5
or 6000 Men. This mighty Success had the Muscovites in their two great
Expeditions into the Crim; which far from gaining them any honor or profit, on
the contrary produced the greatest damage the Nation could ever suffer, in the
Ruin of their General, which happened soon after his Return. I learned all
that I have related, from the King of Poland's Ministers, who have resided at
the Czars Court, and followed the Armies ever since the Death of the Czar
Theodore, to this present. I shall next give the Particulars of the Troubles
that I was an eyewitness of, having often ventured in disguise to go about the
City, and even to Trinity-Convent.

A Relation of the Troubles in Moscow, occasioned by the Princess Sophia, upon
her Brother Peter's being made Czar.
PRince Galischin, at his Return to Moscow, found Affairs in quite another
posture than he expected; his Enemies had informed themselves of the truth of
the matter, and rendered him odious to the Czar Peter. He was refused Audience,
and hardly, through the intercession of the Prncess, could he be admitted to
kiss the Czar's Hand; he underwent bitter Reproaches, and could not say any
thing that would pass as a justification of his Conduct. For some days
Galischin was left at Quiet, but the Princess's Liberality gave occasion to new
Commotions. She had a mind to distribute among the Boyars considerable Presents
in recompense of the good service they had done to the Empire; but the Czar
opposed it, and would enquire first into the Merits of their Services, that
their Rewards might be proportionable. The Princess would bear no restraint,
but found means to bring the Czar to a compliance with her Desires. She gave
then to Prince Galischin 1500 Peasants Houses, in several Villages; to other
Commanders in the Army, 300; to other Officers, in proportion to their
Stations, and likewise to all the Gentlemen that served in the Expedition,
designing to make 'em all of her own Party. Such Gifts had never before been
used to be bestowed in Muscovy; the Czar always gave a Royal Vest to those they
would honor, but no more.

Galischin governed with his usual Power; and being aided by the Princess,
undertook a bold attempt. Ever since the Hettmans were under the Muscovites
Dominions, they never entered Moscow. Galischin, under pretense of doing the
Hettman the honor of presenting him to do homage to the Czar; but having
another end in it, so ordered it, that Mazepa came to Moscow with 500 of his
chief Officers, but could not be admitted to see the Czar. I went to him
several times disguised in the nightime, accompanied by a German Physician of
the Czar's who assured him of the King of Poland's Protection. The Czar Peter
was then at one of his Country-Houses, called Obrogensko, situate upon the
River Yarus, a short League from Moscow, whilst the Princess Sophia and
Galischin laid a Plot, which we are going to give an account of. The Princess
foresaw all along that the Czar Peter's Life would one day be the ruin of her
Authority, and a dangerous obstacle to her Ambition, in case she did not remove
it in time; and now she repented that she had followed the wise and moderate
Counsels of Galischin; she reflected on the difficulty she met with in
procuring him a disgraceful Audience; was concerned at it, and the Reproaches
that were made him; and though she had gained her Point in getting the Czar to
consent she should bestow her Bounty as she pleased; yet she could not forget
how dear it cost her, and what Oppositions she struggled with. All this she
resented the more deeply, because she had ruled the State without control,
according to her fancy, for several years; she judged rightly, that for the
future she should not be so Absolute; and that the best she could expect, was
to have her Authority lessened, as her Brother's increased, and guessed 'twas
upon that account he did not directly deny her; but that in process of time,
instead of conferring Favors upon her, they would take pleasure in crossing
her Desires, which her Brother's Party would ever be ready to do, and to
destroy her Creatures; and after all these Vexations, she should be obliged to
quit the Court, and retire into her Convent.

These Considerations made this Princess, who is Ambitious and Daring above her
Sex, resolve to venture all to maintain her self in the Post she was in. During
her Regency, she had done what she could to engage all to be her Creatures, and
'twas with the same design that she bestowed those Presents on the Army, though
under color of rewarding their Services; for she thought they would think
themselves more obliged to her upon the score of such valuable Gifts, than they
could have been to the Czar for a Vest, with which his Predecessors used to
gratify 'em. She assured Prince Galischin he ought to apprehend that their
Enemies would not be satisfied with diminishing her Power by degrees, but would
proceed further, and force her to return to her Convent; which could not be
effected without involving Himself, his Family and Friends, in her Fall. -- He
was prevailed upon by these Reasons; and though he was prudent and discreet,
and naturally averse to all violent Counsels, he no longer opposed her design;
he desired only, before she put it in execution, that he might send his eldest
Son into Poland upon a feigned Embassy, with the greatest part of his Riches,
whither he might shelter himself from the storm which he saw coming upon him,
and knew not what would be the issue of it. But the impatient Princess
overrul'd him; she represented to him, that they were not to lose a minute;
that his precaution was needless, being they were certain of success. After she
had taken such measures as she had long before concluded upon, she determined
at last to give the Blow; and pitched upon Theodore Thekelavitau for the
purpose; he was President of the Chamber of Estreles, and was raised by the
Princess from a mean Scrivener to be an Akalnik or Sword Bearer, a Dignity next
to that of Boyar Senator. This Theodore promised to execute the Princess's
Order punctually. He drew together at the Castle of the Crim, where the Czar
and the Patriarch usually reside, and in which all the Courts of Judicature are
held, 600 Estreles, all trusty Fellows, Commanded by Colonel Rojannau;
Theodore put himself at the head of them, and commanded them to follow him to
Obrogensko; but whilst he was giving out his Orders, two of his Estreles, whose
hearts misgave them, resolved not to stain their hands with their Prince's
Blood; and stealing off, they ran and gave notice to the Czar Peter, who in a
dreadful Consternation leaped out of bed, sent for his Uncles, his Mother's
Brothers, and consulted in all haste what was to be done. 'Twas resolved to
send to the City to enquire into the certainty of the matter; one of the Czar's
Uncles, and Prince Borice, were dispatched upon this Errand, who in their way
met Thekelavitau at the head of his Estreles; they hid themselves whilst they
passed by them, and then hastened back to save the Czar* Peter had but just
time enough to get into his Coach with his Mother, his Wife, and her Sister,
and followed by some faithful Servants, he fled toward Trinity-Convent. The
Conspirators being arrived, searched all about for the Czar; but the Estreles
of the Prince's Guard knowing nothing of the matter, and amazed at his sudden
flight, told their President or Judge that his Majesty was gone with all the
speed he could.

Thekelavitau having missed his aim, next day returned to the Princess, whom he
found no less concerned than himself at their disappointment. Every body in
Moscow was astonished at the News of this flight, for none could divine what
should be the Cause of it; but toward Evening 'twas known that the Czar Peter
had sent to the Princess to reproach her with her Treachery, and that she
denied the matter absolutely, and protested they had been deceived in taking
those for Conspirators who came only to relieve the Guard, and that they
wronged her extremely in thinking she could harbor so black a design as to
kill her Brother. This Excuse of Relieving the Guards appeared a weak one to
most people, for they usually relieved them in the daytime, and these Estreles
came to Obrogensko at night. But be that as it will, the Czar Peter being got
safe into Trinity-Convent, wrote to all the Boyars to render themselves there
without delay; he wrote also to all the Gentry, and sent Orders to all the
Towns to raise the Militia; and having published throughout the Empire
Thekelavitau's Attempt, they came in to him from all Parts, and in less than
eight days he had a numerous Body of the Gentry about him; immediately he sent
Orders to Galischin to attend him at Trinity-Convent, but he excused himself
upon pretense of being withheld by the Czar John.

Mean time the Princess did all she could to get the Estreles on her side; she
called together all the Piecestniks and Diecestenites, Subaltern-Officers, who
on such occasions can prevail more with the Soldiery than their Colonels; and
having ordered them to be planted at the foot of the Stairs, the Czar John and
she coming from Mass, stood at the top of the Stairs; whence the Czar spoke to
them to this purpose: My Brother is retired into Trinity-Convent, I know not
for what reason; doubtless he designs to disturb the Peace of the State, and,
as I am told, has commanded you to attend him; but we forbid you upon pain of
Death to obey his Order.

The Princess reiterated this Prohibition; but the Estreles little heeded it:
They marched to Trinity, and assured the Czar Peter of their Fidelity; which
the Princess having considered, and that most of the Boyars had joined with
Peter, she resolved to make her Peace with him; to which end she sent to her
Brother two of his Aunts, his Father's Sisters, the Princess Ann Michaelwa, and
one of her Sisters Marfa Aleyewa.

Before we proceed further, it is fit the Reader should be told, That the
Regency of the Princess had encouraged several other Princesses of the Czarian
Family to leave their Convents, and come to the Imperial Palace, where she
herself resided, which she tolerated during her Regency, for fear the Reasons
and Custom which she could allege for their Confinement, should be laid to her
Charge; and least those who envied her, and were tired with her Administration,
should make use of them to oblige her to return to her Monastry. Besides these
three already named, Katherine Sophia, Maria, and Sediassa, are Sisters by
Father and Mother of the Czar John Alexerwich, their Mother's Name was
Mirasselawka. The Czar Peter, and the Princess Natalia, are by a Second
Marriage with a Lady of the Family of Naraskin. The Czar John's Wife is of the
House of Salliskau, her Name is Martha, she has had a Daughter by him. The Czar
Peter is married to a Lady of the House of Poukin, named Marfia, or Martha.
This Princess was so frighted at being forced to follow her Husband in his
Flight by Night, almost naked, to escape being murdered, (which had unavoidably
happened, but for the warning that was given to Young Galischin) that she
miscarried a few days after; but has since brought a Young Prince into the
World in February last, which has for ever ruined the Princess's Party.

To return to our Story; The two Aunts, and the Princess's Sister, went to
Trinity in hopes of reconciling their Nephew and Niece; being come before the
Czar, they beseech'd him not to give credit to those Rumors which had frighted
him: They assured him there was some misunderstanding in the matter; that some
were maliciously designing to make a Breach between him and his Sister, and
that he might come back to Moscow with safety and security. The Czar Peter made
answer to these Ladies, That he had not fled in a panick Fear; that there was a
plain Conspiracy to Murder his Wife, his Mother, his Uncles, and himself; and
he laid before them so many Circumstances of the Attempt, that his Aunts could
not deny the truth of it. Then the Princesses fell a crying, and protested they
were no way concerned in that horrid Design, and swore they would not return
again to Moscow, but would live and die with him.

The Princess Sophia having Intimation of the bad Success of her Aunts
Negotiation, and not knowing what course to take, applied her self to the
Patriarch, expressed her Grief to him, and so wrought upon him, that the good
Man offered himself for a Mediator: He went that very day to the Czar Peter,
told him his Errand, and said all that can be imagined to beget a
Reconciliation betwixt him and his Sister; but he was strangely surpised, when
he understood that he himself was to have been taken off; that Ligomede, or the
Abbot Sylvester was in the Plot, and was to have been made Patriarch had it
succeeded. This News extremely troubled him, and he judged 'twould not be amiss
for him to tarry at Trinity-Convent till the Affair was cleared up, and things
better settled; at the same time he published a Proclamation to cause the
Traitors to be apprehended.

The Princess in a worse plight now than ever, assembled her Creatures, and
consulted what to do. 'Twas resolved that the Akalnik Thekalavitau should be
secured in the Palace, and that the Abbot Silvester should be saved; and then
she her self, accompanied by Prince Galischin, and all her Friends, took her
way toward Trinity-Convent, to endeavor to appear her Brother, who had sent
a second Order to the Estreles to render themselves with all speed at Trinity,
and bring the Traitors with them. She was not got half way thither, when the
Boyar Trokourau, sent on purpose by Prince Peter to meet her, came and told
her, she must go back, for she would not be received. The Princess being of
opinion 'twas dangerous for her to stir any further, and that her Brother would
give her a very ill Reception, returned to Moscow. Next day the Estreles and
Germans made their appearance at Trinity-Convent; the Boyars met and resolved
among themselves, to send and seize the Traitors where ever they might be
found. Colonel Sarque with three hundred Men, was commanded to execute this
Resolution, and immediately parted for Moscow; upon his arrival he marched
directly to the Imperial Palace, and there demanded loudly that Fiska
Thekelavitau should be delivered to him; for after the Treason was discovered,
they no longer called him Fiedor, or Theodore, but by his Diminutive or
Nickname, which among the Russians is a term of Contempt. The Princess made
some Resistance at first, but seeing the Colonel resolutely bent to take him,
and considering the ill Consequences of her interposing too far, she delivered
up. Fiska and his Adherents. The Criminals loaded with Chains, were carried in
ascurvy Wagon to Trinity. On the other side, Prince Galischin seeing himself
upon the brink of Ruin; yet, not to be wanting to his own Preservation,
determined to go likewise to the Convent: He took with him his Son Alexis his
Colleague, Talachanau, Woski the Chamberlain to the Czars; Riquenski, the Great
Treasurer; Romanorrick, the Governor of Serene, his Councellor and Favorite;
Esmayan his Creature, who was Commissary-General to the Army; and a particular
Friend of his, named Kassantau; but the Gate of the Convent was shut against
him and his Friends; and after he had been refused Entrance, there were Guards
sent back with him and his Followers, with Orders not to let them stir out of
their Houses.

As soon as Fiska was brought to Trinity, he was carried into a Great Hall, in
which the Czar had called together the Boyars; he was examined for four Hours,
and thence conducted to a Tower in the Convent, where he was tortured, or
rather whipped. They call this Punishment Kenouse; the Malefactor is ti'd upon
a strong Man's Back, who stands upright, and lays his Hands upon a Benoh as
high as his Head. Thus the condemned Person receives two or three hundred
Lashes, more or less, upon the Back, beginning at the Neck, and so down the
whole length of the Back; the Executioner strikes so exactly, that at every
lash he fetches off a piece of Flesh as broad as the Whip, which Kills or Lames
most that suffer; then they ti'd his Hands behind his Back, and hoisted him up,
and the Executioner lashed him with a Whip as long as a Coachman's, but the
Thong is made of a thick and hard Leather, which cuts deep into the Flesh, and
put him to exquisite Pain; after he had undergone a few of these Strokes, he
confessed that he was to have killed the Czar, his Mother, and her three
Brothers. Upon this they carried him back to Prison, from whence he wrote to
the Czar Peter, and acquainted him at large with all the particulars of the
Conspiracy; pleaded that he was over-persuaded to this cruel Enterprise, and
named the Persons that put him upon it. The Czar, though fully satisfied of his
Sister's Barbarity, would not publicly expose a Princess of the Blood; and
Prince Borice Alexewich Galischin, had need of all his Credit with the Czar, to
save the Prince, his Cousin, from being executed, to the dishonor of his
Family.

After this, several others who were to have been the Assassins, were examined.
They gave them the Question, or extraordinary Torture, which is more severe
than the former. They shaved their Heads, and having tied them fast, they
poured boiling Water drop by drop upon their Skulls, which put them to such
intolerable Pain, that they immediately acknowledged their Crime, and
discovered their Accomplices, as Fiska had done: Two days were spent in
consulting how to punish the Criminals. Prince Galischin, his Son, and Friends,
were condemned to Banishment, and the Sentence was read to them by a Secretary
of State at the foot of the Stairs. He stood up to hear it, encompassed with
the Guards, who brought him from his House. And this was the Form of it:

You are ordered by the Czar to go to Karga, a Town under the Pole, and remain
there as long as you live, removed from, and in Disgrace with his Majesty;
whose Goodness nevertheless is such, that he allows you Three Pence a day for
Subsistence. His Justice ordains that all your Goods be forfeited to his
Treasury.

The miserable Prince having bowed his Head, and only answered, That 'twas hard
for him to justify himself to his Majesty, retired, and was conducted to the
place of his Exile by a Colonel. A Secretary of State was dispatched to Moscow
to seize upon his Palace, and make an Inventory of what was in it. They found
there very rich Movables; a hundred thousand Ducats in a Trunk, buried in a
Vault, which were thought to be the Spoils of the Hettman Jean Sameuelewick;
four hundred Vessels of Silver, weighing forty Pounds each, and some Money. The
Wife of this Prince, and his Son's Wife, were banished with them; but they were
not admitted to take any thing with them; thirty Roubles was all that these
four Persons were allowed.

Galischin being disposed of, the Boyar Romanorrich, Woywode of Serene, was
brought to the foot of the Stairs, and condemned to go to Postozora, a Town
further North than Karga Poka, there to spend the rest of his Days; his Estate
was confiscated likewise. Wedenik Andrewik Esmeyan was charged to confine
himself at home till further Order. Kassantau was turned out of all his Places,
and confined to his own House and Lands. Talachanau was made for his Life
Woywode of Prziacelavaka, a Town not far from Kiau upon the Nieper; and the
Great Treasurer was made Woywode of Novogrod, upon the River Samare, as long as
he lived. Next day Fiska had his Head cut off upon a Block; and two Estreles
that were to have been the Assassins suffered the same Punishment. The Colonel
that commanded the Detachment was whipped, had his Tongue cut out, and was sent
to end his Days in Ziberia, with an allowance of a Penny a day; the five other
Estreles had their Tongues cut out likewise, and were sent into Ziberia to kill
Sables.

All these Executions being over, the Czar Peter acquainted the Princess with
what he had done, and desired her to leave the Palace, and retire into a
Monastry, which she had built out of Town; but she refused to comply with his
request, not being able to prevail with her self to enter into a place for
Life, from whence she had cunningly delivered her self contrary to Custom; she
liked better to retreat into Poland, of which the Czar being informed, he sent
Order to the Commander of the Estreles to Conduct her either willingly, or by
force, to the Monastry, and set Guards upon all the Avenues, and suffer no
Person to come to her; which was accordingly done. And two days after the Czar
Peter returned to Moscow, and made his Entry on Horseback; there was nothing
remarkable in it, but 18000 Estreles of his Guards armed. A quarter of an Hour
after, his Wife and Mother came in a Coach, and all together alighted at the
Palace. The Czar John stood to receive his Brother at the top of the Steps;
they embraced; Peter asked John to be Friends; and he that answered for him,
having assured him he was so, each retired to his Apartment; and since that
time no mention has been made of John, but at the beginning of their Acts. Thus
ended the Regency of the Princess Sophia, who had been Mistress of the Great
Empire of Russia for some Years, but for endeavoring through a boundless
Ambition to get all the Power into her hands, which she held in the Name of her
Brothers, and to be absolute and independent, was confined and shut up for the
rest of her Life, with eight hundred Religious Women, whom she had caused to
come from Kiovia, with design to make her self the more Creatures through their
assistance; for they have nothing of Religion in them, but the Name; and not
doubting but they would be more in her Interest than in her Brother Peter's,
whose Subjects they were made in 1666. when the Palatinate, and City of Kiovia,
were yielded by the Poles to the Muscovites.

The Causes of the Troubles in Moscow.
AFTER having given an ample Relation of the Conspiracy against the Czar Peter;
it may be proper to show, That the Troubles that Court has been embroiled in,
and those that may hereafter happen, were and will be owing to the Intrigues of
the Princess Sophia, whose Wit and Merit is of another Stamp than her Person;
for she is very ugly, being of a monstrous Size, with a Head as big as a
Bushel; she has Hair upon her Chin, Tumors upon her Legs, and is at least
forty Years old. But though her Shape be deformed, her Judgment is regular and
piercing; and though she never read Machiavel, she has by Nature all his
Maxims, and especially this, That they may attempt any thing, and stick at no
Crime, who are resolved to Reign: And had she contented her self with the
Administration of the Government, and had not attempted to rid her self of her
Brother Peter, no body durst have formed a Party in Favor of the Czar Peter
against her. Toward the end of the Czar Theodore's Reign, the Princess Sophia
having those Qualifications we have mentioned; and foreseeing that Prince could
not live long in his infirm State of Body, she contrived how to get out of her
Convent, notwithstanding the settled Custom which obliges the Female Issue of
the Czarian House to pass their Lives in that Confinement unmarried. To which
end she pretended an extraordinary kindness for her Brother, and complained of
her unhappiness that she could not visit a Person whom she loved so tenderly,
and attend him in his Sickness; when he was in the Fits of his Distemper, she
sent every moment to ask how he did; and at other times she let slip no
occasion of testifying her Love for him, and the Grief she felt in being
obliged to be absent from him. At length, by these Methods having prepared a
way for her intended Design, she left the Convent under pretense of serving her
Brother, and administering to him in his Sickness, which she did, not suffering
any body to come near him, nor give him Medicines but her self; for she wisely
considere'd, that the more she did for him, the more she should be beloved,
both by the Czar himself, and every body else. Thus she insinuated her self
into the good Opinion of the Grandees, to whom she carried her self very
obligingly, and won the Peoples hearts by her affable Behavior, studying to
make all approve her Conduct, and excuse her leaving the Convent. One would
have thought she should have been satisfied with being at liberty; but being
determined never to return to her Confinement, she thought her best way would
be to make her self absolute Mistress; which Design being not to be carried on
without a considerable number of Friends, she pitched upon Prince Galischin, as
the fittest Person to be the chief of her Party.

He was a Man of great Quality, descended from the last Duke of Lithuania, of
the House of Jagelon: The Courtiers at first seemed well enough pleased with
this Choice, imagining he would only have the Name of Chief Minister, and they
should share the Power with him; but the Prince having more cunning than all
the Muscovites put together, easily managed them during the Reign of Theodore,
who dying suddenly, Couvanski, a bold Man, and a declared Enemy of Galischin's,
made an Insurrection, and cut off all the great Men that he thought would
oppose his Design of making himself Czar, under pretense of revenging his
Master's Death upon those, who as he gave out, poisoned him. When thinking
himself sure of the Crown, and fearing no body, he was taken and punished for
his Temerity and Cruelties; as we have related at large already.

The Death of this Rebel, gave rise to the Princess's Regency, who conferred
the Office of Grand Chancellor upon her Favorite Galischin, in which Post
never any Man in this Country governed with so great Authority.

The Princess Sophia thinking now she might do any thing; for the ease of her
Conscience, she was minded to change her scandalous Familiarity with this
Favorite into a Marriage; all the difficulty lay in getting rid of Galischin's
Wife, whom the Prince was loath to part with, as well out of a Natural
Principle of Honor, as because he had a great Estate and Children by her, and
did not love the Princess but upon the Account of his Fortune.

But Women being ingenious in such Affairs, she found means to make him
persuade his Wife to go into a Monastry; in which Case, according to the
Religion of the Muscovites, the Husband being of too Sanguine a Constitution to
live unmarried, obtained leave of the Patriarch to Marry again; the good Lady
having consented to it, the Princess no longer doubted of succeeding in her
Design, that that most troubled Galischin was the Murder of the two Czars,
which she had absolutely resolved, to secure the Crown entirely to her self.
The Prince more Politic than Amorous, laid before her the Barbarity of such a
Design, in which should she succeed, she would infallibly draw upon her the
hatred of all Men; and which, though never so secretly hid, might one day be
discovered, and give occasion to some Malecontent to raise such a Sedition as
Couvanski had done, under Color of revenging their Deaths, and endanger the
Crown. But he advised her to take a Course less bloody, yet in all likelihood
as proper to effect her Designs, which was to Marry the Czar John, and give his
Wife a Gallant to supply his Impotence, which the Lady might be more readily
inclined to comply with, for that her Heirs would succeed to the Empire, that
when the Czar John should have a Son, the Czar Peter would loose all his
Friends and Interest, and then they might Marry; and to give a better Grace to
their Marriage, they would get chosen for Patriarch, Father Silvester, a Polish
Monk of the Greek Church, who should immediately propose by an Embassy to Rome,
the Reunion of the two Churches; which being brought about, would procure them
a general Esteem, and then they would compel Peter to go into Orders; or else
they might find means to dispatch him out of the way more easily, and with less
Odium, than she could propose to do it now. And then they would make John
complain of his Wives Incontinence, and show that the Children that she had
could not be his; which would be easy for them to prove, who were themselves in
the Secret, whence would follow a Divorce, and the Wife be confined to a
Convent; after which they would get a permission to Marry him again to one who
they would take care should bring him no Children. Thus without fear or danger,
or even of being suspected of foul play, they should Rule the State during the
Life of John, and after his Death succeed him for want of Heirs Male in the
Czarian Family.

The Princess liked this Project well, and left the Conduct of it to Galischin;
it never entered into her head that this Prince had further Designs, since by
reuniting Muscovy to the Romish Church, provided (as he hoped) the Princess
should die before him; He did not doubt to prevail with the Pope to make his
own Legitimate Son Heir to the Empire, instead of any he should have by the
Princess during the Life of his Wife.

He began then with marrying John; and whereas the Czars never Match with
Foreigners, they publish an Order for all the handsomest Maids in all Russia to
be brought to Court, who are visited by the Czar's Mothers, Sisters, and
Kinswomen, with the Physicians and Surgeons, and she is chosen that is best
liked; it was not difficult to find one that was proper for their Designs, whom
they provided with an Italian Surgeon for her Gallant, who soon got her with
Child, but as ill fortune would have it, proved a Girl; mean time Peter's
Friends being acquainted with the roguery, cast about how to Counter-plot them;
but finding they wanted sufficient power, they engaged on their side another
Prince Galischin, Cousin to this, who was despised by him for his Drunkenness,
and made him the Young Czar's Favorite; then under pretense of honoring him,
they obliged the Great Galischin to take upon him the Command of the Army a
second time, and in his Absence married Prince Peter in spite of the Princess.
This bold Stroke increased Peter's Party; all the Young Men, whose Fathers
affected to follow the Princess, declared for Peter. Galischin upon his Return
seeing his Measures broken by the Marriage of the Young Czar, whose Wife was
with Child, he agreed at last to take off the Czar Peter; but the Plot
miscarrying, as we have before related, he thought it high time to fly, which
he might have done, had not the Princess opposed it, who assured him all along,
that no body durst call to Account a Person of his Authority. His design was to
send his eldest Son Ambassador to Poland, with his younger Son, his Grandson,
and all his Riches, and to follow himself, if the Conspiracy did not succed to
his wish, hoping to engage the King of Poland to protect him, upon promising
him to raise some Troops in his Kingdom, with which he designed to go over to
the Cossacks and Tartars, and then he would undertake that by Force, which he
could not effect by Policy. It Is probable this Design might have succeeded, he
having great Interest in those Parts: But the Princess not being able to part
with him, hindered his Retreat till the very Night before his Disgrace, when he
might still have saved himself, having all the Seals in his own Hands, and
having but forty German Leagues from Moscow to the nearest Town in Poland: And
I am persuaded he would then have fled if he had done what he projected; but
seeing the Precipitation and Violence of the Princess Sophia had prevented him,
he chose rather to suffer the utmost Stroke of Fortune, and even Death it self,
rather than by his Flight to expose his Family that he must leave behind, to
all the Outrages which his malicious Enemies could invent; and to see himself
reduced from such a height of Fortune, to be a poor wandering Fugitive in a
Foreign Country.

The Present State of Muscovy.
WHEN Galischin was gone into Banishment, Naraskin, the Czar Peter's Uncle by
the Mother's side, found but one Obstacle to his Design of succeeding his
Nephew, viz. The Young Galischin, Prince Peter's Favorite, whom he could not
easily destroy, because he himself had been the cause of his rise; but young
Peter and his Favorite being little read in Politics, this old Fox insinuated
into his Nephew, that his Favorite must needs have been concerned with the
Great Galischin, as might be judged from the zealous Endeavors he had made to
save his Life; but the Czar representing to him how hard it was for him to
suspect a Man that had saved his Life three times, Naraskin accompanied by his
Daughter and Sons with Tears in their Eyes, declared to Peter, That if he did
not remove that Favorite, he might even as well recall the Great Galischin. A
Prince of more understanding than he, would have been shocked at least with
this; but he readily promised to confine his Favorite to live upon his own
Lands; whither that Prince being advertised of the matter, was already gone
without staying for Orders.

As soon as the Czar heard of it, he sent to him Courier after Courier, to ask
the Cause of his Retirement: To whom he gave no other Answer, Than that seeing
his past Conduct could not convince His Majesty of his Fidelity, he would never
more come to Court. The Czar Peter was so sensibly affected with this, that he
sent two Boyars to visit him; and some days after impatient to see him, he sent
two others to desire him to return, which he presently did. The Czar Peter
carest him extremely upon his return, which so alarmed the Naraskins, and their
Party, that they resolved to endeavor to be Friends with him; for a little
while he made a great Figure by the Favors that he conferred upon his Friends;
but at last, this Prince, who had nothing of the Merit of his Cousin in him,
began to follow his Maxims, in causing the Grandees to be disgraced, and their
Places given to such Drunkards as himself; but he soon fell into Disgrace
himself; for his Opponents making as if they would restore the Princess, partly
wrought so far upon Peter, that in the end he resolved to give the Place of the
Great Galischin, which his Cousin expected, and which till then had been
managed by Commissioners, to Naraskin, his Mother's Father. This Action, at a
time when 'twas least expected, determined all People to follow the Party of
the Naraskins, whose Sons were soon put into Places of the greatest Trust;
among the rest, his Eldest Son was made Great Chamberlain, and Young Galischin
turned out of that place; which so incensed him, that he could not forbear
expressing his Resentment, by charging the Czar with Weakness. His Enemies made
their advantage of this Conduct, and determined the Czar, who has no other
Merit than Cruelty, to Banish this Favorite ignominiously; and he has since
given Orders to put both the exiled Galischins to Death. Those that rejoiced
most at the fall of the Great Galischin, are now sensible of the loss of him;
for the Naraskins that Govern now, are Ignorant and Brutish, and begin to
destroy, contrary to all Policy and good Sense, all that that Great Man had
done with so much prudence for the Glory and Advantage of the Nation, and would
gladly recommend themselves by reviving their ancient barbarous Customs.

These Brutes have already forbid Strangers to come into their Country, and
have forbid the Exercise of the Catholic Religion: The Envoy of Poland is
allowed a Chapel indeed, but he obtained it with a great deal of difficulty.
Nay, it is thought that ere long they will oblige the Muscovites to learn only
to Read and Write as formerly, that in that as well as in other things their
Government may be absolutely Tyrannical, which will make the loss of Galischin
the more lamented.

For he built a very noble College of Stone, and put into it twenty Grecian
Doctors, and a great many Books; he advised the Noblemen to give their Children
learning: obtained leave for them to send some of their Sons to the Latin
Colleges in Poland, and to send for Polish Tutors to those they would Educate
at home, and permitted Strangers to come into, or go out of the Kingdom, which
before his time was never allowed. 'He would also have the Nobility travel
abroad, and learn the Art of War in Foreign Countries; his design being to lay
aside those Legions of Peasants, whose Lands were left uncultivated when they
went to the Wars; and instead of that useless Charge upon the People, to lay a
reasonable Tax upon every House. He advised that Ministers should be sent to
reside in all the chief Courts of Europe, and to give a Liberty of Conscienc^
^hroughout the Country.

He had already received the Jesuits into Moscow, with whom he very often
converst; but the next day after his Disgrace, they were all sent away with a
Declaration from the Czars to the Emperor, and King of Poland, who had sent
them, that they would never again let any come into the Country. Accordingly,
in March 1690. they refused to let the King of Poland's Envoy (who requested it
in his Master's Name) to pass through their Dominions; and likewise Father
Grimaldi from the Emperor, who is now in Poland for the Emperor of China. If I
should set down all that I have learnt concerning this Prince, I should never
have done. It Is sufficient to say, That he designed to people Deserts, to
enrich Beggars, to make Men of Brutes, good Soldiers of Cowards, and Palaces of
Cottages; all which advantages Muscovy has lost by the fall of that Prince. His
own Palace is one of the most Magnificent in Europe; it is covered with Copper,
and hung within with rich Tapestries, and noble Paintings; and during his
Ministry, three th^^^^nd Houses were built of Stone in Moscow, which will not
be thought strange by those that know there are five hundred thousand
Inhabitants in that City, and that it is composed of three Towns, one within
another, each surrounded by a great Wall, and a Ditch full of Water to defend
them from the Incursions of the Tartars; the first is called Kzim; the second
Bialogrod, or the White Town; and the third Novogrod, or the New Town.

The greatest Curiosity in it to a Stranger, is to see in December two thousand
Wooden-houses set up for the Eastern and European Merchants. Prince Galischin
also built upon the River Moscow, which runs into the Occa, a Stone Bridge of
twelve Arches, and of a prodigious height, because of the Floods; it is the only
Stone Bridge in all Muscovy, and was contrived by a Polish Monk.

The Manners and Religion of the Muscovites.
THE Muscovites, to speak properly, are Barbarians, Suspicious and Mistrustful,
Cruel, Sodomites, Gluttons, Covetous, Beggars, and Cowards; all Slaves except
three Families of Foreigners; Prince Sirkache, formerly Lord of the Country of
that Name, who is vastly rich; Galischin, and Harthemonerrich. Besides, they
are so dull and brutish, that were it not for the Germans, who are very
numerous in Moscow, they could do nothing well. They are very nasty, though
they often Bathe themselves in places built on purpose, and made so excessive
hot, that no body but they could support it. Men and Women mingle together in
those Bagnio's which usually stand upon the Waterside, that those who Sweat
may jump into the cold Water, which they do as well in Winter as Summer; but
though they are very hardy, yet they are more sensible of Cold than the Poles.
They Eat and Drink very ill; their usual Food is only Cucumbers and Melons of
Astrakan, which they pickle in Summer, in Water, Flower, and Salt. They eat no
Veal out of a scruple, too infamous to be named; nor Pigeon out of
Superstition, because the Holy Ghost is represented to us under that Figure.
The Men are clothed much like the Poles; those that are Rich, in Winter wear
Cloath-Gowns brought from Holland, lined with fine Furs, and Jewels, or little
Pearls, that are common in their Country, in their Caps: In Summer, Persian and
Chinese Stuffs and Silks.

The Women are dressed like the Turks; the poorest of 'em are proud of having a
Cap of Persian Stuff, more or less Rich, such as they can purchase. The richest
garnish 'em with Pearls and Precious Stones. Their Gowns or Sultanaes in Winter
are made of Stuffs flowered with Gold, lined with Sables, and in Summer of
Chinese Damask. They wear no Hair in their Head-dresses. They walk very
uneasily, for their Shoes are made like Sandals, and too big for their Feet.
They paint their Faces, shave their Eyebrows and color 'em as they fancy. Are
very fond of Strangers, little scrupulous about the Nearness of Blood; and
despise their Husbands above all things. The Muscovites love to go abroad, and
are always in haste; their Equipage is very pitiful, most of 'em ride about
Town upon a scrubbed Horse, with their Footmen running bareheaded before 'em:
In Winter this Beast is harnessed to a Sledge, and this is all their Carriage.
As for the Women, they have most of 'em a scurvy kind of a Coach made like a
Litter, drawn commonly by a single Horse; they go 5 or 6 together in it, and sit
squat down, for there is neither Seat nor Cushion in it. Though there are Five
or Six hundred thousand Inhabitans in Moscow, there are no more than Three
hundred of these Coaches, but above a Thousand little Chariots with one Horse,
which for a small matter carry people from one place to another.

Some of the Richest have Coaches made after the French fashion, brought from
Holland and Dantzick. Those of the Czars are very old; the reason is, they
never buy any, hoping to have 'em presented by foreign Princes or Ambassadors.
The best they have are made after the Mode of the Country, some with Boots, and
others like Litters. Their Sleds are very fine; those that are open, are made
of Gilded Wood lined within with Velvet, and broad Galoons: They are drawn by
Six Horses, whose Harness is covered with Velvet. Those Sleds that are covered,
are made like a Coach with Glasses, covered on the outside with Red Cloth, and
within with Sables: They lie down and sleep in them when they travel, which
they commonly do in the Nighttime in Winter.

When the Czars go through the City either in Coach or Sled, they change their
best Equipages for such as they use in the Country. They have several Wooden
Houses about Moscow, which they improperly term Pleasure-houses, for there is
neither Gardens nor Walks, they are only surrounded with Walls, for fear of
being carried off by the Poles or Tartars, which often happened fifty years ago.

The Czar* Peter is very tall, and pretty well shaped, and has a Comely Face;
his Eyes are large, but unsteady, which makes it no pleasant thing for any body
to look upon him; his Head shakes continually, though he is but Twenty Years
old. His diversion is to make his Favorites shoot at one another, and
sometimes they kill one another to ingratiate themselves with him. In Winter he
causes great holes to be made in the Ice, and forces his fattest Lords to pass
over 'em in Sleds; they fall in and are drowned sometimes, when the holes are
not froze over again hard enough to bear 'em. Now and then he causes the Great
Bell to be tolled, and nothing pleases him better than to see houses on fire;
which happens very often in Moscow, for they never take pains to put out the
fire till there are four or five hundred burnt. The truth on it is, there is
seldom much damage done, for these houses are little better than our Hogsties
in France or Germany: They are bought in the Market ready built. In 1688 there
were Three thousand burnt; and within four Months last Year I saw three fires,
in each of which five or six hundred houses at least were burnt. These fires
are occasioned by their perpetual Drunkenness, and their negligence to put out
the many Tapers that they stick about the Pictures in their Chambers. They
prepare themselves for Lent by a Carnival of as many days, during which the
disorder is so great, that the Foreigners who live in the Suburbs dare hardly
venture into the City, for they butcher one another like Wild Beasts, and make
themselves drunk with Brandy and other Liquors, so strong and yet so
abominable, that no body but they can drink 'em; so that it is no wonder they
lose the little reason they have naturally, and stab one another with great
Knives like Bayonets. A fellow shall kill his best Friend and Comrade there, if
he hopes to rob him of a Penny. All they do to hinder or at least lessen these
outrages, is to reinforce the Guards; but the Soldiers, who are no soberer than
the rest, never come in till the mischief's done; and provided they have their
share of the Plunder, the Criminal is sure to escape; insomuch that no body's
concerned in this Country to see people murdered daily in the streets. They
eat so greedily, that they are forced to sleep three hours at least after
dinner, and go to bed as soon as they have supped; but they make amends by rising
betimes in the morning. Nay, they live thus in the Army, and every private
Soldier takes a Nap at noon. In the Summer they strip themselves naked, and
bathe, and so they lie down to sleep. They cannot endure Rain, and it is very
rare in these parts. They all wear little Caps, and when they meet their
Friends they make a sign of the Cross, and shake hands. This they do, I
suppose, to call God to witness to their Infidelity, for cheating's one of
their Virtues.

The Religion of the Muscovites is that of the Greeks, and may be called
Archischismatical, for it is so full of horrible Superstitions, which their
Ignorance has introduced into it, that they may pass for half Idolaters. They
have kept up the Sacerdotal Order among 'em, but they treat their Priests and
Monks with very little respect; for they make no scruple when they catch 'em
out of their Churches, to take off their Caps, and when they have thresh'd 'em
sufficiently, to put 'em upon their heads again very orderly.

The Patriarch of Muscovy resided formerly at Kiovia, but the Muscovites have
obtained since that City surrendered to 'em, that his Seat should be
transferred to Moscow. This Patriarch is usually chosen from among the
Metropolitans, and confirmed by the Czar. He cannot be deposed but by those of
Constantinople and Antioch. In the Reign of the Czar Theodore, one was sent
thither at the Czar's Charge; he died last year, and was chosen at first purely
for his handsome Beard. The Patriarch and Metropolitans always wear their
Pontifical Habits, and go abroad in them either in a Coach or on Horseback.
Their Cross is carried before them by a Footman, who always is bareheaded; for
let the Weather be as 'twill, the Servants that according to custom walk before
their Masters, are never covered. Their Copes differ from those of our Bishops
in this particular, that they have little Bells hung all round 'em. The
Prelates carry their Beads in their hands, which reach down to the ground, and
are always mumbling over 'em. Their chief Devotion is in Processions, which are
performed in the following manner. All the Clergy in magnificent Copes, most of
them edged with Pearls, come out of some Church, but all in a Crowd without any
order, to go to another where the Solemn Service is to be held. Every Priest
carries something in his hand, some a Book, others a Cross, and others a
Crosier. Those that march next to the Metropolitan or Patriarch, carry great
Pictures of the Virgin richly adorned with Gold, Jewels, and Chaplets or
Bead-rolls of Pearls, others great Crosses richly adorned likewise, and so
heavy, that some are carried by four Priests. Then come those that carry the
Gospels, which without dispute are the most magnificent in Europe, for a single
Leaf costs betwixt Twenty five and Thirty thousand Crowns. I have seen one
which the Czar Peter had made for him by a French Jeweller, on each side set
with five Emeralds, the least of which is worth Ten thousand Crowns, and
enchas'd in four Pound of Gold, for these people value no Work but what is
weighty. After these come the Abbots, followed by the Metropolitans, and last
of all at some distance comes the Patriarch, having his Bonnet on, thick set
with Pearls, and fashioned, excepting the Three Crowns, like the Pope's Tiara.
He ought to be supported by the Czars, but they having more occasion when they
walk, to be led themselves, nominate some Lords to do that Office. These
Processions are preceded by about a hundred men, some with Brooms to sweep the
way, and others to strew Sand upon it. Before Prince Galischin's Ministry they
were obliged to march sometimes through the dirt, which he remedied by causing
all the Streets to be plank'd, for there is no paving in Muscovy; but since his
disgrace they have kept none but the great Streets in repair. All the Devotion
of the Muscovites lies in assisting at Mass, which their Priests begin at
Midnight; though their Service is very long, they never sit down at Church, nor
ever pray but in Meditation, for most of them can neither write nor read, and
not one of 'em, no not among their Priests, understands Greek. They have
abundance of Holidays, which they observe no otherwise than in ringing all the
Bells from the Eve before the Festival to the Morning after it, and they work
upon all the days in the year indifferently. They are likewise very fond of
making Pilgrimages: The Czar John, though he be so Paralytick, spends his Life
in them, though 'twould be more to his Credit not to show himself abroad so
often, but keep within his Palace, for he is a frightful sight, so very ugly,
that it is irksome to look upon him, tho he is but Twenty eight years old. When
they arrive at the place, they begin their Devotion by kissing the Earth,
making many signs of the Cross, and bowing to some Images, or places where they
ought to be. Their Priests are married, but must not lie with their Wives the
Night before their Festivals. The Bishops and Abbots are obliged to live
single. When a Roman Catholic turns to their Religion they baptize him anew,
and if he be married, and his Wife will not turn too, he may marry another. They
keep Lent three times a year; the first is ours, the second six Weeks before
Christmas, and the third fifteen days before our Lady's day in September. They
dress their Fish in Oil, which next to themselves is certainly the filthiest
stuff in the world: This kills most of the Soldiers, for the Fish they use
being dried in the Sun, and in a manner putrified, breeds great distempers
among 'em; and so does their common Drink, which is nothing but Water and
Flower.

They love to build Churches; and whenever a Nobleman builds a House, he erects
a Chapel, and maintains in it as many Monks as he can afford. There are in
Moscow Twelve hundred Churches built of Stone, which have every one five
Turrets with Bells in them, and at top of each Turret is a Cross, the least of
which is four Foot high. The most magnificent Churches are those of the Virgin,
and St. Michael, which stand near the Czar's Palace, the Dome and Turrets are
covered with Copper gilt, and the Crosses are painted Red. The Inside of these
Churches is painted like Mosaic Work, over against them is a great Steeple, in
which hang several great Bells, among the rest one that is twenty Foot in
Diameter, forty in height, and a Foot and a half thick; they have shaved forty
thousand Weight of Metal out of it, to make it sound well. They never ring it
out but on Twelfth-day, which is kept very solemnly by the Muscovites: And they
strike upon it when the Czar lies with the Great Duchess, to warn the people
to pray for the Conception of a Prince, for they make little account of a
Daughter. Half the Lands in Muscovy belong to the Monks, because the great
Piety of the Muscovites consists in building Cloisters, several of which hold a
hundred Religious, who live in great Plenty and perfect Ignorance. There are
likewise many Convents for Nuns. All sorts of Religions are permitted in
Muscovy, except the Catholic, which they look upon as the only good one next
to their own. If a Foreigner of any Religion soever goes into their Churches,
they make him turn Russian, because formerly those that looked in, used to
laugh at their Ceremonies and singing, which is very like the humming of dumb
People.

An Account of a Way by Land through Muscovy to China, and of the Commerce
betwixt them and the Muscovites.
THE Trade of Furs is of long standing in Muscovy, but is altered now from what
it was; the Sables were little known there formerly, and they dealt only in
ordinary Furs, except Ermins, which they exchanged for such Goods as they
wanted. But the Grandfather of the present Czars, Basile Bazillewik, Sirnam'd
the Tyrant, (he was justly so called, for he took pleasure in spilling the
Blood of his Subjects, and particularly once made his Coachman drive the Coach
in which was his Wife, over a Lake that was thinly frozen within a quarter of a
League of Moscow, in which she, and all that were with her were drowned);
having conquered the Kingdoms of Astrakan and Cazan, discovered at length part
of that vast Country, since called Ziberia, which in the Sclavonian Tongue
signifies a Prison, because that Cruel and Barbarous Prince sent into that
Country, which had then no Name, those that displeased him; to whom is owing
the Discovery of the Sables, or Zibelin Martins; and also of a Way to China
through those vast Deserts, covered with impassable and unknown Woods, which
probably stretch as far as the frozen Sea, by advancing still forward, and
penetrating further in chase of these Creatures, Black Foxes, Wolves, and other
Wild Beasts, with which these uninhabited Forests abound, and whose Skins are
so valuable.

After the Death of this Tyrant, his Son succeeding him, studied how to make an
Advantage of his Power, by permitting Foreign Merchants to come and Trade in
the Country. The Dutch were the first that attempted to pass by Sea to Muscovy;
but not being able to succeed in it, the English adventured with success, and
arrived at Archangel, a Port situated in the Sea or Gulf of St. Nicholas. The
Czar hearing of it, granted them large Privileges, viz. To pay no Custom
inwards and outward, to engage them to settle a Trade. The Dutch being piqu'd
at this Discovery, endeavored all they could to break off this Agreement; but
the Czar fearing the Establishment of Commerce with the English would be
delayed by such a proceeding, forbid the Dutch to enter into the Port. And so
the English remained sole Masters of this Trade, till the Death of King Charles
I. of which this Prince, though a Barbarian, being informed, took away from the
English out of Policy, though he termed it a Punishment for beheading their
King, all their Privileges, and gave leave to the Dutch to come into the Port,
upon Condition to pay 15 per Cent. for all that they imported and exported; and
they have since carried this Trade on so advantagiously, that at present they
maintain above two hundred Factors in the Country; of whom the greatest part
come and Winter at Moscow, because of the excessive Cold. It was upon this
occasion that Money was first brought into Muscovy, which is now as common
there as in Poland; for there are in the Suburbs of Moscow above a thousand
Merchants, English, Dutch, Hamburghers, Flemings, and Italians; these Trade in
Russia Leather and Cavear, which are Sturgeons Eggs, which they make up in
Cakes, as thick as ones Finger, and as broad as ones Hand, and salt and dry
them in the Sun; it is a Commodity to be had here in great Quantities, for
there is an incredible number of Sturgeons taken at the Mouth of the Wolga, and
other Rivers, that fall into the Caspian-Sea; they are brought up by Water to
Moscow, and from thence are distributed all over Muscovy, and the Neighboring
Countries, as Herrings are among us; and is of great support to the Muscovites
in their three Lents, which they keep very regularly. The English and Dutch
truck their Cloth and Spices for Corn, Hemp, Rosin, and Potashes. The Flemings
and Hamburghers deal with them for Wax and Iron. The Ships of these Nations
come to Archangel in July, and depart in September; they that stay longer, run
the hazard to be lost. The passage from Bergen to Archangel, is commonly
performed in fifteen or twenty Days, either going or coming. This Commerce is
very considerable, yet there does not come above thirty Ships a year into that
Port. The Persians come from Hispa^^n cross the Caspian-Sea to Astrakan at the
end of October, thence they Travel in Sleds to Moscow at the Czar's Charge in
five Weeks; when they go back, they go down the Wolga in thirty or forty Days.
The Dutch got leave of the Great Galischin to send some of their own Carpenters
and Pilots to Astrakan, where they built two Frigots, and crossed over the
Caspian-Sea to Chemakay, the first Town in Persia, and traded with the
Persians; but the Tartars having burnt them about eighteen Months ago, the
present Ministers have forbid the building any more, which will be very
pernicious in the consequence, for the Muscovite Vessels are very incommodious.
The Design of this Prince was to make this State like the rest in Europe; he
procured Memoirs of all their Methods of Government; he designed to begin with
giving the Peasants their Liberty, and the Lands they cultivate now for the
Czars profit, paying an Annual Tribute; by which, as he computed the Czar's
Revenues would be increased one half, which does not amount to less than seven
or eight Millions of French Livers in ready Money; for as to the Commodities
that make up the rest of his Revenue, it is very hard to compute their Value.
He designed the same thing in Relation to their Drinking-Houses, and other
Callings, thinking by these means to make the People Laborious and Industrious,
in hopes of enriching themselves.

As to the Hunting of Sables, he made no Alteration in it; that is carried on
by Criminals, who are banished into Ziberia; and Soldiers who are sent thither
in Regiments, Commanded by a Colonel, and stay there commonly seven Years;
they are all obliged to bring in a certain Quantity of Furs weekly; they must
take particular care that the fine Furs have no Holes in them, nor stained with
Blood; and especially the Sables, which they say spoils them; and therefore
they are beaten if they commit any such Fault; this makes them very dextrous at
Shooting them, which they always do in the Head with a single Ball. The success
of this Hunting depends upon much Patience and Assiduity; wherefore they allow
the Officers to encourage the Soldiers by sharing with them the overplus of
what they must kill weekly for the Czar, which makes this Employment very
considerable, for a Colonel may get in Seven Years by this Service Four
thousand Crowns, the Subalterns in proportion; but a Common Soldier never makes
more than Six or seven hundred Crowns, and they must have good Friends to get
that; for a Gentleman at Moscow has nothing in the World to live upon, but a
thousand Crowns a Year, half of which is paid in Sables, valued ordinarily at
more than they are worth: A Colonel has Four hundred Crowns a Year, and
Subalterns proportionably, paid the same way. Galischin's design for the
Czar's, and his Officers Profit, was to defray the Charge of the State in
Money, and for that end sent such as he could Trust into Foreign Countries,
with Sables and Furs, either to sell or truck them for such Goods as might be
sold again for the Czar's Profit. What he did to settle a Commerce with China
by Land through Ziberia and Tartary, deserves to be particularly related.

Spatarus, a Walachian, was banished out of his own Country, after having had
his Nose cut off, for discovering to the Grand Seignior, a Secret Treaty that
the Hospodar of Walachia, his Kinsman, had made with the King of Poland, and
which was the occasion of the Hospodar's being deposed, who is kept by the King
of Poland now in his Court. He retired first to the Elector of Brandenburgh,
who received him very kindly, because he was very Ingenious, and spoke Latin,
Greek, and Italian, very well; but the King of Poland informing the Elector of
his Infidelity, he was forced to fly from thence; and not knowing what to do,
went into Muscovy; Galischin received him, and gave him Subsistence; some time
after he sent him to China, to discover by what means to establish a Trade by
Land betwixt that Country and Muscovy; he spent two Years in this Journey, and
met with great difficulties; but he took such Observation of the Places he
passed through, that at his return he put Galischin in hopes, that in a second
Voyage he would take such a Method, that the way should be made as easy as
through any part of Europe. Galischin, upon his Assurances, began to think of
some commodious short Road, and having pitched upon it, he contrived how to
settle convenient Carriages, viz. to build from Moscow to Tobolk, the Capital
of Ziberia, some Wooden Houses every Ten Leagues, to put Peasants into them,
and to allow them some Lands, upon condition they should maintain in every
House Three Horses, he giving them the Three first; who should have a Right to
demand of Passengers to and from Ziberia upon their own business 3 d. per Horse
for every Ten Mile: He likewise planted Posts upon this Road, as upon all the
rest in Muscovy, to mark the Way and the Miles; and in those Parts where the
Snow is so deep that Horses cannot travel in it, he built some Houses, which he
bestowed upon some people who were condemned to perpetual Exile, and furnished
them with Money, Victuals, and great Dogs to draw the Sleds over the Snow, and
so to Tobolk, which stands upon the great River Irstik. He had erected some
Magazines, and laid up Provisions in 'em; he built several great Barks to go up
that River as far as Ketilbas, a Lake at the foot of the Mountains Pragog,
where he had provided necessary Carriage for the rest of the Voyage. Spatarus
assured me he went his last Journey in five Months, with as much ease as he
could have traveled in our parts of Europe. I earnestly desired to learn all
particulars, as the Names of Rivers, Mountains, and Provinces through which he
went; but I found him very shy and reserved, and that he durst not communicate
himself freely to me, for fear it should come to be known that he had
discovered a thing to me that the Czars would have kept secret; and lest his
Complaisance to me in telling me all I desired, should cost him a drubbing; for
the Czars never exempt any one whom they have a mind to give that Correction
to, from the Boyar to the Peasant. He told me however, that he did not question
to find an easier and shorter Way the next time he went. But the Hollanders
being always jealous of their Neighbors (as they have shown by all their
Establishments in the East) and designing to get into their hands the Trade of
all the world, and exclude every body else if they could, obliged the
Muscovites, after the disgrace of Galischin, to forbid all other Foreigners to
come into the Country; fearing lest if that Road should once be known, and
easy to be traveled, the French would attempt it; who carrying thither so many
curious sorts of Work as they make, which the Chinese and Tartars mightily
esteem, and for which in return they might bring back the richest and most
valuable Merchandises, in time might damage their Commerce to the Cape of Good
Hope, Batavia, Malaca, and other places in the East Indies, which they took
from the Portuguese and English; and foreseeing that the Commodiousness of this
Way by Land being once settled, all other Merchants would choose it, rather than
venture all the Tempests, Distempers, and other ill Accidents that happen at
Sea, besides the tediousness of the Voyage; and that thus a great Trade would
one day be carried on, which they don't apprehend from the Muscovites, who they
know want understanding to make any thing considerable of it, and that they are
too poor to buy the rich Commodities of those Kingdoms, and could bring away
nothing but a few Silks, Tea, Wooden Ware, and such like Baubles; so that they
have nothing to fear from them, who can never do 'em much harm, nor disturb
their Trade. Some time after the King of Poland made Complaints by his Envoy at
Moscow against this Prohibition which is directly contrary to the Treaty of
1686, in which it is expressly said, That his Subjects might go and come through
Muscovy to China: But all the Answer he could get, was, That the Czars had so
ordered it. They gave the same Reply to the King of Sweden, whose Ambassador
Fabricius made the like Agreement with 'em in 1686. They thought they did a
great deal in suffering the King of Poland's Envoys to pass through their
Dominions to Astrakan at their Charge, who from thence went to Persia.

The King of Poland inserted this Article in the Treaty of 1686, at the request
of the Jesuits, who hoped to go by Land to China; but Galischin with all his
Interest could not get leave for those to go, whom Count Siri, Envoy from
Poland to Persia, brought with him to Moscow in 1688, with Order from his
Master to facilitate their Journey to China; because the Dutch Resident
hindered it underhand, by informing the Muscovites, that among the Twelve
Jesuits were Father Avril and Beuvolier, Frenchmen, which the Most Christian
King had sent thither to discover the way by Land to China. This made these
Brutes declare to the Polish Envoy, That he might take His Master's Subjects
with him into Persia; but for the French, whose King had lately affronted the
Czar's Ambassador, they could show 'em no other Favor, than send them back the
way they came: At their Return the King of Poland took care to convey them safe
to Constantinople; but in all likelihood, when the King of France has made a
Peace, he will force the Muscovites to suffer his Subjects to pass through
their Country, and settle a Trade that way to China.

FINIS.

