A SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE HIGH and MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY De La TOUR D'
AUVERGNE, Vicount of TURENNE, Marshall General of FRANCE; Colonel General of
the LIGHT HORSE, and Governor of the Upper and Lower LIMOSIN.

Preached December 15, 1675.

By CLAUDE FRANCIS, MINISTRIER.

Englished out of FRENCH.

LONDON, Printed by W.G. and are to be Sold by Moses Pit at the Sign of the
Angel in S. Paul's Churchyard. 1677.

2 Samuel 3.32, 33, 38. -- And all the People wept.

And the King lamented, and said, Died he as a Fool dies?

-- Know ye not that there is a Prince and a Great Man fallen this day in
Israel? It Is the Death of Abner General of the Army, whom David lamented so.
It Is in the Heb. (...) which signifies the Princpal Man; and in the Greek
(...), the great Captain.



WHen I observe these Walls hung with Mourning, and the profound silence which
attends this mournful Ceremony, I see plainly, Gentlemen, that you are
assembled here to mix your tears with the tears of all France, and I conceive
my self to be but the interpreter of your grief. But when I cast my eyes upon
the Trophies which attend the Corpse, and upon those marks of Grandeur which
present to our sight a kind of Triumph in the midst of the very Shades of
Death, I am sensible that you come not here barely to weep at the remembrance
of a Hero we so lately lost; the memory of Heroes requires somewhat more than
this. To the demonstrations of an universal affliction, we should add public
Elogics, and apparent signs of our particular veneration; a weak, but a due
acknowledgment of what they merit of us.

How happy should I be, Gentlemen, if being chosen this day to publish the
Encomiums of so great a man, I was but able to express one part of your
thoughts, and but in some measure to represent an Idea of what you your selves
conceive of his worth! But how is it possible, but to omit something in the
infinite number of matters which offer themselves in a crowd to my Fancy? How
can I confine within the narrow Bounds of a Discourse, the Elogium of a Person
whose Glory fills the whole Earth? It Is rare to see a man's Wit upon such an
occasion, to reach the Sentiments of his Mind: And this am I most abundantly
sensible of, being now to speak the Elogium of Monsieur de Turenne.

When I call to mind the wonderful number of great Actions which he has done,
my eyes are dazzled, and my Fancy is at loss. As I know not where for to begin,
I see not where to end. If his Military Virtues surprise me, his Christian
Virtues ravish me. An non proprius virtutum nitor splendorem armorum
illustravit? Cassiod. ep. 5. var.
If I contemplate him as a Great Hero in War, I look upon him likewise as Great
a Hero in Christianity; and in the midst of that admiration, which so many
Virtues, so many Great Actions, so many Miracles both of Wisdom and Valor,
occasion, I must say with the Prophet, Know ye that he whom we lament, was one
of the greatest and wisest Captains in his Age? Number ignoratis quoniam Princeps
and Maximus cecidit? Great by the splendour of his Birth, and his Immortal
Actions; but greater yet in the sight of God, by the Innocence of his Life.
It Is this last Virtue, which makes the Praises of Heroes to be allowed of in
Holy Places; for without it, methinks, Custom could not have introduced Funeral
Ceremonies to any other end, Mors matter moeroris usurpatur ad gloriam. Bern.
Sermon. 26. in Cant.
but to flatter the living by the Elogiums of the dead.

But a thought so little Christian-like, The Cardinal of Bouillon. Non tam
clari sanguinis color, quam virtutum succo hujus vestimenta purpurascunt. D.
Ambr. in Hexant.
could never possess the mind of that Prince, who has caused the paying of
these Devoirs to the Memory of his Uncle, and who is now as Noble by the Purple
with which the Church has honored him, as by the Splendour of his Birth. He
designs not here, to show how great he was born, but to testify his Piety. Let
us endeavor then to imitate him in so holy a Design, and let us not so much
admire all the other Virtues of Monsieur de Turenne, as that alone, which is
able to render him acceptable in the eyes of the Sovereign Lord of all things.

If true it is, that Nature gives in the Blood the first dispositions to
Courage, who ever had by Birth greater dispositions to Virtue, than the Prince
whom we are now speaking of? The glorious Blood which descended to him from his
Ancestors, was, as 'twere, the original Source of his Heroic Valor. He is
descended from a House, whose Royal Alliances have communicated to his
Ancestors by fifteen Princesses all the Greatness of all the Sovereign Powers
in Europe. He is descended in a direct and Male Line from the Ancient Sovereign
Counts of Auvergne, Justel's Hist. of the House of Auvergne.
Dukes of Aquitane, true Heir both to the Virtue and Glory of those Princes,
who were the Wonders of their several Ages.

A Birth so advantageous did inspire into him from his very Infancy a strong
desire to imitate, Pene adolescens Glory maturitatem occupavit. Plin. epist,
1.4.
nay, to surpass the great examples, which they had left him. He began to bear
Arms at an Age when he had not as yet strength to manage them. The memory only
of so many Glorious actions which those of his Family had done, did put him
upon great things; but the reputation in Arms, which the Prince of Orange, his
Uncle by the Mothers side, had gained, did yet more vigorously excite him to
deserve a share in his Conquests. He made the first Essays of his Valor under
that Prince, and learning there to obey, he was soon qualified to command.
'Twas his own desire to pass all the degrees before he arrived to that great
Command of a General; in all which different Employes, he acquitted himself
most honorably. To gain that profound understanding, in which he did outvie
all other Captains, he was in person in threescore several Sieges, and six set
Battles, before that he commanded in Chief His Majesty's Armies. What he did
upon every of those occasions, do very well merit Elogiums; but his Actions
since he was a General, carry so much of Splendour and Glory with them, that a
man cannot fix his eyes upon what preceded.

Let us omit then all the testimonies of Valor and Prudence, which he gave
before Casal, at Turin, at Quiers, at the passage of the Po near Montcallier,
at Rousillon, in Lorrain, and in many other places, which I do not mention,
because I would not distract your Fancy with the almost infinite multitude of
his private actions. Let us make a little stop at the mavelous effects of his
Courage, when being sent to command the Army of the Mareshal de Guebriant,
which the Death of so sage a Commander had dissipated, he re-established it in
a very little time, and put it in so good a condition, that soon after it made
that famous Conquest of Fribourg, to which he himself did in no small measure
contribute; if you will take the judgment of that great Prince, who then
commanded the French Troops. The Prince of Conde, then Duke d' Enguien.
He so well knew how to improve this Success of our Arms, that all the
neighboring parts had a perfect dread of him; and in one Campaign only, what
by the swiftness of his Victories, what by the defeating of four great
Generals, and what by the taking of Eight or Ten Towns, he did constrain the
Emperor to conclude at Munster that Peace which was so much for the Glory of
France, and did secure the repose and quiet of our Allies. But scarce had these
great Successes given us hopes of forcing Spain to comply with this Peace, but
those hopes were entirely blasted by a Civil War, which was near tearing the
very Bowels of our Kingdom, in that very instant that 'twas rising to the
highest prosperity.

Is it not possible to bury these troubles in oblivion? Why should the Glory of
our Hero be mixed with our misfortunes? But We should do wrong to his memory,
if in taking no notice of our Disorders, we should omit to mention the most
important Services which he then performed for his Prince, and his immortal
Actions at Villeneuve, S. George, at Gergeau, at Bleneau, and many other
places, where both his Valor and Prudence did appear with the greater
splendour, for that he had to deal with the greatest Captains in that Age; for
without hazarding any thing, in a Conjuncture so perilous to the State, he knew
(if a man may say so) how to force Victory to follow him, and to attend upon
the honest party: Which did oblige one of the bravest Queens that France ever
had, to say of him what is higher than all our Panegyricks, to wit, that
Monsieur de TURENNE had three several times preserved the Crown to the King her
Son. These very Services occasioned the greatest Monarch in the world, as he
was passing by one of those places not long since, to say, Here is that place
where Monsieur de TURENNE saved both my State and my Person. Is there any
Subject that can boast of a Glory which parallels this? What satisfaction is it
to a man, to see his Merit crowned by the acknowledgment of a King, who is
himself the wonder of the World? A recompense worthy of so matchless fidelity.
How often have we seen him, with the Remains of an Army that has been either
defeated or dissipated, to repair the faults of others, to revenge himself of
Fortune, to make up to the Enemy victoriously, and to force from them those
Spoils which they but just before had taken? A General should of himself see
all things, and penetrate into Futurities, while his Army discerns nothing but
what is present and directly before their eyes. If he be not a Soul to that
great Body, if he does not regulate their Movings, if he be not at the same
time every where, and if he understands not how to retrieve the most
unfortunate Accidents, he runs the Risque of losing entirely his Reputation,
how successful soever he has been in preceding Campagnes. But observe upon
such occasions, the Air, the Disposition and the Manners of the Hero we now are
speaking of. He had not only Courage and Wisdom himself, but he could inspire
them into others. Those that were under his Conduct, he could make them both
wise and valiant. His Soldiers never counted the number of their Enemies; they
out-brav'd the illness of Seasons, Fatigues, and Dangers. Equally bold and wise
in all that he undertook; he was never mistaken in his apprehensions, never at
a loss in his Conduct or Commands. In one of his actions, you might see all
that Parts, Courage, Experience and Resolution could contribute; conducting all
things to their ends, with as much Judgment, as Address and Vigor. All his
Orders, all his Words, all his Steps were so many admirable Lessons both of
Wisdom and Valor. In the midst of the mightiest Successes, suspecting Dame
Fortune, he foresaw every thing, and provided against all things, reflections
upon things past never diminishing his Valor. As soon as ever he advanced into
his Enemies Territories, he was thoughtful to secure his retreat upon occasion,
but never declined any thing which in prudence could have been executed. By his
wise Conduct, how often has he shown, that the number of Soldiers was not
always the main strength of an Army, that the advantage of ground was not at
all times an advantage; that there was an art to conquer numerous Armies with
but a small handful of men; that Ingenuity might render the very
incommodiousness of places useful? How many times have we seen him by his
presence only, keep off a Deluge of Nations, which were coming thundering upon
our Frontiers? He was acquainted with the art of disappointing all their
Projects, and would retrieve affairs in such Conjunctures where you would judge
him abandoned of all manner of succor: For though his Wisdom never trusted
Fortune with any thing where he could be secure, yet never did man dare more,
or push his Enterprises farther, when he found a necessity of relying upon
Chance, and of betaking himself to rash attempts, which are often attended with
great Successes, and sometimes are the effect both of Wisdom and Conduct. By
this means, he did acquire so much esteem and reputation amongst his Soldiers,
that he found them not only full of obedience, but full of desire, of zeal, of
passion, of transport to follow his Orders. When he undertook any great thing,
they who were engaged in it with him, did submit themselves with all manner of
respect to his Commands, and never doubted the event under the Conduct of that
Chief, whose reputation alone had no few times effected greater things than the
strength of Armies.

'Twas of him, that the great King, whose Conduct and Valor at this day are
most justly admired by all Europe, the true Heir of the Charlemagnes and Holy
Lewis, did desire to learn the great Art of War. What progress did so
mavelous a Scholar make presently under such a Master! He was soon able to
dictate to himself Lessons, how to conquer and subdue the most renowned
Captains. In a little time, had he need of nothing but his own Genius, to
overthrow his Enemies, to pass Rivers, take Towns, and give Laws to every
thing. Monsieur de TURENNE knew well how to second him in that glorious
swiftness. Victory never left him; his Winter Quarters were Marches and
Attaques, his Encampments Fights and Battles, his Retreats Victories, his
Delays Enterprises, his very Repose Action. Triumph succeeded Triumph; he did
that in one Campaign, which another would have found hard to do in a great many
Ages. Let Greece and old Rome spend their Titles and Elogiums in favor of
those Worthies they gave birth to; (...) Pausan. Duo Fulmina Belli Scipiadas. 6
Aeneid. Liberatori Reipublicae, Fundatorique quietis. Inscript. in arcu
Constantini.
let them style them the Terror of Kings and Nations, Thunderbolts, and Gods of
War, Takers of Towns, Pillars of the State, Defenders of their Liberty. All
these Elogiums are due to the Glory of Monsieur de TURENNE; and we are obliged
to engrave them upon his Tomb, as the just Monuments of our acknowledgment. His
Troops had a general confidence in him, which could not have been acquired by
an Understanding less profound than his. That Virtue never deserted him in the
midst of the greatest dangers. He judged of all the Events of War with that
penetrating eye, and with that certainty, that at the opening of a Campaign, he
would make you a Model of all his own Designs, and would foresee to all those
of his Enemies. He knew all the Posts that they could take. He prevented their
Motions, he divined all their Wiles and Stratagems, and pretending to be
ignorant of them, he caught them in the very Snares they laid for him.

This has he done several times in these two last Campagnes, when all the
Powers of the Empire in Arms against us, having made an imaginary Division of
our Provinces, did cross the Rhine with seventy thousand men, thinking to
swallow up with their multitude the small number of Troops we had in Alsatia,
for the securing our Frontiers. But Monsieur de Turenne was at the Head of that
small handful. What does that great man do? He presently takes Posts so
advantageous, that the Enemies did never dare to attaque him: He lets that
puissant Army consume it self, partly by the misunderstanding among the
Commanders, and partly by its want of being well disciplined.

He makes a sudden March, and falls upon them with so much surprise and vigor;
that he forces them shamefully to repass that River, upon whose Banks they had
formed the empty projects of their Conquests. River, so many times a witness of
his Glory, was it not hard that thou should be so near when he died? And that
a fatal Shot should in thy sight snatch him away from the Arms of Victory? If
the just regret at a loss so considerable, did but permit me to give you a
Relation at large of the Actions of this last Campaign, 'twould be easy for
me, Gentlemen, to show you the Valor and Wisdom of our Hero to be like the
shining of those Stars, which do cast the more glittering Light the nearer they
are to their Setting. What could I not say of the Industry and Patience with
which he has confounded the Art, the Wiles, and the Understanding of the
General of the Imperial Forces? All his Achievements were attended with
Glorious Events. If he did but enter into Alsatia, he drove the Enemies from
thence, and retook all the Towns; if he passed the Rhine, he created a terror
throughout Suabia and Franconia; if he moved toward the Palatinate, he secured
Philipsburgh and the Neighboring Towns; if he came to the right, he cleared
Brisac; he assured us the Passage and Commerce of Strasburg; when he went to
the left, he every where victorious, every where wise, every where successful
himself, did observe the Generals of the Imperial Troops and Confederate Forces
fearful, trembling, dismayed, and unresolved. In fine, our Enemies astonished
at his wise Conduct, could not think of him but with a terror mixed with
admiration; and they were forced to own that he alone was as formidable as his
whole Army. The same that S. Ambrose said of that Valiant Machabee, who dying
in the midst of a Victory, which was due to him alone, was buried among his
Triumphs. Lib. 1. de Offic. c. 40.
Tanto virtutis spectaculo defixi hosts sic trepidaverunt, ut impares se omnes
unius virtuti arbitrarentur.

You were near seeing of him to have triumphed over all the Forces of the
Empire. That glorious day was at hand: He himself prevented it. But just when
that Victory which he step by step had managed, could not possibly have escaped
him, your eyes, your mournful eyes did see him, and in him our hopes, with one
chance shot cut off. Nevertheless, afflicted as you are, with the extremest
grief, at the thought of so direful an Accident, remember that you have learned
from this great Man, and from the example of all your Ancestors, that no man's
condition is more glorious, than his, who dies shedding his Blood for the
Service of his King, and the Honor of his Country; more especially when his
Death is attended with all those Circumstances, which Religion and a sincere
Piety require of a Christian Hero. For then we may according to the Gospel,
say, that it is not barely honorable, but happy.

This is, Gentlemen, the most proper Subject of Consolation that we can propose
to our selves, in case of so universal a Misfortune. In vain have Valor and
Wisdom raised the Reputation of those, whose Memory we honor, if Piety and all
Christian Virtues do not attract the Eyes of Heaven to behold those persons
with favor. The admiration which they get, let it come from what other cause
it will, is but like a false Light which glitters, dazles, disappears, and is
lost for ever in the eternal shades of Death. It Is Piety, Gentlemen, which
comprehends in it all other Virtues; and it is upon that Commendation of
Monsieur de Turenne, that the Character I now bear, the Place I now speak in,
and the great things that I have to say, do permit me to enlarge.

There is nothing, Gentlemen, so opposite to the Life of a Christian, as a
Court-Life, and the noise of War. One must have a great command of himself, if
declining the Enchantments of the one, and the Violences of the other, he
preserves his own Innocence; and it is that just government of a man's self,
which makes your true Heroes. It Is a kind of Prodigy, Psalm. 70. Nulla fides
pietasque viris qui castra sequuntur. Exeat Aula qui vult esse pius.
says the Sacred Oracle, to find Piety there; nay, the very Heathens
themselves have been of opinion, that the conversation of either Court or Camp
was enough to infect all Virtues. Upon these Considerations, I cannot but
admire the Hero, whose Funeral Rites we are now solemnizing, as a person much
the more extraordinary, in regard he was educated in the midst of the Vanities
of the Court, and had spent his whole Life in the exercise of War, but yet had
inviolably preserved an invincible sincerity, amongst the Intrigues of one, and
the Chances of the other. His Reason alone, always sage, always Mistress of his
Inclinations, as well as his Thoughts, began to effect in him, what Grace does
in the most Holy and most Religious Souls. Let me behold what part of him I
will, I find in him nothing but Prodigies; but upon an equal observation, of
his Military and Christian Virtues, I discover in the latter a greater fond of
Light, and much a more solid Glory. How fondly men deceive themselves, Filii
hominum usque quo gravi cord? ut quid diligitis vanitatem and quaeritis
mendacium? Psalm. 4.
who seek a counterfeit glory in the apparences of your imaginary Grandeurs?
Know ye that it is Christian Virtue only, which makes our Glory real; that upon
the sight of such Virtue, all other disappears as the Shadows of the Night
before the Light of the Day; and that in the presence of God none of the
Grandeurs of the World remain, but what this Virtue communicates to us. These
happy impressions were so far advanced into the Heart of our Hero, that he was
an Enemy to those vain Passions of Interest and False Glory, which are Masters
almost of all men: The Glory of his King, the Good of the State, and how
faithfully to pay his Devoirs, were the only Objects of his thoughts.

The Devoirs which men render to Princes, proceed ordinarily from two Sources;
either from a disinteressed respect, where Noble Souls consider their Prince as
the Image of God, whose Authority he holds and exercises over his Subjects; or
from a loose Principle, which puts Mercenary Souls upon sacrificing of every
thing to the making of their private Fortunes, and to make use of Justice and
Religion purely to serve their own Interest. How far was Monsieur de Turenne
from these dissolute Artifices? He made his Duty a kind of Religion; he never
appeared greater, than by contemning all things that Fortune and Interest were
able to supply him with? He contenting himself to merit every thing, never
asked any thing; being of opinion that the esteem of his Prince, the testimony
of his Conscience, and the Glory of having done well, were sufficient
recompenses of Virtue. Not knowing how to be idle, he scorned to flatter
Fortune; so far was he from offering Incense to her, like a great many
Mercenary Souls, who make her a Divinity, that he thought it beneath him to
court her. If she offered to leave him, he forced her to follow him, and to
accompany him every where; and showed that he who has Wisdom and Courage
united, is above her reach. The love of Truth and Justice so regulated his
Actions, his Conduct, and his Thoughts, that he only advised with Reason and
Honor. In fine, I find him in every thing just, wise, generous, honorable,
obliging to his very Enemies, whom he would prefer before his Friends to
Offices and Employs, if he judged them more worthy.

You, Gentlemen, who have been faithful companions to him in his Labors, and
are undeniable witnesses of his Equity, do know, that as sensible as he was of
the Amity and Services that were paid him, yet when it was left to him to
dispose of the Charges and Preferments, he thought no farther than to perform
His Majesty's intentions, and to give Merit its due. His hands were so pure and
so clean, that refusing the most allowable and most lawful advantages that War
could offer, he never reserved to himself any other fruits of his Conquests,
than the Glory of having done well. He freely gave to his Soldiers, all that a
successeful Campaign could put into their hands; and loading them with Spoils
which he took from the Enemies, he made of them so many living Trophies of his
Liberality and brave Actions. He was better pleased with the Title of a Father
to his Soldiers, than with that of a Conqueror; being more satisfied to be seen
in the midst of them as a partaker of their Fortune, than the ancient
Triumphers were amongst all their pomp, on those festival Days when they made
their Entry into Rome like so many Divinities. Our Allies often confiding more
in the Faith of his Word, than on the most solemn Treaties, have continued
faithful to our Interests, without being jealous of our prosperities; for they
did assure themselves, that this great man would make use of the highest
advantages for no other purpose but the public good, and that in the most
lucky successes he would have a sincere moderation. (...) Arist. c. 1. Mag.
Moral.
For sure, Gentlemen, true Valor is not an unbridled Passion of domineering
over every body. It Is a Virtue which has its Rules and Motives grounded upon
Justice, and which follows in every thing the Conduct of Reason. It Is this
moderation, which puts a man upon wise Enterprises, and judicious Wars; without
it, the greatest of men are but rash, though they chance to be successeful.
What if they fill the whole world with the noise of their Name? What if they
conquer Provinces? What if they subdue whole Nations? Have they done any more
than those Tyrants did, who insolently attributed to themselves the Name of the
Scourges of the Almighty, after that they had ransackt the whole Earth? The
Successes which attend those lucky rashnesses, are more due to the Fantastic
Caprichio of Fortune, than to their Valor. If that love of Reputation which
emboldens men, if that heat which sets men a fighting, be not tempered with the
love of Justice, if it be not regulated by the Laws of Equity, it is but a
barbarous thirst after humane Blood, more proper to make Usurpers than just
Conquerors.

It Is that love of Justice, which has made our Generous and disinteressed
Prince appear to you so moderate amidst the most fortunate Successes. You,
Gentlemen, are all well satisfied of that great Truth, which a Sacred Oracle
has pronounced, that the noblest of Victories is that which a man gains over
himself; if he would know how to triumph over his Enemies, first he should
learn how to rule his Passions; Melior est patiens viro forti, and qui
dominatur animo suo, expugnatore urbium. Prove. 18. Miaus est, quod i^li
bellious labor quam quod Pax Christiana subjecit. S. Leo, Sermon. in Not. Apost.
and that it is more glorious to subdue his own Pride, than to pull down Walls
and take Towns. So may I say, that he did never gain a more glorious Victory,
than that which rendered him Master of all his Passions, and has so often in the
midst of the noise of War, afforded him all the sweetnesses of an inward Peace.
He, at the Head of Armies, in the midst of his Conquests, at his return from
those wonderful Campagnes where he struck astonishment and terror into the
remotest parts, did appear humble and modest, and far from adding to the
greatness of his Exploits, or suffering it in Sycophants, would scarce endure
to hear his true and just praises. When he observed others seized with
admiration at so great Events, not being able to lessen them in his Discourse
without doing wrong to Truth, he would give all the Glory of it to him who is
the Author of all good, using these Christian words, That on such occasions he
ought to think of doing his Duty, and 'twas the God of Armies that made a
fortunate or unfortunate Success to attend it.

Will ye not say, Gentlemen, that I speak the Elogium rather of a Saint than of
a Prince or a General of an Army? But what will ye say, when I add, that all
this is but a shadow of his Christian Virtues; and that this Piety, which was
the Soul and Principle of all his Actions, was the pure effect of his own
natural disposition? Before that he was sensible of the impressions of Grace,
he acted thus.

We can very rarely observe in the world persons advanced above others, whether
by Fortune, or their own Merit, to be generally beloved, till that they are
dead: As if there was a necessity to cease to be, or else to be unfortunate,
for to avoid the aspersions of Envy. Nevertheless, we may say, that Monsieur de
Turenne has conquered even Envy it self, in the last part of his Life. His
Glory was mounted to so high a pitch, that one might compare it to the Sun,
which when at the highest, hardly leaves any shadow upon the Earth. He was the
object of the Esteem, of the Love, and of the Veneration of all Europe. He was
looked upon as the Prodigy and the Wonder of his Age. Every body seemed
transported when they talked of the greatness of his Genius, his Labors, his
Exploits, his wonderful Successes, and his wise Conduct. The Princes both of
Germany and Italy coveted his Picture, and Travelers that came amongst us,
went home satisfied, when they had seen that great man.

Who can sufficiently express that ardent zeal with which he burned for the
interest of Religion? In the midst of his Victories, he would be thinking of
the Conquests of Faith; he formed the Models and the Designs of it; he employed
for that purpose all his Estate, Care and Credit. This man, in whom the whole
State reposed the care of their Frontiers, and the public safety, was as
industrious in promoting the progress of Faith and Religion, as in advancing
the progress of his Masters Arms. Shall I be afraid after this, to say, that we
have not seen more zealous or more pure Faith in Israel? I mean not at Court,
where it is rare to meet with that sincere submission to the light of the
Gospel. I mean not in Armies, where Piety does so seldom appear. I mean in the
Sanctuary, amongst the most Holy and Religious Souls. Matthew. 8.
Amen, dico vobis non inveni tantam fidem in Israel. And, Gentlemen, if the Son
of God has thought the Faith of a Captain a fit Subject for his Elogiums and
Admirations, sure we have no reason then to refuse the paying of the just
tribute of Praise to the Piety and Zeal of Monsieur de Turenne, which is the
only recompense that he can receive from us.

The Reputation and Glory of his Arms, never made him forget his Duty to God.
He worshipped him as the only Author of his Triumphs; and duly every Morning
offered to him his Spirit and his Heart, as the Victims of his Faith and
Obedience. The Sacrifices of the Spirit and the Heart are the most agreeable
Sacrifices that we can make to the Almighty. We discharge our selves of these
Duties by Faith and Religion. Faith is the Sacrifice of the Spirit, and Piety
the Sacrifice of the Heart; and if one of these Sacrifices be a sincere
resignation of our Spirit to the Spirit of God, who is the Sovereign
Understanding, and the primitive Truth; the other is a voluntary offering of
all the Motions of our heart to the orders of his Providence. It Is to the Piety
and to the Faith of Monsieur de Turenne, that we owe these great Successes,
which so many persons have attributed to his Valor and his prudent Conduct.
Exodus 27.
He was at the same time both the Moses and the Joshua of his Army; he both
charged the Enemy in the Field, and prayed to Heaven too to bless his party
with Victory. One might say of his Camp, as of those Heavenly Troops which came
to the succor of Jacob, that 'twas the Camp of God; Castra Dei sunt bec. Genesis
32.2.
for he had purged his Army of those Debaucheries that are committed in others;
and had established there a due Worship and public Prayers. He was in his
Tent, as those ancient Patriarchs, who encamping under their Pavilions, looked
upon this Life but as a place of passage, which they were always ready to
leave. In the midst of his Victories, and his greatest Successes, he would be
vehemently desiring of Heaven, and solitary in his Tent, after that he had
given his Orders for the securing his Camp, he in the midst of the noise of his
Army would be making of his inward peace, and conversing with the Almighty.
It Is thou alone, Great God! that can effect in the World such surprising
Prodigies. They are the effects of thy Grace and thy Mercy. Christus milites
suos quos in personam Ducis, attollit inter acies quaerit. Ennod. orat. dicenda
Maximo.
Thou selects Souls brought up in the tumults of War, to make them patterns of
Virtue and Holiness. Thy Goodness makes them sensible of the Divine beams of
Grace, to confound the dissolute Notions of those who think War and Piety to be
inconsistent. This man, who always lived at Court, and in Armies, where Virtue
is so little acquainted, and holy matters so much slighted, did die the best of
Christians. It Is the thought of this, Gentlemen, which removes all our fears.
Though his Death was sudden, yet he was not unprovided; and I may say of him,
what the Divine Apostle said of an ancient Patriarch who was snatched away in a
Whirlwind, Genesis 5.
that his Conscience and his Piety bore him witness that he was acceptable to
God. Ante translationem enim testimonium habuit placuisse Deo. Ad Heb. 11.


But how can a man keep from shedding of tears at the remembrance of so direful
a death? Our Hero now ceases to be, and there remains with us nothing but empty
Ashes, and a Name pleasing in our Ears. Glory, Grandeur, Authority, Esteem,
Reputation, are ye all so inconsiderable, as not to be able to prevent Heroes
from dying like the most vulgar sort of men?

Methinks, Gentlemen, this is the Fatal Moment that we received the News of the
Death of that great man. The Consternation then was universal, and our Grief
was a long while before it had power to break its silence, and open a passage
for our Sighs. The general Astonishment which such doleful Tidings did disperse
throughout all France, made us sensible of the greatness of our loss, before we
had leisure to think of the mischievous Consequences it might make us dread.
The tears of the whole Army, the cries and mourning of the Soldiers, and the
concern they showed to revenge his death, though at the expense of their own
lives, did sufficiently demonstrate that they had lost their Father as well as
their General. Ye sad, but glorious Remains of that great man, Ashes of his
Body half burnt with that Thunderbolt which snatched him from amongst his
Triumphs, go ye and receive the last Honors, and the just Marks of the grief,
of the esteem, and of the sense of the greatest of Kings. The Tomb which is to
enclose you, what glorious Titles does it bear of so many brave Actions? Go and
divide this Honor amongst those great Captains, whom Valor, Alphonse de
Brenne. Bertrand du Queseline. Lewis de Sancerre, Lewis de Evereux, Arnaud de
Barbaran, Guillaume du Chastel, buried at S. Denis.
Wisdom and Piety did so much distinguish in their Life-times, that they remain
yet distinguished since their Deaths, by those proud Monuments, which the
Magnificence of our Monarchs has caused to be erected for them, in the Temple
appointed for the Burial of Kings. But, Gentlemen, might not this Prince hope
for a more solid recompense of his Labors, than the Glory of a vain Tomb? So
many wonderful Actions, are they not able to procure him a further advantage,
than a cold Marble decked with the Adornments of Vanity? Then he might say with
the most afflicted and the wisest of Kings; that nothing would remain of him
but a Magnifick Silence, a vain Ostentation of Elogiums and Specious Titles to
cover the emptiness of his Tomb. Job 3.14.
Dormiens silerem and somno meo requiescerem cum Regibus and Consulibus Terrae,
qui aedificant sibi Solitudines. They are but Solitudes, that the Powers of the
Earth build in erecting of Tombs, since that their Glory and Grandeur accompany
not the Persons, and there remains nothing of them but dumb Shadows. Monsieur
de Turenne has thought of a more solid Glory. He entered so often into the bosom
of Eternity in his wise reflections, he was so often raised above the pitch of
those foolish Idea's with which vain men are pleased, that I date to say, that
his Soul has acquired an eternal happiness, by the Innocence of his Life, and
the Holiness of his Manners. He might have lived longer for the Glory of
France, for the Repose of the People, for the Reputation of our Arms, and for
the Security of our Frontiers. But what could he have added to his own Glory?
Go then, Generous Soul! go, and enjoy that profound peace which you have so
vehemently desired. You have sought it already in the midst of the great
successes of a Campaign so glorious, and you have made haste to secure the
repose of France, that you might entirely apply your self to the thoughts of
Eternity in the peaceable repose of a more quiet Life. Pretiosa Mors haec quae
emit immortalitatem pretio sanguinis Cypr. Epist. 9.
But in the very instant that your wishes were upon being perfectly fulfilled,
you met with Death in the bosom of Glory. Our Enemies themselves did commend
you, at the same time that we lamented you. Both Rome and Vienna paid you the
Devoirs of Esteem and Piety, when Paris rendered you the Devoirs of their
Acknowledgments. Our Churches, Quam opinionem nemo unquam mortalium assequi
potuit sine eximia virtutis gloria. Aug. l. 3. De Civ. Dei. c. 15.
our Sanctuaries, the Tribunals of Justice, the Circles, the Academies, and the
Public Oratories have rung with your Praises; both Prose and Verse have
consecrated the remembrance of your glorious Actions in all the polite
Languages. They have said the very same things of you throughout all Europe, as
have been said throughout all France. From the moment of his Death, all our
Joys have been changed into Torrents of Tears; our public Acclamations, into a
sorrowful Silence; and our Songs of Victory and Triumph, into most lamentable
Sighs. To conclude, the People have mourned, and the King Himself has shed
tears, and that incomparable Monarch did make the best Elogium that could be
made of your Glory, when he publicly said, that we had lost the wisest
Captain, and the Chief man in this Age. Flevit omnis Populus, plangensque Rex,
and lugens ait, Nequaquam ut mori solent ignavi mortuus est. Number ignoratis
quoniam Princeps, and Maximus cecidit? Not being able to add to this Elogy,
which has proceeded from the mouth of Two great Kings, I hold my peace, and
leave to History the care of making the Panegyric, and communicating to
Posterity the Wonders of this Hero.

FINIS.

