The breathings of true Love, from the Immortal Seed, in the Prisoner for the
Lord, unto his People.
DEar Friends, Brethren and Sisters in the Light, called to be a people, loved
of God the Father in the Lord Jesus Christ, Grace, Love, and Peace be
multiplied amongst you, through the abundant manifestation of the Spirit of
Life, proceeding from the Father and the Son.

My Children, and beloved Friends, the God of all truth has appeared unto you
in the everlasting Covenant of light, and life, visiting you in an acceptable
day, and time; making known unto you his eternal Truth, by the revelation of
his mighty power in your mortal bodies; whereby he brought you indeed to feel
and know the miserable estate and condition that ye were in; and he has also
given you to see him upon whom help is laid, and you have received him (who is
the salvation of God) through the drawings of his mighty power; and you are
brought to know and believe, that salvation is not to be had in another; yea
many of you have received the Covenant of God, and do indeed know that your
sins are washed away in the blood thereof, for you have the witness in your
selves, and the word of reconciliation is selt and known in your hearts,
whereby abundance of peace and joy unspeakable is witnessed, and the Kingdom is
come, of which there is no end; and some of you are placed together therein, in
Christ Jesus; and many others of you the called of the Lord, are traveling
thitherwards through the righteous Judgments of the Lord, in the spiritual
warsare, and in the faith and patience of the Lamb.

Now my Friends, be you steadfast in the truth of God received; you have been a
suffering people most of the time since the Lord has brought you in any
measure into the obedience of his glorious Truth and Gospel, (which is the
power of God) and you who have abode in his fear, and singly given up to his
will, you have mightily been preserved, and you have felt the hand of a tender
Father upholding you, and giving you peace and content, when you have lost much
of this world, and the honor and pleasures thereof for his names sake: Oh
Friends! He has not been wanting unto you, he has seen your sufferings, and
has looked upon your afflictions, and has ministered strength proportionable
thereunto, that you might not faint, nor be weary; Oh! let not his mercies and
fatherly care and loving kindness be forgotten by any of you; but let them for
ever be had in remembrance, so shall the reward be witnessed.

Now Friends, the Lord has suffered a Cloud and a Mist as it were to spread it
self in these Nations, whereby an evil favor is gone forth, which by fire must
be taken away, in which he will yet further try his people that they may be as
gold separated clearly from the dross, and that they may indeed be truly
gathered and redeemed from the earth, and all earthly things: and that they may
wholly look unto him for deliverance, and know that he indeed is the alone
refuge and hiding place in the day of distress: Therefore let all, who knows the
power of God, retire inward, and watch in the light of the Lamb, that you may
seel the movings of the life, in your own vessels, and be kept in obedience to
its drawings and leadings, in this day of trial, temptation and darkness;
which is spreading it self, for a moment ( mark that) least any of you be
scattered, for the enemies work is, and will be, to seek to draw you from your
strength and true guide, which, where he attains it, great will be the sorrow
and loss of such.

Therefore my dearly beloved friends, who have tasted how good the Lord is, in
the tender bowels of Christ, I beseech you, be servent in love to God, and one
toward another; and be watchful in the Light, and therein watch one over
another, and strengthen, and comfort, and encourage, and build up one another,
in the work and service of the Lord: And if any (through the temptation of the
enemy) has at any time spoken or done any wrong to another, even as God, in
Christ, forgave you, so freely forgive ye one another; and be ye plain hearted
one to another, and be ye reconciled in that which destroys all prejudice, and
purges out all hard thoughts; that so the unity may be witnessed in that love,
which thinks no evil; and the one Head and Master over all submitted unto; and
let the gathering be unto him alone, that so the blessing may be multiplied in
and amongst you, unto the glory and praise of him, that gives the increase. And
be diligent in meeting together (whilst you may) in the name and power of the
Lord, and be watchful in the measure of the life of God, that you may feel your
strength renewed and increased in the inward man; For Friends, this is a day
which will try every ones strength; therefore dwell in the power, in which the
true gathering is, that ye may not scatter abroad; for he, that gathers not,
scatters abroad, and he, that goes from the drawings of the power, gathers not.
Now Friends, as ye keep in the drawings and springings of the invisible life,
ye will be knit together in one life, and there will be no striving, who shall
be greatest; but every one will be serving the Lord in their several places and
measures, and one another in love; and as this is abode in, the weak in
somethings and at sometimes may help the strong, and the stronger in other
things may help the weak; Oh Friends! be as Children of one Father, dwelling in
innocence and love together, helping one another; Be ye indeed as members of
one body, knowing that the nourishment to the several members thereof comes
from one head, and considering that every member has not the same office, yet
of exceeding service, as each moves and acts in true love to the body, and
therefore ought to be born and owned in their respective places; and if any
member would act any thing, that might hurt the body, or any part of it, either
through being out of the sense, what is of service to the body, or otherwise,
then if another member or members be made sensible of the same, it, or they,
are bound in love to the body, to seek to hinder the same, and in tender love
to restore the erring member, that so the body may be kept in true order, and
every member seeking the good one of another: Oh Friends! consider how the
members, even of the true natural body, serve one another in love; how does one
cover another? how does one bear, and strain, and labor for the good of each
other, to help one another? and how much more ought these things to abound in
the spiritual body, of which Christ is the head?

And now, that which chiefly lies upon me at present to you is this, That ye
all, in the feeling of the pure Life and power of God, may keep, and that where
there has been any watching for advantage by any (among you) against one
another, or strife of words, or prejudice, or striving to lord it one over
another, or strangeness one toward each other, that these things be utterly
laid aside and resisted (for where these things, or any of them, take place,
they eat as does a canker, and devour the babe which should inherit the
promises, and receive the blessing) and that in tender bowels of love ye
receive and embrace one another; and that all whatsoever has tended to the
contrary in any, may die and be sorgotten, as if it had never been; that so the
birth immortal (which has been quenched in some) may spring and grow in the
virtue of the Father, that its strong cries, both in the male and in the f^male,
may pierce through the clouds, and reach unto the Father of Life and power, and
wrestle with him, until the blessing be given abundantly, yea, until he make
bare his arm in the sight of his enemies, that the o^pressour may cease, and
the land may be swept of evil doers; that so a way may be made, for the further
spreading of his everlasting name and truth, and for the exalting of the
Kingdom of the Lord Jesus over all the kingdoms of the world.

Ah Friends! the Unity, the Unity (in the Spirit) the Love, the Love (from a
pure heart) is exceeding precious; the yearning of bowels one toward each other
(in the Lord the Faith, the Patience, the Watching, and Breathing, and groaning
and sighing, and praying, and crying in the spirit and power of Emmanuel, is
able to astonish the Heathen, and to confound Armies, and Powers, that
withstand the Kingdom of the Lord Christ, and to cause vengeance to come upon
such, as will not repent and turn to the Lord, in the day of their visitation,
even in the day of Gods long patience and forbearance, but set and bend
themselves against the Lord and his Anointed.

Now Friends here is our strength, and these are the weapons, which we must
war withal, against all this ungodliness that is come and coming up:
Therefore every particular, hearken diligently unto the Call of God, in the
inward parts, and wait in the meek princi^le of Life, that each may know and
feel their own proper gift or gifts, weapon or weapons, and that every one may
be kept sensible of the teachings of the Captain of our salvation, that so ye
may be expert in handling and using of it, or them, to the glory of him, who
has called you to war against Babylon: And dear Friends, if any, who loves the
truth, be yet further oppressed and their goods spoiled by the false Prophet,
or Beast, as many will be; Oh! be ye tender hearted toward such and know that
the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and they that follow the
Lamb, are redeemed from the earth; Therefore ye, who know the life, dwell in
it, that your redemption from all earthly things may be witnessed, and that
your bodies and estates may freely be given up to serve the Lord, and one
another, whilst you are suffered to enjoy them. Friends, I know many of your
bodies and estates have been, and yet are so given up; But these things I speak
by way of remembrance, to stir up the pure mind in all, who breath after the
truth, that love unfeigned may be maintained and increased among you, that ye
may be all as Children of one family, dwelling together in unity and peace,
contented with the will of the Father: and be not at all discouraged or
daunted, because of the strength, and malice, and cruelty that is in the
Adversary, but be still and patient in the faith, and stand out of all mortals,
in the sense of the invisible, immortal power of God; and in that, meet often
together, and visit one another whilst you may; and be as Lambs amongst
Wolves, and the Lord our God shall appear for us, and fight against our
enemies, as he fought in the days of old against the enemies of his Seed; yea
he shall confound our enemies, and bring them to naught, and bring liberty to
his people, when he has tried them to the full; be patient, and doubt not,
though the day must be hot, yet it shall be but short, for the Elects sake;
Watch and look not out, He that will save his life shall loose it, but he, that
is willing to part with it, shall find it eternally. So the endless, eternal
Father of Life, of Power, of Wisdom, of Peace, of Love, of Salvation, gather,
and knit, and unite you together, and preserve and keep you in the melting
power and love of the Lamb, that ye may be as a garden of spices, that your
savor may be pleasant unto the Lord, and unto all that breath after him, in
this the day of trial, Amen.

Ah my dear Friends, you have had a large and glorious day allowed you for the
begetting and gathering of you into the precious faith, and the unity thereof;
and many precious opportunities have you had for the assembling your selves
together in the name of the Lord, and plentiously has his eternal sweet power
and life been manifested in and among you; and as you have waited therein Oh!
how have you felt the blood of the everlasting Covenant, the life of Jesus
purging and purifying your Consciences, that therein you might hold the mystery
of that says, which is your victory over the world, And now my Friends, the
Lord our God has seen it good, that you may yet be tried, yea you must further
be tried, your faith, your strength, your patience, must all be tried, and that
by fire (as I said before) that a pure people you may be (who stands and
endures the trial) unto the Lord, yea a glorious people shall ye be, whose
beauty and splendor shall fill the earth.

Therefore my dearly beloved in the Lord, be watchful, I beseech you, and turn
in, and keep low in the feeling of the eternal Power in your own vessels, and
know that every particulars strength lies there, and every particular will be
tried. Therefore keep to your particular strength, and be obodient to the Power
in all its movings, that so by it your minds may be drawn off all things that
can or may change and come to an end, and become wholly centered in the
unchangeable endless life of God. Then my Friends, nothing can harm you. But
verily if any of your affections be centered in Husbands, Wives, Children or
any earthen vessel or visible thing whatsoever, so as that you cannot be
willing to part with all, if it be required at your hands; then may your
sufferings be great and dangerous unto you. Therefore I beseech you be ye
followers of the invisible Life of Jesus, in all its appearances and drawings;
that so by it you may be taught how to use all visible changeable things unto
the Glory of the Lord, whilst you are permitted to enjoy them. And that you
may be made willing to give up, and to part with all, yea even with your lives
also, if you be called thereunto, for the trial of your faith (or that your
enemies thereby may fill up the measure of their iniquity, and that judgment
may come upon them to the full). And whilst you have outward liberty for the
keeping your meetings together, be diligent therein (as I said before) and when
any of you come to be hindered from such opportunities as you have enjoyed. Oh!
then be patient, and wait upon the Lord for strength; and if in any place it
should come to pass, that but two or three of you could come together, neglect
not that; for if in the pure fear and love of God you be kept, it will be
profitable and comfortable unto you. And dear Friends, you who are but weak in
the Truth, to you I now speak, Take heed of looking out at any of us, whom the
Lord God has drawn forth by his own power and love, to declare his living
eternal Truth unto you, I say, look not out at us (as for strength or
teachings) but look to the endless life in your selves, which we have directed
you unto, in which your strength and satisfactory teaching is; for we may be
removed far from you as to the outward) but the Life and Power, by which you,
and we stand, abides with and in you; and we (as to the outward) may be
bruised, broken and slain for the testimony of Jesus, and the Word of God,
which we hold. But the Life and Spirit of God and the Lamb dwells for ever
with you that believe in it; and if ye crucify it not to your selves, there is
none that can slay it. And while you have us, or any of us, among you, I exhort
and warn you all, and that in the name and authority of the Lord, that ye look
not upon; or think of any of us, above what we are, least thereby you should
hurt your selves (or any of us); but according as God has distributed unto us
of his heavenly treasure, even so know us, and feel us, and receive us in the
Lord, and know no man after the flesh, neither admire any thing but the pure
Life of God, and the birth born of him, and know, that what of Gods treasure we
have in our earthen vessels, we have received it from the Lord, that none might
glory or boast (in what they have) over another. And what we have received it
is partly for your sakes, that we might impart of the same unto you, as good
shewards of the manifold grace of God; and although we are become the Lords
freemen, through the work of his eternal Power and Spirit, yet are we your
servants in Christ, and so let us be accounted among you, for that is our place
and duty, even to serve you in the Lord, and to stand given up, to spend and be
spent for you; and if we should not so walk among you in all humility of mind,
I know the Lord would soon withdraw his glorious power and presence from us and
then what should we be more then others nay, how much less and weaker?

So dear Friends, keep in the pure sear, and live in the true favor, that ye
may have a true sensible feeling one of another in your present conditions; and
that ye may be able to strengthen one another in the Lord. And if at any time,
any be felt not to be in so clear and living a condition as they formerly have
been in; Oh! take heed how you judge of those things, and beware of prejudice,
or of a spirit that would rejoice, because advantages at such a time may easily
be taken, for that is accursed in the sight of God. But keep ye in the dread
and wisdom of the Lord; and they that reprove, or exhort, such as are come to
loss in their conditions, let it be in that spirit which can bear and suffer
all things (that are to be born) for the Seeds sake, in the true patience and
meekness. Oh Friends! this is the restoring, healing, strengthening,
consolating Spirit, which is of great price with the Lord, and in this live and
you will feel the blessing, the peace, and mercy upon the Israel of God, and
you will be meet helps one to another.

And now dear Friends and Babes, you who watch for peace and unity in
righteousness, and can bear and endure all things (that may be born) for the
Elects sake, my life is bound up with you in the overcomings of Gods love; and
I am refreshed in you, and I partake of your peace and joy, and meet and kiss
you in the meek Spirit, and rejoice with you in the work of the Lord; My
Friends, go on in the power of God, and build up one another in the living
says, and wait therein together, that in the eternal power ye may seel
dominion over all the cruelty of the enemy; for it is the faith in the power
that must break through all this wickedness, and bring down all this
ungodliness, that is spreading it self as if there were no end of it: But
Friends, as in the dread of the Lord ye keep, you will see the power of
darkness vanish away, and they that act in it shall be chained under, though
for a moment they have liberty, for the trial of our faith: But verily in the
power of the Lord God, I can truly rejoice over all these things, because I see
the Lords presence and loving kindness in a wonderful manner amongst those that
truly wait upon him, and trusts alone in him for deliverance, even in the time
of their trials; and because he has given me steadfastly to believe, that he
will bring deliverance for his people, and set them over all the powers of the
earth, by his own arm: Therefore let none murmur, nor think that the Lord is
flack concerning his appearing for his people but let every one, that knows the
truth, in that patiently wait, and endure whatsoever the Lord suffers the
wicked to do unto you in the day of his long patience and sorbearance, which he
in compassion grants unto them, that they might come to repentance and
amendment of life, which if they wholly slight, and will not be gathered in
that day, he has ^ower enough (and will execute it) to destroy them, and to
deliver his people, that trust in him.

So in the pure life, and power, and virtue of the Father be ye stayed, and
quiet in your minds, and wait to receive your daily bread and water of life
from him, that ye may grow up in the eternal, and be established for ever, in
the power of an endless life: Oh Friends, if any looks out, in this day, they
will let in weakness; and whosoever seels weakness, let them abide and believe
in that which makes them sensible of their weakness, and they will gather
strength, and be able to stand.

And as for you, my dearly beloved Friends, who are come to witness your
Redemption from the earth by the blood of the Covenant, and are now following
of the Lamb whithersoever he goes, leads, draws, or commands you; I know you
are come to the Anointing, and have received it, and that abides in you, and
you into it are comprehended, so that you need not any man to teach you, but as
the same Anointing that abides in you does teach you: for that is true, and
there is no lie of it; and that teaches you of all things (which are suitable
to your conditions) and it shows you things to come, and with it you are able
to try Spirits and Doctrines, and even as it has taught you, ye shall abide in
him, the Lord, that Spirit. And where this is felt and witnessed, there is
liberty; and sitting and waiting in this, you are sed with the bread from above
(which gives life) and refreshed with the springs from beneath (which makes
its way through the Rocks and Mountains to the pleasant Valleys) and you that
are come to this seat, you are able to judge of things within and without; and
although you have not need to be taught by letters, yet I know, you that are
come to this state can bear the word of Exhortation to be sounded among you,
that so it may reach unto them to whom it is of service, for the slirring up of
their pure minds, that so the life and power immortal, may in the freshness
and purity of it be felt in and amongst all the flock, and that in the
sweetness and virtue thereof you all may be kept and preserved, in pure unity
and peace with God and one with another. So the Blessing and Mercy of the
Almighty, rest and abide for ever upon you all, who delight in the truth which
is eternal.

And Friends, take heed how you receive reports, and report them again, for
there is a great danger in those things, and there is and has been very much
wrong among people upon that account, for many thereby are begotten into
strange lying wonders, and some into questionings and sears in their minds, and
some into false joys and foolish expectations, and some into prejudice one
against another, because false reports has been received and reported again.
Therefore that you may be clear of these things, be you very mindful, watchful,
and careful, that you report not any thing but as you have a certain ground for
the truth of it; and as you may see a service in speaking thereof, or else you
had better be ^^^ent to those things, and let them die, that so truth, unity,
and peace may be lived in, and abound amongst you in all things.

London, the eight day of the eight month, 1660. I am your endeared Friend and
Brother, in the bowels of Christ, whose life is freely given up to answer the
will and requirings of the Father; traveling for Unity, and Peace, and
Righteousness amongst men, where its wanting; and greatly rejoicing with all
those in whom it abounds, and is felt and witnessed, George Fox the Younger.
Behold! how good and how pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to (...)
together in unity.



THE END.
LONDON, Printed for Robert Wilson at the Black-Spread-Eagle and Windmill in
Martins l'Grand, 1660.


