APTYPOLOGIA ALPHAETIKE OR, AN Alphabetical Martyrology.

CONTAINING THE Trials and Dying Expressions OF MANY MARTYRS Of Note since
CHRIST.

Extracted out of Foxe's Acts and Monuments of the Church.

WITH AN ALPHABETICAL LIST Of GOD'S JUDGMENTS remarkably shown on many Noted
and Cruel PERSECUTORS.

Together with an APPENDIX of things pertinent to the understanding this
MARTYROLOGY.

By N. T. M. A. T. C. C.

-- These all dyed in the Faith, Hebr. 11.13.
-- In all these things we are more than Conquerors.
Romans 8.37. LONDON, Printed for R. Butler in Barbican, and are to be sold by
Samuel Wooley Bookseller in Louth, in Lincolnshire. 1677.

ERRATA,
IN the Epistile Page 3. read 2 Cor. 4, 7, 8, 9. In the Book p. 25. l. 17. read
James Bainham. p. 27. l. 18. put out then. p. 9. l. 5. read Pomponius. p. 53.
l. 21. put out so. p. 69. l. 13. read cruel. p. 79. l. 2. read sparer in words.
p. 80. l. 16. read Wind. p. 140. l. 20. read Wounds. p. 150. l. 17. read
trailed. p. 167. l. 22. read must. p. 169. and 170. read Thiessen. p. 172. l.
24. read confuted. p. 185. l. 8. read Fool. p. 224. l. 10. Concerning Dr.
London's Punishment in the former part of the Book. Add Page 174. p. 226. l.
12. read Maximinus. p. 230. l. 7. read Suit.

ADVERTISEMENT.
TWO Sermons of Hypocrisy, and the vain hope of self-deceiving Sinners.

A Vindication of Oaths, and swearing in weighty cases, as lawful and useful
under the Gospel: And the Quakers Opinion and Practice against Oaths and
Oath-taking, proved to be unscriptural, and without any just Reason; as also
against their own Principles. Both written by John Cheney, Minister of the
Gospel. Printed for R. Butler, and are to be sold with the rest of his Works by
John Miller, at the Rose at the West End of St. Paul's Church.

To the Christian READER, all increase of Grace here, and all fullness of Glory
hereafter.
SO great an enmity has Satan evidenced, ever since his own Apostasy, against
Mankind, that he must be conceded to have bin very sedulous and vigilant in all
Ages to destroy Souls, one while alluring them to sin against God, by his (...)
of worldly or sensual propositions, or else deterring them from adhering to
God, vi and armis, by his assaults and persecutions; the verity of which has
been continuedly evidenced in the successive Ages of God's Church, wherein the
first member dying, dyed a Martyr on the account of his Religion, and the
several Prophets and Children of God before Christ have been so persecuted,
sawn asunder, cast into Dungeons, fiery Furnaces, Lions dens, etc. That if to
these we add the consideration of St. Paul's Martyrology in Heb. 11. we may
propose our Savior's Enquiry; Which of the Prophets have they not slain? Nor
did the fury of Satan and his Instruments terminate there; but when Christ the
Son of God was incarnated and became Man for our Salvation, Satan the
Arch-enemy of Man, assails him as Tempter; but being put to flight so, he
becomes Accuser, and by his Instruments persecuted our dearest Savior, not
desisting till they had crucified the Lord of Life: Which being effected, this
Serpentine Seed continued its enmity againg Christ in his Members; so that few
of Christ's Apostles or Followers have escaped tribulation; as the Writings of
the Sacred Writ aver, and the succeeding pages will much evidence, which seem
in respect of their matter to be serviceable to the Church of God many ways:

1. In demonstrating the verity of our Religion, and the great and sure
foundation of our Faith, sealed by the Blood of many thousand Martyrs, who have
as witnesses thereof, attested the verity of their Professions by their deaths.

2. In evidencing the state of God's People here, whose Life is but a (...), a
warfare, whilst they remain Members of the Church Militant on Earth, which may
dissuade us from singing Requiem's to our Souls, and may excite our constant
watch.

3. In assuring us of the Triumph of Christ the Captain of our Salvation, who
in himself and Members has verified that (...) of the Seed of the Woman's
breaking the Serpent's head, in that in the midst of all troubles the Saints of
God have experienced joy, which may engage our running with patience the Race
that is set before us.

4. In declaring God's fidelity to his People, who in the greatest misery has
shown them the greatest mercy, and often then has most given his People
assurance of their living with him, when they were going to dye for him; which
may support our Spirits under pressures, in that they cannot separate us from
God here or hereafter, Romans 8.38. 2 Cor. 7.8, 9.

5. In proposing the Examples of many thousands of constant Martyrs, who chose
rather to suffer than sin; and found more joy in dying for Christ than ever
they did trouble in serving of Christ.

6. In showing the sad effects of Apostasy upon many of God's People, who
found all the wordly enjoyments without a Christ but (...), bitter sweets, and
have not acquiesced, till through God's Spirit they did reassume the Profession
of Christ, and at last did dye for Christ, which may incite our holy jealousy
over our selves.

7. In setting before us the care of God for his People in their Lives, and
Death, and after death, by supplying their wants, comforting their Souls,
mitigating their pains, and preserving their Names to succeeding Generations,
verifying his own assertion, That the memory of the Just shall be blessed.

8. In representing the efficacy of Christianity and its Champions constancy,
so as often to have influenced the very Persecutors of it and them; not only
to pity them, but also to close with their Principles, and dye for the same
Faith; so that we have no need to be ashamed of the Gospel of Christ.

9. In demonstrating the frustration of the grand design of Christ's Enemies
(the extirpation of his Faith and Religion by Persecution) it being evidently
manifested that Christianity has been more propagated, the more it has been
persecuted; and it was long since observed that Sanguis Martyrum was Semen
Ecclesiae. So that against all opposition the Faith of Christ and its
Professors have been (...), more than Conquerors; nor has the gates of Hell
hitherto prevailed against the Church of Christ.

10. In manifesting God's mercy and justice. His Mercy in preserving his true
Religion and its Professors amidst all their Enemies, and his Justice in his
diverse inflictions of punishments upon their Persecutors. Insomuch that some
have confessedly acknowledged Christ Conqueror, his cause true, and themselves
because Persecutors of it, damned.

This is the matter of the Pages humbly offered, and unfeignedly recommended to
thy perusal. And as to the manner of the Epitome, an Alphabetical method, both
as to Sufferers and Persecutors, seemed most apt for thy reaping advantage. The
reasons moving the Epitomizing the voluminous works of the Author were these:

1. Because many who probably would read those greater Volumes, either cannot
acquire them being scarce, or cannot purchase them being dear, or perhaps have
not time to peruse them being great, to occur all which this abstract may
suffice.

2. The Chief things in these Volumes desired by the Vulgar (whose instruction
is chiefly designed hereby) is the Lives and deaths, the Constancy and Comforts
of the Martyrs, which here are briefly contained as to the most remarkable
Martyrs ever since Christ's time; which being portable, may serve as a Manual
to be often in our hands to be perused, till we get their experiences on our
hearts.

And although in these Halcyon days of the Church (which God long continue)
these endeavors way seem to some supervacaneous; yet if we consider that while
we are in the World we must expect troubles, it is no small prudence to prepare
for it. However, the ten premised Reasons may plead for thy acceptance of what
is humbly tendered, and sincerely published for God's Glory, and thy Soul's
good, by Thine in the Service of GOD,

N. T.

AN Alphabetical Martyrology.
A A
ANdrew the Apostle, and Brother of Peter, being conversant in a City called
Patris in Achaia, brought many to the Faith of Christ. Egeas the Governor
hearing of it resorted to him, and with threats of the Cross dissuaded him by
his Proconsul; but Andrew said he would not have preached the honor and glory
of the Cross, if he had feared the death of the Cross. And being condemned,
when he saw the Cross he said, O Cross, most welcome and long looked for, with
a willing mind, joyfully and desirously I come to thee, being the Scholar of
him who did hang on thee, because I have always been thy Lover, and have
coveted to embrace thee. And so being crucified he gave up the ghost the last
of November. See Vol. 1. page 42, 43.

One Alexander under the Tenth Persecution standing near the Bar, at the
Examination of the Christians, beckned to them with signs to confess Christ;
which the multitude perceiving, made it known to the Judge, who examining what
he was, and being answered by him, I am a Christian, condemned him to be
devoured of wild Beasts. And he having endured sad Torments never sighed, but
from the bottom of his heart praised and prayed to the Lord. Vol. 1. p. 62.

Apollinia an ancient Virgin, under the Seventh Persecution, having her Teeth
dashed out, and being threatened to be cast into a great fire made before her,
unless she would blaspheme with them, and deny Christ; she paused a while, and
suddenly leaped into the fire, and was burned. Vol. 1. p. 80.

Ammonarion, an holy Virgin, told the persecuting Judge, That for no Punishment
she would yield to his request; and constantly she performed her words, under
very severe Torments, and was at last slain with a Sword. Vol. 1. page 80, 81.

Alban the first English Martyr, under the Tenth Persecution, did receive a
Clerk into his House, flying for Religion, by whose Precepts and Precedents he
of a Pagan became a Christian; and when the Emperor sent to apprehend the
Clerk, Alban put on the Clerks Habits, and offered himself to the Soldiers as
the Clerk, and so was had away; and being commanded on pain of death, by the
Emperor, to sacrifice to Idols, he said, I am a Christian, and worship the
true and living God, who created all the World; and the Sacrifices offered to
Devils can neither help them that offer them, nor can they accomplish the
desires of their Supplicants; but they whoever they be that offer Sacrifice to
Devils, shall receive everlasting pains of Hell for their portion. Whereupon he
was cruelly beaten, and at last beheaded. Vol. 1. page 115.

Agnes a Virgin of Rome, in the Tenth Persecution, of Noble Parentage, before
she was marriageable she was dedicated to Christ, and boldly resisted the
wicked Edicts of the Emperor, who by fair and foul ways induced her to
renounce her Faith, yet she remained constant and courageous, and offered her
body to suffer any torment or pain, not refusing to suffer whatsoever it should
be, though death it self: But the Tyrant threatened to expose her Chastity to
danger, by sending her to the Stews, unless she would ask Minerva pardon.
Whereupon she inveighed against Minerva, and said, Christ is not so forgetful
of those that are his, that he will suffer violently to be taken from them
their golden and pure Chastity. Thou shall, says she, bathe thy Sword in my
blood if thou will, but thou shall not defile my body with filthy lust, for any
thing thou can do. After which the Tyrant commanded her to be set naked in
the open Street, to the shame of himself and all present, who went from her;
and she returned God thanks for this deliverance of her Chastity: And an
Executioner being sent to kill her, she willingly met him and prayed, O God
vouchsafe to open Heavens Gates, once shut up against all the Inhabitants of
the Earth; and receive, O Christ, my soul that seeks thee. And so she was
beheaded. Vol. 1. p. 121, 122.

Anselm, an Italian, born and brought up in the Abbey of Beck in Normandy, and
afterward made Archbishop of Canterbury, said he had rather be in Hell without
sin, than in Heaven with sin. Vol. 1. p. 240.

Augustinus a Barber, about Hennegow in Germany, being an embracer of the
Gospel, yet naturally so timorous that he fled twice when he was sought for,
was so bold when he was apprehended that he confounded all Opposers: And being
desired to pity his Soul and recant, he said he evidenced his pity to his Soul
in giving his Body rather to be burned, than to do any thing contrary to his
Conscience. And being set at the Stake, and the Fire kindled, he heartily
prayed unto the Lord, and patiently departed, 1549. Vol. 2. page 124.

Aymond de Lavoy at Bourdeaux in France, a Preacher of the Gospel, being
persecuted and sent for; his People and Friends persuaded him to fly; to whom
he said, He had rather never have been born than so to do; it was the Office of
a good Shepherd not to fly in time of danger, but rather to abide the peril
lest the Flock be scattered; or lest some scruple might by his flight be left
in their minds, that he had fed them with Dreams and Fables, contrary to Gods
Word; wherefore beseeching them to move him no more therein, he told them he
feared not to yield up both Body and Soul in the quarrel of the truth which he
had taught, saying He was ready, with S. Paul, Acts 21. not only to be bound,
but also to dye for the Testimony of Christ. And when the Sumner came to
apprehend him, being in the City of Bourdeaux three days, Aymond preached each
day a Sermon, and in his defense the People flew upon the Sumner, till Aymond
desired them not to stop his Martyrdom, since it was the will of God he should
suffer for him. Being apprehended, his greatest Accusation was, that he denied
Purgatory: He was nine Months in Prison, in great misery, bewailing his former
life, though no man could charge him with any outward Crime; and enduring more
severe torments by the Officers afterward, he being of a weak body, comforted
himself thus, This Body (said he) must once dye, but the Spirit shall live; the
Kingdom of God endures for ever. And swooning, when he came to himself, he
said, Oh Lord why have thou forsaken me? but his Tormentors further vexing him,
he said, O Lord I beseech thee forgive them, they know not what they do. And
when Sentence was given against him, he comforted himself with S. Paul's words,
Romans 8. saying, Who shall separate us from the love of God? shall the Sword,
hunger, nakedness? no, nothing shall pluck me from him. And being brought to
the place of Execution, he sang the 114. Psalm, and testified he dyed for the
Gospel of Christ, and said, O Lord haste thee to help me, and tarry not: and
desired all to study the Gospel, and not to fear them that kill the body. He
said he found his Flesh to resist marvellously his Spirit, but he should soon
cast it off: And then begging the people to pray for him, he said often, O Lord
my God into thy Hands I commend my Soul. In the often repeating of which he
dyed, being strangled and burned. Vol. 2. p. 129, 130.

Anne Audebert, an Apothecaries Wife and Widow at Orleance in France, being
judged to be burnt for Religion's sake, when the Rope was about her neck to
strangle her, she called it her Wedding Girdle wherewith she should be married
to Christ: And as she should be burned on a Saturday, she said, I was first
married upon a Saturday, and on a Saturday I shall be married again. And
martyred she was with such constancy as made the beholders to marvel. Vol. 2.
p. 135.

Somponius Algerius a young man, burnt at Rome 1555. being in Prison at Venice,
(from whence he was sent to Rome) he wrote an Epistle to the persecuted and
afflicted Saints, wherein he declares the many ways he was tempted to recant,
to which Tempters he said, God forbid I should deny Christ, whom I ought to
confess, I will not set more by my life than by my Soul, nor will I exchange
the life to come for this present world. Vol. 2. p. 180, 181, 182.

Mrs. Anne Askew being 1545. apprehended, and often examined as an Heretic,
subscribed two of her Confessions thus, By Anne Askew that neither wishes
death nor fears his might, and as merry as one that is bound toward Heaven,
God have the praise thereof with thanks. She always concluded her Letters with
Pray, Pray, Pray. She was racked till almost dead, to discover her
Confederates, but she would not; then was she by flattery tempted, but was not
so won to deny her Faith, but said she would rather burn than deny it. In
Newgate before she suffered she made a Confession of her Faith, clearing her
self from Errors, and proving her self a Christian; and then prayed for
support against the malice of her Enemies, that they might not overcome her;
and that God would pardon their sins, and open their Eyes and Hearts to do what
God pleased, and to set forth his Truth without Error. She was of a Family
that she might have lived in great wealth and prosperity, if she had loved the
world more than Christ, but she being constant, was at last (being unable to go
by reason of her racking) brought in a Chair to Smithfield, and there chained
to a Stake, when Wrisley then Lord Chancellor sent her pardon, and bad her
recant; but she refused to look once on them, and said she came not thither to
deny her Lord and Master; and so was burned in June 1546. with whom suffered
also John Lacels, John Adams, and Nicholas Belenian, which three men though
courageous before, yet by her Exhortation and Example were emboldened, and
received greater comfort. Vol. 2. p. 580.

John Ardeley an Essex man, being burnt June 10. 1555. was examined and
persuaded by Bishop Bonner to recant; to whom he said, Bear as good a face, my
Lord, as you can, you and all of your Religion are of a false Faith, and not of
the Catholic Church. God foreshield I should recant, for then should I lose my
Soul; and if every hair on my head was a man, I would suffer death in the Faith
and Opinion that I now am in. And so he did. Vol. 3. p. 253.

Will. Allen a Norfolk man, burnt at Walsingham 1555. in September, because he
would not go in Procession and kneel to the Cross; he was in such favor with
the Justices of Peace, for his tried conversation amongst them, that he was
permitted to go to his Sufferings untyed, and there being fastened with a Chain,
stood quietly without shrinking till he dyed. Vol. 3. p. 419.

Rose Allen of much Bentley in Essex, being fetching drink for her sick Mother,
in a morning with a light Candle, who was also with her self and Father
apprehended by Edmond Tyrrel Esquire to be all three carried to Colchester Goal for
the Gospel, who persuaded this Rose Allen to counsel her Parents well; who
said, They had a better Counselor than she, to wit, the Holy Ghost, who I
trust will not suffer them to err. And being for this accused of Heresy by
him, she said, With that which you call Heresy I worship my Lord God: To whom
he then said, I perceive you will also burn for company's sake: And she
answered, Not for company's sake, but for Christ's sake; and if he call me to
it, I hope in his mercy he will enable me to bear it. So Tyrrel took her Candle
and held it to her hand, burning it crossways the back of it, till the sinews
cracked asunder; and asked her often during that tyranny, What you Whore will
you not cry? To whom she said, she had no cause to weep, if he considered it
well he had more cause to weep, for she had none she thanked God, but rather
had cause to rejoice; and she said, that though at first burning it was some
grief to her, yet the longer it burnt the lesser she felt, or well near no pain
at all. Vol. 3. p. 830.

John Alcock, a young man in Suffolk, apprehended at Hadley because he would
not move his Cap as the Priest came into Church with a Procession, and being
bid to take heed of the Priest, he said, I fear not, for he shall do no more
than God will give him leave; and happy shall I be if God will call me to dye
for his Truths sake. And being sent up to London he dyed in Prison at Newgate,
and was buried in a Dunghill 1558. Vol. 3. p. 883.

Richard Atkins burnt at Rome 1581. he was born in Hartfordshire in England,
and traveling to Rome he came to the English College, knocking at whose Gates
several English Scholars came out, and bid him go to the Hospital, and there he
should receive his meat and drink: But he declared he came not to any such
intent, but to reprove the great misorder of their lives, which (said he) I
grieve to hear and pity to behold: I came also to let your proud Antichrist
understand that he does rob God of his honor, and poyseneth the whole world
with his Blasphemies: So declaming against their Idolatry he was put into the
Inquisition by one Hugh Griffith a Welchman, and a Student in that College,
where after a few days he was set at liberty: But one day going in the Streets,
and meeting a Priest which carried the Sacrament, which offended his
Conscience, he catched at it to have pulled it down, but missing of it he was
let pass: A while after he seeing diverse persons in S. Peter's Church at Mass,
he stepped up without any reverence, and threw down the Chalice of Wine, and
would have gotten the Wafer-Cake out of the Priest's hands; for which he was
much beaten with persons Fists, and cast into Prison; and upon Examination why
he would do such a Crime, he said, I came for that intent, to rebuke the Popes
wickedness, and your Idolatry. Upon this he was condemned to be burned: Which
Sentence he gladly received, he said, because the sum of his offense pertained
to the glory of God. A while after he was set on the bare back of an Ass,
stripped from the head to the waist, and so carried in the Streets, who called to
the people and told them they were in a wrong way, and willed them for Christ's
sake to have regard to the saving of their Souls; all the way as he went he had
four men that did nothing else but thrust at his body with burning Torches,
whereat he never moved nor shrunk, but with a cheerful countenance often bended
his body to meet the Torches, and would take them in his own hand and hold them
burnig to his own body; which posture he continued in near the space of half a
mile, till he came at the place of Execution, before S. Peter's Church* Then
made they a device not to make the fire about him, but to burn his Legs first,
which he suffered marvellously cheerfully; then they offered him a Cross, but
he put it away, telling them they did ill to trouble him with such paltry, when
he was preparing himself for God, whom he beheld in majesty and mercy ready to
receive him into the Eternal Rest: And so he dyed. Vol. 3. p. 1022.

Francis d' Alost in Flanders, beheaded May 1. 1566. said to his apprehenders,
Now ye think to deprive me of life, and so to do me a great hurt, but ye are
deceived; for it is all one as if ye took Counters from me, to fill my hand
with a great sum of Gold. Being at the place of Execution, he said, Seeing ye
thirst after my blood, I willingly yield it unto your hands, and my Soul into
the hands of my merciful Lord God Almighty. And so he was beheaded, and his
body given for a prey to the Fowls of the air. Addition to Vol. 3. of Massacre
in France and Flanders, p. 34, 35.

B B
BArtholomew the Apostle is said to have preached to the Indians, and to have
converted the Gospel of S. Matthew into their Tongue: He continued there a great
space doing miracles, at last in Albania, a City of Greater Armenia, after
diverse persecutions, he was beaten down with Staves, and then crucified; and
after being excoreate was at length beheaded. Vol. 1. p. 42.

Blandina a Woman, under the Fourth Persecution, was so tormented that the
Tormentors for weariness gave her over, admiring at her strength and courage,
who became stronger and stronger; and as often as she spoke these words, I am a
Christian, neither have we done any evil, it was a mavelous comfort, and
emboldened her to abide the Torments. Vol. 1. p. 60. She afterward was fastened
to a Stake, and cast to ravening Beasts, but no Beast would come near her; so
the Persecutors took her down, and laid her in Prison till another time. At
length she was put in a Net, and cast to the wild Bull, and after she was
sufficiently gored with his Horns she felt nothing of pain, but was thus slain;
of whom the very Persecutors said, Never Woman was put to death of them that
suffered so much as she did. Vol. 1. p. 62, 63.

Barlaam a Martyr, under the Tenth Persecution, having endured many Torments,
was at last laid on the Altar by the Persecutors, where Incense was offered to
their Idols, and they put Incense into his hand, thinking that fire would cause
his hand to scatter the Incense, and so he have sacrificed, but the flame eat
round about his hand, which remained as though it had been covered with hot
Embers, when as Barlaam recited that of the Psalmist, Blessed be God who
teaches my hands to fight. Vol. 1. p. 118, 119.

Ioane Boughton, Mother to the Lady Young, was burned April 28. 1494. (and in
the ninth year of King Hen. 7. King of England) in Smithfield, for holding of
Wickliffe's Opinions, from which all the Doctors in London could not turn her:
And being told that she should be burnt, she defied them, saying, She was so
beloved of God and his holy Angels, that she passed not for the fire; and in
the midst of it she cried to God to take her Soul into his holy hands. Vol. 1.
p. 956.

John Brown of Ashford was burned 1517. at Ashford, being taken away by force
from his own House, the same day his Wife was Churched, and he was carried to
Prison at Canterbury, for no Crime but for asking a Mass-Priest, where the Soul
was when he began Mass and when he had done Mass? who answering he knew not;
John Brown asked him then, how he could save the Soul? For which he was
continued in Prison from Low-Sunday till Friday before Whitsontide, his Wife
not knowing where he was all this time; till the night before he was burned
being set in the Stocks at Ashford, she came and sat up by him, to whom he
declared the whole passage, and said that the Bishops, Warham and Fisher,
heated his Feet on the Coals, and burned them to the bones, to make him deny
his Lord; which I will never do, added he, for if I should deny him in this
world, he would deny me hereafter. I pray thee, said he further, good
Elizabeth, continue as thou have begun, and bring up thy Children virtuously in
the fear of God. And the next day being Whitsonday-Eve this godly Martyr was
burned; standing at the Stake he thus prayed, holding up his hands, O Lord I
yield me to thy grace,
Grant me mercy for my trespass,
Let never the Fiend my Soul chase:
Lord I will bow, and thou shall beat,
Let never my Soul come in Hell heat.
Into thy hands I commend my Spirit, for thou have redeemed me, O Lord of
truth. And so he ended. Vol. 2. p. 13.

John Bertrand, a Forester in France, 1556. being condemned for the Gospel's
sake, he being to enter a Cart, to be carried to Execution, gave thanks he was
not there for any evil action, but for the quarrel of our Savior; and when
tied to the Post he sang the 25. Psalm; and with Eyes looking up to Heaven,
seeing the place of Execution, he said, O the happy journey, and fair place
prepared for me. He in the fire cried, O Lord give thy hand to thy Servant, I
recommend my Soul to thee: And so meekly yielded up the Ghost. Vol. 2. p. 150.

Dominicus de Basana, an Italian, burned at Placentia, 1553. being asked
whether he was a Priest, said, Not of the Pope, but of Christ; being asked if
he would renounce his Doctrine, answered, He maintained no Doctrine of his own,
but of Christ's, which also he was ready to seal with his blood, and gave hearty
thanks to God which so accepted him, as worthy to glorify his Name with his
martyrdom: And being cast into Prison, he continued constant; yea at his
Execution he did preach, and pray for his Enemies, and so finished his days.
Vol. 2. p. 167.

A Bookseller of Avinion was burned by the means of the Bishop of Aix, for
selling some Bibles in the French Tongue; and as a sign of the Crime for which
he was burnt, he had two Bibles hanged about his neck, one before and another
behind him. Vol. 2. p. 191.

Maurice Blane, a young man in Merindol in France, being one of the Waldenses,
and taken by one John Miniers Lord of Opede, who went as Captain against
Merindol, was shot to death with Harquebusses, and though he was not very well
instructed, yet in all his Torments he lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and with a
loud voice ceased not to call on God; and the last words he was heard to say
were, O Lord God these men take from me a life full of misery, but thou will
give me life everlasting, by thy Son Jesus Christ, to whom be Glory. Vol. 2. p.
198.

Thomas Bilney, being brought up under Popish ignorance, and did in order to
his obtaining pardon of sins, use fasting, watching, buying pardons, etc. and
at last hearing that the New Testament was translated into Latin elegantly by
Erasmus, out of a love to the Latin more than to the Word of God (which he
then knew not what it meant) bought one and did read it; and at his first
reading he happened on 1 Timothy 1.15. It is a faithful saying, etc. which
sentence through Gods instructions, and co-workings, exhilerated him, and was a
means of his conversion to the Faith of Christ, learning that all travels and
watchings without Christ availed nothing: And having tasted of the sweetness of
Christ himself, he greatly endeavored the promoting of Christ's Gospel, and
opposed Popery in its abuses of Pardons, etc. Vol. 2. p. 268. He was
instrumental to the conversion of Mr. Latimer, p. 271. He was of Trinity Hall
in Cambridge, and first framed that University to the knowledge of Christ, Vol.
2. p. 274.276. He once recanted, and was absolved, which created such trouble
to him, that for two years he almost despaired, nor could any Scripture comfort
him, till at length God, by the means of Mr. Latimer, comforted him. And he
propagated the Doctrine of Christ in Norfolk, and was burned at Norwich 1531.
The night before which eating an Ale-berry cheerfully, some Friends said they
were glad to see him so merry, to whom he said, he did as Husbandmen, repair
the ruinous House of his body. He often tried the heat of the fire, by putting
his finger in the Candle flame, saying, I feel and know fire to be naturally
hot, yet I am persuaded by Gods Word, and by experience of some in it, that in
the flames they felt no heat. And I believe howsoever that the stubble of my
body shall be wasted by it, yet my Soul shall be thereby purged: it is a pain
for a time, on which follows joy unspeakable. Vol. 2. p. 277.

Richard Bayfield, a Monk of S. Bennets belonging to Berry, converted by means
of one Dr. Barnes, was November 20. 1531. degraded and condemned; and being
struck with a Crosier he fell backward, broke his head, and swooned; when he
came to himself again, he thanked God that he was delivered from the malignant
Church of Antichrist, and was come into the sincere Church of Christ militant
here on Earth: And I trust anon, said he, to be in Heaven with Christ, and that
Church triumphant for ever. And being in a slow fire was half an hour alive,
and when the left arm was on fire and burned, he rolled it with his right hand,
and it fell from his body; and he continued in Prayer to the end without
moving. Vol. 2. p. 293.

James Beinham, a Lawyer, in King Henry the Eighth's days, for knowledge of the
New Testament was burnt, April the last 1532. who first abjured, but soon
relapsed, declaring he would not suffer the like Hell he did when he was
abjured for all the world; and when he was again taken and burning, he in the
fire, when his legs were half consumed, said, O ye Papists, ye look for
miracles, here ye may see one, for in this fire I feel no more pain than if I
were in a Bed of down, and it is to me as a Bed of Roses. Vol. 2. p. 301.

Thomas Benet, Master of Art in Cambridge, thinking after his conversion not
safe to stay there, went to Exeter, and there taught a School: And at last
abhorring the blasphemy of the Papists, he fixed up Bills against the Popes
Supremacy, etc. for which, after much enquiry being found out, he at length
suffered, all their endeavors being not able to reclaim him to Popery, to
whose perswaders he mildly answered; desiring them to desist, for he was
resolved, and did more desire to dye for Christ, than to live longer and
partake of and behold their detestable Idolatry. At the fire he prayed so
fervently, and his sayings were so pious, and himself so constant, that his
very Enemies counted him a good man, and God's servant; yet was he burnt: And
at Stake being commanded by one Esquire Barnhouse to pray to Saints, he would not,
it being God on whom only he must call: to whom the Esquire said, he should
pray to Saints, or else he would make him, and therewith thrust a Fir-bush on
fire at his Face: to whom the Martyr said, Alas, Sir! trouble me not; and
prayed, Father forgive them. Whereupon the Esquire caused the fire to be
kindled, and then the Martyr lifted up his Eyes and Hands, saying, O Lord
receive my Spirit; and so continuing Prayers, did never stir nor strive, but
abode the flames until he ended. Vol. 2. p. 314.

Dr. Barnes of Cambridge, in King Henry the Eighth's days, burned in Smithfield
1541. July 30. he much promoted good Learning in Cambridge, and then Religion,
yet afterward recanted twice, but at length preached Christianity again; for
which, he being apprehended, was to be burnt; who making his Confession, said,
He dyed for the Faith of Christ, by whom alone he doubted not but to be saved:
he prayed for pardon: And whereas Stephen Gardner Bishop of Winchester caused
his Martyrdom, he there said, I pray God forgive him, as heartily, and as
freely, and as charitably, and without feigning, as ever Christ forgave them
that put him to death. And then putting off his Clothes, made him fit for the
fire, and patiently took his death, and was burnt with Mr. Garret and Mr.
Hierom. Vol. 2. page 517. See more Mr. Hierom.

George Bucker: See Adam Damlip.

John Bradford a Lancashire man, a good Scholar, Servant to the Lord
Harrington, afterward went to Cambridge, and after one years time was made
Master of Arts and Fellow of Pembroke Hall; and some time after ordained by
Bishop Ridley, and made Prebend of S. Paul's in London. Vol. 3. p. 380. He was
a zealous Preacher and a good liver, yet in Queen Mary's days silenced and
imprisoned; although but three days before he appeased the people in London, by
preaching against Sedition, and persuading them to obedience, who were incensed
much against one Bourn (who afterward was made Bishop of Bath) who preached
against King Edward 6. and pleaded for Popery, so that a Dagger was thrown at
him, till this Mr. Bradford appeared in the Pulpit, and then the People cried
out, God save thy life, O Bradford. He slept but four hours in the night, and
spent most of the other hours in prayer and studying; so that he counted that
hour lost, he said, in which he had done none good with Pen, study, or
exhorting: he preached twice a day in Prison, unless sickness hindered him. When
the Keepers Wife with sorrow brought him news of his burning next day, he said,
I thank God for it, I have looked for the same a long time; it comes not on me
suddenly, but as a thing waited for every day and hour, O Lord make me worthy
of it. When he went from the Counter to Newgate, he prayed, and gave every
Servant and Officer in the House money, wishing them to serve God and eschew
evil, and prayed to God to effect it in them: He was imprisoned two years,
lacking one Month and a half. He being upon examination offered mercy, if he
would recant, said, Mercy with God's mercy I desire; but mercy with God's wrath
God keep me from; his good will be done, life with his displeasure is worse
than death, and death with his favor is true life. Vol. 3. p. 283. One
Creswel, an acquaintance of his, after this came to him, and proffered him his
service to make suit to the Queen for him: To whom he said, If the Queen will
give me life, I will thank her; if she will banish me, I will thank her; if she
will burn me, I will thank her; if she will condemn me to perpetual
imprisonment, I will thank her. Vol. 3. p. 292. At the Stake he freely forgave
all persons, and begged all persons to forgive him: He prayed and kissed the
Stake and Faggot, crying, O England, England, repent thee of thy sins, repent
thee of thy sins, beware of Idolatry, beware of false Antichrists, take heed
they do not deceive you. Vol. 3. p. 307. His Letters were many and pious,
exhorting to constancy: 1. From God's love to us: 2. God's power over our
Enemies, and care for us: 3. The necessity of dying once: 4. The shortness of
the troubles: 5. The eternity of our joys: 6. Examples of Christians: 7. The
Conjugal Relation engages both Soul and Body to Christ: 8. All worldly
Enjoyments, and life it self, but tokens of God's love to us, and must not be
denied if called for by God, as tokens of our love to him: 9. Death is our due
for sin, but when for Christ, prepares a greater glory: 10. God's care over
their Children and Families that dye for him: 11. Our Cross from God as a
Father. Vol. 3. p. 307. to 337.

Roger Bernard, a Suffolk man, burned with two others at S. Edmunds-Bury, June
30. 1556. he being diversely flattery allured to turn, yet though a poor
Labourer continued constant; and when he was threatened with punishments, he
said, Friends, I am not better than my Master Christ, and the Prophets, whom
your Fathers served after this sort; and I for his Names sake am content to
suffer the like at your hands, if God shall so permit, trusting that he will
strengthen me in the same, according to his promise, in spite of the Devil and
all his Ministers. And so constantly he endured the flames with Prayer and
Praises. Vol. 3. p. 710.

Agnes Bongeor, one of 10 Prisoners at Colchester, who with another Woman, one
Margaret Thurston, was not executed with the other 8, because of the mistake of
her name in the Writ, being there written Bowyer instead of Bongeor; which
mistake caused much sorrow to the poor woman, who was thereupon dejected, even
almost to despair, because she was left and the rest taken and burnt, as if God
did not think her worthy of that honor; in order to the receiving of which,
she had disposed of a sucking Child that morning to another Nurse, and had
habited her self fit for the fire: But at last with much endeavors she was
comforted, by a Friend's proposing the instance of Abraham, whose will in
offering his Son was by God accepted, as if Isaac had been sacrificed; and so
her desire to have offered up her self, had God pleased; and also the real
offer of her Child, disposed of already to another Nurse, in order to her self
being burnt, might be acceptable before God. And she being thus comforted in
due time, September 17. 1557. was also with the said Margaret Thurston burnt at
Colchester. Vol. 3. p. 849, 850.

Bergerius, being imprisoned for the Gospel's sake, met there with one John
Chambon a Thief, imprisoned also at Lions in France 1553. which Chambon was
almost famished for want of food, eating only such things as Horses and Dogs
refused, and was also almost devoured of Lice, insomuch that he cried out
against God, and cursed his Parents that bare him, till by the Prayers and
endeavors of this Bergerius he was converted; and he declared to diverse
persons by Letters, that his Lice left him the next day after his Conversion,
so that he had not one; and he was sufficiently provided for by the Alms of
persons, so that he fared very well. Vol. 2. p. 140, 141.

John Badby an English Martyr 1409. martyred for opposing Transubstantiation;
he, though he felt the flames, which were immediately quenched, and he invited
to recant by the Kings eldest Son, with promises of great revenues, and with
threats of being burned, if he would not recant, could not not be persuaded to
recant. Vol. 1. p. 681.

Guy de Brez, Prisoner at Tournay in Flanders 1567. writes to his Wife thus
(after the declaring what Conflicts he had with his flesh, and the Victory
which through Christ he had in order to suffering) Be comforted, our separation
shall not be for ever, it will not be long e're we be gathered together under
one head, Jesus Christ: the world is not the place of rest: Heaven is our home,
and the world but our place of banishment: Let us aspire after our Country:
Consider the honor God does you, in that you have a Husband who is not only
called to be a Minister of Christ, but highly advanced to partake of the Crown
of Martyrdom, which honor the Angels in Heaven are not capable of. I rejoice
in my sufferings, I am filled with the abundant riches of my God. I now taste
and see Gods goodness, I feel by experience he never forsakes them that trust
in him; I have profited more in the School-house of my Prison than in all my
life time before; I would not change my condition with them which are my
Persecutors, I eat and drink and rest with more hearts-ease than they.
Additions to Vol. 3. concerning Massacre in France and Flanders. p. 37, 38.

Francis le Bossu, with his two Sons, martyred at Lions in France in the
Massacre there 1572. he encouraged his two Sons to suffer with him for the
Gospel, exhorting them thus, Children, we know the enmity of the wicked and the
world against Gods people is no strange thing: Let not their drawn Swords
affright us, they will be but as a Bridge whereby we shall pass over out of a
miserable life into immortal blessedness; we have breathed and lived long
enough among the wicked, let us now go and live with one God. And so all three
embracing each other, were found slain. Additions to Vol. 3. concerning
Massacre in France. p. 68.

C C
CAlocerius seeing the great patience of the Christians in so great Torments
and Persecutions, cried out, Vere magnus Deus Christianorum, that is, truly the
God of the Christians is a great God. Which words being heard, he was
apprehended, and brought to the place of execution, and made partaker of their
martyrdom. Vol. 1. p. 53.

Cecilia the Virgin brought Valerian her espoused Husband, and Tiburtius his
Brother, to the Faith of Christ, and with her exhortations made them constant
to Martyrdom; after whose sufferings she was apprehended and brought to offer
Sacrifice to Idols, but refusing, she was had to the Judge to be condemned; in
the mean time the Sergeants and others began to persuade her to favor her
self, and not cast her self away; to whom she so replied with Reasons and godly
Exhortations, that by the grace of God they were converted also, and diverse
others were with them baptized, to the number of 400 persons; which being done
she was condemned, and was enclosed in a hot Bath a day and a night without
hurt, and was afterward ordered to be beheaded in the Bath. Vol. 1.

Cyprian, being also named Statius, he was an African and born in Carthage, an
Idolater and a Gentile, altogether given to the study of Magical Arts, who was
converted to the Christian Faith, through the grace of God, by the means of
Cecilius a Priest, and by the occasion of hearing the History of the Prophet
Jonah; and was after his conversion ordained Priest and Bishop of Carthage:
Soon after in which Office and Dignity he so shined in Gifts and Virtues, that
he had the Covernment of all the East Church, and Church of Spain, and was
called the Bishop of the Christian men: And was beheaded in the 259. year of
Christ, under the Eighth Persecution. He is said to observe 12 abuses in man's
life.

1. A wise man without good works. 2. An old man without Religion. 3. Youth
without obedience. 4. Rich men without Alms. 5. A Woman shameless. 6. A Guide
without virtue. 7. A Christian contentious. 8. A poor man proud. 9. A King
unrighteous. 10. A Bishop negligent. 11. People without discipline. 12.
Subjects without love. Vol. 1. p. 89, 90, etc.
Christians to the number of 2000 being assembled in their Temple at Nicomedia,
to celebrate the Nativity of Christ, and fire being caused to be set to the
Temple by the order of Maximianus, under the Tenth Persecution, with a Crier,
That all that would have life should come out of the Temple, and do sacrifice
upon the next Altar of Jupiter. One in the behalf of all the rest answered,
They were all Christians, and that they would do Sacrifice only to Christ, his
Father, and the Holy Ghost, and that they were all now ready to offer.
Whereupon they all and the Temple were burned. Vol. 1. p. 102.

John Clardon, a Currier of London, was burned only for having English Books in
his house, which as his Enemies said contained heretical Opinions, which he
owned against the Popish Party, 1415. year of Christ. Vol. 1. p. 842.

John Clerk of Meldon in France, a Wool-carder, for saying the Pope was
Antichrist in a Bill he set upon the Church doors against the Pope's Pardons,
was to be whipped three several times, and each time marked on the forehead with
a note of infamy, whose Mother being a Christian woman, and seeing those things
done to her Son, courageously emboldened him, crying, Blessed be Christ, and
welcome be these marks. He afterward removing to Metz in Lotharing, the night
before the people idolatrously, according to their Custom, was to go out of
Town to worship some Images, he brake them down; and the next day the Monks and
people coming to worship, found their Images broken, whereof they suspected
this Clerk, who being examined confessed the fact, and showed his reason for
it; whereat the people were enraged, and cut off his right arm, and with
Pinsers pulled off his nose, arms, and breast, and then burnt him, An. 1514.
who patiently endured it, singing, Their Images be of Silver and Gold, the work
of men's hands. Vol. 2. p. 107.

Dr. John Castellane, a French Divine, was degraded and burnt only for
Religion, in which he continued constant to death, and so patiently underwent
it, 1525. that many ignorant people were thereby drawn to the knowledge of the
Truth, and many weak were greatly confirmed. Vol. 2. p. 107, 108, 109.

George Carpenter burned in Munchen in Bavaria, Feb. 8. 1527. whose Crimes
were, because he held a Priest could not forgive sins, nor call God out of
Heaven, that God was not in the Bread in the Sacrament, nor that the Element of
Water in Baptism did confer Grace; which four Articles he refused to recant:
and being asked if he was let go if he would not go to his Wife and Children:
he answered, If I was let go, whither should I go rather than to my Wife and
well-beloved Children? And being told if he would recant he should be set at
liberty; he said, My Wife and Children are so dearly beloved of me, that they
cannot be bought from me for all the Riches of the Duke of Bavaria; but for the
love of my Lord God I will willingly forsake them. And being led to the place
of Execution, he promised a sign of his Faith, that while he could open his
mouth, he would not cease to call upon the Name of Jesus; and being in the fire
he cried aloud, Jesus, Jesus, and so gave up his spirit joyfully. Vol. 2. p.
114.

One Cowbridge burnt at Oxford, he was a person distracted, and knew not what
he said, and yet burned for an Heretic, who in the midst of the flames,
lifting up his Head to Heaven soberly and discreetly called upon the Name of
the Lord Jesus Christ, and so departed. Vol. 2. p. 437.

Roger Clarke, a Suffolk Man, taken at Ipswich, and judged 1546. with one
Kerby, by my Lord Wentworth; who, after Sentence given, talked with another
Justice on the Bench a good while, to whom Clarke said, My Lord, speak out, and
if you have done any thing contrary to your Conscience, ask of God mercy, and
we from our hearts do forgive you; speak not in secret, for ye shall come
before a Judge, and then make answer openly, even before him that shall judge
all Men. He was burned at Berry, and at Stake, kneeled down, and said, My Soul
does magnify the Lord, etc. Vol. 2. p. 569.

Dirick Carver, a Beer-Brewer in Bright-Hamsted in Sussex, an ancient and pious
Man, though not understanding a Letter of the Book, was apprehended for having,
with some others, been at Prayer in his House; and after his apprehension he so
improved his time in Learning, though ancient, that before he suffered, through
Gods blessing, he could read any English printed Book. At the Stake in Lewis,
July 22. 1555. he went into the Barrel, having stripped himself, and there spoke
to the People. Dear Brethren and Sisters, witness to you all that I am to seal
with my Blood Christ's Gospel, because I know it is true; and because I will not
deny Gods Gospel, and be obedient to Men's Laws, I here am condemned to dye.
Dear Brethren and Sisters, as many as believe on the Father, Son, and Holy
Ghost unto everlasting Life, see ye do the works pertaining to the same; I ask
ye all, whom I have offended, forgiveness, for the Lords sake, as I heartily
forgive all you who have offended me in thought word and deed. Lord have mercy
upon me, for unto thee do I commend my Soul, and my Spirit does rejoice in
thee. And so the Fire being kindled, he said, Oh Lord have mercy upon me, and
sprang up in the Fire calling on the Name of Jesus, and so ended. Vol. 3. p.
386.

Richard Colliar of Ashford in Kent, being examined and condemned for the
Gospels sake, as soon as he was condemned he sang a Psalm, and was afterward
burnt with five more Kentish Men, at three Stakes in one Fire, in August 1555.
Vol. 3. p. 394.

Tho. Cranmer, a Gentleman of a Family ancient as the Conquest, born at
Arselacton in Nottinghamshire, brought up at School, and at Cambridge was
Fellow of Jesus College, and afterward one of the Heads of the University,
used to examine all Graduates in Divinity, who would not admit any to be
Batchellors or Doctors in Divinity, but those who were well read in the
Scriptures; whereby he refused many Friars, some of whom by being thereby
brought to consult the Word of God were converted, and afterward returned him
thanks. This Cranmer was afterward by King Hen. 8. made Archbishop of
Canterbury, for his Service to him in endeavoring to satisfy his Conscience
about the divorce of his Queen, Catherine his first Wife, the Widow of his late
deceased Brother: He was of a mild Nature, soon reconciled to his Enemies, and
so ready to do them good that it grew Proverbial, Do my Lord of Canterbury a
displeasure, and then you may be sure to have him your Friend whilst he lives.
Vol. 3. p. 637.

He was by many endeavors tempted to recant, and after much resistance did at
last recant, chiefly out of a design to complete an Answer against a Papish
Book which he had begun; but though he subscribed, the Papists were ordered to
burn him, March 21. at Oxford, by the Queen, who had ordered Doctor Cole to
have a Funeral Sermon in readiness against that day; and accordingly at the day
appointed, the Doctor did preach, and Cranmer was had to the Church not knowing
the design; but as he was persuaded to publish his Recantation publicly, and
after Sermon, when it was expected he should declare his Recantation, he with
many tears and earnest desires did entreat the People to pray for him to God
for pardon of his sins, amongst which, none troubled him more than his
subscribing to Popery with his hand, which he hated in his heart; But, says
he, for as much as my hand has offended, it shall be first punished; for may I
come to the Fire, it shall first be burnt; and so he began to cry against the
Papists and Popery, whereby the Papists expectation were frustrated and they
grew mad at him, stopping his Mouth, and pulling him down, and led him
forthwith to the Town-ditch to be burnt, where in the Fire he put forth his
right hand into the flames as soon as they came near him, and held it there
till it was burnt, his body being unburnt; often saying, Oh unworthy right
hand; and saying often, Lord Jesus receive my spirit, he stood immovable in the
flames, and dyed March 21. 1556. Vol. 3. p. 670, 671.

John Carter, a Weaver of Coventry, dyed in the King's Bench a Prisoner for the
Gospel, who expected and desired to have been burnt. In a Letter to Mr. Philpot
he writes thus, My Friends report me to be more worthy to be burnt than any
that was burnt yet, God's blessing on their hearts for their good report, God
make me worthy of that dignity, and hasten the time, that I might set forth his
glory. He wrote diverse Letters of encouragement to the persecuted Brethren; and
in one Letter to his Wife he begs, and charge her to rejoice with him in this
his state of sufferings for Christ's sake. Vol. 3. p. 716. etc.

Peter Chevet: See Peter.

Mrs. Gertrude Crockhay, Wife to Mr. Robert Crockhay at St. Katherines by the
Tower in London, being for the Gospel persecuted, fled 1556. to Gelderland,
beyond Sea, to look after some Estate that should fall to her Children by a
former Husband: but there also she was betrayed, and came to trouble at
Antwerp; where, at the request of her Friends, she was set at liberty, and she
came for England, where she was infested again by the Papists; and being very
sick: They told her Daughter, that unless her Mother would receive the
Sacrament she should not be buried with Christian burial: who hearing the same,
said, Oh how happy am I that I shall not rise with them, but against them: The
Earth is the Lords and all the fullness thereof, and therefore I commit the
matter to him. Soon after she dyed, and was buried in her Husbands Garden. Vol.
3. p. 1013, 1014.

Christians to the number of 30000 slain in the Massacre at Paris in France,
1572. which was effected by the French King's inviting the chief Captains of
them, and all other that would, to the Wedding between the Prince of Navarre,
and the Kings Sister; at which being kindly received, some of them after the
completing of that Marriage were slain, and all the Soldiers in Paris charged
to be in Arms at a watchword, so that within three days 10000 of them were
slain, besides many other in the days following in Paris, and the Persecution
in other places in a Months time completed the number of 30000 aforesaid;
which News being sent to the Pope, he solemnly gave thanks for it as a mercy;
and the French King also did the like; and the Messenger of the News had 1000
Crowns for his News: but the poor Protestants were much troubled, of whom some
turned, others fled, and all had been destroyed, had not those in Rochel by
God's mercy been courageous, and resolved to be steadfast and fight for the
Faith; which being known, the French King besieges it, and charge all his
Nobles and Gentry, on pain of great punishment, to besiege it; which was done
with great vigor by the whole Force of France, and also of the Duke of Anjou,
Duke of Alanson, Navarre, and Condee, which Forces assaulted it seven times and
were resisted, so that they lost 122 Captains; and at last the Duke of Anjou
being made King of Polony, which News coming to the Camp they rejoiced; whereat
the new King treated with them of Rochel, and finding them not unconformable,
made peace with them, and prevailed with the French King by Edict to let them
have peace, and the liberty of Religion in that and other Cities, 1573. Vol. 3.
p. 1028, to 1030.

D D
DOrotheus and Gorgoneus, persons of Dioclesian's Privy Chamber, seeing the sad
Torments inflicted on Peter their Household Companion, said to Dioclesian, Why,
O Emperor, do you punish in Peter that Opinion which is in all of us? Why is
this accounted in him an offense, that we all confess we are of that Faith,
Religion, and Judgment that he is of? Wherefore he commanded them to be brought
forth, and to be tormented almost with like pains to Peter's, and afterward to
be hanged. Vol. 1. p. 101, 102.

John Diazius, a Spaniard, was murdered 1546. by his Brother Alphonsus
Diazius, who hired a Man with an Hatchet to cleave his own Brother's head, as
he was reading some Letters, under a pretense sent to him by his Brother, who
was by when the fact was done, and forth with fled with the Murderer: But he
being the Popes Lawyer, and procuring his Companion in Rome on purpose to
murder his Brother being a Protestant, escaped punishment. Vol. 2. p. 109.

Dennis a French Martyr 1528. burnt at Melda, for saying the Mass is a plain
denying of the death of Christ; he was wont to have always in his mouth the
words of Christ, He that denies me before men, him also will I deny before my
Father, and to muse on the same earnestly. He was burnt with a slow fire, and
did abide much torment. Vol. 2. p. 128.

Adam Damlip, alias George Bucker, a great Papist, in his Travels at Rome
seeing the great profaneness and impiety of that place, where he expected so
much goodness, loathed Popery; and at Calice reforming, he preached against it,
and was at length sentenced to death. When the News was told him by the Jailer
of the Marshalsee in London on a Saturday night, that on Monday he must for
Calice, and suffer there, he did eat his Supper cheerfully, insomuch that some
asked him how he could do it, being to dye so soon; to whom he said, Ah
Masters, do you think that I have been God's Prisoner so long in the
Marshalsee, and have not learned to dye? Yes, yes; and I doubt not but God will
strengthen me therein. He was at Calice the next Saturday following hanged,
drawn, and quartered as a Traitor, in King Henry the Eighth's time. And his
greatest Enemy, who at his death said he would not depart till he did see his
heart out, (one Sir Ralph Ellerken) was soon after slain amongst others by the
French, and his Enemies cutting off his Privy Members, cut his heart out of his
body; which cruelty they did to none other of the company, and may be looked on
as a just judgment of God on him, who so desired to see Damlip's heart. Vol. 2.
p. 564, 565.

John Denley, a Gentleman of Maidstone in Kent, burnt for the Gospel's sake at
Uxbridge, August 8. 1555. who in the flames sang a Psalm; whereat Dr. Story
caused one to throw a Faggot at him, which hurting his Face did cause him to
lay both his hands on it, and to leave singing; whereupon the Doctor said to
him that flung the Faggot, You have spoiled a good old Song; but Mr. Denley
being yet in the flame put abroad his hands again and sang, yielding up his
spirit into the hands of God. Vol. 3. p. 390.

Alice Driver, a Suffolk Woman and a Laborers Wife, persecuted for the Gospel
of Christ, said that Quen Mary, for her persecuting the Saints of God, was like
Iezebel; for which she had her Ears cut off presently, which she suffered
joyfully; and said, she thought her self happy that she was counted worthy to
suffer any thing for the Name of Christ. Being examined by several Doctors, she
reasoned with them so, and silenced them all. She perceiving which, said, Have
ye no more to say? God be thanked you be not able to resist the Spirit of God
in a poor weak woman: I was never brought up at the University, but often drove
the Plow before my Father; yet, in the defense of Gods Truth, and in the Cause
of my Master Christ, by his Grace I will set Foot to Foot against any of you in
the maintenance of the same; and if I had a thousand lives, they should all go
for the payment of it. She being at Stake, and a Chain put about her Neck to
bind her with, she said, Here is a goodly Neck-kerchief, Blessed be God for it.
She was burned November 4. 1558. Vol. 3. p. 886, 887, 888.

John Davis, a Schoolboy of twelve years of age, was, because he had a Bible,
and had written some things against the Papists, betrayed by his Aunt, one Mrs.
Johnson, in Worcester, 1546. with whom he lived; and he was imprisoned from
August 14. till 7. days before Easter, with Fetters and Bolts; and one
persuading him from burning, advised him first to try the Candle, who holding
his Finger, and the other holding a Candle under it a good space, he cried not,
felt no pain, nor was his Finger scorched. He was afterward arraigned, and
should have been punished with death, but that King Henry the 8 th. dyed, and
the Law was thereby out of force. Vol. 3. p. 919, 920.

E E
EUlalia, a Virgin of Noble Parentage in Eremita, a City in Portugal, of twelve
years of age, refusing great Marriages and Dowries, being a Christian, joined
her self with Gods Children under the 10 th. Persecution; and being kept close
by her Parents, lest she should hasten her own death, she by Night stole out
and ran to the Judgment Seat, and cried out, I am a Christian, an Enemy to your
devilish Sacrifices; I spurn your Idols all under my Feet, I confess God
Omnipotent with heart and mouth: Isis, Apollo, Venus, what are they? Maximinus
himself, what is he? The one a thing of naught, because the work of Men's hands;
and the other a castaway, because he worshippeth the same work. Whereat the
Judge incensed, threatened torments, but first persuades her to return and offer
Incense; whereat she spits in his Face, spurns abroad with her Feet the
Incense; and then was miserably tormented, scratched and cut to the Bones, she
singing and praising God, saying, O Lord I will not forget thee! what a
pleasure is it, O Christ, for them that remember thy triumphant Victory, to
attain to these high dignities? and so she was burned. Vol. 1. p. 120.

Edmund, King of Eastangles, in the Saxon Heptarchy in Britain, being summoned
to submit to Inguar, a Dane, returned an answer, That he, a Christian King,
would not, for the love of a temporal life, subject himself to a Pagan Duke,
unless he became a Christian first; whereupon he was taken, and fixed to a
Stake, and shot to death. Vol. 1. p. 148.

F F
FRuctuosus, Bishop of Tarraconia in Spain, being by Emilianus under the Eighth
Persecution, in the year of Christ 262. to be burned, because he would not
worship Idols, said, He worshipped not any dumb God of Stocks and Blocks, but
one God the Creator of all things: And being cast into the fire with his hands
tied behind him, his bands were by the fire dissolved, his hands unhurt, and
his body remained whole, and he lifted up his hands and praised God, praying
also that the fire might speedily dispatch him; which then was soon done: in
the mean time a Soldier in the house of Emilianus, with the Daughter of
Emilianus, said they saw the Heavens open and the Martyr to enter in. Vol. 1.
p. 96.

Nicholas Finchman burned in Dornick 1549. who being condemned, blessed God
which had counted him worthy to be a witness in the cause of his dear and well
beloved Son; and patiently took his death, commending his Spirit unto God in
the midst of the fire. Vol. 2. p. 124.

James Faber an old man, about the year of Christ 1562. being apprehended,
said, he could not answer or satisfy them in reasoning, yet he would
constantly abide in the truth of the Gospel; and so was martyred. Vol. 2. p.
127.

Ioannes Filieul, or Filiolus, and Iulianus Leville, suffered both at Sanserre
in France 1554. who having their Tongues cut out, yet had some utterance given
them of God, that at their death they said, We bid Sin, the Flesh, the World
and the Devil farewell for ever, with whom never we shall have to do hereafter.
Vol. 2. p. 145.

Fininus at Ferraria, an Italian, was burnt 1550. who being apprehended, by the
persuasion of his Friends he recanted, and then was in so great horror that he
almost despaired, till he publicly again preached the Gospel; for which he
being again taken, could not by all the solicitations of his Wife and Children
be drawn from it, but told them that his Lord had commanded him not to deny him
for taking care of his Family, wherefore he desired them to depart: And being
afterward commanded by Pope Julius the Third to be executed, he returned
thanks to the Messengers of the News, and much rejoiced at it: And being asked
what would become of his Wife and Children, if he so left them: he said he had
left them to a good Overseer, Christ the Lord, a faithful Keeper of all
committed to him. One seeing him so merry before his death, asked the Reason,
since Christ wept and sweat drops of blood before his Passion? To whom he
answered, Christ sustained in his body all the sorrows and conflicts of Hell
and death due to us, by whose death we are delivered from sorrow and fear of
them all. And at the Stake, after his Prayers to God, he meekly gave his neck
to the Cord, with which he was strangled, and was afterward burned. Vol. 2. p.
165, 166.

John Frith burnt at one Stake in Smithfield 1533. with one Andrew Hewet, this
Frith willingly embraced the Stake, and whenas one Dr. Cook bad the people
pray for them no more than for a Dog, he said smiling, Father forgive them; and
the fire being by the wind more blown to his Partner than himself, he, though
in so great torments, rejoiced; and seeming to feel no torments, comforted his
fellow-sufferer rather than was careful for himself. Vol. 2. p. 309, 310.

Henry Filmer, a Preacher of the Gospel, in King Hen. 8. days, about Windsor,
was brought to be burnt by the Envy of Dr. London, and the false accusations of
his own Brother, induced to it by promises of maintenance from the Doctor: To
which Brother, Filmer (seeing himself like to suffer by reason of his
accusations) said, Ah, Brother, what cause have thou to show me this
unkindness? I have been always a natural Brother to thee; and is this a
Brotherly part, to reward me now so? God forgive thee it my Brother, and give
thee grace to repent. He suffered with one Testwood and Anthony Persons. As he
came to his Brothers door, as he was going to suffer; he called his Brother
three or four times, but he appeared not: and then Filmer said, And will he not
come? then God forgive him, and make him a good Man. He being with the other
two at the Stake, drank to each other; and Filmer said, Be merry, for I trust,
that after this sharp Breakfast, we shall have a good Dinner in the Kingdom of
Christ. Vol. 2. p. 553, 554.

Dr. Robert Farrar, Bishop of S. David's in Wales, being to be burnt, and much
pitied by a Knights Son, who lamented the painfulness of the death he was to
suffer; to whom Ferrar said, If ye see me once stir in the pains of my burning,
you shall not believe my Doctrine: And as he said, so it was; for he stood so
patiently that he never moved; but as he stood holding up his Stumps, so he
continued till he was struck down by a Staff, March 30. 1555. in the Reign of
Queen Mary. Vol. 3. p. 216.

William Flower, alias Branch, a Cambridgeshire Man, brought up a Monk, at last
was reformed; and after removing from place to place, he came to Lambeth, by
London; and on an Easter Day went to Westminster, and in S. Margarets Church
he, out of zeal for Gods Cause, drew his Hanger, and wounded the Priest as he
was administering the Sacrament; for which he was imprisoned, and though he much
lamented the Fact as done amiss, yet did he justify his Faith against them.
And Bishop Bonner threatening him one while, and then persuading him by proffers
of Gifts, he thankt him and said, whereas it was in his power to kill, or not
kill his Body, he was contented he should do what he pleased; but he knew over
his Soul he had no such power, but that being separated from the Body is in the
hands of no Man, but only of God, either to save or spill. At length he was
burnt in Westminster-Abby Yard, April 24. 1554. where his right hand was cut
off, he not showing any sense of pain; and at last, burning in the Fire, he
cried out, O thou Son of God have mercy on me, O thou Son of God receive my
Soul; and dyed by much torment, his lower part being burnt when his upper part
was untouched, by reason of want of Fuel. Vol. 3. p. 243, 244. 246.

Elizabeth Folks, an Essex Maid, being imprisoned and condemned for the
Gospel, kneeled down and lifting up her hands, prayed to God and praised him
that ever she was born to see that most blessed day, that the Lord would count
her worthy to suffer for the Testimony of Christ; and, Lord, said she, if it be
thy Will, forgive them that have done this against me; for they know not what
they do: and going to the Stake at Colchester, August 2. 1557. and the People
not permitting her to give her Petticoat to her Mother (who was present and
kissed her at the Stake, and exhorted her to be strong in the Lord) she threw
away the Coat, saying, Farewell all the World, farewell Faith, farewell Hope; and
then taking hold of the Stake, she said, Welcome Love. She was burned with five
more, who all clapped their hands for joy in the flames. Vol. 3. p. 832.

John Frith being in the Tower as an Heretic, because he held against
Transubstantiation. And being afterward sent for to Croydon by my Lord of
Canterbury, Cranmer, in King Henry the 8 th's time, the Lords Men who were sent
for him advised him to submit to the Bishops and Doctors opinion: to whom Frith
said, My Conscience is such, that in any wise I neither may, nor can, for any
worldly respect, without danger of damnation, start aside from that true
knowledge, though I should presently lose twenty lives if I had so many. The
Servants, still endeavoring to save him, contrived how he might fly, and so
escape; which they imparted to him: To whom he said, Should you leave me, I
would surely follow you; should you bring the Bishops news ye had lost Frith, I
would bring them news I had found him, and brought him again: for, though
before I was taken, I being at liberty, fled, to make use of my liberty; yet I
being taken, cannot fly, but run from God, and should then be worthy of a
thousand Hells. And so he went cheerfully to the Bishops at Croydon, and there
disputed the Point; and after was sent to Bishop Stokesteys, the Bishop of
London's Consistory; and soon after was burnt. Vol. 3. p. 990, 991, 992. See
more of Frith p. 59. of this Book.

G G
GErmanicus, a young devout Man, being by the Proconsul of Antoninus Verus in
the 4 th Persecution, persuaded to favor himself being in the flower of his
age; he would not be allured, but constantly, and boldly, and of his own accord
provoked the Beasts to come upon him to devour him, to be delivered the more
speedily out of this wretched Life. Vol. 1. p. 57.

Gordius, a Centurion of Caesaria, in the 10 th Persecution, willingly exiled
himself, till a public Feast of Mars was celebrated, and much People was
assembled; and then appearing in the Theater, cried out, I am found of them
that sought me not: And being examined by the Sheriff, he said, I came hither
to publish that I set nothing by your Decrees against Christian Religion, but I
profess Christ to be my hope and safety: Hereupon he was scourged, and he said,
It would be an hindrance to him, if he could not suffer diverse torments for
Christ. And having more torments tried on him, he sang, The Lord is my helper,
I will not fear the thing that Man can do unto me; I will fear no evil, because
thou Lord art with me. After this, being with prayers and entreaties dealt
with, he derided the madness of the Magistrates; who being thereby incensed,
condemned him. And he being much importuned by diverse acquaintance to deny
Christ with Tongue, and to keep his Conscience to himself; he said, My Tongue,
which by the goodness of God I have, cannot be brought to deny the Author of
it. And to those who wept for him, and by tears importuned him to save himself;
he said, Weep not, I pray, for me: but weep for the Enemies of God, which
always make war against the Christians, who prepare for these a fire, and
purchase to themselves Hell fire; but molest not, I pray, my settled mind; truly
I am ready to suffer for the Name of Christ a thousand deaths if need were.
Vol. 1. p. 117.

John Goose in the time of King Edward the 4 th, being to be burnt, desired of
the Sheriff somewhat to eat, and he did eat as if he had been toward no manner
of danger, saying, I eat now a good and competent Dinner, for I shall pass a
little sharp shower ere I go to Supper: And having dined, he gave thanks, and
desired that he might be shortly led to the place where he should yield up his
Spirit to God; and was burned on Tower Hill in August 1473. Vol. 1. p. 939.

Lawrence Ghest, in King Henry the Seventh's days, being to be burnt at
Salisbury, and having his Wife and seven Children shown him, and his Wife
desiring him to favor himself, he desired her to be content, and not to be a
block in his way, for he was in a good course, running toward the mark of his
salvation; and so he was burned. Vol. 1. p. 1012.

Galeasius Trecius, an Italian, burned at Aus Pompeia in Italy 1551. for
professing the Gospel. He having professed it a while, and then by the
persuasion of Friends denying it, felt great sorrow, and, as he declared, never
greater in all his life; but recovering by the grace of God, he longed for a
time to evidence his return by confession of his Faith again, affirming he
never felt more joy of heart than when by Papists examined, nor more sorrow
than when he recanted, declaring that death was much more sweet to him, with
the testimony of the truth, than life with the least denial of the truth and
loss of a good conscience: And being imprisoned, he could not be prevailed with
to recant, but confirmed his first Faith, and burned. Vol. 2. p. 167, 168.

Franciscus Gamba, an Italian, burned at Comun 1554. being accused for an
Heretic, and importuned to recant; he defended his Doctrine by manifest
Scriptures, and proved his Opinions to be the true Doctrine of Christ, and
rather than he would deny them he was ready to stand to the effusion of his
blood: And being long and often assailed by his Friends to recant, he could not
be expugned, but gave thanks to God, that he was made worthy to suffer the
rebukes of the world, and civil death for the testimony of his Son; and so went
cheerfully to death: And when at his death the Friars held a Cross before him,
he said that his mind was so replenished with joy and comfort in Christ, that
he needed not them, nor their Cross: And declaring many comfortable things to
the people, he was strangled and burned. Vol. 2. p. 180.

Garret, a great promoter of Christianity in Oxford, was at last July 30. 1541.
by Gardner Bishop of Winchester to be burnt, who professing his Faith, and
detesting all Heresies, begged pardon of God for his sins, and of all persons
whom he had offended: He resigned up his Soul to God, whom he believed would
through Christ save him, and pardon his sins, and desired the persons present
to pray for him; and dyed Christianly with Barus and Hierom. Vol. 2. p. 528.

William Gardener, born at Bristow, and there dealing in Merchandise under one
Mr. Paget a Merchant, at 26 years of age sailed to Spain, but by chance the
Ship arrived at Lisborne the chief City of Portugal, where he stayed and
merchandised, and learning their tongue, he acted for many English Merchants,
and had much knowledge in Scripture and the Reformed Religion: And being there,
and happening to be at the solemnizing of a marriage between the King of
Portugal's Son, and the King of Spain's Daughter, and beholding great Pomp and
greater Idolatry acted by the Kings, and all the Assembly's adoring the Mass,
praying, kneeling and worshipping the external Sacrament, he was much troubled,
and could he have got near the Altar would have interrupted them; but being
hindered by the throng of the people, he was very sorrowful for his neglect of
that opportunity to declare against their Idolatry, which neglect he much
lamented, and contrived how to redeem it; to effect which he cast up all his
accounts, and bad adieu to worldly concerns; and giving himself to reading,
meditating, fasting, weeping, and praying: He being cleanly dressed the next
Sunday, when the like Solemnity was to be done, he gat to the Altar betimes,
and there stood with a Testament in his hand till the Cardinal came to
solemnize it, and till he consecrated, sacrificed, and lifted up on high the
Host, showing his God to the people, who with the Kings and Nobles gave great
reverence to it; and at last, when the Cardinal came to begin to toss it to and
fro round the Chalice, making several Circles, this Gardner stepped in, and with
one hand took the Cake and trod it under foot, and with the other hand
overthrew the Chalice, in the presence of the Kings, and the Nobles and
Citizens, which abashed them all; and one cut him with a Sword, but the King
commanded he should be saved; and being examined, he confessed himself to be an
Englishman and a Protestant, and decryed much against their Idolatry; for
which after several torments to cause him to confess others, he taking all the
blame on himself, they put a hard roll of Linen with a string into his throat,
and so often pulled that up, and then cut of his right hand, which he took in
his left and kissed, then in the Marketplace they cut off his left hand, and he
kneeling down kissed it, then was he carried to Execution, and being hung on
high a fire was made under him, and he by degrees let down into it, so that
only his legs at first felt the fire, yet would he not recant; and being bid to
pray to Saints, he said, That when Christ leaves off to be our Mediator and
Advocate, then he would pray to our Lady and the Saints. And then he prayed, O
Eternal God, Father of all mercies; I beseech thee look down upon thy Servant.
And the more terribly he burnt, the more vehemently he prayed; which his
Enemies desiring to hinder, he said the 43. Psalm; before the close of which,
the Rope was burnt asunder, and he fell down into the Fire, and was burned to
death, 1552. whose death was not unpunished, for among the King of Portugal's
Ships ready to sail, being in a Haven hard by, one was burnt by a Spark of Fire
blown from the Martyrs Fire; and within half a Year the Kings Son dyed; and the
King himself within a Year. Vol. 2. p. 745, 746, 747, 748.

Robert Glover was apprehended to be burnt at Coventry, being very sickly in
Prison, said, he found daily amendment of body, and increase of peace in
Conscience; many consolations from God, and sometimes, as it were, a taste and
a glimmering of the life to come: But he was much assaulted by Satan, from his
unworthiness, to do or suffer for Christ. Which Objection he answered from Gods
mercies, and the unworthiness of like Servants in all Ages, who have been
accepted. Yet, three days before he was burnt, he had a sad dullness of Spirit,
and was desolate of all spiritual comfort; against which he prayed much, and
earnestly; but yet finding no ease, nor comfort, he told it to his Friend, one
Austin, who advised him to wait God's time for the manifestation of himself,
and to continue steadfast in the Faith and willing to suffer; knowing his Cause
to be right, not doubting but God in his due time would replenish his heart
with spiritual joy; requesting him to show it by some token, if he felt any
such thing: And as he went to burning, as soon as he came in sight of the
Stake* he cried out, being suddenly full of comfort, clapping his hands
together, Austin, He is come, he is come; with so great joy and alacrity, as if
he had been one risen from some deadly danger, to liberty of life; and so dyed
cheerfully in September, 1555. Vol. 3. p. 427, 428.

Bartlet Green, a Londoner, brought up at Oxford; converted from Popery by
Peter Martyr, Reader of Divinity in Oxford; and afterward he was Student in
the Temple, and at twenty five years of age, January 28. 1556. he was burnt,
with six others, for the Gospel of Christ. He often repeated, as he went to the
Stake, and at the Stake, this Distich.

Christ Deus sine te spes est mihi nulla salutis,
Te Duce vera sequor, te duce falsa nego.
In English thus.

O Christ my God, sure hope of health,
besides thee I have none;
The truth I love, and falsehood hate,
by thee my guide alone.
Vol. 3. p. 627.
He wrote to one in a Letter, thus: Man of Woman is born in Travel, to live in
misery; Man, through Christ, does dye in joy, and live in felicity: he is born
to dye, and dies to live; whilst here he displeased God, when dead he fulfilled
his Will. Vol. 3. p. 629.

Charles Le Roy de Gand, once a Friar Carmelite, but reformed, had a Canonship
promised him by the Magistrate, if he would but yield a little: to which, he
said, You proffer me a Canonship, that I might live quietly, and be in
security; but know, Sir, that rest is no true rest, which is obtained against
peace of Conscience; and so he was burned at Bruges, April 27. 1557. Addit. to
Vol 3. of Massacre of France, p. 5.

H H
JOHN Husse, a Bohemian, was burned 1415. about July, by the Council of
Constance; where he often desired to be heard, to clear himself of the errors
they impeached him of, and could not. Then he requesting their proving by
Scripture any error he held, they would not; but, because he held Wicklif's
Doctrine they degraded him, and left him to the Secular Power, to Sigismund
King of the Romans; by whom he was condemned, and burned, and all this cruelty
against a safe Conduct, sealed by the Emperor, and promised by the Council.
When he was to be burned he prayed often, and especially for his Enemies; and
after the kindling of the Fire he sang aloud, Jesus Christ, the Son of the
living God, have mercy upon me. Vol. 1. p. 821, 822.

Richard Hunn burned in Smithfield, December 20. 1514. sixteen days after he
was privately Murdered by the Papists. Vol. 2. p. 19.

Mr. Hierom was condemned in King Henry the 8 th's time, 1541. by Bishop
Gardner, Bishop of Winchester; and at the Stake he confessed his Faith, and
exhorted all Persons to Duties to God and Man, considering what Price Christ
paid for us; and exciting them to bear their Cross with Christ, considering his
Example of Patience under sufferings; and at last prayed them to pray for him,
that he, Barns, and Garret, who were all three together burnt, might have their
Souls, leaving these wretched Bodies, constantly depart in the true Faith of
Christ; and so, committing his Soul to Christ, he dyed. These three, which at
this Fire were burnt together, took each other by the hand; and kissing each
other, quietly, and peaceably, offered themselves to the tormentors hands; and
took their deaths Christianly, and patiently. Vol. 2. p. 528, 529.

Mr. John Hooper, Student in Oxford, flying, in King Henry the 8 th's time,
beyond Sea, because of Persecution for the six Articles; was at Zurick
acquainted with Mr. Bullinger, and Married a Burgonian Woman: But, in King
Edward the 6 th's days, he returned, and did promise his Friends they should
hear from him: Though, says he, the last News of me I shall not be able to
write; for there, says he, where I shall take most pains, there shall you hear
of me to be burnt to Ashes: Which Prophecy came to effect: He preached at
London often twice a day, but always once a day: He was, in his Sermons,
earnest; in his Tongue, eloquent; in Scriptures, perfect; in pains,
indefatigable; he was spare of diet, sparest of words, and sparest of time. He
was, by King Edward the 6 th, made Bishop of Gloucester and Worcester; in both
which Diocesses he preached at, and visited them: and, at Worcester, his manner
was every day to have a certain number of poor Beggars of the Town Dine in his
Palace with whole and wholesome Meat, four at a Mess; whom he examined, or
caused to be examined, in the Lords Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments, before
himself sat down to Dinner. He was with one John Rogers the two first that
were condemned in Queen Mary's days: To which Rogers Bishop Hooper said,
Brother Rogers, Must we two begin first to fry these Faggots? fear not but God
will give us strength. He suffered amongst his People, at Gloucester; where Sir
Anthony Kingston, his old Friend, did desire him to accept of life, and not
dye; saying, life is sweet, and death bitter: To whom Bishop Hooper answered,
True, but eternal death is more bitter, and eternal life most sweet; in respect
of which, I value not this life. Vol. 3. p. 145, 146, 147. He was after that
persuaded much, but he said, Death to me for Christ's sake is welcome. At the
fire a Box was set on a Stool before him with the Queens Pardon (as it was
said) if he would turn; but he cried, If ye love my Sonl away with it, if ye
love my Soul away with it: He was prohibited to speak to the people, and
permitted only to pray: he begged of the Sheriffs for a speedy fire to dispatch
him; but when he was to be burnt, what through the wetness of the wood and
greatness of the frude, three fires one after another were made before he was
consumed; in the first fire he prayed mildly, as one without pain, Lord Jesus
thou Son of David have mercy on me, and receive my Soul. After the second fire
was spent he wiped both Eyes, and looking on the people, begged for Gods sake
more fire: And in the third fire he cried out, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit,
Lord Jesus have mercy on me; and so spoke no more, continuing motion of his
lips, till they shrank to his gums; and beating his breast with his hands till
one arm fell off, and the other by fat, water, and blood, stuck to the Iron, by
which he was fastened to the Stake; and so he dyed. Vol. 3. p. 156.

In a Letter he wrote out of Prison to diverse Friends, he undervalues the
worldly joys and troubles, in comparison of Hells misery, or Heavens glory;
and exhorts them to constancy, thus: It was an easy thing to hold with God and
Christ, whilst the Prince and World held with him; but now the World hates
him, it is the true trial who be his: Let us not run when it is most time to
fight; none shall be Crowned, but them that fight manfully: Beware of beholding
the Worlds felicity, or misery, too much; whose love, or fear, draws from
God: Think the felicity of the World good, but yet no otherwise than stands
with Gods favor: It is to be kept, yet so as we lose not God; of adversity,
judge the same: Imprisonment is painful, yet liberty, on evil terms, worse: I
must be alone, and solitary; yet that is better, and to have God with us, than
to enjoy the company of the wicked: Loss of goods is great, but loss of Gods
favor greater: I shall dye by the hands of cruel Men; but he is blessed that
loses a life full of misery, and finds a life full of eternal joys: Neither
felicity, or misery, in the World, can be great, if compared with joys, or
pains, in the World to come. Vol. 3. p. 156, 157.

In another Letter he exhorts the godly to meet often, and pray and confer
together of their ignorance, before their knowledge of God; and their state, by
their knowledge of God in his Word; and to compare their Popish Principles with
Gods Word, being careful to do all things for three ends; Gods glory, the
Churches edification, and their Souls profit. p. 158, 159.

In another Letter, exhorting to patience under the Cross, he says, That our
Enemies cruelty has no further power than God permits, and what comes to us by
the will of our heavenly Father, can be no harm, but felicity to us. We, as
Men, suffer these evils; but as Christians we overcome them, nor can they
separate between Gods love and us; they can but last our short life, and then
must give way to our partaking of eternal joys. Vol. 3. p. 161. Nothing can
hurt us that is taken from us for Gods Cause, nor can any thing do us good that
is kept against Gods Commandment; let us surrender goods and life to his will,
and then it matters not whether we keep or lose it. Vol. 3. p. 163.

William Hunter, an Apprence to one Thomas Tailor, a Silk-weaver in London,
fled at nineteen years old for Religion's sake, to Burntwood, to his Fathers
House; and being at Burntwood, in the Church, found a Bible, and did read in
it, till a Sumner came in and threatened him for it, telling him he was an
Heretic and deserved death; and called one Thomas Wood Vicar of Southwel
(being then in the Town) to him, who said to Hunter, He ought not to read, and
that he was an Heretic; and threatened him much. To whom Hunter said, I would
you and I were now fast tied to a Stake, to prove whether you, or I, would
stand strongest to our Faith; I dare set my Foot to yours, even to death. Yet
being thus threatened, whilst the Vicar went to inform, he fled into the
Country; but his Father was sent for, and forced to go and seek him, and to
bring him into his Enemies hands: who, much against his natural affection and
will, rode two or three days into the Country to seek him. And his Son, meeting
him, did conjecture the cause of his Fathers Journey; and said, he would return
with him and save him harmless, whatever came of it: and as soon as he came
home he was laid in the Stocks, and had before one Justice Brown; who soon sent
him to Bishop Bonner, who a while flattered the young Man; but at last, seeing
he would not recant, threatened to make him sure enough: To whom William said,
You can do no more than God will permit you, I will never recant while I live,
God willing: Then was he imprisoned for three quarters of a year, and allowed
but a Halfpenny a day, and at length condemned: To whom, after condemnation,
Bonner said, If he would turn he would make him Freeman of the City, and give
him forty Pound to set up with; or else would make him Steward of his House: To
wom William Hunter said, I thank you for your offers, yet if you cannot
persuade my Conscience by Scripture, I cannot find in my heart to turn from God
for the love of the World; for I count all things but dung and loss, in respect
of the love of Christ. When he came to Burntwood to be burnt, his Parents came
to him, and desired of God heartily that he might continue to the end in that
good way he had begun; and his Mother said, she was glad she was so happy to
bear such a Child that could find in his heart to lose his life for Christ's
sake: To whom William Hunter said, For my little pain which I shall suffer,
which is but short, Christ has promised me a Crown of joy; may you not be glad
of that Mother? Who answered, yea, I think thee as well bestowed as any Child I
ever did bear; and prayed to God to strengthen him to the end. He was burnt
March 26. 1555. As he went to the Stake he met his Father, who said to him, God
be with thee my Son William: and he answered, God be with you my good Father;
be of good comfort, for I hope we shall meet again when we shall be merry. And,
taking up a Faggot, he kneeled down and prayed, and read the 51. Psalm, and
then went to the Stake, standing upright, begging the people to pray for him
and to dispatch him quickly: He still had his pardon offered, if he would
recant; but he refused. At his request for the peoples Prayers, one Justice
Brown said, he would pray no more for him, than for a Dog. To whom William
Hunter said, You now have, Sir, what you sought for; I pray God it be not laid
to your charge, howbeit I forgive you. And soon after he prayed, Son of God,
shine on me; and immediately the Sun in the Element shone out of a dark Cloud
so full in his Face, that he was forced to turn away his head; whereat the
people mused, because it was so dark a day a little time before. Then William
Hunter took and embraced a Faggot in his Arms, and when the Fire was kindled,
he lift up his hands to Heaven, and said, Lord, Lord, Lord, receive my spirit,
and so dyed. Vol. 3. p. 191, to 194.

Thomas Hawks, an Essex Gentleman, being threatened by Bishop Bonner if he would
not recant, said always, Ye shall do no more than God will give you leave; and
at last at his condemnation being urged to recant, he said, No, had I an
hundred bodies I would suffer them all to be torn in pieces, rather than
recant. As he went to Execution, June 10. 1555. being desired by his Friends
that he would show them some sign in the flames, if he could, whereby they
might know more certainly, whether the pain of the burning was so great that a
man might not therein keep his mind quiet; which he promised to do, and that if
the pain was tolerable he would lift up his hands toward Heaven before he gave
up the Ghost: And being at Stake, he mildly and patiently addressed himself to
the fire, and after he had been in the fire, his fingers burnt and gone, and
skin so drawn together, that all men thought he had been dead, he suddenly
reached up his hands burning of a light fire over his head, to the living God,
and with great rejoicing as seemed struck or clapped them three times together,
and then sinking down into the fire he gave up his spirit. He wrote to his Wife
and Children to fear and serve God, and to continue fervent in Prayer, for then
God would provide for them better than he was able to do ever; yea, says he,
God will cause all men that fear him to pity you, to help you, to succor you
in all your necessities; so that if any would do you wrong, he will be avenged
on him. Vol. 3. p. 265.

John Hullier, Fellow of Kings College in Cambridge, was burnt for the Gospel;
who being degraded said cheerfully, This is the joyfullest day that ever I saw,
and I thank you all that ye have delivered me from all this paltry. He was
burned on Jesus Green in Cambridge; he said he dyed in the right Faith, and
desired the people to take notice that he dyed in a just cause, and for the
testimony of the Truth: And feeling the fire, he called earnestly on God; and
many Books being burnt with him, he gat one which was cast into the fire, and
fell into his arms, and was a Communion-Book, which he did read in till the
flame and smoke hindered him from seeing: And then laying the Book next his
heart he prayed again: And when all the people thought he had been dead, he
suddenly said, Lord Jesus receive my Spirit, dying very meekly: And after his
flesh was burnt his bones stood upright, as if he had been alive. Vol. 3. p.
827, 828.

Thomas Hudson, a Glover, of Ailsham in Norfolk, an ignorant person till he
learned the English Tongue, about one or two years before the Reign of Queen
Mary; and then he detested the Mass and Popish Idolatry, and became a zealous
Protestant, reading, praying, singing Psalms; and being sought for, he prayed,
if it was Gods will, he might suffer persecution for the Gospel of Christ: and
when Persons came to apprehend him, he said, Welcome Friends, welcome; you are
they that shall lead me to life in Christ: and so he went with them. And being
by Bishop Hopton (then Bishop of Norwich) his Commissary Berry, asked to
recant, he said, God forbid, I had rather dye many deaths, than do so. Then was
he sent to Norwich to the Bishop, and went as merrily as ever he was; and was
burned with two more, May 19. 1555. And being bound with them to the Stake by a
Chain, he not feeling the joys of Christ, came from under the Chain, being
troubled in mind, and fell down and prayed earnestly to God, who hearing him,
and restoring to him comfort, he arose and went to the Stake again, saying, Now
I am strong, and pass not what Men can do unto me. Vol. 3. p. 869, 870.

Roger Holland, Son to a Lancashire Gentleman, and Apprentice to a
Merchant-Taylor in London, a zealous Man; to whom this Roger was a great
trouble, being a debauched Lad, and a great Papist, yet did he trust him with
his Accounts; but it happened one night that Roger lost thirty pound at Dice, and
not being able to pay it, resolved next morning to go to France, or Flanders;
but acquainted his Fellow Servants, a Maid, whose name was Elizabeth, a Woman of
great Christian profession and practice; to whom he gave a Bill to give his
Master for the thirty pound, that his Master might not acquaint his Friends
with it; and that if ever he was worth it, he would pay it to his Master: and
so he going to leave the House, the Maid, having Money by her, brought him
thirty pound, and gave him; saying, I will take the Bill my self, and conceal
the thing from your Friends, and my Master; and you may have this thirty pound
to pay my Master, on condition that you will throw away your Popish Books and
read the Bible, and attend all Christian Lectures; nor more swear, curse,
drink, whore, nor play: But if you do those things again, and I know of it, I
will then tell my Master of the business. But in half a years space Roger was
so reformed, and so zealous a Protestant, that he was admired by his
Associates: And going into Lancashire to his Friends, he was, by his Books he
carried, and by his discourse, instrumental, that his Father and his Friends
began to try the truth of God, and to hate Popery. And at his return to London
his Father gave him fifty pound to set up with; and then he paid the Maid
Elizabeth her thirty pound, and soon after Married her; and they lived heavenly
together, till he was apprehended for the Gospels sake, and by Bishop Bonner
persecuted; to whom he openly told the impurity of their Principles, the
corrupt tendency of their confessions from his own Practice, who cared not what
sin he used to commit so long as he was a Papist, since the Popish Priest
would, for Money, absolve him. And when he was condemned, he told Bishop
Bonner, That his cruelty should be but short, nor after that day should he burn
any more: which came so to pass. At the Stake, he said, Lord, I humbly thank
thy Majesty that thou have called me from the state of death to the light of
thy heavenly Word, and now into the fellowship of Saints, that I may sing and
say, Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God of Hosts; Lord, into thy hands I commend my
Spirit: Lord, bless these thy People, and save them from Idolatry: And so
praising God he dyed in the flames, with two more, in Smithfield, July 27.
1558. Vol. 3. p. 874. to 878.

Bartholomew Hector, burnt at Turin in Piedmont, June 19. 1556. being bound to
the Stake, and Gunpowder and Brimstone placed about him, he lifted up his Eyes
to Heaven, and said, Lord, how sweet and welcome are these to me? Addition to
Vol. 3. concerning Massacres in France, p. 5.

Philibert Hamelin, a Minister in Tournay, being persuaded to fly, said, No, I
esteem it altogether unbeseeming for a Man called to preach the Gospel to
others to run away for fear of danger, but rather to maintain its truth even in
the midst of the flaming Fire: And he was executed 1557. at Tournay. Additions
to Vol. 3. of Massacres of France. p. 5.

John Herwin, a Soldier of Flanders, of very dissolute profane life; but
coming over to England was, by means of a Beer-brewer in London (with whom he
was a Servant) converted, and became a zealous Protestant, and a pious liver.
And afterward, returning to Flanders, he was apprehended for the Gospel, and
imprisoned; which he took patiently, and cheerfully: and in Prison he sang
Psalms, and testified his inward joy by a Letter to the Brethren, whom he
exhorted to persevere constant in the Faith. After sentence of death he blessed
God for that honor to dye for Christ; and being led out to execution, he said,
See how the wicked World rewards the poor Servants of Christ. Whilst I gave my
self to Drinking, Carding, Dicing, and such like Vices; I was let alone, and
accounted a Good Fellow; and who but I? And no sooner began I to look after a
godly life, but the World wars on me, imprisons me, persecutes me, and will put
me to death. At the Stake he sang the 30. Psalm; and said to the people, I am
now going to be sacrificed, follow ye me, when God of his goodness shall call
you to it. He was burned at Honscot, November 4. 1560. Additions to the 3. Vol.
concerning Massacre in France and Flanders. p. 18.

I I
JAMES, the Son of Zebedee, and Brother of John, brought by a Person to the
Tribunal Seat of Herod, and condemned; the Person seeing he should now suffer
death, being moved therewith in heart and conscience, did confess himself, of
his own accord, a Christian; and as he and James were led together, he desired
James to forgive him what he had done: After that James had a little paused
with himself upon the matter, turning to him, Peace (says he) be to thee
Brother, and kissed him; and both were Beheaded together, Anno Christi 36. Vol.
1. p. 42.

James, the Brother of our Lord, who was Bishop of Jerusalem; called, for his
holiness, James the just, had Knees like Camels Knees by praying; being by the
Jews set upon the Pinnacle of the Temple to give testimony concerning (as they
expected against) Jesus, he declared Jesus to be the Christ: whereupon the Jews
threw him down, and he not being dead, they came to stone him; who turned on
his Knees and prayed, saying, O Lord God, Father, I beseech thee forgive them,
for they know not what they do: Yet they stoned him, and at last, with a
Fullers Instrument, struck him on the Head, and he dyed. Vol. 1. p. 43, 44.

John the Evangelist was banished into Pathmos the 97. Year of Christ; and
after the death of Domitian was recalled by Pertinax the Emperor; and being
returned to Ephesus, he was desired to resort to the adjacent places to appoint
Bishops: where he committed a comely ingenuous young Man to the Bishop of the
place, to be by him kept with great diligence; in witness hereof, Christ and
his Church: Which young Man the Bishop received, and with diligence brought up,
baptized, and at length committed to him a Cure in the Lords behalf. The young
Man now having his liberty, through the corruptness of his Companions, became
dissolute, a Thief, and a Murderer, yea, the Captain of them: and S. John being
sent for again into those Parts, demanded of the Bishop, the charge committed
to him; who said, he was dead to God, and become an evil Man, a Thief
frequenting this Mountain: Whereat S. John rent his Clothes, and said, I have
left a good Keeper of my Brother's Soul: And got him a Horse and presently fell
into the company of the Thieves, and was designedly taken, desiring to be
brought to their Captain who was well armed, yet beginning to know S. John,
fled; but when recalled by S. John, he threw down his Arms and became truly
penitent, and was received into Church again. After this, S. John going to
bathe himself, and seeing Cerinthus the Heretic in the Bath, would not go in
lest the Bath should fall on them. Vol. 1. p. 47, 48.

Ignatius was given to be devoured of Wild Beasts the 111. year of Christ; when
he was going to the Lions, he said, Oh, would to God I were come to the Beasts
prepared for me, which I wish with gaping Mouths were ready to come upon me;
whom I will provoke, that they may without delay devour me. I esteem nothing
visible or invisible, so I may get or obtain Christ; let the Fire, Gallows,
devouring of Beasts, breaking of Bones, pulling asunder of Members, bruising,
or pressing, my whole Body, and the torments of the Devil, or Hell it self come
upon me, so that I may win Christ: And when he heard the Lions roaring, he
said, I am the Wheat, or Grain, of Christ; I shall be ground with the Teeth of
Wild Beasts, that I may be found pure Bread. Vol. 1. p. 52.

Justin Martyr was a profound Philosopher, and became a Christian by seeing the
constancy of their sufferings; whence he gathered they could not endure
carnality or vice, who could thus easily lay down their lives; and being a
Christian, he wrote diverse Apologies in their behalf, and prevailed not a
little for their good; and was at last Martyred, soon after Polycarpus, in the
4 th Persecution; he dyed cheerfully, and with honor. Vol. 1. p. 58.63, 64.

Iulitta being spoiled of her goods by the Emperors Officer under the 10 th
Persecution; and complaining to the Emperor, that so she might have her goods
again, the Officer pleaded her to be a Christian, and therefore not to have her
goods; which being proved, and owned, she was sentenced to lose goods and life:
whereupon she said, Farewell life, welcome death; farewell riches, welcome
poverty: all that I have, were it a thousand times more than it is, would I
lose, rather than speak Blasphemy against God my Creator. I yield thee thanks
most hearty, O God, for this great gift of Grace, that I can despise this
transitory World, preferring Christianity above all treasures. And whenever she
was examined, she said, She was a Servant of Christ, and did detest their
Idolatry. And as she past to the Fire, she exhorted the Women thus, O Sisters,
stick not to travel after true Piety, cease to accuse feminine frailty; are not
we Created of the same Mould with Men, and made after Gods Image as well as
they? God used not Flesh only in Creating Woman to declare her weakness; but
Bone also, in token that she must be strong in the living God; all false Gods
for saking, constant in faith, and patient in adversity: wax weary of your
lives my Sisters led in darkness, and love my Christ, my God, my Redeemer:
Persuade your selves there is a future state, wherein the worshippers of Idols
shall be perpetually tormented, and the Servants of the high God Crowned
eternally. With which words she embraced the Fire. Vol. 1. p. 122, 123.

Jerome of Prage, a Bohemian, burnt 1415. being condemned, and to be Crowned
with a Paper Mitre painted with red Devils; he willingly received it, saying,
He would wear that for Christ's sake, who wore a Crown of Thorns for him. And
going to execution he sung Psalms, and prayed; and after the Fire was kindled,
he said, O Lord God Father Almighty, have mercy upon me, and be merciful unto
mine offenses; for thou know how sincerely I have loved thy truth. And so
the Fire consumed him; whose Ashes, as also the Ashes of John Husse, were
gathered up and cast into the River Rheine. Vol. 1. p. 837, 838.

Ioris of Aschen in Flanders, hanged on a Gibbit for the Gospel, 1567. being
condemned, wrote to his Parents; he said, Comfortable News, namely, that in all
my life I never saw one day so pleasing to me as this is, in which the Lord
has counted me worthy to be one of his Champions to suffer for his holy Name;
for which I give him most humble thanks. -- I do take my last farewell of you,
till we meet in Heaven; be not grieved, I pray you, but be patient; for the
affliction which is befallen me is most acceptable to me; for which I bless and
praise God. Additions to Vol. 3. concerning Massacre in Flanders. p. 96, 97.

K K
LEonard Keyser, of Bavaria, was, for maintaining Justification by Faith,
degraded and to be burned; who as he went to execution spoke and said: O Lord
Jesus! remain with me, sustain me and help me, and give me force and power. And
when the wood was fit to be set on fire, he cried with a loud voice, O Jesus! I
am thine, have mercy upon me and save me; and so was burned August 16. 1526.
Vol. 2. page 114, 115.

Kerby, a Suffolk Man, being apprehended at Ipswich 1546. was to be condemned;
and one Mr. Wingfield much persuading him to accept of mercy and not burn, he
said; Ah M. Wingfield, be at my burning, and you will say, There stands a
Christian Soldier in the fire; for I know that fire, water, sword, and all
things are in the hand of God, who will suffer no more to be laid upon me than
he will give me strength to bear. Being condemned, he said, Praised be Almighty
God; and at the fire he showed himself a Christian, and died calling upon God,
and holding up his Hands. Vol. 2. page 569.

L L
Lucius hearing Ptolomeus unjustly condemned by Urbicius, in the 4 th
Persecution, reproved the Judge, who said to Lucius, Methinks thou art a
Christian? which being granted by Lucius, the Judge forthwith condemned him to
be had away to the place of execution: whereupon Lucius said, I thank you with
all my heart that you release me from most wicked Governors, and send me to my
most good and loving Father, who is the King of gods. Vol. 1. p. 59.

Laurence a Deacon of Xystus Bishop of Rome, seeing him going to be martyred,
earnestly desired to die with him, and cried out to him, saying; Oh dear
Father! whither go thou without the company of thy dear Son? have thou
proved me unnatural? Now try whether thou have chosen a faithful Minister or
no? Grant that the Body of thy Scholar may be sacrificed, whose mind thou have
beautified with good Letters. To whom Xystus said, He should follow him after 3
days. And when this Laurence was to be persecuted, he being as Deacon,
Treasurer of the Church, and commanded by his Persecutors to produce the
Treasure, caused a number of poor People to come together, and said; These were
the Church's riches in whom Christ dwells. Whereat the Persecutors raged, and
caused the fire to be kindled, and he was laid on a hot burning Iron-bed, or
Grid-Iron, and held down with hot forks, who said to the Tyrant: This side is
roasted enough, turn up O Tyrant that, assay whether roasted or raw thou
think the better meat. This was done under the 8 th Persecution, Vol. 1.
page 92, 93.

Simon Laloe burned at Dyon in France 1553. showed such faith and constancy,
that his Executioner, James Silvester, seeing it, was so compuncted with
repentance, and fell into such despair, that they had much ado with all their
promises of the Gospel to recover any comfort in him; at last through Christ's
mercy he was comforted and converted, and he with his Family removed to Geneva.
Vol. 2. page 142.

John Lambert being much examined concerning the Sacrament, and released by
reason of the death of Archbishop Warham, was at last by the malice of Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester brought before King Henry the VIII. and many
Nobles, and ten Bishops caused to dispute him 1538. and against reason by
Popish instigation the King was persuaded to condemn him; and he was burned in
Smithfield, who was very cheerful the day of his sufferings; and when in the
fire his legs were burned to the stumps, the Tormentors withdrew the fire, so
that a small fire and coals were left under him, and two Persecutors ran their
Halberts into him; then he lifting up that hand he had with fingers flaming
cried out, None but Christ! none but Christ! and so being let down from their
Halberts fell into the fire, and died. Vol. 2. page 427.

John Lacels Servant to King Henry VIII. was burnt with Mrs. Anne Askew about
June 1546. who in a Letter against Transubstantiation, subscribed himself thus,
John Lacels late Servant to the King, and now I trust to serve the Everlasting
King with the testimony of my Blood in Smithfield. Vol. 2. page 581.

John Lawrence burnt at Colchester March 29. 1555. he was so badly used in
Prison that he could not go to the Stake, but was carried in a Chair and burnt
sitting. Whilst he was burning the young Children came about the fire and cried
as well as they could speak, saying: Lord strengthen thy Servant, and keep thy
promise: Lord strengthen thy Servant, and keep thy promise. Vol. 3. page 200.

Hugh Lawrence, a Kentish Man, being August 2. 1555. examined by the Bishop of
Dover, Dr. Thornton and Dr. Harpsfield, stood constantly against Popery; being
required to subscribe to their Articles, he took a pen and writ, Ye are all of
Antichrist, and him ye fol. intending to write as appears, follow; but was
prevented, condemned and burned with 5 more Kentish Men at 3 Stakes in one
fire. Vol. 3. p. 393.

Hugh Latimer writing to Bishop Ridley, says, Pray for me, for sometimes I am
so fearful that I would creep into a Mouse-hole, sometimes God does visit me
again with his comfort; so he comes and goes to teach me to fell and to know
my infirmity. Vol. 3. p. 441. He was a Leichestershire man, and went to
Cambridge at 14 years of age; he was a zealous Papist, till by Gods will and
Mr. Bilney's endeavors he was converted, and then he became a zealous
Protestant, p. 450. and openly preached against Popery in Cambridge, and other
places, for which he was imprisoned, p. 456, 457. yet was he by God long
preserved, and by the Lord Cromwell in King Henry the 8 th's days made Bishop
of Worcester, p. 460. but some years after he lost his Bishopric, because he
would not comply to the six Articles; and when his Rotchet was pulled off, he
leaped for joy of being lightened of so great a burden as his Bishops Office; he
was usually studying both Summer and Winter by Two of the Clock in the morning,
p. 462. he was a great Prophet, foretelling most Plagues that came on England,
and used to say his preaching the Gospel would cost him his life, as it also
did; he prayed earnestly and often, so that being aged he could not get up
again from his knees; in his prayer he much and earnestly desired the restoring
the Gospel again to England, which God granted in a short time by Queen
Elizabeth; he also begged that as God had called him to be a Minister of the
Gospel, he might have grace to stand for it to death, and to give his hearts
blood for it; which God answered and effected; for at the Stake in the greatest
extremity he lifted up his Eyes to Heaven, and with an amiable countenance
said, God is faithful who has promised not to suffer us to be tempted above
our strength; and by and by fire breaking his body the blood of his heart was
shed for Christ, in such abundance, that the standers by did marvel, as if all
the blood of his body was gathered to his heart. p. 463. The Bishops according
to Custom presenting the King each New-years-day with a Gift, he being Bishop
of Worcester, whilst others presented Gold, Silver, etc. presented King Henry
the 8 th with a New Testament with a Napkin having this Poesy, Whoremongers
and Adulterers God will judge, page 486. He being at the Stake in his shirt, to
be burned in Oxford with Bishop Ridley, the Executioner brought a Faggot
kindled with fire and laid it at Ridley's feet, to whom Latimer said, Be of
good comfort Mr. Ridley, and play the man, we shall light such a Candle this
day by Gods grace in England, as I trust shall never be put out; and in the
flame he cried, Oh Father of Heaven receive my Soul; receiving the flames, as
it were embracing them, he soon dyed feeling little or no pain. Vol. 3. p. 503.

Hugh Laverock, a lame man of 68 years of age, going on Crutches, and one
Apprice a blind man were burned, 1556. by Bishop Bonners command; and at the
Stake this Laverock the Cripple threw away his Crutches, and turning to Apprice
did comfort him saying, Be of good comfort, my Brother, for my Lord of London
is our good Physician, he will heal us both shortly, thee of thy blindness, and
me of my lameness. And so they both suffered. Vol. 3. p. 701.

Mrs. Ioice Lewis, a Gentlewoman of Manceter, was burnt for the Gospel in Queen
Mary's days; who was at first in her days a great Papist, till the burning of
one Laurence Saunders by the Papists for the Mass, which put her upon an
enquiry into it; and she consulting some persons about it, declined it, nor
would frequent Mass; for which she was punished, and at last condemned: And
when in the morning before she suffered, the Sheriff told her of it, after one
years imprisonment, giving her but one hours time to prepare for it; she said,
Your message is welcome to me; and I thank God that he will make me worthy to
adventure my life in his quarrel. Going to the Stake she prayed against Popist
Idolatry, and drank to all them that truly believed the Gospel: In the fire she
neither struggled nor stirred, but only held up her hands to Heaven, and so
dyed soon. Vol. 3. p. 839.

Mrs. Elizabeth Lawson, an ancient Gentlewoman of 60 years of age of Bedfield
in Suffolk, was sent to Berry Goal 1556. because she would not go to Mass, and
at last she was condemned to be burnt: She continued in Prison two years and
three quarters, in which time her Son and many more were burnt, and she hearing
of it, said often, Good Lord what is the cause that I may not yet come to thee
with thy Children? Well good Lord, thy blessed will be done, and not mine. But
by the death of Queen Mary she was delivered. Vol. 3. p. 916.

M M
MArtyrs to the Number of 300 at Carthage under the 8 th Persecution, being
offered near Lime-kills, either to offer Incense to Jupiter, or to go into the
Furnace of Lime, did all together rush into the Kill, and were there, with the
dusty smoke of the Lime, smothered. Vol. 1. p. 94.

A Mother exhorted her Child of seven years of age, suffering under the 7 th
Persecution, to suffer joyfully; and while it was tormenting and slaying, she
sang to God thus, All laud and praise with heart and voice,
O Lord we yield to thee;
To whom the death of all thy Saints
we know most dear to be.
Vol. 1. p. 116.


Mary. See Ursula.

Michael Michfote, a Tailor in France, burned 1547. being apprehended for the
Gospel's sake, and put to his choice whether he would turn and be beheaded, or
not turn and be burnt; he said, God who had given him grace not to deny the
truth, would also give him patience to abide the fire; and so he was burned.
Vol. 2. p. 134.

Lodovicus Marsac, being with two others, at Lions in France, apprehended and
condemned 1553. they all sang Psalms; and the other two having a Rope put about
their Necks, and he having not one, did desire that he might have one of those
precious Chains about his Neck, in honor of his Lord; which request was
granted, and they all three were cast into the fire. Vol. 2. p. 141.

88 Martyrs murdered at Calabria in Italy, 1560. whom the Executioner,
bringing out one by one with a Muster, on a Stage before the People, took a
Knife and slew, by cutting the Throat, of one, and leaving him half dead,
bleeding, went for another; and so served every one till the 88 were murdered;
which sight amazed the people, and shamed even some of the Romanists. Vol. 2.
p. 184.188.

Walter Mill, a Scotch Man, 1558. was condemned to be burnt; whom the Popish
Party could neither affright with threats, nor allure with proposals; but he
said to them, I am accused of my life, I know I must dye once, and therefore ye
shall know I will not recant the truth: I am Corn, not Chaff; I will not be
blown away with the Wind, nor burst with the Flail, but will abide both: and at
the Stake, the Bishops being constrained by the People to give him liberty to
speak, he made his humble supplication to God on his Knees; and then said to
the people, Dear friends, I suffer this day not for any Crime laid to my charge
(albeit I be a miserable Sinner before God) but only for the defense of the
faith of Christ Jesus; for which I praise God that he has this day called me,
of his mercy, amongst the rest of his Servants, the Martyrs, to seal up his
truth with my life; which as I received on him, so I willingly offer it to his
glory; and so he dyed: and was the last Martyr that dyed in Scotland for
Religion. Vol. 2. p. 626.

George Marsh, of Deane in Lancashire, married, and was a Farmer; but after his
Wife's death he went to Cambridge to study, and was a Minister of Gods Word,
and zealous against Popery, for which he was imprisoned: His Mother, and diverse
other Friends, advised him to fly: To whose Counsel, says he, My Flesh would
gladly have consented, but my Spirit did not fully agree. Whereupon he prayed
earnestly to God for direction, and unexpectedly in the Morning he had a Letter
from a Friend, whose Bearer said to him, before he looked on the Letter, That
his Friends advice was, not to flee, but to abide boldly and confess the Name
of Christ; which he did. He was many ways, and much solicited to turn upon
the account of his Children: whom, he said, he would gladly keep, could it be
with a pure Conscience; and he would have accepted of Queen Mary's mercy,
should he not thereby, by denying Christ, win everlasting misery. He was burned
April 24. 1555. with a Firkin of Pitch over his head; which melting and
dropping on him, added much to his torments; yet after much misery when they
thought him to be dead, he spread his hands, saying, Father of Heaven have
mercy upon me, and so he dyed. Vol. 3. p. 228.

Menas, an Egyptian, under the 10 th Persecution, lived a retired life a great
while; at length returning to the City Cotis, in the open Theater, at a time of
Pastimes, he loudly proclaimed himself a Christian; and being brought to
Pyrrhus the President, and demanded of his Faith, he said, It is convenient I
should confess God, citing Romans 10.10. And being most painfully pinched and
tormented, he said in the midst of his torments, There is nothing in my mind
that can be compared to the price of one Soul; and said, I have learned of my
Lord and King, not to fear them who kill the Body, and have no power to kill
the Soul. And being sentenced to be beheaded, he said, I give thee thanks my
Lord God, which have so accepted me to be found a partaker of thy precious
death; and have not given me to be devoured of my fierce Enemies, but have made
me to remain constant in thy pure Faith to my life's end. Vol. 1. p. 117, 118.

N N
SAintinus Nivet, being a Cripple, burnt at Paris 1546. when apprehended and
asked if he would stand to what he said, he asked his Judges if they dare be so
bold to deny what was so plain in express words of Scripture, and did so little
regard his own life, that he desired his Judges for Gods sake, that they would
rather take care of their own Souls and lives, and consider how much innocent
blood they spilled daily, in fighting against Christ and his Gospel. He
suffered at Paris. Vol. 1. p. 133.

Noblemen 100, and others, of Alsatia, were burned and martyred the 1212. year
of Christ, under Pope Henricus 3. for holding every day was free for eating
Flesh, so it be done soberly; and that they did wickedly who restrained Priests
from their lawful Wives. Vol. 1. page 336.

John Noyes, a Shoemaker of Laxfield in Suffolk, burned 1557. in September,
when he came to the place of Execution he kneeled down and sang the 50 th
Psalm; and being bound at the Stake, he said, Fear not them that kill the Body,
but fear him that can kill both Body and Soul, and cast it into everlasting
fire: And seeing his Sister weeping, he desired her not to weep for him, but
for her sins. Having a Faggot thrown at him, he kissed it, and said, Blessed be
the time that ever I was born to come to this. And in the fire he said, Lord
have mercy upon me, Christ have mercy upon me, Son of David have mercy upon me.
He wrote a Letter to his Wife containing nothing but consolation from Texts of
Scripture, and bidding her farewell, he desired his Wife and Children to leave
worldly care, and see that they were diligent to pray. Vol. 3. p. 850, 851, 852.

Nichaise of Tomb, born in Tournay, martyred for the Gospel, being condemned,
he said, Praised be God. At the Stake he said, Lord they have hated me without
a cause; and prayed thus, Eternal Father! have pity and compassion on me,
according as thou have promised to all that ask the same of thee in thy Sons
Name. And so he continued praying until his last gasp. Additions to Vol. 3. of
the Massacre in France and Flanders. p. 33.

O O
Origin at 17 Years old wrote to his Father Leonides, to encourage him to
suffer martyrdom under the fifth Persecution, began the 205. Year of Christ. He
wrote about 7000 Volumes, as much as 7 Notaries and as many Women could pen.
Vol. 2. p. 70.

Cicely Ormes, Wife of Edward Ormes a Worsted-Weaver in Norwich, was burnt
September 23. 1557. at Norwich. She was an ignorant simple Woman, yet zealous
in the Lord's cause; and being threatened by the Chancellor of Norwich, she
said, He should not be so desirous of her sinful flesh, as she would by God's
grace be content to give it in so good a quarrel. Being condemned, at the Stake
she prayed and repeated her Faith, and then said to the People: I would not
have you think that I believe to be saved in that I offer my self here unto
death for Christ 's cause; but I believe to be saved by the death of Christ 's
passion, and this my death is and shall be a witness of my Faith unto you all:
Good People, as many as believe of you, I pray you pray for me. And then she
coming to the Stake, she kissed it, and said: Welcome sweet Cross of Christ;
and so was bound to it: and in the fire she said; My Soul does magnify the
Lord, and my Spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior; and so she yielded up her
Life. Vol. 3. p. 833.

Robert Oguier, of the City Lile in Flanders, his Wife and two Sons Bardicon
and Martin were apprehended 1556. and first the Father and Bardicon suffered,
who upon examination confessed their Faith; and Bardicon being apprehended, as
he went, said: O Lord assist us with thy Grace, not only to be prisoners for
thy sake, but so as to seal with our bloods thy Truth: And told the Emperor's
Commissioners the tenor of their prayers (in their Meetings) for God's glory,
and the Empires and Emperors felicity. And then he and his Father submitted
themselves to the Judges (while Martin his Brother chose to accompany his
Mother, who was still detained in Prison.) And these two were by their Judges
condemned to be burnt, which sentence being past, they returned to Prison,
rejoicing that the Lord had honored them to enroll them amongst the number of
Martyrs. The day of Execution being told them, they blessed God who delivering
their Bodies out of Prison, would receive their Souls into his Kingdom. The
Father being advised to pity his Soul, said: You see what pity I have of it,
when for the Name of Christ I willingly abandon my Body to the fire, hoping to
day to be with him in Paradise. At the Stake he and his Son sang the 16. Psalm;
and being chained, the Son said to his Father; Be of good comfort, the worst
will be past by and by: And often repeated these words; O God, Father
Everlasting, accept the Sacrifice of our Bodies for thy wel-beloved Son Jesus
Christ 's sake: And lifting his Eyes to Heaven, he spoke to his Father, saying;
O Father! behold I see the Heavens open, and millions of Angels ready to
receive us, rejoicing to see us thus witnessing our truth in the view of the
World. Father, let us be glad and rejoice, for the joys of Heaven are set
before us. Fire being kindled, he often repeated to his Father thus, Yet a little
while, and we shall enter into the Heavenly Mansions; And their last words
were, Jesus Christ thou Son of God into thy Hands we commend our Spirits. And
within 8 days the Mother Jane Oguier and Martin her Son, were brought forth;
but in Prison Jane by the Papists, was persuaded to recant, and to endeavor
her Son's return to Popery; who hearing of it, said to her; Oh Mother, what
have you done? have you denied him that redeemed you? What evil has he done
you, that you should requite him with so great an injury? Ah, good God! that I
should live to see this day, which pierces my heart. And his Mother hearing
his words, and seeing his tears, began to renew her strength in the Lord, and
with tears cried, Father of mercies be merciful to me, miserable sinner, and
cover my transgressions under the Righteousness of thy Blessed Son. Lord enable
me to stand to my first Confession, and to abide steadfast in it to my last
breath: And when the Papists came to her again, she said; Avoid Satan, get thee
behind me; for hence forth thou have neither part nor portion in me, I will by
the help of my God stand to my Confession, and if I may not sign it with Ink, I
will seal it with my Blood. And so she and her Son were condemned to be burnt,
and their ashes to be cast into air; who rejoiced at the Sentence, and
accounted it a day of Triumph over their Enemies; and Martin being profer'd an
hundred pound if he would recant, said, He would not lose an Eternal Kingdom
for it. Addition to Vol. 3. of Massacres of France page 1. to 5.

P P
PHilip the Apostle, after he had much labored amongst the Barbarous Nations,
in preaching the Word of Salvation to them, at length he suffered in Hierapolis
a City of Phrygia, being there crucified and stoned to death; where also he was
buried, and his Daughters with him. Vol. 1. page 42, 43.

Peter the Apostle, being to be crucified under Domitius Nero, would be
crucified with his head downwards, and his feet upwards; because he said he was
unworthy to be crucified after the same manner and form as the Lord was. Vol.
1. page 45. As he was a crucifying, he, seeing his Wife going to her Martyrdom,
was greatly joyous and glad thereof, and spoke to her with a loud voice, called
her by her Name, and bidding her remember the Lord Jesus. Vol. 1. p. 45.

Polycarpus, three days before he was apprehended saw in a Vision his Bed on
fire, and consumed; and when he awaked he told them with him, how that he
should die in the fire for Christ: And when he was pursued, having removed once
or twice, and might still have fled, he would not, but said; The will of God be
done: and came down to his Pursuers as soon as he heard they were come, and
spoke to them with a cheerful voice and a pleasant countenance, and caused the
Table to be spread, and they to dine with him; and begged of them an hours time
for prayer: which he made so, as the hearers thereof were astonished and sorry
they had pursued him: And going to the place of Execution, in an uproar of the
People, when he could not be heard, there came a voice to him from Heaven,
saying: Be of good cheer, Polycarp, and play the Man. Many heard the voice, but
none was seen to speak. And after this, Polycarp being advised by the Proconsul
to defy Christ, he said; 86 years have I been his Servant, and in all this
time he has not so much as hurt me; how then can I speak evil of my King and
Sovereign Lord who has thus preserved me. Being to be fixed to the Stake, he
would not; but said, God who had given him strength to suffer, would give him
power to abide, and not stir in the midst of the fire. So he stood, and thanked
God that he should now become a Martyr; and though the fire was kindled, yet
could it not burn his Body, but the wind kept it off; and when the Persecutors
saw that, they ordered his Body to be thrust through with a Sword; and so much
blood issued out as quenched the fire. He suffered the 167. year of Christ,
about January 24. and was martyred in his own Church at Smyrna. Vol. 1. p. 55,
56, 57.

Ptolomeus being demanded, whether he was a Christian, declared that he had
taught and professed the verity of the Christian Doctrine; for whosoever denies to
be what he is, either condemns in denying the thing that he is, or makes
himself unworthy of that, the confession whereof he flies; which thing is
never found in a true and sincere Christian. He was condemned to suffer. Vol.
1. p. 59.

Ioannes Pistorius, one of Holland, preaching and speaking against the Masses
and other Popish abuses, was committed to Prison with ten other Malefactors,
whom he comforted; and to one of them, being half naked, he gave his own Gown:
He was condemned and degraded, and had a Fools Coat put on him; his Fellows at
his death sang Te Deum: and he coming to the Stake gave his Neck willingly to
the band, saying, O Death, where is thy Victory? 1524. Vol. 2. p. 116.

Stephen Peloquine, burnt at Ville France in France, 1553. being half burnt,
ceased not to hold up his hands, and call on the Lord, to the admiration of
people. Vol. 2. p. 141.

Mrs. Philips, a Gentlewoman of Paris, 1558. being apprehended and condemned
for the Gospel's sake, received it courageously; and being to be distongued,
she said, Shall I, who do not stick to give my Body, stick to give my Tongue?
And being distongued, though she was in Mourning for her Husband, a Lord of
that Country, then late deceased; she laid aside her Mourning, and on the day
of execution she decked her self in her best Array, as if she was going to
another Marriage; nor did she alter her color or countenance, during her
suffering. Vol. 2. p. 156.

Anthony Persons, a great Preacher of the Gospel in King Henry the 8 th's days,
1544. and was, by Dr. London, condemned; who answering to his Indictment, said,
So long as I Preached up the Pope and his superstition, so long ye favored me;
but since I took on me to Preach Christ, ye have always sought my life; but it
makes no matter, for when ye have taken your pleasure on my Body, I trust it
shall not be in your power to hurt my Soul. He, with one Testwood, and Filmer,
were condemned to suffer: and the night before they suffered they spent almost
wholly in Prayers for strength under the Cross, and comforting one another that
their Master Christ who had led the way before them, and had so far made them
worthy to suffer for his sake, would give them steadfast faith and power to
overcome these fiery torments; and of his free mercy, for his Promise sake,
receive their Souls. Praying that God would forgive their Enemies and turn
their hearts, which out of blindness and ignorance had done they knew not what.
This Persons afterward coming to the Stake, did embrace it, saying, Now
welcome mine own sweet Wife; for this day shall thou and I be Married together
in the love and peace of God. Vol. 2. p. 152, 153, 154.

John Philpot, a Knights Son of Hampshire, brought up at Oxford; a great
Scholar, and a zealous Preacher, who in King Edward the 6 th's days was
Archdeacon of Winchester; and in Queen Mary's days, with a few others, opposed
Popery, and stood in the vindication of the Gospel in the Convocation-house at
London, against all the other Prelates called by the Queen to determine of
Religion. Vol. 3. p. 538. being apprehended and examined by Bishop Bonner, and
told that the next day he should be judged, he said, I am glad hereof, I look
for no other but death at your hands, and I am as ready to yield my life in
Christ's Cause as you are to require it. p. 547. And being in discourse with
Dr. Story, he said, I am sure I have the Judge on my side, who shall justify
me in another World; and however you now unrighteously do judge me, yet sure I
am, in another World, to judge you: And after, when Dr. Story hastened his
death, and said to Philpot, he came to hasten it; which he came to tell him, he
said, that he might thank no body else for it: To whom Philpot answered, I
thank you with all my heart, and I pray God forgive you. And going again to
Prison, meeting with Bishop Bonner, who proffered him any pleasure he could
show him, he only requested this pleasure, that his Lordship would hasten his
judgment, and dispatch him out of this miserable World to his eternal rest, p.
151. At last he being condemned, and having word of it the night before, to be
ready next morning to be burnt, he said, I am ready, God grant me strength and
a joyful resurrection: and so retiring to his Chamber, he prayed and praised
God, that he had made him worthy to suffer for his truth. In the morning,
coming to Smithfield where he was burnt, he kneeled down at the entrance into
it, and said, I will pay my Vows in thee, O Smithfield! and then coming to the
Stake he kissed it, saying* Shall I disdain to suffer at the Stake, seeing my
Redeemer did not refuse to suffer on his Cross for me: and then he said the
106, 107, 108. Psalms; and was burnt December 18. 1555. His Letters were many
and pious, comforting the penitent Sinners: From,

1. Examples of Penitents.

2. God can Pardon more than we can sin, and will pardon him who with hope of
mercy is sorry for his sin.

3. God permits his People to see the evil of their sins, and to sorrow for it,
to let them experience his superabounding Grace: He brings to Hell, that with
greater joy he might lift up to Heaven.

4. Satan's conflict in you tempting, and your strife against sin, is an
evidence you are the Child of God, whom he may unawares cause to fall by sin,
but he shall never overcome; for God does it but to try your Faith, and he
beholds your resistance, is pleased with it, and will never forsake you: The
Just falls 7 times a day, but yet he rises again.

5. Rejoice therein, in that your temptation and sorrow shall add to your
glory. Page 598.

In diverse Letters he much exhorts to Martyrdom; and in one to the Lady Vane,
he thus writes: The World wonders we can be merry in such extreme misery, but
our God is omnipotent who turns misery into felicity. Believe me, dear Sister,
there is no such joy in the World, as the People of God have under the Cross: I
speak by experience, therefore believe me, and fear nothing that the World can
do; for when they imprison our Bodies, they set at liberty our Souls; when they
kill us, they bring us to Everlasting Life: and what greater glory can there be
than to be at conformity with Christ, which afflictions do work in us. Page
603. In another he writes to her, he says; I that am under the Cross have felt
more true joy and consolation in it than ever I did by any benefit that God
has given me in all my life before; for the more the World hates, the nigher
God is unto us, and there is no joy but in God. Page 604. In another to that
Lady, he writes thus: We have cause to be glad of the times of Persecution as
to our selves; for if we be imprisoned, we are blessed; if we lose all we have,
we are blessed a hundred times; if we die, we are blessed eternally: so that in
suffering persecution all is full of Blessings. Vol. 3. page 605.

Agnes Potten, an Ipswich Woman, burnt with Joan Trunchfield in Q. Mary's
days. They being undressed for the fire, with comfortable words of Scripture
exhorted People to constancy against Popery; and so continuing in the torment
of the fire, they held up their hands and called on God constantly, so long as
Life endured. Vol. 3. p. 678.

Julius Palmer, born at Coventry, and Student and Fellow of Magdalen College
in Oxford, who in King Edward the Sixth's days was a great Papist, for which
he was expelled the College, till Queen Mary's time, when he was received
again to his Fellowship; and about 24 years of age by Scriptures, and Peter
Martyr's Books, and Calvin's Institutions, God so wrought that he became a
zealous Protestant, nor would be revoked from it, declaring the Pope to be
Antichrist; whereupon for his safety he left the College, and went to Reding
to teach a School, where in a short time by false pretended Friends he was
betrayed and forced to fly. And he thinking to receive some Legacy due to him
by his Father's Will, went to his Mother in this his need, and begging her
Blessing on his knees, she saluted him thus; You shall have Christ 's curse and
my curse where ever you go: To which words of his Mother, he said, being amazed
at the salutation: Your curse, O Mother, you may give me, which (God knows) I
have not deserved; but God's curse you cannot give me, for he has already
blessed me. Then she said, You went out of God's Blessing into the warm Sun,
when you went from your Religion; for I am sure you believe not as I and your
Father, and our Forefathers believed, but art an Heretic: and know your
Father bequeathed nothing for Heretics: As for money and goods, I have none
for you; faggots I have to burn you; more you get not at my hands. To whom he
answered, I am no Heretic, but do embrace a Religion as old as Christ and his
Apostles; and though you curse me, yet I pray God bless you: And so softly
spoke to her, that she threw after him an old Angel to keep him honest. So he
went away from his Mother, going privately to Reding again, to gather up some
Money due to him, where he was basely betrayed, and brought to Examination, and
was condemned; and about one hour before his Execution, he comforts himself and
two others who suffered with him, with Christ's Words, Mat. 5.10, 11, 12. and
by these sayings; Be of good cheer in the Lord; faint not we shall not end our
Lives in the fire, but make a change for a better Life; yea, for coals we shall
receive Pearls. And in the fire they three lifted up their hands, and quietly
and cheerfully as if feeling no pain, they cried, Lord Jesus strengthen us,
Lord Jesus assist us, Lord Jesus receive our Souls: And so called on Jesus till
they dyed, being burnt at Newbury July 16. 1556. Vol. 3. page 733 to 741.

One Prest's Wife of Exeter, being a Protestant, but seeming to be a simple
ignorant Woman, left her Husband and Children, because they were Papists, and
went up and down to work for her living; and being taken and examined, she
said, In the cause of Christ and his truth, she must either forsake Christ or
her Husband; I am content to stick only to Christ my heavenly Spouse; and
renounce the other; whom I left not for Whoredom, Theft, or the like, but
because they by their Superstition and Idolatry persecuted me, rebuked and
troubled me, when I would have had them leave their Idolatry. The Doctors
further talking with her, she said: You do but trouble my Conscience; you will
have me follow your doings, but I will first lose my life; I pray depart. She
openly reproved and argued against their Idolatry, and that they went about to
damn Souls by their Doctrine, and persuading them to Idolatry. She seemed to be
a very simple Woman, yet could she rehearse many places in Scripture. And when
(she being condemned) was desired to ask Pardon, because she was an unlearned
Woman, not able to answer in such high matters; she said, I am not indeed able
to answer in such high matters, yet with my death am I content to be a witness
of Christ 's Death. And being again proffered a pardon if she would recant, she
said; Nay, that I will not; God forbid I should lose Life Eternal for this
carnal and short Life; I will never turn from my Heavenly Husband to my
Earthly; from the fellowship of Angels to my mortal Children: And if my Husband
and Children be faithful, I am theirs. God is my Father, God is my Mother, God
is my Brother, God is my Sister, my Kinsman, my Friend most faithful. And at
the Stake she continued crying, Lord, be merciful to me a sinner. Vol. 3. p.
890, 891.

Peter Chevet, burnt at Maubert near Paris March 11. 1559. being threatened to
suffer, he said; Truly I do not think to escape your hands; and though ye
scorch and roast me alive, yet will I never renounce my Christ. Being asked by
the Official, If he would not be absolved, he said, It is a question, Oh poor
Man! whether thou can save thy self; and will thou take upon thee to save
others? Who being thereat angry, threatened him with longer imprisonment; to
whom the Martyr said; Alas! alas! though I should rot in Prison, yet shall you
find me still the same Man. And at the Stake, having his Clothes pulled off, he
said: How happy, how happy, Oh how happy am I? with eyes lift up to Heaven; and
so he died. Additions to Vol. 3. concerning Massacre in France, page 9.

R R
ROmanus, a great encourager of the Christians in Antioch, when they were
persecuted in the 10 th Persecution, was himself by Galerius, then Emperor,
called out, apprehended, and sentenced to all the torments the Christians
should have undergone, who said, O Emperor, I joyfully accept of thy Sentence,
I refuse not to be sacrificed for my Brethren; and that by as cruel a means as
thou may invent: then he was scourged, and under the lashes he sang Psalms,
and laughed to scorn the Heathens Gods; affirming the Christian's God to be the
only true God, before whose judicial Seat all Nations should appear: then was
his side launched till the Bones appeared; yet he still Preached Christ, and
exhorted them to adore the living God; then were his Teeth knocked out, his
Eyelids torn, his Face cut; and he said, I thank thee that thou have opened to
me many Mouths whereby I may Preach my Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; look how
many Mouths I have, so many Mouths I have lauding and praising God. After that
he was brought to new wounds and stripes, and distongued; who still spoke and
said, He that speaks Christ shall never want a Tongue. At length he was had
to Prison, and there strangled. When some pleaded he was of Noble Parentage,
and it was not lawful to put such a one to an un-noble death; he said, He
required them not to spare him for Nobility-sake; for, said he, not the blood
of my Progenitors, but Chrstian Profession makes me Noble. Vol. 1. p. 116, 117.

John Rogers, a Cambridge Scholar, and Chaplain to the Merchants of Brabant
beyond Sea, where he was acquainted with Mr. Tindal, and helped him and Mr.
Coverdale in the Translation of the Bible; he threw off the Yoke of Popery, and
becoming a Protestant, he married and went to live at Wittenberg in Saxony,
Vol. 3. p. 119. and there learning the Dutch Tongue, he had a Congregation
committed to his charge, where he staid till King Edward the 6 th's time; and
then being orderly called, came into England and Preached there, and was by
Bishop Ridley made Prebend of Paul's; but in Queen Mary's days he suffered
much, and was burned Feb. 4. 1555. He was the first that suffered in Queen
Mary's days; he Prophesied of Rome's downfall, and that e're long in England
true Gospel Ordinances should be again restored, and the poor people of England
should be brought to as good, or a better state: His Wife, and ten Children
that could go, and one at her Breast, met him going to burn; but he was not
moved, but continued constant, and suffered. Vol. 3. p. 130, 131.

Bishop Ridley, born in Northumberlandshire, had his education in Newcastle,
was Master of Pembroke-Hall in Cambridge, Vol. 1. p. 432. then Chaplain to King
Henry the 8 th, who made him Bishop of Rochester; and in King Edward the 6 th's
days he was made Bishop of London. He Preached every Sunday, and Holyday, in
some place or other, if not hindered by great affairs: he was kind and affable,
one that presently forgave injuries; and was wont to tell his Relations, that
if they acted evil, he should esteem them as strangers to him; and they who did
honestly, should be to him as Brothers and Sisters. As soon as he was ready
each morning, he always prayed for half an hour, and then spent most part of
the day and night in study, he not going to Bed usually till eleven of the
Clock, and then praying. He did read every day a Lecture in his Family, gave
every one of his Family a new Testament, and hired them to learn several
Chapters, especially the 13. of the Acts. He being advised, by one that was his
Chaplain formerly, to consult others, and to turn Papist, he said, I would have
you know that I esteem nothing available for me, which also will not further
the glory of God. Vol. 3. p. 447. He being condemned at Oxford, was kept close
Prisoner in Mr. Irish, the Major's House; where he being at Supper the night
before he was to suffer, he was very merry, and invited the Guests at the Table
to his Wedding next day; for to morrow, says he, I shall be married; which the
Major's Wife hearing, wept; to whom he said, You love me not now I see, for I
perceive you will not be at my Wedding, nor are contented with my marriage; but
quiet your self, though my Breakfast be sharp and painful, yet I am sure my
Supper shall be more pleasant and sweet. Vol. 3. p. 502. And at the Stake, he
suffering with Mr. Latimer, he cheerfully ran to him, embraced him, kissed him,
and said, Be of good cheer Brother, for God will either assuage the fury of the
flames, or else strengthen us to abide it: and then he went to the Stake and
kissed it, and prayed effectually. Being stripped into his Shirt, he held up his
hands, and said, O heavenly Father, I give thee most hearty thanks that thou
have called me to be a Professor of thee, even to death. And fire being
kindled, he often said, Into thy hands O Lord, I commend my spirit; Lord, Lord,
receive my spirit: but through the badness of the fire he burned on one side,
and below on the legs, a great while, and yet his upper parts were not burned,
so that he leaped under the Faggots; and calling to the Lord for mercy, did
call on the Persons by to let the fire come to him, for he could not burn, he
said; and showed them one side clean Shirt, and all untouched, whole, and the
other burnt. p. 504, 505. he writing to his Friends, and taking leave of them,
desires them not to be astonished at the manner of his sufferings; and said, I
assure you I esteem it the greatest honor that ever I was called to in my
life; and I thank my Lord heartily for it, that he has called me to the high
favor to suffer death willingly for his sake, which is an inestimable gift of
God; therefore, O ye that love me, rejoice, and rejoice again, with me; and
render, with me, thanks to God that has called me to this dignity. Vol. 3. p.
505.

Could Queen Mary have been entreated for Bishop Ridley, or could his life have
been purchased, the Lord Dacres in the North, his Kinsman, would have given her
1000 Marks, or 1000 Pounds, rather than he should have been burned. Vol. 3. p.
996.

John Rabec, burned at Aniers in France, April 24. 1556. had his Tongue cut
out, because he would not pronounce Jesus Maria, joining them both in one
Prayer; and being urged thereto with great threats, he said, If his Tongue
should but offer to do so, he would himself bite it asunder. Additions to Vol.
3. concerning French Massacre, p. 5.

Anthony Ricetto, a Martyr at Venice, 1566. being, by his Son of twelve years
of age, persuaded to recant, that he might not be Fatherless; said to his
Child, A good Christian is bound to forego Goods, Children, yea Life it self,
for the maintenance of God's honor and glory: and so he was drowned, having an
Iron Hoop about him, and to a Chain fastened to that Hoop a great Weight
fastened; and so carried in a Wherry into the Sea: where being laid on a Board,
and that Board laid cross on two Wherries, the Wherries removing he fell into
the Sea; which was the manner of the Venetians punishing their Martyrs.
Additions to Vol. 3. p. 44.

S S
SAnctus, being under the fourth Persecution grievously tormented; and by the
Tormentors asked, What he was, answered nothing, but said he was a Christian:
And notwithstanding his being scorched by hot plates in the tenderest parts of
the Body, so that his Body lost the shape of a Man; yet he never shrank: and
declared, That nothing was terrible or ought to be feared where the love of God
is, and nothing grievous wherein the glory of Christ is manifested. And when he
was again punished, though his Body was so misfigured before his second
punishment, yet now was it reduced to its first shape of a Man, and suppled in
all its contracted parts. Soon after he was again tormented, and set in an hot
Iron-chair; nor yet would he confess any thing but that he was a Christian: And
after this, being made a sad spectacle to the People, he was beheaded. Vol. 1.
p. 60.61, 62.

Soldiers, being put to their choice by the Marshal of the Camp by
Diocletian's order under the tenth Persecution, whether they would sacrifice to
Idols at the Emperors command, or lay aside their Offices and Weapons: They
unanimously answered, They were ready not only to lay down their Weapons, but
their Lives also if by the Emperor's tyranny required, rather than they would
obey the wicked Decrees of him. Vol. 1. p. 101.

Simeon Archbishop of Seleucia, being by Sapores King of Persia, under the
tenth Persecution, called and examined, confessed himself to be a Christan: And
being demanded, Why he kneeled not before the King as he used to do, he said,
That before he observed what the custom of the Realm did require of him; but
now it is not lawful, for I come to stand in defense of our Religion and
Doctrine. He was beheaded. Vol. 1. page 125, 126. See Usthazares in the latter
part of this Book.

Henry Sutphen Monk, an associate of Luthers 1524. converted Breme, and being
sent for after two years time to Deithmar to preach amongst those great
Idolaters, he at last went, designing only to lay the foundation of a
Reformation, and so to return to Breme, to satisfy the importunity of his
Friends. He being at Breme, the Monks and Friars conspire against him, and
consult his destruction; accordingly they sent Minatory Letters to the
Inhabitants at Deithmar, and also to their Parish Priest, who had received him:
But Sutphen's ananswer was, That being called by them to preach the Gospel, he
would do it; and if it pleased God he should lose his Life at Deithmar; there
was as near a way to Heaven as in any other place: for he doubted not at all
that once he must suffer for the Gospels sake. Upon this courage he preached
diverse times, and Popish Priests were sent to supplant him, and to trap him in
his Sermons; many of whom were converted by them, and did declare them to be
agreeable to the word of God. After this many ways were used to destroy him;
and at last the Franciscan Friars conspired with some Presidents of the Country
to kill him, before the Inhabitants of the Town of Deithmar should know of it,
or before his cause were tried, not permitting him to speak to them for
himself, lest (as they said) he should persuade them to be Heretics: Whereupon
the Presidents assembled 500 Husbandmen, to whom (when met together) they
imparted the business; who detesting it would not do it, but would have
returned home; but were forced to obedience by the threats of their Governor;
who to fit them for the work, gave them three Barrels of Hamborough Beer, and
then about midnight they came to Deithmar to the Priest's, and first woefully
abused him, and then trained Sutphen out of bed naked, and tying his hands
behind him, forced him on so fast that his feet were much wounded by the Ice;
whereof he complaining and desiring a Horse, they said he should go on foot
whether he would or no: And in the morning after much misery by him suffered,
without any examination they condemned him to be burnt; and accordingly they
bound him hands, neck and feet, and brought him to the fire, which was not
oftener kindled than it went out, nor could they make the wood burn. As he
passed by to the fire, a Woman, seeing the sad usage of him, wept bitterly: to
whom he did reply, Weep not, I pray, for me. And at the fire, being condemned,
he said; I have done no such thing as they accuse me of: And holding up his
hands, he said; O Lord, forgive them, for they offend ignorantly, not knowing
what they do. In the mean time, a certain Woman offered to suffer 1000 stripes,
and to give them much Money, so they would but keep him in Prison till he had
pleaded his cause; but they were the more enraged, and threw down and trod upon
the Woman. And seeing the fire would not burn Sutphen, they smote him with
their hands, and pricked and struck him with diverse weapons, and then bound him
to a Ladder by the neck to strangle him, so strait and hard that the blood
gushed out of his nose and mouth; the doer of it treading upon his breast the
while, not permitting him to prate or pray; and being tied to a Ladder, one
John Holmes ran to him, and struck him with a Mace till he was dead. Vol. 1.
page 102, 103, 104, 105, 106.

Mr. Peter Spengler of Schalt, in the Country of Brisgois 1525. a vigilant
Preacher and a peaceable good Man, often reconciling differences with great
prudence, and much lamenting the corruptness of Principles and Practices of the
Popish Monks, and especially their Vow of single Life and its consequents,
which moved him to marry; for which crime chiefly he was afterward
apprehended, and condemned to die: And being led to Execution, he answered all
Persons gently, but desired the Monks to let him alone, who troubled him with
their babbling about Confession, when he was striving in his Spirit against the
horror of death, and making his prayer to God, to whom he said also that he had
confessed his sins to God, not doubting but he had received absolution and
forgiveness of them. And I, said he, shall be an acceptable sacrifice to my
Savior Jesus Christ; for I have done no such things whereof I am condemned,
which might displease my God, who in this behalf has given me a good and quiet
Conscience: Saying also, he being very lean, It is all one, for I must shortly
have forsaken my Skin, which scarce cleaves to my bones: I know I am a mortal
and corruptible worm; I have often desired my last day, and have made my request
that I might be delivered out of this mortal Body to be joined with my Savior
Jesus Christ. I have deserved through my sins my Cross, and my Savior has
born the Cross; and for my part I will not glory in any other thing but in the
Cross of Christ. Presently he was cast into the River; he struggling a while in
it, the water was red with blood, which the People looked to be a miraculous
sign to show that innocent blood was that day shed. This was done at Enshesheim
1525. Vol. 2. p. 111, 112.

Wolfgangus Schuch, a German, at St. Hyppolite 1525. a Town in Lotharing; a
Reverend and godly Pastor, there preached he Justification through Christ by
Faith. He was apprehended willingly, offering himself to Trial by Scripture,
rather than to see the Town of St. Hyppolite be exposed to the danger threatened
to it by Anthony Duke of Lorrain for his sake; and being apprehended, he was
imprisoned in sad misery a year, where disputing with diverse Friars he
confounded them all by Scripture. At last he was condemned to be burnt; at
which Sentence he sang, and being at the place of Execution, he sang the 51.
Psalm till smoke and fire choked him. Vol. 2. page 112.

George Scherler, a German Preacher near Saltzburg, was taken and imprisoned
and condemned to be burnt alive; but at last it was granted he should be first
beheaded. He going to his death, said, That ye may know that I die a true
Christian, I will give you a manifest sign: Which he did by God's power; for
after his head was off his body, falling on his belly, and so lying a good
while, it easily turned it self on the back, and crossed the right foot over
the left, and the right hand over the left; at which sight the Spectators
marvelled, and the Magigistrates burned not but buried the Body amongst the
Christians; and many were hereby brought to believe the Gospel. Vol. 2. p. 117.

Peter Serre, was burned 1553. in France; who having his tongue cut out stood
so quiet looking up to Heaven at the time of his burning, as though he had felt
no pain, bringing such admiration to the People, that one of the Parliament of
France that condemned him, said, That way was not best to bring Lutherans to
the fire, for that would do more hurt than good. Vol. 2. p. 143.

Mrs. Smith near Coventry, condemned and burnt for having the Lord's Prayer in
English, April 4. 1519. Vol. 2. p. 225.

Hellen Stirk, a Scottish Woman, seeing her Husband go to the Stake 1543. for
Christ's cause, and being her self condemned, did desire to suffer with her
Husband; but when it was not permitted, she went to him and exhorted him to
perseverance, and with a kiss parted, saying; Husband, rejoice, for we have
lived many a joyful day together; but this day in which we must die together
ought to be most joyful unto us both, because we must have joy for ever;
therefore I will not bid you good night, for we shall suddenly meet with joy in
the Kingdom of Heaven. And after that, she parting with her sucking Child from
her breast, recommended her self to God and the Child to Nurse, and so was
drowned. Vol. 2. page 615, 616.

Laurence Saunders, brought up at Eaton, and then at King's College in
Cambridge three years; then by his Mother, having a great Estate, was bound
Apprentice in London to a Merchant, Sir William Chester; but he not liking his
Apprentiship, his Master gave him his Indentures, perceiving his inclinations
to Study; and being himself a good Man, he wrote Letters to his Mother and
Friends (who were great Persons) about it: whereby he went again to King's
College, and after several years was a Minister in Leicestershire, and then in
London till Queen Mary's days, when he had two Livings, not being permitted to
lay down either of them by reason of the troubles; and as well as he could he
Preached at both, though at length at London he going to Preach was dissuaded
for fear of danger, but he would not cease: and Preaching, he did (as he often
had) speak against Popish Tenets, for which he was examined by Bishop Bonner,
and Gardener; and at last imprisoned, he prayed much; and in all spiritual
assaults, he prayed and found present relief; and he said, while Bishop
Gardener examined him, he found a great consolation in spirit, and also in body
he received a certain taste of the Communion of Saints, whilst a pleasant
refreshing issued from all parts of his body to his heart, and thence did ebb
and flow to and fro. He in a Letter to Bishop Gardener, proved Popery a
Whoreish and ravening Religion, robbing God of his honor and worship in truth;
and also our Consciences of peace and true comfort. He dissuaded his Wife and
Friends from sueing for his liberty: He, in his Letters, spoke much of his own
experience through God's grace, of Christ's sweetness; and how loath his Flesh
was to go forward in God's Path, and also his hopes with the godly to be
shortly singing Halelujah in Heaven; and as he saluted those to whom he wrote
with grace and mercy and peace, and assured them of his Prayers for them, so
also he generally begged their Prayers, ending his Letters with pray, pray,
pray; and after 15 months imprisonment he was condemned, who said, My dear Lord
Jesus Christ has begun to me a more bitter Cup than mine can be, and shall not
I pledge my most sweet Savior? yes I hope. As he went to Stake he often fell
down and prayed; and at the Stake he took it in his arms and kissed it, saying,
Welcome the Cross of Christ, welcome everlasting life; and so being fastened,
was burned with green Wood to make his torments greater; yet he stood quietly,
and slept sweetly in the fire. Vol. 3. p. 132. to 136.

Robert Smith burnt, 1555. at Uxbridge, August; who being at the Stake,
comforted the people, willing them to think well of his Cause, and not doubt
but that his Body dying in that quarrel should rise again to life: And I doubt
not, said he, but God will show some Token thereof: At length, being near half
burnt, and clustered together on a lump like a black Coal; all Men thinking him
to be dead, he suddenly rose upright, lifting up his stumps of his Arms,
claping them together as a Token of rejoicing; and then bending down again he
dyed. In a Letter to his Wife, he writes thus, If ye will meet with me again,
Forsake not Christ for any pain.
Vol. 3. p. 410, 411.
He wrote this Exhortation to his Children.

Give ear my Children to my words,
whom God has dearly bought;
Lay up my Law within your heart,
and print it in your thought:
For I, your Father, have foreseen
the frail and filthy way,
Which flesh and blood would follow fain,
even to their own decay;
For all and every living Beast
their Crib do know full well;
But Adam's Heirs above the rest
are ready to rebel:
And all the Creatures on the Earth
full well can keep their way,
But Man, above all other Beasts,
is apt to go astray;
For Earth and Ashes is his strength,
his glory, and his Reign;
And unto Ashes, at the length,
he shall return again:
For Flesh does flourish like the Flower,
and grow up like a Grass;
And is consumed in an hour,
as it is brought to pass,
In me the Image of your years,
your treasure, and your trust;
Whom ye do see, before your Face,
dissolved into Dust:
For as you see your Father's Flesh
converted into Clay,
Even so shall ye, my Children dear,
consume and wear away.
The Sun and Moon, and eke the Stars,
that serve the day and night;
The Earth, and every earthly thing,
shall be consumed quite;
And all the worship that is wrought,
that have been heard or seen,
Shall clean consume and come to naught,
as it had never been:
Therefore that ye may follow me,
your Father and your Friend;
And enter into that same life
which never shall have end.
I leave you here a little Book
for you to look upon,
That ye may see your Father's face
when I am dead and gone;
Who for the hope of heavenly things,
while he did here remain,
Gave over all his golden years
in Prison and in pain;
Where I, among mine Iron bonds
enclosed in the dark,
Not many days before my death,
did dedicate this work
To you, mine Heirs of earthly things
which I have left behind,
That ye may read and understand,
and keep it in your mind;
That as you have been Heirs of that
which once shall wear away,
Even so ye may possess the part
which never shall decay;
In following of your Father's Foot,
in truth, and eke in love;
That ye may also be his Heirs
for evermore above:
And in example to your Youth,
to whom I wish all good;
I preach you here a perfect faith,
and seal it with my blood:
Have God always before your eyes
in all your whole intents,
Commit not sin in any wise,
keep his Commandments;
Abhor that arrant Whore of Rome,
and all her blasphemies;
And drink not of her Decretals,
nor yet of her Decrees:
Give honor to your Mother dear,
remember well her pain;
And recompense her in her age
in like with love again:
Be always aiding at her hand,
and let her not decay;
Remember well your Father's fall,
that should have been her stay.
Give of your Portion to the Poor,
as riches do arise;
And from the needy naked Soul
turn not away your Eyes:
For he that will not hear the cry
of such as stand in need,
Shall cry himself, and not be heard,
when he would hope to speed.
If God has given great increase,
and blessed well your store;
Remember ye are put in trust
to minister the more.
Beware of foul and filthy lust,
let whoredom have no place;
Keep clean your Vessels in the Lord,
that he may you embrace:
Ye are the Temples of the Lord,
for ye are dearly bought;
And they who do defile the same
shall surely come to naught.
Possess not pride in any case,
build not your Nests too high;
But have always before your face
that you were born to dye.
Defraud not him that hired is
your labor to sustain,
But give him always, out of hand,
his Penny for his pain:
And as ye would that other Men
against you should proceed,
Do ye the same again to them
when they do stand in need:
And part your Portion with the Poor,
in Money, and in Meat;
And feed the fainted feeble Soul
with that which ye should eat;
That when your members shall lack meat,
And clothing to your back,
Ye may the better think on them
That now do live and lack:
Ask counsel also at the wise,
Give ear unto the end;
Refuse not ye the sweet rebuke
Of him that is your Friend.
Be thankful always to the Lord
With prayer and with praise;
Desire you him in all your deeds,
Ever to direct your ways,
And sin not like the swinish sort,
Whose bellies being fed,
Consume their years upon the Earth
From belly unto bed.
Seek first, I say, the Living God,
Set him always before,
And then be sure he will bless
Your Basket and your store:
And thus if you direct your days
According to this Book,
Then shall they say that see your ways
How like me you do look:
And when you have so perfectly
Upon your fingers ends,
Possessed all within this Book,
Then give it to your Friends;
And I beseech the Living God
Replenish you with Grace,
That I may have you in the Heavens,
And see you face to face:
And though the Sword has cut me off,
Contrary to my kind,
That I could not enjoy your love
According to my mind;
Yet I do hope that when the heavens
Shall vanish like a scrowl,
I shall receive your perfect shape
In Body and in Soul.
And that I may enjoy your love,
And ye enjoy the Land;
I do beseech the Living God
To hold you in his hand.
Farewell, my Children, from the World
Where ye must yet remain.
The Lord of Hosts be your defense
Till we do meet again.
Farewell my Love and loving Wife,
My Children, and my Friends,
I hope to God to have you all
When all things have their ends:
And if you do abide in God
As ye have now begun,
Your course, I warrant, shall be short
Ye have not far to run.
God grant you so to end your years
As he shall think it best,
That ye may enter into Heaven
Where I do hope to rest. Vol. 3. p. 405, 406.
Robert Samuel, a Suffolk Minister, was imprisoned by Dr. Hopton Bishop of
Norwich, and kept sadly, being chained bolt upright, so that he stood on
tip-toes day and night, and was kept without meat and drink, save only three
mouthfuls of bread and three spoonfuls of water a day: And at last being to be
burned he said to his Friends, That when he was imprisoned and almost pined
away 2 or 3 days together, he fell into a slumber, and one clad in white
seemed to stand by him, and comforting him, said; Samuel, Samuel, be of good
cheer, and take a good heart to thee, for after this day thou shall never
hunger nor thirst more. Which thing was effected, for from that time to his
sufferings, he felt neither hunger nor thirst; and it is said that his Body
when it was in the fire, shone as bright and white as new tried Silver. Vol. 3.
p. 414, 415.

John Spicer, burnt at Salisbury, March 24. 1556. with 2 others: At the Stake
said, This is the joyfullest day that ever I saw. Vol. 3. p. 680.

Agnes Stanley, burned at Smithfield with four more April 12. 1557. she being
by Bishop Bonner threatened with death if she would not recant, said; I had
rather every hair of my head were burned, if it were never so much worth, than
that I should forsake my Faith and Opinion, which is the true Faith. Vol. 3. p.
788.

Thomas Spurdance, one of Queen Mary's Servants, being apprehended for the
Gospel, and examined at Norwich by the Bishop, who bad him submit to the
Queen's Laws, he said; You must know, My Lord, that I have a Soul as well as a
Body; my Soul is none of the Queen's, but my Body and Goods are the Queen's:
And I must give God my Soul, and all that belongs to it. That is, I must do the
Laws and Commandments of God, and may not do Commandments contrary to them for
losing of my Soul, but muct rather obey God than Man; if I save my life I shall
lose it, and if for Christ 's sake I lose it, I shall find it in Everlasting
Life: And was burned at Bury in November 1557. Vol. 3. page 855.

William Sparrow of London, burnt in November 18. 1557. who being examined
said, That that which the Papists called Heresy was true and godly, and if
every hair of his head was a Man (he said) he would burn them, rather than go
from the Truth. Vol. 3. p. 857.

Cuthbert Simpson, a Minister in London, was wrakt often in one day to discover
his Confederates, but he would not; and at last was burnt. He writing to his
Wife, persuades her to constancy, pleading God's promises to help us; and that
nothing shall befall us but what is profitable to us, either a correction of our
sins, trial of our Faith, to set forth his Glory, or for all together. Vol. 3.
p. 866, 867.

Archambant Scraphom, martyred 1557. in Flanders, for speaking that the Pope
was the Antichrist St. Paul described: And being willed to subscribe his
Saying, replied, Yea, yea, I am ready to sign it with my Blood, rather than
with Ink. When he looked on his hands, he used to say, O flesh! you must suffer
and be burned to ashes, till the last day. Additions to Vol. 3. concerning the
Massacre of France, p. 6.

T T
THeban Soldiers a Legion, having Mauritius their Captain, being sent for by
Maximinus the Emperor, under the tenth Persecution, to go against and
persecute the Christians, would not; for which every tenth Man was killed: And
being still urged, they made a notable Oration to the Emperor, declaring,
Though they were his Soldiers, yet were they God's Servants; and would not
persecute the Christians, nor sacrifice to the Emperor's devilish Idols:
Whereupon again every tenth Man was slain; and afterward their whole Army
totally destroyed, who made no resistance, but laid down their armor and gave
their naked Bodies to their Enemies fury. Vol. 3. p. 104, 105.

Nicholas and Francis Thressen, being brought up in Christianity by their
Father Andreas Thressen, who flying into England (out of Germany from their
Mother and two other Children) died there: and then these two Sons returned
into Germany to their Mother and the two Children with her, and instructed them
in Christianity: With whom the Papists labored to make them recant; and the
two youngest being not well grounded, did so: the Mother would not, and was
condemned to perpetual prison. These two Sons inveighed against Popery, and
despising torments were condemned to the fire; and desiring to speak, had Gaggs
put into their Mouths and balls of wood to hinder it; but they with vehemence
of speaking drove them out: and desiring for the Lord's sake that they might
have liberty to speak, they sang the Creed with a loud voice, and went and were
fastened to the Stake, praying for their Persecutors and exhorting each other,
they did abide the fire patiently. The one feeling the flame to burn his beard,
said; Ah! what a small pain is this to be compared to the glory to come: and so
committing their Spirits to the hands of God, they died. Vol. 2. p. 121.

Giles Tilleman, a Cutler, born at Brussels, burned 1544. He received the
Gospel at 30 years of age, and was very charitable to the poor, and so zealous
in prayer that he seemed to forget himself, and neither to hear nor see those
that stood by him, till he was lift up by the arms. So patient was he of
private injuries, that he would not speak again to revilers, insomuch that they
said he had a dumb devil, though in the cause of Religion he had words and
Scripture enough. When tidings came to him of the Sentence against him, he gave
hearty thanks to God that the hour was come that he might glorify the Lord;
and at the place of burning, when the Hangman would have strangled him first,
he would not let him, saying, There was no need that his pain should be
mitigated, For, said he, I fear not the Fire. And lifting up his eyes in the
middle of the flames, he died. Vol. 2. page 119.

William Tracy of Todington in Glocestershire Esquire 1532. in his Will and
Testament ordained his Executors not to make any funeral pomp at his Burial,
neither passed he for any Mass, saying, He trusted only in God, and hoped by
him to be saved, and not by any Saint. He said there was but one Mediator
between God and Man, Christ Jesus; and therefore he gave nothing that any
should say or do any thing to help his Soul after his death; for which Will he
was near two years after his death taken up and burnt as an Heretic, by the
Archbishop of Canterbury's order to Dr. Parker Chancellor in Worcester Diocese,
whom King Henry VIII. made it cost 300 pound. Vol. 2. p. 317, 318.

William Tyndal of Magdalen College in Oxford removed thence to Cambridge, and
thence to Glocestershire, where in the House of one Welsh a Knight he resided
sometime, disputing with the Clergy, Priests and Abbots, and refuted them by
Scripture evidences, so that they hated him, and brought him to trouble: At
last he intending to translate the Bible into English for the good of his
Native People, and to deliver them from the blind Idolatry and superstition of
Popery; and finding England would not bear it, nor afford a place to do it in,
he fled to Saxony, and there translated the New Testament 1527. And after he
translating 5 Books of Moses, intending to print at Antwerp, to which place he
sailing did suffer shipwreck, and lost all his labor; but he lodged at
Antwerp, and with the help of one Coverdale performed the five Books, and
printed them; and residing there he was basely betrayed by one Henry Philips an
Englishman, whom he had received lately as an intimate Acquaintance: And being
so persecuted that though many Letters were for his delivering, he was
executed; who in Prison converted the Keeper, his Daughter, and others. By the
testimony of his condemner, he was a learned pious good Man, who died with this
earnest prayer, Lord, open the King of England's eyes. He was martyred at
Filford Castle in Flanders 1536. Vol. 2. p. 361, to 367.

Robert Testwood about Windsor, in King Henry Eight's Reign 1544. for opposing
Idolatry and Image Worship, was apprehended and persecuted by the Bishop of
London; Vol. 2. p. 543, 544. at last being condemned, he suffered with one
Filmire and Persons, who kissed each other at parting from the Prison, and at
the Stake drank to each other; and then this Testwood lifting up his eyes and
hands, desired the Lord to receive his Spirit. See Persons and Filmire. Their
Persecutors, Symons and Dr. London, soon after convicted of Conspiracy against
some Nobles, and being perjured, did ride with Papers on their heads, and their
faces toward the Horse tails, round about Windsor Marketplace. Vol. 2. p.
555, 556.

Rowland Tailor, Dr. of both Canon and Civil Laws, and a perfect Divine; Parson
of Hadley in Suffolk, where he resided, calling his People together and
preaching to them every Sunday and Holiday, when he might. He was humble and
meek, and his life an Example of Piety. He was ready to do good to all,
forgiving all Enemies readily; and never sought to do evil to any one. To the
poor, blind, lame, and sick, he was a very Father, a careful Patron, and
diligent provider. When Mass was contrived to be set up in his Church, he
opposed it, and said it was against God's Word, the Queen's honor; and tended
to the utter subversion of the Realm of England. Whereupon he was sent for up
to London, by the Bishop of Winchester, Stephen Gardener: And his Friends
persuaded him not to go, saying he could not be heard for himself, but must
expect imprisonment, and death; and that Christ advised to fly from one City to
another: and the People of God would in time want such godly Preachers. To whom
he said, Dear Friends, I thank you for your care; yet I know my Cause so good,
and the truth so strong on my side, that I will, by God's grace, go and appear
before them; and to their beards will resist their false doings. God will not
forsake his Church, but will raise up more fruitful Teachers than I, who shall
never have again so glorious a call as I now have; wherefore I be seech you to
pray for me, and I doubt not but God will give me strength and his spirit, that
all my Adversaries shall have shame of their doings. And so taking care of his
people, he and his Man, John Hull, went toward London; but his Man advised him
to fly, proffering his faithful service to him in all affairs: To whom the
Doctor replied, Oh John, shall I give place to this thy Counsel, and leave my
Flock in this danger? Remember Christ, the good Shepherd, who not only fed his
Flock, but dyed for them also. Him must I follow, and by God's grace will;
therefore, John, pray for me; and if thou see me at any time weak, comfort
me; and discourage me not in this godly Enterprise, and purpose. When he came
to Bishop Gardener, who reviled him much, and asked him how he durst look him
in the face, and if he knew who he was? Dr. Tailor said, Yes, I know who you
are, Dr. Stephen Gardener, Bishop of Winchester, Lord Chancellor; and yet but a
mortal Man I trow: but if I should be afraid of your Lordly looks, why fear you
not God the Lord of us all? How dare ye look any Christian Man in the face,
seeing you have forsaken the truth, denied Christ, and done contrary to your
Oath and Writing? With what face will ye appear before Christ's Judgment Seat,
and answer to your Oath against Popery in King Henry the 8th 's time, and in
King Edward the 6th 's days, when you both spoke, and wrote against it. Vol.
3. p. 167, 168, 169. When he was condemned with Mr. Bradford, and others; they
joyfully gave thanks, and stoutly said to the Bishops, That God would require
their blood at their hands, and that one day they should repent this their
Tyranny against the Flock of Christ. p. 174. When Bonner, Bishop of London,
came to degrade him; and brought with him the Vestments, according to their
Popish manner; he bad him put them on, but Dr. Tailor would not, so Bonner
caused another to put them on; and then Dr. Tailor set his hands by his side,
and walked up and down, saying, How do you like me now? how say you my Lord, am
not I a goodly Fool? how say you my Masters, if I were in Cheapside now, should
not I have Boys enough to laugh at me, and at these Apish toys, and toying
trumpery? So the Bishop performed his Ceremonies of degradation, and cursed
him: To whom Dr. Tailor said, Though you curse, God will bless: you have done
me wrong, and violence; yet I pray God, if it be his will, forgive you. The
next day his Wife and Son and Man, supped with him; and he exhorted his Son to
obey God and his Mother; and exhorted her to be steadfast in the faith, and to
shun Popery; and then wrote his last farewell to his People of Hadley,
persuading their stedfastness in the Doctrine he had preached amongst them
against Popery. Vol. 3. p. 175. The next day after he was carried out toward
Hadley to suffer, and his Wife and Children suspecting as much, lay all night
in Botolph's Churchyard; and as he went early in the morning, she cried to him,
Rowland, Rowland, and came to him; who took his Daughter Mary in his arms, and
then all of them kneeled and said the Lords Prayer; then kissed he his Wife,
saying, Farewell my dear Wife, be of good comfort; for I am quiet in my
Conscience, and God shall stir up a Father for my Children; and kissing his two
Daughters, Mary, and Elizabeth, he said, God bless you: and so praying them all
to keep close to God's Word, and to fly Idolatry, he went on: to whom his Wife
said, God be with thee my dear Rowland, I will meet thee at Hadley: And after
this Speech to his Wife, he did see his Son Thomas, and his Man John Hull, whom
he commanded to lift up his Son, whom he blessed and prayed for; and then gave
him again to his Servant. At Burntwood as they went, they made a Hood for the
Dr. with holes only to see and breathe through, that none might know him, nor
he speak to any. The Dr. was very pleasant all the way, as if he was going to a
Banquet. And when he came to Chelmsford, the Sheriff of Suffolk met him; and as
they were at Supper, the Sheriff of Essex persuaded him to turn to Popery;
pleading his strength of body might live long, and he would be in great esteem,
because all loved him for his sweetness and Learning, and a pardon might still
be had, and so drank to him, and so did all the Yeomen of the Guard, his
Attendants. And when the Cup came to the Dr. he considered a while before he
spoke, and at last thanked them for their Counsel; and said, To be plain with
you, I perceive I have been deceived my self, and am like to deceive a great
many of Hadley of their expectation: At which words they rejoiced, saying, Gods
blessing on your heart, hold you there still, why should you cast away your
life? But he said, My meaning is this; I am deceived, and, as I think, I shall
deceive a great many: I am, ye see, a Man of a great carcass, which I thought
should have been buried in Hadly Churchyard, but herein I see I am deceived:
and there are a great many worms in Hadly Churchyard which would have had a
jolly feeding upon this carrion, but now I know they will be deceived, for this
carcass must be burned to ashes: Which sayings astonished the Sheriff, that he
should but jest at death now at hand. Within 2 miles of Hadly, he desired to
alight to make water, and fetched a frisk or two as Men do in dancing, saying
he was very well, never better; For now I know I am almost at my Father's home.
And after that he did understand he should go through Hadly, he blessed God
that he should once more see his People before he died, whom he prayed God to
bless and keep steadfast in word and truth* and at Hadly a poor Man and 5
Children meeting him, begged an alms, and prayed to God to comfort him, as he
had done often him and his Children. And the People of Hadly stood in the
streets weeping and praying for him, saying; There goes our good Shepherd; Oh
God! what will become of us poor Lambs: To whom the Dr. all along said, I have
preached among you God's truth, and am now come to seal it with my blood. And
at the Almes-house he gave them all the Money he had: His care was once a
fortnight to visit with the Gentry the poor Inhabitants, and whom he found to
blame he reboked, whom he found to want he supplied. At last coming to Aldam
Common, (the place of his suffering) he would have spoke, but was not
permitted; only he said to the People, He had preached and was now to seal the
truth of the Gospel with his blood, for which saying he was struck. And being
tied fast to the Stake in a pitch-barrel, he held up his hands, saying,
Merciful Father of Heaven, for Jesus Christ 's sake my Savior, receive my Soul
into thy hands: And so he stood with his hands joined until one with a Halberd
knocked his brains out, and the dead Corpse fell down into the fire. Vol, 3. p.
176, 177, 178.

Thomas Tomkins, burnt March 16. 1555. a London Waver, to whom Bishop Bonner
used cruelty; and at his own Palace hall at Fulham, to terrify the poor Man,
burnt his hand with a Taper till the veins and sinews broke, and the water
spirted in the faces of the standers by, who being moved with pity, requested
the Bishop to stay, saying he had tried him enough: But the Bishop stayed not
till he had effected his burning in Smithfield. This Tomkins never shrank at
the burning his hand, but said he was wrapped in Spirit, so that he felt no pain.
Vol. 3. p. 187, 188, 190.

John Tailor, otherwise called John Cardmaker, Prebendary of Wells and a
Franciscan Friar, burnt with one Warn May 30. 1555. in Smithfield, where the
Sheriff talking much with Tailor, and the Papists having noised abroad his
recantation, the People began to suspect it; but at last Tailor suddenly went
and prayed, then stripped himself to his shirt, went to the Stake and kissed it,
and shaking his Fellow-sufferer John Warn by the hand, comforted him; and then
heartily gave himself to be burned: whereat all the People cried out for joy,
God be praised, the Lord strengthen thee, Cardmaker, the Lord Jesus receive thy
Spirit; till such time as by fire he was consumed. Vol. 3. p. 246, 248.

George Tankerfield, a zealous Papist in King Edward VI. days, a Cook in
London; But in Queen Mary's days seeing their Popish persecution and cruelty,
hated their doctrine, prayed to God for direction, and studied the word of God,
and became a zealous Protestant, who for the Gospel was condemned and was burnt
at St. Albans, August 26. 1555. In the Inn before he suffered, he called for
some Malmsey and a loaf to eat and drink, in remembrance of Christ's death and
Passion, which he said he did not in contempt of the Ministry, or to detract
from the Ordinance, but because he could not have it administered to him
according to God's Word. And after he had with prayer and thanksgiving
received, he caused a good fire to be made in his Chamber, and he sitting by
it, pulled off his hose and shoes, and stretched out his feet toward it, and
when the flame had touched his foot he quickly drew back his leg, showing how
the Flesh did persuade him one way, and the Spirit another. The Flesh said, Oh!
thou foot, will thou burn and need not? The Spirit, Be not afraid, for this is
nothing in respect of fire Eternal. The Flesh said, Do not leave the company of
thy Friends which love thee: The Spirit said, The company of Jesus Christ and
his glorious presence does exceed all fleshly Friends. The Flesh says, Do not
shorten thy time, for thou may live if thou will much longer: But the Spirit
said, This Life is nothing to the Life in Heaven which lasts for ever. And
after he coming to the Stake, prayed, and with a joyful faith said, That
although he had a sharp dinner, yet he hoped to have a joyful supper: And in
the fire he calling on the name of the Lord, was quickly out of pain. V. 3. p.
397.

William Tyms Minister, burnt with several others April 14. 1556. wrote to his
Sister thus, I take my leave of you till we meet in Heaven, you shall find me
merrily singing, Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath at my journey's end. And
at the end of his Letter, he wrote his name in blood, in token that he would
seal the Doctrine of Christ with the rest, and also he wrote in blood these
words, Continue in prayer, ask in Faith, and obtain your desire. In another
Letter to his Parishioners at Hockley in Essex, exhorts them to constancy to
his Doctrine which he now was about sealing with his blood, praising God that
ever he lived to see that day, and blessing God that ever he gave him a Body to
glorify his Name by. Vol. 3. p. 685.

John Tuscaen, a young Man of 22 Years of age, of Audenard in Flanders, hearing
of the Popish Idolatry in worshipping the Host, determined to demonstrate to
them that the worshipping of that Breaden-god was abominable and execrable
sacrilege: To effect which, on May, 30. 1566. called Corpus Christi Day he
went to a Church in Pamelle, which stood near to Audenard, and seeing the
Priest at elevating the Host, and the People ready to prostrate themselves
before a Breaden-cake, he stepped to the Priest, and snatched the Cake out of his
hands, broke it in pieces, and cast it unto the ground, saying unto the People,
See here, my Masters, your goodly Breaden-god, who you see is not able to help
himself, but is here broken all to pieces: How long, how long, O ye senseless
Priests, will ye thus defile the Holy Supper of the Lord? Shall we never see an
end of your filthy Idolatries? If the authority of the Holy Scriptures can
nothing move you, yet at length be admonished by the present example, that
there is not one jot of Divinity within that Bread, seeing it is subject to be
thus handled; will ye worship a dead Idol, your selves being living Men? For
which actions, and expressions he was imprisoned, and had first his hand cut
off, which he took patiently, saying, O Lord God, it is for the glory of thy
Name that I endure these things, enable me now with strength from above that I
may finish this Sacrifice. Then was he burnt, and his ashes cast into the River
Escaut. Additions to Vol. 3. of the Massacre of France and Flanders, p. 356.

Du Tour, Deacon of the Church at Bourdeaux 1572. in the Massacre there. He had
been a Priest of the Romish Church, but now was a Protestant, aged and sick in
bed; who was haled into open street, and asked if he would go to Mass and save
his Life: But he said, No, especially now drawing so near its end, both in
regard of my sickness and Years: I hope I shall not so far forget the eternal
salvation of my Soul, as for fear of death to prolong this Life for a few
days, for so should I buy a short term of Life at too dear a rate. And so they
massacred him. Additions to Vol. 3. concerning Massacre in France. p. 72.

V V
VIctor, a Theban Soldier, under the 10 th Persecution; being dismissed for
his age, and coming suddenly to the Emperors Soldiers, who had even then
destroyed a Legion of Theban Christian Soldiers, and were very merry, inviting
him also to sit down as a Guest; but he inquiring into the cause of their
mirth, and feasting, detested it and them, and would not eat: And being
demanded whether he was a Christian, he said he was, and ever would be a
Christian; whereupon they rushed on him and killed him. Vol. 1. p. 105.

Usthazares, under the 10 th Persecution, having been Tutor to Sapores King of
Persia, and a Professor of Christianity, which afterward he denied again, yet
was again reduced to it by occasion of Simeon the Archbishop of Seleucia; who
being led to Prison for Christ, and saluted by Usthazares as he passed by him;
the Archbishop cried out against him in great anger for his cowardice in
revolting from Christ; whereupon Usthazares wept bitterly, saying, With what
Face shall I look for my God who have denied him; when as this Simeon, my old
acquaintance, so much disdaineth me for it. And he went and acquainted the King
he was a Christian, nor would again be so foolish as to deny Christ; and being
sentenced to be beheaded, he requested it might be proclaimed that he dyed not
for Treason, but for the Name of Christ; that so those who had fallen away by
his example, might also by him learn constancy. Vol. 1. p. 125, 126.

Henry Voes, and John Esch, two Augustine Friars, being converted to
Lutheranisme, adhereing to the Word of God, and obeying and believing Decrees
of Councils, or Fathers, no farther than they agreed with Scripture, were
condemned by the Papists to be burned. Then they began to bless God which had
delivered them from that false and abominable Priesthood, and made them Priests
of his own holy Order; receiving them unto him as a Sacrifice of sweet odor.
Their greatest error, as by their Bill of accusation appeared, was, that they
said Men ought to trust in God alone, forasmuch as men are Liars, and deceitful
in their words and deeds. As they were led to Execution, July 1. 1553. at
Bruxels, they went joyfully and merrily, making continual protestation that
they dyed for the glory of God, and the Doctrine of the Gospel, as true
Christians believing and following the holy Church of the Lamb of God, saying,
This was the day they had long desired: And at the place of Execution they
joyfully embraced the Stake, patiently and joyfully enduring whatsoever was
done to them, and singing, Te Deum laudamus, that is, We praise thee, O God;
and rehearsing the Creed in testimony of their Faith. And a Doctor bidding
Henry Voes take heed he gloried not so foolishly in himself: He answered, God
forbid that I should glory, save in the Cross of Christ. One of them seeing the
fire kindled at his feet, said, Methinks they strew Roses under my feet:
Finally, the smoke and flame choked them. Vol. 2. p. 102.

Ursula and Mary, two Sisters of a Noble Family in Delden in lower Germany,
were burnt 1545. who being instructed in the Book of God, defended the benefit
of our Salvation to come only by faith in Christ, and all the other merchandise
of the Pope was needless. And Mary being first (though the younger) put to the
fire, she prayed ardently for her Enemies, commending her self to God; at whose
constancy the Judges greatly marvelled, and exhorted Ursula the other Sister to
turn, or to desire she might be beheaded; to whom she said she was guilty of
and defended no Error, but defended what was consonant to Scripture, in which
she trusted to persevere to the end; and as for the kind of death or
punishment, she said she feared not the fire, but rather would follow the
Example of her dear Sister. The Bodies of these two could not be consumed by
fire, but they were left by the Executioners whole, lying on the ground white:
But certain good Christians privily in the night took them up and buried. Vol.
2. p. 120.

Two Virgins in the Diocese of Bamberg, 1551. being led to slaughter, did
sustain it with cheerful countenances and patient hearts; they had Garlands of
Straw set on their heads, whereupon one said to the other, going to their
Martyrdom, Seeing Christ bare a Crown of Thorns for us, why should we stick to
wear a Crown of Straw for him? No doubt but the Lord will render to us again
better than Crowns of Gold. Vol. 2. p. 125.

W W
WEndelmuta, a Widow in Holland, was martyred 1527. of Christ, who being
extremely beloved, had many importuning her to recant, but she would not; and
amongst the rest, a certain Noble Matron communing with her, persuaded her to
keep silence, and to think silently in her heart what she believed, that she
might prolong her days: To whom she said, Ah you know not what you say; it is
written Romans 10. with the heart we believe to Righteousness, and with the
tongue we confess to salvation. And thus she remained steadfast and firm in her
Confession, and was November 20. condemned to be burnt to ashes; which sentence
she took mildly and quietly: And being at the place of Execution, a Monk
brought her a blind Cross, willing her to kiss it, and worship her God; to whom
she said, I worship no wooden God, but only that God which is in Heaven: And so
with a merry and joyful countenance, she embraced the Stake, and by an ardent
prayer commended her self to the hands of God. Vol. 2. p. 115.

Waldenses began 1200 years after Christ, and were so called from Waldo who
first instructed them; and they delivered their Doctrine from Father to Son
successively. They had indeed diverse Names according to the places where they
lived: In the Northern parts they were called Lollards; about Lions in France
they were called Pauperes de Lugduno; in Flanders, Terraelupins, of a desert
where Wolves did haunt; in Dolphine, Chugnards, by way of despite, because they
lived harbourless. They taught at first in Caves of the Earth, and in the night
for fear of Persecution, and were a people fearing God, living uprightly and
justly, yet they suffered much Persecution, especially in Merindol and
Calabria, whither they came from Piedmont Valleys, and though those places were
deserts, yet were they by them so cultivated that they proved very fruitful.
Vol. 2. p. 185, 186. They were charitable to the poor, hospitable to strangers,
and were known by these marks, they would not swear, nor name the Devil; were
true to their promise, and would not take an Oath, unless in judgment, or in
making some solemn Covenant; nor would they in any company talk of dishonest
matters, but whenever they heard wanton or swearing talk, they presently
departed out of that Company; and also they always prayed before they went to
any business, and opposed generally Images, crossing, and other Popish
Fooleries, as was testified by their very Enemies, and their neighboring
Inhabitants, to the French King. Vol. 2. p. 193. They were also called
Albigenses, from the place where they frequented in Tolouse; and Merindolians,
from Merindol a place of Provence in France, which with Cabriles were laid
waste, burned and rased, their Inhabitants cut asunder, and their Women and
Maids ravished, those with Child cut open, by one John Minerius Lord of Opede,
at the command of Francis the French King, April 12. 1545. Vol. 2. p. 196, to
page 200.

Their Principles were these:

1. One God the Creator of all things.

2. The Son the only Mediator and Advocate of all Mankind.

3. The Holy Ghost the Comforter and Instructor of all truth.

4. They acknowledged the Church to be the Fellowship of the Elect of God
whereof Jesus Christ is the Head.

5. They allowed the Ministers of the Church, wishing such as did not their
duty were removed.

6. Magistrates they granted to be ordained of God to defend the good, and to
punish the transgressors, and that they ought to the Magistrate love and
tribute, and that none herein was exempted.

They acknowledged Baptism to be an outward and visible sign representing to us
the Renewing of the Spirit, and mortifying of the members.

8. They confessed the Lord's Supper to be a Thanksgiving, and a memorial of
the benefits received through Christ.

9. Matrimony they esteemed holy, instituted of God, and inhibited to no Man.

10. Good works they observed, and thought them to be practiced of all Men, as
Scripture teaches.

11. False Doctrine leading from the true worship of God ought to be eschew'd.

12. The order and rule of their Faith was the old and new Testament,
protesting they believed all contained in the Apostolic Creed. Vol. 2. p. 200.

They at they burying of their Dead used to accompany the dead to the grave
reverently, with a sufficient company, and made Exhortation out of the word of
God to the Living, and to comfort the Parents and Friends of the party
deceased, and to admonish all Men diligently to prepare for death. Vol. 2. p.
203.

They were much persecuted by Henry the Ninth French King, and often delivered
miraculously in Angrogne, Lusern and other places, Valleys of Piedmont; till
1559. when a peace being made between France and Spain, those Valleys were (as
due) given to the Duke of Savoy, who entreated these Waldenses gently, till by
the Pope and his Legates he was instigated to persecute them, which was very
severely and cruelly done, Vol. 2. p. 204, 205.

They were persecuted in all their places; and one called The Lord of Trinity,
and one Trunchet were their great enemies. The Waldenses used to go and pray
before Battle, and after Battle gave thanks; and though they were but few in
number and without armor, only by Slings and stones, and a few Harquebusses,
they so amazed and put to flight their Enemies often, that they flying said,
God fought for them. And at last (though after much misery and cruelty) they
had a peace brought them by the Lord of Raconis from the Duke of Savoy, which
was obtained by the Mediation of his Duchess. Vol. 2. p. 218, 219, 220, 222.
So much of the Waldenses Rise and Actions, Vol. 1. p. 299.

George Wisehart, a Scotchman, burnt March 1. 1546. being condemned by David
Beton Archbishop of St. Andrews, although he answered all the Articles he was
accused of. Who going to the Stake sat down on his knees, and rose again,
saying three times, O thou Savior of the World, have mercy on me, Father of
Heaven I commend my Spirit into thy holy hands: And then turning to the People,
he said: I desire you not to be offended with the word of God, for which I
suffer; and exhorted them to embrace it, and to continue steadfast. For which,
says he, I suffer this day, not sorrowfully, but with a glad heart and mind:
Consider and behold my visage, ye shall not see me change my color; this grim
fire I fear not, and so I pray you to do if any persecution befall you; I know
that my Soul shall sup with Christ, for whom I suffer this, within these six
hours in Heaven: Then prayed he for his Enemies, saying, Father, I beseech thee
to forgive them that have ignorantly or of evil mind forged any lies upon me; I
freely forgive them with all my heart, and I beseech Christ to forgive them,
who this day condemned me to death. And being to be hanged on a Gibbet, and so
burned, the Executioner begged his pardon; whom he kissed, saying, There is a
token that I forgive thee, do thine Office: And so he was burnt. Vol. 2. p.
618, 620, 621.

Adam Wallace, a Scotchman, burnt 1549. as an Heretic. He passed over the
night of his condemnation in singing and lauding God, having learned David's
Psalter by heart to his great consolation; and being tempted by several to
recant, he (though a poor mean learnned Man) said, He would adhere to
whatsoever could be proved by Scripture, but he would consent to nothing that
had not Scripture evidence, though an Angel from Heaven came to persuade him.
And on the day of his sufferings he asked, whether the fire was fit, saying, As
it pleases God I am ready soon or late; and so desired the Faithful to
remember him to all the Brethren, being sure to meet together with them in
Heaven. As he went to the fire, the People said, God have mercy on you; And on
you too, said he. At the fire he lifting up his eyes two or three times, said
to the People, Let it not offend you that I suffer for the truth's sake; for
the Disciple is not greater than his Master. But he was not permitted to speak,
and so was burned. Vol. 2. p. 623.

Rawlins White, a Welchman, a Fisherman of Cardiff, was very superstitious in
time of Popery, till afterward through God's Grace, he, upon the Reformation,
began to give ear to good Men, and searched out the Truth; but being a very
poor ignorant Person, he knew not how to be informed; and so resolved to put
his Child to learn to read, whom he caused, when he could read, to read every
night Summer and Winter after Supper, a piece of Scripture or some good Book,
which profited him so much through God's grace, and the blessing of a good
memory, that he soon became very perfect in Scriptures, did see his former
errors, and was enabled to admonish others; by which means he was instrumental
for the conversion of many others, whom he instructed; for which he expected to
be apprehended; and his Friends desired him to fly, but he said, No: He had
learned, That if he should presume to deny his Master Christ, Christ in the
last day would deny and condemn him. I will therefore by his favorable Grace
bear witness of him before Men, that I may find him in Everlasting Life. And at
last was taken and imprisoned for a year; where as often as his Friends visited
him, he would spend the time in prayer and Exhortation: And after many means of
threats and flatteries used by Bishop of Landaffe to bring him to a conformity,
but in vain: he resolved to condemn him, yet exhorted he his Fellow-Assistants
to pray to God for Grace for Rawlins to convert him: Whereat Rawlins rejoiced,
and commending them, said, Go and pray, and I also will pray. After prayer, the
Bishop asked him, If he would recant, and he said, No. Rawlins ye left me, and
Rawlins ye find me, and by God's Grace Rawlins I will continue. Certainly if
your petitions were just and lawful, God would have heard you; but ye honor a
false God, and pray not as ye ought to pray, and therefore has not God granted
your desire; but God has heard my complaint, and I trust will strengthen me in
his own cause. Then the Bishop would have a Mass, at which Rawlins went, and
begged the Brethren or but one Brother to bear witness that he did not worship
that Idol the Host over the Priest's head: and so, soon after he was condemned:
who then sent to his Wife for a Shirt to be burnt in, which he called a
Wedding Garment. And going to the Stake, seeing his Wife and Children there,
who made great lamentation, his heart was pierced and he wept, but soon after,
being angry with himself for that infirmity, he struck his breast, saying, Ah
Flesh! would thou fain prevail? Well, I let thee do what thou can, thou
shall not through God's grace have the victory. And being in the fire, he cried
whilst he could open his mouth, O Lord, receive my Soul; O Lord receive my
Spirit. Vol. 3. p. 219, 220, 221.

Thomas Watts, an Essex Man, a Linen-Draper, expecting every day to be sent for
and imprisoned for the Gospel, did dispose of his things; and sold, and gave to
the Poor, his Cloth, and at length was imprisoned; and not recanting by the
flatteries and threats of Bishop Bonner, he was condemned; and going to take
leave of his Wife and six Children, he said to them thus: I must now depart
from you, therefore henceforth I know you no more; but as the Lord has given
you to me, I give you again to him, whom I charge ye see to obey, and beware ye
turn not to Popery; against which, by God's grace, I shall anon give my blood:
Let not the murdering of God's Saints cause you to relent, but take occasion
thereby to be strong in the Lord's quarrel; and I doubt not but he will be a
merciful Father to you: and so he went to the Stake, kissed it, and was burned,
June 9. 1555. Vol. 3. p. 268.

Christopher Ward burned at Dartford, 1555. who coming to the Stake, being in a
Pitch Barrel fastened to it, he held up his hands and eyes to Heaven, saying,
with a cheerful and loud voice, the last Verse of the 86. Psalm, Show some good
token upon me for good, that they which hate me may see it and be ashamed;
because thou Lord have helped me and comforted me: and the fire being kindled,
he cried with a loud voice, but without any impatience, Lord Jesus receive my
Soul; and when his voice could not be heard, his hands were held up, and
continued clasped together and held up toward Heaven, even when he was dead
and altogether roasted, as though they had been stayed up by some Prop; which
token God granted as it were an answer to his Prayer. Vol. 3. p. 382.

Thomas Whittle, a Priest, burnt with six others, Ian. 28. 1556. was, by the
persuasions of the Papists, brought to recant; but after that, he felt such an
horror of Conscience, that he did earnestly beg to see again the Bill he had
subscribed; and seeing it, he rent out his Name, and then was right glad: and
in a Letter, after his condemnation, he said, Now I am condemned to dye, my
conscience and mind is, I praise God, quiet in Christ, and I am willing and
content to give this Body to death for a Testimony of his truth against
Antichrist* In another Letter he thus writes; The World I do forsake,
To Christ I me take;
And for his Gospel's sake,
Patiently I Death take;
My Body to the Dust,
Now to return it must;
My Soul I know full well,
With my God shall dwell.
Vol. 3. p. 615.621.


Joan Waste of Derby, born blind, yet by hearing the Word of God did become
knowing; and purchased a New Testament, which she gat sometimes one Prisoner to
read, and sometimes another, by giving them often some Money to read a Chapter
or two in it to her: by which means she grew understanding in the Scriptures,
could say much of them by heart; and at last was burned for the Gospel, August
1. 1556. who told the great Doctors that opposed her, that if they would take
it upon their Consciences to answer for her at the day of Judgment, that their
Doctrines were true, she would embrace it; but they would not; and burnt her
because she would not recant: who in the flames, while life lasted, did
continue praying the Prayers she had learned by heart, and calling on Christ
for mercy. Vol. 3. p. 756, 757, 758.

Richard Woodman of Warbleton in Sussex, imprisoned for reproving their Priest
who preached in Queen Mary's days contrary to his Doctrine in King Edward the
VI. time, which he then averred to be true, and charged his people to believe
no other. Woodman was imprisoned one year and a half, and then dismissed, and
afterward sent for again, whom the Commissioners found in his Fields at
Plough, and its news made him tremble and fear; but he said he would not go
with them, they not having their Commission about them: And he much reproved
himself for his carnal fear, thus, They can lay no evil thing to my charge, and
if they kill me for well-doing, I may think my self happy. And as soon as I was
persuaded in my mind to dye, I was as merry and as joyful as ever I was. But
having now escaped them, he fled home, and for six or seven weeks in a wood
near his House, he lived under a Tree, where he had his Bible Pen and Ink and
his provision brought daily by his Wife to him; and then the Country being
sought for him, he went into Flanders, and soon returned again, and was
betrayed into his Enemies hands by his Father and Brother. Being taken, he was
bound, which much rejoiced him, he said, That he should be bound for Christ's
sake: and he took leave of his Wife and Children, thinking never to see them
again; because it was said, He should not live six days; yet he said, He knew
it was not as they would, but as God pleased. I know, said he, what God can do,
but what he will do I know not; but I am sure he will work all things for the
best for them that love and fear him. And so they went away with him. Vol. 3.
p. 800, 801, 802, 803.

X X
XYstus Bishop of Rome, was martyred under the eighth Persecution with his six
Deacons: And one Deacon of them named Lawrence, following him, desired to dye
with him; to whom Xystus said, I am a weak old Man, and therefore run the Race
of a lighter and easier death; but you are young and lusty, and after three
days you shall follow me. And so he did. Vol. 1. p. 92. See Lawrence, page 104
of this Book.

Y Y
FOrty Young Men Soldiers under the tenth Persecution, being charged by the
Emperor's Officers to disown Christ. They freely and boldly all with one
accord confessed themselves to be Christians, and told him their names; and
being endeavored with to win them by fair words as well as by threats of
torments, they said, They desired not Life, Liberty, honors or dignities, or
Money, but the Celestial Kingdom of Christ: For the love of whom and Faith in
God they were ready to endure the Cross, Wheel, Fire; and were sentenced to be
all that night in a Pond of water in cold weather, and next day to be burnt;
who when they were putting off their clothes, said, We give thanks, O Lord,
that with these our clothes we may also by thy Grace put off the sinful Man;
for by means of the Serpent we once put him on, and by the means of Jesus
Christ we put him off. Vol. 1. p. 118.

Elizabeth Young, apprehended for selling some good Books, and was examined
many times and punished severely, and should have been burnt, had not Queen
Mary lain irrecoverably sick. She being committed to prison, and charge being
by Dr. Martin that she should have one day Bread, and another day Water only
for her provision, she said cheerfully, If ye take away my meat, I trust God
will take away my hunger. Vol. 3. page 911.

AN ALPHABETICAL LIST OF GOD'S IVGMENTS Remarkably shown On many Noted and
Cruel PERSECVTORS.

2 These. 1.6. It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to
them that trouble you.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Butler, next door to the Lamb and three Bowls in
Barbican. 1677.

An Alphabetical List of Gods Judgments.
A A
ANtiochus, a Persecutor of Agapetus a Martyr, suddenly fell down from his
Judicial Seat, and cried that all his inward Bowels burned; and so he gave up
his breath. Vol. 1. p. 76.

Alexander, the Keeper of Newgate-Prison, a cruel enemy to God's People, who
often hastened their death, dyed himself so miserably swelled and so stinking,
that none could endure the stench of him. And his Son within 3 years spent all
his Estate; and it being wondered how he could have wasted it so soon, he said,
Evil gotten, evil spent: And in Newgate-Market he fell down suddenly, and dyed
miserably. And his Son-in-law John Peterson after dyed rotting above ground.
Vol. 3. p. 257.

Arundel Archbishop, giving Sentence against the Lord Cobham, dyed before him,
and his tongue was so smitten that he could neither swallow nor speak. Vol. 3.
p. 960.

B B
BErry, Commissary to the Bishop of Norwich, a great Persecutor, as he came
from Church on a Sunday after Even-song, fell down on the ground, and never
breathed more. Vol. 3. p. 870.

Blanchenden, who would have had a poor Man's Legs cut off, who fled from him
and others, following him to apprehend him for the Gospel's sake, was soon
after slain by his own Servants. Vol. 3. p. 931, 932.

Burton, the Bailiff of Crowland in Lincolnshire, a pretended Gospeller in King
Edward VI. time; but in Queen Mary's days a zealous Papist: A profane
swearer, and one that threatened the Curate there to sheath his Sword in him if
he would not say Mass: But soon after, he riding with a Neighour on the
Fenne-bank, a Crow flew over him, and shit on his nose, so that the excrements
ran from the top of his nose to his beard; which poisoned scent so annoyed his
stomach, that he never ceased vomiting till he came at home, and there for
extreme sickness went to bed, not being able for the stench in his stomach and
his painful vomiting, to eat any meat, and cried out of the stink, cursing the
Crow; and soon after dyed desperately. Vol. 3. p. 956.

Robert Baldwin, a Persecutor, at the taking of one Seaman, was struck with
lightning, and so pined away. Vol. 3. page 957.

Beaton, Archbishop in Scotland, a great Persecutor of George Wisehart, was
soon after slain in his bed, and lay seven months unburied; and at last was
buried like a carrion on a dunghill. Vol. 2. page 621.

Bishop Bonner, Bishop of London, and the greatest Persecutor in Queen Mary's
days; being imprisoned by Queen Elizabeth, died in his bed unrepentant, and
was denied Christian burial, being at midnight tumbled into a hole amongst
Thieves and murderers. Vol. 3. p. 974.

C C
CAiaphas, who wickedly set upon Christ, was deposed from the High-Priest's
room by Caligula. Vol. 1. p. 40.

Clarke, a great Persecutor, hanged himself. Vol. 3 p. 957.

Coxe, a great Promoter in King Edw. VI. and in Queen Mary's days, going well
to bed at night, was found dead next morning. Vol. 3. p. 957.

D D
DR. Dunnings, Chancellor in Norwich, a great Persecutor in the midst of Queen
Mary's Reign and his rage, died suddenly in a Chair in Lincolnshire. Vol. 3. p.
954.

Dale, a great Papistical promoter, was eaten into his Body with Lice, and so
died, Vol. 3. p. 967.

E E
Emperors, who were Authors of Persecution against Christians, all of them
came to sad ends: either staying themselves, or being slain by others, or dying
by unheard of deaths. Vol. 1. p. 41.

Sir Ralph Ellerken, a Knight at Calice, who at the martyrdom of Adam Damlip
said, He would not stir till he see his heart out, had his own heart soon after
cut out of his Body by the French. See Damlip page 51 of this Book, and see
Vol. 2. p. 564, 565.

Robert Edgar, Executing the Office of a Parish Clerk against his Conscience,
was bereft of his Wits, and kept in chains many years. Vol. 3. p. 960.

F F
DR. Foxford Chancellor to Bishop Stoksely in King Henry the 8 th's days and a
great Persecutor, dyed suddenly. Vol. 3. p. 957.

Bishop Fisher, Bishop of Rochester, who with Bishop Warham caused one John
Brown to have his feet heated and burnt to the Bones by coals to make him
recant his Religion, was soon after beheaded for opposing Kings Supremacy. Vol.
3. p. 957. with Sir Thomas Pure another great Papist. See John Brown, page 19.
of this Book.

The Wife of John Petty of Clerkenwel Parish in London, being the occasion of
her own Husband's taking, was immediately struck mad. Vol. 3. p. 960.

A Dominick Friar, inveighing in the Pulpit against the Gospel, was suddenly
struck with lightning, and so ended his Life. Vol. 3. p. 964.

G G
GRimwood, a false witness against one John Cooper, a Suffolkman (whereby the
poor Man was proved guilty of Treason falsely, and was hanged, drawn, and
quartered, and his Wife and nine Children turned out of their Estate,) was
afterward sadly, and suddenly, afflicted; for in Harvest time, as he was
stacking Corn, and was very well, fearing no evil, his bowels suddenly fell out
of his body, and he dyed most miserably. Vol. 3. p. 955.

Bishop Gardener, a cruel Persecutor, dyed despairing; and having a Bishop with
him, who put him in mind of Peter's denying his Master, he said, I have denied
with Peter, but never repented with Peter. Vol. 3. p. 957. He rejoicing at the
News of Bishop Ridley's, and Latimer's burning, at a Dinner that day, was that
instant struck sick, denied the use of Nature, either by Urine, or otherwise,
for fifteen days; and then dyed with a sad inflamed body. Vol. 3. p. 527.

H H
Herod, the murderer of John Baptist, and condemner of Christ; was, by
Caligula Caesar, condemned to perpetual banishment; where he dyed miserably.
Vol. 1. p. 40.

Hoeimester, an Arch-Papist, going to Ratisbon to dispute against the defenders
of the Gospel, dyed suddenly, and miserably in his Journey, with roaring and
crying. Vol. 3. p. 963.

I I
JEws, who refused Christ, and also were Persecutors of him, were forty years
after Christ's Passion destroyed by Titus, and Vespasian his Father, to the
Number of 1100000, besides them which Vespasian slew in subduing Galilee, and
them which were sold and sent into Egypt, and other Provinces to vile slavery,
to the Number of 17000, and 2000 were brought with Titus in triumph; of which,
part were devoured by Wild Beasts, and part of them were otherwise cruelly
slain. Vol. 1. p. 40, 41.17.

L L
THomas Leland, a Justice of Peace in Lancashire, sitting in his Chair, talking
with his Friends, fell down dead suddenly, not moving a joint: He was so great
an Enemy to Christians, that he was called Persecuting Tho. Leland. Vol. 3. p.
925.

Leyson, Sheriff, at the burning of Bishop Farrar, fetched the Bishop's Cattle
into his own Ground; but many of them would not eat, but continued bellowing
till they dyed. Vol. 3. p. 954.

Iacobus Latomus having, at Brussels, made an Oration against Luther; and being
in his public Lecture at Lovane, he fell into an open fury, uttering words of
blasphemy and despair, that the Divines there did carry him away and shut him
up; who, to his last breath, said nothing, but that he was damned and rejected
of God, and that there was no hopes of Salvation for him; because he wittingly,
and willingly, withstood the manifest truth of God's Word. Vol. 3. p. 964.

Dr. Leyson, a Civilian, a Justice of Peace, who would not let Bishop Farrar
speak a word at the Stake, about half a year after died; and in his sickness,
when he would have spoken his mind, could not. Vol. 3. p. 1002.

Dr. London, Persecutor, punished. See the former Part of this Book.

Queen Mary, while she promised her protection of the Gospel she prospered, and
by the help of the Gospellers she gat the Crown; but after, she breaking her
promise and bringing in of Popery, and burning of God's People for the Gospel's
sake, she and her Nation was much punished. She was, especially, punished these
several ways;

1. Her best Ship, yea, the best Ship in all Europe, called The great Harry,
was burned.

2. She was opposed in her endeavors to restore the Abby-lands.

3. Her Subjects suffered almost a Famine, so that the Poor, for Famine, were
forced to eat Acorns instead of Bread.

4. She lost Calice in France, which had been the English King's Right through
the Reign of eleven Kings.

5. She was deprived of Children which she greatly desired, and the whole
Nation were cheated in the rumors of her bringing forth a Son.

6. She having married Philip, King of Spain, and so subjugated her Subjects to
a stranger, with whom she promised her self much felicity, was very unhappy by
his withdrawing from her. Vol. 3. p. 953.

M M
MAlicia accusing Eugenia, (who for fear of the 8 th Persecution had put on
Man's Apparel to preserve her life and chastity, and called her self Eugenius,)
to Philippus, the Judge, and Father of the unknown Eugenius, that he would have
deflowered her, the said Malicia; the falsity was made apparent by Eugenia's
discovering her self to be a Woman in Man's habit; and Malicia, the accuser, was
doubly ashamed, and was smitten with Lightning. Vol. 1. p. 95.

John Martin of Briqueray, boasting he would cut off the Nose of a Minister of
Angrogn, one of the Waldenses, 1555. had his own Nose bitten off by a Woolf, so
that he dyed thereof mad. Vol. 2. p. 202.

Maximus, the great Persecutor of the Christians in the 10 th Persecution, was
smitten with a dreadful Ulcer in his Privities and Entrails, so that the
Physicians durst not come near him, nor could they cure him; for which he
caused them to be slain: And being put in mind of God's judgment herein for
persecuting the Christians, he ordered their peace; yet after he again
commanded their torments, ascribing plenty and peace to Jupiter, and war and
pestilence and famine, as caused by the Christians; but it did happen contrary:
for, famine, war, and pestilence, destroyed most of his heathenish Subjects;
while the Christians, amongst them, relieved one another, and them also; and
were preserved to the enjoyment of peace: for Maximus was afterward forced to
acknowledge the true God; and being oppressed by his Disease, he repented and
glorified the Christians God; and made an absolute Law for the Christian's
safety and welfare. Vol. 1. p. 106. to 113.

Bishop Morgan, Bishop of S. David's, who usurped Bishop Farrar's place, after
he had condemned him, was so afflicted that his Meat would not go down, but
rise up and come out of Mouth and Nose; and so he continued to death. Vol. 3.
p. 954.

Morgan, the Justice, that condemned the Lady Jane Gray, fell mad not long
after, and so dyed; having ever in his Mouth, Lady Jane, Lady Jane. Vol. 3. p.
954.

Domitius Nero began to Reign the 56. year of Christ: Reigned 14 years with
great Tyranny; he slew most part of the Senators; set Rome on fire, and laid it
to the Christians; and caused them to be persecuted: at last he was, by the
Senate, declared a public Enemy to Mankind; and commanded to be drawn from the
City and whipped to death: for fear whereof he fled into the Country to a Manor
of his Servants, and slew himself- Vol. 1. p. 40.

P P
A Person being hired, by Pope Hildebrand, to murder Henricus, the 4 th
Emperor of Germany, as he was at Prayers; by throwing a great Stone upon him
from a place directly over him. As the Person moved the Stone to do this horrid
Act, he broke the Plank he stood on, and fell down, the Stone falling on him;
and so was killed by that Stone he designed to slay the Emperor by, the
Emperor being safe. Vol. 1. p. 229.

Pilate, under whom Christ suffered, was apprehended under Tiberius Nero, and
accused at Rome; deposed, and banished to Lions; and at length slew himself.
Vol. 1. p. 40.

A Persecutor seeking three days for Dionisius, that he might be persecuted,
was struck with blindness. Vol. 1. p. 81.

Portugal King, and his Son, who persecuted William Gardener, dyed soon after.
See p. 73. of this Book.

A Persecutor of one James Abbyes, a Martyr, in Berry, told the People that
Abbyes was a Madman not to be believed. After that Abbyes was burnt, this
reviling Persecutor, being one of the Sheriff's Men, pulled off his Clothes,
and was struck with a Frenzy, running about and crying, Abbyes was a good Man,
and is saved; but I am damned: and though the Sheriff did endeavor what he
could to bring him to his right senses, yet could it not be done; but he
always cried out to his dying day, Abbyes was a good Man, and saved; but I am
damned. Vol. 3. p. 956.

John Peter's, (Son-in-Law to one Alexander, the Keeper of Newgate Prison, who
dyed miserably,) did also dye sadly; for his use in all his affirmations was to
say, If it be not, true, I wish I rot e're I dye: and so he did rot away, and
dyed miserably. Vol. 3. p. 957.

Ponchet, an Archbishop of Towers, made sure to erect a Chamber to be called
Chamber Ardent, therein to condemn the Protestants to the fire: and he was soon
after stricken with such a Disease, called the fire of God, which began at his
feet and burned upwards, that he caused one Member after another to be cut off;
and so he dyed miserably without any Remedy. Vol. 3. p. 967.

S S
SCribes, and Pharisees, who refused Christ, and chose rather to be subject to
Caesar; were at length destroyed by their own Caesar, when as Christ's Subjects
were preserved. Vol. 1. page 39.

Smith, a great Papist and Persecutor, fell down suddenly in the street, and
dyed. Vol. 3. p. 957.

William Swallow, a cruel tormentor of one George Egles, shortly was so plagued
that all his hair came off, his nails of fingers and toes came off, his eyes
were near closed that he could not see, and his Wife was stricken with the
Falling Sickness, which she never had before, Vol. 3. p. 960.

Symons, a Persecutor of Robert Testwood, soon after was convicted of
Conspiracy, and rode round about Windsor Marketplace with his face toward the
Horses tail. See 174 page of this Book.

T T
TArtarians Army of 5000000 waring against Polonia 1241. and having killed old
and young of both sexes, were discomfited by Thunder and Lightning, at the
instance, and prayers, of God's People. Vol. 1. p. 442.

Twiford, in London, an Executioner of several Martyrs, and a Suborner of false
Witnesses against one Merial, at last died rotting above ground, so that none
could abide him. Vol. 2. p. 603.

Bishop Thornton Suffragan of Dover, a cruel Persecutor, coming to Canterbury
on a Saturday; on Sunday, seeing his Men playing at Bowls, was taken with a
Palsy, and had to bed; and being bid to remember the Lord, he said, Yes so I
do, and my Lord Cardinal too; and so soon died. Vol. 3. p. 954.

V V
Valerian, the Butcher of the Christians in the eighth Persecution, was taken
in Wars against Persia; and Sapores, King of Persia, made him his Footstool
for him to mount on horseback by, to his Life's end. Vol. 1. p. 96.

W W
Woodriffe, a Sheriff in London, a cruel Persecutor, was not above a week out
of his Office before he was smitten with a lameness all on one side, that he
lay bedridden 7 or 8 years until his dying day. Vol. 3. p. 955.

AN APPENDIX OF Things pertinent to the understanding the preceding Martyrology.

Containing the Times, and Authors, of the ten Persecutions; and other
remarkable Occurrences necessarily to be explained.

LONDON, Printed for R. Butler, next door to the Lamb and three Bowls in
Barbican.

An Appendix, etc.
THE First Persecution was raised by Nero Domitius, the 6 th Emperor of Rome;
who thought, by raising a Persecution in all his Provinces, to abolish the Name
of Christians. It was done in the year of Christ, 67. Vol. 1. p. 44.

The Second Persecution began in the 69. year of Christ by Domitian, who began
mildly, yet did after so rage in pride, that he commanded himself to be
worshipped as God: He slew most of the Nobles, and all of the Seed of David: He
intending to destroy all of the Seed of David, lest Christ should come and cast
him out of his Empire: And sending for two Nephews of Jude, the Brother of
Christ, who were then alive; and demanding of them concerning Christ's Kingdom,
upon their information that it was not an earthly Kingdom, but an heavenly
Kingdom, to be manifested in the consummation of the World, when he should come
again to judge the quick and dead. Domitian stayed the Persecution, and
dismissed them. Vol. 1. p. 48.

The Third Persecution began by Trajan, 100 years after the other. He was a
very just Man in Matters of the Commom-wealth, but in religious things he was
very cruel. Vol. 1. p. 57.

The Fourth Persecution began by Marcus Antoninus Verus, who began to Reign in
the 162. year of Christ, and was very sharp and severe against Christians:
which Christians, when the Armies of this Emperor were warring against the
Vandals, and had like to have perished for want of Water five days, did, to
the number of a Legion, withdraw themselves suddenly from the Camp, and
prostrated themselves before God; and by ardent Prayer obtained of God, by and
by, a double relief; Rain for themselves, and Lightning, discomfiting their
Enemies, who were many of them put to flight: which Miracle so pleased the
Emperor, that he abated his fury against the Christians; grew milder, and
ordered his Rulers to give thanks to the Christians, no less for his victory,
than for the preservation of himself; and also ordered that their Accusers
should be burned alive. Vol. 1. p. 54. to 66.

The Fifth Persecution was raised by Severus, the Emperor; who, in the year of
Christ, 215. proclaimed, and commanded, no Christian should be suffered. Vol.
1. p. 70.

The Sixth Persecution began by Maximinus, about 237 years of Christ, against
the Teachers of the Christians; thinking thereby to destroy the rest the
sooner. Vol. 1. p. 76.

The Seventh Persecution was raised by Decius, in the 250. year of Christ. Vol.
1. p. 77.

The Eighth Persecution was raised by Emilianus, President of Egypt, 259 years
after Christ. Vol. 1. p. 88.

The Ninth Persecution was raised by Aurelian, in the 276. year of Christ. Vol.
1. p. 98.

The Tenth Persecution was raised by Dioclesian, in the 308. year of Christ,
and lasted 10 years. This Dioclesian and Maximinian, deposed the Emperial
Office willingly, 309. and lived retiredly. Vol. 1. p. 100.105.

King Henry 8. King of England, by the instigation of Stephen Gardener, and
other Popish Prelates, was forced to make, and decree, these 6 Articles, to be
observed by his Subjects, 1540. which were cause of great Persecution.

1. That in the Sacrament of the Altar upon the efficacy of the words of Christ
expressed by the Priest, Christ's natural body is really present, Water, Bread,
and Wine; and that after Consecration there remains no Bread, nor Wine, nor any
other substance; but the substance of Christ, God and Man.

2. That the Communion in both kinds is not necessary absolutely, by the Law of
God, to all Persons; and that in the Flesh, under the form of Bread is the very
Blood; and with the Blood, under the form of Wine, is the very Flesh; as well
apart, as they were both together.

3. That the Priests, after the Order of Priesthood, may not marry by the Law
of God.

4. Vows of Chastity and Widowhood, advisedly made by the Law of God, ought to
be kept; and exempteth from other liberties of Christian People, which else
they might enjoy.

5. That it is meet and necessary, that private Masses be continued in the
English Church and Congregation.

6. That Auricular Confession is necessary, and expedient to be retained, used,
and frequented in the Church of God.

The Opposers of those Articles were to be esteemed Fellons, and to lose both
life and goods; which occasioned great and cruel Persecutions. Vol. 2. p. 441.

These Articles, and all other Popish Articles, were repealed by King Edward
the 6 th. Vol. 2. p. 654.

FINIS.
Books printed for, and sold by, R. Butler, next Door to the Lamb and three
Bowls in Barbican.
1. A Skirmish made upon Quakerism, being a brief Confutation of a most gross
Principle, or Point of Doctrine, published and maintained by one William Pen,
a Quaker, in two Sheets.

2. The Shibboleth of Quakerism, or that which they call The pure Language,
proved as used amongst us, to be only a matter of indifferency, and not of
absolute necessity, as you-ing and thou-ing, and the naming the Days and the
Months, etc. in two Sheets.

3. One Sheet against the Quakers, detecting their error and mis-practice, in
refusing to reverence Men outwardly by Word and Behavior after the manner in
use among us, which is proved to be good and lawful.

4. Quakerism proved to be gross Blasphemy, and Antichristian Heresy, in four
Sheets; all stitched together, price, Nine-pence.


