A VISITION OF LOVE unto all PEOPLE. (In whose hearts there are any true honest
tender desires, begotten toward God and his righteousness,) In what sect or
opinion or profession soever they be, in which is not in the Light; Especially
unto such who has felt something of the workings of the life and Power of God
in them, and yet notwithstanding has been led by the subtilty of the Serpent,
from the life and power of God into many Sects and opinions and forms, which
are without the life and Power of God; and herein the subtle workings, and
devices of the Serpent whereby he deceives the hearts of the simple is clearly
made manifest. And this is written in tender Love unto all of you who feel
something stirring in you, that is not satisfied with all the words that ever
you have heard from man or woman, nor yet with all the practices and
performances that ever you have practiced and performed in all the Sects and
opinions and Profession that ever you have been in. And here the pure and
living way is declared, whereby every particular who returns to this way, and
believe and wait in it shall come to receive a particular satisfaction unto
that in them (the seed) which never yet they could witness satisfied in all the
Sects and opinions they have been in, which is out of Christ the light, which
is the new and living way.

By a labourer in the power of Truth (which does make free) for the deliverance
and freedom of the Righteous Seed. George Fox, the younger.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Simmons at the Bull and Mouth near Aldersgate, 1659.

A visitation of love, unto all people in (whose hearts there are any true
honest tender desires begotten toward God and his Righteousness) in what
sect, or opinion, or profession soever they be in, which is not in the Light.
Friends,
GOd, the higher Power, unto whom the soul is to be subject, he only has
immortality, and dwells in the Light; and he is Light: And he has freely
given his Son into the world, (by whom the World was made) for a covenant of
Light, and he is the true Light, which lights every one that comes into the
World, that all men through him might believe, who is the Word of God, in whom
is Life, and that life (mark) is the light of men; and the pure grace of God
which brings salvation (by which the Saints are freely justified) has
appeared unto all men; yea the Eternal God of truth has appeared unto you in
his Son Jesus Christ, the true Light, and with this Light has God made
manifest unto you your sin and evil deeds, and with the measure of the Light of
his Son (in you) sometimes has he appear in his mighty power, whereby he has
smitten you for your sins and evil deeds, and he by his power has broken you
into tenderness, and brought you down into lowliness for a time, and then by
his unresistible power thus working (in you) did he beget a holy Seed, from
whence pure desires and breathings after God has often arose (in you) which
seed could not, nor cannot be satisfied without Gods living presence; Now ye,
not standing in the power which convinced you, and smote you and broke you into
tenderness, and brought you down, and then begot a holy Seed in you; from
whence a pure unfeigned love to God has often sprung (mark) you not minding the
workings and movings of this power in you; nor walting in it for to receive
counsel, you entered into reasonings and thoughts, which the subtilty (which is
the Devil) presented in you; and so ye hearkened not to Gods voice (the power
which had wrought so in you) but you entered into reasonings with the substilty
(which abode not in the power) and this begot a questioning in you what that
should be, which had so appeared in you, and broken you into such a
tenderness, and had wrought such a sudden change in you, which you were not
able to resist; And ye going into the reasonings in your minds; thus you turned
from the pure power of God, and then sin (which separateth from Gods presence,
which he by his power works in you, had in measure smitten and brought down
in you) arose again, and got the dominion in you, and so you going thus from
the power wherein ye should have waited to have been preserved in the
tenderness, ye soon lost the tenderness and fear, which the power had wrought
in you; and then hardness of heart soon grew in you again, and then the seed
which God had begotten in you, (which cannot be satisfied without his presence)
that began to be sorely oppressed in you, by the sin (which separates from Gods
presence) which got up more and more in you; through your turning from the
power which ye once felt manifested and working in you against sin: And then a
grievous weight or burden came upon the righteous seed in you; and then it
began to groan and cry to God from under the burden and weight of iniquity
that was upon it, and then the Light appeared more brighter in you again, (for
the seeds sake which suffered in you) and showed you that you were wrong, then
the Light judged you for the wrong, and then trouble came upon you, and
increased in your minds; and then the Serpent, the subtilty, the devil (which
abode not in the truth) he appeared likewise in you, and begot a hurrying, and
a confused noise in your minds, and then presented many things unto you, and
sturred you up to do them, that so he might draw ye from hearkening unto the
Light (wherein you should have waited to have heard and known Gods voice, and
council and to have seen and heard, what God had required at your hands) and
thus the subtilty which is the Devil, who was a murderer from the beginning,
and abode not in the truth; sought to draw you from the Light (which is the
truth) that so he might murder the Righteous seed, which God had begotten in
you, (unto which seed the promises are) Now your minds being drawn from the
Light which convinced you of sin, you entered further into sin, and then you
could not find any power for to resist sin, because you went from the light
which showed you your sin, where in ye should have waited to have received
power against sin, and then the seed suffered in you, by the sin which ye were
entered into exceedingly; and trouble increased more and more in your minds,
(this has been the condition of some of you) and then the subtilty drew you
into reasonings and consultings what to do, that so the burden which you felt,
and the trouble in your minds might be removed; So ye harkening unto the
subtilty, he then presented several things unto you to be done, some of which
once were commanded by God to be done by them unto whom the command came, and
so the subtilty persuaded you, that ye must do those things likewise, before ye
could have peace, and witness the burden and trouble removed, which ye felt;
So he having drawn you out of the senceableness and feeling of the light and
power of God, your understandings became wholly darkened, as unto the counsel of
God, and then these things which the subtle enemy presented, exceedingly
pleased the affectionate part in you, and some of you he persuaded to act such
things as God never commanded any to act; and so ye going from the light (which
never changes) and harkening unto the subtilty (which leads into
changeableness) here ye began to run into Sects and opinions, and heaps, and
parties, and devisions; yea, here is the ground and rise, and beginning of all
Sects, and opinions in the world, peoples going from the light and power of
God, which leads into the substance, and into onenese of mind, and harkening
unto the subtilty which leads but into the likeness of Truth, and into
selfe-separation and devisions, and changeableness of mind, and when the
Serpent had drawn you into several opinions, and practices in your worship,
then he fed you with knowledge, that so each of you might be able to plead, and
contend for your opinions and practices; and then he begot a strong, hot, hasty
will in you (which has been called zeal for God) whereby he drew you into hot
contentions one with another, and so by little and little he raised up a secret
envy and prejudice in you, one against each other, till at length some of you
break forth into rage, and scorn, giving one another scornful Names.

And thus the Mystery of Iniquity wrought in many of you, until the seed grew
weak in you (as to your feeling) and became as a dead thing unto you, being
thus strangled in you, by your going from the Power, into those things that the
power of God never moved, or drew you to act, (but the Serpent which abode not
in the power) So then you were not sensible of such a burden indeed, as ye
were once, when the seed which God had begotter in you was more quick and
livelie, and then the subtlety persuaded you that now you were right, because
you selt not such a burden and trouble in your minds as you once did; and
then a joy sprung in you for a time, and then the subtlety persuaded you, that
you were now entered into the work, and service, and worship of God; and that he
had given you some reward; now because you were not sensible of such a burden,
and trouble in your minds as ye were before you acted those things in your
worship, and thus the subtlety beguiled some of you; But this condition
continued not long with you, for Gods eternal witness (which ye had as it were
slain, and made merry over it) that arose and appeared in you again, for the
seeds sake, and desturbed and broke that false peace, and joy and preswasion
that you were got into, (through transgressing [and going from] that which is
pure of God in you, and acting those things in the transgression, which God
never required at your hands) and then with Gods witness the light, you law
your selves wrong again, and the light judged you for your forwardness, and
then you begun to loath those practices in your worship, which before you
delighted in, and then something you came to feel stirring in you again, which
was not satisfied, but breathed and groaned and cried unto the Lord: and then
you were in a fine tender condition again; But then the subtlety soon appeared
in you again, and presented some other new things unto you, and called those
which he had formerlie led you into, old empty weak and beggarly things, and
thus he wrought in the subtlety, to draw you from harkening unto that which
made manifest your condition unto you, and thus he has drawn some of you into
most of the Sects and opinions that be in the World, and through them, and thus
in the subtlety has he wrought in you to save his head, (or life) for he knew
that if you had hearkened unto the truth of God as it appeared in you, and had
obeyed it, that then Gods power would mightily have been made manifest in you,
whereas the seed immortal would have been raised up in you, which would have
bruised his head.

So take notice how the Lords love, the Light has followed you, and checked
and reproved you for your hastiness and forwardness and has showed unto you
the emptiness and deadness of all the profession and worship that ever you have
run into.

And some times when you have been brought into lowliness and tenderness; by
the power of the Lord which has smitten you, then the Lord has opened mighty
things in you unto his seed, which breathed and thirsted after his
righteousness, and could not be satisfied without it, and then the Serpent has
wrought in you again in the subtilty, to lead you from that which opened, and
from the pure, and so lead you up in the boasting nature, to hold forth those
things in the fleshly Principle which the Lord opened unto his own seed, and
thus he has kept you out of the life and power of truth, and he has filled
some of you a with many strange imaginations, and expectations concerning God
and Christ, and his appearance without you; and so all along he has strove to
keep you from minding Gods appearance within you, by drawing your minds into
the visible changeable things, and yet the Lord in love to his own seed has
spared you; so mind the Lords long patience, and forbearance which has been
great toward you, for his Seed sake in you, which breathes and thirsts after
his righteousness, and cannot be satisfied without his life and presence.

And truly friends my love is exceeding tender and large toward you in whom
there is such a pure tender seed stirring, and my desire is (who have seen the
emptiness of all profession without the life) that you might come to witness
the seed satisfied in you (with the pure power and life and virtue of the
living God) which has suffered long in you, and has not been satisfied by
reason of your disobedience unto the light.

Therefore in tender bowels of love and compassion unto you, I do freely
declare unto you all the new and living way which has been from the beginning,
which is Christ Jesus the true light which lights every one which comes into
the world, whereby every one of you believing in the light, may come to receive
a particular satisfaction from Christ, from whence the light does come.

Friends, the manifestation of the spirit is given to every man to profit
withal, but you have transgressed and gone from the manifestation of Gods
Spirit in your own particulars, and so it is impossible for you for to profit
in the things of God, or come to receive a particular satisfaction, until you
come to own that, and believe in that which you have transgressed and gone
from, which was given you to profit withal, and to lead you into the
substance, which gives satisfaction; now the manifestation of the spirit does
show unto you your runings and willings, and actings and strivings that ye have
been in, whereby ye could never obtain satisfaction unto that in you which
breathes to do the will of God; now you must mind that which makes manifest
these things unto you, and as you take notice of that (which is the light) and
wait in it, you will come to feel it drawing you into stilness, and coolness
and quietness of spirit, and then with the light you will come to discern the
subtilty, and the motions thereof, which has often beguiled you, by drawing you
from quietness and stilness into the Airy imaginations, whereby he has tossed
and unsettled your minds; and as you wait in that which does make manifest,
(which is the light) and believe in it, you will come to feel something arising
in you, in power to judge and condemn the subtilty, as that stirs in you to
draw you from waiting upon God, and then you will come to know and seel, the
spirit of Judgment and burning, placed in you to purge you, and as you wait
in the judgment in patience and stilness you will come to hear the still voice
that is spoken of in the Scriptures, saying, This is the way (and showing it
unto you) and when you see the way as you wait in that which shows it unto
you, then you will come to hear the command in power, saying unto you, walk in
it, and then you will come to know your Teacher which cannot be removed into a
corner, and so here the path of the just ye will all come to know and witness
in your selves, which is the shining light which shines more and more, until
the perfect day; for as you all wait in that which calls for stilness and
silence to the flesh and the motions thereof, ye will come then to see more
light and so ye will come to witness what David spoke to be true, who said to
God, in thy light shall we see light, and then the just (which has been long
oppressed and burdened in you) will begin to spring and as you believe and
wait in the light, your minds being staid in it, you will come to seel Gods
living power working and opperating in you, condemning and removing that in
you, which has oppressed and burdened the just, and so by Gods pure power,
(as you wait and continue in it,) you will come to feel and witness the just
holy seed raised up in you from under that which did oppress and burden it,
and here you will feel the captive come out of captivity by the Gospel which is
the power of God, and the prison door set open, and the prisoners set as
liberty; and then as you wait in the light you will come to feel Gods pure
powerful presence, and life and virtue running through you, which will refresh
the seed, which is tender, and give satisfaction unto it; and so as you all
wait low in the fear of God, watching in the light, that nothing may get up in
you to boast and glory which is not of God, you will then feel your love
exceedingly increased toward the pare living truth of God, and your whole
delight will be to walk in the truth, in righteousness and holiness, (without
which no man shall see the living God) and as you all walk in the light obeying
it, you will come into the pure fellowship, and Communion and unity of the
Saints, and then you will feel the life, which is the blood of Jesus Christ
cleansing you, purging and purifying you from all sin; and so as every one of
you abide in the faith, feeling it standing in the power of God that will
purify your hearts, and give you victory over the world, and then you will
come to receive a particular satisfaction from Christ the power, which is the
Author and ground of the Saints faith, and you will feels Gods spirit, and
power and lifevas you dwell in it, drawing and leading you into whatsoever he
requires you to do, and as you all wait and are still in that which does
discern the thoughts and the intents of your hearts, and makes them manifest
unto you, you will clearly come to discern the subtilty and the motions
thereof, which would draw you to act such things as the Lord does not require
you to act.

So all take heed to that which discerns the thoughts and intents of your
hearts, for this is a measure of the word of life, which is quick and powerful,
and as you all wait in is, you will feel it to be so: for you will feel it
dividing the precious in you from the vile, and this is the ingrafted word
which is able to save your souls.

So this is not written to feed the carnal mind in any, but it is written for
your fakes, who are truly breathing and thirsting, after Gods righteousness,
and cannot be satisfied without it, that so you may all come into the true
light wherewith you are enlightened, and that you with it may come to see how
you have been tossed and tumbled up and down by the subtlety of the Serpent,
in those things which could never give you true peace nor satisfaction; and
that now through believing in the truth and obedience of the spirit, you may
all come to witness a particular satisfaction, and that you may come to feel
the pure image of the holy God restored in you, even his everlasting
righteousness, his power, his wildom, his life and glory raised up in you, to
have Dominion, and to rule over all the earth and to subdue it, that so the
pure God of life and virtue might be glorified in your mortal bodies, and that
you might all come to feel and witness an everlasting habitation of rest and
peace in him who is worthy of all honor and praise, and thanksgiving and
Dominion for evermore, Amen.

Now some of you who have been ancient Professors will say to us, if we should
join to you, we must lay down all then that ever we have professed; and what,
have we been Professors so many years and yet have to begin all again? have we
known nothing of God all this time? this is hard say they.

To this I answer, friends, if you come to join to the truth, you must then lay
down and leave and forsake all that which you have held up and practiced in
your own wills which you were never led or required to hold up or practice by
the spirit of truth; but I do know and own that there was a pure living
Principle of God, often stiring in you, in your Profession, by which Principle of
God you often saw that you were wrong and that you did that which was not well
pleasing in the sight of God in your Profession; for that Principle of God in
you, the light, Judged and condemned you for many of your actions which you
acted, and sometimes the Lords witness brought you into a tender low condition;
and then opened things unto the Seed in you, but you not taking heed to the
light to be the guide and stay of your minds you continued not long in that
condition, but you consulted with the subtlety (which drew you from Gods
witness) what you should do, and so waited not in that which brought you into
tenderness to receive Gods Council in that, but you took Council of the
Serpent, and your own hearts, and so ran into things which God never required
at your hands, and therefore God had no regard unto your worship because it was
not in the Spirit and in the Truth, you not being guided therein by the Spirit
of Truth; so unto that which was in the beginning you must all come, which is
Christ the true light; who has enlightened you, and you must learn of him who
is the light of life, the word and the Power by which all things were made, and
are upheld, and you must be subject unto the measure of him in you, and this
his measure if you submit to it, that will bring you to cease from your own
wills, and works, and to wait in silence and patience, to see and feel Christ
the Power of God, to work all your works in you and for you; and if you own the
light, that will plainly show unto you how God formerly appeared unto you, and
how you went from his appearance; so the light will own that which God opened
unto you at any time, but it will deny and condemn your own imaginations, which
you mixed with that which God opened unto you, and so unto this witness of the
Lord you must all come, and believe and wait in that which will separate the
precious from the vile, before that can be satisfied in you which breathes
after God.

So my tender love and compassion is unto that in you which is not yet
satisfied, but does truly hunger and thirst after the life and Power of Truth,
and my soul does travel for freedom and satisfaction of that seed, and I
suffer with it, and bear many things for its sake, for I have true unity and
fellowship with that in you, and I know it, and am known of it; but I cannot
have unity with many of your practices, which ye have been in, because they
have caused the Seed in you, (with which I have unity) exceedingly to suffer,
you not being guided and led into them by the Spirit of truth, and so against
all such practices I do bear witness in the spirit of meekness, and I labor in
the spirit of Love, to turn Peoples minds unto the manifestation of the spirit
of truth, which is given to every man wherewith to profit; so all people feel
that and mind that, and heaken unto that which often rises in your hearts,
against Lust, against covetousness, against pride, against vain and meedlesse
words, and thoughts, and against all evil in its appearance; and as you all
mind this principle which moves and stirs in you, against all evil, you will
feel it devide your good words from your bad words, and good thoughts from bad
thoughts, and good deeds from bad deeds and that which devides betwixt these,
and shows you the difference of them, this is the word which Moses and Paul
wrote of, which is nigh the mouth and in the heart; Yea this is the word of
reconciliation, which reconciles to God, this is the ingrafted word, which is
able to save the Soul.

Now you being turned to this word, even to that which discerns the thoughts
and intents of your hearts, as ye wait in this, let the subtilty appear never
so subtly to draw your hearts after any thing, or into any practice, which
the Lord requires not of you then this word which is the power, it will make it
manifest unto you, and it will stop you from entering into any such practices if
you will fully resist it not, and believing and waiting in this word, it will
not suffer you to speak any hasty unsavourie words, or word, and then ye will
come to be truly sensible of a bridle to the tongue, without which the religion
is vain; and this word, ye taking it to be your guide, it will bring you into
savourie sound words, seasoned with the grace of God, and so as your words and
actions, and lives come to be ordered by this word (Christ the power of God)
they will reach unto the witness of God in every one where ye come, and if ye
will hear this word and regard it, and not resist it, it will work true faith
in you, by which you will feel your hearts purified from sin, and ye will feel
it giving you victory over the world, within and without, and if ye keep in
this faith, ye will not make haste, for ye will, feel the eternal light (which
is the life of the Word, calling and drawing you out of the hasty nature, into
soberness, stillness, and quietness, and meekness of spirit, and so ye will
feel your strength renewed in the Lord, as ye all wait upon him in his light;
and all beleiving in the Light ye will not come into condemnation; and as ye
all wait in that which discerns, and reveals the thoughts and the intents of
your hearts (which is the word of power) this also will devide between your
good thoughts and your bad thoughts, and the good motions, and the bad motions,
which you will see stiring in your minds, and if you hold fast the word of
truth, it will preserve and keep you out of the bad thoughts and motions, and
it will join you unto the good, and ye will come to feel the operation of the
spirit, and life, and power of God in you, to shake, and overturn and work out
that ground (which has been in you) from whence the bad words, and bad
thoughts, and bad motions has arose, which has burdened the oppressed the
tender seed in you, which you never could witness satisfied with all that ever
you have performed; but as ye all believe, and wait in this unchangeable
measure of God, you will come to feel the burden taken off the Seed; and ye
will come to feel, and witness more true durable peace and satisfaction in one
hours waiting upon God, then ever you felt and witnessed in all the words
that ever you have heard from any man or woman in all your lives, or in all
your practices that ever you have practiced (before you were brought to vvait
upon God in his gifts, which he has given you to profit with all) although
in those things which we have practiced, I know ye have had a great joy
appearing in you for a time, but it was not durable nor lasting; for when
Gods true and faithful witness, (the light) appeared and shevved you, how
that God never required those things at your hands, which you had practiced,
then your joy, and peace withered, and came to an end, which you appeared some
time to have in those practices, and if at any time ye come to feel some little
peace, and joy, and refreshment, through what God opened to the seed in you,
when by his power ye were brought into some tenderness, ye soon lost this
also, by going from that which brought you into the tenderness; But as you
all come into the obedience of the spirit, and abide in it, this will bring
you into the seasoned life, and then ye will come to feel and witness pure
peace, and joy, and refreshment, and satisfaction which will last, and abide
for ever with you, if ye abide in the spirit, and then ye will be made willing
to lay down, and deny all that which ye have been acting, which ye never were
lead and guided to act by Gods pure holy spirit; and to deny all such also as
would draw you to act that which God requires not at your hands.

So take heed of such as daubes with untempered mortar, and heals deceitfully,
who will speak peace, when there is no true peace, (but the pure witness of
God condemns) for such with the good words and fair speeches deceives the
hearts of the simple, keeping them ever learning, but never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth, and these through covetousness and fained words make
merchandise of poor people, for they have a form of Godliness, but they deny
and resist the power, and therefore from such turn away; And all mind that,
and feel that, and be subject unto that; which for sin condemns sin in the
flesh, and then you will feel the spirit of judgment and burning, and
righteousness, through which the seed is redeemed, which Seed is heir of the
Kingdom of God; So all wait in the meek, lowly quiet spirit, that ye may
come to witness this holy Seed, which delights to do the will of God, (by the
power and life of God) raised up in you, and brought forth out of captivity,
and satisfied.

And look not nor strive not after great and high things beyond your measures
(for that puffs up, and leads into confusion and dark immaginations) but all
wait and be still in the measure of Gods Light manifested in you, that so ye
may come to feel him revealing his secrets and mysteries unto the babes which
cannot live or be satisfied without him.

God is making known that, and stiring that in the hearts of people (throughout
the world) which does and shall confound and overturne all the wisdom of this
World, and the subtilty of the Serpent (from whence all the Worlds wisdom
arose) and therefore the hand of the Lord will be terrible and heavy upon the
disobedient, who disobeyes and transgresses that which he has put into their
hearts, (whereby he is opening a mighty understanding in the people) But the
everlasting blessing and peace and joy and glory of the Lord over all shall
arise and rest upon all these that join to, and believe in, and obey that word
which is nigh, in the mouth, and in the heart.

THE END.

